he acts on the world, if only symbolically. At the same time, the gesturer's motions render an
abstract idea in human-scale embodied terms, an act of translation that makes it easier for
onlookers to mentally simulate the gesturer's point of view for themselves. Perhaps most
important, gesture generates the sense that an as-yet immaterial enterprise is a palpable
reality in the present moment. Using gesture in this way can confer an enormous advantage in the
startup world, one group of researchers notes, since entrepreneurs are operating on the boundary
of what is real and what is yet to happen. That's true for many of us, whether we're offering
projections for the next quarter, presenting a proposal for a project, or explaining why a change
we'd like to make would be well advised. Gesture brings an uncertain future into the observable
present, imbues it with a realness that we can almost touch. Jean Clark, a professor of entrepreneurship
and organization at Enlion Business School in France, has spent years watching entrepreneurs
like Gabriel Hercule make their case at demo days, incubators, and investment forums across Europe.
In a study published in 2019, she and her colleagues reported that company founders who deployed
the skilled use of gesture in their pitches were 12% more likely to attract funding for their new
ventures. Such adept use of movement includes the presentation of symbolic gestures, movements
that capture the overall meaning of the speaker's message, along with what are called beat gestures,
hand motions that serve to punctuate a particular point.
When Hercule repeatedly pointed to his eyes and then to the view before him, he was making a
symbolic gesture, eyes on the road. When he formed his fingers into a pincher or jabbed at the air with
his fist, he was emphasizing his contentions with beat gestures. Skilled gesturers don't leave this
important element of their delivery to chance, Clark notes. They practice the movements they intend to make
just as they rehearse the words they plan to say. Adding persuasive force to a presentation
is just one role gestures can play in shaping the thinking we do, as both gesture makers and gesture
observers. Research demonstrates that gesture can enhance our memory by reinforcing the spoken word with
visual and motor cues. It can free up our mental resources by offloading information onto our
hands. And it can help us understand and express abstract ideas, especially those such as spatial or
relational concepts that are inadequately expressed by words alone. Moving our hands helps our heads to
think more intelligently. And yet gesture is often scorned as hapless hand-waving or disparaged as showy or gauche.
This is an attitude that Frederick Mishkin, an economist at Columbia Business School, knows
well. Whether he's standing in front of a lecture hall or engaged in a casual conversation, Mishkin's
hands are continually in motion, an emphatic complement to his speech. I talk with my hands, he says. I always
have. Early in his career, however, one of his mentors became exasperated by his constant
gesticulating. Seeking to break his protege of the habit, he declared a rule for when Mishkin visited
his office. He made me sit on my hands as I talked with him, Mishkin recalls ruefully.
Such disdain for gesture is a cultural constraint at odds with the way humans naturally communicate.
Indeed, linguists theorize that gesture was humankind's earliest language, flourishing long before
the first word was spoken. Even now, gesture provides an alternate channel of communication
every bit as significant as the verbal one. Gestures exert a powerful impact on how we
understand and remember our interactions with others, but its influence operates largely below
our awareness. We may choose our own words carefully and listen closely to what others say,
yet still fail to notice a substantial proportion of the communication that is actually occurring.
A profusion of extraverbal meaning is continually being offered and received.
At times, gesture works with language to more richly specify the speaker's meaning,
to clarify or emphasize what is being said. On other occasions, gesture supplies meaning that is not
found anywhere in the speaker's words. And at still other moments, gesture asserts meaning that
contradicts or departs entirely from the speaker's verbal self-expression. Gesture conveys things we
don't say. As we'll discover, gesture even conveys things we can't say because we don't yet have the words.
All of us, then, are effectively bilingual. We speak one or more languages, but we are also fully
fluent in gesture. Over the course of our species' evolutionary history, gesture was not superseded or
replaced by spoken language. Rather, it maintained its place as talk's ever-present partner, one that is
actually a step or two ahead of speech. Christian Heath, a professor of work and organization at
King's College London, uses the close analysis of videotaped conversations to examine the dynamic
interplay between physical movement and verbal expression. One doctor-patient dialogue recorded
by Heath demonstrates in fine-grained detail how people often gesture first and speak second.
In Heath's video, the doctor on camera is saying of a particular class of medicines he is prescribing that
they help sort of, you know, to dampen down inflammation. But by the time he says,
you know, he has already completed three downstrokes of his hand. For her part, the patient makes reference
to the stress of her financial troubles and how she goes round and round in circles, trying to catch up
with her bills. But before she utters these words, her hands have already started moving in a circular
pattern. In each exchange, gesture provides a preview of the concept that will be conveyed in words.
And in both cases, the listener shows that he or she understands the sentiment by nodding and murmuring
at the moment when he or she perceives the gesture before the spoken part of the sentiment is uttered.
From watching Heath's tapes, it's easy to conclude that most of our conversations are carried on with our hands,
the words we speak, a mere afterthought. Research shows that we all engage in such
gestural foreshadowing in which our hands anticipate what we're about to say.
When we realize we've said something in error and we pause to go back to correct it, for example,
we stop gesturing a couple of hundred milliseconds before we stop speaking. Such sequences suggest the
startling notion that our hands know what we're going to say before our conscious minds do. And in
fact, this is often the case. Gesture can mentally prime a word so that the right term comes to our
lips. When people are prevented from gesturing, they talk less fluently. Their speech becomes halting
because their hands are no longer able to supply them with the next word and the next. Not being able
to gesture has other deleterious effects. Without gesture to help our mental processes along,
we remember less useful information, we solve problems less well, and we are less able to
explain our thinking. Far from tagging along as speech's clumsy companion, gesture represents the
leading edge of our thought. Gesture was humanity's first language, and every human infant recapitulates
this evolutionary history, becoming fluent in gesture in advance of acquiring even the
rudiments of speech. Well before babies can talk, they are waving, beckoning, holding up their arms in a
wordless signal, pick me up. Pointing is one of children's first gestures, usually initiated around nine months
of age. Between 10 and 14 months, a more nuanced capacity for gesture begins to develop as fine motor
finger control improves. During this time, spoken language lags well behind what toddlers are able
to express by moving their hands. Children can typically understand and act on a request to point
to their nose, for example, a full six months before they are able to form the spoken word nose.
And research suggests they use their gestures to elicit from their caretakers the very words they need to
hear as they learn about the world. A child will point to an unfamiliar object, for example, and an adult will
often obligingly supply the name of that thing. When a parent translates her child's gesture into a word in this
way, that word is particularly likely to enter the child's spoken vocabulary within a few months. Amazingly enough,
as one researcher puts it, young children use their hands to tell their mothers what to say.
These early experiences with gesture lay the foundation for spoken language. Gesture constitutes a
first attempt at the trick of making one thing, a movement of the body, the sound of a word, stand for
another, a physical object, a social act. Connecting a wish, say, to get down from a high chair,
with the spoken word down, is a sophisticated mental move. Performing a downward motion of the hand
can function as an important intermediate step. Indeed, researchers have documented a link between
a child's rate of gesturing at 14 months and the size of that same child's vocabulary at four and a
half years of age. Children learn to make these movements from the gesturing figures around them,
adults. Studies show that children whose parents gesture a lot proceed to gesture frequently themselves
and eventually to acquire expansive spoken word vocabularies. Child development experts have long
emphasized the importance of talking to children. An often cited 1995 study carried out by psychologists
Betty Hart and Todd Visley estimated a 30 million word gap in the number of words heard spoken aloud
by affluent and poor children by the time they start school. Since the publication of the Hart-Visley
study, other research has confirmed that higher-income parents tend to talk more than lower-income
parents, that they employ a greater diversity of word types, that they compose more complex and more
varied sentences, and that these differences are predictive of child vocabulary. Now researchers are generating
evidence that how parents gesture with their children matters as well, and that socioeconomic differences
in how often parents use their hands when talking to children may be producing what we could call
a gesture gap. High-income parents gesture more than low-income parents, research finds. And it's not just the
quantity of gesture that differs, but also the quality. More affluent parents provide a greater variety of types of
gesture, representing more categories of meaning—physical objects, abstract concepts, social signals.
Parents and children from poorer backgrounds, meanwhile, tend to use a narrower range of gestures when they
interact with each other. Following the example set by their parents, high-income kids gesture more than
their low-income counterparts. In one study, 14-month-old children from high-income, well-educated families
used gesture to convey an average of 24 different meanings during a 90-minute observation session, while children from
lower-income families conveyed only 13 meanings. Four years later, when it was time to start school, children from the
richer families scored an average of 117 on a measure of vocabulary comprehension, compared to 93 for children from the
poorer families. Differences in the way parents gesture may thus be a little-recognized driver of unequal
educational outcomes. Less exposure to gesture leads to smaller vocabularies. Small differences in vocabulary
size can then grow into large ones over time, with some pupils arriving at kindergarten with a mental word bank that is
several times as large as that possessed by their less fortunate peers. And vocabulary size at the start of
schooling is, in turn, a strong predictor of how well children perform academically, in kindergarten and throughout the
rest of their school years. The good news? Research shows that offering simple instructions to parents leads them to
gesture more often. In turn, their children also gesture more. Any parent can adopt the strategies suggested by these
intervention programs. Engage in frequent pointing with young children and encourage the kids
themselves to point. Incorporate this same gesture into the reading of picture books. Point to particular words or
illustrations and ask children to point to what they see. Come up with simple gestures to pair with real-life
reference, a clawing motion for a cat, a wiggling index finger for a caterpillar, and be sure to say the word
aloud as the gesture is demonstrated. Perhaps the most important fact to keep in mind, says Harvard
education professor Meredith Rowe, is that a child's language development is malleable and that parents play an
important role in shaping that development. In a 2019 study, Rowe delivered this message to a group of
socioeconomically diverse parents and caregivers, along with reminders to gesture more. At the conclusion of the
intervention, she found that adults who'd received the programming were engaging in pointing 13 times
more often, on average, than those who had not undergone the gesture training. The children in their lives were
pointing significantly more, too. As children grow older, gesture continues to act as an advance party,
scouting out mental territory well ahead of where their words are. Rather astonishingly, researchers have found
that children's newest and most advanced ideas about how to understand a concept or solve a problem
often show up first in their gestures. Take, for example, a six-year-old girl faced with a classic
conservation task. Such tasks were first employed by the pioneering psychologist Jean Piaget to investigate
the course of childhood cognitive development. The girl is shown a tall, skinny glass full of water.
However, the contents of which are then poured into a short, wide glass. Asked whether the amount of water remains
the same, the girl answers no. But at the same time, her hands are making a cupping motion, indicating that she's
beginning to understand that the wider shape of the second glass accounts for the way the same amount of water
fills it at a lower level than the first glass.
This episode is drawn from a voluminous video archive compiled by Susan Golden Meadow,
a professor of psychology at the University of Chicago. Golden Meadow has collected thousands of such
video vignettes, recordings of individuals as they use words and gestures to explain how they solve
problems. Across these many scenes, she has identified an intriguing pattern. When speech and gesture are both
correct and congruent, it's a given that the speaker has mastered the material. When speech and gestures
match but both are wrong, we can assume that the speaker is still far from getting it. But when there's
a mismatch between speech and gesture, when a person says one thing but does something else with her hands,
then that individual can be said to be in a transitional state, moving from the incorrect notion she's expressing
in words to the correct one she is expressing in gesture. In videos recorded by Golden Meadow of
children carrying out conservation tasks, new understandings emerged first in gesture some 40%
of the time. Such mismatches appear to be a common occurrence across development. When 10-year-olds
solve math problems, one study reported, their gestures represent strategies different from those found in their
speech about 30% of the time. Another study found that for 15-year-olds working on a problem-solving
task, the rate of speech-gesture mismatch was 32%. Furthermore, Golden Meadow has found, learners who produce
such speech-gesture mismatches are especially receptive to instruction, ready to absorb and apply the correct
knowledge should a parent or teacher. Even adults signal their readiness to learn through mismatches
between what they're saying and how their hands are moving. In one experiment, for example, a group of
college students was asked to learn about a set of stereoisomers, chemical compounds that feature the same
number of atoms but that differ from one another in the way the atoms are spatially arranged. The extent to which
the undergraduates made gesture-speech mismatches while learning predicted their ability to profit
from instruction, writes Golden Meadow, who was lead author of the study. Namely, the more they expressed
correct conceptual information and gesture that they did not verbalize in speech, the more they were
subsequently able to learn. When our words and our movements diverge, it's our gestures that signal what
happens next. Why would our most advanced ideas appear in our gestures before surfacing in our speech?
Researchers speculate the gesture helps give shape to an incipient notion still forming in our minds.
At a moment when we cannot quite put words to a concept we're struggling to comprehend, we can still
move our hands in a way that captures some aspect of our emerging understanding. We may then be able to use
the experience of making and seeing our own gesture to help us locate the appropriate language.
It's possible, too, that we feel freer to try out new ideas in movement before committing to them in speech.
As Susan Golden Meadow puts it, gesture encourages experimentation.
The role played by gesture in consolidating our initially inchoate thoughts is revealed by the
changes our hand motions. At first, we gesture profusely and rather indiscriminately as we attempt to wrap
our heads around an unfamiliar idea. We gesture more when we are actively trying to apprehend or reason
about a concept than when we are describing a concept we already understand. Gesturing also increases as a
function of difficulty, the more challenging the problem, and the more options that exist for
solving it, the more we gesture in response. Meanwhile, we engage in what one researcher calls
muddled talk, speech that is a jumble of incompletely articulated notions.
Our speech and our gesture are not yet coordinated or congruent. So cognitively demanding is the task of
assimilating a new idea that we divide the work between our head and our hands, each going its own
way for now. The process may be messy, but it allows us to circle ever closer to the attainment of
complex knowledge that would otherwise remain out of reach. While moving our hands around, we may find
that our gestures summon insights of which we had previously been unaware. Psychologist Barbara Tversky
has likened gesturing to a virtual diagram we draw in the air, one we can use to stabilize and advance
our emerging understanding. As our comprehension deepens, our language becomes more precise and our
movements become more defined. Gestures are less frequent and more coordinated in meaning and timing
with the words we say. Our hand motions are now more oriented toward communicating with others
and less about scaffolding our own thinking. Without gesture's initial assist, however, this happy state
might never have been reached. Research shows that people who are asked to write on complex topics,
instead of being allowed to talk and gesture about them, end up reasoning less astutely and drawing
fewer inferences. This same sequence unfolds not only for novices learning a subject for the first time,
but also for experts venturing into uncharted territory. Gesture is especially useful in supporting the
provisional understandings shared by team members who together are working their way toward new
discoveries. This was evident in a study conducted by researchers at the University of California, San Diego.
Amaya Bekvar and two colleagues analyzed hours of videotape recorded at the lab meetings of a
biochemistry research group on the UCSD campus. The scientists in this lab were studying the
dynamics of blood clotting, with a particular focus on an enzyme called thrombin. Depending on which
protein attaches to thrombin's active site, blood clots are either formed or broken down. Determining how
and why thrombin binds to one protein or another could guide the design of drugs to treat heart attacks and
strokes, conditions that are caused by aberrant blood clots. The lab scientists had a hunch that a key
role was played by thrombomodulin, a protein that is a binding partner of thrombin. At one of the lab's
weekly meetings, a graduate student presented new research on thrombomodulin to two other graduate
students and a professor, the group's research advisor. Responding to the new findings, the professor used her
left hand to represent a thrombin molecule, curling her fingers into a claw and pointing to her palm.
That's the active site, she explained. Our new theory is that thrombomodulin does something like this.
She curled each of her spread fingers more tightly. Or, she added, perhaps it has an effect like this,
and she drew her fingers tightly together. Throughout the rest of the meeting, Bekvar notes,
the professor and the graduate students, continually reproduced the thrombin hand gesture,
pointing to it, talking at it, shifting the position of their fingers to represent various
potential configurations. The scientists' creation of new knowledge was actively supported by the
symbolic movements of their hands, Bekvar concludes, a fact acknowledged by the title of her article,
hands as molecules. Gestures are especially useful in the effort to understand concepts that words will
always fail to capture fully. Concepts that are visual and image-rich, that pertain to the relation between
objects or ideas, or that concern entities beyond direct perception, those things tiny as an atom or vast as the
solar system. Gestures are also particularly well-suited to conveying spatial concepts.
Professional geologists, for example, employ a range of specialized gestures to think and communicate
about the way terrestrial layers bend, fold, and shift in space. When they refer to subduction,
the sideways and downward movement of a plate of the Earth's crust beneath another plate,
they slide one hand across and under another. When they invoke angular unconformity, rock strata that
lie flat on top of other strata that are beveled or uneven, they hold one hand steady above the other
hand, which tilts side to side. Though these experts surely have the words to express their meaning,
still they rely on their hands to do much of the work. Students learning about geology for the first time
can also benefit from using gesture. Kanari Atit, an assistant professor of education at the
University of California, Riverside, asked two groups of college students to explain how they
would use Play-Doh to create three-dimensional models of geological features. The members of one
group were permitted to use their hands to gesture. Those in the second group were asked to employ only
words. Before and after the exercise, both groups were tested on their ability to engage in what
experts call penetrative thinking. This is the capacity to visualize and reason about the interior
of a three-dimensional object from what can be seen on its surface, a critical skill in geology
and one with which many students struggle. Study participants who gestured got significantly
higher scores the second time they were tested on a measure of penetrative thinking, while participants
who only explained verbally showed no improvement. Such results suggest that the act of gesturing
doesn't just help communicate spatial concepts to others. It also helps the gesturer herself
understand the concepts more fully. Indeed, without gesture as an aid, students may fail to understand
spatial ideas at all. Strike and dip is a basic geological concept that describes a rock layer's rotation
from north, strike, and a rock layer's rotation from horizontal, dip. After reading a textbook-style
introduction to the concept, many college students made dramatic errors in recording an outcrops strike and dip
on a campus map, noted a team of researchers from Penn State. Better performance on this task,
they found, was linked to greater use of gesture by the students. For learners endeavoring to grasp
spatial concepts, language can actually get in the way, says Michelle Cook, a professor of geoscience
at University of Massachusetts Amherst. Cook, who is hearing impaired, has spent years leading outreach
programs that engage deaf students in the study of geologic fault systems. She has noticed that
these students are especially quick to master geological concepts and theories, a deafness she
attributes to the skills of observation and spatial cognition they have developed as users of American
Sign Language, ASL. People who are fluent in sign language, as Cook is, have been found to have an
enhanced ability to process visual and spatial information. Such superior performance is
exhibited by hearing people who know sign language as well as by the hearing impaired, suggesting that it
is the repeated use of a structured system of meaning-bearing gestures that helps improve spatial
thinking. Cook often employs a modified form of sign language with her hearing students at UMass.
By using her hands, Cook finds, she can accurately capture the three-dimensional nature of the
phenomena she's explaining. She can efficiently direct her students' attention to particular features she
wants to highlight. And she can divide the river of information she's presenting into two smaller
streams, one verbal and one visual, thereby reducing her students' cognitive load, often heavy when novices are
learning new ideas and vocabulary terms at the same time. Cook asks the undergraduates enrolled in her
courses to imitate her ASL-based gestures as they are introduced to new geological concepts and encourages her
students to use the hand motions when talking with one another in discussion groups. In Cook's class,
the single-minded focus on written and spoken language that characterizes so much university teaching and
learning has been nudged aside, making room for the intuitive genius of gesture.
We can do the same, elevating gesture above its current status as a dismissed or disparaged adjunct to
speech. A good place to start, making more gestures ourselves. Research shows that moving our hands advances
our understanding of abstract or complex concepts, reduces our cognitive load, and improves our memory.
Making gestures also helps us get our message across to others with more persuasive force.
Studies demonstrate that hearing speech and seeing gesture at the same time evoke a stronger reaction from the
brains of those listening and watching than does speech or movement on its own.
Gesture works to amplify the impact of speech. The sight of a speaker making gestures effectively captures
listeners' attention and directs it to the words being uttered. The sight of someone making motions that are not
gestures, moving while carrying out a functional act such as stirring a cup of coffee with a spoon,
does not have the same attention-grabbing effect. One of the brain regions roused to attention by the
sight of gesture is the auditory cortex, the part of the brain responsible for processing oral language.
Hand gestures appear to alert the auditory cortex that meaningful communication is occurring,
says Spencer Kelly, a professor of psychology and neuroscience at Colgate University in New York.
When we make gestures as we explain a concept or tell a story, others better understand what
we're saying. Our hand movements clarify, specify, and elaborate on our speech in ways that aid our
audience's comprehension. People are also more likely to remember what we've said when we deliver gestures
along with our words. In one study, subjects who had watched a videotaped speech were 33 percent more
likely to recall a point from the talk if it was accompanied by a gesture. This effect, detected
immediately after the subjects viewed the recording, grew even more pronounced with the passage of time.
30 minutes after watching the speech, subjects were more than 50 percent more likely to remember
the gesture-accompanied points. It's just these benefits of observing gesture that should lead us
to take a second step, seeking out educational resources for ourselves and others, in which the
instructor makes proficient use of physical movement. A number of studies have demonstrated that
instructional videos that include gesture produce significantly more learning for the people who
watch them. Viewers direct their gaze more efficiently, pay more attention to essential
information, and more readily transfer what they have learned to new situations. Videos that incorporate
gestures seem to be especially helpful for those who begin with relatively little knowledge of the
concept being covered. For all learners, the beneficial effect of gesture appears to be even stronger for
video instruction than for live in-person instruction. Yet, the most popular and widely viewed instructional
videos available online largely fail to leverage the power of gesture, according to a team of psychologists
from UCLA and California State University Los Angeles. The researchers examined the top 100 videos on
YouTube devoted to explaining the concept of standard deviation, an important topic in the study of
statistics. In 68 percent of these recordings, they report, the instructor's hands were not even visible. In the
remaining videos, instructors mostly use their hands to point or to make emphatic beat gestures. They employed
symbolic gestures, the type of gesture that is especially helpful in conveying abstract concepts in fewer than
10 percent of the videos reviewed. The takeaway? When selecting instructional videos for ourselves or for our
children or our students, we should look for those in which the teacher's hands are visible and active. And if we
ourselves are called upon to teach online, or even just to communicate via Zoom or another video conferencing platform,
we should make sure that others can see our moving hands. Research suggests that making these motions will
improve our own performance. People who gesture as they teach on video, it's been found, speak more fluently and
articulately, make fewer mistakes, and present information in a more logical and intelligible fashion.
Enacting gestures has another, more indirect benefit. When others, children, students, co-workers, employees,
see us gesturing, they tend to make more hand motions themselves. But we need not wait for them to follow our
example. We can explicitly encourage them to gesture. A simple request to move your hands as you explain that
may be all it takes. For children in elementary school, for example, encouraging them to gesture as
they work on math problems leads them to discover new problem-solving strategies expressed first in their
hand movements and to learn more successfully the mathematical concept under study. Another experiment,
this one conducted with college students, found that those who were encouraged to gesture while solving
spatial problems, such as rotating a mental object or visualizing the folding of a piece of paper,
solved more of the problems correctly than students who were prohibited from gesturing,
or even students who were allowed but not encouraged to move their hands. The gesturing students'
improved capacity for spatial thinking persisted into the solving of a second round of spatial problems
during which they were not permitted to gesture. The spatial skills supported by their initial
gestures had become internalized, the researchers suggest, and the internalized effects of gesturing on
the students' thinking carried over into a new and different set of spatial problems. Even adults,
when asked to gesture more, respond by increasing their rate of gesture production and consequently speak more
fluently. When teachers are told about the importance of gesturing to student learning and encouraged to make more
gestures during instruction, their students make greater learning gains as a result. Encouraging others to gesture
may have surprisingly powerful effects like helping to close achievement gaps. The disparity in spatial thinking
skills between males and females is the largest known cognitive gender difference. A study led by psychologists at
the University of Chicago found that five-year-old boys were already better than girls the same age at solving spatial
thinking problems that involved mentally fitting shapes together to make a whole. Upon closer analysis, however, this
disparity was revealed to be not a gender difference so much as a difference in the propensity to gesture.
The more children gestured while executing the task, the better their performance, and boys tended to gesture
far more than girls. While 27% of boys gestured on all eight problems, for example, only 3% of girls did.
23% of girls did not gesture at all, compared to only 6% of boys. The study's authors suggest that this
discrepancy may emerge from differences in boys and girls' experience. Boys are more likely to play with
spatially-oriented toys and video games, they note, and may become more comfortable making spatial gestures
as a result. Another study, this one conducted with four-year-olds, reported that children who were
encouraged to gesture got better at rotating mental objects, another task that draws heavily on spatial
thinking skills. Girls in this experiment were especially likely to benefit from being prompted
to gesture. Another, more subtle approach to promoting gesture involves creating occasions for its use,
setting up scenarios in which people are likely to move their hands. One such circumstance arises when
people are asked to improvise, that is, to come up with an explanation or a narrative on the spot in
front of an audience. Improvisation is cognitively taxing, and in the face of its demands we tend to gesture
more. Wolf Michael Roth is a cognitive scientist at the University of Victoria in Canada. His research on
the role of gesture in the development of scientific literacy has led him to change the way he conducts his
courses as a professor. Rather than presenting lectures in which he does most of the talking,
Roth finds as many opportunities as he can to ask individual students to describe and explain the topics
being covered in that day's class. Lacking a fully developed understanding, or even the relevant
technical vocabulary, his students lean heavily on gesture to convey their budding knowledge, and this is
just what their professor wants to see. It is from the attempt of expressing themselves that
understanding evolves, rather than the other way around, he maintains. Roth is also a practitioner of
another kind of occasion creation. He has observed, and research has confirmed, that people are more likely
to gesture when they have something to gesture at. Providing what Roth calls visual artifacts—charts,
diagrams, maps, models, photographs—induces speakers to gesture more, thus generating all the benefits
for understanding that such hand motions confer. With his colleagues in the University of Victoria
physics department, he has developed a set of visual depictions and concrete models that the physics
professors now use to encourage gesture production in class. When standing next to such objects, students
can simply point to parts or processes they can't yet fully describe or explain, allowing them to engage in
more mature physics talk than would otherwise be possible at this early stage of their studies. The use of
gesture supplies a temporary scaffold that supports these undergraduates' still wobbly understanding of the
subject as they fix their knowledge more firmly in place. One more way to leverage the power of
gesture—we can pay closer attention to the manner in which others move their hands. As we've discovered,
people's newest and most advanced ideas often show up first in their gestures. Moreover, individuals signal
their readiness to learn when their gestures begin to diverge from their speech. In our single-minded focus on
spoken language, however, we may miss the cues conveyed in this other mode. Research finds that even
experienced teachers pick up on less than a third of the information contained in students' hand movements.
But studies also demonstrate that we can train ourselves to attend more closely to gestures' corporeal code.
In a study carried out by Susan Golden Meadow and colleagues at the University of Chicago, a group of adults was
recruited to watch video recordings of children solving conservation problems, like the water-pouring task we
encountered earlier. They were then offered some basic information about gesture—that
gestures often convey important information not found in speech, and that they could attend not only to what
people say with their words, but also to what they say with their hands. It was suggested that they could pay
particular attention to the shape of a hand gesture, to the motion of a hand gesture, and to the
placement of a hand gesture. After receiving these simple instructions, study subjects
watched the videos once more. Before the brief gesture training, the observing adults identified only around
30 to 40 percent of instances when children displayed emerging knowledge in their gestures. After receiving the
training, their hit rate shot up to about 70 percent. With a little effort, it's possible to glean the
information gesture holds, and once we do so we have a host of new options. We can supply the insight the
gesturer is reaching for—an insight for which research suggests she is already mentally primed. We can
translate that individual's gestures into words—it looks like you're suggesting that—and we can second
her gesture by reproducing it ourselves, thereby reaffirming the promising strategy she has pointed to
with her hands.
It's clear that spontaneous gestures can support intelligent thinking. There's also a place for what we might call
designed gestures—that is, motions that are carefully formulated in advance to convey a particular notion.
Geologist Michelle Cook's gestures, inspired by sign language, fall into this category. She very deliberately uses hand
hand movements to help students understand spatial concepts that are difficult to communicate in words.
Designed gestures offer another benefit as well. They are especially effective at reinforcing our memory.
That's because gesturing while speaking involves sinking multiple mental hooks into the material to be remembered—hooks
that enable us to reel in that piece of information when it is needed later on.
There is the auditory hook—we hear ourselves saying the words aloud. There is the visual hook—we see
ourselves making the relevant gesture. And there is the proprioceptive hook—this comes from feeling our
hands make the gesture. Proprioception is the sense that allows us to know where our body parts are positioned in space.
Surprisingly, this proprioceptive cue may be the most powerful of the three.
Research shows that making gestures enhances our ability to think, even when our gesturing hands are
hidden from our view. Kerry Ann Dixon, an Associate Professor of Anatomy and Cell Biology at
Victoria University in Australia, makes use of all three of these hooks when she teaches.
Instead of memorizing dry lists of body parts and systems, her students practice pretending
to cry—the gesture that corresponds to the lacrimal gland—tear production—placing their hands behind
their ears—cochlea—hearing—and swaying their bodies—vestibular system—balance.
They feign the act of chewing—mandibular muscles—mastication—as well as spitting—salivary glands—saliva
production. They act as if they were inserting a contact lens, as if they were picking their nose,
and as if they were engaging in tongue-kissing—motions that represent the mucous membranes of the eye,
nose, and mouth, respectively. Dixon reports that students' test scores in anatomy are 42% higher
when they are taught with gestures than when taught the terms on their own.
The acquisition of vocabulary is also central to learning a foreign language. And here, too,
design gestures can act as an aid to memory, says cognitive psychologist and linguist Manuela Macedonia.
Today, Macedonia researches second language acquisition as a senior scientist at Johannes
Kepler University in Austria. But earlier in her career, she was a language instructor,
teaching Italian to German-speaking college students. Back then, Macedonia found herself
increasingly frustrated with the conventional format of foreign language courses—a lot of sitting,
listening, and writing. That's not how anyone learns their native language, she notes. Young children
encounter new words in a rich sensory motor context. As they hear the word apple, they see and touch the
shiny red fruit. They may even bring it to their mouth, tasting its sweet flesh and smelling its crisp
scent. All of these many hooks for memory are missing from the second language classroom. Macedonia sought to
recover at least one physical movement. She began pairing each vocabulary word with a corresponding
gesture. After demonstrating the gesture for her students, she would ask them to perform the motion
themselves while speaking the word aloud. Her students learned new words more easily this way,
she found, and retained them more successfully over time. Macedonia eventually became a student again
herself, writing her PhD thesis on the use of gesture to enhance verbal memory during foreign language
encoding. In the years since, she has continued to contribute to a growing body of evidence showing
that enacting a gesture while learning a word helps cement that word in memory, perhaps by stimulating
a more extensive network of areas in the brain. In a study published in 2020, for example, Macedonia and a group of
six co-authors compared study participants who had paired new foreign language words with gestures to
those who had paired the learning of new words with images of those words. The researchers found evidence
that the motor cortex, the area of the brain that controls bodily movement, was activated in the gesturing
group when they re-encountered the vocabulary words they had learned. In the picture viewing group,
the motor cortex remained dormant. The sensory motor enrichment generated by gesturing, Macedonia and her
co-authors suggest, helps to make the associated word more memorable. Macedonia has also begun
experimenting with a form of extended technology that seems a natural fit with her previous work,
an online language learning platform that features a virtual agent or avatar providing instruction and
vocabulary. The avatar on the screen behaves just as Macedonia did as a teacher. It demonstrates a gesture
which the user imitates as he or she repeats the novel word. Evaluations of the platform show that
users who follow the avatar in making a gesture achieve more lasting learning than those who simply hear the
word. Gesturing students also learn more than those who observe the gesture but don't enact it themselves.
Studies by other researchers have found that math students solve problems more quickly and
generalize their new knowledge more effectively after they have been taught by an avatar that gestures
than by one that does not. Online instructional resources, including commercial language learning
platforms like Duolingo and Rosetta Stone, might be made much more effective by adding an animated
agent who induces users to engage in gesture. In addition to reinforcing memory, design gestures can
lighten our mental load. Gesturing offloads our cognitive burden in much the same way as making a list or
drawing a diagram on a piece of paper, except that we always have our hands with us ready to assume some of
the weight. Indeed, studies show that when people are given challenging problems to solve, but are
prohibited from using pencil and paper, they gesture more to compensate. A familiar example of such
offloading is the way young children count on their fingers when working out a math problem. Their fingers
hold an intermediate sum so that their minds are free to think about the mathematical operation they must
execute—addition, subtraction—to reach the final answer. More complex or conceptual gestures serve a
similar purpose for older children and adults. Our hands offer our heads overflow capacity, such that we can
manage a greater volume of information overall, and can subject that information to a greater number of
acts of manipulation and transformation. In pursuit of that additional capacity, some teachers purposely show
their students how to shift information onto their hands. Washington State math teacher Brendan Jeffries
turned to gesture as a way of easing the mental load carried by his students, many of whom come from
low-income households, speak English as a second language, or both. Academic language, vocabulary terms
like congruent and equivalent and quotient, is not something my students hear in their homes, by and large,
says Jeffries, who works for the Auburn School District in Auburn, a small city south of Seattle. I could see
that my kids were stumbling over those words even as they were trying to keep track of the numbers and
perform the mathematical operations. So Jeffries devised a series of simple hand gestures to accompany,
or even temporarily replace, the unfamiliar terms that taxed his students' ability to carry out mental
math. To signify that an angle is acute, Jeffries taught them, make Pac-Man with your arms. To signify that
it is obtuse, spread out your arms like you're going to hug someone. And to signify a right angle,
flex an arm like you're showing off your muscle. For addition, bring two hands together. For division,
make a karate chop. To find the area of a shape, motion as if you're using your hand as a knife to butter bread.
Jeffries' students enthusiastically adopted the gestures, and they now employ them while talking in class,
while doing homework, and even while taking tests, he reports. As they become more adept at executing the
mathematical operations themselves, the students are often able to reincorporate the academic language
that had confused them initially, a benefit of the mental spaciousness made possible by the load-lightning
effects of gesture. Jeffries' approach has proved so successful in helping his students learn math that he has been
asked to extend it to all 22 schools in his district. He is now at work on developing a set of gestures to support
students in reading and writing, motions that indicate terms like character, setting, summary, and main point.
As Brendan Jeffries' students have discovered, our hands are impressively flexible tools.
They can represent so many things, an entrepreneur's vision for his product, an infant step towards spoken language, a teacher's clue
a teacher's clue that a student is ready to learn. Hands can be a prompt, a window, a way station, but what they ought
never have to be is still. Part Two, Thinking with Our Surroundings
Chapter Four, Thinking with Natural Spaces
As the summer of 1945 came to an end, the artist Jackson Pollock was approaching a breaking point.
New York City, where he lived in a downtown apartment, felt increasingly frenetic and chaotic. His ever-present
struggles with drinking and depression seemed to be worsening. His wife, the painter Lee Krasner,
worried about his mental health. In August, Pollock and Krasner went to visit friends on the east end of Long
Island, then a quiet home to farmers and fishermen, as well as a few artists and writers. Pollock felt both
soothed and stimulated by the place. The light, the green, the cool breezes blowing in from Long Island Sound.
After returning from the trip, Pollock sat for three days, thinking, on a couch in the 8th Street apartment.
When he rose to his feet, he had a plan. He and Lee would move to the east end.
In short order, Pollock and Krasner relocated to a ramshackle farmhouse near the sleepy hamlet of
Springs, Long Island. Pollock spent hours on the house's back porch, gazing out at the trees and at
the marshland stretching down to Bonac Creek. The move to Springs would inaugurate a years-long period of
relative peace for the volatile painter. It was a healing place, says Audrey Flack,
a fellow artist who spent time with the couple on Long Island, and they were in great need of being healed.
Nature changed Pollock's thinking, gently tempering his raging intensity, and it also changed his art.
In New York, Pollock worked at an easel, painting intricate, involved designs.
In Springs, where he worked in a converted barn full of light and views of nature, he began spreading
his canvases on the floor and pouring or flinging paint from above. Art critics view this period of
Pollock's life as the high point of his career. The years when he produced drip painting masterpieces like
Shimmering Substance, 1946, and Autumn Rhythm, 1950. The fulcrum for this turn of fortune was the time
Pollock spent musing in his New York apartment. The artist said it was then that he realized he would
always be homeless when inside. Out of doors, he found his home.
Artists like Jackson Pollock are not the only people whose mental activity is shaped by their surroundings.
All of us think differently depending on where we are. The field of cognitive science commonly
compares the human brain to a computer, but the influence of place reveals a major limitation of
this analogy. While a laptop works the same way whether it's being used at the office or while
we're sitting in a park, the brain is deeply affected by the setting in which it operates.
And nature provides particularly rich and fertile surroundings with which to think.
That's because our brains and bodies evolved to thrive in the outdoors. Our ancient forebears
practiced a lifestyle that would look to us like a camping trip that lasts a lifetime, as a pair of
ecologists has put it. Over hundreds of thousands of years of dwelling outside, the human organism became
precisely calibrated to the characteristics of its verdant environment so that even today our senses and
our cognition are able to easily and efficiently process the particular features present in natural
settings. Our minds are tuned to the frequencies of the organic world. No such evolutionary adjustment
has prepared us for the much more recent emergence of the world in which we now spend almost all our
time. The built environment with its sharp lines and unforgiving textures and relentless motion.
We've set up camp amid the high rises and highways of our modern milieu, but our minds are not at ease in this
habitat. The mismatch between the stimuli we evolved to process and the sights and sounds that regularly confront our
senses has the effect of depleting our limited mental resources. We are left frazzled, fatigued,
and prone to distraction simply as a function of the hours we spend in a setting for which we are
biologically ill-equipped. Just how much of our lives unfolds inside buildings and vehicles is revealed by
scientists' time use studies. Only about seven percent of our time is spent outdoors. That's much,
much less than for our nature-dwelling ancestors, of course, but it's meager even when compared to that of
Americans 20 years ago. More than 60 percent of American adults report spending five hours or less
outside in nature each week. Children, too, engage in outdoor recreation far less frequently than earlier
generations. Only 26 percent of mothers report that their kids play outside every day. Such trends are likely to
continue. More than half of Earth's humans now live in cities, and by 2050 that figure is predicted to
reach almost 70 percent. Yet despite these massive shifts in culture, our biology remains identical to
that of our progenitors. Even now, our brains and bodies respond to nature in ways that reveal the deep
imprint of our evolution in the outdoors. In fact, we can draw a direct line from the kind of landscapes we
enjoy today to the settings in which our species evolved. One place to begin drawing that line is
with the crowds of people who throng to a half-mile-wide strip of land in the middle of Manhattan Island.
42 million people visit New York Central Park each year, ambling across its wide sheep meadow,
browsing its fragrant gardens, circling its shimmering reservoir. Why are so many drawn to these 840 acres?
Its creator knew the reason. Natural scenery, wrote landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted,
employs the mind without fatigue and yet enlivens it, and thus, through the influence of the mind over
the body, gives the effect of refreshing rest and reinvigoration to the whole system.
Residents and tourists alike love Central Park's rolling hills, copses of trees,
and dappled bodies of water. But though the park's features look natural, they were in fact almost
entirely man-made. When Olmsted started his work in 1858, the piece of land with which he had to
contend was an unpromising expanse of swamps and rocky outcroppings, available for parkland only because
real estate developers could not build on it. Over the course of the next 15 years, more than 3,000
laborers moved some 10 million cartloads of rocks and dirt and planted an estimated 5 million trees
and shrubs in service to Olmsted's vision. That vision was drawn from the visits Olmsted made to
legendary estates in England, such as Birkenhead Park and Trentham Gardens, which had themselves been
contrived by landscape architects in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
The preferences around which Olmsted was shaping Central Park were older still,
ancient in fact, reaching back to humanity's early days on the African savanna.
The particular environment in which our species evolved left us with a set of predilections that
persist to this day. For it's not just any kind of nature that appeals to us.
Much of what is natural is unpleasant or even threatening—predators, storms, deserts, swamps.
In order to survive, humans evolved strong—and shared—preferences for certain kinds of natural
spaces—spaces that look safe and resource-rich. We like wide, grassy expanses dotted by loose clumps
of trees with spreading branches, and including a nearby source of water. We like the capacity to see
long distances in many directions from a protected perch—aspects that geographer Jay Appleton memorably named
Prospect and Refuge. And we like a bit of mystery—a beckoning promise of more to be revealed around the bend.
The world's greatest landscape designers intuited these preferences and incorporated them into their
work. Starting in the mid-18th century, Lancelot Brown—better known by his nickname, Capability—transformed
more than 250 English estates, moving hills and planting trees in order to achieve his vision of an
idealized countryside. Brown was succeeded by another British landscape architect, Humphrey Repton,
who drew before-and-after sketches for prospective clients. The after-pictures promised shady clusters
of trees giving way to views of open meadows and glimmering ponds. Repton's and Brown's designs
inspired Frederick Law Olmstead, along with many others, but they were no mere fashion.
The preferences they elevate transcend time, culture, and nationality. They are shared by people all over
the world—from Australia to Argentina, from Nigeria to Korea—including people who must go to great lengths
to emulate the archetype. Landowners in the bone-dry southwest United States irrigate their properties to
evoke the lush, grassy savanna. Gardeners in Japan prune their trees so that the boughs resemble the spreading
branches of the trees of East Africa. Such choices reflect the brain's very particular evolved history—the
ghosts of environments pass, in the phrase of biologist Gordon Oriens. What we imagine to be
aesthetic preferences are really survival instincts honed over millennia—instincts that helped us find
promising places to find promising places to forage and to rest. When, today, we return to nature when
we're stressed or burned out, when we take a walk through the woods or gaze out at the ocean's rolling waves,
we are engaging in what one researcher calls environmental self-regulation—a process of
psychological renewal that our brains cannot accomplish on their own.
It's not simply that we prefer such settings. They actually help us to think better—in part by
relieving our stress and re-establishing our mental equilibrium. Drivers who travel along tree-lined roads,
for example, recover more quickly from stressful experiences and handle emerging stresses with more
calm than do people who drive along roads crowded with billboards, buildings, and parking lots.
Laboratory studies of people who are given a challenging math test or are subjected to
sharp questioning by a panel of judges report that subsequent contact with nature calms their nervous
system, returning them to a state of psychological balance in the wake of such trying experiences.
The more stressed individuals are, the more benefit they derive from exposure to nature.
The sights and sounds of nature help us rebound from stress.
They can also help us out of a mental rut.
Rumination is a psychologist's term for the way we may fruitlessly visit and revisit the same negative
thoughts. On our own, we can find it difficult to pull ourselves out of this cycle, but exposure to
nature can extend our ability to adopt more productive thought patterns.
Gregory Bratman, an assistant professor at the University of Washington, asked study participants
to undergo a brain scan and to complete a measure of ruminative thinking before taking a 90-minute walk outside.
Half the participants strolled through a quiet leafy natural area, the other half walked alongside a
busy roadway. Upon returning to the lab, all the participants took the ruminative thinking measure
and had their brain scanned for a second time. People who'd spent the previous hour and a half in nature
had become less preoccupied by the negative aspects of their lives. In addition, an area of the brain
associated with rumination, the subgenual prefrontal cortex, was less active than before the nature walk.
The people who had walked alongside a busy roadway gained no such relief. Rumination is especially
common in those who are depressed, and research has shown that a walk in nature lifts the mood of
people diagnosed with depression. It also improves their memory. The obsessive cycling through negative
thoughts that many depressed people experience consumes a significant portion of their mental resources,
experiences, adversely affecting their ability to recall important information. A deficit that time
in nature helps ameliorate. Yet another way that nature helps us think better is by enhancing our
ability to maintain our focus on the task in front of us. People who have recently spent time amid outdoor
greenery catch more errors on a proofreading assignment, for example, and provide quicker and more accurate
answers on a fast-paced cognitive test than do people who have just finished a walk in an urban setting.
Working memory, our ability to hold in mind information relevant to the problem we're currently solving,
also benefits from time spent in a natural setting. In a study led by Mark Berman, a psychologist at
the University of Chicago, participants who walked through an arboretum for just under an hour
scored 20% higher on a test of working memory, compared to those who spent the same amount of
time navigating busy city streets. Time spent in nature can even relieve the symptoms of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADHD. A pair of researchers at the University of Illinois,
Andrea Faber-Taylor and Ming Kuo, were intrigued by reports from parents that their ADHD-affected children
seemed to function better after exposure to nature. Putting this possibility to an empirical test,
they had children aged 7 to 12 take a supervised walk in a park, in a residential neighborhood,
or in a busy area of downtown Chicago. Following the walks, the youngsters who'd spent time in the park
were better able to focus than the children in the other two groups, so much so, in fact, that on a test of their
ability to concentrate, they scored like typical kids without ADHD. Indeed, Taylor and Kuo point out,
a 20-minute walk in a park improved children's concentration and impulse control as much as
a dose of an ADHD drug like Ritalin. Doses of nature might serve as a safe, inexpensive, widely accessible
new tool in the toolkit for managing ADHD symptoms, the researchers concluded. All these salutary effects
on our mental function can be understood as a process of restoration. Time spent outdoors gives
us back what the built environment so relentlessly drains away. More than a century ago, psychologist
William James drew a distinction that bears closely on our understanding of nature's restorative powers.
There are two kinds of attention, wrote James in his 1890 book, The Principles of Psychology,
Voluntary and Passive. Voluntary attention takes effort. We must continually direct and redirect our
focus as we encounter an onslaught of stimuli or concentrate hard on a task. Navigating an urban
environment, with its hard surfaces, sudden movements, and loud, sharp noises requires voluntary attention.
Passive attention, by contrast, is effortless. Diffuse and unfocused, it floats from object to object,
topic to topic. This is the kind of attention evoked by nature, with its murmuring sounds and fluid motions.
Psychologists working in the tradition of James call this state of mind, soft fascination.
The respite from insistent cognitive demands that nature provides gives our supply of mental resources
an opportunity to renew and regenerate. As we've seen, these resources are finite and soon exhausted,
not only by the clamor of urban living, but also by the stringent requirements of academic and professional work.
Just as our brains did not evolve to react with equanimity to speeding cars and wailing sirens,
neither did they evolve to read, or to perform advanced math, or to carry out any of the highly
abstract and complex tasks we ask of ourselves every day. Though we manage to meet these demands,
our near-universal struggles with attention and focus, not to mention motivation and engagement,
suggests that we ought to pay more heed to the supply side of our attentional economy. That is,
not simply drawing down our mental resources, but also ensuring their regular replenishment.
We can do so by simply going outside. We don't need to wait for perfect weather or to find our way to some
unspoiled wilderness. Any form of nature, under any conditions, will do. There is, however, an optimal
attitudinal stance we can adopt, what researchers call open monitoring, or a curious, accepting,
non-judgmental response to all we encounter. Dora Abrahamson, a professor of education at the
university of california berkeley, suggests borrowing the technique of soft gazing from the traditional
chinese practice of meditative movement known as tai chi. When soft gazing was introduced at a
workshop he organized on bringing mindfulness to education, Abrahamson reports that one participant
immediately noticed how it departed from his usual mode. There is hard looking at, the participant pointed
out, and there is the soft receiving of images. The orientation we adopt when in nature is ideally
one of such informal mindfulness. For those intending to establish a more formal practice of meditation,
research shows that doing so in nature makes the habit easier to implement and maintain.
When we seek psychological restoration outdoors, it's best to leave our devices behind. Research has
found that using a smartphone while outside substantially counteracts the attention enhancement effects of
being in nature. One exception might be the use of an app like Retune, an example of extended
technology developed by University of Chicago psychologist Mark Berman and doctoral student Catherine
Schertz. The name is an acronym that stands for Restoring Through Urban Nature Experience.
Retune is like a conventional GPS system, but programmed with a different set of values.
Instead of providing its users with the speediest route, it offers them the path with the greatest
number of trees, the largest proportion of flowers, the highest frequency of birdsong.
Say a visitor to Chicago wants to walk from the university's campus in the city's Hyde Park neighborhood to
Promontory Point, a peninsula that juts out into Lake Michigan. If she consulted Waze, the popular mapping
app owned by Google, its recommended route would take a brisk 28 minutes, three blocks north on South
Blackstone Avenue, then a right on East 56th Street and a left onto South Shore Drive. It's the most direct
way to make the journey, but the experience would be one of glass and brick, concrete sidewalks and
asphalt roads, honking cars and hurried commuters. The same coordinates entered into Retune would produce
a markedly different suggested route, a stroll that begins in the Midway Plaisance, an urban oasis of green,
then a ramble through Jackson Park with its lush gardens and sparkling lagoons, emerging finally onto
a path that runs along the shores of Lake Michigan, winding its way to Promontory Point. The trip would
take a comparatively less efficient 34 minutes to complete, but our visitor would likely arrive at
her destination clearer headed and more relaxed. There are values embedded in the technology we use,
and as we scroll and tap we often unthinkingly adopt these priorities as our own. By extending
technology with the thought-enhancing properties of nature, Retune encourages us to question the
elevation of efficiency above all other values, including our own mental well-being. Retune makes
its own commitment clear. It's not the speed of the journey, it's what you see along the way.
The Retune app assigns each potential route a restoration score based on the presence of auditory
and visual features that connote naturalness. Its co-inventor, Mark Berman, is one of a number of
researchers working to answer the question, what makes nature natural? This investigation may seem
befuddlingly circular, but if science could determine at a granular level precisely which features of
nature work their effects on our bodies and brains, such information could be used to inform the design
of buildings and landscapes that actively enhance their users' mood, cognition, and health.
Through close analysis of natural and man-made scenes, Berman and others have begun to compile
a kind of taxonomy of naturalness. Natural landscapes, they have found, feature less variation in hue than
urban settings. That is, their colors range from green to yellow to brown to more green, and more color
saturation or pure undiluted color. Natural environs also present the eye with fewer straight lines and more curving
shapes than do urban ones. Finally, unlike man-made designs in which edges tend to be spaced apart, think of a row of
windows on the face of an office building. In natural vistas, edges tend to cluster densely together. Picture the overlapping
edges of a tree's many leaves. Applying these characteristics as a filter, Berman and his
team have designed a computer model that can predict with 81% accuracy whether a given image depicts a
scene that actual human beings have rated as highly natural. Other researchers have identified additional
features that distinguish natural tableau from their artificial counterparts. Natural settings incorporate
dynamic and diffuse light, gentle, often rhythmic movement, and muted sounds that repeat with
variations such as ocean waves or birdsong. It's not the case that nature is simpler or more elementary than
man-made environments. Indeed, natural scenes tend to contain more visual information than do built ones.
And this abundance of visual stimulation is a condition we humans crave. Roughly a third of the neurons in
the brain's cortex are dedicated to visual processing. It takes considerable visual novelty to satisfy our eyes'
voracious appetite. But balanced against this desire to explore is a desire to understand. We seek a sense
of order as well as an impression of variety. Nature meets both these needs, while artificial settings often
err on one side or the other. Built environs may be monotonous and under-stimulating. Picture the unvarying
glass and metal facades of many modern buildings, and the uniform rows of beige cubicles that fill many offices.
Or they may be overwhelming and over-stimulating, a barrage of light and sound and motion. Call to mind New York's
Times Square or Tokyo's Shibuya Crossing. Nature is complex, it's true, but its complexity is of a kind that our brains are
readily able to process. When we're surrounded by nature, we experience a high degree of perceptual
fluency, notes Yannick Joy, a senior researcher at the ISM, University of Management and Economics in
Lithuania. Basking in such ease gives our brains a rest, Joy explains, and also makes us feel good. We react
with positive emotion when information from our environment can be absorbed with little effort.
The perceptual fluency we experience in regard to nature emerges from the way the various elements
of a natural vista interact with one another. Natural scenes are more coherent, lacking the
jarring disjunctions common in man-made settings, a Rococo building next to a garish billboard beside a
severe modern sculpture. Natural scenes also offer more redundant information. The shape and color of a
leaf or a hillside repeat again and again, a factor that facilitates the brain's habit of making
predictions. When in nature we have a good sense from what we just looked at of what we will take
in with the glance that follows, unlike in an urban setting where we never know what will come upon next.
Natural environments are characterized by a deep degree of perceptual predictability and redundancy,
whereas urban scenes tend to consist of perceptually divergent objects, Joy notes.
These divergences compete for our visual attention and make urban scenes substantially
less easy to grasp and process. Fractals are one form of redundancy that has attracted particular
attention from scientists. A fractal pattern is one in which the same motif is repeated at differing scales.
Picture the frond of a fern, for example. Each segment, from the largest at the base of the plant to the
tiniest at its tip, is essentially the same shape. Such self-similar organization is found not only in
plants, but also in clouds and flames, sand dunes and mountain ranges, ocean waves and rock formations,
the contours of coastlines and the gaps in tree canopies. All of these phenomena are structured as
forms built of smaller forms built of still smaller forms, an order underlying nature's apparently casual
disarray. Fractal patterns are much more common in nature than in man-made environments. Moreover,
nature's fractals are of a distinctive kind. Mathematicians rank fractal patterns according to
their complexity on a scale from zero to three. Fractals found in nature tend to fall in the
middle range, with a value of between 1.3 and 1.5. Research shows that, when presented with
computer-generated fractal patterns, people prefer mid-range fractals to those that are more or less
complex. Studies have also demonstrated that looking at these patterns has a soothing effect
on the human nervous system. Measures of skin conductance reveal a dip in physiological arousal
when subjects are shown mid-range fractals. Likewise, people whose brain activity is being
recorded with EEG equipment enter a state that researchers call wakefully relaxed, simultaneously
alert and at ease when viewing fractals like those found in nature. There is even evidence that our
ability to think clearly and solve problems is enhanced by encounters with these nature-like fractals.
Study participants asked to carry out information search, map reading, and location judgment tasks
within computerized fractal landscapes did so most efficiently and effectively when the complexity of
the fractals fell within the middle range. Another experiment, led by Yannick Joy, required subjects to
complete challenging puzzles during and after exposure to fractal patterns of varying complexity.
They solved the puzzles most quickly, easily, and accurately when the fractals they saw had a structure
similar to those found in nature. It seems that our brains are optimized to process the fractal
characteristics of natural scenes. Hundreds of thousands of years of evolution have tuned our
perceptual faculties to the way visual information is structured in natural environments. We may not
take conscious note of fractal patterns, but at a level deeper than awareness, these patterns reverberate.
Research on the effects of fractals on the human psyche was pioneered by Richard Taylor,
a professor of physics, psychology, and art at the University of Oregon. As his title suggests,
Taylor has a dizzyingly broad range of interests. A number of years ago, he was studying the fractal
patterns present in the flow of electricity when the forms he saw reminded him of something, Jackson Pollock's
paintings. Pursuing this unexpected connection, Taylor analyzed a group of Pollock's later works and determined that
they, too, exhibited a fractal pattern with a value in the mid-range of 1.3 to 1.5.
Astonishingly, Pollock's strip paintings, the ones he made after moving from New York City to Springs,
Long Island, turn out to bear the visual signature of nature. Like Capability Brown and Humphrey Repton,
the landscape architects who unconsciously recreated the characteristic features of the East African
Savannah, Pollock seems to have tapped into humanity's ancient affinity for the natural world.
Take, for example, a drip painting Pollock completed in 1948, known only as Number 14.
Rendered in stark black, white, and gray, the artwork bears no immediate resemblance to the verdant
vegetation that surrounded the home he shared with Lee Krasner in Springs.
A longer look at the painting, however, draws the viewer deeper into its swoops and whirls,
its intricate nest of thinning and thickening lines. Says Richard Taylor admiringly,
if someone asked, can I have nature put onto a piece of canvas? The best example there has ever been of that
is 1948's Number 14.
Time spent in nature relieves stress, restores mental equilibrium, and enhances the ability
to focus and sustain attention. We spend most of our time indoors, however, so might we find ways to
make inside more like outside? Environmental psychologist Roger Ulrich has asked this question,
and answered it in the affirmative, regarding a particular kind of built setting, hospitals and other
healthcare facilities. Our ancient biological wiring allows us to exploit nature like a drug,
says Ulrich, now a professor of architecture at Chalmers University in Sweden, and he means this almost literally.
Several decades ago, he demonstrated that exposure to nature relieved pain and promoted healing in
patients recovering from surgery. Ulrich's study, carried out at a hospital in suburban Philadelphia,
found that patients who occupied rooms with a view of trees required fewer painkillers, experienced
fewer complications, and had shorter hospital stays than patients whose rooms looked out on a brick wall.
Nurses also recorded many fewer negative notes about patients' state of mind. Upset and crying needs
much encouragement for those individuals who had a view of greenery. Ulrich recounts that the inspiration
for the study emerged from his own long-ago experience. As a teenager, I had some serious
illnesses that forced me to spend time at home in bed, he says. My window was my compass of stability.
Every day I watched the trees in the wind. There was something endlessly calming about it.
Further research by Ulrich and other scientists has confirmed that exposure to natural elements
helps diminish patients' pain and hasten their recovery. This work helped inspire a revolution in
the design of healthcare facilities, leading to the renovation and construction of buildings that
provide patients and staff with natural light and views of greenery. It also led to a raft of research that
has sought to identify more precisely the effects of the out-of-doors on our bodies. This work has
established that nature is indeed a highly reliable and effective drug, bioengineered by evolution over
thousands of years. It appears to affect us all in the same fashion. Within 20 to 60 seconds of exposure to
nature, our heart rate slows, our blood pressure drops, our breathing becomes more regular, and our brain
activity becomes more relaxed. Even our eye movements change. We gaze longer at natural scenes than at built
ones, shifting our focus less frequently. We blink less often when viewing nature than when looking at urban
settings, indicating that nature imposes a less burdensome cognitive load. We remember details of natural
scenes more accurately, and brain scans show that a larger portion of the visual cortex is activated when
we look at nature, along with a larger number of the brain's pleasure receptors. Of course, it's not only
hospital patients who can benefit from regular doses of this drug. Our homes, schools, and workplaces
could all become more cognitively congenial spaces if they were to incorporate elements of what is known as
biophilic design. In a book published in 1984, the Harvard University biologist E. O. Wilson advanced
what he called the biophilia hypothesis, the notion that humans have an innate tendency to focus on life
and lifelike processes, an urge to affiliate with other forms of life. This urge is powerful, Wilson argued,
and our thinking, as well as our health and well-being, suffers when it is suppressed, as it must be when we
spend most of our time surrounded by inorganic forms and materials. Fortunately, he adds, an alternative
path has already been mapped out for us. Nature itself provides a comprehensive guide to the conditions
in which our minds and bodies work best. For example, we know that our brains thrive on the coherent
organization and redundant information embedded in plant life. So why not bring the green stuff inside?
That's what the managers of Second Home, a network of co-working spaces in Europe, have done.
More than a thousand plants fill the Second Home headquarters in London. When the space opened in
2014, E. O. Wilson was brought in to speak to the Second Home staff.
Everything we do at Second Home is inspired by nature and biophilia, says Rohan Silva, one of Second
Home's co-founders. Silva adds that the Second Home office in Lisbon, Portugal, was modeled on a
greenhouse and is home to even more vegetation, more than 2,000 plants representing 100 different
varieties, including talancias, philodendrons, and monsteras. Research indicates that the presence of
indoor plants does in fact improve employees' attention and memory and increases their productivity
levels. For students, too, a green wall in the classroom sprouting living plants has been shown
to enhance their ability to focus. Greenery is only one part of nature's bounty, of course,
and practitioners of biophilic design have begun to incorporate other organic elements into new
construction, of schools, office buildings, factories, and even skyscrapers. The 55-story Bank
of America tower, completed in 2009, sits at the corner of Bryant Park in Midtown Manhattan.
When people arriving at the entrance reach for a door handle, what they feel is not steel or plastic,
but wood. We wanted the first thing visitors touched to have a grain, an imprint of nature,
says Bill Browning, an environmental strategist who helped design the space.
Inside the lobby, the natural theme continues. The ceilings are covered in bamboo, and the walls
are constructed of stone in which the fossils of tiny shells and sea creatures are visible.
Even the shape of the tower was inspired by nature. It emulates the fractal form of a quartz crystal.
Biophilic design is an emerging discipline, but a handful of studies have begun to suggest
that working and learning in buildings inspired by nature can grant some of the same benefits for
cognition as actually being outdoors. In a study published in 2018, for example, a group of
researchers from Harvard's T.H. Chan School of Public Health asked participants to spend time in an indoor
environment featuring biophilic elements, potted plants, a bamboo wood floor, windows with a view of
greenery and a river, as well as an indoor environment lacking such elements, a windowless,
carpeted, fluorescent-lit space. Participants were outfitted with wearable sensors that monitored their
blood pressure and their skin conductance. Tests of mood and cognitive function were administered
following each visit. After just five minutes in the biophilic surroundings, the subjects' positive
emotions increased, their blood pressure and skin conductance dropped, and their short-term memory
improved by 14% over the level recorded following a visit to the non-biophilic environment.
It may not come as a surprise that the people in this study felt better in the space with windows.
Who doesn't prefer a glimpse of sun and sky to the sickly glow of fluorescent panels?
Yet for decades, planners and builders believed that thinking happens best under even, unchanging light,
shielded from the undesirable distractions and eye-straining glare ostensibly introduced by windows.
These beliefs still shape the spaces in which we learn and work today, spaces that were often
deliberately engineered to eliminate the natural variations in sunlight that we experience when outside.
Such subtle shifts in illumination, we now know, help keep us alert and help regulate our
biological clocks. Indeed, research shows that people who experience natural light during the day
sleep better, feel more energetic, and are more physically active. One study found that employees
exposed to daylight through windows in their offices sleep an average of 46 minutes more per night
than workers who labor in windowless spaces. The technology giant Google has determined that
employees who have desks positioned near windows report being more creative and productive than do
workers located farther away from sources of natural light. The company has issued guidelines for how much
daylight Googlers should be getting at work, and has asked some employees to wear light sensors around
their necks to determine whether their workplace makes the grade. In addition to brain-bound notions about
the ideal conditions for thinking, the buildings many of us occupy today were shaped by the energy crisis of
the 1970s, when windows were commonly blocked or removed in the name of energy conservation. Today, some
educational and business leaders are recognizing the folly of depriving students and workers of natural light.
At the HB Plant High School in Tampa, Florida, for example, the large windows that were closed off in the 1970s were
recently restored, letting daylight shine in for the first time in some four decades. When new schools and office
buildings are constructed, some architects are now thinking in terms of balancing occupants' need for natural light
with the obligation to reduce costs and conserve energy. At PS 62 in Staten Island, New York, also known as the
Kathleen Grimm School of Leadership and Sustainability, the school building generates as much energy as it consumes,
thanks to solar panels, a wind turbine, and heating and cooling systems powered by underground geothermal wells.
Completed in 2015, the structure achieves daylight autonomy as much as 90% of the time. That is,
its classrooms and hallways are illuminated almost entirely by the sun. In addition to saving funds
and protecting the environment, says Principal Lisa Sarnicola, the thoughtful design of the school
building enlivens the students' education. It changes the whole mood of the building, she says. It makes the
children happy. There is even evidence that views of nature are associated with improved academic
performance. John Spengler, a professor at the Chan School of Public Health at Harvard, employed an
ingenious method of gauging the greenness of school grounds, with satellite images taken by a NASA
spacecraft from 400 miles above the Earth. Spengler and his colleagues analyzed aerial photographs of
public schools in Massachusetts, determining the amount of vegetation present on their grounds and
compared these measurements with scores on the MCAS, the statewide assessment of academic skill earned by students
in grades three through ten. Controlling for race, gender, family income, and English as a second language, among other
factors, the results showed that a higher surrounding greenness contributes to a better English and mathematics
academic performance in students of all grades, the researchers reported.
Another, more direct test of the effect of natural surroundings was carried out by William Sullivan,
a professor of landscape architecture at the University of Illinois, and his colleague Dong Ying Li.
High school students were randomly assigned to a room with a view of greenery,
a room with a view of a building or parking lot, or a windowless room. The researchers taxed the mental
resources of the participants with a series of challenging activities, including completing a
proofreading exercise, giving a speech, and solving a set of mental math problems. Then Sullivan and Lee
administered a test of attention to each participant, gave them a ten-minute break, and administered the
attention test a second time, all within each participant's assigned room. The high school
students who were able to gaze out the window at greenery during their break scored 13% higher on
the second administration of the attention test. The students who looked out on built surroundings,
or at windowless walls, did not improve at all. The benefits of a room with a natural view
hold for office workers as well as students. A study carried out for the California Energy Commission
examined the effects of window access on the performance of two groups of people employed by
the Sacramento Municipal Utility District. Workers in the district's call center were found to process
calls 6 to 12% faster when they had the best possible view, a nearby window looking onto a green vista,
versus having no view. And workers in the district's main office were found to score 10 to 25% higher
on tests of mental function and memory recall when they had the best possible view versus having no view.
Even a brief glance out the window can make a difference in our mental capacity. Researchers from
the University of Melbourne in Australia found that a 40-second micro-break spent looking out at a roof
covered with flowering meadow plants, led study participants to perform better on a cognitive test,
then did an equally short break spent looking at a bare concrete expanse. Participants who gazed at the
green roof were more alert, made fewer errors, and were more in control of their attention. We can seek
out such micro-restorative opportunities throughout the day, replenishing our mental resources with each glance
out the window. Micro-restorative experiences have their place in busy work days and school schedules.
But longer stretches spent in nature, when we can arrange them, may change how we think in deeper and
more subtle ways, altering how we experience time and how we think about the future.
Oh, these vast, calm, measureless mountain days, exclaimed naturalist and author John Muir about the time
he spent hiking the Sierras in the American West. In May 1903, Muir guided Theodore Roosevelt,
then President of the United States, on a three-day camping trip through California's Yosemite Valley.
The first night, we camped in a grove of giant socorris.
The first night, we camped in a grove of giant socorris.
