is rooted in our awareness of the sensations that originate in our organs and extremities,
and the more alert we are to these inner signals, the more resilient we are able to be in the face
of life's hardships. The reason for this, every action we take requires the expenditure of scarce,
precious energy. On a level below awareness, we're constantly keeping tabs on how much energy we have
on hand, and how much energy we will need to take the actions the world demands of us.
Interoception acts as a continually updated gauge of our present status. Its cues let us know when
we can push ourselves and when we have to give ourselves a rest. They help us match our effort
to the magnitude of the challenge and pace ourselves so that we can see it through to the end.
And just as some people are better than others at using bodily sensations to guide their decisions,
some people are better than others at using interoceptive signals to monitor and manage
their moment-by-moment expenditure of energy. Martin Paulus is a professor of psychiatry at the
University of California, San Diego, who investigates the role of interoception in promoting resilience.
In a study he conducted in 2016, Paulus gave participants a list of statements like these,
asking them to agree or disagree with each one.
I can deal with whatever comes my way. I tend to bounce back after a hardship or illness.
I give my best effort no matter what. When things look hopeless, I don't give up. Under pressure,
I focus and think clearly. I am not easily discouraged by failure.
With their replies, his subjects sorted themselves into two distinct groups,
high resilience and low resilience. By their own accounts, when faced with adversity or challenge,
the high resilience group was likely to push on through to success, while members of the low
resilience group were more likely to struggle, burn out, or give up. Paulus found an additional
difference between the two groups. On average, the low resilience individuals exhibited poor
interoception, as measured by the heartbeat detection test, while the high resilience people possessed a keen
sense of their internal world. In order to explore such intriguing findings, Paulus has devised a protocol
that exposes volunteers to a challenging internal experience as their brains are being scanned.
Over the past decade, Paulus has administered this regimen called the Inspiratory Breathing Load Task
to hundreds of people. One of the most famous of his guinea pigs is the champion swimmer Diana Nayad.
A world record holder in distance swimming, Nayad made history in 1975 by becoming the first woman to swim around
Manhattan Island. Four decades later, at the age of 64, she set out to swim from Cuba to Florida.
Nayad was a model of resilience as she battled fatigue, nausea, and potentially deadly jellyfish stings
over the course of the 110-mile swim. She failed four times in the attempt before trying and succeeding
in August 2013. Later that same year, she became a pioneer in another fashion, arriving at Paulus' lab
to be studied. Before climbing into an MRI machine, she was fitted with a nose clip, which prevented her
from breathing through her nose, and with a tube that went into her mouth. At the end of the tube was a
stopper. When the stopper was removed, it was possible for Nayad to breathe freely through the tube.
When the stopper was inserted, only a very small amount of air could pass through.
Once inside the MRI chamber, Nayad was directed to look at a computer screen mounted in front of her eyes.
When the screen turned blue, the breathing tube was left open. When the screen turned yellow,
there was a 25% chance that the tube would be plugged, forcing Nayad to struggle for breath.
Observing the activity of Nayad's brain under each condition allowed Paulus and his colleagues to
investigate how she anticipated a stressor, how she responded to a stressor, and how she recovered
from a stressor. While all this was going on, Nayad was also responding to questions in a test of her
cognitive ability. Writing about the experience in her autobiography, Nayad commented,
Of course, I'm competitive, so I wanted to score higher than anyone who's ever had the MRI.
The scan of Nayad's brain revealed a distinctive response to this uncomfortable experience.
Her insula mounted an intense anticipatory response before the stressor, when the screen
turned yellow, but settled down to a state of relative quiescence during and after the stressor.
As for the cognitive test, Nayad recalls Paulus showing her the results, presented as dots charted
on a digitized graph. Clumped at the bottom are ordinary people, who did very poorly on the test
during the periods of oxygen restriction, and when they were anticipating the upcoming oxygen
restriction, she recounts. Next were a group significantly above the control group, who did
much better. These were the Marines. The next group was a big bump up from that, Navy SEALs. Then Dr.
Paulus pointed high up to the right, almost off the computer screen. This, he said, is me.
Nayad is truly an outlier, but Paulus has found the same pattern in elite performers of all stripes.
Astonishingly, putting these individuals through an extremely unpleasant,
interoceptive experience actually improves their cognitive performance. These champions have a
superior ability to sense their body's cues, and are therefore better able to monitor and manage
their body's resources as they rise to meet a challenge. They are like efficient, well-calibrated
motors that don't waste even a bit of power, keeping plenty of energy in reserve. People with low
resilience, by contrast, present a very different profile. When undergoing the inspiratory breathing
load task, their brain scans show a pattern that is the opposite of Diana Nayad's. Low levels of
activity before a stressor, and high levels during and after the stressor. The self-management of these
individuals is sloppy all over the place, like poorly calibrated motors that leak power. They are brought up
short by challenges and then waste energy in the scramble to catch up. They begin to struggle to answer the
test questions. Discouraged by their failures, their energy reserves depleted, they lose motivation and give up.
Such differences clearly matter in attempting a physical feat of courage or endurance, but they
matter too when the pursuit is of a more cerebral sort. Mental activity, like any other we undertake,
requires the mobilization and management of energy. Indeed, the brain consumes fully 20% of the body's
energy supply. The ability to allocate our internal resources effectively in tackling mental challenges
challenges is a capacity researchers call cognitive resilience.
For one of Martin Paulus' collaborators, cognitive resilience holds a special importance.
Elizabeth Stanley, an associate professor of security studies at Georgetown University,
is a member of a storied military family who spent years working as an intelligence officer in the U.S.
Army, including postings in Germany, South Korea, and the Balkans.
In military service and in civilian life, Stanley drove herself relentlessly.
She describes her modus operandi as dig in, access deep wells of willpower and determination, and power through.
For decades, she writes, I considered my capacity to ignore and override my body and my emotions in this
way to be a good thing, a sign of strength, self-discipline, and determination.
Eventually, however, she came to recognize that this default strategy was actually undermining my
performance and well-being. The time she threw up all over her computer keyboard after months of 16-hour
days at work on her PhD dissertation was one hint. Seeking a different approach, Stanley found
her way to mindfulness meditation, which she practices daily. She also created a program
called Mindfulness-Based Mind Fitness Training, designed to bolster the cognitive resilience of
service members facing high-stress situations. MMFT, as it is known, places an emphasis on recognizing
and regulating the body's internal signals. In collaboration with academic psychologists and
neuroscientists, Stanley has tested the efficacy of the program among troops as they prepare to
deploy to combat. Results show that the training helps participants maintain their attentional focus
and preserve their working memory, even under the most challenging circumstances.
In workshops around the country, Stanley teaches the method not only to members of the military,
but also to others in high-stress occupations—firefighters, police officers, social workers,
health care providers, disaster relief workers. Like the expert traders interviewed by Mark Fenton-O'Creevy,
and like the elite athletes studied by Martin Paulus, Stanley has found that the most cognitively
resilient soldiers pay close attention to their bodily sensations at the early stage of a challenge,
when signs of stress are just beginning to accumulate. She instructs her workshop participants
to do the same, using mindfulness techniques similar to the ones described by Jon Kabat-Zinn.
By remaining alert to these preliminary signals, she says, we can avoid being taken by surprise and
then overreacting, entering a state of physiological arousal from which it is hard to come down.
Stanley notes ruefully that many of us take just the opposite approach, as she once did,
pushing aside internal red flags in the hope that we can power through and get the job done.
Stanley also demonstrates for her students a technique she calls shuttling—moving one's focus
back and forth between what is transpiring internally and what is going on outside the body.
Such shifts are useful in ensuring that we are neither too caught up in external events,
nor too overwhelmed by our internal feelings, but instead occupy a place of balance that incorporates
input from both realms. This alternation of attention can be practiced at relaxed moments until it becomes
second nature. A continuously repeated act of checking in that provides a periodic infusion
of interoceptive information. The point is to keep in close contact with our internal reality at all
times, to train ourselves to pay attention and notice what's happening while it's happening,
as Stanley puts it. The vision of resilience she offers is not a formidable display of will and grit
of the kind she once would have embraced. It is rather a flexible, moment-by-moment responsiveness
to changing conditions, both inside and out. An awareness of our interoceptive signals can assist us
in making sounder decisions and in rebounding more readily from stressful situations. It can also allow us
to enjoy a richer and more satisfying emotional life. Research finds that people who are more
interoceptively attuned feel their emotions more intensely, while also managing their emotions more
adeptly. This is so because interoceptive sensations formed the building blocks of even our most subtle and
nuanced emotions. People who are more interoceptively aware can interact more intimately and more skillfully
with the emotions that interoceptive sensations help construct. But first, understanding the relationship
between interoception and emotion requires correcting a basic misconception most of us hold about how
feelings come about. The story we're used to telling goes like this. On the basis of what's happening to
us, the brain determines the appropriate emotion—happy, sad, scared—then directs the body to act
accordingly—smile, cry, scream. In fact, the causal arrow points in the opposite direction.
The body produces sensations, the body initiates actions, and only then does the mind assemble those
pieces of evidence into the entity we call an emotion. The pioneering American psychologist William
James seduced this more than a century ago. Imagine you meet a bear in the woods, James wrote.
Your heart pounds, your palms sweat, your legs break into a run. Why? It might seem that it's because
your brain generates a feeling of fear and then tells your body to get moving. But James suggested that
it works the other way around. We feel fear because our heart is racing, because our palms are sweating,
because our legs are propelling us forward. As he puts it,
common sense says we lose our fortune, are sorry and weep. We meet a bear, are frightened and run. We are
insulted by a rival, are angry and strike. But, he went on, this order of sequence is incorrect.
It would be more accurate, wrote James, to say that we feel sorry because we cry, angry because we strike,
afraid because we tremble. In recent years, scientists have begun to elaborate on James's
theory with the help of modern investigative techniques like brain scanning. Their research
has confirmed that the thing we call emotion, an experience as a unified whole, is actually
constructed from more elemental parts. These parts include the signals generated by the body's
interoceptive system, as well as the beliefs of our families and cultures regarding how these signals
are to be interpreted. This perspective carries two important implications. First, the greater our
awareness of interoceptive sensations, the richer and more intense our experience of emotion can be.
And second, equipped with interoceptive awareness, we can get in on the ground floor of emotion
construction. We can participate in creating the type of emotion we experience.
Psychologists who study the construction of emotion call this practice cognitive reappraisal.
It involves sensing and labeling an interoceptive sensation, as we've learned to do here, and then
reappraising it, reinterpreting it in an adaptive way. We can, for example, reappraise nervousness as excitement.
Consider the interoceptive sensations that accompany these two emotions. A racing heart, sweaty palms,
a fluttering stomach. The feelings are almost identical. It's the meaning we assign to them
that makes them variously, an ordeal to be dreaded, or a thrill to be enjoyed. The one thing we are not
in such moments is cool or calm, and yet most of us are convinced that when we are in anxiety's grip,
what we ought to do is try to calm down. Allison Wood Brooks, an associate professor at Harvard
Business School, had a different notion of how to handle nervousness. In a series of three studies,
she subjected groups of people to experiences that most everyone would find nerve-wracking,
completing a very difficult IQ test administered under time pressure, delivering on the spot a persuasive
public speech about why you are a good work partner, and most excruciating of all, belting out an 80s pop
song, Don't Stop Believin' by Journey. Before beginning the activity, participants were to direct
themselves to stay calm or to tell themselves that they were excited. Reappraising nervousness as
excitement yielded a noticeable difference in performance. The IQ test takers scored significantly
higher. The speech givers came across as more persuasive, competent, and confident. Even the
singers performed more passably, as judged by the Nintendo Wii Karaoke Revolution program they used.
All reported genuinely feeling the pleasurable emotion of excitement, a remarkable shift away from the
unpleasant discomfort such activities might be expected to engender. In a similar fashion, we can
choose to reappraise debilitating stress as productive coping. A 2010 study carried out with
Boston-area undergraduates looked at what happens when people facing a stressful experience are informed
about the positive effects of stress on our thinking. That is, the way it can make us more alert and more
motivated. Before taking the GRE, the admissions exam for graduate school, one group of students was
given the following message to read. People think that feeling anxious while taking a standardized test
will make them do poorly on the test. However, recent research suggests that arousal doesn't hurt
performance on these tests and can even help performance. People who feel anxious during a test
might actually do better. This means that you shouldn't feel concerned if you do feel anxious
while taking today's GRE test. If you find yourself feeling anxious, simply remind yourself that your
arousal could be helping you do well. A second group received no such message before taking the exam.
Three months later, when the students' GRE scores were released, the students who had been encouraged to
reappraise their feelings of stress scored an average of 65 points higher.
Reappraisal research has begun to elucidate the mechanisms by which this technique exerts its effects.
In the GRE study, saliva samples were collected from all the participants and analyzed for the presence of a
hormone associated with nervous system arousal. Among the students who engaged in reappraisal,
the level of this hormone was elevated, suggesting that their bodies had identified the presence of a
challenge and were mounting an effective response, enhancing their alertness and sharpening their
attention. Another study explored the neural effects of the reappraisal technique on students who struggle
with math anxiety. Their brains were scanned twice as they completed a set of math problems inside an
fMRI machine. Before the first round, participants were told to use whatever strategies they usually
employed. Before the second round, participants were given instructions on how to engage in reappraisal.
When employing the reappraisal approach, students answered more of the math questions correctly,
and the scans showed why. Brain areas involved in executing arithmetic were more active under the
reappraisal condition. The increased activity in these areas suggests that the act of reappraisal allowed
students to redirect the mental resources that previously were consumed by anxiety, applying them to the
math problems instead. Psychologists offered two additional points of interest for those adopting the
strategy of reappraisal. The first is that reappraisal works best for those who are interoceptively aware.
We have to be able to identify our internal sensations, after all, before we can begin to modify the way we
think about them. Second, the sensations we're actually feeling have to be congruent with the emotion we're
aiming to construct. We're able to reappraise nervousness as excitement because the physiological cues
associated with the two emotions are so similar. If what we're feeling is a heavy sense of apathy or
lassitude, exclaiming, I'm so excited, isn't going to work. Becoming aware of our internal sensations can help us
handle our own emotions. Perhaps more surprisingly, the body's interoceptive faculty can also bring us into
closer contact with other people's emotions. That's because the brain, on its own, has no direct access to the
contents of other people's minds. No way to feel what others are feeling. Interpreting others' spoken words
and facial expressions may yield only a coolly abstract sense of the emotions that churn within.
The body acts as a critical conduit, supplying the brain with the visceral information it lacks.
It does so in this way. When interacting with other people, we subtly and unconsciously mimic their
facial expressions, gestures, posture, and vocal pitch. Then, via the interoception of our own body's
signals, we perceive what the other person is feeling because we feel it in ourselves. We bring other
people's feelings on board and the body is the bridge. In an act akin to taking a bite off our
partner's plate or borrowing an earbud to hear the song our friend is listening to, we are sampling
their emotions. When people can't engage in such mimicking, they have a harder time figuring out what
others are feeling. A striking example, people injected with the wrinkle reducer Botox, which works by
inducing mild paralysis of the muscles used to generate facial expressions, are less accurate
in their perceptions of others' emotions, presumably because they can't simulate others' feelings within
themselves. On the other end of the spectrum, interoceptively attuned people are more likely to
mimic the expressions of others and more accurate in their interpretation of others' feelings than are
people who are less aware of their bodily sensations. They also tend to have more empathy for others.
Via mimicking, all of us feel the pain of others. Research demonstrates that the area of the brain involved in
sensing our own pain are also activated when we see other people experience physical harm. But when interoceptively
attuned people see someone experiencing pain, they rate the other person's pain as more intense.
The interoceptive champions among us may be clinical psychologists who are professionally trained to read their own
body signals for clues to what their patients are feeling, even when their clients are not yet able to verbalize their
emotions. For me, it's like using the body as radar. You think of those sort of dishes that collect satellite messages
and funnel them down? Well, I see the body in that way, observed one clinician in a 2004 study of how therapists
use their bodies to understand their patients. In similar fashion, Susie Orbach, a clinical psychologist
and the author of groundbreaking books on women and body image, has found that her own body is a sensitive
instrument for picking up on what her patients are feeling. Focusing on the sensations that well up inside her
during therapy, says Orbach, has helped me to realize that the body's development is every bit as crucial
as the mind's. Like psychotherapists, we can develop the capacity of the body to enhance our connections
with others, a faculty called social interoception. Research suggests that looking our conversational
partner directly in the eye increases our interoceptive attunement, as does a brief touch on the hand or the arm.
Studies also show that when interpersonal situations become challenging, when we feel socially rejected
or excluded, for example, we tend to shift our focus away from our own internal sensations
and toward external events, perhaps in an urgent effort to repair the breach. This shift, however well-intentioned,
may cut us off from a source of insight about the other person just when we need it most.
Better to attempt a flexible back-and-forth movement between attending to others' social cues and our own
interoceptive signals, a process that recalls Elizabeth Stanley's technique of shuttling. By drawing on data
from both sources, we can feel our way into the other person's emotional world while maintaining a vivid sense
of our own. John Coates, the trader-turned-scientist we met at the beginning of this chapter,
likens our bodies to sensitive parabolic reflectors registering a wealth of predictive information.
These biological antennae are continually receiving and sending important messages, he notes,
yet these messages are notoriously frustratingly hard to hear. They fade in and out like a radio picking up
a distant station. Coates believes that technology can help, not by replacing gut feelings with data-driven
algorithms, but by amplifying the body's own
accumulated insight. He has now embarked on a third career, this time as an entrepreneur. His company,
Dewline Research, collects data on financial traders' physiological signals via wearable sensors,
tracking the relationship between the gyrations of the market and the traders' bodily reactions.
Another group of interoception researchers, meanwhile, have developed a similar device, this one oriented
around enhancing the body's role in promoting resilience. HeartRadar, a technology introduced
by scientists at the Brighton and Sussex Medical School in the UK, allows athletes to monitor their
internal climate more closely, permitting a more efficient use of energy and a more rapid recovery from exertion.
Perhaps the most intriguing use of such extended technology, that is, digital tools extended by the body,
has been pioneered by interoception researcher Manos Sakiris, a professor of psychology at Royal Holloway
University of London. With a team from the firm Empathic Technologies, he helped develop a device called Doppel.
It provides users with bodily feedback that is not amplified, but rather deliberately distorted. In effect,
Doppel seeks to trick the user into believing that her heart is beating slower or faster than it actually is.
Recall that, as William James explained so eloquently, our brains take their cues about the emotions we're experiencing
from the sensations generated by the body. Sakiris' device intervenes in this loop by offering the brain a message
that is different from the one the body is actually producing. Worn on the wrist like a watch or a Fitbit,
Doppel generates the persuasive sensation of a slow, relaxed heartbeat, or, on a different setting,
of a fast, excited one. When set to slow mode, Doppel induces a sense of calm in people who are nervous about having to engage
in public speaking. When it's in fast mode, people wearing the device are more alert and more accurate in their performance
on a challenging test of sustained attention. The technology allows us, says to Sakiris,
to harvest our natural responses to heartbeat-like rhythms in the interest of improving our performance.
That such trickery is even possible only serves to underline the robustness of the connection between body and mind,
the two-way flow of information that does so much to shape our daily decisions, our everyday efforts, our most intimate relationships.
This link may also form the foundation of something even more fundamental, our sense of self.
Among all their other functions, the steady flow of internal sensations we experience provides us with a sense of personal continuity.
Thinkers have long mused on how it is that we can regard ourselves as unique and persistently existing entities.
What makes me the same person throughout my life and a different person from you? wondered the late philosopher Derek Parfit.
Their answers have usually had something to do with the brain, with our thoughts or our memories.
As a French philosopher René Descartes declared,
I think, therefore I am.
According to neuroanatomist and interoception expert A.D. Craig,
it would be more accurate to say, I feel, therefore I am.
Craig maintains that interoceptive awareness is the basis of the material me,
the source of our most fundamental knowledge of ourselves.
Because our hearts beat, because our lungs expand,
because our muscles stretch and our organs rumble,
and because all of these sensations unique to us have carried on without interruption since the day of our birth,
we know what it is to be one continuous self, to be ourselves and no other.
Interoception, says Craig, is nothing less than the feeling of being alive.
Chapter 2. Thinking with Movement
Dr. Jeff Fidler is a radiologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.
In the course of his professional duties, he regularly reviews 15,000 or more images a day,
and he used to do so sitting down. Not anymore.
These days, Fidler walks as he looks, having set up a treadmill in front of the large screen
that displays the radiological slides he is charged with examining.
Within the first year of creating his walking workstation, Fidler lost 25 pounds,
and, he felt convinced, he was doing a better job of identifying the abnormalities hidden in the X-ray images he scrutinized.
With a colleague, Fidler designed a study to test his hunch.
Radiologists inspected a batch of images while seated and while walking on a treadmill at one mile per hour.
The participating physicians identified a total of 1,582 areas of concern in the slides,
and rated 459 of these as posing potentially serious risks to the health of the patient.
When they compared the detection rates they achieved, while sitting and while moving, the results were clear.
Radiologists who remained seated spotted an average of 85% of the irregularities present in the images,
while those who walked identified, on average, fully 99% of them.
Other evidence supports Fidler's findings.
A study conducted at the University of Maryland Medical Center, for example,
found that radiologists reviewing images of patients' lungs were more likely to identify potentially problematic nodules
if they walked rather than sat as they worked.
And a study conducted by physicians in the radiology department of the Naval Medical Center in Portsmouth, Virginia,
found that radiologists who used a treadmill workstation did their work faster with no loss of accuracy.
A different set of research findings helps to explain the radiologists' results.
When we're engaged in physical activity, our visual sense is sharpened,
especially with regard to stimuli appearing in the periphery of our gaze.
This shift, which is also found in non-human animals, makes evolutionary sense.
The visual system becomes more sensitive when we are actively exploring our environment.
When our bodies are at rest, that is, sitting still in a chair, this heightened acuity is dialed down.
Such activity-induced alterations in the way we process visual information
constitute just one example of how moving our bodies changes the way we think.
Scientists have long known that overall physical fitness supports cognitive function.
People who have fitter bodies generally have keener minds.
In recent years, however, researchers have begun to explore an exciting additional possibility,
that single bouts of physical activity can enhance our cognition in the short term.
By moving our bodies in certain ways, that is, we're immediately able to think more intelligently.
Scientists investigating this phenomenon have approached it from two different directions,
the intensity of the movement and the type of movement.
As we'll soon learn, low, medium, and high-intensity physical activity each exerts a distinct effect on our cognition.
Later on in the chapter, we'll explore how certain types of movement,
congruent movements, novel movements, self-referential movements, and metaphorical movements,
can also extend our thinking beyond what is possible when we remain stationary.
The tight connection between thinking and moving is a legacy of our species' evolutionary history.
The human brain is approximately three times larger than it should be given the dimensions of the human body.
According to fossil evidence, a remarkable expansion in the size of the brain took place about two million years ago.
Scientists have proposed various reasons for this increase, such as the growing complexity of our forebears' social interactions,
or the need to adapt to changing ecological conditions.
Recently, another explanation has been put forth.
At the same time as brain size began to increase in the human lineage,
aerobic activity levels appear to have changed dramatically,
notes David Rachelen, a professor of biological science at the University of Southern California.
Human ancestors transitioned from a relatively sedentary ape-like existence to a hunting and gathering lifestyle,
which required an increased amount of physical activity compared to earlier hominins.
Rachelen, who has conducted extensive studies of some of the world's remaining hunter-gatherer tribes,
points out that this way of life is both physically and cognitively demanding.
Foraging requires vigorous, sustained physical activity.
It also makes demands on attention, memory, spatial navigation, motor control,
and executive functions like planning and decision-making.
Hunting, too, poses both a mental and a physical challenge.
The hunter has to locate the animal and track its unpredictable movements,
even while mustering the energy to outrun it.
Such are the conditions under which the unique human brain evolved.
The dual demands of physical challenge and cognitive complexity shaped our special status as homo sapiens.
To this day, bodily activity and mental acuity are still intimately intertwined.
Of course, things have changed for those of us who live in modern societies.
We are no longer a species on the move.
While the Hazda people of East Africa, one of the hunter-gatherer tribes studied by Rachelen,
spend an average of 135 minutes a day engaged in moderate to vigorous physical activity,
most inhabitants of industrialized countries fail to meet health experts' minimum recommendation of 150 minutes of activity a week.
Put another way, contemporary hunter-gatherers engage in more than 14 times as much moderate to vigorous physical activity as a typical American.
The lack of physical movement in our society is due in large part to the dominance of academic learning and of knowledge work,
and to the habits and convictions that have grown up around these endeavors.
While we're thinking, we believe, we should be sitting still.
Challenges to this belief may be met with derision.
When Jeff Fidler published his findings in the Journal of the American College of Radiology,
some of his colleagues reacted with mocking ridicule.
I see that I can depend on this publication for comic relief, wrote Robert Feld, a radiologist from Hartford, Connecticut, in a letter to the editor.
Fidler's study, he declared, was a parody of clinical research gone awry.
In Feld's view, making provisions for physicians to move as they work is a staggering waste of effort and resources.
Such attitudes are widely reflected in the way students and workers use their time.
Children spend an average of 50% of the school day sitting, a proportion that increases as they enter adolescence.
Adults in the workplace move even less, remaining seated for more than two-thirds of the average workday.
We inherited a mind on the hoof in the phrase of philosopher Andy Clark.
But in today's classrooms and offices, the vigorous clatter of hoofs has come to an eerie halt.
That's emphatically not the case in the classroom helmed by Maureen Zink,
a fourth-grade teacher at Valicito Elementary School in San Rafael, California.
Her students don't sit still at their desks.
In fact, most of them are not sitting at all.
In 2013, the entire school replaced traditional desks and chairs with standing desks,
and the school's activity-permissive ethos allows pupils to stand upright, perch on stools, sit on the floor, and otherwise move around as they wish.
Though some were hesitant about the change, Zink and the other teachers at Valicito now say it's been a resounding success.
Students are more alert, more attentive, and more engaged.
I taught at sitting desks for 30 years, says Zink, and I'll never go back.
Tracy Smith, the principal at Valicito during the switch to standing desks, agrees that students are
more focused, confident, and productive when given license to move.
The community's initial trepidation is telling.
We associate stillness with steadiness, seriousness, and industriousness.
We believe there's something virtuous about controlling the impulse to move.
At times and places where there's work to be done, physical movement is regarded with disapproval, even suspicion.
Consider the way we associate fidgeting with a certain moral shiftiness.
What this attitude overlooks is that the capacity to regulate our attention and our behavior is a limited resource,
and some of it is used up by suppressing the very natural urge to move.
This tradeoff is highlighted by the work of Christine Langhans and Hermann Müller of Justice Liebig University in Germany.
For a study published in 2018, they asked groups of volunteers to solve a set of math problems in their heads while staying still,
while remaining relaxed but without substantial movement, or while moving slightly in a rhythmic pattern.
All the while, the participants' cognitive load, how hard their brains were working, was being measured with a brain-scanning technology called functional near-infrared spectroscopy, veneers.
The results were illuminating.
Subject's cognitive load considerably increased under the instruction not to move, Langhans and Müller report.
Significantly, the stay still command increased brain activity in the same area as did the mental calculations,
the prefrontal cortex responsible for carrying out intellectual tasks like arithmetic and for keeping our impulses in check.
Of the three conditions, the requirement to remain still produced the poorest performance on the math problems.
The greater their overall cognitive load as registered by veneers, the worse the subjects did on the calculations.
Sitting quietly, the researchers conclude, is not necessarily the best condition for learning in school.
The continual small movements we make while standing as opposed to sitting, shifting our weight from one leg to another, allowing our arms to move more freely, constitute what researchers call low-intensity activity.
As slight as these movements appear, they have a marked effect on our physiology.
An experiment carried out by researchers at the Mayo Clinic determined that simply by standing rather than sitting,
study participants expended 13% more energy.
The impact on our cognitive functioning is also significant.
Research has found that the use of a standing desk is associated with an enhancement in students' executive function,
that crucial capacity for planning and decision-making,
and with an increase in on-task engagement.
In adults, working at a standing desk has been shown to boost productivity.
It's not only that such activity-permissive setups relieve us of the duty to monitor and control our inclination to move.
They also allow us to fine-tune our level of physiological arousal.
Such variable stimulation may be especially important for young people with attention deficit disorders.
The brains of kids with ADHD appear to be chronically under-aroused.
In order to muster the mental resources needed to tackle a difficult assignment,
they may tap their fingers, jiggle their legs, or bounce in their seats.
They move as a means of increasing their arousal,
not unlike the way adults down a cup of coffee in order to feel more alert.
Julie Schweitzer, a professor of psychiatry at the University of California, Davis,
led a 2016 study of children aged 10 to 17 who had been diagnosed with ADHD.
As the young participants worked on challenging mental tasks,
their movements were monitored by a sensor, called an actometer, strapped to their ankles.
She found that more intense physical movement was associated with better cognitive performance on the task.
The more the children moved, in other words, the more effectively they were able to think.
Parents and teachers often believe they have to get kids to stop moving before they can focus and get down to work, Schweitzer notes.
A more constructive approach would be to allow kids to move around so that they can focus.
Even among those without an ADHD diagnosis, the amount of stimulation required to maintain optimal alertness varies from person to person.
Indeed, it may differ for the same individual over the course of a day.
We have at our disposal a flexible and sensitive mechanism for making the necessary adjustments – fidgeting.
At times we may use small, rhythmic movements to calm our anxiety and allow us to focus.
At other moments we may drum our fingers or tap our feet to stave off drowsiness.
Or toy with an object like a pen or a paperclip as we ponder a difficult concept.
All of these activities, and many others, were submitted to researcher Catherine Isbister after she put out a call on social media for descriptions of people's favorite fidget objects and how they used them.
Isbister, a professor of computational media at the University of California, Santa Cruz, believes that the social disapproval directed at fidgeting is misplaced.
Though we imagine that we can manage our mental activity from within our heads, it's often more effective to employ the movements of our bodies for that purpose – to engage in what she calls embodied self-regulation.
Isbister would reverse the usual chain of command in which the brain tells the body what to do.
Changing what the body does, she notes, can change our feelings, perceptions, and thoughts.
Her research, and that of others, suggests that fidgeting can extend our minds in several ways beyond simply modulating our arousal.
The playful nature of these movements may induce in us a mildly positive mood state of the kind that has been linked to more flexible and creative thinking.
Alternatively, their mindless and repetitive character may occupy just enough mental bandwidth to keep our minds from wandering from the job at hand.
One study found that people who were directed to doodle while carrying out a boring listening task remembered 29% more information than people who did not doodle, likely because the latter group had let their attention slip away entirely.
Perhaps most intriguing is Isbister's theory that fidgeting can supply us with a range of sensory experiences entirely missing from our arid encounters with screen and keyboard.
Today's digital devices tend to be smooth, hard, and sleek, she writes, while the fidget objects she crowdsourced exhibit a wide range of textures, from the smoothness of a stone to the roughness of a walnut shell to the tackiness of cellophane tape.
The words contributors used to describe their favored objects were vivid.
Such articles were crinkly, squishy, clickety-clackety.
With them they could scrunch, squeeze, twirl, roll, and rub.
It's as if we use fidgeting to remind ourselves that we are more than just a brain.
That we have a body, too, replete with rich capacities for feeling and acting.
Thinking while moving brings the full range of our faculties into play.
Activity-permissive settings are still the exception in schools and workplaces, but we ought to make them the rule.
We might even dispense with that apologetic-sounding name, since low-intensity physical activity clearly belongs in the places where we do our thinking.
Meanwhile, medium and high-intensity activity each exerts its own distinct effect on cognition, as the psychologist Daniel Kahneman has discovered for himself.
Kahneman spends a few months each year in Berkeley, California, and on most days he takes a four-mile walk on a marked path in the hills with a view of San Francisco Bay.
Ever the scientist, Kahneman has subjected the experience to close analysis.
I usually keep track of my time and have learned a fair amount about effort from doing so, he writes.
I have found a speed, about 17 minutes for a mile, which I experience as a stroll.
I certainly exert physical effort and burn more calories at that speed than if I sat in a recliner.
I experience no strain, no conflict, and no need to push myself.
I am also able to think and work while walking at that rate.
Indeed, I suspect that the mild physical arousal of the walk may spill over into greater mental alertness.
He noted, however, that accelerating beyond my strolling speed completely changes the experience of walking, because the transition to a faster walk brings about a sharp deterioration in my ability to think coherently.
As I speed up, my attention is drawn with increasing frequency to the experience of walking, and to the deliberate maintenance of the faster pace.
My ability to bring a train of thought to a conclusion is impaired accordingly.
At the highest speed I can sustain on the hills, about 14 minutes for a mile, I do not even try to think of anything else.
Kahneman's careful self-observations are backed up by empirical research.
Moderate intensity exercise, practiced for a moderate length of time, improves our ability to think both during and immediately after the activity.
The positive changes documented by scientists include an increase in the capacity to focus attention and resist distraction,
greater verbal fluency and cognitive flexibility, enhanced problem-solving and decision-making abilities,
and increased working memory, as well as more durable long-term memory for what is learned.
The proposed mechanisms by which these changes occur include heightened arousal, as Kahneman speculated,
increased blood flow to the brain, and the release of a number of neurochemicals,
which increase the efficiency of information transmission in the brain, and which promote the growth of neurons or brain cells.
The beneficial mental effects of moderately intense activity have been shown to last for as long as two hours after exercise ends.
The encouraging implication of this research is that we have it within our power to induce in ourselves a state that is ideal for learning,
creating, and engaging in other kinds of complex cognition, by exercising briskly just before we do so.
As things stand, however, we don't often take intentional advantage of this opportunity.
Our culture conditions us to see mind and body as separate,
and so we separate, in turn, our periods of thinking from our bouts of exercise.
Consider how many of us make our visits to the gym only after work, for example, or on weekends.
Instead, we should be figuring out how to incorporate bursts of physical activity into the work day and the school day,
which means rethinking how we approach our breaks.
Lunch breaks, coffee breaks, downtime between tasks or meetings,
all become occasions to use exercise to maneuver our brains into an optimally functioning state.
For children, this is precisely the role played by recess.
Research shows that kids return from a session on the playground better able to focus their attention
and to engage their executive function faculties.
Yet at schools all over the country, recess has been reduced or even eliminated
in order to generate more seat time spent on academic learning.
The notion that time away from concentrated mental work is effectively time wasted
is one of several wrongheaded notions we hold regarding breaks.
Wrongheaded, in this case, because the ability to attend to such work declines steadily over time
and is actually refreshed by a bout of bodily exertion.
Parents, teachers, and administrators who want students to achieve academically
should be advocating for an increase in physically active recess time.
Another misguided idea about breaks.
They should be used to rest the body so as to fortify us for the next round of mental labor.
As we've seen, it's through exerting the body that our brains become ready for the kind of knowledge work so many of us do today.
The best preparation for such metaphorical acts as wrestling with ideas or running through possibilities
is to work up an actual sweat.
Instead of languidly sipping a latte before tackling a difficult project,
we should be taking an energetic walk around the block.
There's one more erroneous assumption about breaks to address.
We imagine that we're replenishing the brain's depleted resources
when we spend our breaks doing something that feels different from work.
Scrolling through Twitter, checking the news, looking at Facebook.
The problem is that such activities engage the same brain regions
and draw down the same mental capital we use to do our cognition-centric jobs.
We resume our duties just as frazzled as before the pause, and maybe more so.
Turning coffee breaks into what some public health experts call movement breaks
allows us to return to our work a bit smarter than when we left it.
On his walks along the coastal California hills,
Daniel Kahneman noticed that moving very fast
brings about a sharp deterioration in my ability to think coherently.
This observation, too, is supported by research.
Scientists draw what they call an inverted U-shaped curve
to describe the relationship between exercise intensity and cognitive function,
with the greatest benefits for thinking detected in the moderate-intensity middle part of the hump.
On the right downward slope of the curve where high-intensity activity is charted,
control over cognition does indeed start to slacken,
but this is not always a bad thing.
Very intense exercise, extended over a relatively long period,
can induce a kind of altered state conducive to creative thought.
Such is the experience of Haruki Murakami, the celebrated Japanese novelist.
Murakami is a committed runner,
a veteran of more than two dozen marathons who logs as many as 50 miles a week.
He has even authored a book about it titled,
What I Talk About When I Talk About Running.
I'm often asked what I think about as I run, Murakami writes.
Usually the people who ask this have never run long distances themselves.
I always ponder the question,
what exactly do I think about when I'm running?
Not much, he concludes.
That's kind of the point.
As I run, I don't think much of anything worth mentioning.
I just run.
I run in a void.
Or maybe I should put it the other way.
I run in order to acquire a void.
Scientists have a term for the void Murakami describes.
Transient hypofrontality.
Hypo means low or diminished,
and frontality refers to the frontal region of the brain,
the part that plans, analyzes, and critiques,
and that usually maintains firm control over our thoughts and behavior.
When all of our resources are devoted to managing the demands of intense physical activity, however,
the influence of the prefrontal cortex is temporarily reduced.
In this loose hypofrontal mode, ideas and impressions mingle more freely.
Unusual and unexpected thoughts arise.
Scientists speculate that the phenomenon of transient hypofrontality may underlie all kinds of altered states,
from dreaming to drug trips,
but intense exercise may be the most reliable way to induce it.
Low and moderate intensity exercise does not generate this disinhibiting effect.
Indeed, as we've seen,
moderately intense physical activity actually enhances executive function.
Achieving transient hypofrontality generally requires exercising at one's ventilatory threshold,
the point at which breathing becomes labored,
corresponding to about 80% of the exerciser's maximum heart rate,
for 40 minutes or more.
It's a daunting summit to scale,
but when it is reached, observes Katherine Schultz, another writer-runner,
it can provoke a kind of Cartesian collapse,
mind and body melding together in what she calls a glorious collusion.
In considering the impact of motion on thought,
the releasing or enhancing or disinhibiting effects of physical activity are only half the story.
Also important are the many varied and nuanced ways that particular physical movements,
which carry their own load of meaning and information,
participate in our thinking processes.
Over the past several decades,
the field of embodied cognition has produced persuasive evidence that our thoughts,
even or especially those of an abstract or symbolic nature,
are powerfully shaped by the way we move our bodies.
According to the conventional brain-bound understanding of cognition,
we first have a thought and then direct our bodies to move accordingly.
This more recent corpus of research turns that causal arrow around so that it points in the opposite direction.
We move our bodies and our thoughts are influenced in turn.
The exciting implication of such findings is that we can intentionally enhance our mental functioning
through an application of physical activity.
That we can, for example, improve our memory not through working our brains ever harder,
but by looping in the meaning-bearing movements of our limbs.
When we're charged with learning and remembering new material,
our tendency is to lean heavily on visual and auditory modes,
reading it over, saying it aloud.
This approach has its limits.
In particular, research demonstrates that our memory for what we have heard is remarkably weak.
Our memory for what we have done, however, for physical actions we have undertaken, is much more robust.
Linking movement to the material to be recalled creates a richer
and therefore more indelible memory trace in the brain.
In addition, movements engage a process called procedural memory,
memory of how to do something, such as how to ride a bike,
that is distinct from declarative memory, memory of informational content, such as the text of a speech.
When we connect movement with information, we activate both types of memory,
and our recall is more accurate as a result,
a phenomenon that researchers call the enactment effect.
Fittingly, professional actors can shed light on the way physical enactment reinforces memory.
Helga Noyce, a professor emeritus of psychology at Elmhurst University in Illinois,
and her husband Tony Noyce, a professor of theater at Elmhurst as well as a Chicago-area actor,
have spent years studying actors' ability to memorize pages and pages of lines.
They have determined that during performance,
actors render written lines with 98% accuracy, on average.
Months after a play's run has ended, the Noyces found,
actors can still recall verbatim some 90% of the script.
How do they do it?
Actors' mental feats of memory, the Noyces have concluded,
are intimately connected to the movements they make with their bodies.
In the course of their research, many actors commented that they never tried to learn their lines until a play had been blocked.
That is, until all the physical movements to be made on stage had been planned out.
You've got to have these two tracks going simultaneously.
This is what I say, and this is when and where I move.
One feeds the other, an actor observed in one of their interviews.
In a study they conducted in 2000, the Noyces gathered together six actors from a repertory company,
who had earlier performed together in a production of The Dining Room by the American playwright A.R. Gurney Jr.
In this scene from the play, adult siblings Arthur and Sally debate what to do with the contents of their parents' house, which is being sold.
Arthur
You sure mother doesn't want this stuff in Florida?
Sally
She hardly has room for what she's got.
She wants us to take turns, without fighting.
Arthur
We'll just have to draw lots then.
Sally
Unless one of us wants something, and one of us doesn't.
Arthur
We have to do it today.
Sally
Do you think that's enough time to divide up a whole house?
Arthur
I have to get back, Sal.
He looks in the sideboard.
We'll draw lots, and then go through the rooms taking turns.
He brings out a silver spoon.
Here, we'll use this salt spoon.
He shifts it from hand to hand behind his back, then holds out two fists.
Take your pick.
You get the spoon.
You get the dining room.
Sally
You mean you want to start here?
Arthur
Gotta start somewhere.
Even though the run of the dining room had ended five months earlier, and many of the actors had learned new roles since then, they still remembered the lines from Gurney's play that had been accompanied on stage by movement or gestures, as when Arthur holds out the spoon to Sally.
Lines they had delivered while standing or sitting still, the noises discovered, were much more likely to be forgotten.
In other studies, the noises have shown that connecting words to movements improves recall among people who are not actors, college students, for example, and older people residing in assisted living facilities.
Most activities advertised to forestall age-related memory loss, such as crossword puzzles, sudoku, and commercial brain training programs, like Lumosity, conform to our society's brain-bound model of how thinking works.
Users sit still and use their heads.
By contrast, Helga and Tony Noyce have found that moving the body makes an essential contribution to strengthening memory and other mental capacities as well.
In a series of studies conducted with people aged 65 to 85, the Noyces instructed participants in professional acting techniques and then led them in the rehearsal and performance of theatrical scenes.
Before and after the four-week long program, they tested participants on general cognitive capacities, like word memory, verbal fluency, problem solving, and handling daily tasks, such as comparing nutrition labels, paying bills by check, and looking up phone numbers.
Compared to people the same age, compared to people the same age who did not enroll in any program, or who took part in activities that did not involve movement, an art appreciation class, for example, individuals who had participated in the theatrical program became mentally sharper.
Participants were apparently able to borrow strategies they learned in acting class, such as linking movement to material to be remembered, and apply them to the activities of everyday life.
Similar results have been found among younger people.
Again, movement seems to be key to remembering.
In a study of undergraduates published in 2001, for example, the Noyces reported that the effects of physical movement, previously found after lengthy real-world rehearsal and repeated performances by professional actors, could be produced by giving a few minutes of instruction to non-actors with little or no performing experience.
The difference such minimal instruction made in participants' ability to recall information, they noted, was striking.
Students who incorporated movement into their learning strategy remembered 76% of the material, while those who engaged in deliberate memorization recalled only 37%.
The implications of the Noyces research are clear.
First, information is better remembered when we're moving as we learn it.
This is the case even when the movement is not a literal enactment of the meaning of the information to be recalled, but simply a movement of the body, meaningfully related to the information and made at the same time as the information is absorbed.
Second, information that has become associated with the movement is better remembered when we can reproduce that same movement later, when we're calling it up from memory.
This may be possible in some situations, for example, when giving a speech for which we have practiced accompanying gestures.
But moving while learning is still beneficial even when those movements can't be replicated at the time of recall, during an exam, for instance.
Indeed, simply forming the intention to move in connection with a piece of information seems to tag that information with a mental marker of importance.
Our natural egocentric bias leads us to preferentially attend to and remember that information that we have connected in some way to ourselves.
My intention, my body, my movement.
Concluded Helga and Tony Noyce in one of their academic articles, one might paraphrase Descartes and say,
I move, therefore I remember.
Moving while learning can help us remember information more accurately.
It may also be the case that moving while learning can help us understand information differently, more deeply from the inside, as it were.
A stray comment from an undergraduate working in her lab got psychologist Sian Bielak, then an assistant professor at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, wondering about the body's role in the act of understanding.
The student played on the university's hockey team, and he mentioned to his professor that when watching hockey on television, he seemed to understand the action as it unfolded in a way that was different from that of his friends who had not been out on the ice.
Bielak and her colleagues designed a study to test his impression.
First, experimenters read action sequences drawn from hockey games, the hockey player shot the puck, and from everyday life, the child saw the balloon in the air, to two groups of study participants.
One group was made up of experienced hockey players, while the other group had never played the sport.
Then participants were shown pictures that either did or did not correspond to the action sequences they'd heard.
For instance, an image depicting a child seeing a balloon in the air, or a child seeing a deflated balloon on the ground.
For each sentence-picture pair, all the participants were able to correctly identify whether the two matched or not.
But when the action concerned a hockey game, the hockey players were much quicker than their non-playing counterparts to make the identification.
They exhibited what Bielak calls facilitated comprehension.
Brain scans conducted on both groups showed that a particular neural region was activated more strongly in the hockey players' brains than in the non-players' brains, when they listened to hockey-specific language.
The left dorsal premotor cortex responsible for executing well-practiced physical movements.
This area isn't typically associated with language processing, but the players' personal history with the game gave them a body-based experience that they could connect to the words they heard.
The surprising import of Bielak's study is that people who have moved in different ways go on to think in different ways, an insight that can be applied well beyond sports.
The research on using movement to enhance thinking identifies four types of helpful motion – congruent movements, novel movements, self-referential movements, and metaphorical movements.
The first of these, congruent movements, express in physical form the content of a thought.
With the motions of our bodies, we enact the meaning of a fact or concept.
Congruent movements are an effective way to reinforce still-tentative or emerging knowledge by introducing a corporeal component into the process of understanding and remembering.
A familiar example is moving the body along a number line.
Children who are learning about math benefit from taking steps on an oversized number line placed on the floor as they count or as they carry out procedures like addition and subtraction.
Moving their bodies up or down the number line is congruent with the mental operation of counting up or down.
Taking small steps is congruent with the mental operation of counting one unit at a time, while venturing a bigger leap is congruent with the mental operation of adding or subtracting a number of units at once.
Students who practice connecting numbers with movements in this way later demonstrate more mathematics knowledge and skill.
Moving the body in ways congruent with thinking is beneficial in part because it helps students make the tricky transition from the concrete to the abstract.
This is the challenge facing children when they first learn to read.
They must forge connections between the solid stuff of the world and the abstract symbols we use to represent it.
In everyday life, children typically encounter the word ball or cup when there's an actual ball or cup around, notes Arthur Glenn Berg, a professor of psychology at Arizona State University.
But within the pages of a book, words must be understood in the absence of such real-world reference.
Glenn Berg uses congruent movement to bridge this gap.
His moved-by-reading intervention teaches children how to simulate with concrete physical action the text they are reading, abstract symbols.
Such simulation leads to large gains in learning.
When children act out the words on the page, Glenn Berg has found, their reading comprehension can actually double.
In one such study, Glenn Berg asked first and second graders to read stories about life on a farm.
The children were also provided with farm-related toys, such as a miniature barn, tractor, and cow.
Half of the kids were directed simply to read the stories a second time.
The other half were instructed to use the toys to enact what they were reading.
After reading the sentence, the farmer drove the tractor to the barn, for example,
the child would move the toy tractor over to the toy barn.
Youngsters who acted out the sentences were better able to make inferences about the text,
and they later remembered much more about the stories than their peers who merely re-read them.
Other studies have shown that congruent movements of this type can help children with math as well.
In another of Glenn Berg's experiments, elementary school students were asked to act out a zookeeper's distribution of food to his animals,
while figuring out how many fish went to each of the hippos and alligators.
Glenn Berg reports that the students who moved in ways congruent with the text of word problems were more accurate in their calculations
and more likely to reach the right answer than children who completed the problem in their heads.
It seems that enacting the story told within the math problem helped students identify the information important for its solution.
Enacting made them 35% less likely to be distracted by irrelevant numbers or other details included in the problem.
Technology, which so often seems designed to keep us sitting still in our chairs, eyes glued to our screens,
could extend itself with movement by incorporating congruent motions into the way it operates.
And indeed, research using touch-screen devices shows that digital educational programs that encourage users to make hand movements
that are congruent with the mental operation being taught support the successful learning of those operations.
A program offering instruction in number line estimation, for example,
a task that depends on understanding numerical magnitude as continuous and not discrete,
achieves better results when the movement required to interact with the program is a continuous one,
dragging a finger across the screen, as opposed to a discrete one, tapping the screen once.
Another kind of physical action capable of advancing our thinking is novel movements,
movements that introduce us to an abstract concept via a bodily experience we haven't had before.
Consider, when you step into your shower at home, how do you turn on the hot water?
To answer that simple question, you simulated the familiar, well-practiced action in your head.
Maybe you even reached out and turned an imagined faucet handle.
But how would you engage in thinking about an action you've never physically experienced?
That's the dilemma facing physics students,
who are expected to reason about phenomena like angular velocity and centripetal force
without a felt sense of what they're like.
Decades of research on physics education revealed the discouraging result.
Most students never achieve a firm grasp of the subject.
Some studies have found that students' understanding of physics becomes less accurate
after they have completed an introductory college physics course.
The conventional and widely ineffective approach to teaching physics is based on a brain-bound model of cognition.
Individuals are expected, like computers, to solve problems by applying a set of abstract rules.
Yet the fact is that, very unlike computers, humans solve problems most effectively by imagining themselves into a given scenario,
a project that is made easier if the human in question has had a previous physical encounter on which to base her mental projections.
Providing students with such physical encounters was the purpose behind a study designed by Sian Bielak,
inspired by the work with hockey players we heard about earlier.
In collaboration with Susan Fisher, an associate professor of physics at DePaul University in Chicago,
Bielak designed a set of hands-on activities intended to introduce students to the forces they were studying in physics class,
not as abstract concepts, but as visceral experiences.
One such activity, for example, employed a prop.
Two bicycle wheels mounted on a single axle,
which could be held out in front of the body while the wheels were spun.
When the axle was tilted from horizontal to vertical,
the person holding it felt firsthand what physicists called torque,
the resistive force that causes objects to rotate.
Bielak and Fisher asked one group of undergraduates to hold the contraption in their hands
and to experience what it felt like to tilt the axle.
A second group of students simply watched while someone else demonstrated its use.
Afterwards, members of both groups were tested on their understanding of the concept of torque.
Students who'd experienced torque with their own bodies, the experimenters found,
achieved higher scores on the assessment.
Their superior understanding was especially evident in their answers to the most challenging theoretical questions.
What's more, brain scans showed that when they were asked to think about torque,
the region of the brain that controls movement was activated only in those who'd had a direct physical encounter with the force.
Even while lying immobile inside an fMRI machine, or while sitting still taking an exam,
these students were able to access a bodily experience of motion,
access that gave them a deeper and more accurate understanding of the concept.
An implication that leaps out from this research.
When demonstrations are incorporated into science class,
students should not be relegated to the role of observer.
Only those who physically participate will gain the deeper from the inside understanding that comes from physical action.
As education professor Dore Abrahamson puts it,
learning is moving in new ways.
Yet another type of motion with the capacity to improve the way we think is self-referential movements,
movements in which we bring ourselves, in particular our bodies, into the intellectual enterprise.
Though it may seem unscientific to place oneself at the center of the action,
scientists themselves frequently use their bodies as instruments of exploration,
imagining themselves as the object of their investigation.
In so doing, they cultivate a kind of empathy with entities they are struggling to understand,
notes Eleanor Ox, an anthropologist who has studied theoretical physicists at work in the laboratory.
The world's most famous physicist, Albert Einstein,
reportedly imagined himself riding on a beam of light while developing his theory of relativity.
No scientist thinks in equations, Einstein once claimed.
Rather, he remarked, the elements of his own thought were visual and even muscular in nature.
Other scientists have described the imagined acts of embodiment that helped them make their discoveries.
Geneticist Barbara McClintock, whose work on the chromosomes of corn plants earned her a Nobel Prize,
recalled how it felt for her to examine the chromosomes through a microscope.
When I was really working with them, I wasn't outside.
I was down there. I was part of the system.
I was right down there with them, and everything got big.
I even was able to see the internal parts of the chromosomes.
Actually, everything was there.
It surprised me because I actually felt as if I were right down there, and these were my friends.
Virologist Jonas Salk, inventor of the polio vaccine,
is another scientist who brought his body into his research.
He once described how he went about his work in this way.
I would picture myself as a virus, or a cancer cell, for example, and try to sense what it would be like to be either.
I would also imagine myself as the immune system, and I would try to reconstruct what I would do as an immune system engaged in combating a virus or cancer cell.
When I had played through a series of such scenarios on a particular problem and had acquired new insights, I would design laboratory experiments accordingly.
While students are often encouraged to adopt a detached, objective perspective on science, research shows that they can benefit from engaging the embodied imagination, just as scientists do.
Thinking and learning with our bodies takes advantage of humans' fundamentally egocentric mindset.
We've evolved to understand events and ideas in terms of how they relate to us, not from some neutral or impartial perspective.
Research has found that the act of self-reference, connecting new knowledge to our own identity or experience, functions as a kind of integrative glue, imparting a stickiness that the same information lacks when it is encountered as separate and unrelated to the self.
Adopting a first-person perspective doesn't mean we become limited by it.
Indeed, using the movements of our own bodies to explore a given phenomenon seems to promote the ability to alternate between viewing it from an internal perspective and from an external one, an oscillation that produces a deeper level of understanding.
Rachel Sherr, an assistant professor of physics at the University of Washington, has devised an educational role-playing program called energy theater.
One attribute of energy that students find difficult to grasp, Sherr notes, is that energy is always conserved.
It doesn't get used up, but instead is converted to a different form, as when the energy in the coiled spring of a pinball plunger is converted into the energy of the pinball's motion.
Students may read about the conservation of energy in a textbook without truly grasping its implications.
When, as a part of energy theater, they embody energy, they begin to understand such implications in a visceral way.
Students who use movement to become energy can fall back on the feeling of permanence and continuity conveyed by their own bodies, says Sherr.
They don't get used up, and so they're better able to understand that energy doesn't either.
Sherr's research shows that students who have taken part in energy theater develop a more nuanced understanding of energy dynamics.
Another opportunity to recruit self-referential movement in the service of learning arises when students are endeavoring to understand the nature of complex, multi-step, interactive processes, such as that bane of biology class, mitosis and meiosis.
The many phases and processes entailed in the study of how cells divide and reproduce can easily overwhelm students' mental bandwidth, leading to superficial comprehension at best and utter confusion at worst.
Having watched many of his undergraduates struggle to understand these centrally important concepts, Joseph Chinichi, an associate professor of biology at Virginia Commonwealth University, had an idea.
Why not ask students to become human chromosomes, to understand cell division and reproduction from the inside, as it were, by acting out these processes with their own bodies?
After fine-tuning his approach over several years, Chinichi published an account of his method in the journal The American Biology Teacher.
He begins by distributing baseball caps and t-shirts, each of which has been marked with a letter representing a gene, uppercase letters for dominant genes, lowercase letters denoting recessive genes.
Once they have donned these items of clothing, students are guided through a kind of carefully choreographed waltz.
In prophase, some of the human chromosomes pair up by linking arms.
In metaphase, those chromosomes who have remained unpaired move to an area designated as the spindle.
On to anaphase, during which the paired-up students split apart and move to opposite poles of the spindle.
Finally, they act out telophase, in which the spindle dissolves and the chromosomes unwind.
Amid some awkward laughter and some momentarily furrowed brows, students find their way through this odd dance, seeing and feeling for themselves how the many moving parts interact.
Chinichi's study found that students who had engaged in role-playing mitosis and meiosis achieved a more accurate understanding of the concept, a result mirrored in other similar studies.
Researchers have examined the effects of having students embody the solar system's planets as they engage in direct and retrograde motion, of having students embody carbon molecules as they undergo the enzymatic reactions of the Krebs cycle,
and of having students embody amino acids undergoing polymerization as they are synthesized into proteins.
In each of these scenarios, students learned more and performed better when they were offered the opportunity to embody these entities rather than simply reading or hearing about them.
Being it, embodying a conceptual object, is a very different experience from watching it or viewing a conceptual object as remote and separate from oneself, notes Carmen Petrick-Smith of the University of Vermont, who has studied the effects of physically embodying mathematical concepts.
Groups of students might form a triangle with their outstretched arms, for example, and then experiment with moving closer to and farther away from one another.
In this way, they come to understand that the size of a triangle can vary without changing the degree of the angles at its corners.
Smith notes that such body-based activities have been shown to deepen students' understanding and strengthen their memory of mathematical concepts.
Mathematics teachers have long incorporated manipulatives into their instruction, counting rods and cubes, for example.
The research of Smith and others suggests that students learn even more when the manipulatives they employ are their own bodies.
One final category of thought-enhancing movements encompasses those that enact an analogy, whether explicit or implicit.
The language we use is full of metaphors that borrow from our experience as embodied creatures.
Metaphorical movements reverse engineer this process, putting the body through the motions as a way of prodding the mind into the state the metaphor describes.
Moving the body can alter the mind by unconsciously putting ideas in our head before we are able to consciously contemplate them on our own, as Sian Bielak has written.
Getting a person to move lowers his threshold for experiencing thoughts that share something in common with the movement.
To take one example, by moving our bodies, we activate a deeply ingrained and mostly unconscious metaphor connecting dynamic motion with dynamic thinking.
Call to mind the words we use when we can't seem to muster an original idea.
We're stuck, in a rut, and those we reach for when we feel visited by the muse.
Then we're on a roll. Our thoughts are flowing.
Research has demonstrated that people can be placed in a creative state of mind by physically acting out creativity-related figures of speech, like thinking outside the box.
Psychologist Evan Pullman of the University of Wisconsin-Madison designed an experiment in which participants were asked to complete a creative thinking task.
Some students carried out the assignment while sitting inside a five-foot-square cardboard box.
Others completed the task while sitting next to the box.
The participants who did their thinking literally outside the box came up with a list of creative solutions that was, on average, 20% longer than the list produced by those who brainstormed inside the box.
Pullman and his colleagues also tested the generative effect of enacting another metaphor.
The use of the phrase, on one hand, on the other hand, to convey the consideration of multiple possibilities.
This time, participants were asked to come up with novel uses for a new campus building complex.
Half of them were asked to hold one hand outstretched as they engaged in brainstorming, while the others were instructed to alternate holding out one hand and then the other.
The study subjects who unwittingly acted out the metaphor, on the one hand, on the other hand, generated nearly 50% more potential uses for the building, and independent judges rated their ideas as more varied and more creative.
Such experiments suggest that we can activate a particular cognitive process by embodying the metaphor that has come to be associated with it.
Simply moving the body through space is itself a loose kind of metaphor for creativity, for new angles and unexpected vistas, for fluid thinking and dynamic change.
The activation of this metaphor may help account for the finding that people are more creative during and after walking than when they are sitting still.
Daniel Schwartz, Dean of the Stanford Graduate School of Education, often urges his doctoral students to walk with him as they brainstorm about their dissertations, rather than remaining seated in his office.
In 2014, one of these students, Marilee Opezo, now an instructor in medicine at the Stanford Prevention Research Center, decided to investigate empirically the effects of walking on creativity.
In a series of experiments, Schwartz and Opezo administered several different tests of original thinking to groups of Stanford undergraduates, Stanford employees, and students from a nearby community college.
Some students were asked to complete the tasks while taking a stroll through campus or while walking on a treadmill.
Others took the test while seated in a classroom.
For the first test, participants were asked to generate unexpected uses for ordinary objects, such as a brick or a paperclip.
On average, students came up with four to six more uses for the items if they were walking rather than sitting down.
Another test presented participants with an evocative image, such as a light bulb blowing out, and asked them to come up with an analogous image, like, for example, a nuclear reactor melting down.
Ninety-five percent of students who walked were able to do so, compared to only 50 percent of those who remained immobile.
Walking opens up the free flow of ideas, the authors conclude.
Studies by other researchers have even suggested that following a meandering, free-form route, as opposed to a fixed and rigid one, may further enhance creative thought processes.
Although contemporary culture prescribes sitting still while thinking, a stroll through the history of literature and philosophy finds ample evidence of a counter-message.
Remember Friedrich Nietzsche from earlier in our journey.
Only thoughts which come from walking have any value, he maintained.
Soren Kierkegaard felt similarly.
I have walked myself into my best thoughts, remarked the Danish philosopher.
Walking is gymnastics for the mind, observed the American writer Ralph Waldo Emerson.
I am unable to reflect when I am not walking.
The moment I stop, I think no more.
And as soon as I am again in motion, my head resumes its workings, averred the Swiss-born philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
The French philosopher and essayist, Michel de Montaigne, lamented that his thoughts often came to him when he was on the move, at moments when I have nothing to jot them down on.
This was wont to happen, especially on my horse, the seat of my widest musings.
These great thinkers were clearly on to something.
We ought to be finding ways to integrate movement into all our daily activities, to tap into the mobile intelligence of the mind at three miles per hour, as the contemporary writer Rebecca Solnit has called the mental state induced by walking.
This could mean walking on a treadmill as we type at our computers, walking as we talk on the phone, walking as we conduct work meetings, even walking as we attend class.
Thinking while walking would seem to be a natural fit for the world of academe.
A few years ago, philosophy professor Douglas Anderson of the University of North Texas got to wondering why he and his students stayed put in a lecture hall while the texts they studied so often extolled the merits of movement.
He began teaching one of his courses, philosophy of self-cultivation, while on the move.
Professor and students walk about the campus as they discuss the week's assigned reading.
Anderson says he has noticed a difference in his students as soon as they leave the room where the class initially assembles.
Their voices and expressions become more animated.
They have more to say.
Their minds seem to work at a faster clip.
Included on Anderson's syllabus is, of course, Walking, the essay by philosopher and naturalist Henry David Thoreau, first delivered at the Concord Lyceum in 1851.
I think that I cannot preserve my health and spirits unless I spend four hours a day at least, and it is commonly more than that, sauntering through the woods and over the hills and fields, he declared.
That same year, that same year, Thoreau expanded on the theme in his journal.
How vain it is to sit down to write when you have not stood up to live, he exclaimed.
Me thinks that the moment my legs begin to move, my thoughts begin to flow.
Chapter 3. Thinking with Gesture.
Gabriel Erquil
Gabriel Erquil bounded onto the stage of Startup Bootcamp's 2018 Demo Day, wearing a slim gray suit, white shirt, and red tie.
Before he said a word, his confidence announced itself in his smooth stride and fluid gestures.
Two years ago, I was hit by a van because the driver's eyes weren't on the road, he began.
Erquil widened his eyes and held out his hands, palms up, as if to say, can you believe it?
Fortunately, I made it out with only minor scratches, but this left me with a very real sense that something needed to be done about automotive safety, especially in the commercial vehicle sector, where drivers face huge time pressures.
He spread his arms wide to emphasize the word huge.
One of the key lessons we learned—the fingers of his right hand formed a precise pincher gesture—in the commercial automotive sector is that the fleet manager is responsible for ensuring that every delivery—the words were punctuated by two jabs at the air—is made at the right place at the right time, a task that's much easier said than done.
Fleet managers, Erquil continued, are nervous—nervous about their drivers getting lost, nervous about road accidents, nervous about packages arriving late.
This is why fleet managers wish they could be in the vehicle with their drivers—he made a downward tucking motion, emphasizing the word in—to teach them better habits.
And now they can.
Erquil paused for dramatic effect.
I'd like to introduce the Atlas 1, the very first head-up display that sends driving information directly to the driver through a projected hologram, with three key features to enhance driving behavior.
All this while keeping the driver's eyes on the road.
Erquil's hands were in constant motion as he got to the heart of his pitch.
They framed his gaze like a camera's viewfinder, then motioned toward himself as if information was flowing into his field of vision, then pointed from his eyes toward the imagined road before him.
In fact, what was before him was an audience of several hundred potential customers, partners, and investors listening carefully to every word.
What these attendees likely didn't realize is that they were being influenced at least as much by Erquil's gestures as by his speech.
Researchers who study embodied cognition are drawing new attention to the fact that people formulate and convey their thoughts not only with words, but also with the motions of the hands and the rest of the body.
Gestures don't merely echo or amplify spoken language.
They carry out cognitive and communicative functions that language can't touch.
Where language is discrete and linear, one word following another, gesture is impressionistic and holistic, conveying an immediate sense of how things look and feel and move.
The special strengths of gesture are especially valuable in the effort to persuade or enlist others.
Such movements visually place the gesturer at the center of the action, situating him at the locus of agency and control.
When he talks, his words may describe, or extol, or explain.
But when he gestures…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
