as Roosevelt later recalled. It was clear weather, and we lay in the open, the enormous cinnamon-colored
trunks rising about us like the columns of a vaster and more beautiful cathedral than was
ever conceived by any human architect. As the two men toured the glories of Yosemite,
Muir warned the president that the country's bountiful natural beauty was in danger of being
despoiled if it was not preserved by official decree. Muir's urgent message was received.
Over the next few years, Roosevelt more than tripled the square miles reserved for natural
forests, doubled the number of national parks, and established 17 national monuments, including the
Grand Canyon. Speaking to an audience in Sacramento soon after he parted from Muir, Roosevelt explained
why the sequoias under which he had reclined should be protected from lumbering.
I hope for the preservation of the groves of giant trees simply because it would be a shame
to our civilization to let them disappear, he remarked. They are monuments in themselves.
These and other natural resources, he continued, should be handed on unimpaired to your posterity.
We are not building this country of ours for a day. It is to last through the ages.
The capacity to delay immediate gratification in favor of longer-term interests, what Roosevelt
called posterity, is one that is strengthened by spending time in nature, research has found.
Meredith Berry, a psychologist at the University of Florida, showed images of nature, mountains,
forests, forests, and of urban settings, buildings, roads, to study participants who were then asked
questions that measured their tendency to engage in future discounting, that is, to prefer a smaller
payoff right now over a larger reward later. People who'd been exposed to pictures of nature
were more likely to postpone gratification, responding with less impulsivity and more self-control
than people who had looked at pictures of cities. Ariane van der Waal, a psychologist at Leiden
University in the Netherlands, asked participants in her study to walk through a green, leafy area
of Amsterdam or through a busy, built-up part of the city. Afterwards, she reported, the people
who'd just experienced nature were 10 to 16 percent more likely to restrain their impulse to satisfy
their immediate desires. Similar results have been found with children. Kids aged 8 to 11 were more
capable of delaying gratification after watching a video of nature than after viewing a video about
cities. When we see or experience an urban setting, we are primed to feel competitive to believe we need
to grab what's available. Nature, by contrast, inspires a feeling of abundance, a reassuring
sense of permanence. The orientation toward the future that is evoked by nature may also be related
to the way it changes our sense of time. In another of Berry's studies, participants were asked to estimate
how many seconds or minutes had passed in a given period. People who had just viewed scenes of nature,
perceived time as passing more slowly. Likewise, research has demonstrated that people who take a walk
in a natural setting overestimate how long the walk lasted, while people who have walked in an urban setting
accurately estimate the amount of time that elapsed. Our perception of time is malleable, subject to the
influence of situational cues. By reducing our arousal and increasing our attentional capacity,
exposure to nature grants us a more expansive sense of time and a more generous attitude toward the future.
Nature may also lead us to think more creatively. Children's play is more imaginative when they are
outdoors than when they are inside, research has shown. Natural play spaces are less structured and more
varied, and the props children may come across, leaves, pebbles, pine cones, have no purpose
predetermined by teachers or parents. For adults as well, spending time in nature can promote
innovative thinking. Scientists theorize that the soft fascination evoked by natural scenes engages
what's known as the brain's default mode network. When this network is activated, we enter a loose
associative state in which we're not focused on any one particular task, but are receptive to unexpected
connections and insights. In nature, few decisions and choices are demanded of us, granting our minds the
freedom to follow our thoughts wherever they lead. At the same time, nature is pleasantly diverting in a fashion
that lifts our mood without occupying all our mental powers. Such positive emotion in turn leads us to think more
expansively and open-mindedly. In the space that is thus made available, currently active thoughts can mingle with the deep
stores of memories, emotions, and ideas already present in the brain, generating inspired collisions. Nature's contributions to
creative thought can be felt on a lunchtime stroll through the park, but there may be something especially fruitful about an
extended foray into wilder terrain. David Strayer calls it the three-day effect. Strayer, a psychologist at the
University of Utah, had long observed that his most original ideas came to him on his overnight trips into Utah's
rugged outback. For a study published in 2012, he administered a measure of creative thinking to groups of hikers in
Alaska, Colorado, Maine, and Washington State. Some completed the measure before setting off on their
expedition, while others did so after they had spent three days in the wilderness. The results confirmed his
own experience. The backpacker's responses were 50 percent more creative following extended exposure to
nature. Strayer, who also studies the distracting effects of digital media, believes that an enforced
separation from phones and computers played no small part in the hiker's increased ability to think
creatively. Our electronics are deliberately engineered to grab our attention and not let it go.
Our devices work against the diffuse mental processes that generate creativity, and escaping into nature is
one of the only ways we can leave them behind. There's another way in which the digital respite we get in
could enhance our creativity. The time we spend scrutinizing our small screens leads us to think
small, even as it enlarges and aggrandizes our sense of self. Nature's vastness, the unfathomable scale of
the ocean, of the mountains, of the night sky, has the opposite effect. It makes us feel tiny, even as it opens
wide our sense of the possible. It does all this through an emotion that we confront most commonly
in nature, awe. Dasher Keltner, a professor of psychology at the University of California, Berkeley,
has led much of the recent research on awe. He calls it an emotion in the upper reaches of pleasure
and on the boundary of fear. One of the pleasurably fearsome things about awe is the radically new
perspective it introduces. Our everyday experience does not prepare us to assimilate the gaping
hugeness of the Grand Canyon or the crashing grandeur of Niagara Falls. We have no response
at the ready. Our usual frames of reference don't fit, and we must work to accommodate the new
information that is streaming in from the environment. Consider the physical behavior that accompanies
awe. We stop, we pause, we stare with eyes wide and feature slack, as if to let in more of the scene
that has so astonished us. The experience of awe, Keltner and other researchers have found, prompts a
predictable series of psychological changes. We become less reliant on preconceived notions and
stereotypes. We become more curious and open-minded. And we become more willing to revise and update our
mental schemas, the templates we use to understand ourselves and the world. The experience of awe has
been called a reset button for the human brain. But we can't generate a feeling of awe and its
associated processes all on our own. We have to venture out into the world and find something bigger than
ourselves in order to experience this kind of internal change. Scientists who study awe have also
found that it alters the way we regard other people. Brain scans of people who are experiencing awe
find that the region of the brain that contributes to our sense of occupying and orienting ourselves in
space becomes less active. This diminished activity would seem to underlie the feeling we have when
awestruck that the boundaries between ourselves and others have become more permeable, that we are part of
a larger connected whole. In behavioral terms, people act more pro-socially and more altruistically
following an experience of awe. They share and cooperate more in games, after having watched a video of
sublime scenes of nature. After having gazed up at a grove of old-growth trees, an experiment found,
people were more likely to bend down and help pick up pens that a stranger, actually a confederate of
the researcher, had dropped on the ground. The functional account of awe, biologists and psychologists'
attempts at explaining why we feel this emotion, proposes that it spurs humans to put aside their
individual interests in the service of a collective project. Members of the species who were inclined to
feel awe, the story goes, were better able to band together to accomplish essential tasks,
by extending ordinary thinking with awe at nature's immensity, humankind may have ensured its own
survival, a reminder to us, perhaps, to look away from our small screens long enough to confront the
dangers that threaten our kind and our planet today. The occasions for awe available to our forebears are the
same ones that move us now. Mountains, oceans, trees, sky. But there is one all-encompassing encounter with
the natural world that, to date, has been experienced by only a handful of our contemporaries, the view of
Earth from outer space, as glimpsed by astronauts. So emotionally overwhelming is this sight, and so
consistent are the psychological consequences for the few who have seen it, that scientists have given it a
name, the overview effect. If somebody had said before the flight, are you going to get carried away
looking at the Earth from the moon, I would have said, no, no way, recalled Alan Shepard, an American
astronaut who walked on the moon in 1971. But yet, when I first looked back at the Earth, standing on the
moon, I cried. This emotional reaction to the sight of Earth, to its beauty, to its fragility, is one persistent
motif noted by David Yadin, a research fellow at Johns Hopkins University, who has studied astronauts'
accounts of their flights. A second recurring theme is the dissolution of the boundaries and barriers that
divide those of us here on the ground. From up and outer space, recounted astronaut Rusty Schweikert,
you identify with Houston, and then you identify with Los Angeles and Phoenix and New Orleans,
and that whole process of what it is you identify with begins to shift when you go around the Earth.
You look down and see the surface of that globe you've lived on all this time, and you know all
those people down there, and they are like you. They are you. You recognize that you're a piece of this
total life. Astronaut Edgar Mitchell recalled an explosion of awareness upon seeing Earth from space,
an experience that gave him an overwhelming sense of oneness and connectedness.
Paradoxically, the intense feelings of connection felt by space travelers are often pierced by equally
powerful feelings of dislocation and alienation. When they're not marveling at the sight of Earth on the
horizon, astronauts must contend with what many describe as a stultifying environment, tightly confined,
filled with highly technical instruments, but with none of the features that ease or delight the human
mind. The result may be boredom, ennui, anxiety, even aggression toward other crew members.
How to preserve the psychological well-being of astronauts has emerged as a compelling question
as the prospect of long-term space travel draws closer. One possible answer has already shown some
promise. Have them grow green things. When NASA astronaut Michael Foll arrived at the joint
American-Russian space station, Mir, in 1997, one of the tasks he was assigned was tending to the
station's greenhouse. He carried out a variety of experiments intended to investigate how plants
grow in space. If astronauts are to spend months and even years on board, they will need to have a
supply of fresh food. And indeed, Foll did succeed in growing and tasting what the astronauts called
space broccoli. That required figuring out how to use light to guide the broccoli seedlings in the
right direction. Without gravity, they didn't know to grow up. Without bees to pollinate the mizuna,
a salad green, Foll himself had to do the job, gently transferring pollen from one plant to another
with a toothpick. Foll took such care with his plants that the team on the ground at NASA nicknamed
him Farmer Foll. But the space garden was of more than utilitarian value. I loved the greenhouse
experiment, said Foll at a press conference after returning from Mir. Maintaining a greenhouse on a
long-range space flight, such as a trip to Mars, would be essential, Foll added, because there would be so
little to do in that long period in between planets. And growing and tending plants is certainly a very
soothing thing to do. Of the plants under his care, he said, I enjoyed looking at them every morning for
about 10-15 minutes. It was a moment of quiet time. Psychologists who study the psyches of astronauts,
many of whom already spend months at a time on space stations orbiting Earth, use a telling word for
the malaise that many experience. Such individuals, they say, are homesick. It's possible to perceive
an unsettling similarity between those space travelers, starved for the Earth they can see only through a
window, and ourselves, sealed in our capsules of home and car and office, separated from the verdant
vegetation, fresh air, and ever-shifting sunlight that is our natural habitat. When we're outdoors,
we feel at home because we remain in part the children of our ancestral past, the architect
Harry Francis Malgrave has written. That past lives on in the way we think when we open the door and go
outside. Chapter 5. Thinking with Built Spaces
Jonas Salk was stuck. For years, the young medical researcher had been working 16 hours a day,
seven days a week, in a small basement laboratory in Pittsburgh, trying to develop a vaccine for polio.
In the spring of 1954, exhausted and out of ideas, Salk realized he had to take leave of the lab to refresh
his mind. He found the solitude and tranquility he sought at the Basilica of St. Francis of Assisi,
a 13th-century monastery in central Italy. For several weeks, Salk read and thought and walked
among the monastery's whitewashed colonnades and arches, its quiet courtyards, its chapel filled with
light pouring in from tall windows. During this time, he experienced an intellectual breakthrough,
one he attributed to the buildings themselves. The spirituality of the architecture there was so
inspiring that I was able to do intuitive thinking far beyond any I had done in the past,
Salk would later write. Under the influence of that historic place, I intuitively designed the
research that I felt would result in a vaccine for polio. I returned to my laboratory in Pittsburgh
to validate my concepts and found that they were correct. But this is not the end of the story.
Less than 10 years after his visit to Azizi, Salk had the opportunity to build an intellectual
community from the ground up, to create a space where scientists like him would do their thinking.
Together with his architect, Louis Kahn, he set out to design the ideal place for reflection
and discovery. They modeled the new institute on a monastery. In his discussions with Kahn,
Salk specifically invoked the basilica at Azizi. The architect knew it well, having visited it and
sketched it years earlier. Kahn imbued his design with references to the monastery, both subtle and overt.
The resulting complex of buildings, the Salk Institute in La Jolla, California, completed in 1965,
has been recognized as a masterpiece of modern architecture. Its structures are monumental,
even austere. But they are also carefully designed to fit the needs of the people who work inside
them. Natural light is everywhere, even on the floors located below ground, thanks to sunken courtyards
and light wells. The laboratories feature wide swaths of unobstructed space. Through an ingenious
construction technique, Kahn managed to create entire floors free of interior columns.
Mechanical elements like ducts and piping are located on alternating floors, so that repairs and updates can
be made without disturbing the scientists as they work. Set apart from the labs are the scientists' studies,
properties, each of which offers a view of the Pacific Ocean. The researchers who work there,
including a number of Nobel Prize winners, report that it is an optimal place to think.
Salk professed himself pleased with the result,
I would say the building is as close to perfection as anything possible.
For centuries, architects like Louis Kahn have thought about how to create spaces that evoke particular
states of mind. There is an even longer tradition of folk architecture embedded in the structures
ordinary people have created for themselves, tweaking and tuning inherited forms. Now the emerging
field of neuroarchitecture has begun to examine empirically how the brain responds to buildings and their
interiors, and to theorize about how these reactions might be shaped by our evolutionary history and by
the biological facts of our bodies. Given all this thought and care, it's puzzling and dispiriting that
many of us learn and work and live in spaces that don't help us think effectively. One reason for this,
our culture does not hold the built environment in especially high regard. Many individuals and
institutions seem of the view that it doesn't much matter, that we should be able to engage in
productive mental labor no matter what the setting. Second, thoughtful design takes time and money,
and there is always the pressure to build quickly and cut costs. A third reason, it must be said,
is architects and designers themselves, and the tyranny of their bold ideas. As we'll see in this chapter,
their edgy experiments and avant-garde adventures have often created difficulties for the people who
must live inside them every day. Even Louis Kahn could fall into this trap. A few years before he designed
the Salk Institute, he received a commission to build the Richards Medical Research Laboratories at the
University of Pennsylvania. Kahn's design was hailed as a triumph by architectural critics.
It even earned him an exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art. But from the perspective of the people who
worked in the building, it was a disaster. Cramped, dark, confusing to navigate, hardly the sort of
place to evoke a eureka moment of discovery. Kahn corrected course with his next project, placing the
needs of the building's occupants at the heart of the plan for the Salk Institute. During this busy time
in Kahn's professional life, an equally robust intellectual project was unfolding halfway
across the country in Oskaloosa, Kansas. Psychologist Roger Barker had set out to discover why people
behave as they do by recording their activities in minute detail as they went about their everyday
lives. With his colleague, Herbert Wright, he set up the Midwest Psychological Field Station in
Oskaloosa, population 750, and began following a group of children from the instant they woke up in
the morning to the moment they were put to bed at night. From their exhaustive observations, a distinct
pattern emerged. As one scholar notes, Barker and his colleagues found that there was a great deal of
order, consistency, and predictability in the children's behavior. But this order was not a
product of the children's personalities, nor their intelligence, nor any other internal quality. Rather,
the factor that overwhelmingly determined the way the children acted was the place in which they were
observed. As Barker himself reported, the characteristics of the behavior of a child often
changed dramatically when he moved from one region to another, e.g. from classroom to hall to playground,
from drugstore to street, from baseball game to shower room.
Barker's Midwest study, which ultimately extended over a quarter century, generated reams of evidence
that the spaces in which we spend our time powerfully shape the way we think and act. It is not the case
that we can muster the ability to perform optimally no matter the setting, a truth that architects have
long acknowledged, even as our larger society has dismissed it. Christopher Alexander, author of the
classic book A Pattern Language, and an architect who celebrates the hard-earned wisdom embedded in
folk architecture, laments,
the arrogance of the belief that the individual is self-sufficient and not dependent in any essential
way on his surroundings. To the contrary, Alexander writes, a person is so far formed by his surroundings
that his state of harmony depends entirely on his harmony with his surroundings. He adds,
some kinds of physical and social circumstances help a person come to life. Others make it very difficult.
Today, we too often learn and work in spaces
that are far from being in harmony with our
human nature, that in fact make intelligent and effective thinking
very difficult. Yet the built environment,
when we know how to arrange it, can produce just the opposite effect.
It can sharpen our focus.
It can sustain our motivation.
It can enhance our creativity and enrich our experience of daily life.
A tour through recent research in psychology and neuroscience,
and through the varied kinds of places that humans have long created,
can show us how to turn space into an extension of our minds.
Apart from offering shelter from the elements,
the most critical function of a built interior is simply giving us a quiet place to think.
Such protected space is necessary because thinking,
at least of the kind the modern world expects of us,
doesn't come naturally to the human animal.
Throughout the long history of our species,
we did our cogitating out in the open,
in the moment,
often on the run,
relying on instinct and memory far more than considered reflection
or careful analysis.
It was only when we found ourselves compelled to concentrate
in a sustained way on abstract concepts
that we needed to sequester ourselves in order to think.
To attend for hours at a time to words,
numbers,
and other symbolic content
is a tall order for our brains.
Maintaining this intensely narrow focus
is a highly unnatural activity,
and our minds require external structure
in order to pull it off.
Historically,
society's demand for increasingly abstract thought,
combined with the growing density of human habitation,
to create a need for such structure,
that is,
for walls.
Walls became necessary
as a way of relieving the mental strain
that comes along with closely packed populations
of unfamiliar others.
For most of human history,
after all,
people lived with their family members
in one-room dwellings.
Everyone they knew
lived not far from their front door,
and it was useful to keep track
of others' comings and goings.
Even medieval kings and queens
lived in a single large hall
filled with their chosen attendants and counselors.
But with the emergence of cities
and their crowds of unacquainted people,
urban residents began to seek out spaces
in which to read,
think,
and write
alone.
The wall was designed
to protect us
from the cognitive load
of having to keep track
of the activities of strangers,
observes Colin Ellard,
an environmental psychologist
and neuroscientist
at the University of Waterloo in Canada.
This became increasingly important
as we moved
from tiny agrarian settlements
to larger villages
and eventually to cities,
where it was too difficult
to keep track of
who was doing what to whom.
The privacy afforded by walls
represented a truly revolutionary
extension of the mind,
maintains John Locke,
professor of linguistics
at Lehman College
of the City University of New York.
Our distant ancestors
could see each other
at all times,
which kept them safe
but also imposed
a huge cognitive cost,
he notes.
When residential walls
were erected,
they eliminated the need
to look around
every few seconds
to see what others were doing.
The result,
he says,
was that
a human vigil,
one beginning with ancestors
that we share with apes,
was reduced
to manageable proportions,
freeing up many hours
of undistracted time
per day.
An early example
of such walls
can be found
amid the hubbub
of today's Manhattan,
tucked away inside
the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
There,
among the Grecian urns
and the colonial-era silver,
is a tiny gem
of a room
recreated
as it was
in 15th century Perugia,
the studiolo
of Federico
da Montefeltro,
Duke of Urbino.
Federico,
whose title
called on him
to be variously
a royal,
a politician,
and a warrior,
lived in the town
of Gubbio
in what is now
central Italy.
The walls of the study
allowed the Duke,
a lover of literature,
architecture,
and mathematics
to retreat
from the company
of the townspeople
he ruled
into quiet study
and contemplation.
And because his studiolo
was constructed
in Renaissance Italy,
these were no ordinary walls.
Craftsmen from Siena,
Florence,
and Naples
created elaborate
trompe l'oeil murals
made entirely
of inlaid wood,
a technique
called intarsia.
In slivers of rosewood,
oak,
and beech,
these designs depict
in precise detail
and in linear perspective
a then newly invented technique,
simulated cabinets
full of precious objects,
each one a symbol
of what the Duke
most admired
and to which
he most aspired.
A lute and a harp
showed he was
a man of culture.
A mace
and a pair of spurs
represented his skill
in battle.
A bound volume
of Virgil's Aeneid
was a sign
of his erudition.
Incorporated
into every corner
of the space
were mottos
and motifs
that represented
the Duke's
personal,
familial,
and regional identity.
Federico's version
of a private study
was extraordinary,
but in the centuries
that followed,
as people continued
to flock
from the countryside
to the cities,
such thinking rooms
served a need
that became
more and more common.
The fad
for the studiolo
spread north
through Europe
as people of means
added such rooms
to their homes.
Like Federico's study,
these spaces
often featured
displays of meaningful
or sacred objects,
collections of books,
scientific
and musical instruments,
religious relics,
and they carved out
a space
of undisturbed quiet,
space that made
deep,
fresh thinking
possible.
For one of the
16th century's
most original thinkers,
Michel de Montaigne,
the study became
a central metaphor
for the freedom
of thought
he prized.
Montaigne,
it should be noted,
was not only
a man of letters,
but also mayor
of the city of Bordeaux.
Amid the hustle
and bustle
of social
and commercial life,
we must reserve
a back room,
wholly our own
and entirely free,
wherein to settle
our true liberty,
our principal solitude
and retreat,
wrote Montaigne
in his essay
Of Solitude.
Montaigne's term
for this room,
arrière boutique,
or literally
behind the shop,
speaks to the
close relationship
between busy engagement
and quiet withdrawal.
In this room,
Montaigne added,
we must,
for the most part,
entertain ourselves
with ourselves.
For many of us,
that space
has now largely
disappeared.
Starting in the middle
of the 20th century,
the walls that had
gone up hundreds
of years earlier
began to come down.
In every sort
of building,
homes,
schools,
offices,
walls that had
once been welcomed
as guardians
of discrete
or dedicated spaces
were now disparaged
as interruptions
of a desired
openness.
An unstructured
space of potential
came to feel
preferable
to a closed-off
space of definition.
This development
was especially apparent
in the places
where we work.
By the beginning
of our own century,
some 70 to 80 percent
of American office workers
labored in open-plan rooms.
Why did the wall-less
workspace triumph
over the private office?
For one thing,
it's cheaper.
Open-plan office space
can cost as much
as 50 percent
less per employee
than more traditional
office layouts
because of its
smaller footprint
and lower interior
construction costs.
But there was also
a theoretical rationale
behind the enthusiasm
for open offices,
a bold idea,
if you will.
The idea is this,
take down the walls,
throw everybody
together in one
big room,
and communication
will flow
with increased
collaboration
and creativity
sure to follow.
The notion
of promoting
collisions
in a shared space
comes with an
appealing historical
and intellectual
pedigree.
The coffeehouse,
as author
Stephen Johnson
has told us
in his influential
writings on
Where Ideas
Come From,
is the arena
in which the
modern world
was born.
These buzzy
gathering places,
Johnson writes,
fertilized countless
Enlightenment-era
innovations,
everything from
the science of
electricity
to the insurance
industry
to democracy
itself.
New ideas,
he argues,
arise out of
the collisions
that happen
when different
fields of expertise
converge in some
shared physical
or intellectual
space.
For example,
during the years
he lived in
London,
from 1764
to 1775,
Benjamin Franklin
spent many hours
at a coffeehouse
near St. Paul's
Cathedral.
In his book
The Invention
of Air,
Johnson recounts
how Franklin
mingled there
with a group
of free thinkers,
scientists,
mathematicians,
philosophers,
who stimulated
and inspired
one another
through their
wide-ranging
conversations.
There should
be a plaque
to commemorate
that coffeehouse,
Johnson has
said.
It was really
a tremendously
generative space.
Today's leaders
and managers
have seized
on this notion.
Get people
to collide
with one another,
the thinking goes,
and magic
will happen.
How better
to promote
collisions
than to remove
the physical
barriers that
would keep
them from
happening?
And, in fact,
it is the case
that people
who work near
one another
are more likely
to communicate
and collaborate.
This finding
was first
demonstrated
more than
40 years ago
by Thomas Allen,
a professor
at MIT
who drew
what has come
to be known
as the Allen
Curve.
The curve
describes
a consistent
relationship
between physical
distance
and frequency
of communication.
The rate
of people's
interactions
declines
exponentially
with the distance
between the spaces
where they work.
This would mean,
for example,
that people
sitting six feet
apart are four
times more likely
to talk regularly
than people
seated 65 feet
apart.
Allen found
that 50 meters,
about 165 feet,
was the cutoff
point for regular
information exchange.
Beyond that
distance,
routine communication
effectively ceased.
People who are
located close to
one another
are more likely
to encounter
one another,
and it's these
encounters that
spark informal
exchanges,
interdisciplinary
ideas,
and fruitful
collaborations.
Allen further
observed that
shared spaces
through which
every member
of an organization
passes at least
once a day
are especially
useful in
counter-promoters.
He offered,
as an example,
MIT's
Infinite Corridor,
an 825-foot-long
hallway that runs
through several
buildings,
effectively extending
from one side
of the campus
to the other.
That's longer
than two football
fields,
although MIT
students are
less apt to be
interested in
football than
in other things.
Undergraduates
at the university
celebrate the
moment each
school year
when the sun
lines up in
just the right
spot to beam
its rays directly
down the long
hallway.
They call it
MIT Hinge.
More recent
research has
confirmed Allen's
original finding.
In the age of
texting, email,
and slack, the
Allen curve
still applies.
Online communication,
it seems, is no
substitute for the
offhand conversation,
the casual exchange
carried out in
person.
But, fruitful
proximity is one
thing.
Continual distraction
born of unenclosed,
unprotected spaces
is another.
Appealing though it
may be to modern
sensibilities,
the coffeehouse was
always a terrible
model for a
place in which
complex, cognitively
demanding work is
to be carried out.
That's because the
conditions created
by the open plan
workspace are in
direct conflict with
the unalterable
realities of human
biology.
The brain evolved
to continually
monitor its
immediate environment
to be, in
effect,
distractible,
lest nearby
sounds or
movements signal
a danger to be
avoided or an
opportunity to be
seized.
And organizational
environments are
full of the kind
of stimuli that
distract us most.
First, humans are
especially attuned to
the presence of
novelty, to whatever
appears new and
different.
The pull of the
novel on our
attention is an
efficient, evolved
strategy.
It would be a waste
of our time and
energy to keep
noticing the many
things around us
that don't change
from day to day.
But our selective
attraction to the
fresh and new
becomes a problem
when we operate
in environments
that are hubs
of constant
activity and
change.
Psychologist
Fabrice Parmentier,
who researches the
effects of acoustic
distraction, reports
that unexpected
sounds ineluctably
break through
attentional filters
and end up
distracting those
who hear them,
regardless of the
sound's informational
value.
Our attention, he
notes, is subject
subject to
involuntary
capture by any
sudden or
surprising noise.
Second, we are
especially attuned
to the sound of
speech, especially
when the words are
distinct enough to
make out.
Any ambient noise
can grab our
attention, but
intelligible speech is
particularly distracting
because its semantic
meaning is processed
by our brains
whether or not we
want to be
listening.
What's more, the
speech we can't
help overhearing, is
processed by the
same brain regions
we employ to
carry out the
kind of knowledge
work done at the
office, like
analyzing data or
writing a report.
Involuntarily
auditing speech and
trying to complete
tasks involving
words or other
symbols means
drawing on the
same limited
resource, with
the result that we
have less brain
to devote to
each.
In a 2014
study conducted
by researchers
from the
University of
Jovla in
Sweden,
participants were
asked to write
short essays under
five different
acoustic conditions.
Background noise
in the five
conditions ranged
from .08 to
.71 on a
measure called
the Speech
Transmission Index,
that is, from
completely
unintelligible
speech to
somewhat
intelligible speech
to crystal
clear speech.
The participants'
writing fluency,
the investigators
reported, dropped
drastically at
speech transmission
index values
above .23,
levels that, they
note, would not
be at all
uncommon in an
open-plan office.
Third, we are
especially attuned
to the nuances
of social
interactions,
alert to what
people say to
one another and
to what we think
they will say.
In an effort to
master our
interpersonal world,
we're constantly
making predictions
about what will
unfold in the
social exchanges
that go on
around us.
Our habit of
projecting forward
makes it especially
hard for us to
tune out one-sided
conversations, such
as those we hear
when others near us
are talking on the
phone.
Research by
Lauren Emberson,
an assistant
professor of
psychology at
Princeton University,
has found that
we are more
distracted and
our cognitive
performance more
impaired when we
overhear what she
calls a half-a-log
than when we
catch both sides
of an in-person
dialogue.
When we hear
only half of a
conversation, it's
more difficult to
predict when the
speaker will pause
or resume talking
and what the
person will say to
their unheard-by-us
conversational
partner.
In a study
Emberson published
in 2010,
participants asked
to complete verbal
and motor tasks
started to make
mistakes just
moments after they
began hearing a
half-a-log.
What about
wearing headphones?
That takes the
problem and puts
it directly into
our ears.
Like overheard
speech, music
with lyrics
competes for
mental resources
with activities
that also involve
language, such as
reading and
writing.
Music has been
found to impair
performance on
tasks that are
difficult or
complex, as well
as those requiring
creativity.
And it's not
just the words.
Music, with its
insistent beat
and catchy
riffs, is
engineered to
grab and hold
our attention.
Studies suggest
that music with
high-intensity,
fast tempos, and
frequent variation
is more distracting
than more low-key,
laid-back music.
Students who
try to study while
listening to high-intensity
music like hip-hop,
one researcher found,
are subject to what
he memorably called
the attention
drainage effect.
Music disrupts
cognition for young
people just as
much as it does
for adults.
Perhaps most
regrettably, people's
intellectual performance
while listening to
music they prefer is
significantly poorer
than when listening to
music they dislike.
What's true for our
sense of hearing holds
for vision as well.
We can't choose not to
see what enters our
field of vision.
It's nearly impossible
to prevent our gaze from
darting towards a visual
stimulus that is new
or in motion.
And just as our ears
prick up at the sound
of people's speech,
our eyes are drawn
towards the human
visage.
The brain automatically
prioritizes the
processing of faces,
even when we're trying
hard to focus on a
page or a screen.
Our attention is
pulled especially
powerfully towards the
gaze of other people.
We are uncannily
sensitive to the
feeling of being
observed.
Once we spot
others' eyes on us,
the processing of eye
contact takes
precedence over
whatever else our
brains were working
on.
An awareness of being
looked at even
increases our
physiological arousal,
as revealed by a
spike in skin
conductance.
Recall that when our
nervous system becomes
aroused, we start to
perspire in a barely
perceptible way.
This slight sheen of
sweat momentarily turns
our skin into a better
conductor of
electricity.
When we glimpse a
face in which the
eyes are closed or
directed elsewhere, we
register no change in
skin conductance, but
that same measure shows
a jolt whenever we see
eyes looking our way.
All this visual
monitoring and
processing uses up
considerable mental
resources, leaving
that much less brain
power for our work.
We know this because of
how much better we
think when we close
our eyes.
Eye closure helps
people disengage from
environmental stimulation
and thereby enhances the
efficiency of cognitive
processing, one team of
researchers reports.
Temporarily relieved of
such stimulation, people
experience less cognitive
load, are better able to
engage in visualization,
and can more readily
retrieve elusive
information when faced
with one of those
frustrating tip-of-the-tong
moments.
They're also much better at
recalling details, both
visual and auditory.
One study reported a
23% increase in
correct answers when
participants closed their
eyes as they answered
questions about a film
they had just watched.
Of course, we can hardly
go about our work or our
learning with our eyes
closed.
We have to rely on
elements of physical
space to save us from
our own propensity for
distraction, to impose
the sensory reduction that
supports optimal attention,
memory, and cognition.
Good fences make good
neighbors, wrote poet Robert
Frost.
Likewise, good walls make
good collaborators.
Walls and the protected
spaces they create shield us
from distraction.
But they do more.
They also provide us with
privacy, a state that bears a
surprising relationship to
creativity.
The open-plan coffeehouse
model now enjoying such
popularity is
performance-oriented,
almost exhibitionist in
nature.
Think of Benjamin Franklin
and his fellow debaters
holding forth at the
coffeehouse near St.
Paul's.
But putting oneself on
display consumes mental
resources, leaving less
brainpower for the work
itself.
The act of self-presentation
may be particularly draining
for members of certain
groups.
One recent study conducted
in a British government
agency that switched from
enclosed offices to an
open-plan workspace found
that the heightened
imperative to engage in
self-presentation in such
settings fell most heavily
on women for whom
appearance is considered
especially important.
When people are relieved of
the cognitive load imposed by
their environment, they
immediately become more
creative, neuroscientist
Moshe Barr has found.
Barr, who directs the Gonda
Multidisciplinary Brain
Research Center at Bar
Elan University in Israel,
reports that when he taxed
subjects' mental resources
as they completed a test of
creative thinking, they came
up with more statistically
common, that is, conventional
and commonplace
associations.
In his study, Barr found that
a high mental load
consistently diminished the
originality and creativity of
his subjects' responses.
His explanation?
When our minds are otherwise
occupied, we resort to
mental shortcuts—convenient
stereotypes, familiar
assumptions, well-worn grooves.
These are the thoughts that
come most readily to mind, that
take the least mental energy to
generate.
It requires abundant cognitive
resources to inhibit these
stale, reflexive responses and
to reach beyond them for ideas
that are fresher and more
original.
Privacy supports creativity in
another way.
It offers us the freedom to
experiment unobserved.
When our work is a performance
put on for the benefit of
others, we're less likely to try
new approaches that might fail or
look messy.
Ethan Bernstein, an associate
professor at Harvard Business
School, has investigated the
relationship between privacy and
innovation at a mobile phone
factory in China.
In a study published in 2012, he
found that granting the workers
greater privacy, concealing their
activities behind a curtain, led
them to become more innovative and
more productive.
They came up with faster and more
effective ways of doing their work
when the process of experimentation
was shielded from view.
A similar dynamic prevails in
white-collar work, says Bernstein, where
the surveillance that employees
experience may be digital in nature.
Professionals are less likely to play
around with new ideas or approaches
when they know that an all-seeing
electronic eye is tracking their every
keystroke.
It's not simply that staffers fear
their bosses will think they're
goofing off or breaking the rules.
Being subject to oversight at all
times is a disempowering experience,
and feeling powerless discourages
exploration and creativity.
Conversely, a number of studies have
found that a sense of privacy leads to
feelings of empowerment, which in turn
lead to greater creativity.
Lastly, the benefits of privacy extend to
our communications with colleagues.
Effective collaboration often requires
a degree of discretion, a retreat from
public scrutiny that's hard to find in
an open office.
Research has found that employees have
fewer and more superficial work-related
conversations in wall-less spaces, often
because they are leery of discussing
delicate or confidential matters in the
open.
Ben Weber, whose firm, Humanize, tracks
employees' activities via wearable
sensors, found that after companies move
from a workplace with enclosed offices to
an open-plan workspace, interactions among
employees actually decrease during most
times of the day.
This may be due to employees putting on
headphones or the difficulty of engaging
in conversation when dozens of people are
within earshot, Weber notes.
Other studies have found that as workspaces
become more open, trust and cooperativeness
among co-workers declines.
The open-plan office seems to discourage
exactly the kind of behavior it was intended
to promote.
Such negative effects are especially
pronounced in offices where employees have
no assigned workspace at all, an increasingly
common arrangement.
The drawbacks of hot-desking or hoteling, as it's
called, point to another way in which space can be
used to extend our minds, but too often is not.
When we operate within a space over which we feel
ownership, a space that feels like it's ours, a host of
psychological and even physiological changes ensues.
These effects were first observed in studies of a
phenomenon known as the home advantage, the consistent
finding that athletes tend to win more and bigger victories
when they are playing in their own fields, courts and
stadiums. On their home turf, teams play more aggressively, and
their members, both male and female, exhibit higher levels of
testosterone, a hormone associated with the expression of
social dominance.
But the home advantage is not limited to sports.
Researchers have identified a more general effect as well.
When people occupy spaces that they consider their own, they
experience themselves as more confident and capable.
They are more efficient and productive.
They are more focused and less distractible.
And they advance their own interests more forcefully and
effectively.
A study by psychologists Graham Brown and Marcus Bayer, for
example, found that people who engage in negotiation within the
bounds of their own space claim between 60 and 160 percent more
value than the visiting party.
Benjamin Meagher, an assistant professor of psychology at Kenyon
College in Ohio, has advanced an intriguing theory that may explain
these outcomes.
The way we act, the way we think, and even the way we perceive the
world around us differ when we're in a space that's familiar to us, one
that we have shaped through our own choices and imbued with our own
memories of learning and working there in the past.
When we're on our home turf, Meagher has found, our mental and
perceptual processes operate more efficiently, with less need for
effortful self-control.
The mind works better because it doesn't do all the work on its own.
It gets an assist from the structure embedded in its environment, structure
that marshals useful information, supports effective habits and routines, and
restrains unproductive impulses.
In a familiar space over which we feel ownership, he suggests, our cognition is
distributed across the entire setting.
The place itself helps us think.
With ownership comes control, and a sense of control over their space, how it
looks and how it functions, leads people to perform more productively.
This was demonstrated in dramatic fashion in an experiment conducted by psychologists Craig
Knight and Alex Haslam.
In the study, volunteers were given a set of tasks to perform under one of four conditions.
They worked in a lean office, spare, uncluttered.
In an enriched office, decorated with posters and potted plants.
In an empowered office, participants could arrange the room as they liked.
And in a disempowered office, the room was rearranged in front of them without their
cooperation or consent.
In the lean office found Knight and Haslam, participants invested a low level of effort in
their assigned work.
They were listless and lackadaisical.
In the disempowered office, subjects' productivity was similarly mediocre.
In addition, they were very, very unhappy.
I wanted to hit you, one participant confessed to the experimenter in a follow-up interview,
describing how he felt as his office was rearranged to the researcher's liking.
In the enriched office, participants worked harder and were more productive.
In the empowered office, people performed best of all.
They got 30% more done than in the lean office and about 15% more than in the enriched office.
The size of such effects is large enough to make any employer sit up and take notice.
Three people working in empowered offices accomplished almost as much as four people
in lean offices.
Perhaps the most important form of control over one's space is authority over who comes in
and out, a point missed by those who believe that our workspaces should resemble a bustling
coffeehouse.
The informal exchanges facilitated by proximity are indeed generative, but the value of such
interactions can be extracted only if it is also possible, when necessary, to avoid interacting
at all.
Consider again in this light the denizens of the St. Paul's coffeehouse, who surely had private
studies to which to retreat at home, or the professors who traverse MIT's infinite corridor
on their way to their own quiet, book-lined offices.
It's certainly the case that the nature of today's work demands frequent consultation and
cooperation with others.
What we may not realize is that good work also requires periods of abstention from such
exchanges, a phenomenon that organizational psychologists call intermittent collaboration.
Research on intermittent collaboration is based on the understanding that complex problem
solving proceeds in two stages, the first of which entails gathering the facts we need to
clarify the nature of the problem and begin constructing a solution.
In this stage, communication and collaboration are essential.
But there is a second phase, equally vital, the process of generating and developing solutions
and figuring out which of these solutions is best.
During this phase, studies find excessive collaboration is actually detrimental.
The reason can be found in our nature as a group-dwelling species.
We are exquisitely sensitive to social pressure, easily drawn into consensus and conformity.
When we're constantly in touch with others, we all end up gravitating toward the same pretty
good but not great answers.
Research finds that people who keep lines of communication perpetually open consistently
generate middling solutions.
Nothing terrible, but nothing exceptional either.
Meanwhile, people who isolate themselves during the solution generation phase tend to come up
with a few truly extraordinary solutions, along with a lot of losers.
The best of all worlds is enjoyed by those who engage in cycles of sociable interaction and
quiet focus.
Just as we need walls to protect us from our propensity to be distracted, so we require walls
to shield us from our susceptibility to social pressure.
What arrangement of space could support this way of thinking and working?
A surprisingly apt model can be found in the one adopted by Jonas Salk and Louis Kahn, the monastery.
In the popular imagination, monks are solitary, hermit-like creatures, but historically they have
lived within a communal setting that balanced time spent alone in study and contemplation
with time spent with others in robust social interaction.
Richard Irvine, an anthropologist at the University of Cambridge, explored this equilibrium in an ethnographic
study he conducted at Downside Abbey, a Benedictine monastery in Somerset, England, where the way of life
has remained little changed for centuries.
In describing the abbey's architecture, Irvine observes that the buildings reflect their inhabitants'
daily cycles of intense engagement and hushed withdrawal, accommodating communal spaces like the library,
the refectory, the workshop, and the courtyard, as well as the monks' solitary cells.
The monastery even has its own version of the infinite corridor, in the form of the cloister,
a long passageway that serves as the key element of connection in the architecture of the monastery,
Irvine notes.
The cloister is a space of movement which facilitates frequent interpersonal encounter as the monks
pass through it regularly to reach the common areas of Abbey Church, where they attend six
communal services a day, and the refectory, where they join together in silence to eat three
meals a day.
Though organizational psychologists have only recently recognized its value, the monks of
Downside Abbey have been practicing intermittent collaboration for more than 400 years.
While the monastery is the site of frequent interpersonal encounter, the importance of solitude is also
structured into the timetable through the commitment to twice-daily private prayer, as well as the summum
silentium, complete silence, sometimes referred to as the great silence, at the end of the day,
Irvine explains.
This silence restricts interaction and gives the monk opportunity to be alone.
He notes that members of the community have available to them another way of ensuring
intermittent interaction.
They can pull up the hood of their vestment, hence covering the ears and closing off part of
the peripheral vision, thus making them less inclined to distraction from other people.
The ancient arrangement of space in a monastery bears some resemblance to today's activity-based
workspaces, which nod to the human need for both social interaction and undisturbed solitude
by providing dedicated areas for each—a café-style meeting place, a soundproof study carol with
a door.
Too often, however, such offices still fail to provide their occupants with that most effective
mental extension, a private space, persistent and therefore familiar, over which they can have
a sense of ownership and control.
Such a space can generate benefits even beyond those we've already covered, because they are so
well-positioned to meet two additional pressing human needs—the need to claim one's own identity
and the need to belong to a larger group.
For this extension of mind by physical space, there can be no better model than the studiolo.
Recall the richly decorated walls of the study belonging to Federico da Montefeltro, Duke
of Urbino.
They surrounded their occupant with visual reminders of who he was—an esthete, a warrior, a scholar.
There was the lute and the harp, the mace and the pair of spurs, the bound volume of
Virgil.
On display as well were symbols representing his membership in meaningful groups.
Worked into the intricately inlaid paneling was the Montefeltro Imprese, a kind of family
crest, featuring an image of an ostrich holding an arrow in its beak.
Inscribed underneath the bird was a swaggering motto, rendered in German and first proclaimed
by Federico's grandfather, Ich kann ein großes eisen essen, or I can eat a big iron.
The walls also featured the emblem of the Order of the Garter, England's highest chivalric
order, awarded to Federico by King Edward IV.
Self-referential images and messages are not mere decorations, whether they're built into
the paneling of a Duke's splendidly outfitted retreat or tacked to the walls of an office
worker's cubicle.
Research shows that in the presence of cues of identity and cues of affiliation, people
perform better.
They're more motivated and more productive.
The first of these are the tangible signs and signals we employ to support our self-conception.
We're the kind of person who likes cats or rock climbing or far-side cartoons.
We use our space to advertise our hobbies, to show off our awards and honors, to express
an unexpected creative streak or a quirky sense of humor.
Such displays may sometimes be aimed at informing other people of who we are or who we'd like
to be, but often they are intended for a more intimate audience, ourselves.
For a study published in the Academy of Management Journal, researchers examined the workspaces of
people holding a variety of jobs, from engineer to event planner, from creative director to real
estate agent.
The investigators found that about one-third of the personal tokens these professionals had
incorporated into their workspaces were positioned so as to be visible only to their owners.
Of the objects whose stated purpose for their owners was reminding them of their goals and
values, 70% were placed out of sight of others.
Why would we need such reminders?
While our sense of self may feel stable and solid, it is in fact quite fluid, dependent on
external structure for its shape.
We can sense this truth when we travel to a foreign country.
Everything around us is strange and unfamiliar, producing in us a dizzy sense of discombobulation.
This disorientation can be pleasurable, if exhausting, while on a holiday in a faraway land, but in
our day-to-day lives we need to cultivate a steady sense of identity in order to function effectively.
The material things we arrange around us help us maintain that sturdy self-conception.
As the psychologist Mahali Csikszentmihalyi has written, we keep certain objects in view
because they tell us things about ourselves that we need to hear in order to keep ourselves
from falling apart.
Moreover, we need to have close at hand those prompts that highlight particular facets of
our identity.
Each of us has not one identity, but many—worker, student, spouse, parent, friend—and different
environmental cues evoke different identities.
Daphna Oizerman, a psychologist at the University of Southern California, notes that signals from
the environment function to bring one of these many personas to the fore, with real effects
on our thought and behavior.
Which identity is salient in the moment, influences both what one pays attention to and what one
chooses to do, she writes.
One particularly striking example.
Research has found that cues that remind Asian American girls of their ethnicity improve their
performance on math tests, while cues that remind them of their gender undermine their performance.
For all of us, the objects on which our eyes come to rest each day reinforce what we're
doing in that place, in that role.
Through the ups and downs of our lives at school and at work, the reassuring stability of meaningful
material objects can also help us manage our moods and emotions.
When we engage in such environmental self-regulation, we rely on cues outside ourselves to maintain
the kind of equilibrium inside ourselves that facilitates the pursuit of our goals.
In a study of mid-level professionals, Gregory Lawrence, a professor of management at the
University of Michigan, Flint, found that incorporating personal items into their workspaces helped them
relieve the emotional exhaustion brought on by a stressful job, especially for employees whose
office settings did not afford much privacy, being able to personalize their work area with photographs,
posters, comic strips, mugs, help them carve out their own space, inscribe it with personal meaning,
and thus create a kind of sanctuary at work, write Lawrence and his co-authors.
Lawrence is not the only researcher to detect an almost spiritual cast to the way people regard
their personal space.
In an ethnographic study of research and development professionals in the U.S. headquarters of the
Japanese technology company Hitachi, authors Ryoko Emai and Masahide Ban note that the employees
they studied did intensive reading, writing, and most importantly, thinking in the comfort and
solitude of their own cubicles. Often stocked with personal comfort items, familiar references,
and favorite tools, a dedicated private space served as a sacred space to rejuvenate and regroup.
It's possible to see shades of the monastery and the studiolo in these modern-day workstations
and cubicles, evidence of the persistent human need to imbue our spaces with meaning and significance.
Yet many organizations discourage or even ban the display of personal items in employees' workspaces.
Such clutter may be frowned upon as an irrelevant distraction from the work at hand, or as an
obstacle to achieving the clean spare aesthetic associated with admired leaders, like the late
Apple computer founder Steve Jobs. For psychologists Craig Knight and Alexander Haslam, such dictates bring
a different figure to mind a different figure to mind, Frederick Winslow Taylor, the early 20th century
engineer who introduced scientific management to American corporations. Taylor specifically
prohibited workers from bringing their personal effects into the factories he redesigned for maximum
speed and minimum waste. Stripped of their individuality, he insisted, employees would function as
perfectly efficient cogs in an industrial machine. Knight and Haslam, who conducted the study of lean
versus enriched and empowered versus disempowered working environments described earlier, believe that an
embrace of neo-Taylorism is a mistake, especially in an era when employees are expected to behave not as
generic cogs, but as critical and creative thinkers. As their own research has demonstrated, people are less
productive in a lean, featureless office. Making people feel they are in the wrong place, that it isn't
their place, is a very powerful way of undermining performance, says Haslam. Although managers and
administrators may fear that the presence of personal tokens will reduce organizational cohesion and loyalty,
research evidence suggests that just the opposite is the case. Employees feel more committed to their
company when they are able to see themselves reflected in it. A sense of ownership extends from the
individual to the organization, and it flows through physical space. The way space is arranged can
recognize our individuality, with positive effects on our motivation and performance. It can also affirm or
deny our sense of belonging within an organization. Members of groups that have historically been
excluded, marginalized, or negatively stereotyped are especially attuned to the signals of belonging or
non-belonging they encounter in the environments they enter. Such signals are pervasive and powerful,
though they are rarely the focus of discussions about bias. When we think of prejudice, most of us think of it
as a problem of people, says Mary Murphy, a professor of psychological and brain sciences at Indiana
University Bloomington. But, she points out, inequalities of experience and outcome are also generated by
features of the organizational setting, of which the built environment is a significant part. Murphy and her
colleagues have advanced a theory of prejudiced places, which they define as places that unequally tax the
emotions, physiology, cognitive function, and performance of some groups more than others.
When we regard prejudice as a property of people alone, as an entity that exists inside individuals'
heads, we fail to see the full picture of how bias operates within institutions, and we miss out on
opportunities to push back against it. According to what Murphy calls the prejudice-in-places model,
systemic inequality will not be eradicated by identifying and rooting out a few bad actors who hold racist
or sexist beliefs. Indeed, prejudice can be perpetuated by places, even when the people within them are
endeavoring to act in egalitarian ways. Precisely because physical places exert such a profound effect
in the behavior of the behavior of the people who work and learn within them, altering aspects of these
spaces might offer the most effective route to reducing bias. Efforts to change people's beliefs more
directly may provoke resistance or resentment. And, in fact, research has repeatedly found unimpressive
results for conventional diversity workshops and training sessions. Prejudiced places might well have
described the environments Sapna Cherian encountered in the summer of 2001. Recently graduated from
college, Cherian was interviewing for internships at tech firms located in California's Bay Area.
At one of the companies she visited, she found herself put off by a workspace that looked like a
computer geek's basement hangout. The action figures, the Nerf guns, the soda cans stacked up to make a model of
the Golden Gate Bridge, as Cherian recalls it now. The firm's adherence to a very particular aesthetic
seemed designed to promote an exclusive conception of its ideal employee, one that felt unwelcoming or
even alienating to her, a young woman and person of color. Cherian encountered a very different setting
when interviewing at the software company Adobe. There, the workspace was bright and inviting.
Cherian accepted Adobe's offer and stayed on at the firm for five years. Her next move was to a
psychology PhD program at Stanford University, where she enrolled with the aim of investigating how cues
in the physical environment affect the way people think. In an experiment she conducted while still a
graduate student, Cherian commandeered space in Stanford's Gates Computer Science Building, creating what she
called a stereotypical classroom. The stereotypical classroom was filled with soda cans, books of
science fiction fantasy, and Star Trek and Star Wars posters. The non-stereotypical classroom featured
accoutrements like nature posters, literary novels, and bottles of water. After spending time in each room,
undergraduates were surveyed about how interested they were in computer science and how well they thought
they would perform in that discipline. Following a few minutes in the stereotypical room, male students
reported a high level of interest in pursuing computer science. Female students indicated much less
interest than their male counterparts. But after they spent time in the non-stereotypical room,
women's interest in computer science increased markedly, actually exceeding that of the men.
Subsequent research by Cherian has found that women exposed to a non-stereotypical classroom
are more likely to predict that they will perform well in computer science courses, whereas men tend to
predict that they will succeed regardless of which room they encounter. That's important, says Cherian,
because we know from past work in psychology that how well you expect to do in a certain environment
can determine how you actually perform. Cherian called the phenomenon documented in her study
ambient belonging, defined as individual sense of fit with a physical environment, along with a sense of
fit with the people who are imagined to occupy that environment. Ambient belonging, she proposed,
can be ascertained rapidly, even from a cursory glance at a few objects. In the research she has since
produced, Cherian has explored how ambient belonging can be enlarged and expanded, how a wider array of
individuals can be induced to feel that crucial sense of fit in the environments in which they find
themselves. The key, she says, is not to eliminate stereotypes, but to diversify them, to convey the
message that people from many different backgrounds can thrive in a given setting. Just such an effort
was undertaken at the University of Washington, where Cherian is now a professor. UW revamped its
computer science lab, applying a fresh coat of paint, hanging new artwork, and arranging the seating to
encourage more social interaction. Five years later, the proportion of undergraduate computer science
degrees earned by women at UW reached 32 percent higher than at any other flagship public university in the
country. Cherian and others are now exploring how to create a sense of ambient belonging in online
spaces, an example of extending technology with what we know to be true about physical spaces in the
offline world. As is the case in real life, research finds that members of historically stigmatized groups
are especially attuned to cues of exclusion that appear on digital platforms, such as online courses.
And just as in non-digital realms, these signals of non-belonging can negatively affect their levels of
interest and their expectations of success in subjects like computer science, as well as influencing how
actively they engage these topics. Renee Kazilchich, an assistant professor of information science at
Cornell University, investigated the effect of adding a gender-inclusive image and statement to an
advertisement for an online computer science course that ran on Facebook. The image featured a group of
eight women of diverse ages and ethnicities. The statement read,
The history of computer programming is a history of women. You can join this epic journey.
Female viewers clicked through to find out more at a rate that was 26 percent higher than for a similar
ad that did not include such cues. When gender-inclusive signals were embedded in the enrollment page for
the course, women were 18 percent more likely to sign up. In another study led by Kazilchich,
The inclusion of a diversity statement on the webpages of online courses in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics increased the enrollment of students of lower socioeconomic status,
another group that is often underrepresented in STEM fields.
This is an equal opportunity course that offers you a supportive and inclusive space to learn,
the statement read. Everyone, no matter their age, gender, or nationality, can be successful in this
course. People like you are joining from all over the world, and we value this diversity.
Such psychologically inclusive design, as Kazilchich calls it, aims to lower barriers to participation by
strategically placing content and design cues in the environment, an effort that is as important in the
online world as it is in the material one. Bringing empirical research to bear on our experience
of the built environment is a relatively new phenomenon. For centuries, architects and builders
have worked on the basis of tradition and intuition. Architect Louis Kahn, for example,
consciously drew on the forms and styles of the past. He relied as well on his tactile sense of the
material world and on what the site or the structure demanded. In one of his characteristically
gnomic remarks, Kahn described an imagined exchange between himself and the stuff of which his buildings
were made. You say to Brick, what do you want, Brick? He began. Brick says to you, I like an arch.
If you say to Brick, arches are expensive, and I can use a concrete lintel over an opening.
What do you think of that, Brick? Brick says, I like an arch. Jonas Salk observed of his architect
that Kahn had the vision of an artist, the understanding of a philosopher, and the knowledge
of a metaphysician. Sometime in the future, architects may need to add to that arsenal
the expertise of a neuroscientist. The burgeoning discipline of neuroarchitecture has begun to explore
the way our brains respond to the built settings we encounter. Finding, for example, that high-ceilinged
places incline us toward more expansive, abstract thoughts. That's not hard to believe when one
pictures the domed ceiling of the reading room at the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, rounded like a
bouquet of balloons, or the ethereal, cloud-studded ceiling of the Rose Main Reading Room at the New York
Public Library in Manhattan. Symmetrical shapes, meanwhile, impress upon us a sense of power and
robustness. Call to mind the Taj Mahal, built of white marble in the Indian city of Agra by the 17th
century Mughal emperor Shah Jahan. It is perfectly symmetrical, from the pair of minarets arrayed on
either side, down to the tiles inlaid on the floor. It's noteworthy that the Salk Institute is also
symmetrical, and indeed has been compared to the Taj Mahal. As intensely social creatures, we respond
positively to architectural designs that resemble faces, like the beloved Villa Rotonda, an Italian
Renaissance villa designed by architect Andrea Palladio. Curved shapes, it has been found, induce in us a
sense of ease and comfort. Babies as young as one week old prefer to look at curved objects rather than
sharp ones. The attraction goes so deep that it is found across generations, across cultures, even across
species. Consider the undulating sculpture Sheep Peace, created in 1971-72 by the British artist Henry
Moore. A study that scanned the brains of rhesus monkeys found that the areas of their brains associated
with the experience of reward and pleasure lit up when they looked at it. The human animal is similarly
delighted by the sight of gentle curves, like those that characterized the building Frank Gehry designed
to house the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain. When the eminent architect Philip Johnson first saw it,
he was so moved that he began to weep. Though its insights are suggestive, neuroarchitecture is far from a
mature discipline. For now, when building and designing, we still need to rely on our stock of conventional
forms, and from these we must choose carefully, knowing how profoundly setting can shape the way
we think and act. We've seen how fully the coffeehouse model has come to dominate our notion
of how workplaces should be arranged, for example. It is quintessentially modern in its rejection of
bounded spaces and closed social circles, its embrace of transparency and openness. But it bears both
the advantages and the drawbacks of this stance. The appeal of such places, so suited to our current
sensibilities, can blind us to the virtues of other models, pre-modern forms, such as the monastery
and the studiolo, that served their inhabitants well before the coffeehouse was even invented.
But perhaps more concerning than spaces that affect our thinking in problematic ways are spaces that
decline to shape us at all. Richard Coyne, a professor of architectural computing at the University of
Edinburgh in Scotland, has lamented the cognitive deficiency of non-places, those spaces, all too common in the
modern world, that are empty of queues or associations. Recall the major finding from Roger Barker's
Midwest study. Physical places influence our thinking and behavior far more than personality or other
factors. This is possible because places offer our minds so much to work with. A rich layering of
custom, history, and meaning, as Coyne writes. He continues, a sign saying, wait here, would be
superfluous in the vestibule of the cathedral or temple, as the appropriate behavior or action is
already inscribed in the architecture and ritual practices of the place. Neither would we require
a text saying, think of God or consider your finitude in such places. In fact, it could be said that we are
already caught up in such thought by virtue of being in the sacred place. But such rich signification
is missing from non-places. What meaning or message is inscribed on a featureless chain store or a
generic hotel lobby or the bleak urban plaza that surrounds many a skyscraper? What thoughts are
inspired? What emotions are stirred by a row of beige cubicles or a classroom housed inside a windowless
trailer? We are set adrift in such spaces, alienated and purposeless. This is not simply a question of
aesthetics. It is a question of what we think, how we act, who we are. Not surprisingly, Louis Kahn was
one who understood the transformative effect places could have on the human psyche. Kahn, deeply versed as
he was in the history of architecture, once reflected on the felt impact of the soaring design of public
baths in ancient Rome. If you look at the baths of Caracalla, said Kahn, we all know that we can
bathe just as well under an eight-foot ceiling as we can under a 150-foot ceiling. But, he went on,
there's something about a 150-foot ceiling that makes a man a different kind of man.
Chapter 6. Thinking with the Space of Ideas
Ben Pridmore is famous for his astonishingly accurate memory. A three-time winner of the
World Memory Championship, Pridmore has pulled off feats such as reciting without error almost
a hundred historic dates after just five minutes' study, correctly recalling the order of more than
1,400 randomly shuffled playing cards and committing to memory the digits of pi to thousands of decimal
places. He was prominently featured in the best-selling Moonwalking with Einstein, a 2011
book by journalist Joshua Foer detailing the triumphs of memory prodigies.
Yet Pridmore, a resident of the town of Redditch in the United Kingdom, can't be counted on to
remember his lucky hat, a black fedora that brought him good fortune at memory competitions
until he left it behind on a train. Pridmore sometimes forgets to bring his briefcase or
important papers to his job as an accountant, and he admits that he is hopeless at remembering
friends' birthdays. I am famously bad at being able to remember people's names and faces, he concedes.
He became a celebrated memory champion only through the application of what is known as
the method of loci, a mental strategy that draws on the powerful connection to place that all humans
share. The method of loci is a venerable technique invented by the ancient Greeks and used by educators
and orators over many centuries. It works by associating each item to be remembered with a particular
spot found in a familiar place, such as one's childhood home or current neighborhood. For Ben
Pridmore, this place is Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, which he attended as a child growing up in
Horncastle, England. Preparing to recall the sequence of, say, a randomly shuffled deck of cards, he imagines
placing each card, in order, in a succession of physical locations he would pass by if strolling through
his old school, through the front door, down the corridor, past the sixth form common room, into the
classroom where math was taught. The method of loci, also known as the memory palace strategy, or in
Pridmore's phrasing, the journey technique, is remarkably effective. On their own, bits of data like the
number or suit shown on a playing card are quickly forgotten, but when linked to a physical place we know
well, that same information can be durably integrated into memory. Pridmore is not the
only memory champion to make use of the method of loci. Indeed, research conducted with other memory
contest winners has concluded that the strategy of tying new information to pre-existing memories of
physical space is the key to the extraordinary performance of many of these memory athletes.
One such study was conducted by Eleanor McGuire, a professor of cognitive neuroscience at University
College London. Using neuropsychological measures, as well as structural and functional brain imaging,
we found that superior memory was not driven by exceptional intellectual ability or structural brain
differences, McGuire and her co-authors reported. Rather, we found that superior memorizers used a spatial,
learning strategy, engaging brain regions such as the hippocampus, that are critical for memory and for
spatial memory in particular. The difference between superior memorizers and ordinary people,
McGuire determined, lay in the parts of the brain that became active when the two groups engaged in the
active recall. In the memory champion's brains, regions associated with spatial memory and navigation were
highly engaged, while in ordinary people, these areas were much less active.
What sets memory champs apart, then, is their conscious cultivation of an ability every one of us comes by
naturally, the capacity to find our way around and to remember where we've been. Research has found that
all of us seem to use the brain's built-in navigational system to construct mental maps, not just of physical
places, but of the more abstract landscape of concepts and data, the space of ideas.
This repurposing of our sense of physical place to navigate through purely mental structures is reflected
in the language we use every day. We say the future lies up ahead while the past is behind us. We endeavor to stay
on top of things and not to get out of our depth. We reach for a lofty goal or stoop low to commit a
disreputable act. These are not merely figures of speech, but revealing evidence of how we habitually
understand and interact with the world around us. Notes Barbara Tversky, a professor of psychology and
education at Teachers College in New York, we are far better and more experienced at spatial thinking
than at abstract thinking. Abstract thinking can be difficult in and of itself, but fortunately it can
often be mapped onto spatial thought in one way or another. That way, spatial thinking can substitute for
and scaffold abstract thought. Scientists have long known that the hippocampus is centrally involved in
our ability to navigate through physical space. More recently, researchers have shown that this region
is engaged in organizing our thoughts and memories more generally. It maps abstract spaces as well as concrete
ones. In a study published in 2016, neuroscientist Branka Milivojevic of the Donders Institute for Brain
Cognition and Behavior in the Netherlands scanned the brains of a group of volunteers as they watched
the 1998 movie Sliding Doors. In this romantic comedy-drama, the main character, Helen, played by
actress Gwyneth Paltrow, meets two different fates. In one storyline, she makes it onto a train and returns
home in time to find her boyfriend in bed with another woman. In a second, parallel storyline,
she misses the train and remains oblivious to her boyfriend's infidelity. As the study participants
watched the film, Milivojevic and her collaborators observed activity in their hippocampi identical to
that of people who are mentally tracing a path through a physical space. Milivojevic proposes that the viewers of
sliding doors were effectively navigating through the events of the movie, finding their way along its
branching plotline and constructing a map of the cinematic territory as they went. We process our
first-hand experiences in the same manner, she submits. Some researchers have even suggested that the way our
sense of space helps organize mental content can explain the puzzling phenomenon of infantile amnesia,
the fact that we can't recall much about our earliest years. Because very young children are not able to
move through space under their own locomotion, the theory goes, they may lack a mental scaffold on which
to hang their memories. Children's impressions of their own experiences may become well enough
structured to be memorable only once kids are able to move about of their own volition. As adults,
our memories continue to be tagged with the sense of the physical place where the original experience occurred.
When re-listening to a podcast or audio book, for example, we may find that we spontaneously recall the place where we
first heard the words. The automatic place log maintained by our brains has been preserved by evolution because of its
its clear survival value. It was vitally important for our forebears to remember where they had found
supplies of food or safe shelter, as well as where they had encountered predators and other dangers.
The elemental importance of where such things were located means the mental tags attached to our place
memories are often charged with emotion, positive or negative, making information about place even more memorable.
All of us possess this powerful place-based memory system simply by virtue of being human. But some,
like Ben Pridmore and his memory champion peers, make far better use of it. The rest of us can learn to do
what they do, as demonstrated in a study led by neuroscientist Martin Dressler of Radboud University in the Netherlands.
Dressler and his collaborators, who included Boris Nikolai Conrad, himself a decorated memory athlete, tested
two dozen of the world's top memory competitors, comparing their performance on a word memorization
task to that of a group of ordinary citizens. Not surprisingly, the memory champions came out ahead,
correctly recalling an average of 71 words from the list of 72 words they were given, with a number of
them turning in perfect scores. Regular people recalled an average of only 29 words. After six weeks of
training using the method of loci, however, these previously undistinguished experimental participants
turned in an impressively improved performance, more than doubling their average score.
Associating information to be learned with a sense of physical space can help people remember
in real-world situations, too. Whether it's a high school student memorizing verb conjugations,
a medical resident learning a litany of diseases and their symptoms, or a best man practicing a speech
for a rehearsal dinner. Undergraduates who take the course on civil liberties taught by Charles
Wilson, a professor of political science at the University of North Georgia, have to learn a
multitude of new facts and ideas. Wilson helps them do so by showing them how to link individual pieces
of information to particular locations within a space they know well, the campus cafeteria, familiarly called
the chow hall. For students struggling to recall the provisions set forth in the Bill of Rights,
for example, Wilson encourages them to imagine stepping up to the chow hall soup tureens. The
soup course, which comes first in a meal, thus becomes associated with the first amendment. Then on to the station
where bread is sliced. Here Wilson recommends that students picture a pile of the severed limbs of
grizzly bears, a scenario sure to prompt a memory of the second amendment and its assurance of the right
to bear arms. That image is a bit grizzly, but Wilson and his students have found that imagery that is
garish or outlandish more readily triggers recall. Obeying that principle, Wilson's students learned to
associate the landmark court case of McDonald versus City of Chicago with an image of the fast food clown
Ronald McDonald wearing a Chicago Bulls jersey, filling his plate at the salad bar. And so on through the
remaining eight amendments in the Bill of Rights, each one paired with an imagined sampling of the
chow hall's culinary offerings. Wilson's students enjoy the exercise, and they say it helps them enormously
in remembering material for the course. Many students have told him that they've started using the
method of loci to study for their other classes as well. The human brain is not well equipped to
remember a mass of abstract information, but it is perfectly tuned to recalling details associated with
places it knows. And by drawing on this natural mastery of physical space, we can, as Martin Dressler showed,
more than double our effective memory capacity. Extending our minds via physical space can do more than improve
our recall, however. Our powers of spatial cognition can help us to think and reason effectively, to achieve
insight and solve problems, and to come up with creative ideas. Such powers are especially generative when
permitted to operate not on imagined space, as in the method of loci, but on the real thing, tangible,
three-dimensional space of the kind our minds and bodies are so accustomed to navigating.
Our culture tends to valorize doing things in one's head. We are awed by mathematicians who can engage in
elaborate mental calculations, chess grandmasters who can plot a long progression of moves in their mind's eye,
and, yes, memory champions, who can remember so much without reference to external prompts.
But true human genius lies in the way we are able to take facts and concepts out of our heads,
using physical space to spread out that material, to structure it, and to see it anew.
The places we make for ideas can take many forms, a bank of computer screens, the pages of a field
notebook, the surface of a workshop table, or even, as one celebrated author demonstrates,
an expanse of office wall.
Brilliant, masterful, and monumental are words regularly used to describe the work of historian
Robert Caro.
