participants had synchronized with one another, and when they had experienced arousal together,
they then behaved in a distinctive way, forming more inclusive groups, standing closer to one
another, and working together more efficiently, observations made possible by analyzing footage
recorded by the roof-mounted camera. The findings suggest that behavioral synchrony and shared
physiological arousal in small groups independently increase social cohesion and cooperation, the
researchers write. They help us understand why synchrony and arousal often co-occur in rituals
around the world. As demonstrated in this study, physical exertion is a dependable method of producing
physiological arousal, but it's not the only one. An experience of heightened emotion will also do
the trick. Whether hearts are racing as a result of running laps or because of hearing an exciting
story, such shared arousal is another way of getting a group of individuals to cohere.
In behavioral synchrony, group members are moving their arms and legs as if they were one being.
In physiological synchrony, their hearts are beating and their skin is perspiring as if they were one
body. Both behavioral and physiological synchrony in turn generate greater cognitive synchrony.
Emerging research even points to the existence of neural synchrony, the intriguing finding that when a
group of individuals are thinking well together, their patterns of brain activity come to resemble
one another's. Though we may imagine ourselves as separate beings, our minds and bodies have many ways of
bridging the gaps. A host of laboratory experiments, as well as countless instances of real-world rituals,
show that it's possible to activate the group mind to flip the hive switch, as it were, by hacking
behavioral synchrony and physiological arousal. The key lies in creating a certain kind of group experience,
real-time encounters in which people act and feel together in close physical proximity.
Yet our schools and companies are increasingly doing just the opposite. Aided by technology, we are
creating individual, asynchronous, atomized experiences for students and employees, from
personalized playlists of academic lessons to go-at-your-own-pace online training modules. Then we
wonder why our groups don't cohere, why group work is often frustrating and disappointing, and why thinking
with groups doesn't extend our intelligence? Why is our current approach so wrong-headed? It assumes
that information is information however it is encountered. The tasks are tasks no matter how we
take them on. But in fact, the new science of the group mind is demonstrating that we think differently
and often better when we think as part of a close-knit group rather than as individuals. This is
particularly the case regarding our attention and our motivation. The nature of these two states is
altered in meaningful ways when we enter them collectively instead of alone.
First, attention. The phenomenon that psychologists call shared attention occurs when we focus on the
same objects or information at the same time as others. The awareness that we are focusing on a
particular stimulus along with other people leads our brains to endow that stimulus with special
significance, tagging it as especially important. We then allocate more mental bandwidth to that
material, processing it more deeply. In scientists' terms, we award it cognitive prioritization.
In a world of too much information, we use shared attention to help us figure out what to focus on,
then direct our mental resources toward the object that the spotlight of shared attention has illuminated.
As a result of these mostly automatic processes, we learn things better when we attend to them with other
people. We remember things better when we attend to them with other people, and we're more likely to act upon
information that has been attended to along with other people.
The practice of engaging in shared attention starts in infancy. By nine months, a baby begins to look in the
direction in which an adult turns her head. Infants will gaze longer at what the grown-ups around them appear to be
looking at, and they are more likely to recognize objects that they earlier jointly attended to with a
caregiver than objects they attended to alone. In this subtle and mostly unconscious way, parents are
continually instructing their offspring on what is important, what merits attention, and what can be
safely ignored. By one year of age, a baby will reliably look in the direction of an adult's gaze,
even absent the turning of the adult's head. Such gaze following is made easier by the fact that
people have visible whites of the eyes. Humans are the only primates so outfitted, an exceptional
status that has led scientists to propose the cooperative eye hypothesis, the theory that our eyes evolve to
support cooperative social interactions. Our eyes see, but they are also meant to be seen, notes science
writer Keraton. The ability to experience the world from a shared perspective is an evolved adaptation
that grants humans an unequaled capacity for coordinating thought and behavior with other
members of their species. Shared attention and the increased cognitive resources devoted to
information that is mutually attended to produces greater overlap in group members' mental models of a
problem, and therefore smoother cooperation while solving it. It is, in a sense, what makes all human
achievements possible, from jointly maneuvering a piece of furniture through a narrow doorway to
collaboratively designing and launching a rocket sent to the moon, and it starts with babies following the
direction of our eyes. Shared attention remains important among adults, though it plays a different role than in the
interactions of caregivers and children. Here, the function of shared attention is not so much the
expert instruction of a novice, but rather the maintenance of a mutual store of information and
impressions. We feel compelled to continuously monitor what our peers are paying attention to and to direct our
own attention to those same objects. When the face of everyone on the street is turned skyward, we look up, too.
In this way, our mental models of the world remain in sync with those of the people around us.
The common ground established by shared attention is especially crucial for teams working together to
solve a problem. Studies of groups laboring on a shared task, from students programming a robot to
surgeons performing an operation, show that the members of effective teams tend to synchronize their gaze,
looking at the same areas at the same time. More of these moments of joint attention are associated with
more successful outcomes. Research suggests that the ability to coordinate such moments can be acquired
with practice. One study of physician teams performing surgery on a simulator found that the gaze of
experienced surgeons overlapped at a rate of about 70 percent, while the gaze of novices overlapped only
about 30 percent of the time. But effective collaborators aren't always looking at the same place at the same
time. Rather, they cycle between looking on their own, then looking together. If attention is
different when we experience it as a member of a group, so too is motivation. Common conceptualizations of
motivation, such as grit, the notion popularized by University of Pennsylvania psychologist Angela
Duckworth, are based on the assumption that engagement and persistence are individual matters,
individually willed. What this understanding omits is that our willingness to persevere can be enhanced
when our efforts are made on behalf of a group we care about. Membership in a group can be a potent
source of motivation if we feel a genuine sense of belonging to the group and if our personal
identity feels firmly tied to the group and its success. When these conditions are met, group membership
acts as a form of intrinsic motivation. That is, our behavior becomes driven by factors internal to the
task, such as the satisfaction we get from contributing to a collective effort, rather than by external rewards,
such as money or public recognition. And as psychologists have amply documented, intrinsic
motivation is more powerful, more enduring, and more easily maintained than the extrinsic sort.
It leads us to experience the work as more enjoyable and to perform it more capably.
Experiencing ourselves as part of a collective we, rather than as a singular I, changes the way we direct
our focus and the way we allocate our energies, often in felicitous fashion. Yet so much in our
every-man-for-himself society conspires against the creation of a robust sense of we. Our emphasis
on individual achievement and our neglect of group cohesion means that we are failing to reap the rich
benefits of shared attention and shared motivation. Even when groups do exist in name, they are often
weak and dilute in their bonds. Psychologists have found that groups differ widely on what they call
entitivity, or in a catchier formulation, their groupiness. Some portion of the time and effort we devote to
cultivating our individual talents could more productively be spent on forming teams that are genuinely
groupie.
In order to foster a sense of groupiness, there are a few deliberate steps we can take. First,
people who need to think together should learn together, in person, at the same time.
The omnipresence of our digital devices can make it difficult to ensure that shared learning takes
place even among students gathered in a single classroom. Some years back, high school teacher
Paul Barnwell realized that many of his students were physically present but mentally absent during
class. They were pecking away at their smartphones under their desks, checking their Facebook feeds
and texts, recalls Barnwell, who teaches English at Fern Creek Traditional High School in Louisville,
Kentucky.
Moreover, once he got their attention and directed them to engage in a group assignment, he discovered
that his students didn't know how to carry on an academic discussion. They were so used to the stutter-stop
rhythm of asynchronous text exchanges that holding a substantive conversation in real time was an unfamiliar
and unpracticed activity. Notably, research has found that asynchronous communication, of the kind that is now
common not only among teenagers but among adult professionals as well, reduces the efficiency and
effectiveness of group work. In a clever jujitsu move, Barnwell redirected his students' use of
technology. He asked them to record one another with their smartphones and then analyze their own and
their partners' conversational patterns. Before long, his students were holding lively class-wide
conversations, thinking and acting more like a group and reaping the cognitive benefits that only a group
can generate. A second principle for engendering groupiness would go like this. People who need to
think together should train together, in person, at the same time. Research shows that teams that trained
as a group collaborate more effectively, commit fewer errors, and perform at a higher level than teams made up
of people who were trained separately. Training together can also reduce the silo effect, a common phenomenon
in which co-workers fail to communicate or collaborate across different departments and disciplines.
Yet training together is not the norm in many industries. In medicine, for example, healthcare providers
representing various specialties—surgeons, nurses, anesthesiologists, pharmacists—must collaborate closely when caring for
patients. But traditionally, their training occurs in isolation from one another, in different departments
and even different institutions. Some medical schools and hospitals are now experimenting with group training
across disciplinary lines. The University of Minnesota has found an especially engaging way to do so,
creating an escape room. In this activity, modeled on an adventure game, UMN students studying nursing,
pharmacy, physical therapy, and social work, among other disciplines, are invited into a simulated
hospital room. There they are given the case study of a fictional patient. For example, a 55-year-old
male with a past medical history of bipolar disorder and type 1 diabetes presents to the emergency room
with diabetic ketoacidosis triggered by a recent manic episode. Acting under the pressure of a one-hour time
limit, the students must work together to develop a discharge plan for the patient by solving a series of
puzzles, making use of the objects and information available in the room, and drawing on the participants' varied areas
of expertise. The game is followed by a guided debriefing session in which students reflect on the challenges of
collaborating across fields. The interprofessional escape room is now part of the formal curriculum for
students studying the health sciences at the University of Minnesota. Similar activities have been introduced at
hospitals and medical schools located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Buffalo, New York, Tucson, Arizona, and Lubbock,
Texas. A third principle for generating groupiness would hold that people who need to think together
should feel together, in person, at the same time. Laboratory research, as well as research conducted
with survivors of battlefield conflicts and natural disasters, has found that emotionally distressing
or physically painful events can act as a kind of social glue that bonds the people who experience them
together. But the emotions that unite a group need not be so harrowing. Studies have also determined
that simply asking members to candidly share their thoughts and feelings with one another leads to
improvements in group cohesion and performance. The Energy Project, a training and consulting firm based
in New York, holds a company-wide community meeting every Wednesday. Each of the organization's employees
is asked a series of simple questions, starting with, how are you feeling? That's a very different
question than the standard, how are you? We all ask each other every day, notes Tony Schwartz, the company's
founder and CEO. When people stop and reflect and then say one at a time how each of them are really
feeling, it opens up a deeper level of dialogue. At times, he recounts his colleagues' answers have been
searching, or even wrenching, reflecting a personal crisis or family tragedy. But even when
responses are more run-of-the-mill, the members of his close-knit staff have shared an emotional experience
with one another, one that is fleshed out by the remaining questions in the series. What's the most important
thing you learned last week? What's your goal for this week? What are you feeling most grateful for?
The fourth and final mandate for eliciting groupiness is this, people who need to think
together should engage in rituals together, in person, at the same time. For this purpose, a ritual can be
any meaningful organized activity in which members of a group take part together. If the rituals involve
synchronized movement or shared physiological arousal all the better. Both of these switches are flipped
at Clearview Elementary School in Sherbourne County, Minnesota, where each weekday starts with the morning
mile. Students in every grade spend 20 minutes walking briskly before class, usually outside. The
physical exertion involved means that shared physiological arousal is a given. Teachers report
that students arrive at their desks with cheeks flushed, especially during the cold Minnesota
winters. But the morning mile generates synchronous movement as well. Research shows that when people
walk or run together, they automatically and unconsciously match up their bodily movements.
Even so ordinary a ritual as sharing a meal can make a difference in how well a group thinks together.
Lakshmi Balachandra, an assistant professor of entrepreneurship at Babson College in
Massachusetts, asked 132 MBA students to role-play executives negotiating a complex joint venture
agreement between two companies. In the simulation she arranged, the greatest possible profits would be
created by parties who were able to discern the other side's preferences and then work collectively to
maximize profits for the venture as a whole rather than merely considering their own company's
interests. Balachandra found that participants who dined together while negotiating, at a restaurant
or over food brought into a conference room, generated 12% higher profits on average than those who bargained
while not eating. The explanation may go back again to synchrony. Balachandra notes that when we eat
together, we end up mirroring one another's movements, lifting the food to our mouths, chewing,
swallowing. This unconscious mimicking of each other may induce positive feelings towards both the other
party and the matter under discussion, she writes. Other research has found that the positive effect of
shared meals on cooperation is heightened if participants dine family-style, eating the same food
served from communal dishes. It may also be enhanced if very spicy entrees are on the menu, since consuming
such food increases body temperature and perspiration, raises blood pressure, speeds up heart rate, and
prompts the release of adrenaline, all hallmarks of physiological arousal. A group of Australian
researchers reported greater economic cooperation among people who together had eaten bird's-eye
chilies, a painfully hot pepper. In addition to incorporating the now familiar factors of
behavioral synchrony and physiological arousal, consuming food with others is in itself uniquely
meaningful. Our very survival depends on this elemental sharing of resources. Eating together is a more
intimate act than looking over an Excel spreadsheet together, observes Kevin Niffin, an assistant professor
of management at Cornell University. That intimacy spills back over into work. In a study published in the
journal Human Performance, Niffin and his co-authors reported that teams of firefighters who eat their
meals together perform better than firefighters who dine on their own. He believes that our focus on
individual achievement and individual rewards leads us to overlook the performance-enhancing effects
of group rituals. Co-workers who eat together tend to perform at a higher level than their peers,
yet cafeterias are often undervalued by companies, he notes. And those tech companies that do offer
luxurious cafeterias as a perk to their employees? The key may not be the freshness of the sushi or the
deliciousness of the vegan grain bowls, but whether the firm's workers consume such delicacies together.
All of these approaches to generating groupiness are firmly grounded in our nature as embodied,
situated, social beings. Their effectiveness depends on people moving, talking, and working together
so closely that their brains and bodies fall into a joint rhythm. This marks a difference from notions
such as crowdsourcing and the hive mind, which have enjoyed a sustained surge of popularity.
In theory and in practice, these concepts are highly brain-bound, a bunch of disembodied minds
bouncing ideas around, usually online. Technology more generally has often served to isolate us from
one another, sealing us within our individual digital bubbles. But this need not be the case. Promising
examples of extended technology, that is, extended by the age-old resource of the human group,
are now emerging. For example, scientists at Germany's Max Planck Institute and elsewhere are
experimenting with automatic rapport detection within groups. Sensors embedded in a conference room or in
video conferencing equipment unobtrusively monitor group members' nonverbal behavior. Their facial
expressions, hand motions, gaze direction, and so on. These data are analyzed in real time to yield a measure of
how well a group is cooperating. When rapport falls below a critical level, nudges can be applied to
move the group toward greater cohesion. The system might alert the group's leader that a shared coffee
break is in order, or it might suggest to him, via a pop-up message, that he engage in more mirroring of
his co-workers. Inside wired-up, smart meeting rooms, it may even elect to raise the temperature by a few
degrees or introduce some soothing white noise. Another technology-assisted tactic for generating
groupiness are activities in which members of a group are challenged to synchronize their movements
while dancing with one another or moving in time to music. Body-worn sensors compute the degree of
synchrony group members achieve, and real-time feedback allows participants to fine-tune their
movements, such that they become ever more closely matched to those of their peers.
We set out to design a mobile-based play experience that enhanced in-person social interaction and
connection, explains Catherine Isbister, a professor of computational media at the University of
California, Santa Cruz, who says she was inspired by research that shows how being physically in sync
brings people together emotionally and builds trust. Isbister notes that her game, called
Ya Move, encourages looking not at a screen, but at the other players. The more players look at each
other, the better results they achieve in coordination and the stronger the lingering positive
social effects, she says. Used as an icebreaker or team-building activity, games such as Ya Move may
strike some as embarrassing or ridiculous. But unlike those we typically endure, these digital
nudges in the direction of greater synchrony might actually work. And, potential embarrassment aside,
what's striking about the group experiences explored here is how very positive they are.
Military historian William McNeil entered a state of generalized emotional exaltation while
marching with his fellow recruits in basic training. Tony Schwartz, the founder of the
consulting group The Energy Project, says that he and his staff members find their weekly community
meetings powerful and liberating, even transformational. On surveys, participants in
educational escape room activities describe the experience as engaging, motivating, and even fun.
This is, to put it mildly, not the perspective most of us bring to group projects. Group work is widely
disliked, even despised, in both educational and professional settings. It is commonly viewed as
inefficient, unfair, and just plain annoying. The research literature has even given this phenomenon
a name, group hate, defined as a feeling of dread that arises when facing the possibility of having to work
in a group. What explains the disparity between the productive, invigorating, even ecstatic ideal of group
thought and action, which, as we've seen, human beings evolve to do well, and the dispiriting reality as most of us
experience it? The answer may lie in a profound mismatch between the present-day demands of knowledge work and a set of
ideas about such endeavors that is rooted deep in the past.
The letter to Albert Einstein, dated June 4, 1924, began on a deferential note.
Respected sir, I have ventured to send you the accompanying article for your perusal and opinion.
I am anxious to know what you think of it. The author of the letter, Satyendra Nath Bose,
was an obscure academic at a university in East Bengal. The paper he was sending to Einstein
had already been submitted to, and rejected by, a professional journal. And the letter's addressee
was not just the most famous scientist of his time. He was one of the best-known individuals on the entire
planet, notes Yale University physics professor A. Douglas Stone. But Bose felt at ease reaching out
to Einstein, he explained in his letter, because we are all your pupils. And so, with some combination
of veneration and chutzpah in Stone's words, Bose went on to make an astonishing request.
I do not know sufficient German to translate the paper. If you think the paper worth publication,
I shall be grateful if you arrange for its publication in Zeitschrift für Physique,
he wrote, naming Germany's leading physics journal. Even more surprising, Einstein agreed to his
entreaty. Reading the paper, he saw that Bose had solved a problem that Einstein had labored on
without success, how a law of radiation, formulated by German physicist Max Planck some 24 years earlier,
could be deduced from the theory that light is a particle as well as a wave, a theory that Einstein
himself had proposed in 1905. It was, as Einstein wrote to Bose, a beautiful step forward. Bose took
this step on his own, powered only by his own curiosity. It was simple, he later explained.
I wanted to know how to grapple with the difficulty in my own way. In 1925, Bose's paper was published in
the journal he had specified, Zeitschrift für Physique, along with a commentary from Einstein.
It is not an exaggeration to say that the course of scientific history was altered by one man thinking
alone. Ninety years later, another paper was published. It documented a successive step forward
in the discovery process to which Bose had made a signal contribution, reporting a newly precise
measurement of the Higgs boson mass. Bosons, which were named in honor of Bose, are a type of particle
that obeys the rule of what is called, in physics, Bose-Einstein statistics. Their mass is measured by means
of a particle accelerator, a gargantuan machine that propels charged particles to extremely high speeds.
The author of this paper was Georges Aad, and Brad Abbott, and Jalal Abdallah, and Avsat Abdunov,
and Rosemary Abdin, and Maris Abolins, and Osama Abu-Zaid, and Helena Abramowitz, and Henzo Ebru,
on and on for a total of 5,154 authors. The publication in the journal Physical Review Letters is but an
extreme example of a trend now ascendant in every industry and occupation. In order to carry out the
intensely complex work demanded by the modern world, people must think together in groups.
The shift is easiest to see, and to measure, in the social and physical sciences, where contributions by
single individuals were once the norm. Today, fewer than 10% of journal articles in science and
technology are authored by just one person. An analysis of book chapters and journal articles
written across the social sciences likewise found a sharp decline in single-author publishing.
In economics, solo-authored articles once predominated. Now they account for only about 25%
of publications in the discipline. In the legal field, a 2014 survey of law reviews concluded that
nowadays, team authors dominate solo authors in the production of legal knowledge.
Even the familiar archetype of the solo inventor—think Thomas Edison or Alexander Graham Bell—is no
longer representative. A 2011 report found that over the previous 40 years, the number of individuals
listed on each U.S. patent application had steadily increased. Nearly 70% of applications now named
multiple inventors. This development is more than an academic fad, says Brian Uzi, a professor of
management at Northwestern University who conducted some of this research. It suggests that the process
of knowledge creation has fundamentally changed. More broadly, Uzi notes, almost everything that human
beings do today, in terms of generation of value, is no longer done by individuals. It's done by teams.
What has not changed is our model of how intelligent thinking happens. We're still convinced that good
ideas and new insights and ingenious solutions come from a single brain. We're a bunch of pencil-wielding
Satyendra Bose's in an era of particle accelerators and mega collaborations. This fundamental mismatch lies at
the root of many of our struggles with group work. It's time we tossed out that individual model and
replaced it with one better suited to the world in which we actually live. We can begin by identifying
those ways in which thinking with a group is different from thinking on our own, and by instituting
new practices that support the smooth operation of the group mind. Once these practices are put into place,
research shows, a group can think more efficiently and more effectively than any one of its members,
a phenomenon that psychologists call collective intelligence. The ways in which group thinking
differs from individual thinking are obvious and yet almost always overlooked. The first of these,
when we think on our own, all of our thoughts get a hearing. But when we think as part of a team,
it takes intentional effort to ensure that everyone speaks up and that everyone shares what they
know. Research on group dynamics reveals that this rarely happens. Instead, very few people,
and sometimes just one, dominate the conversation. In addition, group members often neglect to contribute
their uniquely held information, gravitating instead to discussion of information that everyone present
already knows. Thus do less than optimal patterns of communication produce the inefficiency and ill will
associated with group work without generating any of the potential benefits. This outcome isn't
inevitable, however. Simple changes in the way communication is carried out can steer teams toward the group mind.
Steven Rogelberg, a professor of management at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte,
notes that group members often hold back in meetings, waiting to hear what others say and what their boss
might say, out of fear of being perceived as difficult, out of touch, or off the mark.
Asking attendees to write out their contributions instead of speaking them, he says, can be a solution to
this problem, allowing space for unique knowledge and novel ideas to emerge. Participants jot down their
thoughts on index cards, which the group's leader then reads aloud. Or they write them on sheets of paper
posted around the room, after which participants circulate again, this time marking down comments
on their colleagues' ideas, which the group as a whole then discusses. Another potential change to
communication patterns centers on the behavior of group leaders. Cass Sunstein is a professor at Harvard
Law School who also served as administrator of the White House Office of Information and Regulatory
Affairs under Barack Obama. Upon assuming this role, Sunstein learned a valuable lesson in group
leadership. If he began a meeting by stating his own views, he discovered, the ensuing discussion was
far less expansive and open than if he started out by saying, what do you all think? This is a tough one.
As soon as a leader makes his preferences known, says Sunstein, many who work for him will choose to
engage in self-silencing rather than rock the boat with a dissenting view. And, he notes, some people are
more likely to silence themselves than others. These may include women and members of minority groups,
as well as individuals with less status, less experience, or less education. Yet it's just this range of
voices that must be heard if the group mind is to exert its unique power. One solution, says Sunstein,
is for leaders to silence themselves. The manager or administrator who adopts an inquisitive and
self-silencing stance, he maintains, has the best chance of hearing more than his own views reflected back
to him. The second way in which group thinking differs from individual thinking is this. When thinking is part of
a collective, we need to make our thought processes visible to others on our team. While we do leave
traces for ourselves when engaging in private thought, underlining, jotting notes in margins,
moving papers from the unread pile to the have-gone-through pile, these traces must be far more specific and
explicit if they are to be used productively by others. Philosopher Andy Clark, observing the progressive
delegation of our mental operations to our devices, has noted that the mind is just less and less in
the head these days. More than that, the mind must be less and less in the head, and more and more
emblazoned on the world, if we are to extend our minds with the minds of others. Once again, verbal
communication is key, but not of the unstructured type that too often conforms to and confirms our
individual-oriented model of thinking. Rather, researchers recommend that we implement a specific
sequence of actions in response to our teammates' contributions. We should acknowledge, repeat,
rephrase, and elaborate on what other group members say. Studies show that engaging in this kind of
communication elicits more complete and comprehensive information. It re-exposes the entire group to the
information that was shared initially, improving group members' understanding of and memory for that
information. And it increases the accuracy of the information that is shared, a process that
psychologists call error pruning. Although it may seem cumbersome or redundant, research suggests that
this kind of enhanced communication is part of what makes expert teamwork so effective. A study of airplane
pilots, for example, found that experienced aviators regularly repeated, restated, and elaborated on
what their fellow pilots said, while novice pilots failed to do so. And as a result, the less experienced
pilots formed sparser and less accurate memories of their time in the air. Another way to make our
thinking visible to others is to collaborate on the creation of what Gary Olson and Judith Olson call
shared artifacts. The Olsons, both professors of informatics at the University of California,
Irvine, have spent more than three decades studying how people think and work together.
One major contributor to the success of group cognition, they have discovered, is the effective
use of such artifacts, or tangible representations of the task to be completed, which are ideally large,
complex, persistent, and revisable. Over the course of their long careers, the Olsons have often
evaluated the effectiveness of workplace technology, such as video conferencing software and digital
collaboration platforms. But the baseline against which they compare these tools, the working
arrangement they regard as the best of all worlds, is decidedly analog. A group of people gathered
together in a room that is dedicated to their current project, with plenty of space on the walls to
tack up those shared artifacts, which may take the form of lists, graphs, charts, or sketches.
It matters above all that these artifacts are, in fact, shared. At one design meeting they observed,
all the participants were handed individual copies of a system diagram. As they discussed and agreed to
things, they took notes on their own copy of the diagram, adding things and crossing things out,
the Olsons recounted in one of their academic articles. We noted at the end of the meeting that
different people had made different marks, implying different understandings of what they had agreed to.
Without the capacity to refer to a single shared artifact, the Olsons concluded, these co-workers
ended up not singing from the same sheet of music. In addition to being shared, it's beneficial for
group artifacts to be large and complex. The Olsons have found that people often gesture at large
artifacts, enhancing their own thinking and that of the people who observe them. Meanwhile, a complex
artifact, as opposed to a simple or schematic one, allows more of the group's thinking to be
explicitly represented for all to see, rather than remaining concealed inside individuals' heads.
Finally, shared artifacts are most effective when they are persistent, preserved, retained, and kept
continuously visible, but also revisable, able to be changed as new information or insight emerges.
Describing another team at work, the Olsons noted that this group's artifacts were often put up
in the order in which they were produced. People knew where to look for something because they
knew when it was produced, and they could tell something about another person's attention by
seeing where that person was looking. Lamenting the inherent invisibility of much of today's
computing artifacts, we can't see what's inside our colleague's laptop any more than we can see what's
inside her head. The Olsons report that the best materials with which to create these representations
are simple ones, a felt-tip pen used on large sheets of paper. There's a third way in which group
thinking diverges from individual thinking. When engaged in the latter, we of course have access
to the full depth of our own knowledge and skill. That's not the case when we're thinking collectively,
and that's a good thing. One of the great advantages of the group mind is its capacity to bring together
many and varied areas of proficiency, ultimately encompassing far more expertise than could ever
be held in a single mind. We couldn't know all that our fellow group members know, nor should we want
to. Our mental bandwidth would quickly become overloaded. We do, however, need to know that they
know it in order to call upon it when it's needed. The process by which we leverage an awareness of the
knowledge other people possess is called transactive memory. It could be said that the study of
transactive memory began on the day when Daniel Wegner and Tony Giuliano were wed. The groom later
wrote, Tony and I noticed not long after we were married that we were sharing memory duties. I remembered
where car and yard things were, she remembered where house things were, and we could each depend on the
other to be an expert in domains we didn't need to master. As social psychologists, Wegner and
Giuliano quickly identified their experience as not only an interesting feature of newlywed life,
but also a promising target of scientific investigation. A year later, the couple, along with colleague
Paula Hertel, published a paper introducing what Wegner called a new way to understand the group mind.
As he observed, nobody remembers everything. Instead, each of us in a couple or group remembers
some things personally, and then can remember much more by knowing who else might know what we don't.
In this way, we become part of a transactive memory system. Over the past few decades, psychologists
have confirmed Wegner's claim that a robust transactive memory system effectively multiplies the amount of
information each group member has. Members of such groups are able to work on deepening their own
areas of expertise while still remaining in contact, through their colleagues, with a broader range of
relevant information. Their cognitive load is reduced, as they need only to attend in the moment to the
portion of incoming information that concerns them, secure in the knowledge that their teammates are doing
the same. And members of these groups are able to engage in smooth and efficient coordination,
directing tasks to those members who are best suited to carry them out. As a result, research finds,
teams that build a strong transactive memory structure perform better than teams for which that structure
is less defined. Within a group of any size, a transactive memory system will spontaneously assemble itself,
as it did for Daniel Wegner and Tony Giuliano once they married and began living together.
But because such systems usually aren't cultivated in an intentional way, much of their potential to
extend the group's intelligence is lost. The goal of such cultivation is to make the group aware of what
its members know, without requiring each member to take on the full burden of her teammates' specialized
knowledge. Notice how this model differs from early notions of the group mind,
in which members of a group were believed to be thinking the same thoughts at the same time. By contrast,
the value of a transactive memory system lies in its members thinking different thoughts while also
remaining aware of the contents of their fellow members' minds. The struggle to cope with information
overload has led many of us to turn to technological filters, smartphone alerts and email applications that
offer to sort for us the information that must be attended to from the information that can be ignored.
Research suggests, however, that other people can function as the most sensitive and discriminating
filters of all, as long as we're aware of what they know and can access their knowledge when we need it.
All of us maintain a set of mental markers that help us locate information we don't currently possess.
We may not recall every detail contained in a report, but we know the folder, physical or digital,
where the report can be found. Such markers also point us toward the people who possess information we do
not. The aim in building a robust transactive memory system is to make these pointers as explicit
and as accurate as possible. The process of setting out these markers should begin early in a team's
work together. It's important to establish from the outset not only who's responsible for doing what,
but also who's responsible for knowing what. Group members should be explicitly informed about
their colleagues' distinctive talents or spheres of specialization, and clear protocols should be
established for directing questions and tasks to the appropriate individual. Research shows that
groups perform best when each member is clearly in charge of maintaining a particular body of
expertise, when each topic has its designated knowledge champion, as it were. Studies further suggest
that it can be useful to appoint a meta-knowledge champion, an individual who is responsible for keeping
track of what others in the group know, and making sure that group members' mental directory of who-knows-what
stays up to date. There's one more way in which solo thought and collective thought differ.
For an individual thinking on her own, applying her mental effort toward the advancement of her own
interests is a straightforward matter. When a group of people think together, however,
their potentially divergent interests need somehow to be directed toward the accomplishment of a collective
goal. Incentives must thus be engineered such that, instead of pursuing their own ends,
group members are inspired by a sense of shared fate. The results achieved by one member are felt to benefit
them all. Psychological research, and some still relevant history, show that such re-engineering can be
dramatically effective, even in the most volatile of situations.
The public schools in Austin, Texas, were in crisis. It was 1971, and the education system was
undergoing court-ordered desegregation, bringing white students, African-American students, and Latino
students together in classrooms for the first time. The schools were roiling with conflict and even
physical violence. Matthew Snapp, assistant superintendent of schools, turned for help to
his former academic mentor, a social psychologist and University of Texas professor named Elliot Aronson.
The first step was to find out what the hell was going on in those classrooms, Aronson recalled.
He and his graduate students sat in the back and watched, and what they saw was in many ways typical
of middle school education, both then and now. The teacher stands in front of the room,
asks a question, and waits for the students to indicate that they know the answer, Aronson recounted.
Most frequently, six to ten youngsters strain in their seats and raise their hands,
some waving them vigorously in an attempt to attract the teacher's attention.
Several other students sit quietly with their eyes averted, as if trying to make themselves invisible.
Through daily experience with such scenarios, he noted, students learn more than the content
of the material explicitly taught in the classroom. The medium is the message. They learn implicit
lessons from the process as well. And what they learned was that there is no payoff for consulting
with their peers. Rather, the payoff lay solely in giving the correct answer the one with the teacher
had in her head. In the best of times, such single-minded pursuit of one's own interests
was incompatible with cooperation and collaboration. In the uneasy environment that then prevailed,
it was exacerbating tensions and reinforcing stereotypes. Aronson and his team sought to foster a more
communal spirit among the students, but they knew that simply encouraging them to work together
wasn't the answer. Instead, they shifted the incentives to which students were responding
by creating, in Aronson's words, a situation where they needed to cooperate with one another
in order to understand the material. They called their procedure the Jigsaw Classroom.
This is how it worked. Students were divided into groups of five or six. When a class began a new
unit, say, on the life of Eleanor Roosevelt, each student in the group was assigned one section of
the material, Roosevelt's childhood and young adulthood, or her role as First Lady, or her work
on behalf of causes such as civil rights and world peace. The student's task was to master their own
section, then rejoin the group and report to the others on what they had learned.
Each student has possession of a unique and vital part of the information, which, like the pieces
of a jigsaw puzzle, must be put together before anyone can learn the whole picture, Aronson explained.
By arranging instruction in this manner, he was effectively creating a transactive memory system
on the spot, turning each student into an expert on a particular facet of the subject under study.
In this situation, Aronson added, the only way a child can be a good learner is to begin to be a good
listener and interviewer. The jigsaw structure demands that students utilize one another as resources.
The effects of the new approach were immediately apparent. The same students who had been straining
to be recognized for their individual brilliance or endeavoring to retreat into a cloak of invisibility
were now focused on collaborating with one another. In studies carried out by Aronson and his graduate students
that compared the jigsaw method to traditional modes of instruction, they identified longer-term effects as well.
Students learned the material faster and performed better on exams when they participated in the jigsaw exercise.
They also developed greater empathy and respect for their classmates.
In the Austin-area schools where the jigsaw classroom was implemented, racial tensions diminished,
absenteeism declined, and students reported more favorable attitudes towards school.
In an effort to collect as much objective evidence as possible, Elliot Aronson asked one of his graduate
students to climb to the roofs of the schools in which they were working and take pictures of the
playgrounds at recess. At the start, these photographs showed a dispiriting reality. Students were tightly
clustered in groups defined by race, ethnicity, and gender. As the jigsaw experiment progressed,
however, the pictures documented a striking shift as these clenched formations began to loosen and
disperse. Pupils were mingling and mixing more freely, their play reflecting their new experiences in
the classroom. From several stories up, an observer could see the change in Austin's students.
They were at last getting outside their own heads.
Conclusion
Some 15 years after Elliot Aronson ventured into the restive classrooms of Austin, Texas,
his 25-year-old son set out to follow his father's professional path. The younger man arrived on the
campus of Princeton University to pursue his Ph.D. in 1986. But Joshua Aronson soon encountered an
unanticipated obstacle to achieving his aim of becoming a social psychologist. He found himself
struck dumb whenever he met with his graduate school advisor, a distinguished scholar named Edward
Ellsworth Jones.
I was totally intimidated by him, Aronson recounts. I'd walk into his office as prepared as I could be, but without fail, I would lose 10 or 15
IQ points the minute I came through the door. They would get sucked out of my head just by being in the presence of this
person.
The humiliation of standing, dull-witted and tongue-tied in Professor Jones's office, affected him so deeply that it shaped the course of his burgeoning career.
Less than a decade later, as a junior professor at the University of Texas at Austin, Aronson helped design a study that became one of the most influential ever conducted in psychology, a modern classic, as it's been called.
The paper described, for the first time, a phenomenon that he and his co-author, Claude Steele, named stereotype threat, a temporary condition that saps the brainpower of those affected, rendering them effectively less intelligent.
Aronson and Steele's experiments demonstrated that members of groups stereotyped as academically inferior, such as female students enrolled in math and science courses,
or African-American and Latino students attending college score lower on tests of intellectual ability when made conspicuously aware of their gender or ethnicity.
Stereotype threat has since become a crucial concept within psychology, guiding researchers' inquiries into why women are underrepresented in STEM fields, for example,
and why well-prepared minority high school graduates may still struggle in college.
These investigations are rooted in a more general truth, says Aronson, one that applies to every one of us.
Intelligence is not a fixed lump of something that's in our heads, he explains.
Rather, it's a transaction, a fluid interaction among our brains, our bodies, our spaces, and our relationships.
The capacity to think intelligently emerges from the skillful orchestration of these internal and external elements.
And indeed, studies have shown that such mental extensions can help us think more effectively when confronted with a challenge like stereotype threat.
Using cognitive reappraisal to reinterpret bodily signals, as we learned to do in Chapter 1, can head off the performance-suppressing effects of anxiety.
Adding cues of belonging to the physical environment of the kind we explored in Chapter 5 can generate a sense of psychological ease that's conducive to intelligent thought.
And carefully structuring the expert feedback offered to a cognitive apprentice, as we learned about in Chapter 7, can instill the confidence necessary to overcome self-doubt.
With a wry smile, Joshua Aronson, currently an associate professor of psychology at New York University, refers to his stammering state when encountering his advisor as conditional stupidity.
Knowing what we do about mental extensions and how they work, we are now able to assemble the conditions for intelligence, even brilliance.
In this book, we've looked intently at one extension at a time.
Interoceptive signals, movements and gestures, natural spaces, built spaces, and the space of ideas, experts, peers, and groups.
But evidence suggests that extensions are most powerful when they are employed in combination, incorporated into mental routines that draw on the full range of extra-neural resources we have at hand.
The skilled use of extensions is a proficiency that has gone largely unrecognized and uncultivated by our schools and workplaces, and it was long ignored by researchers in psychology, education, and management.
But some general principles of effective extending are now clearly discernible, implicit in the more recent research we've covered in previous chapters.
Let's take up, in turn, three sets of such principles, three lenses through which to view the project of extending the mind.
The first set of principles lays out some habits of mind we would do well to adopt, starting with this one.
Whenever possible, we should offload information, externalize it, move it out of our heads and into the world.
Throughout this book, we've encountered many examples of offloading and have become familiar with its manifold benefits.
It relieves us of the burden of keeping a host of details in mind, thereby freeing up mental resources for more demanding tasks, like problem-solving and idea generation.
It also produces for us the detachment gain, whereby we can inspect with our senses and often perceive anew, an image or idea that once existed only in the imagination.
In its most straightforward form, offloading is the simple act of putting our thoughts down on paper, simple, but often skipped over in a world that values doing things in our heads.
As we learn from the story of Charles Darwin and the ship's log he kept on the HMS Beagle, a habit of continuous offloading, through the use of a daily journal or field notebook, can extend our ability to make fresh observations and synthesize new ideas.
And as we saw in the example of historian Robert Caro, offloading information onto a space that's big enough for us to physically navigate, wall-sized outlines, oversized concept maps, multiple monitor workstations, allows us to apply to that material our powers of spatial reasoning and spatial memory.
Externalizing information takes a more involved form.
Offloading offloading need not require written language either.
At times, offloading may be embodied.
When we gesture, for example, we permit our hands to hold some of the thoughts we would otherwise have to maintain in our head.
Likewise, when we use our hands to move objects around, we offload the task of visualizing new configurations onto the world itself, where those configurations take tangible shape before our eyes.
Picture an interior designer manipulating a model as she tries out new groupings of furniture, for example, or a Scrabble player rearranging the tiles on his tray to form new words.
At other times, offloading may be social.
We've seen how engaging an argument allows us to distribute among human debaters the task of tallying points for and against a given proposition.
We've learned how constructing a transactive memory system offloads onto our colleagues the task of monitoring and remembering incoming information.
Offloading also occurs in an interpersonal context when we externalize traces of our own thinking processes for the benefit of our teammates.
In this case, we're offloading not to unburden our own minds, but to facilitate collaboration with others.
Onward to the second principle.
Whenever possible, we should endeavor to transform information into an artifact, to make data into something real, and then proceed to interact with it, labeling it, mapping it, feeling it, tweaking it, showing it to others.
Humans evolve to handle the concrete, not to contemplate the abstract.
We extend our intelligence when we give our minds something to grab onto, when we experience a concept from physics as a bicycle wheel spinning in our hands, for example,
or when we turn a foreign language vocabulary word into a gesture we can see and sense and demonstrate to others.
Vague impressions of what constitutes excellent work can usefully take form as a display of actual models to which to aspire.
Remember Austin's butterfly?
Dry intellectual deliberations can acquire a rooted, embodied dimension when we closely attend to, and label and track, the internal signals that arise in our bodies.
Our days are now spent processing an endless stream of symbols.
With a bit of ingenuity, we can find ways to turn these abstract symbols into tangible objects and sensory experiences, and thereby think about them in new ways.
In a related vein, the third principle, whenever possible, we should seek to productively alter our own state when engaging in mental labor.
We've repeatedly confronted the limits of the brain-as-computer analogy, and here we come up against perhaps its most conspicuous flaw.
When fed a chunk of information, a computer processes it in the same way on each occasion, whether it's been at work for five minutes or five hours, whether it's located in a fluorescent-lit office or positioned next to a sunny window,
whether it's near other computers or is the only computer in the window, whether it's near other computers or is the only computer in the room.
This is how computers operate, but the same doesn't hold for human beings.
The way we're able to think about information is dramatically affected by the state we're in when we encounter it.
Effective mental extension, then, requires us to think carefully about inducing in ourselves the state that is best suited for the task at hand.
We might engage in a bout of brisk exercise before sitting down to learn something new, for example.
We might seek out an opportunity to engage in group synchrony and shared physical arousal, spicy food, anyone, when we're expected to work together as a team.
We might get up from our desk and get our hands and bodies moving when we're seeking to understand a spatial concept.
We might plan a three-day trip into the wilderness when we're in need of a creative boost.
Deliberately altering our own state could entail taking a walk in a nearby park when our frazzled attention requires restoration
or seeking out a sparring partner with whom to argue when we want to make sure our ideas are sound.
Instead of heedlessly driving the brain like a machine, we'll think more intelligently when we treat it as the context-sensitive organ it is.
The second set of principles offers a higher-level view of how mental extension works
in accordance with an understanding of what the brain evolved to do.
The brain is well adapted to sensing and moving the body,
to navigating through physical space, and to interacting with other members of our species.
On top of this basic suite of human competencies, civilization has built a vast edifice of abstraction,
engaging our brains in acts of symbolic processing and conceptual cognition that don't come as naturally.
These abstractions have, of course, allowed us to expand our powers exponentially.
But now, paradoxically, further progress may depend on our running this process in reverse.
In order to succeed at the increasingly complex thinking modern life demands,
we will find ourselves needing to translate abstractions back into the corporeal, spatial, and social forms from which they sprang,
forms with which the brain is still most at ease.
We can begin to understand what this means by taking up the fourth principle.
Whenever possible, we should take measures to re-embody the information we think about.
The pursuit of knowledge has frequently sought to disengage thinking from the body,
to elevate ideas to a cerebral sphere separate from our grubby animal anatomy.
Research on the extended mind counsels the opposite approach.
We should be seeking to draw the body back into the thinking process.
That may take the form of allowing our choices to be influenced by our interoceptive signals,
a source of guidance we've often ignored in our focus on data-driven decisions.
It might take the form of enacting, with bodily movements, the academic concepts that have become abstracted,
detached from their origin in the physical world.
Or it might take the form of attending to our own and others' gestures,
tuning back into what was humanity's first language, present long before speech.
As we've seen from research on embodied cognition,
at a deep level the brain still understands abstract concepts in terms of physical action,
a fact reflected in the words we use, reaching for a goal, running behind schedule.
We can assist the brain in its efforts by bringing the literal body back into the act of thinking.
The fifth principle emphasizes another human strength.
Whenever possible, we should take measures to re-spatialize the information we think about.
We inherited a mind on the hoof, as Andy Clark puts it,
a brain that was built to pick a path through a landscape and to find the way back home.
Neuroscientific research indicates that our brains process and store information,
even or especially abstract information, in the form of mental maps.
We can work in concert with the brain's natural spatial orientation
by placing the information we encounter into expressly spatial formats,
creating memory palaces, for example, or designing concept maps.
In the realm of education research, experts now speak of spatializing the curriculum.
That is, simultaneously drawing on and strengthening students' spatial capacities
by having them employ spatial language and gestures, engage in sketching and mapmaking,
and learn to interpret and create charts, tables, and diagrams.
The spatialized curriculum has obvious applications to subjects like geometry,
but researchers report that learning in a spatial mode can also help students think
in more advanced ways about topics including chemistry, biology, and history.
Nor should spatial reasoning be restricted to schools.
The workplace offers abundant opportunities for reconceiving information in spatial terms,
terms that put us back in touch with our natural talent for navigation.
The sixth principle rounds out the roster of our innate aptitudes.
Whenever possible, we should take measures to re-socialize the information we think about.
We learned earlier in this book that the continual patter we carry on in our heads
is in fact a kind of internalized conversation.
Likewise, many of the written forms we encounter at school and at work,
from exams and evaluations, to profiles and case studies, to essays and proposals,
are really social exchanges—questions, stories, arguments—put on paper and addressed
to some imagined listener or interlocutor.
As we've seen, there are significant advantages to turning such interactions at a remove
back into actual social encounters.
Research we've reviewed demonstrates that the brain processes the same information differently
and often more effectively when other human beings are involved,
whether we are imitating them, debating them, exchanging stories with them,
synchronizing and cooperating with them, teaching or being taught with them.
We are inherently social creatures and are thinking benefits from bringing other people
into our train of thought.
The final set of principles of mental extension steps back for a still wider view,
taking up a rather profound question.
What kind of creatures are we?
We can't design effective protocols for extension without a nuanced understanding of our highly
particular, intriguingly eccentric human nature.
A clear-eyed acknowledgement of our quirks can lead us to create new kinds of mental routines,
such as the one encapsulated in the seventh principle.
Whenever possible, we should manage our thinking by generating cognitive loops.
As Andy Clark has pointed out, when computer scientists develop artificial intelligence systems,
they don't design machines that compute for a while, print out the results,
inspect what they have produced, add some marks in the margin,
circulate copies among colleagues, and then start the process again.
That's not how computers work, but it is how we work.
We are intrinsically loopy creatures, as Clark likes to say.
Something about our biological intelligence benefits
from being rotated in and out of internal and external modes of cognition,
from being passed among brain, body, and world.
This means we should resist the urge to shunt our thinking along the linear path appropriate to
a computer, input, output, done, and instead allow it to take a more winding route.
We can pass our thoughts through the portal of our bodies,
seeking the verdict of our interoception,
seeing what our gestures have to show us,
acting out our ideas in movement,
observing the inspirations that arise during or after a vigorous exercise.
We can spread out our thoughts in space,
treating the contents of the mind as territory to be mapped and navigated,
surveyed, and explored.
And we can run our thoughts through the brains of the people we know,
gathering from the lot of them the insights no single mind could generate.
Most felicitous of all,
we can loop our thoughts through all three of these realms.
What we shouldn't do is keep our thoughts inside our heads,
inert, unchanged by encounters with the world beyond the skull.
We are loopy creatures,
and we are also situationally sensitive ones,
responsive to the immediate conditions and circumstances in which we find ourselves.
Hence, the eighth principle.
Whenever possible,
we should manage our thinking by creating cognitively congenial situations.
We often regard the brain as an organ of awesome and almost unfathomable power.
But we're also apt to treat it with high-handed imperiousness,
expecting it to do our bidding as if it were a docile servant.
Pay attention to this, we tell it.
Remember that.
Buckle down now and get the job done.
Alas, we often find that the brain is an unreliable and even impertinent attendant,
fickle in its focus,
porous in its memory,
and inconstant in its efforts.
The problem lies in our attempt to command it.
We'll elicit improved performance from the brain
when we approach it with the aim not of issuing orders,
but of creating situations that draw out the desired result.
Instead of dictating to a student the information she needs to learn, for example,
have her explain it in front of a group of her peers.
The gestures she makes will generate a deeper level of understanding.
Instead of handing an employee a manual packed with guidelines,
create spaces and occasions where stories,
full of the tacit knowledge manuals can't convey,
will be shared among his co-workers.
Instead of instructing a team to cooperate and work together,
plan an event, a shared meal, a group hike, karaoke,
where synchronized movement and mutual physiological arousal are bound to take place.
The art of creating intelligence-extending situations
is one that every parent, teacher, and manager needs to master.
The final principle of extension doubles back on itself with a self-referential observation.
What kind of creatures are we?
The kind who extend, eagerly and energetically, when given the chance.
Consider, research from neuroscience and cognitive psychology indicates
that when we begin using a tool,
our body's schema,
our sense of the body's shape, size, and position,
rapidly expands to encompass it,
as if the tool we're grasping in our hand
has effectively become an extension of our arm.
Something similar occurs in the case of mental extensions.
As long as extensions are available,
and especially when they are reliably, persistently available,
we humans will incorporate them into our thinking.
Accordingly, the ninth principle,
whenever possible,
we should manage our thinking by embedding extensions in our everyday environments.
Think of the cues of belonging and identity, for example,
that bolster our motivation and improve our performance
when displayed in our study and workspaces.
Recall the transactive memory system
we construct with a group of colleagues over time
in which the burden of attending to and remembering information
is distributed across group members.
Picture even the indoor plants and green walls and roofs
that help restore our attention by providing regular glimpses of nature.
Once securely embedded,
such extensions can function as seamless adjuncts to our neural capacity,
supporting and augmenting our ability to think intelligently.
It's worth noting that this principle bears a bias towards stability.
Enduring cues of belonging and identity are hard to sustain
in an office where a hot-desking or unassigned workspace is the norm.
A transactive memory system is hard to build in a work environment
where turnover is high or team composition is constantly changing.
In a dynamic and fast-changing society
that celebrates novelty and flexibility,
the maintenance and preservation of valued mental extensions
also deserve our respect.
We may not know how much they bolster our intelligence
until they're gone.
This nested set of principles,
what we might call a curriculum of the extended mind,
is not currently taught in any school
or addressed in any workplace training.
That ought to change.
Learning to extend the mind
should be an element of everyone's education.
At present, to the degree that people know how to extend their minds,
it's something they've figured out on their own.
Strikingly, we now have evidence that individuals do differ
in how fully they have developed their capacity to extend.
Furthermore, scientists have found that this competence
can be accurately and precisely measured
using a variation on conventional IQ tests,
which, in their unaltered form,
deliberately exclude all kinds of mental extensions.
Test-takers are not permitted to use tools
such as calculators or the Internet,
nor are they allowed to move their bodies,
rearrange their environments,
or talk to their neighbors.
Most intriguing,
results from these studies show that
skill at employing extensions,
as assessed by a test,
corresponds to real-world performance.
Empirical evidence that individuals
who can extend their minds more fully
can solve problems more effectively
in everyday life.
In February 2019,
a group of psychologists from the Netherlands,
plus philosopher Andy Clark,
published a study in the journal
Nature Human Behavior.
The researchers set out, they wrote,
to quantitatively assess
a powerful, though understudied,
feature of human intelligence,
our ability to use external objects,
props, and aids
to solve complex problems.
They started with a conventional test
of intelligence,
the Raven Advanced Progressive Matrices.
This IQ test,
used millions of times all over the world
since it was first introduced in 1938,
presents users with a series
of geometric puzzles,
each of which is missing a piece.
Test takers are asked to select
from a number of options provided
the piece that correctly
completes each pattern.
The test is available
in a paper and pencil version,
but today it is most often
administered on a computer.
In the standard version of the Raven,
as it is known,
test takers are expected to carry out
the required operations in their heads,
imagining how each potential choice
might or might not fit.
The rules of the test
don't permit them
to extend their minds
with extra neural resources.
They must rely on their
internal reasoning processes alone.
In the version of the test
designed by Clark
and his colleagues,
by contrast,
test takers are able
to digitally manipulate
the potential solution pieces,
moving them around the screen
to create new configurations.
To assess the validity
of the new tests
they had created,
the researchers recruited
495 students
from Leiden University
and Erasmus University,
both located in the Netherlands.
Half the students
were randomly assigned
to take the conventional version
of the Raven.
The other half were given
the extended mind variant
of the test.
In the case of that second group,
the researchers monitored
how actively test takers
engaged in manipulating
the layout on the screen.
A suggestive finding
soon surfaced.
Test takers who took
full advantage
of the new interactive feature
were often able
to identify patterns
that had not been apparent
to them before they began
shifting the pieces around.
An analysis of the moves
they made while taking the test
showed that these
active extenders
seemed to be running
their thinking processes
through successive loops,
switching between
external actions,
which altered the problem-solving
space in helpful ways,
and internal evaluations
of the new configurations
thus created.
Our study showed
very clearly
the relationship
between the amount
of interaction
participants engaged in
and how well
they solved the problems,
says Bruno Bocanegra,
an assistant professor
of psychology
at Erasmus University
and the lead author
of the paper.
We saw people
interacting with the pieces,
reflecting on the new
configurations,
reassessing their strategy,
and then reaching out
to interact again.
These loops are what
allowed them to solve
the problems effectively.
Final results
demonstrated
that the more
test-takers
extended their minds
using the movable pieces,
the more successful
they were at solving
the complex visual puzzles.
What's more,
the researchers found,
the extended-mind version
of the test
was better
than the standard
static Raven
at predicting
students'
intellectual performance
outside the lab,
in the form
of the grades
they received
in their college courses.
The tests
that measured
the student's skill
at mental extension,
the authors wrote,
might be tapping
into an additional
behavioral aspect
of intelligence
that is not
currently measured
by conventional IQ tests.
Says Bruno Bocanegra,
people are applying
an underappreciated
wealth of strategies
to solve problems,
underappreciated in part
because people
are not good
at describing
their own
thought processes.
They often
don't have
conscious access
to their strategies,
but they are using
them nonetheless.
We're interested
in studying people
over time
to see if they can
develop more
sophisticated strategies.
Bocanegra's publication
is just a start,
but it's easy
to envision
a broad expansion
of similar efforts.
Imagine a test
that would evaluate
how well an individual
is able to use
interoception,
movement,
and gesture
to think,
how adept she is
at soaking up
natural settings,
designing built environments,
and exploiting
the space of ideas
to enhance her cognition,
how skillfully
she manages
thinking with experts,
thinking with peers,
and thinking with groups.
Such an assessment
could represent
a new kind of IQ test,
measuring a new
sort of intelligence.
New in the sense
of newly admitted
into our society's
definition of smart.
As we've heard
throughout this book,
humans have been
extending their minds
since time immemorial.
Much more than
we usually recognize,
humans use their
environment to solve
problems,
an environment that is
both material and social,
says Bocanegra.
When you see things
that way,
it starts to seem
very silly to think
that we can measure
intelligence as some
internal,
intrinsic,
individual quality.
Of course,
it's possible
that such a test
would be misused,
as IQ tests
have so often
been misused,
employed to rank,
divide,
and exclude people
instead of helping
them to develop.
But such misuse
need not be inevitable.
Once we make
mental extensions visible,
what we do
with our new awareness
is up to us.
We might begin
by applying it
to an issue
now roiling
our society,
America's
pervasive inequality,
a state of affairs
that many are finding
ever less justifiable
or tolerable.
Defenders of the status quo
have long argued
that social and economic
inequality
merely reflects
a kind of organic
inequality
determined by nature
in the talents
and abilities
with which
individuals are born.
That argument
appears less plausible
when viewed
through the lens
of the extended mind.
If our ability
to think intelligently
is shaped so profoundly
by the availability
of extra-neural resources,
how then can we
continue to justify
their extraordinarily
inequitable distribution?
In a famous
thought experiment,
the contemporary
philosopher
John Rawls
imagined designing
the ideal society,
but doing so
from behind
a veil of ignorance
regarding how
the designers
themselves
would fare
in the new world
they are creating.
While engaged
in deciding
how society's
affluence
and opportunities
are to be distributed,
Rawls writes,
no one knows
his place in society,
his class position
or social status,
nor does anyone
know his fortune
and the distribution
of natural assets
and abilities,
his intelligence,
strength,
and the like.
Intriguing though it is
to contemplate,
Rawls' scenario
has always been hard
to enter into fully.
so closely
are we identified
with what we take
to be our
natural assets
and abilities,
our intelligence
foremost among them.
The theory
of the extended mind
is a tool
with which we might
begin to pry loose
this instinctive
identification.
Unlike innate
intelligence,
which we imagine
to be an inseparable
part of who we are,
access to mental
extensions
is more readily
understood
as a matter
of chance
or luck.
This radically
new conceptual
theory harbors
within it
an old
and humble
moral sentiment.
There,
but for the grace
of God,
go I.
Acknowledging the reality
of the extended mind
might well lead us
to embrace
the extended heart.
We hope you have enjoyed
this unabridged
production of
The Extended Mind,
The Power of Thinking
Outside the Brain.
by Annie Murphy
Paul.
Read by the author.
Presented by Mariner
Books and Harper
Audio.
This program was
directed by Carly
Katz.
Executive producer,
Tommy Heron.
Post-production by
Chris Howerton.
Text copyright 2021
by Anne Paul.
Production copyright
2021 by Harper
Collins Publishers.
All rights reserved.
Thank you for listening.
Audible hopes you have
enjoyed this program.
And I'll chat to
the...
by detail.
