Careless People
By Sarah Wynn-Williams

2025
 

For Tom
I’m sorry I dragged you into all this.
&
For my grandmother Eileen
Who regularly reminds us to “live an ordinary life” and
“enjoy the good times.”

They were careless people, Tom and Daisy—they smashed
up things and creatures and then retreated back into their
money or their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept
them together, and let other people clean up the mess they
had made.
—F. SCOTT FITZGERALD, THE GREAT GATSBY

Prologue
We’re in the middle of an archeological ruin somewhere on the Panamanian
coast. It’s me, two guys I work with, clusters of people who are basically
naked, and Mark Zuckerberg. Mark is not happy. This is the 2015 Summit
of the Americas, an international meeting of world leaders. This particular
event is a state dinner that—other than Mark—is supposed to be exclusively
heads of state of various countries: Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, Canada, the
US, over thirty other nations. I wrangled Mark an invitation because I’ve
been trying to convince him that he needs to have relationships with these
people.
But somehow we are the only ones at this party.
Under dark skies and low clouds, a red carpet stretches into the distance
in the ruins, dimly lit by the open fires. It’s flanked by guards in ancient
costumes with frilly collars and colorful silk pants, wielding swords and ax-
type things. Plus the naked people, who—on closer inspection—are
seminaked, wearing abbreviated, ancient, flesh-toned costumes. On one
side, a group of people wearing only tiny loincloths and holding crops.
Farther down, people who appear to be dressed as members of a kind of
primeval Ku Klux Klan. All in front of these ancient fortifications, the site
of the oldest European settlement on the Pacific coast of the Americas.
“Why are there naked people at a state dinner?” Mark whispers.
“Honestly,” I say, searching for a reasonable response, “I couldn’t say.
This is my first state dinner with naked people.”
We trudge down the endless red carpet past weird scenes of ritual,
trading, fighting, and who knows what else, the Facebook men I’m with
mostly averting their eyes because of the nakedness. And because any time

you look directly at one of the noncostumed extras, they meet your eyes and
stare back at you. It’s unnerving.
When we get to the empty dining area, I see who’s sitting where and it’s
dreadful. Because he isn’t a head of state, Mark is assigned a table between
two people who seem to be random relatives of the president of Panama. I
mean, they might also have been ministers, and I’m trying to google them
and simultaneously pretend that everything about the evening is okay and
normal, and of course I have no internet signal because we’re in
archeological ruins on the coast of Panama.
Seeing few other options, I casually switch out Mark’s name card with
that of a minor president on a better table. I ferry the name cards
inconspicuously in my handbag so the staff who have emerged and are
milling around don’t notice, and then breathe a sigh of relief and let the
team know what I’ve done.
“He wants to sit next to Castro,” Javi says.
“Not happening,” I respond.
Javi’s my favorite of the coworkers here tonight—Javier Olivan, in
charge of “growth” at Facebook, which means he’s the person responsible
for getting the billions who still aren’t on the platform to sign up. Javi’s a
laid-back Spaniard and one of the few people in top management with a
sense of humor.
When the heads of state finally start arriving, my job is to manage “pull-
asides.” I used to work at an embassy, and “pull-asides” is diplomatic
jargon for exactly what you’d think: pulling to one side the person you want
to talk to. Mark waits on the edge of the crowd, not convinced about any of
this. It’s my job at Facebook to run international policy, and to make this
matter I need to get Mark engaged in the issues and politics Facebook
encounters and creates in the world. Some things that a company needs
done on the international stage, only the CEO can do. It’s just that this CEO
doesn’t want to. Mark is deeply skeptical of all this. And he plainly does not
enjoy it.
My first target is the prime minister of Canada, Stephen Harper. I take a
breath, steel myself, and approach.

“Hello, Prime Minister Harper,” I say. “I’m Sarah Wynn-Williams from
Facebook. You’ll remember me from all the data center and privacy stuff.”
Look, it’s not a great start but it’s all I’ve got, and yes, “remember me” is
definitely a stretch. We’ve never met personally, and if he does remember
our data center negotiations, he might feel we screwed his government over.
Facebook got them to agree to a bunch of concessions and then we built the
data center in Iowa.
He just stares blankly at me like I’m a wart on his foot. Out of the
periphery of my eye I see Javi looking relieved that I’m sourcing heads of
state for Mark.
“Anyway, I’m here with Mark Zuckerberg.” I pause. His expression is
inscrutable. “I was wondering whether you wanted to meet him?”
“No,” Prime Minister Harper says firmly. “I wouldn’t.”
I hear the deflating sound of “Oooooh” beside me, and realize that Javi
has brought Mark over with him, and he is standing right next to me for this
exchange. Prime Minister Harper moves off to mingle with other heads of
state. Mark and I just stand there, looking at each other. I turn to Javi, who
declares, “I’m getting mojitos for all of us,” and strides off to the bar,
leaving me and Mark in an uncomfortable silence. “Make sure they’re
doubles,” I call after him.
For the rest of the cocktail hour, the political leaders avoid us. No one
approaches Mark. He’s not used to this, to being ignored. Usually, he’s
hounded by people who think he’s the most interesting person in the room.
Now he stands awkwardly in the middle of this fancy party, a fish out of
water. The three of us down the mojitos Javi has gotten, and I send him
