back for more.
I go to double-check that Mark’s table seating is secure and realize I’ve
been rumbled and the seats switched back. I try swapping the name cards
again with an even lesser-known president’s and stand by and watch as they
get switched back within minutes. The lights start to dim, signaling the end
of the drinks and the beginning of the dinner, and I quickly lay out the
situation to Mark.
“Do I have to stay?” he asks earnestly.

“No,” I answer, conscious that his night has been rather peculiar
already.
“Then let’s leave.”
And right at that moment the lights go out, except for one lone spotlight,
pointed at a tunnel near us. A stream of horses adorned with colorful silks
rushes out, ridden by performers in elaborate costumes.
How do we get out of here?
We can’t go back down the endless red carpet. At the end of the carpet
there’s a large media contingent, and we can’t have the international press
capturing Mark Zuckerberg fleeing from a state dinner. But there’s no other
discernible exit. It’s ruins and fortifications in all directions except for the
red carpet and the tunnel the horses are streaming out of.
The president of Panama stands up and urges people to take their seats. I
take one last look around and make a terrible choice, urging Mark and the
Facebook team, “Run! Follow me!”
I sprint straight into where the horses are emerging from. I figure
wherever the horses are galloping in from, there has to be an exit. But it’s
only as I see the looks of terror from Javi and Mark as they race past me
sprinting in my heels that I realize my mistake. Horses take evasive action
around us, looking equally terrified, and probably not expecting a young
tech CEO to charge at them through the tunnel of a ruined castle or church
or fort or whatever it is we’re running through. This is madness. There’s a
whooshing of hooves and tails and silks, warm mammals, fear, hot breath,
and expressions of surprise in Spanish. And then, abruptly, miraculously,
the tunnel ends. We pop out the other side into darkness.
I double over, partly to catch my breath, partly because I can’t bear to
look at Mark and partly because I have no idea what the security
arrangements are for that many world leaders and I’m afraid that at any
second we’re all going to be taken out by snipers.
When I force my head up, I can see that we’re standing in the middle of
a ginormous field next to some ancient wall, near some straggling horses in
silk that shimmers in the moonlight. Mark gives me a wan smile. Not sure
what else to do, we set off into the darkness, across the fields, dressed in our
formal state dinner outfits, with no cell reception or any sense at all of

where we are other than Panama. We trudge through the black wilderness
for what feels like miles, hoping to come to a road. Eventually, I get one bar
on my phone and call for a car. When they ask me where to send it, I tell
them, “Honestly, I have no idea.” Mark hears this and starts to laugh, and
the others cautiously join in.
That’s pretty much what my early years at Facebook were like. It was a
lot of launching ourselves at various things that did not quite work out like
we expected. I was there for seven years, and if I had to sum it up in a
sentence, I’d say that it started as a hopeful comedy and ended in darkness
and regret. I was one of the people advising the company’s top leaders,
Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg, as they were inventing how the
company would deal with governments around the world. By the end, I
watched hopelessly as they sucked up to authoritarian regimes like China’s
and casually misled the public. I was on a private jet with Mark the day he
finally understood that Facebook probably did put Donald Trump in the
White House, and came to his own dark conclusions from that. But most
days, working on policy at Facebook was way less like enacting a chapter
from Machiavelli and way more like watching a bunch of fourteen-year-
olds who’ve been given superpowers and an ungodly amount of money, as
they jet around the world to figure out what power has bought and brought
them.
That’s the story I’m here to tell.

1
Simpleminded Hope
It was idealism that originally led me to Facebook. Looking back, I’m a
little ashamed to admit that. This was in 2009, back when it still was
possible to be optimistic about Facebook, in those innocent days when it
still was possible to be hopeful about the internet.
It’s hard to admit you wanted to “save the world” without putting it in
quotation marks, but that’s what I thought I’d been doing since my
midtwenties. During those years, I was a diplomat for New Zealand at the
United Nations.
I grew up in Christchurch, which is an agricultural services town, the
biggest city in the South Island and about the size of Lincoln, Nebraska. To
give you a sense of what it’s like, every November there’s a holiday
everyone calls Show Day, where the whole city comes out to see sheep and
vegetables and there’s a dog show and horse racing and a lot of drinking. I
loved Show Day.
I grew up in a family of four kids. The eldest. The responsible one. My
childhood was pretty normal, I guess, except for the time I was attacked by
a shark.
I was thirteen when this happened. We were on vacation at a beach
where my family camped every year. I’m standing in the water with a
friend. I don’t see it. I feel it. A force so powerful and unexpected. A shark
attack is like being hit by a knife attached to a freight train. I’ve never been
on the receiving end of such searing pain as its teeth go deeper and deeper.

It locks its mouth around my torso, just above my waist on my right
side. It feels like it’s trying to get inside me, pushing deeper, trying to rip
my stomach, that chunk of me, away. I’m trapped. It starts shaking me the
way a dog shakes a toy, back and forth, trying to force me under the water. I
go under once and struggle to my feet, then a second time and a third. This
third time I start to take in ocean water and the thought occurs to me, “Oh,
it’s trying to drown me. I could drown.” Like, I thought in a shark attack
you die from the attack, but now there’s a whole new way to die I hadn’t
realized. I’m in its mouth, clenched between its teeth, under the water. I
need air desperately.
My animal instincts kick in. I’m scratching, kicking, punching, pulling,
doing whatever I physically can to escape. It’s like hand-to-hand combat. I
fight with everything I have to try to get my head above the surface.
Whatever I did, it is enough to give the shark a fright. It lets go and
