swims away.
I struggle toward the shore and send my friend for help. My swimsuit is
tattered. I look down and see two big puncture wounds and a chunk of skin
missing. Gone. There’s blood pouring out. I’m worried that’s going to bring
the shark back or maybe some other sharks so I stumble through the water
as fast as I can. But once I get to shallow water, I collapse and lie there
alone, feeling the blood oozing out of me, the sting of the salt water, the
hole in my body.
I don’t know how long I’ve been there when some fishermen come
along.
“Are you all right?”
I’m patently not all right. But the other issue is that I’m exposed; the
shark has ripped off enough of my swimsuit that I’m quite naked. I’m also
thirteen. So I try to tell them I’m fine, just hoping they’ll go away. They’re
like, “Um, you don’t look fine.” And I’m all, “I’m okay. I’ll figure it out,
you carry on.” Maybe it’s the blood, or the shreds of swimsuit but they
don’t buy it. “We’ll get you out of the water.” And I’m still telling them I’m
fine when at a certain point they just stop negotiating, pick up my
seminaked body and carry me up to the shoreline. I am dying of shame.
Absolutely dying of shame. On the beach a small crowd starts to form, to

my horror. My parents arrive and lift me into the back of our family car.
The beach is in a remote part of New Zealand and there’s no hospital
nearby. We set off to the closest town, a twenty-minute drive away.
There’s no hospital in the town, so we have to call the local doctor to
open up his medical office, which is a small, single-story building. Once we
get there everyone seems relieved, like the crisis has passed. It’s almost
jovial as my dad and the doctor discuss the cricket and plans for the
weekend. My dad cheerfully explains that yesterday we’d tried to refloat
whales that had stranded on a beach nearby, that I had been in charge of two
small whales we’d nicknamed Moby and Maybe, not knowing if the smaller
one would make it. No one is in a hurry. No one asks me what happened.
The doctor cleans the wound, pulls the skin around the jaw marks together,
and stitches it up so there’s no longer a chunk missing. He gives me a
tetanus shot and warns my parents that I might be a little dramatic that night
because I might be in shock but I’d be fine. I obviously was a fighter.
Everyone laughs.
We return to the campground. I’m allowed to stay in the camper rather
than head under the attached awning with my three siblings because I’m in
pain, which the doctor had told me and my parents to expect, some mild
pain from the stitches. Very quickly I realize this pain is not mild. It’s
searing. I start vomiting up blood and these thick, dark, sticky clots that
look like coffee grounds, which I assume is stomach lining but I know
nothing about the human body. I pull out a large red plastic cup to collect it
so I don’t get the camper dirty.
Everyone else goes to bed but I can’t sleep. It keeps getting worse and
worse. I feel like I’m on fire. I wait, quiet as possible so I don’t wake
anyone. After a while, the red cup is full and I’m onto another. The pain is
excruciating.
Eventually I wake my parents.
“I’m on fire. I’m burning up inside.”
“Go back to sleep. You’ll be fine.”
This continues throughout the night: I wake my parents, they tell me
that the doctor said I’d be fine. We’ll all learn later what actually is
happening. The shark had bitten through my bowel in several places, so it’s

like I’ve been stabbed multiple times. The blood and the contents of my
bowel are leaking into my gut, basically poisoning me. I have sepsis, acute
peritonitis. Eventually there is so much of this toxic blood liquid that it
floods through my body and flows into my lungs, making it increasingly
difficult to breathe. Like I’m suffocating.
I wake my parents again.
“I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t get the air in.”
My mother—tired of being woken—responds in an authoritative voice,
“Mind over matter. Stop that hyperventilating.” This has become a family
joke. Now anytime one of us mentions anything, a cold or a cut or
appendicitis, we respond, “Mind over matter. Stop that hyperventilating.”
We later learn that my left lung has collapsed from a pulmonary edema.
And my right lung is damaged.
By morning, I realize I’m losing my ability to keep going.
I wake my parents one more time and say:
“I’m dying.”
But I cannot convince them. And my life depends on convincing them. I
have no Plan B. I can’t drive. I don’t have my own phone. This is 1993.
The next morning, after my family wakes and starts getting breakfast,
I’m barely getting in enough air to breathe. Then my eyes roll into the back
of my head. My mother told me later that when she saw the whites of my
eyes, she felt like she was falling through the surface of the earth. Now she
believes me. And wants to rush me to the doctor.
Problem is, my dad’s MIA. Utterly unworried about how badly I’m
doing, he’s taken the car to show fishermen the scraps of my swimsuit,
hoping they can identify the type of shark and, I suspect, secretly hoping
that they’ll go hunting for it.
When he returns, we get in the car. By now, with one collapsed lung and
fluid rapidly accumulating in the other, it’s taking all my concentration to
keep enough air going in and out. I’m lying prone in the back seat of the
car, and as we make our way toward town, for the first time I start to doubt
whether I can keep doing what I’ve been doing to keep myself alive.
My dad, meanwhile, seems not to be rushing at all. He’s a keen
fisherman. I swear that when we cross any bridge, I can feel the car slow

down while he scans the river for fish, like he always does. From the back
seat my mother tells him to hurry.
Eventually we get stuck behind a farmer who’s moving his sheep across
a short bridge, which is a regular New Zealand thing. I hadn’t factored this
into my estimate of “this is how long I have to keep myself going until I
reach help” and now I completely lose it. I start to lose consciousness. It’s
like lifting off in an airplane. It feels good, weightless and painless. Floating
into unconsciousness where there’s no suffering. But I fight it. I think, “I’ve
got to get back.”
We finally get to town. Back at the same medical office with the doctor
who told my parents I’d be fine. By now I can’t speak, can’t move, and I’m
drifting in and out of consciousness. My dad carries me inside and the
doctor from the day before approaches us. Not this guy, I think, as I’m
hoisted onto a table. He and two other doctors crowd around to examine
me, poking me this way and that, and then they leave abruptly to talk to my
