parents off in the corner. I hear one of them say something that I can’t quite
make out but sounds like “she’s dying” or “she’s dead.”
My dad howls, “She was my favorite daughter.” I enjoy that for a
moment. I have two sisters. I can’t wait to tell them. I’d always suspected it.
Then my mother wails, “Just like the cat!” Because our cat Winkels had
recently met an untimely end. Just like the cat. Brutal.
After this my dad gets very angry, yelling at the doctors to do
something, to find out what had gone wrong.
Next thing I know, the doctor comes back. Gets out a very large blade
like a mini ax and starts thwacking it down, carving into my left arm. Then
my right arm. It’s like I’m a piece of meat being hacked open. No
anesthesia. No warning. And I’m beyond the point where I have any control
over my own body. I can’t move or speak. I can’t raise any alarm.
I’d thought the shark attack was more pain than a person can bear, the
worst that could happen. I was wrong.
The doctor repositions himself near my ankle and brings the blade down
with force, splitting the skin and plunging the blade to the bone. Why is the
doctor hacking open my ankles? The only explanation I can muster is that
he thinks I’m already dead. I’m experiencing my own autopsy. The mortal

terror I felt during the shark attack returns, that feeling like, I could die right
this second. Painfully. Hacked to death. Is it weirder to die from a shark
attack or an autopsy? Will they even know they killed me? The fear chokes
me as I anticipate the next ax strike across my neck or skull or some other
vulnerable part of me, delivering the final blow.
Instead the next blow lands on the bone in my left ankle. It’s agonizing
enough that my body spasms. This sparks a change in the room, like they
see me as a person again. Not some inanimate object. They realize I’m
alive. Someone calls for a helicopter to take me to a hospital.
I later learned it wasn’t an autopsy. They knew I was alive. I’d lost so
much blood that the doctors believed if they didn’t get intravenous blood
into me immediately, I would die. In severe trauma cases where it’s
impossible to find a vein, because blood pressure is so low, it’s standard ER
procedure to slice into the arms or ankles. That’s why I have one-inch scars
on my arms and legs. (They’re positively delicate compared with the scars
on my stomach from the jaw marks.) There wasn’t time to give me
anesthetic or explain. I don’t think the doctors expected me to live. By the
time they loaded me up into the helicopter, I don’t think anyone did. And
later, after hours of surgery, the doctors at the hospital tell my parents I’m
unlikely to make it. They started to plan my funeral.
Days later I wake up from a coma in an intensive care unit. I can hear a
nurse calling my mother as I slowly take in my surroundings.
My mother leans over me, looks into my eyes, and says, “Aren’t you
lucky the doctors saved you?”
I can’t talk because I’m on life support and a ventilator is helping me
breathe. So I gesture for a pen and paper. I make eye contact with her to be
sure she’s watching, and write slowly and deliberately, drawing a thick
black line under each word for emphasis:
I SAVED MYSELF
I’m not sure I can name all the ways this experience changed me, but I
think at the very least it probably made me bolder. Any time I glimpse a
possible adventure and have to decide, do I go for this? I do.

I forced myself back in the water, same beach, same time of day, one
year later. I didn’t want to give up swimming in the ocean for the rest of my
life. I liked it too much. Which is to say, I bounced back.
I spent my teenage years having a good time, singing in bands, hanging
out with other kids who liked music, but there was always a sense of, why
did this happen to me? If I survived against the odds, surely there had to be
a reason? Every time someone told me I was lucky to survive, I thought,
Shouldn’t I be doing something with this life? Devoting myself to changing
the world in some way? How do you do that?
In law school, the stuff I was drawn to was human rights and
international environmental treaties, thinking maybe this was the way to
make a difference? In New Zealand, it’s easy to feel like you’re on the edge
of the world. A time zone ahead of everyone else but somehow always
behind. Everything is shaped by other countries. It’s easy to feel adrift in a
sea that others make. After becoming an attorney, I ended up in the foreign
service because it seemed like a way to change the world, and I wanted an
adventure. I ended up at the UN because I genuinely believed it was the seat
of global power. The place you go when you want to change the world.
Which is to say I was young, a New Zealander, and very naive.
My issues at the UN? A lot of protecting. Protecting biodiversity,
protecting oceans, protecting whales, protecting endangered species.
Climate change.
At first, I loved every minute of it, digging into the kinds of big, global
problems that cross borders, stuff you can only make a dent in with
international cooperation. But after years of endless negotiations and
discussion that didn’t seem to result in much change in the world, I found
myself in the bowels of the United Nations’ New York headquarters, a
charmless warren of cramped meeting rooms with cheap furniture and dated
décor, enduring another grueling late-night session on conserving ocean
life. We were drafting the annual report on the “law of the sea,” dozens of
lawyers sitting in a circle, and the delegates were literally arguing over
punctuation. I know it’s a cliché, but it’s a cliché for a reason. Norwegian,
Russian, and Chinese lawyers tussled over whether to insert a semicolon or

a comma after some word in a paragraph deep in a document no one would
ever read.
I’d struck up an unlikely friendship with the aging Argentinian diplomat
I was seated next to. During a pause in the proceedings, he leaned over and
casually asked, “Do you know what the single most impactful thing to
actually protect the oceans over the last decade is?”
“That’s a hard one. You mean a United Nations meeting?” I guessed.
He laughed.
“No. Nemo.”
Thinking “Nemo” might be a Spanish word that I was unfamiliar with, I
laughed too, playing along, not exactly comprehending.
“The fish,” he added. “That little fishy they have to find.”
“Ah.” I finally got it. “Finding Nemo.”
I had to concede that he was right. The system was broken. I was
wasting my twenties toiling long hours with a collection of bureaucrats in
their fifties in the twilights of their careers, arguing about punctuation but
telling ourselves we were saving the environment. When you realize a
cartoon fish can achieve more than the United Nations, it’s time to go.
I moved to a job at the New Zealand embassy in Washington, DC,
