hoping I could get closer to where important decisions about the world were
actually made. DC seemed like the center of the world. The funniest thing
about that job was the number of times state officials would comment,
“Wow, your English is really good.” I never had the heart to admit that it’s
my mother tongue. I’d just take the compliment.
The embassy was a tiny operation—just eight diplomats—and I was
responsible for anything Congress or any US government agency might do
that would affect New Zealand, except military or intelligence stuff. I
quickly discovered that the American politicians and officials regarded New
Zealand as a harmless place they might like to visit on vacation but not
relevant to world affairs in any way. That’s how everyone saw us. In 2008,
after Zimbabwe’s president Robert Mugabe refused to leave office
following an electoral defeat, the State Department called in diplomats from
many countries to its headquarters in Foggy Bottom to coordinate a
response. On my way into the meeting, I read my instructions out loud to

my South African counterpart; this was a cable I’d gotten from my bosses
telling me that New Zealand should take a leadership position in opposing
Mugabe. She laughed so hard she could barely catch her breath. “Oooh! I’m
sure after decades of despotic rule Mugabe will be quaking in his boots!
New Zealand’s taking a leadership position in opposing Mugabe!”
Then in early 2009, I was overcome by what I can only describe as a
Facebook epiphany. It started small enough. Facebook was a lifeline for me,
a way to connect to the things that were important to me. Washington, DC,
still felt foreign, and I was a bit lost in it. Logging on to Facebook was like
going to a new but familiar place where my friends, my family, and scraps
of my old life continued. Facebook had been around since 2004, and by this
point in 2009, around four hundred million people were using it globally. It
was still a pretty scrappy outfit, and still seen by lots of people as a place
for college kids to waste time—that’s what made this crazy. I urged my
sisters, my brother, my friends who weren’t on Facebook to join. I spent an
increasing amount of time on Facebook, and followed friends’ new babies,
new relationships, and old photos back home in Christchurch. I noticed
politicians showing up. I remember looking at a New Zealand politician’s
vacation photos, seeing him on holiday, pictures of him and his kids, and
how new that seemed. Then I saw my actual real-life friend Chris Hipkins,
who’d just been elected to Parliament, responding to voters directly on his
Facebook profile.
By mid-2009, while working my embassy job, my fascination with
Facebook evolved into an unshakable belief that Facebook was going to
change the world. But whenever I tried to explain why I believed this, I
failed. Worse, I just sounded utterly insane.
This site was opening up the world. It seemed obvious that politics was
going to happen on Facebook, and when it did, when it migrated to this
enormous new gathering place, Facebook and the people who ran it would
be at the center of everything. They’d be setting the rules for this global
conversation. I was in awe of its ineffable potential.
The vastness of the information Facebook would be collecting was
unprecedented. Data about everything. Data that was previously entirely

private. Data on the citizens of every country. A historic amount of data and
so incredibly valuable. Information is power.
At some point, governments would want to control it. I’d seen at the UN
how things that cross borders, that are valuable and touch many countries,
raise questions like, Who gets the fish in the sea? I’d seen this with
technology especially. When genetically modified organisms became
widespread, the UN wanted to set global rules for this new scary tech. For
years I worked on treaties that tried to figure out the rules, who got the
benefits, how to manage the risk, and who would pay if something went
wrong.
Facebook was going to be a way bigger thing, especially in politicians’
lives—and their constituents’ lives—than genetically altered crops. I can
only imagine the scale of the global battle to set boundaries that was sure to
come.
After years of looking for things that would change the world, I thought
I’d found the biggest one going. Like an evangelist, I saw Facebook’s
power confirmed in every part of everyday life. Whatever Facebook
decided to do—what it did with the voices that were gathering there—
would change the course of human events. I was sure of it.
This is a revolution.
What do you do when you see a revolution is coming? I decide I will
stop at nothing to be part of it. At the center of the action. Once you see it,
you can’t sit on the sidelines. I’m desperate to be part of it. I can’t
remember ever wanting anything more.
There’s one problem. No one at Facebook seems to think this way. As
best as I could tell, Facebook sees itself as a way for people to waste time
on the internet. Facebook does not seem to think of itself as an explosive
force that’s about to tear apart and remake politics all over the world. It
doesn’t even seem to have people working on politics, or policy, or relations
with governments outside the US, or any of the things that consume me. It
doesn’t seem to know that the revolution is coming and that Facebook is it.
So how do I convince them of that? I’ve never been to Silicon Valley.
I’ve never previously identified a revolution or a new form of politics, and I
am what can only be described as a random New Zealander. So … how do I

get to people inside Facebook and persuade them to take my advice? How
do I convince them to give me a job?
That’s the task I set out on.

2
Pitching the Revolution
Pitching a job at Facebook would not have been possible without Facebook.
I see this as yet another confirmation of its importance. I’ve also never
pitched a job before and I have no idea how to do it, especially a job that
doesn’t exist.
The first roadblock is that Facebook the company prides itself on being
difficult to reach. It has hundreds of millions of users and ensures that not a
single one of them can reach its tiny staff with random emails or phone
calls. So in my spare time I start to internet-stalk all possible connections:
contact numbers listed on the site and any email for any staff member
vaguely connected to the issues I’m consumed by.
Initially there really isn’t anyone to pitch to. The only political staff they
have are teaching Congress how to use Facebook, which isn’t the revolution
I’m looking for. Then I learn that Facebook has hired Marne Levine as vice
president of global public policy in the summer of 2010. I don’t know who
she is but I know her hire means that Facebook is starting to think seriously
