about politics for the first time. I’m thrilled.
The problem is that it’s impossible to figure out how to reach her.
There’s no contact information on the website, of course. So I spend hours
tracking down Marne’s home phone number and address, and consider
cold-calling her to pitch. Fortunately, in this round of the battle between
desire and reality, the few remaining shreds of common sense, the last
vestiges of social norms, and that final gatekeeper, shame, stop me from
phoning her.

I’ve learned enough about America in my time here that it’s clear to me
that it operates on a “who you know” basis. Armed with that knowledge, I
look for someone connected to Marne who’s also connected to me. I scour
every single person on her Facebook friends list, which mercifully is public.
(I can’t believe Facebook provides a detailed list of everyone’s social
connections—to anyone.) We have one friend in common. That’s it. One
shot.
That mutual friend—Ed Luce—is remarkably good humored about
introducing me to Marne. They both worked for Larry Summers at the
Treasury Department. He offers to put me in touch with another ex-
Treasury colleague, Sheryl Sandberg—the number two at Facebook—but
after hours of research I’m sure Marne’s the right person.
My conversation with Ed happens at his home in DC. I can tell he’s
bemused by the idea of recommending someone for a job that doesn’t exist.
Over a cold beer, he quizzes me on why I’m fixated on working for the
company, what I know of its leadership, and why I’m convinced that
Facebook is going to change the world. In retrospect, I can see he was also
gently probing me to understand whether I knew what I was getting myself
into. I plainly didn’t.
Ed sends an embarrassingly generous email to Marne in which he
suggests that I have something very valuable to offer Facebook and
concludes, “You’ll be amused to know that she worked out I knew you after
perusing your friends on Facebook!”
When I don’t hear back from Marne immediately, I draft a manifesto of
sorts outlining how Facebook should be engaging politically around the
world. My boyfriend convinces me not to send it, certain that the only thing
it will convince Marne of is that I’m a crazy person.
Months pass following Ed’s email to Marne, and my evangelical belief
that I have to work on geopolitical issues at Facebook only hardens and
intensifies. This manifests in diligent follow-ups that are diligently ignored.
Finally, as 2010 is about to draw to a close, I’m standing outside a Loft
clothing shop on Connecticut Avenue just before New Year’s Eve. Marne
has finally agreed to hear my pitch, but I’m fairly certain from the holiday

timing months after my original email that it’s a polite favor to Ed rather
than an indication of any interest in what I’m pitching.
The tiny Facebook office is perched on the fourth floor of a building
that looks more like a house than the office of an actual company. I live
about three blocks away, so I arrive far too early. The biting cold winter
wind forces me to duck inside Loft and peruse the vast array of pantsuits—
the political costume of women seeking power—that the store has curated
for its DC clientele. Ten minutes before our scheduled meeting, I punch the
access code into the elevator and seconds later I’m dislodged into a
cramped office space.
The difference between the elegant embassies that I’m used to and this
office is stark. It’s unlike any office space I’ve ever seen. There are cords,
monitors, food, swag, and toy Nerf guns littering the tiny open-plan space.
A friendly brunette with a Texas accent introduces herself as Marne’s
assistant Meredith and guides me to some couches jammed up against an
internal column. We’re meeting a few days before the New Year, so the
office isn’t busy, but there are some guys scattered around the place who
work at their desks with large headphones on.
My mind swings between “this is simply an insane thing to do” and
“Facebook needs this—they need it so much” every few seconds. I feel
nervous.
When I first had my revelation about Facebook, it seemed so obvious to
me that I’d assumed I’d have to beat out a line of bright, connected
Americans making their way to the company to be part of the same
revolution. Instead I’m having to pitch the revolution to Facebook.
Meeting Marne, I’m struck by her eyes; they’re hazel, intense. Her
blond hair is cut into a sharp bob. I spent so much time devouring
everything about her on the internet that it’s somehow a surprise to actually
be sitting in front of her.
I manage to get out the start of my opening line, “Facebook needs a
diplomat…,” before Marne interrupts me with her first question.
“What do you mean by ‘diplomat’?”
Followed quickly by her second, “Why would Facebook need someone
like that?” And then, “How would you rank that need against the other

needs Facebook has at this time?”
Within minutes I’m terrified of her. We haven’t even made it past
dissecting my opening four words. Marne is someone who really knows
how to ask questions and does it relentlessly. I flounder. She stares into me
with those hazel eyes, never seeming to blink. We actually cover a lot of my
pitch but on her terms. She picks it apart, clinically.
“When I was at the United Nations, countries came together to figure
out how to agree rules on the global movement of genetically modified
organisms,” I say. “This was a new technology that was scary and
challenging at the time. The same thing is going to happen as governments
figure out rules on data and content and all the other things Facebook is
built on. A rulebook is going to be written. Facebook needs to decide where
it stands on all these things. It needs to help write it.”
“Why?” She’s like a human metal detector scanning my words for
something of value.
“Because Facebook is this global political force that is going to change
the internet and the world, and these things matter.”
“Matter to who?”
She is not buying this.
“To the people who’ll decide on rules that might stop Facebook from
growing.”
This gets her attention. I realize that’s the sweet spot. I’m focused on
Facebook the global political force; she’s focused on Facebook the global
business force. The main thing that’s interesting to Marne about other
countries is whether they’ll help Facebook prosper or try to stop it. I’d
believed all the stuff Mark Zuckerberg had said about Facebook not being
created to be a company, that it was built to accomplish a social mission to
“make the world more open and connected.” I hadn’t grasped that Marne
