would see it differently.
As I lay out my case that it’s important for the world that Facebook
engage politically, how, like a diplomat serves a country, I saw the need to
protect, promote, and defend Facebook, I sense how innocent and
unnecessary this sounds to her. Especially coming from a young New
Zealander with United Nations all over her résumé, which sits limply

between us. Facebook has not yet experienced any real regulatory
consequences or engaged with governments from outside the US. And it’s
doing fine. With so much to do in the US to establish the company, why
worry about something that hasn’t impacted the company at all?
I speak faster and faster, knowing that at any moment she’s going to end
our meeting and render her verdict, and I’ll find myself ejected back out on
the street. This speed, my New Zealand accent, and nerves combine into
something that may not be entirely comprehensible. I’m not surprised when
she cuts me off.
“Look,” she says. “This has been fascinating. I’ve learned a lot and you
have some really interesting ideas but”—and here she pauses, takes a deep
breath, and her tone changes from brisk politeness to that of a person who’s
had to sit through a timeshare presentation on a property they were never
going to buy—“this team is underwater right now on every type of issue
you can imagine. I’ve only been here a few months and I’ve had Mark in
DC with the Senate Republican High-Tech Taskforce and others on the Hill,
I’ve had our new chief security officer Joe Sullivan making the rounds on
the Hill. I’ve got letters from Franken, Bennet, Rockefeller, and Schumer
and questions from Markey and Barton. The team is working around the
clock and I need a lot of things right now, but let me tell you, a New
Zealand Facebook diplomat is not one of them.”
It’s clear from the exasperated way she says “Facebook diplomat” that I
need to drop that description of the role immediately, and I try to interrupt
to say so, but she continues: “We’re a tiny team right now—just a handful
of people. And I need every single one of them focused on the Hill, focused
on what’s happening here. You’re right that we need more people, and
hopefully we’re going to do that over time, but what I need are people who
are expert in the US regulatory process, who know the FTC or the Hill or
any of the bodies that can actually regulate us. We are an American
company, we are regulated by Americans. I know you know this. What
you’re saying is fascinating but it’s just not our focus. Thank you for your
time. It was great. Have you got plans for New Year’s Eve? Let’s stay in
touch.”

Before I know what’s happening, I’m back out in the biting cold wind
on Connecticut Avenue. I stand on the sidewalk purposefully trying not to
feel the wave of crushing defeat that I can sense is about to roll over me.
But it doesn’t come. As I start to walk the few blocks to my apartment, past
groups of people heading out for an early lunch, I feel strangely at peace.
Like, I lost. But I learned some new things there was no way of knowing
from the outside. I confirmed that no one is thinking about this stuff inside
Facebook. They’re not thinking about any of the issues they’re going to be
facing around the world. And I learned that the way to get them to think
about it is to make it all about growing their business. That’s the kind of
pitch they might respond to.
The brutal rejection only makes me more certain of the need to double
down and convince them to create this job.
So I’m surprised and thrilled when Marne randomly calls weeks later
and throws me a lifeline—by asking me more questions.
“Look—some of the things you suggested might happen in the Middle
East are actually starting to happen and people are bringing up Facebook
and we’re wondering whether we should say something. We’re seeing calls
for Mark to take some credit and we’re trying to figure out if he should.”
“So you’re asking whether I think Mark should take credit for the Arab
Spring?”
At that point in January 2011, uprisings and street protests organized on
Facebook had started in Tunisia and spread to Libya, Yemen, Syria, and
Egypt. When we’d met a month before, I’d mentioned how people were
using Facebook to organize in authoritarian states in the Middle East. I’d
told her this would eventually lead to conflict with governments that would
try to shut down communication, and put Facebook in a challenging
position.
“Yes, well, it’s just something that has come up; the media are quite
interested.”
“Well, I guess we need to talk about China.”
There’s an awkward silence, then a brisk, barely polite, clearly insincere
offer to talk about China at a later date, and she tries to end the call,

reminding me that all she needed to know is whether Mark should take
credit for the Arab Spring.
“Yes,” I say. “How you answer this question about the Arab Spring
depends on what your strategy is for China. If you take credit for the Arab
Spring, if you take credit for a people’s revolution, China will be less likely
to allow Facebook back into China.”
“I think we’re just looking at this from the media interest here in the
US.”
I seize the moment to push again for her to create a role looking at
global strategy, across all the regions, that assesses geopolitical risk so
Facebook doesn’t make these types of decisions in isolation. She quickly
dismisses the idea but, almost as an afterthought, throws me a bone by
saying they’ve opened a communications role in Australia that will do some
policy work, as Facebook’s under a lot of political pressure there because
“somehow the worst of the internet ends up on Facebook Australia.” I tell
her I’m not surprised.
She makes it clear that this is very different from what I’m pitching.
Also, unpromisingly: “We already know who we want for the role and it’s
an Australian and I think we’ll manage to hire them, but if you like, I’m
happy to throw your résumé into the mix. Just as long as we understand
each other so you’re not disappointed. I wouldn’t want you to get your
hopes up.”
Of course, my hopes are sky high. I hear nothing. Nothing happens. It’s
devastating.
In February, to try to break me out of the Facebook funk I have fallen
into, my boyfriend, Tom, suggests that I accompany him on a work trip he’s
taking to Atlanta. I’ve been seeing Tom for less than a year. To this day, he
says we met at a bar. I say we met at a party. What struck me when we met
at a party held in a bar was that he was this person who seemed to be
thinking the exact same thing that I was thinking. And saying the exact
thing I wanted to say. Only somehow he would do it in a witty, charming
