way that I never mastered. By now, he has a key to my apartment and pretty
much never goes home to his. He’s a Brit, dark hair, green eyes, a reporter
for the Financial Times.

We’re sprinting through the Atlanta airport to try to make our flight
back when my phone rings. It’s a New Zealand number but not one I
recognize. I answer the call while running, surprised to hear my sister’s
voice.
“I think I’m going to die.”
“Wait, what? I’m in Atlanta!” I stop running and Tom slows down ahead
of me and mimes his confusion, not wanting to shout at me across the
concourse.
“I can’t get through to Mum or Dad or anyone, I’ve borrowed a
phone…”
“What are you talking about?”
“Just tell everyone I love them,” she says. “I don’t think we’re going to
get out and…” The call drops.
Tom hustles me to the gate—we barely manage to board the flight
before it closes. I make my way to my seat and try to call my sister back.
Nothing—I don’t even recognize the busy tone at the other end of the line.
“What was that all about?” Tom asks.
“It was Ruthie.”
Tom looks at me expectantly.
“Um, she actually said she thought she was going to die and she
couldn’t reach Mum and something about not being able to get out … and it
wasn’t her number and the whole thing was really strange.”
It takes less than two hours to fly between Atlanta and Washington, DC,
but it feels interminable. Ruthie’s voice keeps running through my head. I
can feel waves of panic rising through my body. Why hadn’t I called our
parents? Why did I just get on the flight?
As we descend into Dulles International Airport, notifications start
hitting my phone and I see texts and messages from friends and family.
“Has anyone been able to get through to Ruthie?” “Can’t get hold of Ruth.”
“Is your family ok?”
Tom’s googling.
“There’s been an earthquake in Christchurch. It looks bad, Sarah, like
6.3 or 6.5 or higher. I keep seeing different numbers.”

My hometown. Where Ruthie and my parents still live. Again, I try the
number she rang me on. Nothing. I try her mobile. Straight to voicemail. I
try both of my parents. I can’t get through.
Tom leads me off the plane.
The initial reports out of Christchurch are hard to believe. Familiar
buildings have collapsed, some with people trapped inside. It’s clear there
are fatalities but it’s difficult to grasp the scale. Phone lines are down or
overloaded. My sister’s a TV reporter for TVNZ in Christchurch, but her
station and nearly all the other news outlets in Christchurch have been
damaged. So Facebook seems to be the best place for getting information—
people are sharing reports, photos, personal updates, videos. I go through all
of my sister’s friends and focus on her colleagues and closest friends to see
if anyone has any updates. All I find are people checking to see if she is
okay, with no response. Eventually I manage to get through to my parents.
They’re unharmed but neither of them has heard from my sister.
After midnight I instruct Tom to go to sleep and I settle in on the couch,
obsessively checking Facebook and New Zealand news sites. Facebook
plugs me into the disaster in a way that was previously impossible.
Finally, as dawn breaks in Washington, DC, a message pops up, on
Facebook of course: “Love you, lost everything  … nearly died in that
building … am so scared and have no idea where i will sleep tonight. I am
tired … and living by the minute, but thankful I have a job to do. Escaping
from that building was terrifying … cant explain it to you … There was
dust and stuff falling everywhere  … huge cracks. I am so lucky to be
alive … and that sounds like such a small cliche … but I am … One of the
workers just told me of pulling a man out without his head … and I have
seen body after body … there is a morgue beside our live truck. Its scary
here … as I write an aftershock is shaking the truck. Better go … I love and
miss you.”
I watch the aftermath of the earthquake play out on Facebook. People
use the platform to let friends and family know they are safe, share
information on road closures, coordinate sharing supplies, post warnings
about drinking water, offer tips for managing liquefaction—a new concept
to me that is basically the ground melting—offer up spare rooms, and

support those who had experienced the unthinkable. The community whose
physical infrastructure was damaged found a new infrastructure online.
Facebook was operating at every level, friend to friend, neighborhood to
neighborhood. It was a way for the government to get messages to citizens
and for communities to come together. But it all happened organically.
This is it. Seeing all this in action gives me a whole new sense of
Facebook and what it can do. The meeting place Facebook had created
online could be used as a practical political tool in the most old-fashioned
sense. A digital political tool. New Zealanders had come together on the
platform to figure out what had to happen next, to distribute resources and
information, and to connect people to what they needed. This is new and so
important.
As I scroll from page to page on Facebook, I know I have to tell Marne.
I want to share this understanding, so I put together a script for the call. I
want to show her how powerful Facebook is. How Facebook could work
with governments after disasters to communicate essential information.
How the connection Facebook provides feels like a lifeline after a disaster.
And more than I care to admit, having Ruthie vanish from sight, I’m
also reminded how short life is, how you don’t want to die with regret. Even
though I’m sure Marne doesn’t want to hear from me again and has no
intention of hiring me at Facebook, what’s the worst that can happen? She
can continue to ignore me and I’ll be in the same position I am now.
Getting no response on email, I decide just to call her on her mobile
without trying to set up an appointment. She’s definitely surprised and not
in a good way when she hears my voice. Her irritation is softened by
politeness and curiosity when I explain that the reason I’m calling is the
Christchurch earthquake.
I know I have to pitch quickly. But where I’d previously struggled to
articulate the power I saw in Facebook, now it flows, raw and personal.
Almost too personal. I burn with embarrassment when my voice cracks as I
describe how I searched for my sister. I explain how terrified I was for my
family and the lifeline Facebook provided.
By the end of that call, I think she can finally see Facebook through my
