eyes. How it’s going to change the world.

When I confess to Tom that I called Marne again to pitch working at
Facebook, I’m ashamed. He’s mortified. He’d argued strongly against it and
he’s convinced I’ve humiliated myself. Tom’s British, and thus especially
attuned to—and appalled by—any interpersonal awkwardness.
I don’t hear back from Marne. Tom sits me down and tells me it’s time
to give up on Facebook and move on. I turn to my best friend for solace,
and to complain about Tom, only to learn that she agrees with him and his
aversion. She gently reminds me that after more than a year of trying to get
my dream job, it still doesn’t exist.
One week after the earthquake, I get an email from a recruiter about the
position in Australia. It’s a communications job I have no interest in, not a
policy position, but I go for it, hoping to use the interviews to talk them into
the job I think they should create for me. Getting each person I interview
with to see the problem, the potential, and the solution: me. In each
interview, I pitch that global policy job with a fervor Facebook employees
seem to find surprising. Long story short, many interviews and three
months later, Marne calls out of the blue.
“I’d like to offer you the job.”
“Which one?”
“Well, which one do you want? The one you interviewed for or the one
you pitched?” There’s more than a hint of recrimination in her voice.
“The one I pitched,” I respond without hesitation.
“I’m not sure that’s how this should work, but the job’s yours.”
I can’t believe I have the opportunity to work on the greatest political
tool of my lifetime. I can’t believe my luck that I’m going to be part of
Facebook and the positive changes it’s sure to bring. The biggest adventure
I can imagine is about to begin and there’s nothing on earth I’d rather be
doing.
My title will be Manager of Global Public Policy.
“But you know,” Marne adds, “I’m still not even sure this is a job.”
I’m stunned and just sit on the other end of the phone in silence.
“I mean, it’s great, you’re great, and I’m sure you’re going to find ways
to add value. I’m just not sure that there’s enough work to do on this stuff, I

mean the stuff you’re interested in, to make it a real job, but we’ll figure it
out.”
I had no idea what I was getting myself into.

3
This Is Going to Be Fun
My first day at Facebook: July 5, 2011. The Washington, DC, Facebook
office has moved downtown since my last interview and I’m incredibly
nervous as I walk into the utilitarian reception area the next week. Like
Facebook’s offices in California, the DC office pipes and air ducts are
exposed; it’s all raw concrete and garish paint. Fake graffiti on the walls. If
this seemed odd in Silicon Valley, it’s ridiculous in this DC office building,
which is so fancy that all the offices have glass windows facing a huge
atrium, so you can see into the plush surrounds of lobbying and law firms.
Marne’s assistant Meredith McCollum—who handled logistics for my
many interviews—is there to collect me, and I’m relieved to see a familiar
face. After a quick tour, she shows me to a barren white desk in a room full
of desks. I’ve arrived early and the office is empty aside from the two of us.
“Okay—if you want to give me your laptop, I can get you set up before
everyone else gets in.”
“My laptop?” I stare at Meredith, confused.
“Ah, yeah. They gave you a laptop at orientation in California, didn’t
they?”
It slowly dawns on me that I’ve made a terrible mistake.
“Yes, they did,” I respond as neutrally as possible. “It’s just that I
thought that was like a home laptop.”
“What’s a home laptop?” Meredith looks baffled.
“Um, you know, a laptop to use, ah, um … at home.” I stumble across
words, trying to explain.

“Why would we give you a laptop for your house?”
“I don’t know. I guess I was expecting there to be a computer here at my
desk. I mean at a technology company…”
“Well there would be, if you had brought your laptop in.”
I incoherently try to explain to her that at my previous job—for the New
Zealand embassy—any work on a laptop happened on our personal laptops
at home. In fact, the embassy was so slow to adopt technology that staff
didn’t even have access to the internet at work, other than one “internet
computer” we all shared. Security concerns, we were told. Incompetence,
we suspected.
During the crazy, cultish Facebook orientation program, everyone kept
talking about how generous Facebook was as an employer, so I just guessed
the laptop was for home use. I was wrong. Meredith tells me I should run
back to get it.
“Marne’s going to be here before too long and she will definitely be
expecting to see you and your computer.”
I jog in unseemly haste and heels past the reception area I’d entered so
recently, and back out to the street and the Metro. As I near home, I bump
into a friend who’s setting off to work.
“First day didn’t go well then?” he says with a smile.
When I return to the Facebook office, Marne’s already at her desk. She
welcomes me and (re)introduces me to Meredith, who winks at me the
moment Marne goes to speak to other members of the team. It’s clear that
Marne has no idea I’d been in the office an hour earlier. As soon as we’re
out of earshot, I beg Meredith, “Please don’t tell anyone I came to work
without a computer.”
“This is going to be fun,” she replies, before turning to follow Marne.
I know what I want this job to be. It’s clear that in these next few years,
Facebook and governments all over the world are going to be figuring out
the rules of the road for these giant, globe-spanning internet companies.

What they set in place will determine how social media is used for decades
to come. It will affect elections, privacy, free speech, taxes, and so much
else. I want to be part of that. The debating, the shaping, the deciding. I
imagine the kinds of arguments we used to have at the UN. We’ll be sitting
down with governments to puzzle out what’s best, the trade-offs, the
competing interests, sharing the spoils, all of it. We need to get this right,
for the hundreds of millions who are sure to be using these platforms every
day, for years to come.
So. Where to begin? I sit down at my new desk and realize I have
