absolutely no idea what I should do next.
I begin writing a memo to my bosses, suggesting that we create a
“global council”—fifteen to twenty experts around the world who can
advise us on the political and strategic issues in their countries, as needed. I
check with a friend at Goldman Sachs who confirms that they have
something like this. Other international companies do too. This idea is
rejected within days. “We make the decisions,” I’m told. The bosses don’t
want a bunch of outsiders all up in our business that way.
That first day I also get an assignment. Marne tells me I’m going to be
in charge of one of the first visits by a foreign head of state to Facebook at
our headquarters in California. Coincidentally, it’s the prime minister of
New Zealand, John Key. The perfect collision of my old and new worlds!
Facebook hasn’t done many of these visits, and building relationships with
heads of state had been part of my pitch when I proposed this job to Marne.
Building relationships before Facebook needs them.
I ask if Mark Zuckerberg will host the prime minister. In my old job at
the embassy, we’d just assume that was how it would go. Our top person
would meet their top person. The prime minister is seeing President Obama
on this visit, so it doesn’t seem like a strange question to me.
People don’t openly laugh, but they come close. It’s made very clear to
me that Mark has no interest in policy or politics—that’s Sheryl’s world—
and specifically no interest in meeting the prime minister of New Zealand.
His focus is engineering, and his disregard for politics is a point of pride.
This seems odd to me, given that he’s created one of the world’s all-
time greatest political tools. How can he not be interested in politics? I’m

also disappointed because the implications are obvious. I had hoped he just
hadn’t got around to it. But if the CEO genuinely isn’t interested in policy
or politics, it’s going to be hard to make much of the job I dreamed up,
which is about Facebook policy and politics.
It’s gently suggested to me that Mark’s such a political naif that it isn’t
in the company’s interest to put him forward to meet heads of state.
Yet I know that all John Key cares about is getting a photo with Mark
Zuckerberg. I inform the New Zealand team that this won’t be possible, but
that I’m hoping to find someone senior for the prime minister to meet. The
prime minister has briefed the New Zealand press that he’s meeting “top
brass” at Facebook and I’m desperate to ensure that isn’t me. I’ve heard
through other New Zealanders at Facebook that Sheryl has plans to visit
New Zealand on vacation at the end of the year. Desperate for any hook to
get an executive to take the meeting, I use that as the basis of the pitch to
have her meet the prime minister. She tentatively agrees but it’s made clear
that Elliot Schrage should be presented as the host, as she is a very busy
person. I should simply mention that it’s possible Sheryl will “drop by.”
Elliot is Marne’s boss. He reports to Sheryl, who, of course, reports to
Mark. He’s one of the people I talk to almost every day. I’d describe him as
a bearlike intellectual. Charismatic. Fatherly. Tall. Ferociously clever.
Messy hair and rumpled outfits and glasses. Elliot ran communications and
public affairs at Google in its early days, before he came over to Facebook
to do the same. A family man, married with three kids. I like him. He’s got a
warmth and affable charm. But there’s a steely side to him too. When
people fuck up, he’s quick to drill down and take them apart, point by point.
He seems to be taking measure of everyone, all the time, and he’s good at it.
You want him to like you.
The New Zealanders aren’t thrilled with the idea of meeting Elliot—
rather than Mark or Sheryl—but as I learned during my time in the New
Zealand Foreign Service, we take what we can get. So the meeting is
scheduled.
The next challenge is figuring out what actually happens next. There
isn’t a set of talking points for what Facebook wants to say to foreign
governments or a strategy. There’s nothing.

So I prepare a briefing for Sheryl and a handful of senior executives
about the prime minister’s visit, laying out some regulatory and policy
issues I think it’ll be helpful for them to discuss with him. Hoping this will
trigger interest in a broader strategy.
The only problem I run into during this prep is the number of random
Facebook employees from New Zealand who simply assume they’ll be
participating in the prime minister’s visit in some way. Following the
protocol I learned at the embassy, I dissuade them. Heads of state shouldn’t
meet with a haphazard group of people from various departments for no
reason.
Then I receive a call from Marne, who tells me that all of these people
are “friends of Sheryl” and I should be as accommodating as possible.
Right, I think. It’s the private sector. Government protocols don’t mean
anything. Sheryl’s friends do.
I let Sheryl and other senior executives know that they should manage
their expectations about formality, because New Zealanders are very
informal. I share the example of what happened when New Zealand’s
former prime minister Helen Clark visited the United Nations. The State
Department officer who wanted to know how many cars would be in her
motorcade couldn’t believe it when I explained that she would probably just
take a cab or walk. Assuming I was thick, he repeated the question, kindly
giving me examples of other countries—“For example, Norway will have
two cars in their head of state delegation”—before finally accepting that
New Zealand would have zero cars in our delegation.
There’s much incredulity about this fact when I explain it to the
Facebook executives. There’s also some cynicism, especially from
Facebook’s director of global communications, Debbie Frost. Debbie
becomes one of my closest friends at Facebook; we started down that path
during my job interview when she cut me off as I was trying to explain the
work I’d done at the UN on a treaty for genetically modified organisms. She
reached over and touched my arm. “If you found those fucking seeds at the
boring United Nations interesting,” she said, “then you’re really going to
love working here, where things are actually interesting.” I loved that. And
I’d learn soon enough, this was typical. In one sentence, she simultaneously

dissed my work history, told me I’d bored her, and winked at me. An
Australian with dyed blond hair who was raised in Hong Kong and
educated in the United Kingdom, she’s one of the few foreigners in senior
roles at Facebook.
“Should we expect this prime minister to show up on foot or maybe a
bike?” Debbie asks, deadpan.
I insist that I know what I’m talking about, and given my years as a
diplomat, the executives give me the benefit of the doubt.
The following day the prime minister arrives in a full motorcade, with
multiple armored vans and many California Highway Patrol motorbikes to
