clear traffic. They speed into the entrance of Facebook’s unassuming
headquarters on University Avenue. As the prime minister, his entourage,
and a swarm of security step out of large bulletproof black vehicles into the
blinding California sunlight, Debbie turns to me and says, “Maybe the
prime minister left his bike at home today.”
The security detail is surprisingly aggressive, particularly given the
threat level attached to a New Zealand head of state. They push Facebook
employees out of the way to clear a path for the prime minister to walk.
Perhaps they’re unused to leading a head of state through a building where
women in tiny shorts on rip sticks zoom past bearded guys on motorized
beer coolers.
The New Zealand delegation is at least thirty minutes early. Perhaps
they had nothing else to do. Before we proceed to the designated meeting
room, the prime minister turns to me and asks, “You’re Ruthie’s sister,
aren’t you? I heard you just got engaged; congrats.”
“Thank you! I’m heading back to New Zealand to get married but
we’ve planned precisely nothing. Just under six months to figure everything
out.”
“Yeah, Ruth was telling me that. I actually saw her last week. She’s a
bridesmaid, isn’t she?”
While we chat, a handful of Facebook communications team executives
arrive and belatedly join our conversation. One of them gestures to the
prime minister and says, “Seems it’s true that everyone in New Zealand
knows each other or their sister. Are you two related?”

“Can I introduce the prime minister of New Zealand?” I say.
“Yeah, right,” he responds.
“No, seriously,” I say.
“Seriously,” repeats the prime minister of New Zealand. He starts to
explain how he knows my sister because she’s a TV reporter, how we all
share a hometown, and how he bonded with my sister when he was
surveying earthquake damage. She reported on it while still traumatized
from being trapped in her collapsed workplace only hours before.
The Facebook employees stand together mute and embarrassed.
While the prime minister and I are chatting, Mark Zuckerberg emerges
from one of the nearby conference rooms. I’d never seen him in person.
Until now, any interaction had been over videoconference. He’s smaller,
paler, and—at that moment—angrier than I anticipated. With his ill-fitting
T-shirt and jeans and unruly hair, he looks like the other engineers milling
around the building—though more agitated. To be fair, we’re in the middle
of a companywide lockdown—several weeks where everyone is
encouraged to stay at work day and night—triggered by the launch of
Google Plus, which is widely seen as a “Facebook killer.”
Mark quickly identifies me as the person responsible for the ever-
growing circus of security, consulate officials, prime minister’s staff, and
New Zealand Facebook employees whom I’d worked into the meet and
greet. He marches toward me, ignoring the chaos between us. Everyone’s
now watching. I feel rather than see the New Zealand prime minister
straighten himself beside me.
“Hi, Mark—did you want to meet the New Zealand prime minister?”
“No. I already said I definitely didn’t want to do that,” he says, looking
me directly in the eyes.
“Uh, well, okay … um, well, since he’s actually right here, John Key,
prime minister of New Zealand, this is Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s
CEO.”
I gesture for them to shake hands. Mark looks stricken and jumps back.
Key seizes the moment and steps forward with an outstretched hand. An
enterprising mandarin from the New Zealand delegation lifts a cumbersome
iPad, in keeping with the New Zealand embassy’s Amish technical

capabilities, and snaps a photo as the prime minister grasps Mark’s hand in
his—the only thing Key had wanted from the visit to Facebook.
Mark smiles automatically for the camera and then returns to irritation
and discomfort, which he doesn’t try to hide. He disentangles himself from
the prime minister’s grip and turns to me.
“What’s going on? Some of my engineers are getting pushed around”—
and he gestures at the large security presence that is encircling the four of
us. This is the culture of Facebook. The engineers get what they want. All
of us on “Sheryl’s side” are lesser mortals who do the things the engineers
don’t want to trouble themselves with. We’re not to bother the engineers.
I step closer to Mark and say as quietly as possible, “I know you’re
really busy, but could you please perhaps have a quick word with the prime
minister?” The begging tone in my voice is unmissable. Even to the prime
minister. Mark shoots me a look I struggle to decipher and then turns to the
prime minister, who beams as he scrolls through the photos on the iPad,
discussing with his advisers which one to post.
Mark makes what could generously be called polite conversation with
the prime minister if he weren’t so transparently annoyed. The effort is felt
by everyone. The prime minister, with his photo in hand, is affable and
happy to engage in small talk before Mark skulks back into the room
crammed with male engineers.
I whisk the prime minister and his security detail over to the meeting
room to meet Elliot. When Sheryl arrives a few minutes into the meeting,
the contrast with Mark is striking. She greets the prime minister like an old
friend. The stern professional I’d briefed the day before has transformed
into a celebrity. For all the times I’ve met Sheryl, it feels like this is the first
time I am really seeing her. She turns on the charisma and it transforms her
from a normal-looking fortysomething woman into someone genuinely
glamorous. I swear—her hair, her eyes, her makeup, her skin—suddenly
she positively glows. Sparkles. Like she’s the star of her own show,
radiating confidence and charm.
The prime minister, sensing a like-minded politician, quickly relaxes
into what feels more like a catch-up coffee than a meeting with a head of
state. Until this moment, it had never occurred to me to see Sheryl as a

celebrity or be awestruck by her. I didn’t really know who she was before I
started researching Facebook. But now I can see how she’s sprinkling some
of her stardust, whatever that magical quality is that she has that makes you
forget to focus on the substance of the meeting at hand and instead wonder
what it is she’s doing differently that makes her better than you. As I look
around, I see all of us are agog, in a way that we weren’t with Mark or
Elliot.
The prime minister’s office had released a statement suggesting that
cooperation on technology and innovation issues would be discussed, but
it’s more of a friendly chat with IT help thrown in. Sheryl spends most of
her time advising the prime minister on how to use his Facebook page,
