trying to assuage his irritation about the five-thousand-person friend limit,
and addressing his desire to continue using his Facebook profile rather than
his Facebook page to communicate. From there I expect the conversation to
turn to regulation, potential cooperation, privacy, security, or any of the
other issues I had diligently included in the briefing I prepared for the
meeting. Instead talk turns to my upcoming wedding and Sheryl’s plans to
vacation in New Zealand at the end of the year. It becomes more surreal as
the prime minister starts imploring us to find his friend Choppy in
Queenstown, who manages a scenic helicopter business, and to tell Choppy
that the prime minister sent us to “get the real tour.” Before I know it, the
visit is over and I’m waving off the ginormous motorcade, wondering what
just happened.
I’m stunned at the complete and utter lack of substance.
This is not how I pictured things working.

4
Auf Wiedersehen to All That
I’m determined to do better with the next foreign visitor the following
week, the German minister of consumer protection. Most countries like
Facebook. Germany’s an outlier. The Germans disapprove of everything
Facebook stands for.
It wasn’t very long ago that Germans lived with networks of spies and
informants in their country—the Stasi in East Germany and the Gestapo
before that. As a result, they have a fundamental suspicion of anyone who
wants to gather lots of personal information—which of course is
Facebook’s business model. Where others see a website that’s good for
wasting time, Germans see a comprehensive surveillance tool that needs
muscular oversight. This instinctive and deeply held wariness of a
technology company centralizing and processing vast amounts of personal
information raises questions that Facebook has never had to answer,
certainly not to a government. Germany, prescient because of its history,
can see around corners. It’s on the verge of passing laws and starting
investigations into Facebook—one of the first countries to do so.
Because of all this, prepping to meet with the German minister is the
first time Marne seems worried about accountability. I’m surprised by how
nervous she is, given her extensive government experience. The meeting
will be in our DC office, and I suggest starting with a tour.
The minister and delegation start frowning as soon as I showcase the
open-plan office. I assume they’re troubled by the graffiti or the mess or the
many Nerf guns and toy weapons lying around.

“Is everything okay?” I politely inquire.
“This is not very practical,” the minister says, pointing at the ceiling,
which is crowded with exposed air ducts, pipes, hanging bald light fixtures,
and rough concrete. “All this infrastructure. It is surely not up to code? You
know—a code violation?”
The rest of the German officials nod in vigorous agreement. Some
mutter “code violation” to reinforce her point.
“Umm … er … it’s meant to embody the journey of Facebook. To show
that we’re only one percent finished. I mean, I understand that before we
rented this space, it was finished like those law and lobbyist offices you can
see through the window. And then they had to strip back all that luxurious
finishing. The carpets and everything.”
“You dismantled the furnishing of a proper office to make it look like
this? Like it is under construction?” one of the officials inquired,
incredulous.
“It’s symbolic,” I start to say. This all had sounded much more
convincing in California when Sheryl explained it to the New Zealand
prime minister. I start to realize that Facebook’s office is reinforcing the
idea that Facebook is reckless and feckless and nothing good is going to
come from continuing the tour. As the members of the German delegation
stare at me in disbelief, with some audibly tutting, I make the executive
decision to get to the meeting room as quickly as possible. Better to hurry
past all the posters that say things like THINK WRONG, MOVE FAST AND BREAK
THINGS, and IS THIS A TECHNOLOGY COMPANY?
As soon as the German delegation is seated in the meeting room, we
start formal introductions. Marne explains her background, that she’s
relatively new to Facebook, having most recently worked at the White
House under Larry Summers. At the end of listing her Harvard and
government credentials, she concludes with, “And I’m Jewish.”
The room is silent.
“I mean, I don’t bring that up because of the Holocaust.”
Absolute silence. As if every living thing in the meeting room has been
frozen. I’m trapped in some terrible parody of diplomacy.

“It’s just I figured you already knew,” she continues. “We can discuss it
if you wish?”
The tension in the room is unbearable. I picture leaving and walking
back home. Leaving this whole Facebook thing behind me.
“I think we could probably turn to the substantive part of the agenda we
agreed on, now that we’ve covered introductions,” I cut in, desperately.
We settle into the discussion. Very quickly the delegation brings up
content moderation. They want Facebook to be more vigilant in pulling
down hate speech. Marne explains that Facebook’s built on the kinds of free
speech rights embodied by the First Amendment in the United States, so we
generally leave content untouched. She then segues into an example of
cultural differences between the US and Germany. She says she doesn’t
care to sunbathe topless or to share topless images, but that Germans seem
to. I don’t think I’m the only one in the room struggling to avoid the mental
image of Marne topless. And the overgeneralization that all Germans enjoy
sharing topless images isn’t helping either. The minister physically bristles.
I flash Marne a “What are you doing?” look.
It’s downhill from there. The discussion on regulation doesn’t go much
better.
After the delegation is escorted out of our offices, I’m despondent. This
was horrible at every level. We failed when it mattered. With the country we
most needed to win over. I hadn’t contemplated failing at this. For the first
time, I think this might not work.
Marne, sensing my displeasure, says to me, “Not quite the foreign
service? Regretting pitching this?”
I don’t answer. One thing you learn as a diplomat, or maybe just as an
adult: there are times to keep your thoughts and feelings to yourself.
No one’s surprised when the German government opens an
investigation into Facebook a few weeks later.

5
