The Little Red Book
This place is completely different from anywhere I’ve ever worked. And it’s
not just technology that makes it different. There’s also money.
One of the upsides of the immediately punishing workload that started
as soon as I joined Facebook is that Marne’s assistant Meredith is assigned
to help me as well. She’s the heart and soul of the DC office, and in addition
to being caring and funny, she’s incredibly stylish. One night she’s staying
late to help me and I notice that she’s wearing shoes I’ve been admiring for
weeks.
“I love those. That red sole is incredible. I’ve never seen that before.
Where’d you get them?” I ask.
Meredith comes over to my desk and places her hands on my shoulders.
I’m not expecting this kind of physical contact from our assistant, but
Facebook is more informal than my other workplaces and I kind of enjoy
the intimate gesture, hoping it’s the prelude to her divulging where I can get
these phenomenal heels.
“Sweetie, you’ll never be able to afford a pair like these,” she says,
softly but kindly.
After I google “red sole shoes” and discover Christian Louboutin, it’s
clear she’s right. I’m mortified.
I learn soon enough that I have no reference points for the obscene
wealth that flows through Facebook. What makes it so strange is that it’s
based on tenure, rather than title. So assistants and junior staff are often
worth vastly more than their bosses, based on when they were hired. Like

people who bought a house in a neighborhood that instantly gentrified. All
employees receive stock options, starting a year after they join. The
company hasn’t gone public yet—it’s 2011—so there’s no Facebook stock,
but there’s a thriving market of private investors who pay gobs of money to
buy those stock options.
At work I get distracted in meetings by women’s engagement rings that
are so large it looks like it’s hard for them to type, and diamond bracelets
that cast small rainbows on the wall and clatter against laptops. I’ve learned
my lesson and refrain from asking about all the matching handbags; turns
out they’re Louis Vuitton and cost thousands of dollars. Facebook offices
are glutted with female status symbols and I’m ashamed at how many are
completely lost on me. I’m not even at the starting line in this subtle arms
race of assets and armor.
Another sign of the wealth at Facebook? The weird things people say.
One day, Sam Lessin, a director of product, refers to himself as both “price
insensitive” and “economically insensitive.” I have to ask Marne what he
means. The answer? He has so much money that he doesn’t care what
things cost.
When Debbie refers to herself as an “economic volunteer like most of
the ex-Googlers at Facebook,” I have no idea what she’s saying. Over
coffee she explains to me that she made so much money from the Google
IPO that the salary she earns at Facebook is basically meaningless to her
overall wealth. She’s at Facebook waiting for Facebook’s IPO.
My situation is different. Money’s tight. I didn’t negotiate for anything
when I joined Facebook, feeling grateful that they would give me the job.
They simply matched my (very much nontech) salary. Most of this goes to
rent, because Tom and I have apartments in two expensive cities (he’s
recently taken a job in New York). A life where you aren’t concerned about
money is unfathomable to me, and that dividing line is a constant presence.
The other currency that flows through Facebook is stamina. Marne,
Elliot, and Sheryl ruthlessly manage their own labor, extracting as much
work out of each day as humanly possible. They expect their teams to do
the same. Effort, productivity, and the sacrifice of everything else in life are
valorized and fetishized.

Marne’s work ethic sets the rhythm of my life, and it’s unlike anything
I’ve experienced before—even in the corporate law firms I worked at.
Unlike senior diplomats who, in my experience, were often more grandees
wanting to bless the work done by the team beneath them, Marne is a true
Facebook Stakhanovite. Her ferocious work ethic and endurance are
astounding. To me it seems her emotions, instincts, and physical needs are
all sublimated into her job. A numb efficiency ruled by all-consuming self-
discipline and self-denial. After a full day’s work without break, Marne will
regularly continue at home until the small hours of the morning, rising
before 5:00 A.M. to begin work again before exercising. I rarely see her eat.
From her toned frame, I assume every calorie is ruthlessly tracked,
calculated, assessed, and efficiently eliminated. It’s left her with a body that
looks like hard work.
As her employee, I feel I have no choice but to adapt to her routine,
working with crushing intensity and sleeping only for the few hours
between 1:00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M. that she’s asleep, to ensure I’m available to
respond to her emails when she sends them. Sometimes I like to remind her
—in the small hours of the morning—that she’d declared just a few months
ago that she wasn’t sure there was enough work to make my job a job.
One day I ask her about all we’re sacrificing for our jobs—family,
hobbies, friends, anything that’s not work. She seems surprised.
“But this is it. This is what I do,” she says. “I’m not going to learn the
piano or run marathons or speak new languages. I’m not looking for
hobbies.”
“But what about friends?” I counter, instinctively knowing that the
family question is off-limits.
“My heart is full, Sarah. I have wonderful friends. But they’re in the
thick of it too. I’m not looking to make new friends. I’m good.”
Years later, after a few wines at Davos, Sheryl tells me that the
punishing scale of work is by design. A choice Facebook’s leaders had
made. That staffers should be given too much to do because it’s best if no
one has spare time. That’s where the trouble and territoriality start. The
fewer employees, the harder they work. The answer to work is more work.

To encourage this, the Facebook offices are overflowing with “perks.” I
think this part of Silicon Valley work life is something everyone’s heard
about by now. It’s parodied on TV shows. The offices are like a never-
ending kid’s birthday party. All meals are provided, endless free snacks,
game arcades. Bring your laundry to work and someone will do it for you.
They’ll pay for transport if you can’t access Facebook’s free transportation.
I feel deeply conflicted about these perks, simultaneously eye-rolly and
loving it.
But the quid pro quo is clear. This stuff isn’t free. As Mark declares in
the Little Red Book every employee is handed when they’re hired,
Our philosophy on perks is that we want to provide services that are
utilitarian and help people with things they need in order to help
