them focus on our long-term goals. Everyone needs to eat. Everyone
needs to do laundry. Everyone needs health services. Everyone
needs to get to work. If we can make these parts of our lives easier,
then it helps us focus on what we’re trying to accomplish at work
and it makes us all more productive.
Like Chairman Mao’s original, Facebook’s Little Red Book is filled
with quotes, images, and core principles from its supreme leader, although
in this case of course that’s Mark rather than Mao. Another MZ channeling
his own peculiar form of Maoist zeal. The first page reads, “Facebook was
built to accomplish a social mission—to make the world more open and
connected.”
Employees are encouraged to believe they’re changing the world, not
working for a corporation. “Changing how people communicate will always
change the world,” it declares. “We expect you to change the world.”
The truth is, of course, that Facebook is changing the world—that’s
what attracted me to the company in the first place. But it’s also a
corporation. The Little Red Book says that what we’re doing is more than
capitalism; it’s social justice. Facebook is social change, humanitarian
change. And we are a family. The Facebook Family.
Most people seem to take it seriously. Both the idea of the Facebook
Family and Facebook’s mission. Maybe because we’re mostly in our

twenties and early thirties, we’re particularly susceptible to the moral and
social messages that leadership is indoctrinating us with. Or at least I am. I
buy it. Working at Facebook isn’t a job; it’s your life. I don’t quibble. I love
the work. I feel privileged to be part of it.
And I like Marne. I like Sheryl. I like Elliot. This is so basic, but it’s
nice working with people who are so smart. And the work feels important.
Like Facebook is a force for good in the world. It’s a mission-focused
company, and I share that sense of mission. I feel so lucky to be part of
helping Facebook make the world more open and connected.
And within weeks after I arrive at the company, we do begin setting up
some first rules of the road for how social media should operate, just like
I’d hoped. It’s exciting. I work with other teams to create the first public
Community Guidelines for Facebook, detailing for users what you can and
can’t post on the site. We put out Facebook’s first transparency report,
which Marne pushed for. It’s a count of all the requests that governments
around the world make for us to take down content. We come up with
Facebook’s rules for dealing with law enforcement. What personal
information will we give law enforcement access to? Under what
circumstances?
When one of the few older women on the team tells me I’m spending
too much time at work and this is just a job, I honestly think she’s the one
who doesn’t get it.

6
What Do We Stand For?
Each day in Facebook’s policy team brings fresh chaos. A contractor in
Vietnam sends a casual email mentioning that he met with the leadership of
the Vietnamese government and made a bunch of promises that aren’t fully
explained or doable. A Facebook consultant tells a government committee
in Australia that Facebook removes twenty thousand underage users per
day, which is simply incorrect. The Mexican president is hit by a poop
emoji storm on his page and petitions us for its immediate removal. Sheryl
asks if she should support a viral campaign to arrest Joseph Kony, the
Ugandan militant responsible for abducting thousands of children for his
army. ISIS posts a beheading video on the site. A group of mothers stage a
breastfeeding sit-in to protest Facebook’s policy on nipples. A rabbi posts
that he’s having coffee and a muffin in Israel, but Facebook’s maps say he’s
in Palestine. The problems are relentless and varied. Figuring out how to
solve them feels like connecting the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle without
knowing the picture you’re trying to build, but it feels important, working
out how to do this stuff responsibly, if we’re going to be a force for good in
the world.
And Marne and I are a good team. I trust her judgment, and she listens
to me. We’re making steady progress, shaping this new future.
By early 2012, some of the men in the office start chafing at how we’re
lurching from one crisis to the next. These are guys we hired mainly to
service Congress and state governments. They’re creatures of Washington,
DC, pugnacious and opinionated. They’ve formed a little cabal, and they

want to understand what the company stands for. It’s not an unreasonable
request. This is the Obama era, a time when Mark and Sheryl are on the
covers of magazines, giving interviews with flashy headlines about how
they’re changing the world. The boys corner Marne, demanding to know
how we’re meant to change the world. They’re shocked when the answer
is … nothing really.
Marne, meanwhile, is baffled by their questions. For her and her bosses
Mark and Sheryl, it’s obvious. We run a website that connects people.
That’s what we believe in. We want more. We want it to be profitable and to
grow. What else is there to say?
There is no grand ideology here. No theory about what Facebook should
be in the world. The company is just responding to stuff as it happens.
We’re managers, not world-builders. Marne just wants to get through her
inbox, not create a new global constitution.
There is no bridging this gap in perspective. From the boys’ perspective,
they want something to believe in. Principles. Vision. Leadership. From
Marne’s point of view, there’s nothing wrong with plugging along as we do,
managing each crisis as it comes. That’s business.
Nevertheless, something has to be done to quiet the troops. And that’s
how we end up planning a summit at headquarters in California for
everyone who works on policy and political issues. To decide what we
stand for.
I’m sympathetic to what the boys are saying. From the moment we met,
Marne treated my “Facebook is a revolution,” “Facebook is a political
force” speeches as vaguely embarrassing. She politely ignored that part of
my pitch and since then has consistently communicated that this isn’t what
we do here, we’re not even sure there’s a job doing the stuff I’m interested
in, and please stop talking that way. I get that this is where she’s coming
from, but I’m also quietly confident that as Facebook grows, the company
will find itself embroiled in conflicts and controversies overseas that will
prove my point. My belief in Facebook and its historic importance
overrides any fleeting concerns about Marne’s attitude. The company will
need to develop a theory of how to be in the world. And I’ll help them

shape it. Marne, Mark, and everyone else will come around to my way of
