thinking.
And this summit is a first step toward that. I’m excited for it.
This will be the first time we’ll all be in a room together. The first time
we will talk about how we can use Facebook as a force for good in the
world. This could be the start of something important. A new beginning.
My first clue that this might not be everything I hoped for comes as the
whole policy team gathers together at Facebook’s newly minted
headquarters in Menlo Park, California. We’re still a small enough team,
around a dozen people, that we fit around one table in a regular conference
room. Instead of diving straight into the many critical issues we need to
solve, we play icebreaker games and are assigned personality quizzes. It’s
not until late in the day that we turn to the reason we all flew in: finding an
issue that Facebook can lead on. We agree that it has to be something where
we’ll be collaborating with governments around the world, to build trust.
People on the team put forward various initiatives that they’re passionate
about: promoting Facebook as a way to connect abandoned pets with new
homes, or showcasing Peace.Facebook.com, a crude dashboard that maps
Facebook friendship connections made “just yesterday” between people
across three conflict zones: Israel/Palestine, Russia/Ukraine, and
India/Pakistan.
To my surprise, support coalesces quickly around Joel Kaplan’s
suggestion of a Facebook initiative to support the military. Joel joined
Facebook around the same time I did. He’s a Harvard grad and ex-marine
who clerked after law school for Antonin Scalia and served as deputy chief
of staff for George W. Bush. But as with Marne, I suspect the real
qualification that ensured his hire was his relationship with Sheryl. The two
met at the first night of Harvard orientation, they dated, she thanked him in
her Harvard thesis, and they remained close over the years. His transition to
the tech world from his role as a political operative and lobbyist has been
bumpy. For weeks he turned up for work at Facebook in the DC uniform of
chinos and blue blazer with gold buttons before realizing this was out of

step with the guys in the office, who wore jeans, T-shirts, and hoodies. He
gradually downshifted to a series of dad jeans and blazers before relenting
to just dad jeans and a button-down shirt. He’s a man of routine. Every day
his assistant orders the same salad and every day he sits in meetings picking
the olives out of the salad. When I ask why he doesn’t just order it without
olives, he gives me a look like “You’ll never understand” and says nothing.
The team starts to map out specifics around what an initiative to support
the military would consist of, and how much it would cost.
“Errrr—this is a US-only initiative, right?” I ask tentatively.
I’m the only non-American in the DC policy team and it feels lonely. So
many of Facebook’s day-to-day policy decisions are underpinned by a
subterranean value system that I’m still learning.
“Nope—global,” Marne responds.
“Well, um—it’s just people and governments are still trying to figure
out what Facebook is about, and I don’t think we want to immediately align
with the military.”
“Wrong,” Joel responds. “Military and veteran issues are sure winners.
Here and everywhere.”
“The first political action Facebook takes globally is military? State
force? Maybe that makes sense in America, but there are countries that have
a more complex relationship with state force. Countries where there have
been military dictatorships, for example.…”
“Don’t you love our troops, Sarah?” Joel interrupts.
“You’re asking me, personally? Umm, yes. Of course. My point has
nothing to do with me. I’m saying—even if you leave out countries whose
military propped up dictators, if you just take the US military, not all
countries feel great about the US military. Especially in some of the regions
I’m responsible for, like Latin America and Asia. Vietnam, for example. Do
you need me to explain why the Vietnamese do not love the US military?”
Without clear agreement, the whole initiative is abandoned. That is,
until weeks later when Marne casually drops into conversation that
Facebook’s first proactive initiative to build relationships with governments
around the world will be organ donation.

Body parts and personal decisions about what to do with them after
death wouldn’t have been the issue that I would have led with—any more
than the military—if I wanted to show leadership and forge relationships
with foreign governments, but there wasn’t any discussion about this. Like
many things at Facebook, it didn’t matter what the policy team debated or
decided; it mattered what Sheryl thought. In this case she had run into one
of her Harvard friends, a surgical director of liver transplantation, at a
Harvard reunion and offered to help him source donors.
I’m instructed to work with engineers to set it up. I don’t know how to
set up a global organ donation initiative. And the obstacles pile up quickly.
Organ donation is not a universal practice. It’s discouraged by some
religions, some countries don’t do it at all, and some make it impossible to
distinguish legitimate organ donation from the sale of human organs. In
others there are even darker issues of organ theft and trafficking.
In one of the first meetings with Sheryl to update her on the project, it
becomes clear that we have different visions about the scope of the
initiative and the regulatory framework around organ donation more
generally.
The team of ten people working on the organ donation initiative are
gathered in her meeting room at Facebook’s headquarters. I’m nervous. I
know my push for having Facebook stand for something in the world and
what I bring to Facebook are both about to be tested by Sheryl. I walk her
through what we’ve come up with, explaining that it’s more like a
“registration drive” to push people to their local donation sites, and that
Facebook wouldn’t be matching donors with patients or transporting organs
around the world. We won’t build our own organ or patient registries or
gather detailed health information. In fact, we’ll try to limit the information
Facebook collects and holds. Sheryl seems baffled by this and fixates on
why we haven’t designed the initiative in a way that would allow Facebook
to play a bigger role in the collection of data, marketplace of organs, and
more. I start to explain the legal, cultural, and religious complexity around
organ donation globally, and the sensitivity of the information that organ
registries hold. She looks at me as if I am a complete idiot and have missed
the obvious, which I suppose I have. I wasn’t looking at this as a business

opportunity, a way to start collecting health data from users. Sensing
danger, I pivot to the risk of organ trafficking. I explain that countries have
put a lot of thought into safeguarding organ donation information and
guarding against cross-border transportation of organs.
She turns to me, indignant. The edge in her voice is unmistakable.
