“Do you mean to tell me that if my four-year-old was dying and the
only thing that would save her was a new kidney, that I couldn’t fly to
Mexico and get one and put it in my handbag?”
I look around the meeting room for support, not sure whether she is
clueless or confused. Usually she’s so savvy. But it strikes me she’s serious
and she’s someone who’s used to getting what she wants. Everyone in the
room avoids eye contact with both of us, even Marne and Debbie, my usual
protectors. I realize that in delivering bad news, I’m the prey that’s been
separated from the herd.
“Ah, that’s right,” I say, with as much solicitousness as I can muster.
“Countries generally have strict regulations in place to prevent black-
market sales or theft or illegal harvesting of organs or body parts more
generally. It’s usually something determined by government policy rather
than who can pay the most.”
Sheryl glowers at me. I can feel her estimation of me drop as her
indignation rises. There’s a long, tense moment of silence.
Marne jumps in to save me. “Usually when Facebook releases new
features, once the code is pushed, there’s not a lot of thought to the real-
world consequences. But organ donation requires us to think through all the
relevant rules and laws in every country, plus we’ll have to create
partnerships with organ registries everywhere. We don’t have the resources
to do that sort of work for every country in the world.”
In fact, the natural instincts of the Facebook team—collect data, use a
uniform approach in every country and refuse to deviate from it—aren’t
going to work with organ donation. Marne points all this out to Sheryl, who
reluctantly agrees to scale back the global launch to just four countries.
She is not pleased.
But she’s undeterred. She wants to do everything possible to make this a
success, this first project to spotlight Facebook’s values. So, a few weeks

later, she directs the company’s engineers to add “registered as an organ
donor” to the list of “life events” in people’s Facebook profiles, alongside
other, more traditional life events like “got married” and “expecting a
baby.” Sheryl also directs me and the organ donation team to include a
megaphone—a pop-up that will dominate the screen for anyone who logs
on to Facebook—telling them about the organ donation tool. The engineers
aren’t sold on this idea.
They don’t think Facebook should be using the platform to push people
to do anything—donate their organs, vote, eat more vegetables, floss, adopt
stray puppies, anything. I agree with them. If we get into the business of
advocacy, we’ll have to make all sorts of choices about what causes
Facebook does and does not support. We’ll very quickly find ourselves in a
world of impossible choices. This whole organ donation thing feels cursed.
And a strange place to choose to confront these questions. When we
gathered to decide what Facebook stood for, this definitely was not what I
was hoping for.
And everyone in this conversation knows the stakes here. We know that
when Facebook encourages people to do things, it seems to work. During
the 2010 midterm elections in the United States, Facebook did an
experiment in driving voter turnout. We put a message at the top of the
newsfeed encouraging people to vote, with a link to polling places, and an
“I voted” button they could click, as part of a gigantic, randomized trial
(with a control group). A study later published in Nature showed that 61
million people saw the button, and it actually changed people’s behavior: it
led an additional 340,000 people to vote.
Sheryl hopes the same thing will happen with organ donation. But the
engineers have made their concerns known to Mark and they say he agrees
with them. Given the hierarchy at Facebook, where engineers always get
their way—they’re much more important than Sheryl’s teams—I assume
this pretty much kills the organ donation project, which Mark always
seemed lukewarm on. Now that the engineers have pulled him in, he’ll kill
it.
And so now, for the first time, I’m leading a project that includes both
Mark and Sheryl. It’s the first time Mark’s been involved in any policy

project and it’s not going well. I’m anxious about all of it. Facebook, like
any company, is a web of relationships, and I really want to develop strong
relationships with both Mark and Sheryl. I want them to like me. I want to
become one of their trusted advisers. But this isn’t the way to do it. This
whole project was a bad idea from the start. So I’m relieved the project is
dying.
But things take a turn for the worse. Sheryl really wants the megaphone.
Even though she knows Mark doesn’t. And she has a solution. She directs
me to send an email to the whole team, including Mark, announcing that
we’re moving forward with the megaphone, and explaining Sheryl’s point
of view as if it’s my own. I try and fail to convince her that it’s not a good
idea. She’s having none of it. This is my job. If I can’t write this email, what
use am I to her?
It all comes to a head while Sheryl is on a private jet crossing the country.
She steps onto the plane early one morning. As instructed, I send my email
dutifully setting out arguments I do not agree with that valiantly champion
the use of the megaphone for organ donation. Mark responds with a series
of withering attacks, underpinned by his strong belief that Facebook must
be a “neutral platform” and we should never use “Facebook’s voice” to
interrupt people’s experience on the platform. I defend Sheryl’s position,
against my better judgment. Mark is brutal, and will hear none of it. Sheryl
is silent. Later she’ll tell me she missed the exchange because she didn’t
have Wi-Fi.
I’ll never know whether she did—some of those traveling with her told
me that of course the private jet had Wi-Fi—or whether she told me to send
the email that morning knowing that she’d have a plausible reason to sit out
on the exchange with Mark.
All I know is that I received my very first direct email from Mark
Zuckerberg that day, one sent only to me. It was four words long and simply
said:
“I am overruling you.”


7
Show Him a Good Time
As we approach April 2012, I get an assignment from Elliot: to take Javier
Olivan to Cartagena to show him a good time. I’m expected to do this at a
venue that’s not really known as a rollicking party: the Summit of the
Americas, a gathering of presidents and prime ministers. I’d pitched that
Mark go, to meet heads of state and start establishing relationships with
them. Elliot nixes that and tells me to take Javi instead. The IPO is going to
