happen next month. Lots of Facebook employees will make millions. Many
have already announced that they’re leaving. (I’m oversimplifying only a
little to say they divide into two camps: those who want to create their own
start-ups and those who want to become DJs.) When you’re a company that
doesn’t make or own something tangible, the threat that the most valuable
thing you have—your talented employees—might just up and leave is a
pretty big deal. Leadership is freaking out that certain key people might
decide to go, and first among them is probably Javi.
I pitch my policy strategy for the summit to Elliot. He barely listens; a
smile plays on his lips the whole time. “Just make sure Javi has a good
time. Make sure he comes back from Cartagena wanting to stay at
Facebook.” It’s not clear what exactly he wants me to do with Javi to make
him so happy. It’s just the two of us traveling to Colombia. There’s
definitely a weird vibe to the whole thing. But I choose to ignore that.
Javi’s one of the most important people at Facebook—one of Mark’s top
lieutenants, almost as powerful as Sheryl—but he has no public profile.
People don’t know him.

He’s really like no one else in senior management. For starters, he’s not
American. In his late thirties, he’s got close-cropped hair and a pronounced
Spanish accent. An avid surfer, he developed a competitor to Facebook in
his native Spain in his spare time. It was good enough for Mark to hire him
rather than deal with the competition. A forceful, no-bullshit guy, but with a
sense of humor.
And he’s got a big job. He’s in charge of Facebook’s global growth. His
growth team is the capitalist engine of the whole enterprise. Facebook’s
business model depends on it conquering new territories. Expanding
exponentially.
The growth team is in charge of forging those new frontiers, and like
most frontiersmen, Javi and his team play fast and loose. They’re
aggressive and quick to stake their claim, always looking for opportunities
in the gray area created by the lack of regulation.
Javi’s team is the group that came up with the idea of importing your
contacts into Facebook—so Facebook could press nonusers to join the
service. In the beginning, they didn’t ask permission to do this. You could
tell Facebook “don’t take my contacts” but then when you opened
Messenger, they’d take them by default. And his team is instrumental in the
development of the “People You May Know” tool, which is described by
Mashable as Facebook’s “creepy as hell tool” for its ability to make
uncomfortable friend recommendations, such as when a sperm donor was
recommended a biological child he had never met.
It’s a growth-at-all-costs approach. To me, it seems like a very
American thing. When Alexis de Tocqueville visited the US in the
nineteenth century, he was on a rickety steamboat that hit a sandbar and
capsized, and he nearly drowned. Afterward he found the manufacturers
and asked them why they didn’t make the vessels safer. They explained that
technological innovation in America happened so quickly there was no
point; by the time they made the necessary changes, the boats would be
obsolete anyway. Better just to take a chance on what you have. If some
drown, no need to dwell, safe in the knowledge that something better is just
around the corner. That cheerful recklessness combined with passivity, that
forward motion without introspection, that’s what Javi’s team has.

When we start to run into politicians who put up roadblocks to our
expansion, the growth team is quick to suggest that we “juice” the
algorithm to help them bolster their Facebook presence. The way they put
that? “Let’s dial up the algorithm to give politicians some love.” When they
say that to me, I always say no, believing it’s best for us in the long run to
stay scrupulously neutral. I don’t know what the other people on the policy
team tell them. But that’s the growth team’s mentality. Like the posters all
over the office say: move fast and break things.
Before I started working at Facebook, I didn’t know enough to imagine
the truth about the place, that this is the beating heart of the company, the
growth team. Their values are the company’s values. Their priorities are the
company’s. Those boys in the office who wanted to know what we stand
for? This is what we stand for. Growth. More.
Obviously, I understand that in the history of the world, this conquering
mentality has generally not worked out so well for everyone. And I know
Javi’s team is perfectly happy to bend the rules, to the extent that rules
exist. But I figure, we’re new, that’ll work itself out. Excesses will be
curbed. And the product Javi’s promoting so aggressively—Facebook—
seems benevolent. We’re helping people connect, not selling missiles or
nerve gas.
Javi’s street smart in a way that Mark isn’t. He’s the guy who first alerts
Mark to a new app called Snapchat. The way Javi tells it, he shows it to
Mark and asks him, “You know what people are gonna use this for?”
thinking the answer is obvious. Mark has no idea. Javi has to explain it:
sexting.
So. This is the man my bosses want to stay at Facebook, and I’m
supposed to make sure this trip to Colombia aids that cause.
Within weeks I’m walking down Cartagena’s cobbled streets to collect
Javi for the grand opening dinner with all the heads of state. It’s being held
in a breathtaking sixteenth-century fortress. Javi’s tickled to be there. It
feels important. He loves that they sent him, he loves the pomp and
circumstance, he loves that everyone is speaking Spanish. He loves the
whole thing.

Then we show up at the grand dinner, and no seats have been assigned
to Facebook.
This kind of treatment isn’t unusual. During this period, wherever we
go, most government officials don’t know what Facebook is or don’t really
use it or don’t care. They don’t want to meet. Facebook is not a big deal.
Still adjusting to nondiplomatic life, I’ve mistakenly prepared as if
Facebook will be treated as a government. It is not.
So we spend the evening standing near where the food is being
prepared, watching the politicians eat, milling about with assistants,
handlers, and security. Desperate to succeed in my mission to keep Javi
happy, I occasionally break from milling around to stalk down people who
have mild to no interest in speaking with anyone from Facebook. The
awkward conversations that follow definitely do not help. Javi, to his credit,
is relaxed. He’s never been to a head of state dinner before and is eager to
soak it all in. Once I find some beers, we spend most of the evening
catching up, pausing only when we spot famous politicians or celebrities.
The next day, on a bike ride I organize in the spirit of showing Javi a good
time, Javi—with no prompting from me—starts to talk about his future. As
Elliot suspected, the IPO is weighing on him. He, like me, sees the
