possibility of what Facebook could become and is genuinely excited by
that. But people he respects at Facebook are leaving. Given his
entrepreneurial bent, he’s itching to prove himself on his own terms. To go
and start something. He wants to do both—to stay and to leave. But leaving
seems more likely. That’s not good news for me, with my assignment to
keep him at Facebook.
It’s a pleasant day of cycling to beaches and cafés, except for my
growing fear that there’s nothing I can do to convince Javi not to quit. Soon
enough, it’s back to work. I secured the slot for Javi’s keynote right before
the highest-profile session, which features the heads of state of Colombia,
Brazil, Canada, and the United States, President Obama. This felt like a real
coup. Javi was excited too. Unlike Mark, he enjoys the buzz of being in
front of a crowd. But as he’s about to take the stage, the audience surges

from our auditorium to the one next door, in order to secure their seats for
the session with the heads of state. Javi is left to address an almost empty
auditorium containing the small handful of people who are interested in this
strange thing called Facebook.
After the speech is over I apologize. It’s clear to both of us that I messed
up by booking him into the session before the heads of state. But he’s not a
dick about it. He’s mainly relieved that his keynote is done. He shrugs and
suggests we blow off being ignored at another official dinner, inviting me to
come out with his friends.
I meet up with them at a restaurant a few hours later. It takes a bit to
piece together everyone who’s there—mainly CEOs from some of the
region’s tech companies. Then a striking, tall man with dark features sits
beside me and starts to play the role of host. This is Juan del Mar. The
balmy sea air, cold beers, delicious food, and animated conversation fade to
the background when Juan takes the stage now and then to croon jazz with
the band. This is a surprise given that I thought the host was a tech CEO,
but Javi explains that he owns this restaurant. That’s when I notice—“Juan
del Mar” is emblazoned across the restaurant and the menus.
“Actually, he’s a bullfighter,” Javi says, scanning my face for a reaction.
“And he’s dabbled in a few other things.”
“He’s kind of built for it,” one of the CEOs says cryptically. I’m the
only woman there except for one of the CEO’s wives, who seems to be in
on the joke.
“I think he was hoping to show you,” someone else pipes up, and
everyone laughs. Except me.
As they continue drinking into the night, with Juan occasionally taking
the stage to sing, the men keep coming back to this in-joke that I’m not
understanding. They ask if I’m really engaged, because my engagement
ring is “so small it was very hard to tell.” Which is about the ring and also
somehow about sex, money, power, and availability, but I couldn’t exactly
say how. The men enjoy my confusion and switch into Spanish whenever
they want to say something about me. One of the things they definitely
seem to be saying to Javi: nice job you have there, that they send this girl to
hang out with you here in Cartagena.

Meanwhile, my mind is still racing, trying to figure out if any of this is
going to make Javi stay at Facebook. Is this what I signed up for? Is this
mission even possible? How can I get this done?
After midnight, someone suggests we head to a salsa club. Seemingly
out of nowhere, large, dark executive vehicles, ones I’m used to seeing for
heads of state, pull up. We’re bundled in and quickly skirting the back
alleys of Cartagena in the dark night. We speed into increasingly gritty
neighborhoods. After all the drinks, things start to blur a little.
We pull up to an unremarkable door. Stepping out into the warm air of
the unlit backstreets of Colombia feels illicit. I vacillate between excitement
and apprehension. We’re swept by someone’s security team into a hot,
crowded room where salsa music blares. Some strong unidentifiable drink
is thrust into my hand and I’m pulled onto the dance floor by one of the
CEOs or a bullfighter, it’s hard to know who. After a few songs, Javi makes
his way toward me. He leans in to say something in my ear that I think I’ve
misunderstood because it sounds like, “Hillary Clinton is here.”
“Oh, Javi.” I smile. It’s clear that some combination of the drinks and
the excitement of the summit, being around all these heads of state, has
gone to his head. “There’s no Hillary Clinton here. We’re in some random
back-alley salsa club. It’s way past midnight, the floor is sticky, there’s a
half-naked woman right over there, and I promise you there is no chance
that the US secretary of state is here. She’s somewhere fast asleep.…”
Javi cuts me off by taking my hand and pulling me over to the edge of
the club.
And there she is. Hillary Clinton. Beer in hand, next to the band,
dancing with a small group of her staff, security detail conspicuous with
their earpieces in the steamy club.
Javi looks at me, triumphant. “Hillary Clinton!”
It is undeniably Hillary Clinton. She’s completely caught up in the
music, right in the front, clapping and swinging her hips. I take in every
strange detail of that sight and turn to look at Javi. The delight in his face at
having bested me is contagious, and I take a slug of whatever sticky drink
I’m holding.

“You’re right and I apologize and will forever defer to your superior
knowledge of foreign policy. I should never have doubted you.”
He’s beaming.
“Now you have to tell me the real deal about Juan del Mar,” I shout
over the dance floor.
“Okay,” he says slowly. “He’s a bullfighter, he owns bars and
restaurants, and he’s kind of an actor. He’s what every man here wants to
be.”
“I still don’t get it.”
“Well, he’s a special type of actor.”
I turn my head from Hillary Clinton to look closer at Juan del Mar. “You
mean he’s an adult actor?”
At that moment Juan raises his glass in toast to us. Hillary Clinton
dances behind him, just a few feet away.
“Yeah, I guess he’s a porn star,” Javi says.
“Are you going to quit?” I hadn’t dared ask outright the entire time
we’d been in Colombia but decide in the moment to rip the bandage off. I
need to know if I’ve failed or succeeded. I don’t even know if Javi knows
the real reason he’s here in Colombia.
“I don’t know,” he says, looking over at Hillary Clinton, seeming to
weigh her presence in his head.
The music rolls over us and the dance floor pulses. Javi drains his drink,
pulls me into the fray, and gestures for Juan to join us. We edge as close as
