we can get to Hillary Clinton.
“Just want to be sure,” I say, leaning toward his ear. “Are you going to
stay at Facebook?”
“I think I’ll stay for now,” he says, speaking more to himself than to me.
As I write this, it’s more than a decade later. He’s still there. Running
the place with Mark, now as Facebook’s chief operating officer.

8
Running Out of Road
Before long—October 2012—we’re celebrating one billion people using
Facebook. The festivities are really targeted at the lower-level employees.
They get parties. Shiny silver and blue balloons—Bs and ones and zeros—
float all around the office.
But for top management, one billion users is a crisis.
I’m in meeting after meeting where my bosses agonize about how we’re
“running out of road.” That’s the phrase they use. Facebook’s stock has
dropped by half in just five months, from thirty-eight dollars a share at the
IPO—when shares were first offered to the public—to nineteen dollars now.
They believe that the only way the stock price will rise is if we show
growth, dramatic growth. But as Javi explains, the first billion users are the
easy billion. He says it like everyone knows that. After that, you get into
issues like how to reach children, how to reach parts of the world where
there’s no internet, how to get into places like China that are hostile to any
social media site like Facebook.
Now, with our stock price falling, Facebook’s survival depends on
growth. As a result, countries outside the US become of vital importance.
Before this, my work wasn’t seen as something that would impact the share
price. But now, getting past foreign regulators and opening up markets is
the most important thing. Suddenly I matter.
And I’ve been busy. In the six months since Cartagena, I’ve been flying
into countries to be the first person from Facebook that the government
meets. I hand over a business card to the most senior member of the

government I can wrangle a meeting with. Mexico, Vietnam, Brazil,
Argentina, Colombia, Singapore, Canada, and probably a dozen other
places. I let them know that if they’ve got a problem, I’m the person to call.
If there’s a problem already, I try to find the person behind the problem and
solve it. I show them how the part of Facebook they’re worried about works
or how they could prepare rules or guidelines for it.
Sometimes, my bosses and I don’t agree on the solution. We tussle over
the issue of educating politicians and regulators who don’t under- stand the
complexities of our technology. When the Canadian privacy commissioner
asks for information about the “People You May Know” tool on Facebook,
wondering if it violates Canadian privacy rules, I’m ready to explain. I want
to help. Marne and Elliot thought I was mad. “Why do you want to break
into jail?” Marne asked.
As the teams start to look around the world at where they can pick up
significant numbers of new users, Myanmar comes into focus. The way Javi
and the growth team see it, there are more than sixty million potential new
Facebook users there, largely untapped. But just as they start to hone in on
it, the military junta that runs Myanmar blocks Facebook. We have no idea
why. Maybe it’s because on Facebook the junta is finally facing criticism,
something it’s never tolerated before. But at the same time, Myanmar’s in
the process of democratizing. It’s headed toward its first democratic
elections in over a decade. Why ban us now?
In the past, this would have been met at Facebook with the same
indifference as the blocks in Iran, Cuba, Bangladesh, and North Korea. But
with the pressure for more “road” and the lure of sixty million potential new
users, this quickly escalates into something for top managers to address.
Javi explains his agitation to the small group of policy executives on a
call. “It’s the network effect,” he says, meaning that increasing use will
improve Facebook in Myanmar. As people are first getting the internet,
getting them on Facebook from the start leads to exponential growth. If
we’re not available some other service will capture the value of the network
effect. “Being blocked right now is a disaster. How quickly can we get this
fixed?”

“They shut us down, we’re completely in the dark, and it’s hard to tell
what’s going on from here,” I reply. “Military juntas usually want to control
communications. I’m not sure we can convince this one to just be cool with
Facebook. I don’t think there’s a quick fix.”
“Nope—that doesn’t work,” Javi responds. “Someone needs to get on
the ground and figure out what’s going on.”
“And fix this law,” Marne says, referring to a law that had recently been
drafted giving the junta formal power to shut down Facebook. “Otherwise
this is going to become the new normal.”
There’s silence and I let it hang in the air. No one from Facebook has
ever been there. The junta is still in charge. The country is barely online.
“Oh, you mean I should go to Myanmar?” I say eventually. “Should I
stop off in North Korea on the way home?”
“Yeah,” said Javi, not rising to my bait. “But more importantly, don’t
come back until you’ve sorted it out.”
I really don’t want to do this.
Days later I’m heading toward the center of the capital Nay Pyi Taw, on a
desolate twenty-lane highway that’s completely empty of cars. There’s no
way the average citizen in Myanmar can afford one, and there’s speculation
that the highway can double as a runway if junta leaders ever need to
escape. Like an ornate castle from a fairy tale, the Presidential Palace in
Nay Pyi Taw shimmers in the heat of the day, looming above the deserted
road.
Nay Pyi Taw is a planned city, and it’s a lot like this highway: nice on
paper but weirdly empty. Occasionally, I catch glimpses of women with
chalked faces carrying children in their arms or on their backs, workers
sweeping the empty roads with long straw brushes, men cycling on bikes
loaded with wood or produce. They all look like actors who’ve strayed onto
an empty set.
My hotel is extremely basic. Miles out of the city down a rugged dirt
track, surrounded by scrubby fields. The hotel lobby is also the owner’s
living room. No electricity, hot water, or food available, and absolutely no

internet or cell service. That makes setting up meetings basically
impossible.
But the World Economic Forum (WEF) is holding a regional meeting in
Myanmar. I’ve registered in the hope that I can connect with someone there
who can provide a link to the junta. Despite coming from a country of fewer
than four million people, I’ve found there usually is at least one New
