Zealander in even the most unlikely of places, and they’re usually friendly
and sometimes helpful. So I set out to find one, scanning the list of
participants, which usefully includes everyone’s home country. Bingo. The
Kiwi I latch onto gets me into WEF events, including a party that feels like
a portal to another time and place. A sumptuous feast in a giant tent in what
feels like the middle of nowhere. There are tables groaning with exquisite
food, limitless champagne, and musicians in flowing silks on stilts. It’s
grotesque in its excess, and the WEF guests seem oblivious to the abject
poverty that’s just outside.
It turns out that WEF would be a great place to meet an overconfident
European corporate man in his late fifties. It’s no place to meet members of
the junta. And when I broach the idea of setting up meetings between
Facebook and the junta, these men laugh, stare blankly, or warn me against
the idea.
“You’re in their bad books,” a human rights lawyer says to me. “And
you don’t want to meet with the junta when you’re in their bad books.”
I use WEF’s Wi-Fi to arrange a different hotel and message Tom—who
I’ve not contacted yet—to tell him, “My phone does not work in Myanmar.
No coverage. No data. Will call as soon as you might be waking up. Sorry
for any concern, I didn’t expect this. Love you. Sarah x.”
I also start trying to connect with Aung San Suu Kyi. The Nobel Prize
winner is leading the opposition party that secured significant victories in
recent by-elections. I want to find out if she and her team have thought
about the role Facebook could play in helping Myanmar open up and
transform into a democracy. But reaching her is about as easy as connecting
with the junta.
After her assistant politely informs me that I will not be getting a
meeting now or ever, I learn that she’ll be attending a WEF luncheon in her

honor. I get there early, walking in while the catering staff sets up, before
WEF starts policing the guest list. My diplomatic training helps me locate
the seating plan. Then it’s simply a matter of plonking myself down at her
table and waiting to see if anyone will remove me.
When Aung San Suu Kyi arrives hours later, she’s elegant and more
feminine than I expected. She sits with poise among the circle of men now
assembled at her table, with a large fresh flower in her hair. Among the
CEOs and politicians there’s an unspoken competition to command Aung
San Suu Kyi’s attention. I am ignored. Meanwhile, I’m using all my limited
energy, which is rapidly flagging due to jet lag, to act like I belong at that
table, worried that at any moment someone will realize I’m not even on the
guest list.
I’m so tired I can’t even see straight, and as things slowly come into
focus I see Aung San Suu Kyi looking at me. She gestures and I look beside
me to see who she’s granted an audience to, before realizing that it’s me.
She says across the table, “Come.”
The heads of the gray men rapidly swivel and I meekly get up and walk
around to assume a half crouch beside her.
“I noticed you,” she says warmly.
“I’m Sarah. I’m from New Zealand,” I say reflexively, still groggy from
jet lag, and then am overcome with embarrassment. “I mean, I’m from
Facebook, but I’m also from New Zealand.…” Aung San Suu Kyi looks
confused. “… But I live in the US.” This is not going well.
She gracefully taps the person beside her in a gray tunic. “I want to
introduce you to Shwe Mann, who is soon to be the Speaker in Parliament.”
“Hi, I’m Sarah. I’m here on behalf of Facebook,” I say quickly,
determined to make a better impression.
“I’m sorry, I do not speak English,” he says. As I look closer at his well-
pressed clothes, short-cropped hair, and impeccable posture, I realize that he
may be the first person I’ve encountered from the junta. In the silence, he
assumes I haven’t understood and repeats, “My English it is not very good.”
“Oh, no, it’s great,” I reassure him, “and I’m sorry, I do not speak
Burmese.” He smiles politely. “And in fact some people think I don’t speak
English very well because of my New Zealand accent.”

“I apologize,” Aung San Suu Kyi cuts in. “You have a beautiful New
Zealand accent, and I apologize for not speaking Maori.”
Maori’s the indigenous language of New Zealand.
“I’m actually here to talk about communicating,” I say, smiling. “The
way people and politicians are starting to communicate on the internet.
Facebook, do you know what that is?”
“Yes,” Aung San Suu Kyi interrupts. “Did you know Shwe Mann is
very important in our country? We’re from different parties but we have
forged a wonderful working relationship.”
She’s trying to warn me. Whatever you say to me, you’re saying to the
junta. I try to carry on but she continues.
“His party and ours. We’re trying to find ways we can work together.
There’s so much to do. And he is the right man to do it. Very clever.”
Shwe Mann beams.
“I am conscious of how much you have to do. I think Facebook is going
to play a role in Myanmar’s future. I think it’s important that we figure out
some of the issues that are coming up, especially with the blocking, the new
telecommunications law, and the upcoming election.” I pause, fearing I’ve
overreached.
“You really from Facebook?” Shwe Mann interrupts. I nod vigorously
to ensure no misunderstanding on that basic point.
“Wow,” he says, touching my face gently just to make sure I’m real.
When I return to my new hotel that night, there’s a written message in
my room letting me know that I have a meeting at the Ministry of
Communications set for the next morning.
I’d picked the new hotel I transferred to because it advertised access to
internet. In reality, there’s no Wi-Fi, though for some reason there is a book
next to the bed titled How to Use the Internet. The next morning I discover
a rotary phone; strangely, you can’t dial out, people have to call you. But
these are far from my biggest problems. I have a 10:00 A.M. meeting starting
soon with the deputy minister and no idea how I’m going to get there.
Overwhelmed by WEF chaos, the hotel staff are unable to help with
transport. With little other choice, I walk alone down the road in full
business attire and ponder whether the traditional hitchhiking thumbs-out

sign will work in Myanmar, or whether I’d be better off waving money to
try to incentivize a ride. Not that I have local currency. And there are no
cars on the road. Those barren highways are still empty.
Then a car comes barreling toward me and I stand, one arm
outstretched, dangling an American twenty-dollar bill, the other arm in an
enthusiastic thumbs-up. The driver doesn’t even slow down. Completely
ignores my friendly New Zealand smile. In the long silence that follows, I
