think about the damage it’ll do to Facebook’s relationship with the junta if I
fail to show up to this meeting that I was lucky to get in the first place. And
how I’ll explain to my bosses why I failed to fix Facebook’s situation. Javi
was clear that I shouldn’t come back until this is solved. Saying I couldn’t
get a cab won’t cut it.
I keep checking the time on my otherwise useless phone. Eventually I
see a speck in the distance coming closer. It’s an old car. I decide to take
drastic action and step out onto the highway to stop the car.
The middle-aged Burmese driver is confused and winds down his
window. I lean in, waving my American money, and hit my next stumbling
block: he doesn’t speak English and I don’t speak Burmese.
With no alternative, I mime driving and attempt to pass the money to
him, and when he doesn’t take it I mime again, with more determination.
He seems to get it this time and accepts the money. I get into the front seat
and quickly fasten the seat belt before he can change his mind. He starts to
drive and, with no other cars on the road, we make a quick pace. He’s
speaking to me rapidly in Burmese and I realize he’s asking where I want to
go. I try saying “Ministry of Transport and Communications” three times
but it doesn’t work. I take out paper and pen from my handbag and
carefully write the name of the department before remembering that
Burmese has a different script, so this is as worthless as my phone without
internet. After repeating the name of the ministry hopelessly and seeing a
cloud of confusion start to stretch across his earnest face, I return to
miming. I’m at a complete loss for what else to do. I mime driving, then
answering a telephone, and then draw a square box in the air, which is as
close as I can get to “government ministry.” When he still looks unsure, I do

it again. Eventually, he nods and turns off the highway into a denser area
with more buildings but still mostly devoid of people.
He slows as we approach a collection of shops and nods at me earnestly
before pulling to a stop outside one of them. This is clearly not a
government ministry. It looks like some kind of empty internet café. I have
to hand it to him: given my mime, that’s a pretty good guess. But it’s not
where I need to be. I shake my head no, but try to smile encouragingly. He
responds with a worried look like, “Uh oh—how do I get this foreigner out
of my car?” Meanwhile, I’m panicked that I’m going to have to leave his
car in this random place and lose my only shot of making it to the ministry.
I belatedly remember that the government is a junta, and mime
regimented marching and saluting before redoing the previous mime.
Miraculously, he seems to get it and we set off. But while he may or may
not understand where I want to go, it doesn’t seem like he knows how to get
there. I mean, he’s not a taxi driver. He’s just some punter whose car I stood
in front of. We start to drive into a more remote area, and fear surges
through my body. Not only because no one knows where I am, with no
form of outside communication, alone in a car with a Burmese man who
could drive off and take me wherever he wants without anyone knowing.
But also because my meeting is supposed to have already started and I don’t
know what the consequences are if I don’t show up.
We drive around what seems to be a circular business park, then turn
another corner, and unexpectedly I see a spartan building that looks like a
government ministry. A big concrete box that would look right at home in
downtown Beijing or a lesser Soviet republic. I’m late but so grateful to be
there. I thank my savior, who appears both relieved and genuinely excited
we made it, and race inside.
When I announce that I’m from Facebook, the receptionist shakes his head
in a way that makes me think I’m in trouble and not just for being late. He
requests something that I don’t understand. I hand over my business card
but that’s rejected, and then I realize he wants my passport. I hand it over
and he takes it and puts it in a drawer that he locks. Oh no. I decide not to

protest, but as he leads me upstairs and through a rabbit warren of sterile
corridors—and I feel myself moving farther and farther away from my
passport—I regret not taking a firmer stand on that one. He leads me into a
grand hall. It’s dark and somber like a Gothic cathedral. The scale of it is
ridiculous. I was expecting an office or conference room. There’s a large,
thick curtain, and the room is dominated by large, ornate chairs that look
like medieval thrones carved from dark wood. They line each side of the
room. Against the far wall, raised on a platform, are three even more ornate,
larger thrones. I feel tiny and instinctively want to stick by the door. But the
receptionist leads me over to a seat near the wooden thrones on the raised
stage and then leaves. I sit.
I’m alone in a place that could not be further from Silicon Valley. It’s
like some dimly lit feudal court. I check my phone, interested to see
whether the government department responsible for communications in
Myanmar has Wi-Fi or any form of cell phone reception.
Of course not.
Time passes slowly in the silence of the throne room. Suddenly, there’s
movement behind the curtains and a bright, blinding light bursts through. I
can’t see anything but this light pointed straight in my eyes. As it moves
toward me, I start to make out shapes and realize that a group of men are
approaching, one of them holding what looks like a large video camera,
another the large light, followed by more men in tunics. I am petrified. I’m
reminded of videos of ISIS captives that we’d debated removing from
Facebook, in comfortable, well-lit meeting rooms back in Silicon Valley.
The videos never included the moments before someone becomes a
hostage, but I guess this might be how they start.
As the camera moves steadily toward me, my mind starts replaying the
things people in Myanmar had said about how angry the junta is about
Facebook, and the trouble it was causing in Myanmar. I know that this junta
is vicious, committing human rights abuses with executions, torture, gang
rape, forced labor, and human trafficking. Not long before I arrived in
Myanmar, the possession and use of telephones, fax machines, computers,
modems, and software was a criminal offense. They’ve arrested people for
as little as listening to a foreign radio station.

I try to calmly and rationally calculate a safe route out. But beyond the
name of the ministry, I don’t know where I am. I’m outnumbered by these
men and I don’t know if I could wedge open the heavy ornate doors that
seal the throne room shut, much less navigate my way through a maze of
identical corridors to retrieve my passport. I’m now absolutely terrified. No
one knows where I am. No one is coming to help me. I can’t help but think
of how angry Tom will be if I become a hostage in Myanmar. He’d told me
it was crazy to come here.
Two men in frog-collar tunics peel off from the group and move toward
the raised thrones. The camera crew comes and stands beside me—
wordlessly—their light pointing directly in my face and their camera
