drilling into me. I feel my heart pounding. I start to detect some kind of
mechanical grinding movement from within my chair and fear that some
handcuffs or footcuffs will emerge, but no—it’s a microphone that slowly
extends from somewhere noisily. In the half darkness I have no idea who’s
controlling it. I gulp down air and consciously direct my face away from the
camera and toward the two men in tunics. I make eye contact with the
closest one, who looks down at me from his raised throne. I can’t read his
expression.
He and the other man introduce themselves, and I strain to understand
their heavily accented English. They both have short dark hair, and one has
very bushy eyebrows. At least one of the men is the deputy minister of
information, though it’s possible that they both are. Their thrones are of
equal height. I introduce myself, speaking deliberately, conscious that it’s
all on film and may possibly be the introduction for a hostage video.
I’m surprised when the men respond in humorous disbelief. As if I’d
just crawled out of some hidden computer monitor.
“You are from the Facebook? You are from the internet?” one says.
I assure them I really am from Facebook and there really are people
who work there. When I sense at least one of them is unconvinced, I fish
around in my handbag and pull out a business card, which I hand to one of
the camera crew to walk over to the deputy ministers. Somehow it feels like
I should not leave my throne. The deputy ministers pore over it.

In truth, I don’t really know what to do next. This isn’t like a meeting
I’d prep for Sheryl or Marne to do, where I’d have scripted out a plan.
The men look at me expectantly.
My adrenaline-fueled fear starts to ebb away. Their looks of genuine
astonishment—their amusement—signal that maybe they aren’t going to
hold me against my will or do anything to me, at least not at first.
So I start with the basics. I ask them why they were blocking Facebook.
What were they worried about?
In halting English, they outline a scenario they’d never expected to face.
The junta had controlled the internet until recently, and they priced it so
very few people could afford to go online (it was $300 for a SIM card, if
you could find one). The infrastructure they’d built also let them do all the
surveillance and censorship they wanted. But now the country is opening up
—transitioning from military dictatorship to electoral democracy—and the
internet is moving to everyone’s phones. (This is new, for a country to go
online without a desktop phase.) They’re deciding whether to allow foreign
phone companies to come in and—in a broader way—they’re figuring out
how to handle the internet in this new semidemocratic Myanmar.
The men tell me that only 1 percent of the population has access to the
internet right now, but nearly all of them are on Facebook. With poor
connectivity and challenges navigating to other sites, it’s become the default
home page for the country. So Myanmar is discovering the internet in a
completely idiosyncratic way; it’s as if Facebook were the entire internet.
They explain their concern: that some people are intentionally fueling
ethnic tensions and sowing discord between Muslims and Buddhists by
posting things that are false on Facebook. Also, they’re worried people are
saying nasty things about the junta. The junta’s natural instinct—like that of
any authoritarian military dictatorship—is to control information at all
costs. Facebook and the internet are a profound challenge to this. So they do
what comes naturally. When there’s a problem on Facebook, they simply
switch it off.
No one on Facebook’s side has been tracking this closely, but the sense
I get from the deputy ministers of information is that they have been
switching Facebook on and off for years and basically Facebook hasn’t

cared, until the whole “running out of road” thing became an issue. The
transition to a pseudo civilian government and the growing access to the
internet and Facebook, to say nothing of Facebook’s growth ambitions,
mean this isn’t tenable in the long term, but they don’t have any other
solutions.
The deputy ministers make the arguments for banning Facebook
permanently, and I try to convince them that that won’t solve the
fundamental problems in Myanmar, arguing that their country has a lot to
gain from freer flows of information, outside state control. They know the
internet is coming to Myanmar. The political changes in their country mean
they won’t be able to keep it out forever. All we can agree on between us
is … to talk.
I ask that before they switch off Facebook again, they at least reach out
and explain the problem. But even that is complicated. They don’t know
how we could communicate. They don’t have working government email
addresses.
“But how would we do this?” they ask. “Could we call you on the
telephone?”
I joke that my phone isn’t working in Myanmar so it wouldn’t be a good
system. I wave my useless phone at them but they do not find this funny.
It’s like a curtain falls. I suddenly remember that I’m at the Ministry of
Communications. We’d been getting along—a little—and now it’s clear
I’ve offended them. One of the deputy ministers seems a little embarrassed;
the other is stern.
And with that, the meeting is over.
We agree to stay in touch, but don’t specify how. I leave thinking that,
for the moment at least, these two deputy ministers will support switching
Facebook back on. Unfortunately, they’re not the only ones that have to be
convinced.
I’m sent to meet other men in different locations—some spartan, some
that look like bunkers, some that are like Bond villains’ lairs, with too much
carpet and portraits of generals whose frames are encrusted with sparkling
rubies and garnets. I’m too nervous to ask if they’re real.

Many of the men are in traditional dress. Others are in full military
uniforms adorned with medals. All of them act like they’re used to being
obeyed and rapport is not part of their job description. The raw power they
project is clear and not obfuscated in the way you often get with officials
around the world. But somehow, we reach a tentative agreement to unblock
Facebook and to talk the next time before they decide to block it. Because
there will be a next time.
By the end of the day, I’m overwhelmed with a sense of absolute
exhaustion. It’s unlike anything I’ve ever felt before—like every molecule
in my body is heavy and yet I feel empty, dimly aware of a gnawing hunger,
hollow and unable to bring my brain into focus. It can’t just be jet lag, can
it? I limp toward my hotel room, feet blistering from the heels after walking
across unpaved roads and paths.
I’m writing up notes from the meetings when my rotary phone rings. It’s
