a sound I haven’t heard in years. Like 1982’s calling. The receiver’s
cumbersome and heavy. I assume it’s the front desk calling about transport
to the airport the next day, and I’m surprised to hear Tom’s voice.
“I’ve been calling since I woke up. I haven’t heard from you since you
left for the airport days ago, apart from your email about the hotel saying
you would call me.” His anger’s palpable. Had he somehow found out I’d
been deep inside a government building with the junta and no one at
Facebook knew my whereabouts? That was impossible. Had he somehow
learned of the whole hostage confusion? Surely not.
“I’m sorry, I had no way to contact you. I can’t dial out on this phone. I
know that sounds crazy but it’s true. It only takes incoming calls. My
mobile doesn’t work in Myanmar, but I guess you know that, and it says
there’s internet here, but I haven’t been able to figure it out and I’ve barely
been in my room anyway.”
He cuts me off and his words tumble out in a flood of concern, anger,
and hurt. He’s telling me that the situation is ridiculous and untenable and
when am I coming home and he’s worried about me and why am I there,
and everything he says seems to blur together. But it’s unlike any
conversation we’ve had before. This time his anger has a new, insistent
edge.

Because I’m pregnant.
I was too scared to tell my bosses. I felt like I was still on trial for this
job they never wanted to create in the first place. I was sure it would count
against me if I told them. And I was certain they’d tell me to go anyway.
Marne is someone for whom work always comes first. I felt utterly
powerless.
And I didn’t want to be a whiner. I didn’t want to ask for special
treatment. I felt like I had a job to do and I had to get it done. That’s how I
was raised. You tough it out. Mind over matter, stop your hyperventilating.
Tom thought it was a terrible idea for me to do this trip, and when I
vanished for two days, well, of course that was hell for him.
I hang up and, in a daze, climb straight into the shower feeling an
unfamiliar mix of lonely, chastened, desperately unhappy, irresponsible, and
ashamed, knowing that the water will wash away the tears that are already
streaming down my face. I’m so used to trusting my instincts. Suddenly my
center of gravity is shifting. I don’t know if I’ve done anything right for
Tom or the junta or Facebook or my bosses at Facebook or Aung San Suu
Kyi or the people of Myanmar. I don’t know if Facebook is the right thing
or at least I don’t know if it’s the thing I thought it was. I’m hoping I’m
wrong. I’m at a bit of a loss because none of this feels right.
Of course there’s no hot water at the hotel. Crouched on the floor of the
tub, the cold water against my skin brings me out of my mind and back to
my body. I sit cross-legged under the cold water, sobbing, unable to stop.
Tom’s not being unreasonable. I get it. He was right and I was wrong.
Instinctively, I move my hand to my stomach, gently prodding and
feeling for signs of life from the baby that’s slowly growing inside me.

9
Lady McNugget
Lean In marks a new era in Facebook. When her book is published in
March 2013, Sheryl goes from COO to celebrity and everything is about the
book.
The line between Facebook work and Sheryl’s personal benefit had
always been blurry. Like the time I had to help her get tourist visas to
Australia for one of her nannies through my embassy connections. But the
book blasted this to a new level.
There’s a carefully orchestrated media campaign attached to the launch.
The women in the Washington, DC, office—there aren’t many of us—are
expected to help by doing menial tasks that suspiciously resemble the
“office housework” (administrative tasks that help your bosses but don’t
pay) that Sheryl rails against in her talks and a New York Times op-ed. Some
women grumble about having to give up our evenings to do free labor for
her book. It’s not like we’re short of work—in fact quite the opposite. We’re
fielding regular crises at all hours, in countries around the world. No one
ever explains why we have to help with the book. I guess it’s too crude to
tell us it’s because we share a gender.
My job is passing out name tags, a crushing exercise as I have to ask the
names of DC types who, mortally offended, look at me with a “don’t you
know who I am” face. Which I obviously don’t. When I’m released from
that task, I have to shadow Sheryl, holding her business cards so that she
can work the room unencumbered. My presence is acknowledged only

when she wants to do someone the honor of giving them her contact
information.
I make a point of catching Meredith’s eye every time I’m called over,
like a dog, to perform the trick of handing over Sheryl’s card. But I also
know that Sheryl thinks she’s doing me a favor, having me ride shotgun
with her through this power broker cocktail party. And it is kind of cool.
I’m glad to be there. It’s exciting whenever she’s around. We don’t have
women like Sheryl in New Zealand, and I like it whenever she breezes into
DC.
Watching her work is like a study in female success. How she comes to
decisions, her relationships with men—both the ones she works for and the
ones who work for her—what she wears, how she’s groomed, how she
speaks. She can drop into a soft girlish voice, like you’re sharing an
intimate secret with her, and yet still command a room. Sheryl’s amazing.
Lean In is based on eleven principles that basically boil down to: if a
woman works hard enough, she can thrive at home and at work. These
include:
Sit at the table: Sheryl admits to feeling “imposter syndrome” but
encourages women to “fake it till you make it.” She says that
women keep themselves from advancing because they don’t have
the self-confidence and drive that men do. “We lower our own
expectations of what we can achieve.”
Don’t leave before you leave: This is Sheryl’s belief that many
women tend to “quietly lean back” way before they have children,
worrying how they’ll manage family and work commitments.
And my favorites—they’re both about cultivating and nurturing honesty
in the workplace:
Seek and speak your truth: Sheryl explains how she’s tried to make
Facebook a nonhierarchical organization where everyone is free to
speak their thoughts and criticism.

Let’s start talking about it: Sheryl outlines barriers women still face
in the workplace, including “blatant and subtle sexism,
