discrimination and sexual harassment,” and encourages women to
start talking about sexism in the workplace.
Over the coming years at Facebook, I’ll see both of those tested,
chewed up, and thrown aside. But at this point, they seem very real to me.
Around the office there’s a divide. Some of the older women think Lean
In is bullshit, a way to get more out of us for nothing. The younger staff are
uniformly starstruck by Sheryl’s celebrity. I’m somewhere in between the
two groups, closer to the younger staff. One of the lobbyists, a woman in
her forties, pulls me aside to say, “Don’t take the book seriously. It’s just a
way to make you feel bad about yourself. Which is what Sheryl does.” She
thinks I have stars in my eyes. I’m embarrassed to admit that maybe I do, so
I just nod.
At a Lean In roundtable for the dozen female DC staffers the day after
the book launch, we’re told we should be grateful for the opportunity to sit
with Sheryl. Which is true for some of us—the interns raise their hands to
volunteer how the book changed them and how they love her dress.
“Narciso,” she coos in response. Which, not knowing the designer, I
hear as “narcissism” and am very confused given the broader chat in the
office.
“Why a book and not something else like another TED talk or speech or
video?” one intern softballs from around the conference table, sidestepping
the fact that before Sheryl arrived, we’d all been discussing why she didn’t
post any of this stuff on Facebook.
“What a great question, an absolutely fantastic, insightful question,”
Sheryl responds, sparking a wave of thinly veiled jealousy around the room
among the interns. “Because I wanted to start a national conversation and
the best way to do that is a book. It’s the starting point for not just a
conversation, but a movement.”
Of course, Facebook claims proudly that it’s instrumental in starting
movements and conversations. And she’s the COO. But it seems clear to me

that she hates using the platform personally. Like most of Facebook’s senior
staff, Sheryl hardly ever posts.
Eventually, the women in the room stray from the book talking points
and start asking about Facebook. One of the younger women asks what the
biggest risk for Facebook is.
“Us,” Sheryl says. “The greatest threat to Facebook is us, it’s all of us.”
She sits back, taking in the shocked silence around the table. Then she
says, “I’ve seen this happen before. We, the company, get too confident, too
complacent. We think we know everything, that we have it all figured out.
“I worry about this for everyone, even me. I worry about the day when
people won’t tell me the truth straight. When they won’t have the hard
conversation with me. When I sit in a meeting and everyone will agree with
me. They won’t give me the bad news. They won’t challenge me. We are
our own greatest risk. All of us.”
I hang on every word. This seems like such impressive self-knowledge
and insight that I want to bottle it. I write it down thinking that we can add
it to her speeches elsewhere.
It’s unthinkable that we wouldn’t speak honestly with Sheryl or share
bad news. We say what needs to be said. She’s the champion of these “hard
conversations” telling people what they need to hear even if it feels difficult
to do so.
I underline “it’s all of us” three times.
Funny thing about Lean In: If you happen to be a youngish, pregnant-
looking woman who is the perfect visual accompaniment to some of the
book’s maxims—for example, “Don’t leave before you leave,” Sheryl’s
thesis that you should scale back at work only after a child arrives, not
before—you might find that your book duties extend beyond the launch
party. You may soon find yourself winging your way abroad as part of
Sheryl’s international book tour. I’m told I’m going to Japan.
Japan has always been a difficult country for Facebook. Our growth
rates there have never matched those in the rest of the world. The most
compelling theory is that Japan has a culture that doesn’t like sharing

personal information online. Facebook’s lack of popularity in Japan and the
fact that Sheryl is not CEO (visiting a country that is very conscious of
status and gender) meant that I was flummoxed when Sheryl announced she
wanted to meet Prime Minister Shinzo Abe as part of her book tour. How do
you casually set up a meeting with a head of state from a G7 country for a
tech company that is not even popular in that country, not to mention that
the meeting might also be a Trojan horse for book promotion? The answer, I
learn from trial and error, is that it’s a lot like getting my job at Facebook.
Basically I ask over and over until someone says they might be able to help.
I tell Abe’s office that Lean In will be helpful for his “womenomics”
agenda, which is trying to encourage Japanese women to stay in the
workforce, and trying to boost the percentage of women in leadership.
They buy it. Abe says yes.
We land in Tokyo and arrive at the flashiest hotel I’ve ever stayed at. It’s
humbling. Sheryl’s room at the Ritz-Carlton Japan is several times larger
than my apartment. She’s decided to bring her children and parents on this
trip. I’m excited to meet them until she requests that her parents accompany
us to meet Prime Minister Abe. So now I have two delightful retirees
looking forward to meeting the prime minister of Japan after they finish
their tea ceremony or whatever tourism activities they had planned. In my
time in the foreign service, I’d never seen a head of state show up with their
mom and dad, and I don’t really know how to handle this ridiculous
request. I call up my best friend, Bec, who used to work at the International
Court of Justice. Bec assures me she’s seen heads of state take meetings
with their families alongside them and I could just sneak Adele and Joel
Sandberg in. I ask where she’s seen this, who, and how.
“Robert Mugabe. I think he routinely takes meetings with members of
his family,” she says, laughing, before I hang up despondent, sure this will
be a disaster.
Fortunately, Abe’s office is categorical and says no parents can attend
the meeting with the prime minister of Japan. Sheryl begrudgingly accepts
this.
I may have already been looking for evidence to confirm my sense of
foreboding but when I arrive at Sheryl’s suite at the Ritz-Carlton the

morning of the meeting, I see a stunningly beautiful Japanese woman,
perfectly made up and stylishly dressed, quietly crying outside it.
“Are you okay?” I ask tentatively.
She nods. The tears streaming down her cheeks somehow make her
even more impossibly lovely.
At that moment Debbie comes bundling out of Sheryl’s suite and pulls
me close.
