“I wouldn’t go in there.”
“Why?”
“You were going to go in there, weren’t you?”
“Um, yeah—what’s happening?”
“Major issue with the makeup and hair.”
“Is that who’s crying outside the door? The makeup artist?”
“Ah, yeah. The makeup was a disaster and let’s not mention the hair. I
mean, I think it was basically fine, but Sheryl hated it and some of her
instructions were lost in translation and it’s all come to a head.”
“Or on her head?” I try to pun. Debbie ignores it.
“Oh god. Is it a cultural thing?” I ask. “Like was the makeup artist
doing what she thinks Western women want? Quite eighties? It’s still really
early. Can you get someone else?”
“Ah, that was the someone else. She already fired the first makeup
artist.”
“Ouch. She made her cry too? Okay, so I’m guessing a third makeup
artist isn’t going to happen.”
“No, I think she’s going to do it herself, but this does not bode well for
the day ahead.”
This is a side of Sheryl I have not seen before. Debbie lets me know I’d
better get used to it.
I take her warning and go back to my room to continue prepping for the
meeting with Prime Minister Abe. Sheryl’s approach is very different from
Mark’s. He wants briefings no longer than a text he can read on the screen
of his phone without scrolling. Sheryl wants as much detail as possible.
More than anything, what she really wants is a photo of Prime Minister
Abe holding her book. And that’s the one thing that the Japanese prime

minister’s office has very politely but firmly insisted could not be done.
Sheryl decides she’ll simply hijack the prime minister with a presentation of
the book at the end of the meeting. I’m carrying the book. I’ve added an
inscription to the prime minister and his wife. It feels like smuggling illicit
contraband. I hate myself for being part of this.
Arriving at the prime minister’s sleek office, I’m surprised by the
crowds of photographers and self-conscious about my pregnant body. I’m
not enjoying my role as the designated Lean In visual aid. Sheryl and the
prime minister mug for the cameras, doing the Facebook thumbs-up sign.
Then the press is dismissed and they sit and talk. It’s the two of them, each
with a couple of advisers and interpreters, whom we don’t use. Abe does the
whole meeting in perfect English.
It goes better than I ever imagined. Sheryl hits every single talking
point. There’s actual policy discussion about data centers, consumer
protection and privacy. The Lean In connection to womenomics works—
he’s interested, and it doesn’t seem out of place. It’s proper diplomacy. His
team used everything we gave them and Abe came prepared to respond to
all the issues we’d raised. Sheryl pitches changing Japanese law to allow
politicians to use Facebook for elections. We tell him about the disaster
response tool we’re developing in the wake of the tsunami, which interests
him. By the time they’re done talking, it feels like we have a real
relationship with him and his key advisers. It’s our first successful meeting
with a head of state. The whole thing is like a symphony I orchestrated.
Sheryl and the prime minister stand up. This is the moment I’ve been
dreading. I have my hand firmly on the gift copy of Lean In and thrust it
toward the prime minister like it’s a bomb about to detonate. I then leap out
in front of the two of them with my phone, quickly snapping off three
photos before his team can stop me. Or maybe they’re just reluctant to
wrestle away a pregnant lady.
We return to our van outside his office, ignoring the questions the media
are shouting, and Sheryl asks me to sit beside her. Unexpectedly, she wraps
herself around me and gives me a deep, long hug.
“That was amazing, Sarah. I don’t know how you pulled it off, but it
was phenomenal.”

I’m trying not to blush. “It was a team effort. Really, everyone here in
this van, it couldn’t have happened without them.”
Her tone changes. “Learn how to take a compliment,” she snaps. “This
was all you and it was wonderful.” I feel like I’m being told off.
After a day of media events and Sheryl’s Lean In town hall, Debbie and
the others urge me to come with them for a drink, but I’m tired and
pregnant and opt to go back in the van in a group that includes Sheryl and
her parents. I sit in the back seat trying to be as inconspicuous as possible,
letting the warm glow of the day wash over me. The others are talking
through the events of the day.
I’m not really listening until I hear Sheryl’s voice change sharply at the
mention of her children having had lunch at McDonald’s. She’s furious that
her children have eaten at the fast food restaurant; she would never let them
eat “that sort of food.”
We all stare out of the van at the lights of Tokyo flashing past. It is
gently suggested that this was a thoughtful decision. Informed not just by
the children wanting some comfort in an unfamiliar place with unfamiliar
food, but by a photo she posted on Facebook. Taken at McDonald’s
corporate headquarters, Sheryl beaming as she’s eating Chicken McNuggets
and burgers. She barks back that “of course she wasn’t really eating.” That
was just a photo. She doesn’t eat McDonald’s and neither should her
children. What if they were seen eating that crap?
Everyone in the car slips into painful silence. I’m scared that Sheryl will
remember I’m there in the back seat. I focus on folding my pregnant self
into the smallest space possible, barely daring to breathe.
My mind involuntarily keeps repeating the John Updike quote
“Celebrity is a mask that eats into the face.” The glow from the day’s
success is now completely gone and I just feel sad. Sad because every
person there is trying to do the right thing. Sad because Sheryl can’t see the
good intentions of everyone in that van. Sad because it’s so understandable
to take a photo at face value. To believe it is real. How was anyone
supposed to know those publicity photos were just the mask Sheryl chose?
And, finally, I feel a deep sadness for Sheryl, who let the mask eat into her
face.

We all fly out the next morning—them on United to San Francisco, me
on Asiana to New York—and spirits are low. As soon as I land in the US
and switch on my phone, a bunch of messages pop up, checking to make
sure I’m okay. Weird. Googling, I learn that an Asiana plane, one that
departed a little earlier than mine, had crash-landed at San Francisco
International Airport, killing three people and injuring over two hundred. I
flip through the news and see reports that Sheryl, Debbie, and others on our
team were supposed to be on that flight. They apparently got this from
