Sheryl, who (for a change) posted on Facebook that she and our colleagues
“were originally going to take the Asiana flight that just crash-landed. We
switched to United so we could use miles for my family’s tickets.” This of
course unleashes a storm of concerned comments.
Immediately I stop scrolling and call Debbie.
“Are you okay?”
“Yeah, I’m tired and my neck…”
“No,” I cut in. “I saw you guys were supposed to be on the Asiana
flight. Did something change?”
“You mean Sheryl’s Facebook post about being booked on that flight?
It’s totally weird.”
“You weren’t on that flight. I mean you guys were giving me shit for
flying Asiana, calling it a budget airline.”
“I know, it’s so strange. Sheryl always flies United. That’s who she has
status with. We never considered Asiana. I don’t know why she posted it. I
don’t know why she tagged all of us. Now I’ve got to deal with incoming
media queries about it, though apparently she’s just emailing reporters
herself.”
“I don’t get it,” I said. “I know I’m jet lagged but this doesn’t make any
sense.”
“I know. It’s fucked up. You should get some rest.”
I hang up, but I’m unnerved and the feeling of disquiet never really
leaves. A friend who has seen the reports and knows I’m traveling with
Sheryl messages to check that everything’s okay. Initially I repeat what is in
the press, thinking that’s what I’m supposed to do, before calling her back

to tell her the truth. People don’t lie about narrowly missing plane crashes,
do they? Why would she? It’s not like she needs attention.
I never see Sheryl the same way after that.

10
Only Good News
It’s not like I didn’t know about Sheryl’s temper before the Japan trip. I’d
seen her blow up many times, at lots of people, berating them, humiliating
them, including Marne, one of her best friends. But after Japan, what hits
me, over and over, is how arbitrary it is. I never can predict what will
trigger an outburst, which makes it especially unnerving.
One memorable example, nine of us are in Sheryl’s conference room.
The name she’s given this room is as ominous as you could get, given her
anger-management issues: Only Good News. We’re waiting for a meeting
to begin. The start time comes and goes and we all sit there, eight of us,
looking at her expectantly.
“Where’s Debbie?” she demands. I’m confused. Debbie’s been involved
in the issue we’re discussing to provide comms advice, but she’s not leading
the meeting. Someone reassures Sheryl that she’ll be here soon but we can
get things started.
“Call her,” Sheryl commands.
Someone punches Debbie’s number into the Polycom in the middle of
the table and gently asks her where she is.
“I’m nearly there,” she assures the gathered group. “Start without me.
I’ll be with you shortly.”
“Where are you?” Sheryl demands.
“I’m just turning into campus,” Debbie assures her. “At the traffic
lights.”

We all look at Sheryl, ready for her to start the meeting. But she just sits
there and waits. And so do we. It’s just awkward silence. Minutes pass.
Eventually we’re past any reasonable amount of time it could take to get
from the traffic lights to Sheryl’s conference room.
It probably wasn’t much more than ten minutes.
Finally Debbie enters the room in a bluster of apologies. Sheryl looks at
her accusingly and says, “You weren’t at the traffic lights.”
“Sorry, traffic was a nightmare. I’d just come off the highway…”
Sheryl cuts her off and, in front of her colleagues, gives her a dressing
down about blaming the traffic rather than accepting responsibility for not
anticipating traffic. She asks how many times she’s driven this particular
road, why she hadn’t considered the needs of her coworkers in deciding
when to leave her house, what time might have been more appropriate to set
off from San Francisco to reach Menlo Park. She vents that Debbie has
wasted her coworkers’ time (making no mention of her own decision to
waste our time with this performance).
By now I know there’s probably no specific reason for this outburst.
Debbie’s not in the habit of being late. I’d be shocked if she had been
underperforming in the days or weeks before this. It’s just Sheryl, in an
arbitrary flex of power. That seems to be how she operates, unpredictable,
keeping us all on edge. Never quite knowing when she’ll strike, so we’re
never tempted to push any boundaries, even the simplest ones. Strict rules,
selectively enforced and the baseline of ever-present fear. It ensures we
obey in advance. Why does someone need to be so mean to the people
helping her? I’ve been at Facebook for a few years now, and I’ve hit a point
like the phase of a romance where you still see everything great that
attracted you to the person in the first place. You’re still excited by the
future you’re building together. But you’ve spent enough time together that
you also see their flaws. And wonder how deep they run. I don’t know if
Sheryl’s outbursts are an occasional thing—which I can cope with—or if
that’s who she is. And I’m nervous it’s the latter.
I feel this way about the job in general. I’m the person Facebook flies in
to deal with governments around the world. It still feels exciting and
important to spread this tool around the world to improve people’s lives.

But at the same time, there’s the disturbing things we’re starting to hear
about bad experiences users have on the platform, like kids being bullied,
privacy violations, harassment and crime triggered by Facebook posts. And
there are moments like this.
I’m worried that I’m getting used to these things.
We all sit there and witness Debbie’s humiliation. This is someone who
normally owns the room. Sassy. Now flustered and small and apologizing
over and over: “I’m so sorry,” “You’re right,” “I should’ve left earlier,” “So
sorry, Sheryl.”
I feel terrible for her, but none of us leap to her defense. There’d be no
point.
Or there is the time at the World Economic Forum in Davos,
Switzerland, in 2013, when there’s a badge missing for one of Sheryl’s
assistants. The guilty party is back home in Silicon Valley, so Sheryl lets
loose on the people who happen to be standing in front of her, me and her
best friend, Marne.
