We’re standing in the registration tent. Lots of people are milling around
and witness her tirade. “Why did no one think about this? Do I have to do
all these things myself? Why do I have a team that doesn’t think through the
most basic requirements? What is the point of having you…” I start to
respond that our jobs are in policy, neither of us is responsible for the
badges, but Marne stops me. “Take it,” she says to me quietly. “Just take
responsibility.” So I do, kowtowing to Sheryl as Marne grovels alongside
me. Then she and I march into a WEF workroom and literally stand over a
staffer, refusing to leave until they print a badge.
Other times, of course, Sheryl is charming, charismatic, whip-smart. She’s
all these things at once. There’s talk of her running for office, or taking a
job in the Obama administration. There’s an influx of people to Facebook
who want to work for her. They’re drawn to her like moths to a flame.
There’s a growing class of people looking to align themselves with a
billionaire on the up, but people are drawn to Sheryl in particular. It’s a

running joke in the DC office, where we know they’ve only seen one side
of her: “Incoming moth number twenty-seven. Prepare for impact.”
Sometimes, of course, you can predict that something will upset Sheryl.
When I learn that Angela Merkel—the German chancellor—has declined
Sheryl’s request for a meeting, Marne tells me not to tell her. “We never can
let her know,” she says. “Just say it’s a scheduling issue.” We both know
how angry Sheryl would be if she found out that Merkel doesn’t think
Sheryl’s important enough to talk to.
So that’s what I do. I lie to Sheryl. This doesn’t feel right. Weeks later,
Marne cracks and tells her. I don’t know why. Exactly as she predicted,
Sheryl’s hurt and furious. Not at us for lying (although she probably should
be worried about that). She’s mad at Merkel and at us for not overcoming
any reservations Merkel had about meeting. For months after that, anytime
her name comes up, Sheryl bitterly reminds everyone how Merkel wouldn’t
meet with her. It gets to a point where we all try to avoid mentioning
Germany at all.
In January 2014, I’m in a meeting with an all-male lineup of Facebook
law enforcement experts when my water breaks. I Uber to the hospital and
things get underway pretty fast. I get a message. Sheryl’s about to
unexpectedly go into a meeting with the president of Brazil at Davos and
she wants talking points. I’m in the delivery room, my feet in stirrups, in
labor. I put down my phone and reach for my laptop. I start drafting.
“What are you doing?” Tom asks.
“Just getting Sheryl some talking points.”
“Sarah, no.”
I continue typing. He appeals to my doctor, a person he knows I deeply
respect: “Dr. Veca, make this stop.”
“Two more minutes,” I say, between contractions. Trying not to think of
Lean In’s direction: don’t leave before you leave.
Dr. Veca reaches over and gently closes my laptop. She says, “It’s a very
special thing to give birth to your first child. I don’t think you should be
working through it. Sheryl will understand.”
“She won’t,” I say. “Please let me push Send.”
“You should be pushing,” she says. “But not send.”

Despite the disapproval in the room, I quickly reopen the laptop. I send
the email. I know how this looks, and I can’t defend it. Looking back, I still
can’t quite believe it. I’m ashamed. And I can’t blame this entirely on
Facebook. I’ve been this kind of driven person my whole life. I don’t like to
let people down. But it’s also true that at Facebook, I didn’t feel like I had a
choice.
Not long after, our daughter Sasha is born.
Compared with New Zealand, where there’s six months’ paid leave and
many people take a year, maternity leave is short in the US, and I feel
pressure to return to work even before I use it up. I’m not really sure how to
combine this job with motherhood. Especially since this job never stops.
When I have to travel to work in the Silicon Valley office, I take the baby
and pay coworkers’ nannies to watch her. For the part of my job that falls
outside traditional work hours, Sasha comes with me. To a rally in Madison
Square Garden for India’s newly elected prime minister Narendra Modi. To
Canada, where Facebook has been ordered to testify in Parliament, and
where I’m detained at the border, until a phone call to Tom satisfies border
officials that I am not absconding to Ottawa after kidnapping a tiny baby.
I thought I was doing a good job in a difficult situation. But my first
performance review after maternity leave is problematic. While it’s
positive, the only negative feedback relates to my baby. The fact that people
can hear her in the background on calls—mostly because West Coast time
means I’m often taking the calls on the East Coast in the evening, at home,
where my baby lives. Travel is more complicated. I’d relocated to New
York, and that meant I now had to travel to Washington, DC, regularly.
Where I’m from it’s more usual for a baby to be with its mother or family
for the first six months of life if not longer. My family is trying to come up
with creative ways to make that happen with my mother, grandmother, and
sister all traveling to New York to help.
A few weeks after the review, Marne and I are at Facebook’s
headquarters when Sheryl pulls me aside.

“Marne told me about your childcare situation,” she says breezily. I’m
mortified this is something that has been discussed with the COO. But I
understand this is her way of caring. She’s trying to be nice. She’s saying
this because she likes me.
“Hire a nanny,” she instructs. “Be smart and hire a Filipina nanny.”
She mistakes my look of horror for skepticism.
“Sarah, I’m telling you, they’re English speaking, sunny disposition,
and service orientated.” Marne echoes this sentiment. Both have at least
one Filipina nanny in their retinue of staff.
I call Tom and tell him about these conversations, telling him the COO
of Facebook is now involved in our childcare.
“This is appalling,” he says. “How can employers say such things?”
“I guess this is the real Lean In. The stuff Sheryl really believes about
work and womanhood but doesn’t put in the book.”
I don’t want it to be an issue for my performance reviews in the future,
so Tom and I follow their instructions.
The day our new Filipina nanny starts, I’m in Mexico with Mark,
meeting with the Mexican president. He was completely against this
meeting, and I don’t feel like I can opt out, after browbeating him into it as
part of my push to have Mark engage at the presidential level to understand
how Facebook is impacting other countries. It’s my first time leaving Sasha
and I cry the whole way to the airport.
Tom is a vigilant father in ordinary times. The first day the baby’s alone
