with the nanny he’s extreme. Obsessively checking the baby monitor, which
streams video. He’s set it up on his mobile and the desktop at his office.
During one of these checks, he sees the baby alone in her playpen, the
nanny conspicuously absent. At first, he’s curious. But the longer he
watches, with no nanny in sight, the more alarmed he becomes. He tries to
call our new nanny. She doesn’t pick up. Panicked, he continues to
obsessively check the monitor and call the nanny and then everyone we
know in the neighborhood. Nobody’s home. Eventually in the background
he sees a firefighter in full fire gear walking through our small apartment.
He immediately abandons his desk and calls 911 demanding to know why

emergency services are in our home. They can’t help. He calls me in
Mexico City.
“The baby,” he says as soon as I pick up. “The baby is alone and there’s
a firefighter in our apartment.”
Panic doesn’t begin to capture the terror I feel as he relays what’s
happening.
I’m in a car with Elliot and Javi, speeding from the Mexican president’s
house to a Carlos Slim event. As Tom speeds through the streets of
Manhattan as fast as the taxi agrees to drive him, I don’t think I’ve ever
heard him more scared.
Ultimately, Sasha’s fine. Our small New York third-floor walk-up has
some cupboards outside the front door. Our nanny went to get something
from the cupboard and found herself locked out, with her phone inside the
apartment. Eventually, she used a stranger’s phone to call emergency
services, who broke in through the roof. With everyone safe and accounted
for, we eventually forget about it, until my next performance review when
Marne raises it:
“You shouldn’t tell stories like that, about your baby and nanny.”
My heart sinks. She wasn’t even in Mexico.
“It wasn’t a story. My baby was trapped by herself and the fire
department was called. We didn’t know if something terrible had
happened.”
“That’s not the point. These are personal issues. I’m trying to help. To
give you honest feedback. When you’re with the most senior members on
the team, Mark, Elliot, Javi, you need to be professional and focused on
them.”
Seriously? My baby’s alone in an apartment with emergency services
breaking in through the roof and I’m not supposed to mention it because it’s
personal? And they all discussed this situation afterward and found me
lacking?
The expectation at Facebook is that mothering is invisible, and the more
skilled you are, the more invisible it is. Months later when the baby’s
rushed to the hospital in an ambulance, I don’t mention it at the office for

days. Then I only mention it in passing, assuring Marne that it won’t affect
my work in any way.
This “don’t mention the children” ethos is of course the opposite of the
cheery slogans at Facebook to “bring your authentic self to work.” All
Sheryl’s Lean In stories about leaving work at 5:30 P.M. and telling her
coworkers she needed to be home with her children. Because the reality is
that there is a big difference between what people at Facebook say and what
they do, especially in relation to children. For example, Facebook had
planned to launch a Facebook for children codenamed “Project Family,”
and Sheryl would occasionally remind the policy team of their “failure to
do this while we had the opportunity,” blaming the policy team for missing
the chance to get kids on Facebook but she, like most of the leaders at
Facebook with younger children, severely limits her kids’ access to screens,
let alone social media accounts. And she never shares images of her
children on social media. Silicon Valley is awash in wooden Montessori
toys and shrouded in total screen bans. Parents at work talk about how they
don’t allow their teens to have mobile phones, which only underscores how
well these executives understand the real damage their product inflicts on
young minds.
This year, like every year, Sheryl hosts Women’s Day, an offsite
conference for all the women who work for Facebook. At that point, it’s
hundreds of women, whom she flies in to stay at a hotel in San Francisco.
We’re asked to share hotel rooms, an odd professional situation for grown
women, forcing us to navigate sleeping, sharing bathrooms, and wearing
pajamas with our colleagues.
Women’s Day is part evangelical church event, part multilevel
marketing summit, part Tony Robbins seminar, part yoga retreat, part
Oprah episode. Sheryl presides, dressed in Lululemon yoga pants and Ugg
boots. There’s a lot of talk about motherhood. Sheryl’s favored lieutenants,
in shiny uniformity, provide relatable stories of how they balance parenting
and demanding careers. The head of HR mock-confides in a scandalously
humorous tone that she sometimes gives her children cereal for dinner.
Sheryl tells a story from Lean In about bringing her four-year-old daughter
on a friend’s corporate jet, the eBay Gulfstream, where her daughter

announces, “Mommy, my head itches!” Sheryl checks. Her daughter has
lice. “I was the only person bringing young children on this corporate
plane,” she says. “I spent the rest of the flight in a complete panic, trying to
keep her isolated, her voice down.” This is offered as a story any mom can
connect to. As if we all have friends with Gulfstreams. There are videos of
women from Sheryl’s inner circle—all white, beautifully lit and shot—
working out in their palatial home gyms, playing with their photogenic
children, and relaxing with their mutely supportive husbands. All of these
mothering fables are careful to edit out the role played by the phalanx of
nannies and other help who usually do the bulk of the actual labor of raising
children.
Mothering in form, not function.
They don’t discuss the real secret behind maintaining their work-life
balance, mothering as if they don’t have children: it’s undergirded by their
multimillion-dollar paychecks.
There’s usually some trauma porn, heroic tales of less high-profile
employees working through cancer or some other tragedy, but with a video
montage they always triumph and return to Facebook working harder and
better than they did before. The point, I suppose, is to measure your life
against theirs, and inspire you to work harder.
Sheryl pushes the same kinds of messages in weekly updates she sends
to senior executives called HPM (Highlights, People, Me). Stories like the
time Sheryl and her family went on holiday with Marne and her family in
Europe:
Due to work issues and the time change, I wound up missing
most/all breakfasts and dinners as I was on the phone.… During one
