of the last dinners, my kids came to find me—I was sitting in a
staircase outside the restaurant on the phone. They looked upset and
started to tell me that they thought I should be at the dinner but I had
to tell them that I had to finish the call and then talk. When I was off
I came to find them, expecting them to be upset. Instead, they gave
me a big hug and said, “we just want to thank you for working so
hard to help billions of people!” I looked at Marne, who was on

vacation with us and another family, and asked what happened.
Marne had seen them upset and explained that she knew I did not
want to miss meals and I was upset too but I had a job I needed to
do and they should be proud of me.… It was a brilliant reframe that
I know I will try again when I need it. And might help some of you
when you need it for professional or personal reasons one day too.
Sheryl’s messages weren’t subtle.

11
Road Trip
Lots of moms have issues combining breastfeeding and working. My issue
is the expectation from my bosses that breasts can be turned on and off like
a faucet and I can breastfeed anywhere, anytime. And I really mean
anywhere.
In summer 2014, Colombia’s minister of information technology and
communication invites Javi to Colombia 3.0, a tech conference in Bogotá. I
think Javi can handle this one on his own, and I have a five-month-old at
home. My bosses think differently. I’m ordered to go. I reconcile myself to
this. It’s three days. I can’t bring the baby but I can bring a breast pump. I
can handle it.
We’re in Colombia because of something called Internet.org. Mark
launched it nearly a year ago, in August 2013, with a paper grandly titled
“Is Connectivity a Human Right?” In his opening paragraph, he lays out
what he calls “one of the greatest challenges of our generation”:
Today we connect more than 1.15 billion people each month. But as
we started thinking about connecting the next 5 billion, we realized
something important: the vast majority of people in the world don’t
have access to the internet.
Mark then presents his vision for how to give free internet to all those
people. He explains that we could radically reduce the cost of building the
infrastructure and delivering data, if we start them off with very basic
service. The key is that it would be all text. No movies, no high-resolution

photos, no music—those all use too much data. He says the priority should
be tools to get people the information they need. For Mark that means
search, some version of Wikipedia, weather, messaging, and—of course—
social media. Websites would be modified into text-only versions. Already,
Facebook has an app like this called Facebook Zero, with lots of users
across Africa and Asia.
Who’ll bear the cost of all these free services? The mobile operators—
telecom companies around the world. They’re the ones who’ll invest. Mark
argues that this scheme makes smart business sense for them because it
delivers hundreds of millions of new customers who eventually will want to
upgrade and buy data plans for their phones. One of his big talking points is
that once people get a taste of what’s on the internet, they’ll want to pay for
more data and more access. In Africa, Facebook users are already making
the switch to broadband, so they can get pictures and everything else you
don’t get on the text-only product. The “org” in “Internet.org” is a way of
suggesting there is an altruistic mission at the heart of this.
So that’s the vision.
A few months later, Mark announces partnerships that Facebook’s
Connectivity Lab has established, “to build drones, satellites and lasers to
deliver the internet” to the billions of people who don’t have it.
I’ll admit, I and the rest of the policy team don’t pay much attention to
all this. Internet.org is in such a nascent stage, and just one of the projects
Facebook has going at the time. Facebook buys both WhatsApp and the
virtual reality company Oculus within a month of Mark’s announcement to
build a fleet of low-flying internet drones. But from the little I know it
sounds like a good thing.
Then, in May 2014, Chile’s telecommunications regulator makes it
illegal to give away the kinds of free services Internet.org plans to offer,
effectively banning the venture before it’s even launched. I hear about this
from Javi, who’s alarmed. “Chile is small but if this starts spreading to other
countries,” he says, “we will have a problem.” We decide we need a quick
win, some Latin American government saying yes to Internet.org. To help
convince them, I suggest to Javi that we add free e-government services to

the Internet.org apps, things like paying your taxes or signing up for social
services. That will give each government skin in the game.
And we’re here in Colombia to try to convince its president Juan
Manuel Santos to be our partner. I need some big name to stand on a stage
with us to tell the world—especially other presidents and prime ministers—
they love Internet.org and make the Chileans reconsider their decision.
The way I get President Santos is first to court his minister of
information technology and communication. Javi signs us up to see
firsthand the challenges of connectivity in the jungle. The minister
describes it to Javi as getting to know the “real Colombia” through a road
trip. We fly to Bucaramanga in the north. When we land, we’re led to a line
of armored vehicles occupied by lots of military men with large guns and
dark green uniforms. Turns out, the area is a stronghold for the militia of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), revolutionary guerrillas
who are still fighting and kidnapping foreigners, despite ongoing peace
negotiations.
My sense of alarm rises when it’s explained that the minister will not be
riding in the big black ministerial jeep, or the decoy big black ministerial
jeep, which we’re told to ride in, but instead in one of the many security
vehicles accompanying them, perched among a group of soldiers with
automatic weapons. I ask Javi if it’s such a good idea to get in a car that’s
too dangerous for the government official to ride in. He’s like, let’s just roll
with it. We get in.
We drive for hours into the jungle, off-road. I mean, there are no roads.
And obviously no electricity. No privacy. It’s hard to imagine a worse place
to try to use a bulky electric breast pump that needs to be plugged into a
wall. Four or five hours into this, I’m in physical pain. But I don’t dwell on
that because I’m so afraid we’ll be attacked. We seem like a ridiculously
conspicuous target, churning our way through the wilderness. I think, if
we’re kidnapped, pumping will be out of the question. And ultimately it is
for this trip. Despite the excruciating pain, I don’t pump until I’m safely
