back in Bogotá that night.
But this wasn’t even my worst experience. Two months later, September
2014, I go to Turkey. After my experience in Colombia, I’m nervous about

pumping. I’m right to be. The pump needs to be plugged in, and once our
Turkish Airlines flight hits cruising altitude, I discover that neither the
bathroom nor the seat has any outlets. Over the next ten hours my anxiety
rises as my breasts swell and harden with milk. I’m in a black cardigan and
white T-shirt, and by the time I make it through customs and immigration
the white T-shirt is soaked and I’m in agony. Predictably the cab line is long
and the traffic in central Istanbul is terrible. By the time we make it to the
hotel I am beyond desperate to pump. There’s a massive line to check in
and I find myself tapping my foot and squeezing my palms, ready to burst.
As soon as I’m safely in my room I simply drop the suitcase, grab the
pump as fast as I can, and plug it in—not even bothering to remove my T-
shirt, which is now a translucent rag. I just use the V-neck. I attach the
arcane pieces of equipment and flip the switch to start the pump. It turns
over.
Click.… Click.… Click.
I check that the room key is in the slot for electricity just in case that’s
the issue, but no. Nothing. I navigate my way back to reception, where
there’s still a long line. When I get to the front and try to explain the
problem, the woman at the desk looks confused and apologizes, saying that
her English isn’t very good. I switch to hand gestures, lots of circular
motions and squeezing my hands. I’m so close to tears of frustration and
pain, and at a certain point I just gesture at my breasts and sopping T-shirt
and make a squeezing motion. She finally smiles knowingly, gives me a
wink, and assures me she’ll have it sorted in no time. I head back to my
room.
As soon as I hear the knock at my door I race to open it. There’s a man in
overalls, dark shaggy hair, stubble, gray eyes. I give him the most
welcoming smile and hurry him into my room, closing the door. I bring him
over to the pump by the bed and explain the clicking noise. It becomes clear
that he does not speak English at all. But what’s weird is that he seems
uninterested in the pump. I’ve perched beside him on the bed trying to

explain the issue, and at a certain point I realize he’s gently guiding me into
the bed.
I shake my head no. And point back at the pump.
He looks confused, gestures at my wet T-shirt and my breasts popping
out of the V-neck, and lifts his hands. He does the same air-pumping
motions I’d performed in the lobby earlier.
I suddenly realize the kind of pumping he has in mind. And it’s not
going to help me.
I point to my wedding ring and shake my head no.
He musters some English: “No problem. No problem. It’s no problem
for me.”
“Yes—but it’s a problem for me. There’s been some kind of
misunderstanding. This is not what I need.”
I walk to the other side of the room. Open the door. And walk out.
At a nearby pharmacy, I buy what I surmise is a hand pump. Finally,
relief. Roughly half a day after I first needed it.

12
The Body
We’re about to travel to the one country in the world where there’s an open
arrest warrant for Mark Zuckerberg. And Mark thinks this is the time to
show us his fake gangsta handshakes.
Debbie and I are trying to teach him the respectful bow one’s supposed
to do when meeting the leader of South Korea. Sheryl of course diligently
absorbed all our advice on bows, greetings, gifts, and other protocol issues
that arise when meeting with a head of state, but Mark treats it like a weird
goofing-off session. Debbie and I demonstrate where to put your hands
when you bow to a president, how to arrange your face, how deep the bow
goes. He crosses his arms like the Kangol-hat-era LL Cool J and rocks his
body from side to side hip-hop-style, before moving to a series of fist
bumps, high fives, and backward low fives.
Let’s not even get into how odd the moves look, coming from this slim,
pale-to-the-point-of-translucent man with a square haircut and very rigid
posture. It’s troubling because this matters. When Bill Gates greeted the
South Korean president with one hand in his pocket, it was considered so
disrespectful it made headlines as “the handshake that bruised a nation.” It
undermined anything else that came out of those meetings, and my Korean
friends still talk about it. Mark doesn’t care.
Of course, this is the same man who’s shown absolutely no interest in
policy issues or countries outside the US since I arrived at Facebook. Or
almost no interest. The first time Mark traveled to a country to meet with a
foreign head of state since I arrived was in 2012 when he flew to Russia. He

met Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, and then in 2013 he had a
perfunctory meeting with the Korean president, both of which Marne
handled. Mark was nervous and sweaty in both.
The few policy meetings that Mark agrees to do after that harden his
belief that meeting with foreign leaders is not a good use of his time.
Midway through this protocol session, I realize I’m one of the few people
who work with him on something he’s scared of. His discomfort and fear
are visible and can be measured in sweat.
This trip—in October 2014—is the first time I’m going to be working
so closely with Mark. Up until now most of our interaction has been over
email, or filtered through Sheryl, Elliot, or Marne. It’s been functional
exchanges, the occasional meeting, not weeks together on the road. Four
years after I had pitched Mark on engaging with heads of state, we’re now
trying to secure meetings with a bunch of them in one trip, including those
of Indonesia, Japan, and Korea.
This does not go down well with Sheryl. Meeting with world leaders is
her terrain. She instructs Elliot that Mark should not be doing “other stuff”
beyond business meetings outside the US. Elliot rolls his eyes at this. Of
course the company’s CEO should be meeting with presidents and prime
ministers. He tells me he’ll take care of it and he does.
Mark is bringing the Mteam—the top managers of the company (M for
“management”)—on this trip. It’s the first time they’re traveling together
outside the US. The full-court press is because the company’s growth is
increasingly in Asia. This trip will open up a new front in Facebook’s
slowly expanding war with Google. Despite the fact that, or maybe because,
so many of our top managers worked at Google, there’s a profound mistrust
of the search giant and a discomfort about the way Facebook relies on
