Google for the company’s future success.
Right now, most of our users access Facebook on their Android phones
or iPhones. Android’s made by Google, so this gives Google and Apple
very meaningful control over Facebook. Either could potentially remove
Facebook from their app stores and devices, or restrict the way things like
notifications work with Facebook. Google—very aware of its power over
Facebook—is increasing pressure in a variety of ways, like requesting

payment or data in return for Facebook’s use of Google Maps. (Years later,
when Apple allows iPhone users to opt out of the tracking Facebook does
for advertisers, Facebook’s market value drops $10 billion.)
At one point, Facebook tried to take more control of its destiny by
creating its own phone (“Project Buffy”—named semi-ironically for Buffy
the Vampire Slayer and “social layer”). It launches in 2013, a collaboration
with a Chinese company called HTC, and is a massive flop. Time magazine
calls it one of the biggest tech failures of the year.
In fact, the trip to Korea is framed to Mteam as a trip to Samsung. The
goal for the trip is to deepen trust and build goodwill with a company that
isn’t Apple or Google. Maybe Samsung will agree to preload Facebook on
all Samsung phones.
Unfortunately, Korea is the one country that has an open criminal
investigation into Facebook executives. There are arrest warrants for Mark
and Sheryl and other Mteam members.
The reason for this is unclear, but it appears that the body that oversees
gaming in Korea wrote to us warning that Korean law required Facebook to
submit the games on our platform to be rated by the government. It’s not
clear exactly what happened after the letter was received, but the Koreans
say that Facebook ignored it. It’s shocking that there was no reply. But it’s
plausible. The company is still very “move fast and break things” and “ask
for forgiveness, not permission.”
Now the situation has escalated. The Cybercrime Branch of the Seoul
Police has gotten involved. And you don’t mess around with Korean police.
When they started investigating Google, Google’s head of Korea had to flee
the country.
Still, Facebook appears to stonewall, claiming that basically no one in
Korea—not the Korean government, not the Korean police—has any power
over them. This seems to be Facebook’s preferred position with all
countries outside the US and Ireland (where it has its international
headquarters). The company disputes their power to regulate Facebook at
all, unless they’ve enacted specific laws targeting our business and
legislating jurisdiction. So, I believe, if a local government notices false
advertising on Facebook and asks us to take it down, unless they have a law

giving them power or prohibiting misleading ads that specifically applies to
social media companies, Facebook won’t act. Facebook’s American
leadership believes the “values” it defines can trump national laws when
they conflict.
That’s what seems so outrageous to me about how Korea is being
handled. The government there does have a law demanding that we get our
games rated and approved, and it seems we’re refusing to even
acknowledge it.
It’s a hard argument to make, rejecting the authority of a government or
police agency in a country where you operate.
And Korea isn’t alone in cracking down on Facebook. Other countries
have opened investigations for all sorts of reasons. Our international offices
have had “visits” and “raids”—armed and unarmed—in Brazil, Korea,
India, and France. I usually hear about these when a phone call or email
arrives from our local head of office. (“Hiii! There’s a man with a gun here
wanting to know when we’ll be paying taxes in Brazil.”)
By now it happens with enough regularity that we’ve set up emergency
procedures for raids. They include shutting down access to Facebook’s
network. Because of course the real difference between a “virtual state” like
Facebook and a “real state” like Brazil or Korea is they have real police
with real arms.
In India the situation’s so bad, Facebook’s leadership hires an ex–police
captain who’s been given some boring, official-sounding title but is
understood by the policy team to be someone who “would be able to handle
an arrest situation well”—that is, go to jail in a clash between Facebook and
the Indian government.
In August, just a few weeks before our trip, a Korea crisis meeting is
called. Elliot is part of Mteam and going on the trip, so he is suddenly very
focused on the potential for him, Mark, and Sheryl to end up in a jail cell.
Our lawyers have sent an email that includes the line, “The threat of jail and
criminal liability is very real.”
I set out various solutions, based on the possibility that Facebook is
guilty as charged. Like, we could cooperate with Korea’s Cybercrime

Police. Or we could shift Facebook’s whole approach and review how we
obey the laws of the countries in which we’re operating.
“Would this apply everywhere?” Marne asks.
“Yes, we can’t just make a change for Korea, or other countries will see
why that happened and issue arrest warrants for Mark,” I say to a
dissatisfied room. “I think it’s a change we need to make everywhere
anyway.”
This gets no traction. So I decide not to speak any further, ceding the
floor to those more senior than me.
“We need a body to arrest.”
“To call their bluff.”
“See how serious they are.”
It’s breathtaking to me, how casually leadership speaks of employees
being jailed. As if it’s a fact of life like taxes (though of course that’s
something they try to avoid). Everyone starts calling this a “mitigation
strategy”—even though the mitigation in this case is to find a “body” to be
arrested.
I lose track of the conversation and get lost in thought about how their
language removes the moral questions. “A body to arrest” is more like
chattel you own, rather than somebody’s son or daughter. Such an odd
phrase to hear in corporate America.
This is what we’re talking about. Rather than whether our actions in
Korea are right or not.
“We need to get someone to test the appetite of the Korean authorities
for arresting someone from headquarters. It can’t be someone located there.
They need to fly in before Mark and Sheryl do. You know, a body,” Elliot
states matter-of-factly.
The room falls silent. It’s a weird thing to realize that the tech world,
this most modern of industries, has cannon fodder.
