“I can’t go,” one of the senior security guys in the room quickly says,
followed quickly by others. But they didn’t need to. Everyone in this room
is too senior to be “the body.”
Eventually, the silence becomes awkward. I slowly realize everyone is
looking at me. The least senior person in the room.

“Me?” I ask, as if there’s been a terrible case of mistaken identity.
Elliot nods.
I’m the body.

13
Stockholm Syndrome
I don’t think this says anything good about me, but I would’ve gone and
gotten arrested. Somehow, it didn’t seem like I had a say in the matter. This
was my job. I started to prepare. It took Tom to point out, no, you have a
seven-month-old baby at home. Doing jail time in a foreign country is not a
reasonable ask from your bosses.
It honestly had not occurred to me that I could say no. I have this thing,
which sometimes I think is related to being an eldest daughter, that
someone has to take responsibility and do the hard thing and I guess that’s
going to be me. Also, I had survived a near-deadly shark attack once. So
how bad could it be? Somehow, I convinced myself it would be like
Myanmar or Colombia, bad with the potential of being awful, but whatever
was thrown at me or wherever I was confined, I would figure it out.
Tom’s suggestion that I can just refuse to go seems revolutionary. I envy
his clarity of thought and, honestly, am filled with relief—and grateful to
Tom—for this paradigm-shifting notion that I could tell them no. But I
don’t say that. I’m too annoyed because he also suggests that I have
Stockholm syndrome. That I’m a victim who has come to regard my
“captors,” Sheryl, Elliot, and Marne, with trust and affection they don’t
deserve. Something about that comment stings but makes clear what I have
to do.
I begin a back-and-forth with Elliot, with Marne, and with the legal and
security teams, trying to extract myself from that Korean jail cell that’s
started to feel very real. I throw out different arguments hoping desperately

that one will work: that with a tiny breastfeeding baby at home it isn’t really
feasible for me to be indefinitely detained in an Asian prison. That there are
other crises around the world that need my attention. At times, it feels like it
would be easier negotiating with the Korean authorities for my freedom.
Finally, the thing that clinches it appears to be that they need me to be at
work, not in jail, in order to make Mark’s Asia trip a success.
That’s what gets them. Not concern for me and my family.
I take this in. This is the first time I’ve refused to do something they’ve
asked, and it’s a clarifying lesson. I can see my bosses a little more clearly.
And now I understand more about how they see me. It’s an uncomfortable
realization of how little they care, these people I’m with for sixty, seventy,
eighty hours a week. Facebook’s leaders aren’t the people I hoped they
were. And in retrospect, I should have thought a lot harder about this fact
than I did. But for the first time, I think maybe this place shouldn’t be my
home, not forever. Of course, I talk myself out of any drastic action like
quitting and finding a job somewhere else. The logistics of doing that with a
new baby seem daunting.
Predictably, one of the only other female directors on our team is sent
instead of me. She’s new to the team and looking to prove herself. Or
maybe she didn’t feel like she had a choice either.
She meets with Korean authorities and doesn’t get arrested. So—
presumably—the coast is clear for Mark and Sheryl and Elliot. We prepare
for the trip.

14
Five Settlers and One Billionaire in Catan
As I understand it, the first time you ride on a private jet you’re supposed to
act like you always ride on private jets. Or at least that’s what everyone else
did.
Long before we make it to this point, I’ve unintentionally made it
obvious that I am a random person from New Zealand, not a seasoned
executive used to private jet travel, by earnestly explaining to Mark—in one
of our trip preparation meetings—the different options for layovers en route
to Asia, and the amenities in various airports. I tried to convince him we
should stop in Singapore’s airport between flights, as it has a great
swimming pool.
Not one of the many coworkers in that meeting, including those I
consider friends, corrected me. Nor did Mark.
When I’m told I’ll be traveling on the private jet with Mark and the
Mteam, my first thought is all the frequent-flier miles I was hoping to rack
up on the trip. I’d been saving them, hoping to upgrade my grandmother
when she flies to New York to meet her great-grandchild. I broach this with
Debbie, who’s also going with Mark on the trip.
“Do you think anyone would mind too much if I just take a normal
flight?”
“Are you an idiot?” Debbie says, assuming that’s the end of the
conversation.
“Why would you say that?” It seemed a reasonable question. Facebook
has a generous travel policy.

“Do you know how valuable those seats are?” she asks, as if speaking to
a small child.
“I know literally nothing about private jets. I don’t even know if I’ve
ever seen one.”
“Don’t you understand that people would give anything to spend hours
jetting around the world with Mark Zuckerberg?”
This definitely had not factored into my thinking.
“There’s competition about who gets to be on those flights,” she
continues. “And it’s cutthroat.”
“Okay, okay, okay,” I interrupt. “Forget I asked.”
Once I’m onboard, I’m surprised by so many things on the private jet.
Like how difficult it is to figure out where the toilet is in the bathroom. The
whole bathroom is so refined that I push and pull on lots of levers and
handles in its leathery expanse. These reveal cupboards and drawers, but no
toilet appears. I can’t reemerge from the bathroom to ask without looking
like an imbecile, and the flight is long enough that there’s no choice but to
persevere and figure it out. Eventually I prod or lift something I thought
was a bench and miraculously a silver bowl appears from discreet
surrounds.
I’m also surprised by how beige and tan everything is. Not just the
