bathroom, everything. Like an eighties boardroom. It’s boring. And devoid
of the things I usually rely on to get through flights: solid in-flight
entertainment, lots of food, and a little alcohol. There’s only one screen and
the only thing on it is a flight map. No one seems to request anything else.
Mark doesn’t have a working TV at home and seems completely
uninterested in anything like watching a movie. In terms of food, it’s
Mark’s favorite foods, which at this moment are fried chicken and
McDonald’s (which I feel sure would horrify Sheryl) or other fast-food
options, the type of fatty, salty food you eat when drinking. Although
there’s no chance of that here.
There’s also the fraught decision of where to sit. There’s obviously an
internal hierarchy within the team but I have no idea how this maps to the
geography of the plane. So as everybody boards and starts to settle in, I
stand around in the center of the jet like an idiot, hoping everyone will take

a place and through the process of elimination it will become clear which
seat is mine. When I end up sitting beside Mark, I can’t tell if this strategy
has worked or backfired but I suspect the latter.
Traveling with Mark’s inner circle makes me feel like an outsider. These are
people who are there to look after him, they’re used to spending day after
day together, and they’re used to a different kind of luxury. All of this
becomes very clear once we land in Indonesia. The place we’re staying—
the Amanjiwo resort—is spectacular. Mark doesn’t have the best room in
the place; he basically has an entire compound. To me it looks more like a
citadel than a suite. Large stone pillars support an expansive rotunda with
an excessively large daybed at its center, commanding gorgeous views of
lush rainforest on all sides. Steps cascade down the hill from the daybed to
an enormous private swimming pool, which looks like a public swimming
pool from my world.
When I arrive there for a senior staff get-together, Mark’s stretched out
on the daybed in his swimsuit, his white body propped up on some
cushions. It feels like I’ve stumbled into ancient Greece, though a toga and
laurel wreath would match the room better than his swimsuit. I half expect
someone to appear to feed him grapes, but instead we all make do with an
exotic fruit platter.
Mark announces that we should all go for a swim. I’m immediately self-
conscious about the whole swimming-with-my-bosses situation. I had
packed a bikini, which led Tom to ask why I need a bikini on a business
trip, but I guess my hope was that there’d be an opportunity to swim at
some of the hotels by myself. With work and the baby, I couldn’t remember
the last time I’d been able to go for a swim or do anything indulgent, just
for me. My life is entirely in service of the baby, my bosses, or basic
survival. Everything else is disappearing through disuse. Rightly or wrongly
I’d fixated on this swim, a few minutes by myself submerged and
unavailable, as the highlight of the trip. I hadn’t planned to climb into my
bikini and dive in next to Mark Zuckerberg.

It’s one thing to travel with your bosses. It’s another thing to get into your
bikini while doing so, especially when your stomach has visible shark jaw
marks and other very large, unmissable scars all over it from doctors who
weren’t thinking about your bikini body when they hacked you open. I
almost never tell anyone about the shark attack. I don’t want to be known as
the girl who got bit by a shark. I had that experience already, in high school.
Another issue: I’m still breastfeeding and pumping, and my bikini top
hasn’t really accounted for that whole situation. It’s fitting on me like a pair
of pasties. This wasn’t a problem when it was just going to be me
swimming by myself. Panic sets in, and I look around for another woman to
get guidance on whether to swim. Should I just watch everyone else get in
the water? Is there a nonswimming activity I could pivot everyone to?
But there are only two other women on this trip. Everyone at the citadel
is male, and they’re all sitting around talking about computer games. I start
to message Debbie, begging her to get here as fast as she can because I have
a breast bikini situation, but before I can hit Send I realize Mark is looking
over my shoulder.
“What’s that?”
My stomach drops, thinking Mark’s read my SOS bikini message—
which may or may not have included references to him and his swimming
trunks.
“It looks like Home. Is that like an ancient version of Chat Heads?” he
says, clearly disapproving. I can’t tell if it’s because Home was a failed
product—part of Facebook’s disastrous attempt at a Facebook phone—or
because he disapproves of my lax approach to updating my phone, or
because he’d managed to read my message.
“Ah, yeah. I’m not good about updating any tech. I’m more of a policy
person. Do you want to go over any of the briefings, preparation, protocol?”
I say, trying to distract from the swimsuit texts clearly visible on my screen.
“Now?” he says, surprised.
“Well, you know, always good to be prepared,” I say uneasily, aware
this is perhaps the world’s most unenticing offer. Let’s not swim and relax
in stunning surroundings. Let’s talk about policy and protocol.

“It’s the weekend. We’ve got plenty of time to prep. I’m going for a
swim now. You’re coming, right?”
“Ah, yes. I will. I just forgot something in my room, so I’m just going to
get that.”
“What?”
Panic doesn’t serve me well. “Just a thing I forgot.”
I turn and head toward the hotel lobby and find the gift shop.
Predictably, everything is doll sized to suit the bodies of the 1 percent— or
what look like tiny sizes to me and my breastfeeding breasts—but I manage
to find a one-piece and a cover-up that provide a modicum of modesty and
thankfully cover my shark bite–scarred stomach. The price is astronomical
and I blanch when the sales assistant tells me the total, but hand over my
credit card because we’re in a remote part of the backwaters of Java and I
don’t see any alternative other than baring my shark scars to my bosses.
I return to the pool to find Debbie posing for Instagram photos in a
fantastic skimpy bikini and feel suddenly overdressed in my one-piece and
cover-up.
Everyone swims and lazes about. Picks at the fruit platter. Mark sits in
his little rotunda, shooting the shit with the guys. I join them and I’m
surprised they’re talking about babies. I’m thrilled for an opportunity to
speak about what is actually preoccupying me, missing my baby. But that’s
not the direction the conversation goes in. Mark’s expecting his first child,
and he tells us he might not be present for the birth. As the only person
there who’s birthed a baby, I’m stunned. And genuinely curious. “What
would you be doing instead?” I asked him. Like, what in the world could
