possibly be more meaningful to him than the birth of his first child? He had
no idea. Just “something more important might come up.”
He told us he’d discussed this with Priscilla and I was fascinated by her
response. Apparently she told Mark that she would be totally fine with him
skipping the delivery but that he might come to regret missing the birth of
his first child.
Well played.

At some point in the afternoon, Mark decides that we should all play board
games, but they’ve been left on the private jet, which is many miles away. I
assume that’ll be the end of it and we’ll come up with some other activity,
but hours later one of Mark’s security detail returns with the games. After a
dinner that, in keeping with the surroundings, felt more like a sumptuous
feast of ancient times with rose petals scattered everywhere and more
courses than I could count, we retire to one of the rooms in Mark’s complex
and start to play Settlers of Catan. It’s me, Debbie, Mark’s assistant Andrea,
Mark, and two of the guys from the communications team, Dex Torricke-
Barton and Derick Mains.
Everyone’s really into it despite the blatant nerdiness of it all, building
their little empires and strategically negotiating. But as the night wears on,
it becomes more and more obvious that people are letting Mark win.
Initially, it’s just small things, people not building near his settlements
or going soft when they negotiate with him. As the game continues, things
become more explicit, with people “stealing” from everyone but him and
never placing the “robber” on Mark’s empires. After a particularly
egregious move by Dex in which he uses the robber to block Debbie, who’s
closest to catching Mark on victory points, I cry out.
“You’re letting him win, Dex and Derick. You’re enabling it.”
I know it’s nerdy and I’m ashamed of myself for caring, but I can’t
choke it down anymore. Everyone looks suitably shocked by the
accusation. Dex and Debbie flash me looks of “don’t say this in front of
Mark.”
“What do you mean?” Dex asks brazenly.
“You know exactly what I mean. You could have placed the robber
anywhere but you never place it on any of Mark’s hexes. You always place
it on his closest competitor.”
“That’s ridiculous,” Dex says.
“It’s random,” Derick chimes in, offering support.
“No, it’s the parts that aren’t random that you’re swinging his way, the
negotiations where you’re saying no to everyone else and then yes
whenever he needs a resource, the robber, anything.”
They both look at me as if I’m crazy … for giving the game away.

“Can’t you see what they’re doing?” I appeal to Mark. “You don’t want
to win that way?”
“I’m not winning that way,” he says. He genuinely doesn’t see it. Seems
perplexed by my outburst.
I retreat to silence but shake my head at Dex and Derick and everyone
else who has agreed not to see what is really going on.
“You know what you’re doing,” I say quietly.
The accusation hangs in the air. Everyone pretends it doesn’t. I feel the
dynamics in the room shift and not in a good way.
The next morning we rise before dawn to climb Borobudur, an impressive
Buddhist temple, now a UNESCO World Heritage Site. I visited it a few
years ago. While we’re hanging out at the top, I notice some tourists trying
to take a photo and as I offer to take it, Mark cuts in and takes a quick snap.
They have no idea who he is but are thrilled with the photo and the whole
thing is very sweet. Mark is delighted. I can see he likes his newfound
common touch. I take a picture of Mark shooting their picture, which we
pass around and everyone showers Mark with love.
When later we tour the Hindu temple Prambanan—which the guys
overwhelmingly prefer because it’s just like in Tomb Raider—Mark
marches up to another group of tourists, clearly wanting to build out his
man-of-the-people vibe. They don’t speak English, so he reaches for their
phone to snap a photo. They rebuff him brusquely—like, What are you
doing? Get away from us! Mark looks astounded and a little hurt. He’s so
used to people walking up and asking for selfies and photos with him,
which he allows reluctantly, that he doesn’t know how to handle this
particular situation. His instant dejection is so comical that it’s hard not to
laugh, and I fail and laugh, which does not go over well. I pivot to
comforting him.
“If they ever realize, Mark, I’m sure they’ll be really sad,” I say. He
definitely doesn’t see the funny side of it and tries to rationalize his way out
of his embarrassment.
“Maybe they weren’t actually wanting a photo there.”

“Or maybe they thought you were trying to steal their phone?” I offer.
He looks crushed. He’s so utterly unprepared for rejection like this. And
I never see him offer to take another photo.

15
A Simple Request
This three-week-long Asia tour is going to be a real test for Mark. It’s his
first trip visiting multiple heads of state overseas, so I’m anticipating lots of
questions and requests from him. I didn’t anticipate the only request he
makes: a riot.
To be precise, his exact request is for a riot or a peace rally.
At first, I think he’s joking. Peace rallies are not my area of expertise,
and—to be frank—I’ve never been asked to organize a riot before.
Especially one for a tech CEO. I assume something has been lost in his
communication—that it’s some sort of mix-up. “Riot” and “peace rally” are
such completely different things. Then Debbie emails to say that she ran
into Mark and he told her that he wants a peace rally or a riot and we need
to come up with some ideas that will enable him to be surrounded by people
or be “gently mobbed.” I don’t really know what “gently mobbed” means,
so I push back against this whole idea. Debbie and I use the one argument
that might change his mind, and remind him of how badly starting a riot in
Asia would be viewed by the Chinese government. This does no good. He’s
insistent. And I realize he is definitely not joking.
If anything, he’s really hung up on the size of the crowd. That’s what
matters to him. A public rally of over one million people. That’s what he
wants more than anything. He never says why he wants this, and I don’t feel
I can ask. My guess is that he wants to test out how effective his product is
in turning Facebook’s online tools into offline power. Like, there are all

these people on the platform. Can’t we figure out a way to mobilize them?
