Put them on the streets?
But irrespective of why, my job is now to start a riot.
That’s why I’m nervous when we land in Jakarta after our weekend
playing tourists in Java. By the time we make it to the Four Seasons, the
relaxed vacation atmosphere has definitely dissipated.
The tension gets ratcheted up further with some wardrobe issues.
Somewhere in the back-and-forth with various government officials, an
expectation was seeded that Mark would wear the traditional Indonesian
batik shirt, as a sign of respect, for his meeting with President-Elect Joko
Widodo. The shirt is wax-printed with bright colorful patterns and is
basically the opposite of what Mark wears every day. Early in the morning,
I deliver it to his suite at the Four Seasons. As soon as he sees it, he balks.
“There’s no way I’m wearing that.” Then he disappears back into his
bathroom.
I try to make myself and the loud shirt inconspicuous in his suite, but
we’re at a wardrobe stalemate. I’d told Mark that when we’re meeting
heads of state, he should plan to wear a suit, and it appears the batik shirt is
a bridge too far. I’m worried he’s going to revert to his usual uniform and
we’re going to have yet another hoodie battle. Like when he wanted to wear
his hoodie and T-shirt to meet the president of Mexico.
When he doesn’t emerge from the bathroom, I’m apprehensive. Mark
still hasn’t prepped for this meeting with the president-elect of Indonesia.
The only prep time is now. And yet our scheduled departure time comes and
goes. It’s nearly 9:00 A.M. and we’re still at the hotel. We’re going to be late
and unprepared, especially as traffic in Jakarta is unforgiving. And yet we
sit there, Mark’s assistant Andrea and I, waiting for Mark to reemerge in
whatever clothes he deigns to wear.
We trade tense smiles as we wait. She’s a Chinese American former
gymnast who uses busyness as a sword and shield. Not one for polite
chitchat. Eventually, she slips into Mark’s bathroom and I hear unexpected
giggles.
Finally, Mark pops his head out of the bathroom.
“I split my pants.”

This wasn’t a problem I had foreseen. He usually wears jeans. While we
have backup shirts to deal with the sweat issue, we don’t have backup
pants. But somehow Andrea has managed to mend the pants amid the
giggles in the bathroom. The president’s people are now calling me,
wanting to know where we are and why it’s not city hall, where we’re
supposed to be. I choose to blame traffic rather than pants to explain our
delay. By the time we pull up at city hall we’re seriously late. I push
everyone out of the van as fast as possible.
I’m so focused on getting to the meeting as quickly as we can that it’s
not until I’ve reached the top of the stairs in front of city hall that I realize
chaos has broken out. A swarm of people envelop us and it’s rough. Some
of it’s press, some isn’t, and they’re shouting and jostling us, forcing
themselves between us, separating the Facebook team. They catch sight of
Mark and everything kicks up a notch. There’s a frenzy to get to him. As we
try to get through the doors of city hall, the crowd surges and I’m lifted out
of my high heels and carried forward, my feet not touching the ground.
I find Elliot’s hand and grab it as I’m buffeted from side to side. I scan
the melee trying to spot Mark. We’ve had some intense pre-trip security
briefings, delivered by buff Israelis whose qualifications for the role I try
not to think too hard about. They’ve taken our fingerprints to identify us in
hostage situations, giving me visions of my fingers being individually
mailed to Facebook’s headquarters. Now I start to worry that this mob scene
could all be a setup. Like some Batman movie before someone gets taken
hostage from city hall in the chaos.
I see Debbie and then Mark—who’s with Todd, the head of our security
detail. Todd is a huge guy, ex-military. He’s holding an Indonesian man by
the scruff of his neck, his muscular arm pulled back, fist balled, about to
punch the guy square in the face.
We later learn that this guy he’s about to punch is the head of the
Indonesian president-elect’s security detail, and apparently a two-star
general. Which is funny, but only in retrospect. At the time, it’s pure
adrenaline and terror.
This isn’t even the riot I organized.

The crowd continues to surge forward into the lobby and Elliot loses his
grip on me. Now I can’t see anything because I’m too short and someone
stomps on my feet. In the shock of pain, I’m pushed around the crowd and
then eventually emerge in the clear. The crowd moves on. I can’t see
anyone from our team. It dawns on me that they’ve already gone into the
meeting room with the president-elect without me. I rush toward the door,
which is guarded. But before I charge in, I spot my shoes, lonely and askew,
in the lobby of the grand entrance. I go back for them, wipe the blood off
my bruised feet, and put them on, knowing that it probably doesn’t help me
look any more professional, I’m so disheveled from the humid brawl.
Expecting some kind of pushback from the guards, I thrust my way into
the meeting room and loudly disrupt what is clearly the quiet, polite
protocol part of the meeting where Mark is asking the president-elect about
his priorities. I awkwardly greet the president-elect in a studied Bahasa
Indonesian phrase and sit down in the space Mark makes near him.
The room’s crowded. I’d spent weeks negotiating the number of people
who’d be here, to ensure we had similar numbers on both sides, but all
those negotiations have obviously been ignored. This whole thing is a free-
for-all. I can identify some of the ministers and officials in the room, but
sitting beside the president-elect is a guy who is definitely not a government
official. He has shaggy long hair, a short-sleeved shirt with sunglasses
perched near his collar, and a large chain hanging between his jeans and
back pocket. He looks like he’s lost his way to a nightclub, and I’m
completely confused to see him seated at the right hand of the president-
elect.
The conversation restarts after I’m seated but as the president-elect
starts to outline his priorities, the door swings wide open again and Debbie
bounds into the room, interrupting him again. This disruption gives me the
chance to quietly ask Elliot who the guy is who’s seated beside the
president.
“Apparently he’s a famous Indonesian pop star,” Elliot whispers.

“Riiiiight?” I say uncertainly, still waiting to understand what is
happening. “Why’s he here?”
“Big fan of Facebook.”
“Aren’t we all?”
Elliot shrugs and I start taking notes—ready to prompt Mark or the
president-elect if we drift off the areas of discussion that we’d
