prenegotiated: tax issues, content issues in this predominantly Muslim
country, and their demand for Facebook to store Indonesian user data in
Indonesia.
This whole thing had been difficult for me to set up, because President-
Elect Widodo has been keeping a low profile since winning the election,
and he’s acutely aware that meeting with Mark Zuckerberg would get
incredible press scrutiny—which we’d just experienced in the flesh. It’s
also delicate politically for him and for us, because we’re not meeting with
the sitting president. And because Facebook’s an American company. This
is one of the first public things the president-elect has decided to do since
winning the election. It’s risky.
I couldn’t understand why he agreed to do this, but watching him, I
come to realize the debt he feels to Facebook for getting elected. He really
believes it wouldn’t have happened without us.
“I’m the Facebook president!” he says. He’s so earnest and almost
innocent in the way he speaks, it’s hard not to be charmed and disarmed by
him. “I wasn’t supposed to win, I’m a carpenter after all, but I could talk
directly to people through Facebook.”
And it was true. Jokowi (that’s what everyone calls him) is a relatively
young outsider, a clean break from a line of presidents who were known for
their corruption and cronyism. He’d used Facebook and the internet in
interesting ways, like inviting people to vote on Facebook for which
ministers they’d like to see in his cabinet. That’s why I wanted Mark to
meet with him right at the beginning of his administration. He’s of the
internet, a new type of head of state born of the new Facebook politics. At
this moment, I’m still so convinced of the positive power of Facebook that
it doesn’t occur to me that Facebook could push things the other way,
toward a different type of candidate. In different ways, Jokowi and Mark

both have this youthful optimism and sense that they shouldn’t quite be
where they are. And that seems like a good thing.

16
Just Keep Driving
After the meeting ends, the question of the “riot” I organized hangs in the
air. The president-elect is famous for blusukan, where he makes
spontaneous visits to villages and city slums to walk around, connect with
people, and understand what communities are worried about. These are
popular, and researching it I learn that he gets what is described as “gently
mobbed,” which seems to me exactly what Mark ordered and the right
balance between riot, rally, and million-person event. I’d convinced the
president-elect’s team to have Mark join him on a blusukan, despite some
initial skepticism, especially from my team.
“This will end badly” is Debbie’s response when I let her know about
my small victory in winning over Jokowi.
Mark seems up for it when we arrive in Jakarta, but then the president-
elect’s security team raises the issue of a sniper. The risk of one being used
during a blusukan in the lead-up to the inauguration, that is. Mark’s
assistant Andrea shuts the whole thing down before we even arrive at city
hall.
So it’s surprising, at the press conference after the meeting, when
someone from the president-elect’s office comes to chat with me about the
blusukan that Mark will be doing with Jokowi. I let him know it’s been
canceled, and he corrects me. “No, the location has been moved for security
reasons but it’s going ahead.”
After the city hall mayhem this morning, I’m scared.

Mark is standing next to the president-elect for the formal photo op and
I pull him aside.
“The president wants to do the blusukan.”
He beams. “Cool. Yeah. Let’s do it.”
I then tell Elliot.
“Absolutely no way. Not happening.”
“Well, you better tell Mark because he just said he wanted to do it.”
Elliot goes to Mark. The press and I watch him whispering in Mark’s
ear. One of the formal photos from our press conference with the president-
elect shows Elliot doing a very theatrical whisper into Mark’s ear. His lips
are forming the “o” sound of the word “no.”
We’re then unexpectedly led into an ornate anteroom. The president-
elect explains to Mark that his security people are out “sweeping the route.”
I’m behind them petrified because we’ve used up all the talking points in
the briefing, and no one is prepped to just hang out indefinitely with a
president-elect. I suspect this is well out of Mark’s comfort zone, given that
he barely does small talk at the best of times, with people he actually
knows.
Out of the corner of my eye I see Elliot striding toward me purposefully.
“Have you told the president that the blusukan is off?” he asks.
I gesture helplessly at the president-elect and Mark chatting and
drinking tea and say, “Is that my place? I mean, do I tell presidents what to
do?” noting privately that Elliot’s not offering to speak to the president-
elect himself.
“You seem to have no problem telling them what to do before now.”
I suspect he’s joking but he probably isn’t.
“They both seem to want to do it and there’s a security sweep happening
now. Whose decision is it?” I ask, genuinely unsure.
Elliot walks over to Mark and the president-elect and—as the two of
them continue their conversation—leans in and whispers sternly in Mark’s
ear. Mark looks over at me. I shrug. And then he turns to Elliot and shakes
his head. Elliot returns to my side.
“He still wants to do it. This is madness, after what we went through on
the way in here. It’s not safe. You need to speak to their side and shut it

down.”
I spend the next ten minutes ping-ponging between various officials in
the president-elect’s entourage, Mark, our security detail, Elliot, and back
again before Mark stands and follows the president-elect to his vehicle,
carefully avoiding Elliot like he’s worried that Elliot might abduct him.
And then he’s gone. With the president-elect.
Elliot and I catch sight of Todd, the head of the security detail, whose
whole job is to stay close to Mark and protect him, now not with Mark.
Todd is very stressed.
“Get in the van,” he instructs firmly. “Now.”
I can’t tell if it’s because of the snipers, the chaos earlier, the fact that
Mark is separated from his security detail, or my worries about what in the
world he’ll be saying as he speeds along with the president-elect, but there’s
absolute silence in our van as we twist and turn through the Jakarta streets
