chasing the president-elect’s motorcade.
I’m surprised when we come to a stop outside a shopping mall because the
president-elect’s team had said the blusukan would take place at a nearby
slum. We all jump out to try to locate Jokowi and Mark. Within moments
we’re overtaken by people, tens of people at first, but soon it’s hundreds—
swarming, clawing, pushing, pulling, waves of people, nothing but bodies. I
attach myself to Elliot again.
People are overcome. Bowing, clapping, weeping, outbursts of violent
emotion as if this moment in this shopping mall in Jakarta is the second
coming, but it’s not for Mark. They’re only interested in the president-elect.
I catch sight of Todd trying to make his way through the swarms of
people and realize he’s living a security professional’s worst nightmare. As
we’re knocked around, our little team tries to anchor to each other, but our
sweaty hands keep slipping and we have to push our way back toward Mark
and the president-elect. They seem to be basking in the adulation, enjoying
the rush of the crowd, the waves of emotion, and each other’s company. As
they move from stall to stall chatting with people, it’s like a scene from a
buddy movie, one with a large budget for extras. Eventually we’re pushed

toward the exit and Todd bundles Mark and the rest of us into the van
before yelling at the driver to go as fast as we can to escape the crowds that
are trying to climb in and on the van.
As we pull out I can see Elliot is incandescent with rage and it feels like
99 percent of that is being directed at me. I suspect this may be the last time
I organize a head of state visit or a gentle riot.
Mark turns to us, pauses to make sure he has our attention before he
renders his verdict, and I feel sick, like there are squirrels in my stomach.
I’m anxious that he’s also livid about the security risk I exposed him to, or
possibly all the small talk he had to do with the president-elect. It honestly
seems possible I’m about to be fired.
“That. Was. Awesome,” Mark exclaims. His eyes are more alive than
I’ve ever seen them, face flushed, beaming with pure joy.
“Not for Todd,” someone pipes up from the back of the van.
“Did you see how much they love him? That crowd was crazy for him.
I’ve never seen anything like it. I’ve never seen a crowd like it.”
This from a man who is used to getting a lot of attention. For once, he’s
seen something and someone bigger than him, someone with more impact,
someone who people are personally devoted to.
I can tell it’s affected him deeply, as he relays everything that was said
when he was hanging with the president-elect, adrenaline still pumping. But
he keeps going back to that crowd, how big it was, how much they loved
the president-elect. We speed through the crowded streets and onto the
motorway, miles from the shopping mall, before someone realizes that in
our haste we’ve left a member of our communications team behind, and
they are lost and alone in the swarm of the Indonesian crowd.
“Just keep driving,” Elliot instructs from the back of the van.
And we do.

17
Going Down in a Blaze of Glory
When we get to the South Korea portion of the Asia tour, Sheryl joins us.
I’ve tried to get a meeting for Mark and Sheryl with the president of Korea,
and the president’s office didn’t dismiss it out of hand. They politely
inquired whether we have any announcements about any “investments”
we’ll be making in Korea—casually mentioning that Google had opened a
campus in Seoul when they asked to meet the president. But Facebook’s
pretty cheap about that kind of thing. And I’m not surprised when our
refusal to “pay to play”—combined with the open arrest warrants for Mark
and Sheryl—means that the president is unavailable to see us.
Mark and the team meet with Samsung, but nothing big comes of it.
After a long dinner at Samsung’s headquarters, there’s a karaoke party
just for the Facebook team staffed by Korean DJs. Mark gives it his all on
the Backstreet Boys’ “I Want It That Way” lyrics. The party spills over to
the private jet flight from Seoul to Tokyo. There’s a smaller group traveling
on. Elliot and Sheryl have gone back to the US and it’s mainly guys on the
business and growth teams left. Everyone’s drinking. Before long an in-
flight karaoke system appears and the party on the plane kicks it up a notch.
Without Sheryl or any senior women, things are crazier than on the ground
in Seoul. The guys are dancing and goofing off. Mark is back at it again
with the Backstreet Boys, interspersed with Adele and Disney—“A Whole
New World” from Aladdin—and I perch at the back of the plane just trying
to make myself as invisible as possible, not sure what the etiquette of this
situation requires. I suppose I could find this charming and vulnerable,

Mark trying so earnestly to sound like a Disney cartoon character and the
Backstreet Boys. But somehow it makes him seem so much smaller. Like a
kid. Honestly it feels a little sad. This is what he does to cut loose? I’m
exhausted and missing my baby. It’s a physical thing, the absence of her,
not having her on my body. Not being able to hold her and smell her. That
baby is a whole world to me. I scroll through photos Tom has sent and feel
alone.
About halfway through the flight we strike turbulence. I’ve flown a lot
and am a very relaxed traveler, but this is a magnitude I’ve never
experienced. Even the captain and flight attendant seem worried. The flight
attendant belts herself into her seat and hugs herself with both arms. The
captain comes over the PA several times urging everyone to sit down and
belt up. Nobody listens but me. The plane lurches up and down violently. It
shudders and rattles, like a flimsy toy being slapped around in the sky.
Somehow this just makes the party more frenzied. Someone puts Bon Jovi
on the karaoke system and the guys drunkenly belt out the line, “Going
down in a blaze of glory.” On the word “down” the plane drops again. They
take turns on the verse and then boom out “Going down in a blaze of glory”
together. In the back, the flight attendant and I catch each other’s eye and
share a look. Her eyes squeeze shut with each plunge.
Traveling is when you really get to know someone, and this is the trip
where I start to really get to know Mark. I think he feels the same because
during this trip, he friends me on Facebook.
As we hang out at temples and the Tokyo fish market, karaoke, and
ridiculous Michelin-star restaurants that specialize in fried food of course,
we talk about all kinds of things. I’m fascinated about how you think about
life when you’re one of the richest people in the world. What changes?
What doesn’t?
Being dropped into this world of luxury hotels, private jets, infinity
pools, and personal concierge service, I feel as if the furniture in my home
has all suddenly been massively upgraded but time and the fundamentals of

