what I do all day—eat, sleep, work—don’t change at all. But what’s it like
for him?
Sheryl once explained the cycle of wealth to me as she saw it. I was
complaining that someone I really admired had retired from Facebook at a
very young age. I couldn’t understand why they’d do that. What would they
do instead that would be so interesting? She said matter-of-factly that they
would probably follow the cycle of wealth she’d observed at Google and
Facebook: exotic travel for a year or more before becoming bored of that,
then transitioning to getting very fit or some other personal goal. After
achieving that goal, buying a boat or some other extravagant hobby
purchase, and then finally getting divorced or going through some other
personal crisis. If they come back from that, maybe they attempt their own
start-up or fund or, most likely, philanthropy.
None of this sounds very enticing.
Given the scale of Mark’s affluence, what actually matters to him? It’s
unfathomable to me. This endless wealth. I try to explain that to him over
dinner.
“I was actually talking about this with Masa the other day,” Mark
responds. Masayoshi Son is CEO of SoftBank, a Japanese conglomerate
that invests heavily in technology companies, including many of the buzzy
start-ups Mark’s interested in. “And we both agree.”
“Agree on what?”
“The most important thing.”
“What is it?”
“Food,” he says, lifting a chopstick toward his mouth. A dangling piece
of fried deliciousness hangs in the air near his lips.
“Are you serious?”
“Yeah. I mean, he’s even more serious about it than I am. Every day he
has someone go to that fish market we went to this morning and buy the
absolute best bluefin tuna in that market. He eats the best food in the world.
He has the best chef in Japan.”
During my time working on environmental issues, one of the things I’d
been involved in was trying to protect southern bluefin tuna, which are
critically endangered. I know that a single fish can sell for millions of

dollars. I also know that efforts to regulate and save the fishery are seriously
failing, and the reason those fish command such high prices is because they
are rare and at risk of extinction. It’s as if he’s saying the best thing about
being rich is eating fresh, tender, endangered baby elephants or munching
on little imperiled panda bears.
“I didn’t think you even liked tuna. You like McDonald’s and fried
chicken,” I say, puzzled and also, if I’m honest, really hoping he’s not about
to tell me he wants to eat endangered species himself.
“True. As soon as I knew there was a three-star Michelin fried-food
restaurant in Japan, I knew we all had to try it.”
“Right—but that’s because you like fried food. You don’t need to be the
richest guy in the world to have fried chicken and McDonald’s every day.”
“No, but if I want the best bluefin tuna…”
I cut him off. “You’re going to have to fight Masa for it. But what else?”
“Well, Kevin introduced me to his wine dealer.” I know Kevin is Kevin
Systrom, cofounder of Instagram.
“You don’t really drink wine, though.”
“No, but I love Andrew Jackson.”
There are a lot of downsides to being foreign, but an undisputed benefit
is that you can ask dumb questions, simply because you want to hear how
someone answers them. I know Mark doesn’t particularly care for alcohol,
but he now tells me he’s collecting either sherry or port, I never know the
difference, and what matters to him isn’t the alcohol itself but that it’s from
when Andrew Jackson was president. So I ask him who Andrew Jackson is
and why he likes him so much. Mark explains that Jackson’s the greatest
president America has ever had, that he was ruthless, a populist and an
individualist, and that he “got stuff done.” He also spilled a lot of blood
expanding the territory of the United States, sent five Native tribes out onto
the Trail of Tears, but Mark doesn’t mention that.
“What about Lincoln or Roosevelt?” I ask, pushing my foreigner
credentials. “Wouldn’t you say they got stuff done? Couldn’t one of them
be the greatest?”
“No,” Mark says firmly. “It’s Jackson. It’s not even close.”

After his blusukan with the Indonesian president-elect, and his first
experience of wild, politically fueled adoration, a switch seems like it’s
been flipped in Mark. As we prep for Prime Minister Abe, he asks searching
questions in a way he never has before—How do elections work in Japan?
Why did Prime Minister Abe resign and return? Who holds power in Japan,
is it the emperor or the prime minister?
By the time we meet with Abe, it feels a little like coming home. We’re
really starting to build solid diplomatic relationships in several countries,
and the relationship between Facebook and Japan is much better than most.
It’s the same staff I dealt with for Sheryl’s visit a year before. Same venue.
Similar format. I make a point to remember to wear a different dress.
When he walks in, Prime Minister Abe comes over to me immediately
and smiles.
“Good to see you again. You just always look so young,” he says to me,
which given Japan’s hierarchical and patriarchal society is probably not a
compliment. Then he turns to Mark and says, “Wow, you also look so
young.”
Mark smiles gracefully and, defusing what could be an awkward
moment, he responds, “I guess that’s because I am.”
Abe beams. The rest of the meeting feels like progress. Like what I’d
imagined this tech diplomacy would be. Abe has followed through on
things we’d discussed with Sheryl, like legalizing the use of social media in
elections in Japan. And we’d followed through on things we’d offered, like
the disaster response tool, a way for people to mark themselves “safe”
notifying all their friends and family—which of course had been inspired by
the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan. This tool was personal for me
after Christchurch; I’d had to wrangle engineers and design teams, and it’s
one of the first pieces of engineering that also feels like a policy project. An
intersection between tech and the good things we can do to help people and
countries.
While we’re there, Abe announces the launch of the disaster response
tool and praises it to the press, even though his office had told me several
times before the meeting that the prime minister never endorses products
and never makes exceptions.

When Abe promises to visit Facebook’s headquarters, I know he’ll
follow through. We’ve established something that for so long felt
