impossible—an embryonic statecraft for Facebook—and Mark, as our
founder and CEO, is the face of it.
But I didn’t follow the team where they were going next on our tour. I
knew it had the potential to make any progress we’d made come crashing
down.
They were heading to China.

18
Red Flag
For Mark, it’s hard to imagine a future for Facebook that doesn’t include
China. The country already has nearly 650 million people on the internet,
more than twice the entire US population.
For most of 2014, he’s been putting a lot of time and energy into getting
Facebook into China. A few months before the trip, he sent an email to his
closest advisers explaining why:
From: Mark Zuckerberg
Date: July 25, 2014, at 9:51:37 A.M. PDT
To: Sheryl Sandberg, Elliot Schrage, Vaughan Smith, Kevin Systrom
Subject: China 3-year plan
I’ve said recently that I’d be willing to take 3 trips to China per year and to engage more
intensively in trying to help us operate there. I’ve also encouraged Kevin [Systrom] to engage
more as well. Some of you have seemed surprised by this, so I wanted to provide some
context on why I believe it is time to take this more seriously. In our mission to connect the
world, there have always been a few difficult problems we’ve always said we’d get to
eventually: connecting those who can’t afford the internet, building satellites for those who
don’t have any connectivity infra, and connecting countries where we’re blocked like China.
We’ve now made progress on every single other major problem, and the last one on the list is
China.
He says everyone needs to tackle this intensively right away, if Facebook’s
going to get into China anytime soon. Instagram is already in China—and I
suspect that’s one of the reasons it was such an attractive acquisition target
for him.

If we don’t, it’s most likely we’ll regress and all of our services—including Instagram—will
be blocked.… I think we should view this as a 3-year plan to have Facebook fully operational
there. In year one, we can aim to have key services like Instagram remain up and running, and
we should try to get our sales office running with a senior Chinese leader. By the end of year
three, we should have hopefully built the relationships that would enable Facebook to operate
in China as well. (In the best outcome, it may be the case that Instagram becomes the
Facebook of China and the Facebook app’s full success is not as necessary.)
He ends with one more bit of context on why we have to do this now:
We’ve always needed to connect China, but there have always been other major projects we
could take on to connect large populations instead. Now there are no other major projects left.
It’s time to really build these relationships and make this partnership with China work.
What’s not in Mark’s email is more telling than what is. There’s no
acknowledgment at all of the moral complexity of working in an
authoritarian country that surveils its own citizens and doesn’t allow free
speech.
This is July 2014. Google has already withdrawn from China, years
before, saying it was “no longer willing to continue censoring” Google
products following the breach of human rights activists’ accounts on its
service. Mark, Sheryl, and Elliot all know this well. Both Sheryl and Elliot
were senior executives at Google during that period. Elliot even testified
before Congress about Google’s China strategy, a bruising affair in which
he and a Yahoo executive were condemned for colluding with the Chinese
government. “While technologically and financially you are giants, morally
you are pygmies,” the chair of the House Foreign Affairs Committee told
Yahoo.
But after all that, there’s no question in Mark’s email of “Should we
operate in China?” or “How do we manage the inevitable moral dilemmas
that are sure to come?” China is, in Mark’s eyes, just the end of a to-do list,
the last major project to tackle. Like he’s playing a game of Risk and he
needs to occupy every territory.
I don’t believe Facebook is going to get into China. The mission of the
company—making the world more open and connected—is the exact
opposite of what the Chinese Communist Party wants, particularly under
President Xi Jinping. I can’t imagine they’d allow us in. And I don’t want to
help Facebook try. The way I see it, the only way in will be to collaborate

with the CCP and make compromises we shouldn’t. I tell Marne and I think
she gets it. She takes on nearly all the China-related tasks herself.
Mark, meanwhile, is learning Mandarin. He tells people he’s studying
every day, and he gets together with Mandarin-speaking employees for
conversational practice. Eventually, he’s interviewed in Mandarin, onstage
in a classroom full of Chinese students. The video of this is completely
charming; he’s loose and self-deprecating and funny. The students cheer
and burst into applause when he first busts out his badly accented
Mandarin. “I need some practice after all,” he tells them, and they laugh.
“My wife is Chinese”—more laughter and applause. “We speak Mandarin
to her grandmother.” When the footage is posted on YouTube, many people
comment that he has more personality—he seems more human, cooler, and
more relaxed—in Mandarin than he ever seems in English.
For the longest time, Marne had been leading the policy work on China,
with the Asia business team managing the day-to-day. But while I am out
on maternity leave in early 2014, Facebook announces a new leader for the
China team. Instead of bringing in someone with specific experience in
China, they tap Vaughan Smith from Facebook’s corporate development
team. He’d been working on mobile partnerships at Facebook after
previously working at eBay. This is consistent with Facebook’s approach to
everything; they prioritize insiders over outsiders, business experience over
policy expertise (China expertise, in this case), which seems like madness
to me. By coincidence, Vaughan’s also a Kiwi and attended the same high
school my mother taught at and my brother went to, plus university in
Christchurch, my hometown.
Vaughan’s an affable, enthusiastic guy who talks quickly and always
seems to have pep in his step. I like him. It’s hard not to. He’s wiry, maybe
because of the cycling, waterskiing, and other sporty leisure activities that
he mysteriously seems to have ample time to pursue—unlike his American
coworkers, who seem to have no time for leisure. His friendly features are
complemented by sandy hair, blue eyes, and a thick New Zealand accent.
Several people tell me—the only other Kiwi they know—stories in which
Vaughan has insisted on “showing them his deck.” The New Zealand accent
turns e’s into i’s, so it sounds like a lewd proposition rather than a business

invitation to review some slides. Javi apparently responded, “No, man, no! I
don’t wanna see that.” Vaughan’s the sort of guy who laughs that off, the
