misunderstanding being a feature, not a bug. He seems immune to any kind
of social mortification, and glows with a kind of cheerful, locker-room
bonhomie.
Vaughan often hosts people in his palatial Palo Alto home, where his
very good-looking family mingles with assorted Facebook staff around their
outdoor fire pit or swimming pool, depending on the season. Vaughan
presents as—and I have no reason to doubt this—a man who has everything
he wants.
Vaughan operates in a different way from me and most of the policy
team. He decides to crack the China market with his golf clubs, sending
updates about whom he has golfed with and how this might lead to
opportunities to meet with key government officials. The actual work,
preparing 
briefings, 
tracking 
regulations, 
or 
analyzing 
political
developments, he delegates to interns, or the women who work for him.
Sometimes Vaughan seems oblivious to important facts. He schedules
Mark’s visit during the fourth plenum, arguably the busiest week of the year
for China’s top officials, who are all expected to attend the Communist
Party’s main policy-setting conference. Vaughan only seems to realize the
plenum’s happening a week or two before departure.
With Vaughan still settling into the role and only days after Mark sends
his China email, we learn that Instagram, which is still operating in China,
might be blocked. In fact, there are rumors the Chinese might go a step
further and remove Instagram from both the Apple and Android stores in
China.
The sudden threat to ban the service inconveniently highlights how little
Facebook can control its fate in China, with no direct communication from
the Chinese government before their announcement, and no ability to stop
the block or even know when exactly it will happen.
While others panic, Vaughan, from the ninth hole, is the only person
who shrugs it off.
“Bummer as China has been Instagram’s fastest growing country for a
while and could have passed the US as our #1 country in 2015 had the

previous trajectory continued.”
Instead he focuses on setting up a physical office for Facebook in
China, and pursuing a partnership that’ll help the platform enter China. He’s
targeting venture capital firm Sequoia, private equity boss Stephen
Schwarzman, and information technology company China Broadband,
among others. Anyone who might be able to get Facebook in.
I still can’t figure out what his strategy is. Until I get a glimpse of how the
team is thinking about Hong Kong and China. I’m cc’d on an email from a
junior staffer. It’s about a letter Facebook promised the privacy
commissioner in Hong Kong, responding to questions about the privacy of
Facebook users there:
Update: Rob and I spoke with Vaughan and Zhen on the China team yesterday, and they
flagged a potential complication arising from the likely course of our negotiations with the
Chinese government. In exchange for the ability to establish operations in China, FB will
agree to grant the Chinese government access to Chinese users’ data—including
Hongkongese users’ data.
Facebook will grant the Chinese government access to Chinese users’ data
—including Hong Kong users’ data—in exchange for getting into China?
This can’t be true. It’s one of those crazy ideas the other offices at Facebook
are always floating that Marne and I beat back down before they go very
far. This proposal, which would surely violate the consent order Facebook
agreed to with the Federal Trade Commission in 2012 (and the earlier 2011
agreement with the Irish Data Protection Commission), doubtless is the
work of juniors who haven’t subjected it to any scrutiny by the actual
decision makers at Facebook. This is so far-fetched I’m sure there’s no
danger of it becoming real anytime soon or ever. So I ignore it, even though
the next sentence in the email explains exactly how Facebook would
accomplish this:
New users in China will agree to a modified DUP/SRR reflecting this practice, but we will
have to re-TOS Hongkongese users.

Translation: new users in China will have a new Data Use Policy they’ll
agree to when they sign up for Facebook—a policy that discloses that the
Chinese government will have access to their data—and existing users in
Hong Kong will be forced to accept a new Terms of Service (the contract
Facebook has with its users) that will also contain this stipulation.
Again, I don’t buy it. It sounds so unlikely that the company would use
the data of Hong Kong users as a bargaining chip to get Facebook into
China, and then force Hong Kong users to accept it with a new Terms of
Service that they must consent to or lose access to Facebook, that I assume
the people on the email—who are US privacy experts and not especially
senior—have simply misunderstood. Surely, there’s no way that Facebook
would leverage Hong Kong users’ data as part of a deal to get into China?
Later—just a few months later—I’d learn no, no … this was how the
head of the China project was thinking things would play out. But I’ll get to
that.
In the meantime, the rest of us are trying to figure out why China is
threatening to block Instagram. Why this aggressive move now? We don’t
know for sure, but we suspect that it’s Instagram’s role in protests in Hong
Kong. Tens of thousands of prodemocracy activists are taking to the streets
in the Umbrella Revolution, and Instagram is one of their preferred ways to
organize and get the message out, in part because it’s not blocked in
mainland China. The Chinese activist Ai Weiwei posts a selfie holding his
own leg and aiming it like a rifle. It becomes an instant meme; Hong Kong
protesters photograph themselves in the pose and post on Instagram to
symbolize their own demands, along with the main protest hashtags.
Another possible reason for this potential block is that, back during the
Hong Kong elections a few months before this, in March 2014, Facebook
deployed a megaphone to encourage people to vote. China makes it clear
that Facebook should not have run the megaphone or taken any actions to
increase democratic engagement. In-house, it’s seen as a mistake, a black
mark against the policy team. I escape blame only because I was on
maternity leave at the time.

As the protests in Hong Kong escalate over the summer months, in
September China makes good on its threat and Instagram is blocked
completely in China. Vaughan’s cheery updates start to take a less
