optimistic tone. Less golfing, more gloom.
Before this China trip, we have to figure out what both Mark and
Vaughan will say about Hong Kong’s Umbrella Revolution both publicly
and in private. In an email, Vaughan suggests:
“My pov is it’s a good opportunity to talk about the rule of law and
praise HK.”
In other words, support China’s violent suppression of the protests by
parroting its claim that it was upholding the rule of law. Praise Hong Kong
means praise for Beijing’s puppets on the island who support the
crackdown.
I’m shocked. Everyone else seems to be also. Debbie fires back an
email in response to Vaughan’s suggested talking points. She starts:
I think only very skilled people will be able to do this well.
Devastating. Then:
I feel we say something very bland
I do not want to talk about rule of law
“Like everyone around the world, we continue to watch with interest the events in HK and the
peaceful demonstrations of the HK people.”
Maybe fearing that Vaughan won’t understand why Debbie’s correct, Elliot
chimes in:
Debbie is 100% right here.
Vaughan, you need to appreciate that “respecting the rule of law” only goes so far to explain
or justify government behavior. To many people who follow human rights issues and
international law, the foundation of international law is the rejection of the so-called
Nuremberg defense—the claim by Nazi’s that they “were just following orders” and
respecting the laws and policies of the Nazi state.
Vaughan simply thanks Elliot for “the articulate background.” I can’t tell if
he’s being brazen or genuine. There is simply no putting this man off his

putt.
Either way, I think the point at which you have to explain Nuremberg to
the head of the team leading your China entry is probably a red flag.

19
PAC-Man
Not long after I return home from the Asia trip, Marne leaves the policy
team to become the COO of Instagram. After years of being connected to
her via email almost every waking moment, I feel an unexpected sense of
loss.
She’s replaced by Joel Kaplan. It isn’t a complete surprise. Joel, the
former Bush aide, is coming from the role of vice president for US policy.
Plus, he’s Sheryl’s ex-boyfriend, and by now I’ve realized that Facebook’s
leadership includes a web of people all entangled as bridesmaids, best
friends, neighbors, and exes. Their fealty is seemingly to each other, their
tribe, ahead of any ideology or anything else. Their pasts, presents, and
futures are all deeply intertwined in a way that mine are not. They hire each
other for jobs with big salaries, responsible for each other’s promotions and
bonuses. A tiny enmeshed group of people increasingly responsible for
shaping the attention of billions. Their preferences turned into policy. The
challenge is that Joel doesn’t seem to have any interest in the world outside
the US or even outside Washington, DC. His career and passion is
Republican politics. He didn’t just serve two full terms in the George W.
Bush administration (eventually rising to deputy chief of staff), he was part
of the “Brooks Brothers riot” in 2000 that helped put Bush into office. This
was the melee that shut down the Florida recount in 2000, ensuring that
Florida went for Bush. During Joel’s confirmation hearing, he claimed,
“While I was there, I was not, to the best of my recollection, a participant,”
but his memory seemed way better by the time he was at Facebook, sharing

stories over drinks after work about the craziness of participating in the
riots.
At the White House, he was intimately involved in the response to the
2008 financial crisis, and he remained bitter about Andrew Ross Sorkin’s
account of his role in the book Too Big to Fail, where he felt the importance
of his role was downplayed and he was portrayed as a confused frat boy,
desperate for information to feed back to President Bush, who had given
him the nickname “angular dude.”
I’m surprised to learn, again over drinks, that he had initially been a
Democrat. I would eventually see some irony in his stated reason for
breaking with the party, but he’s adamant that Bill Clinton’s behavior with
Monica Lewinsky turned him into a Republican.
At Sheryl’s urging, he was offered the job of general counsel in
Facebook’s early days, but he found the suggestion that he leave the White
House for a college website preposterous. Now he ruefully acknowledges a
certain jealousy of Ted Ullyot—another Harvard grad, Scalia clerk, and
Bush alum—who did take the job. I don’t think that’s just about the
immense wealth he initially missed out on. He’s openly bitter about how
those who stayed until the very end of the Bush administration were treated.
In Joel’s telling, he’s still surprised by the meager career offerings that were
available to him. When he eventually joins Facebook, he makes clear that
he’ll only consider the job if he doesn’t have to interview for it. His first
position is running US policy. Because Facebook is so heavily aligned with
the Democrats, it needs someone who can handle Republicans.
Now in his newest role, as vice president of public policy, Joel’s a very
different boss from Marne. Where Marne had been deliberative, thorough,
ever questioning, Joel’s her opposite, impetuous and dogmatic. Joel sees
everything through the lens of US power. Facebook, like the US, is a
superpower. When something goes wrong outside the US, he reflexively
turns to the State Department to task them to solve it. Almost like he
considers them an arm of Facebook. When the island nation of Nauru
blocks Facebook out of the blue, Joel contacts the State Department to have
the US government publicly condemn the block. Which they do. It changes

nothing. I urge him, in this case and others, to reach out ourselves. Figure
out why the government blocked us and contact them directly to resolve it.
Joel is surprised to learn Taiwan is an island. Often when we start to talk
about pressing issues in some country in Latin America or Asia, he stops
and asks me to explain where the country is. This happens so frequently that
a few weeks into his tenure, I offer to buy him a world map. He turns that
down, but days later, a large framed map shows up in his office.
Just a few weeks after he takes over Marne’s job, Joel starts hiring a
political sales team to push politicians—here and abroad—into becoming
advertisers. The idea is, if politicians depend on Facebook to win elections,
they’ll be less likely to do anything that’ll harm Facebook. If Facebook is
the goose that lays the golden egg, no one wants to kill the goose. Get them
hooked on those golden eggs. Also, unlike Marne, Joel wants the policy
