team to generate revenue. The way he sees it, Facebook is a business and
the policy team should be contributing to the bottom line. He doesn’t want
to be viewed as a “cost center” internally. Political advertising is a way to
change that. And elections are the biggest opportunity. Fresh-faced Harvard
grads start moving into the Washington, DC, office to sell ads to politicians
and political campaigns.
I find this all repugnant. I feel alienated from this new regime from the
outset. As a foreigner, I have a very different perspective on money in
elections. New Zealand, like so many other countries, has strict limits on
electoral spending: under 27,500 New Zealand dollars per candidate. I’m
astounded at the role money plays in elections in the US. It determines so
much about whose voice gets heard on every issue from guns to abortion to
much else. I’m also against exporting this value system. But Facebook is
effectively bringing this in globally by stealth.
The result? In Brazil, Facebook’s already facing fines of millions of
dollars and court orders to block the platform for violating bans on electoral
advertising. In Mexico, Facebook is being investigated for defying
restrictions on political ads.
My disagreements with Joel come to a head when he tells me to
establish PACs in other countries. Political action committees, of course,
are an American invention that pull together donors to give money to

political candidates. There are PACs for every possible cause: to elect more
women to office and to elect candidates who are friendly to Realtors, or
beer wholesalers, or teachers’ unions. Home Depot runs its own giant PAC,
as does AT&T.
“We were so late in establishing Facebook’s PAC in the US; I don’t
want to make that mistake in other countries,” Joel says insistently. “We
need to get moving to establish PACs outside the US. We should have done
this a long time—”
“So, this is awkward,” I cut in. Joel looks puzzled.
“That’s illegal. Only US citizens can contribute to elections here. That’s
true everywhere. Nobody wants foreigners bankrolling their elections.”
“Really?” Joel looks shocked.
“Definitely. That’s why even though you regularly invite me to
contribute to the Facebook PAC you founded, for me to do so would be
illegal as I’m not a citizen.”
“Well, I was actually meaning the other way,” he says defensively.
“Contributions to politicians in other countries. We need to get moving on
channeling money to our key allies offshore, you know, our most influential
politicians in other countries.”
“Ah, that would be considered bribery and corruption in most of the
countries I’m responsible for,” I say, careful to strike a neutral tone.
Joel looks crestfallen.
“Except the dictatorships,” I offer. “They’ll probably take your money.”
For a minute I worry that he’s seriously considering it.

20
Slouching Toward Autocracy
Joel isn’t the only one starting to flex on foreign policy. So is Mark.
The first time I see it is Russia. An event page has been set up for a rally
in support of the country’s opposition leader Alexei Navalny, on the day
he’s going to be sentenced for trumped-up embezzlement charges: January
15, 2015. Over sixty thousand people are invited to the event and over
twelve thousand respond. But Facebook staff block the event page in Russia
the Friday before Christmas, after receiving a complaint from Russia’s
internet regulator, the wonderfully named Roskomnadzor.
Facebook gets a lot of criticism for this, including in the tech
community and on sites like Techmeme, which Mark is particularly
sensitive to. He’s really annoyed the issue wasn’t escalated to him.
Sheryl writes to him on Sunday, December 21, 2014, at 9:17 A.M.,
defending her policy team:
Mark—this is the right course of action to take to balance free expression with staying up in
Russia—and it is consistent with how we deal with requests. This is certainly small compared
to potential China requests and will be noted by them too.
BUT, if you were optimizing for free expression / tech community only, you would restore
these pages quickly.
The team’s actions here are consistent with the guidance they have from you. This could
become bigger and be negative in the tech community—so if you want to restore pages,
please let us know now. If not, we sit tight.
Hours later, at 1:34 P.M., Mark replies:

I spoke with Elliot about this yesterday.
My view is that for such a sensitive case, this should have been escalated to me (or at the very
least Elliot) before we took it down in the first place. My guidance at that point would have
been to try to push back on the request rather than immediately taking it down.
At the end of the day, however, since the request actually is fully compliant with Russian law,
if we really came to believe not taking this down would cause the whole service (including
this page) to be blocked, then I would have supported taking the page down. We aren’t
helping anyone if the whole service becomes unavailable.
From there, Mark lays out our options. He says we can’t unblock the page
now because at this point it probably will get Facebook shut down in
Russia.
On the flip side, it will also look incredibly weak for us if we unblock the page and then block
it again within a few days if the whole service is about to be blocked.
To make a complicated decision worse, the State Department gets in
touch to relay its “concern” at Facebook’s removing the event page for the
Navalny rally. Joel has a surprisingly brief and unfriendly phone call with
them. The State Department official tells him that if faced with the choice
of removing an event page like this one or being shut down in some
country, the US government position is that Facebook should be shut down.
And that’s not all.
The kicker is that the government threatens to publicly criticize
Facebook to pressure the company to take a principled approach.
Joel is shocked at this, that the government would prefer for a US
company to shut down its operations rather than comply with another
government’s legal request. He fumes on email, “I reacted with
astonishment and asked whether he was sure that was the official U.S.
government position, because I had never heard that articulated before and
found it extremely surprising. I told him that if it ever got to the point where
he thought the U.S. government was going to suggest as much [say publicly
that Facebook should let itself be blocked], then I’d want a heads up,
because I knew that Mark or Sheryl would want to talk to Secretary Kerry
directly.”

Elliot responds, “Wow—these guys really don’t understand how soft
