getting involved, why instead of the set of rules we tout to governments,
decisions are made on his whim.
What Joel and Mark are doing, whether they realize it or not, is sending
an unfortunate message to governments around the world. If the only thing
that will make Facebook change its position is jailing its employees or
blocking its service, they’re effectively issuing an invitation to these
governments to do just that.
After this, we escalate all difficult decisions to Sheryl and Mark for them to
decide. Although in reality it’s just Mark. Facebook is an autocracy of one.

21
Billionaire Time
Good news from Colombia. President Santos has agreed to be our knight in
shining armor and get onstage with Mark Zuckerberg to show the leaders of
Latin America that it’s a great time to sign up for Internet.org. This will
happen in January 2015.
There’s just one snag: convincing Mark to do this in the morning, which
is the only slot that’s free in the president’s schedule. Santos’s staff is clear
with us that they’re squeezing Facebook in as a favor, while the president is
in the middle of heated negotiations trying to get the FARC militant group
to lay down their arms. However, Mark’s assistant Andrea is firm that noon
is too early for Mark. She insists on 12:30 P.M. or later. Mark has spent a
lifetime staying up late into the night coding, and has a strict policy: no
appointments before noon. Which works at home; there are few people in
Silicon Valley who aren’t going to accommodate him. He owns time. But
presidents are different. Turns out, they’re very busy, tightly scheduled
people. It creates enormous issues all the time. It’s hard not to feel like
“Who does Mark think he is?” Like his time is more valuable than that of
someone involved in a delicate peace process to end a brutal fifty-year-old
conflict?
Back when he was a freshman in college, in an interview with the
Harvard 
college 
paper 
the 
Crimson 
(about 
the 
brand-new
“TheFacebook.com”), Mark actually said, “Not having someone tell me
what to do or a timeframe in which to do it is the luxury I am looking for in
my life.”

A week before the trip, this scheduling issue—Mark’s refusal to meet in
the morning—scuttles the whole thing. But this one’s too important to miss.
I’m called in to mediate between their palace and our palace. Andrea holds
firm at 12:30 P.M., and after much coaxing the president’s staff concede to
12:15 P.M. The plans are back on until a day before the event, when Andrea
lets the palace know we’ll be there at 12:30 P.M. They respond—confirming
the meeting for 12:00 P.M., their original time. At this point both sides
remove me from the emails.
The morning of the meeting, Mark hasn’t read the briefings I prepared
for him. Andrea’s insistent that I brief him in the car, on the drive to the
presidential palace, and she’ll message me when Mark is ready to depart. I
wait, watching the clock, assuming we’re supposed to arrive before noon, to
get through security and past the press scrum.
At 11:23 A.M. my phone pings. It’s Andrea:
“Here? We are leaving. Soon. About to be in cars. Where are you? We
are in the garage loading.”
I’d been waiting in the lobby for an hour. I head down and text, “In lift.
Here. At S1. Where are you?”
“You are not at S1. I’m at elevators. We are ready to go. Where are
you?”
Something was badly wrong. That’s when we all realize that they’re at
the Bogotá Marriott and I’m at the JW Marriott Bogotá. Two separate
hotels, far from each other.
I’m told to meet Mark at the presidential palace. I google and learn that
the hotel I’m currently standing in is forty minutes away. The hotel Mark is
currently in on the other side of Bogotá is at least fifty minutes in traffic and
that’s being optimistic. The meeting with the president is now due to start in
less than thirty minutes.
My mind and my body process the horror of what is unfolding
separately. There are no taxis at the hotel. Before I know it, I’m starting to
run. Vaguely in the direction of the palace. It’s hot and muggy. I’m
desperately scanning the street for taxis.
My phone rings; it’s a very nervous Derick, from the comms team, at
the palace. He’s wanting to know when Mark and I are going to arrive.

When I explain I’m not with Mark and I’m not anywhere near the
presidential palace, Derick calmly asks what I need. Transport.
“Didn’t someone hire a van?” Derick directs me to run down a main
calle toward the palace in the hope that the driver can spot me. I take off my
heels and run barefoot as fast as I can, conscious that every second could be
the difference between making it or failing. Little stones jab into my feet.
Eventually, I see a white van and we speed to the palace.
I watch with dread as the van’s clock ticks past noon. When we get to
the palace, military police block us. Of course. I should have realized I
couldn’t use an unmarked white van to charge into the Colombian
president’s palace.
After clearing this up, I’m whisked from the van to pandemonium in the
palace, and marched directly to a stern man in a green uniform replete with
medals. He’s red-faced with anger. He doesn’t bother with the usual
pretense of diplomatic niceties. He just demands to know where Mark is.
I can’t answer because I genuinely have no idea. But President Santos is
waiting to receive him. I can’t even bear to look at the time or look at
Derick. He sidles up beside me and explains that it’s worse than I think and
that the president is clearly pissed, after waiting for ages.
The minister of information technology approaches, the man whose
ministerial van I’d ridden in for our road trip through the Colombian jungle.
He’d stuck his neck out to make this meeting happen during the middle of
peace talks. He looks crushed. This is not good for him.
I try to assure the minister that Mark is nearly here at the same time
Derick takes a call from Andrea, wherever she and Mark are. Derick recaps
the call to me in a whisper—Andrea has told the president’s office that
Mark’s flight was late landing and tells Derick that we should do the same.
I’m stunned she thinks this lie will work. Doesn’t she realize they can
