check? Who does she think controls the airspace? They flew in last night.
When Mark does finally arrive, we’re marched upstairs to the president’s
office. No one acknowledges our lateness, but it is clearly understood and
extremely uncomfortable.

We sit down. Mark seems awkward and off his game just making small
talk. The president opens by telling us he has to go talk to the FARC. He
explains they’re at an especially difficult stage; there’d been a deadly bomb
attack a few weeks before, and the whole thing is at risk of collapsing. He
says he wants to build support in Colombia for the peace process and wants
Facebook to help him get this over the line. Mark seems flustered, with the
wide eyes of a man who has not read his brief. He isn’t prepared to talk
about the FARC. But he offers to do all Facebook can to facilitate the
process. (Facebook doesn’t do anything significant. In fact, months later,
after the peace process is concluded, Joel refuses to allow FARC-related
content on the platform, despite direct requests from the president’s office.)
We all can feel this meeting will be over any minute even though it has
hardly begun. Mark brings up Internet.org, tries to explain how it will help
people in remote parts of Colombia. We’d put two Colombian government
sites in the app—one for agriculture and one for education—and Mark
pitches adding more. Santos is noncommittal and ends the meeting after
less than ten minutes, saying, “We can’t keep the press waiting any longer.”
We decamp to a different room, where Santos interviews Mark onstage
for a little over half an hour. The original plan had been for an hour and a
half; they were supposed to take questions from entrepreneurs and press in
the audience, and then exit together. Instead, Santos gets up and walks out,
along with his retinue. Mark is left standing onstage alone.
Before this meeting, the minister and the president said Colombia would
lead Internet.org globally. They’d put all government services into the app,
not just the couple we launched with. We talked about sending the minister
around the Americas promoting Internet.org. After this, we can’t get them to
do anything.

22
Hunger Games for the 0.001 Percent
Here’s something you don’t see in Davos: children. In fact, everyone seems
like they’re middle aged or old or very, very old. But in 2015 I decide to
bring my eleven-month-old daughter, Sasha.
Davos is what people call the World Economic Forum—the annual
meeting of the high-flying people who think they run the planet—
billionaires and world leaders and celebrities (the Clooneys, Kevin Spacey
back in the day, Bono of course). It’s a festival for the important and the
self-important, held in the ski town of Davos, Switzerland.
One of the conceits of Davos is that the logistics are incredibly difficult,
and that’s if you’re a billionaire with a large staff. It’s a ridiculous place to
hold anything. The location is high up in the remote Swiss mountains in the
dead of winter. Getting there requires a flight to Zurich followed by a long
drive through treacherous icy, windy roads, or train, or—if you’re one of
the top attendees (and not staff like me)—helicopter. The town is tiny, one
main street surrounded by ski chalets. The scarcity of hotel rooms,
restaurants, and convenience stores seems to be the point.
I’ve managed Facebook’s presence at Davos for years, but this time,
Tom’s also going to be there, on assignment for the Financial Times. So we
have to bring the baby. When I confide in other staffers about this plan, they
say, alarmed, “Don’t let Sheryl know. She needs to know all your attention
is on her.” Which told me all I really need to know about Sheryl’s real
attitude to combining work and motherhood. In fact, when a woman I work
with closely expresses surprise upon learning I have a child, she tells me,

“Good job!”—openly admiring the fact that she’d had no idea—and I feel a
flush of pride. Both of us acknowledging the success (and the necessity) of
the subterfuge.
I decide we’ll be smuggling our daughter to Davos. Tom disapproves
but suggests no alternative. We decide reluctantly that the only thing to do
is to bring our nanny to watch Sasha while we’re working. We’ve never
traveled with her before and it feels like a big ask, but she’s excited to go.
We’re traveling in the dead of winter and the baby gets sick. After 4:00
A.M. in the seventies-inspired faux log cabin of the Sheraton Hotel Davos,
when Sasha vomits into my hair again, as the three of us lie in bed
exhausted and unsleeping in the stiflingly hot room, Tom turns to me and
says, “This is, beyond doubt, the worst idea we have ever had. I am never
coming to Davos again.” And he keeps his word.
Around this dull Swiss town, the World Economic Forum has
constructed a byzantine social structure where they control the minimal
resources available. These are then dished out by their grace and favor
according to status. Everything at Davos—every speaking slot, every car
pass, every drinks invitation, every meeting room, the distance you sit at
dinner from the front table—is distributed according to social status. The
ultimate type A personalities at Davos understand these minute power
calibrations and spend their time comparing each and every one, constantly
striving for more. So you overhear people saying sniffily that they’re
surprised that a certain prime minister is staying in the Hilton Garden Inn
rather than the Seehof Hotel, or that a celebrity mistakenly tried to cut in
line for a panel, too uneducated to realize they were pushing past a Nobel
laureate. The narcissism of small differences.
In other words, the WEF has weaponized the concept of status envy to
create a Hunger Games for the 0.001 percent. Maybe that’s why they all
seem to love this place. It’s like the status Olympics—a chance for them to
measure themselves not just against their own industry but across business,
politics, entertainment, and media. A bunch of the richest people in the
world.
Know who this setup is not so great for? Anyone trying to do their job
with a baby in tow. Know who it’s made for? Sheryl Sandberg. At Davos,

every cell in her body is tingling, primed and hard at work weighing,
assessing, and measuring whom we should stop to speak to, who gets a
selfie, whom we share information with or give swag to, and who has
committed some past slight that renders them ineligible for even a polite
head nod. And they’re all doing this! Being around all this constant
calculation is exhausting.
Since I arrived at Facebook, we’ve made Davos into the moment each
year when we pause and assess how things are going around the world for
Facebook. We go into it with a “bible” I take months to pull together,
summarizing every issue of importance to Facebook, and preparing talking
points. It’s like taking Facebook finals each year. We come out of it with an
email Sheryl writes, after meeting with politicians, regulators, and
