journalists at the conference, setting the policy direction for the year ahead.
This year at Davos, Sheryl and Joel are taken aback to hear—from their
own kind—that things are not looking so rosy for Facebook. Joel emerges
from a meeting with a senior editor of the Wall Street Journal looking like
someone has handed him a grenade ready to explode. The guy told him,
“Everyone’s currently going after Google but you’re next.” He warned Joel
that media, regulators, and high-level politicians around the world are all
lining up to start to “rein in Facebook.” One of Sheryl’s former Treasury
colleagues tells her, “You all are two years away from being as hated as the
investment banks.”
The Italian prime minister tells us that he and his counterparts in Europe are
struggling with unemployment and slowing economic growth, and the tech
companies are seen as leeches, sucking money out of their countries and not
creating jobs, making investments, or paying tax. At dinner, the UK
chancellor of the exchequer George Osborne hits the same note, saying that
Facebook isn’t “paying its fair share.” I agree with this. Facebook deploys
something called a “double Irish” to avoid paying taxes. It’s something
Google and Apple do as well. The way the double Irish works is that when
one of these companies makes a dollar selling ads (or iPhones in Apple’s
case) in Italy or Germany or elsewhere in the European Union, that revenue

can be shifted to Ireland for tax purposes, and then on to a tax-haven
country like Bermuda that charges no taxes at all. To do this, the companies
have to set up subsidiaries in Ireland and transfer their foreign IP rights to
those subsidiaries. What Ireland gets out of the deal is big Google and
Apple and Facebook operations located on their soil, with thousands of
local employees earning good wages. Those employees pay taxes to Ireland,
even if the tech companies don’t. After years of controversy and opposition,
the EU had just forced Ireland to shut down the boondoggle a few months
before Davos.
This makes our next meeting with Irish prime minister Enda Kenny
particularly important. Before Facebook, I’d never been in the rooms where
the sausage gets made with world leaders. I’d assumed WEF would be like
my experience at the United Nations, where for all its flaws, things still had
a feeling of idealism to them. A sense that is absent in these Davos
meetings. There’s no pretense that Facebook is out for anything but
ourselves. It’s brazen. By this point I know I shouldn’t be surprised but it
still makes me recoil.
We get together in the WEF Strategic Partners Lounge, a bland room in
the Davos Congress Centre packed with temporary furniture. Unlike the
setting, Kenny is charming, a charismatic man who occasionally recites
poetry from memory or sings in the raucous dinners he hosts each year at
Davos. “Ahh, the beautiful ladies of Facebook,” he says as he greets Sheryl
and me. Coming from another man, this would be creepy. Somehow, from
him, it’s almost charming. He hugs Sheryl, embraces me. Kenny has a sense
of mischief. One year at Davos, tipsy after dinner, he breaks me and
Sheryl’s assistant Sadie into a beyond-exclusive wine party thrown by an
obscenely wealthy private equity guy, telling us, “Come, you’ll never have
better wine in your life.” He barrels past security into a dark room where a
bunch of somber-looking men are sipping from glasses and literally taking
notes, declaring brightly, “Someone get these gorgeous ladies some wine.”
And we’re begrudgingly handed the most expensive wine I’ve ever tasted in
my life.
Kenny has been one of Facebook’s firmest allies since the beginning,
and the Irish have gone above and beyond to court our business. Sheryl

often tells the story about how she decided to locate the Facebook European
headquarters in Ireland in 2008, after the Irish government gave her a
special phone when she landed in the country on her first business trip. The
phone connected her to someone in the Irish government who could solve
any problem or address any accommodation she needed. Every time she
meets an Irish politician she brings it up, and sure enough she starts this
meeting by praising the phone and telling the prime minister, “I told folks at
the White House that they should be like the Irish government, because you
are so good to business. That phone!”
Kenny starts with some feel-good chat on how much the government is
relying on Facebook to reach citizens, and how Facebook is positively
impacting Ireland. Then we get down to brass tacks. With the EU quashing
the double Irish, is Facebook going to stay in Ireland? Google and Twitter
have publicly committed to keeping their operations going, but Facebook
hasn’t.
Sheryl says, “I appreciate that there was substantial pressure and
scrutiny this year on global tax rules and arrangements,” and thanks Kenny
for his “careful” and “considered” handling of it. What she’s thanking him
for is an additional five years of double Irish for Facebook and the other
tech companies that Kenny had somehow wangled. We’re protected from
tax until 2020. But what comes after that?
I feel sorry for him. I know that’s not the right response to tax
avoidance, but Ireland has severe austerity measures in place. This man
needs the economic boost Facebook’s international headquarters provides.
It’s hard to know what he can give that will satisfy Sheryl. He’d already
promised her at Davos three years ago that even if European countries make
him tax Facebook, he won’t raise the corporate tax above what it is now in
Ireland: 12.5 percent. (In comparison, it’s 35 percent in the US.) Of course,
12.5 percent is a lot more than nothing, which is what Facebook is currently
paying.
Kenny starts explaining the pressure he’s facing. “Now, you know
Ireland had no choice but to comply with what these other countries.…”
Sheryl interrupts. “Did you know Facebook has over five hundred
employees from fifty-four nations based in Dublin, and we’ve just leased a

building with capacity for over two thousand employees?”
“Have I told you about the Knowledge Development Box?” Kenny asks
with a twinkle in his eye.
“Sarah, stop taking notes,” Sheryl instructs, knowing Kenny’s about to
tell us how he’s going to keep the gravy train going for us. She doesn’t want
it written down. My notes can be subpoenaed. So this part of the meeting
will be “off the books.” “Is this the thing that you told Marne you were
focused on, to make us happy? The IP initiative?”
“Oh yes,” replies Kenny, before he describes a new tax scheme that will
allow companies like Facebook to separate out “income from intellectual
property” and pay half of Ireland’s already low tax rate. “Details are still
being negotiated.”
“We’ll have our team help shape them,” Sheryl insists.
So is this what it looks like when a company conspires with a
government to avoid paying taxes? I know Kenny’s just trying to do right
