by his people and keep a bunch of jobs in Ireland. But still. It doesn’t feel
right, this backroom deal.
Before the meeting closes, Prime Minister Kenny has a favor to ask.
Europe is steaming about privacy and Facebook, and they’re about to adopt
a law—the General Data Protection Regulation—to crack down on how Big
Tech uses personal data. Exactly who will enforce this law is still being
negotiated. Kenny wants it to be Ireland. We do too. But we’ve got a
problem because no one believes Ireland will be tough enough on the tech
companies. With good reason. Kenny needs to make it seem like his
regulator—the Irish Data Protection Commission—is on the case right now,
doing proper oversight, a watchdog Europe can trust with this
responsibility. “Ireland’s been criticized,” he says, which is true, and asks if
we can assist in “building up the credibility” of his regulator by talking
publicly about its audits of Facebook privacy, and the changes we’ve made
because of it. In other words, we should tell the world the lapdog has been a
pit bull. Of course Sheryl agrees to this.
As soon as the prime minister leaves, Sheryl turns to me and says,
“Taxes.”
“Were you not happy with what he offered?”

“Maybe. But whatever happens in Ireland, taxes are coming our way
throughout the world. Especially in Europe. I don’t think we can escape it.
The current tax structure is too hated to last.”
It’s Joel’s first time at Davos, a place he assumed he was going to hate
because (in his words) “my people”—that is, Republicans—hate this sort of
globalist gathering. But instead, he’s having the time of his life.
I find him scooping up tiramisu out of a large catering-size glass dish
that he has lifted out of the buffet and is eating all by himself, with a fork,
in the middle of the congress center.
“Hey, look at this! Everyone said there wouldn’t be any food at Davos
and I’d be hungry for days and look at me. I’ve got a whole tub of tiramisu.
I love tiramisu.”
“See, isn’t Davos great,” I respond, almost successfully masking my
sarcasm. “I thought ‘your people’ didn’t come to this particular shindig.”
“So did I, but it turns out there’s a bunch of people I know here.”
“Your country club friends? Harvard? DC? Bush administration?
Federalist Society friends? Supreme Court? General global elite?”
“All of it.”
He smiles triumphantly and scoops up another forkful of tiramisu.
As darkness falls in Davos, I half skid, half run back to the hotel to
order some room service ice cream and quietly sing “Happy Birthday” to
Sasha before she goes to sleep. It’s exactly a year since I received the
request for talking points for Davos while I was in the stirrups about to
deliver her. I bundle this sweet baby into bed and myself back into snow
clothes to race back to brief Sheryl and Joel on their next meetings. I am
questioning all my life choices. I want to be at home, with my baby and my
husband and my new “mom friends.” Surely having a kid and a career is not
meant to be like this? I know I’m expected to work as if I don’t have
children, but I didn’t expect it would feel like this. There’s a grief to it. I’m
still committed to the mission, but it feels like the cost is too high. Though
this is what Marne and Sheryl both do. This is the Lean In workplace.

And I haven’t learned the difference between knowing when to quit and
knowing when to persevere.
Joel is very impressed with what he calls his “sweet boots,” cowboy-
inspired snow boots that set him apart as a Republican in this liberal elite
milieu. He sends me a photo of himself wearing the boots, saying, “Look
how smaht [sic] my boots are. I think I might be able to get away with
wearing them to meetings? What do you think?” He regularly asks me to
admire the boots and in subsequent emails to me refers to them exclusively
as his “stylin’ boots.” As we move from meeting to meeting across Davos,
he makes a point of racing off in his boots and telling me to “hurry and
catch up, you’re not pregnant now.”
Just before midnight he realizes he’s lost them and throws a late-night
tantrum. He copies me on an email to other staff titled FYI that simply
states, “SWW lost my sweet boots,” so I understand the extent of his
displeasure. Despite the fact I had nothing to do with him losing his boots.
And this is how I find myself—when I want to be cuddled up in bed with
my sick birthday baby—crawling on my hands and knees through the
various coatracks at the congress center in Davos to find the boots—which
he accidentally left at a coat check. At 12:58 A.M., I email him, “I have your
boots.”
It’s not always the things you think that will bring you to your knees.
In Sheryl’s Davos apartment, she starts to prepare her “Lessons of
Davos” email that she’ll send to Mark and leadership when we fly out. This
will set our policy direction for the rest of the year.
I suggest that she tell leadership we need to take the storms on the
horizon seriously. European leaders are telling us that things aren’t right—
they’ve noticed Facebook is making gobs of money from their citizens and
that isn’t translating into jobs or money for them. They’re not happy. At the
moment they’re being reasonable and asking Facebook to find a way to
invest, but it’s clear that’s going to change. I actually believe it’s only fair
that Facebook should pay more taxes, and that’s what I suggest. It’s not a
crazy idea. Starbucks had just volunteered to scrap its tax-dodging tactics

and pay more tax in the UK, agreeing to contribute as much corporate tax in
2015 as it did in its first fourteen years in the country. Compromising now
on taxes is not just the right thing to do, I say. Giving a little now is smart
strategy; it might prevent worse regulations and taxes later.
Sheryl ignores me, as if I hadn’t said anything. Seriously, it’s so off the
map she doesn’t even bother to respond. Instead she taps out her conclusion
to Mark and the rest of the Facebook executives: “The best thing we can do
is invest in getting policy-makers to use Facebook to communicate and
politicians to win elections.”
This is how Sheryl wants us to address the growing hatred toward
Facebook and the regulations and taxes that are likely to come. Facebook
has an ace that the other tech companies don’t; we can make Facebook
essential to electoral success. The more that politicians are indebted to
Facebook, the better it is for us: “Where policy makers have a positive
experience using Facebook for campaigns or governance, they’re more
open to partnering with us to address policy issues.” It’s a shift that will
have far-reaching consequences.
After this, Facebook invests heavily in campaigns and elections around
the world. Sheryl directs Joel to hire teams in Asia and Latin America and
Europe. They’ll coach politicians on how to target specific messages to
specific sorts of voters, and they’ll sell them ads. Make them reliant on
