Facebook for their power. This is what Joel’s been wanting to do for a while
now, and what he has been doing on a small scale. Now he gets a mandate
to supercharge it. As he launches into this hiring spree, I fight it best as I
can. I think this approach will only end badly. I think we’ll get too close to
people who lose  … which could alienate whoever wins. And in other
places, I think we’ll get too close to objectionable people who do vile things
and win office with our help. That won’t be good for Facebook in a
different way. Either way, we’re complicit. Enabling. I think it’s best to stay
as neutral as possible. Or at the very least let a different part of Facebook
handle it. Not the part of Facebook that is responsible for all policy and
content decisions. But I lose every fight. Nobody’s listening to me.

23
Making Sure This Thing Flies
By April 2015, Internet.org is stalled. Mark’s said he’ll do whatever it takes
to make it a success, and invests inordinate amounts of his own time. But
only nine countries have rolled out the app since it launched nine months
ago.
I pitch him attending the Summit of the Americas in Panama, where he
can meet lots of heads of state and prime ministers in one place. And to
supercharge Mark’s time at the summit (and elevate him above the other
CEOs who’ll be there), I’ve negotiated to have him participate in a panel,
alongside President Obama and the presidents of Mexico, Panama, and
Brazil (our target countries!). It’s been a torturous process to get agreement
to have Mark onstage with presidents, but the Panamanians have been
helpful accomplices. That is until the White House heard what I’d done.
They’re furious for reasons I never uncovered, but I think they don’t like
the power dynamics of Mark onstage with Obama and other presidents. As
a result, Mark’s ousted from the panel, but they put him in the front row of
the audience with the president of Coca-Cola and some other CEOs, and at
one point, Obama points to Mark sitting there and says, “I’m glad that my
friend, Mark Zuckerberg, is here. Obviously, what he’s done with Facebook
has been transformative.”
Mark is handed a mic to ask a question. He takes the opportunity to
promote Internet.org and ends by asking each of the presidents on the panel,
“What more can we be doing together to connect everyone in the world?”
See what we did there? Mark’s momentarily leading them in discussion.

The Mexican president responds, “Digital inclusion is the new
alphabet.” President Obama adds that “governments need to work with the
private sector.” He then goes on to give an unexpected example suggesting
that in Central America young people, instead of joining gangs, can start
internet companies using social media.
Mark’s thrilled. He’s got presidents lining up to reinforce the
importance of connectivity. As the session concludes, Mark and I try to
leave our front-row seats but we’re sucked into a vortex of people. They’re
thrusting business cards, calling his name, requesting selfies, and trying to
move me out of the way to get to him. I need to hustle Mark out of there to
his next meeting. But we can’t make any headway through the crowd. Any
direction we go, another person appears and I feel us being pushed back
into our seats. It’s a relief when Mark’s security team materializes and
pushes people back so we can walk toward the backstage exit. Except we’re
still not making progress and the circle of people around us starts pushing
against Mark’s security. His bodyguard senses the danger and starts to
forcefully move people out of the way. There’s discontent among the crowd
as it becomes clear that Mark is leaving the venue, not doing selfies. As his
bodyguard forcefully shoves a group of men to the side, a plaintive voice
cuts through:
“But, but, but … I’m the president of Guatemala.”
The people around us fall silent at the cri de coeur and stop jostling—
waiting to see how this will unfold. Mark looks at me like, What’s the
diplomatic protocol after you’ve shoved the president of Guatemala? And
before I can say anything, I see the smile playing on his lips. That’s
definitely not the diplomatic response, and everyone else sees it too. We
stand there for what seems like an unreasonably long time before security
hustles us out. For years afterward, anytime there are too many people
getting into a van or a room is too crowded, there’s always someone on the
team who’ll pipe up with plaintive indignation, “But, but, but … I’m the
president of Guatemala.”

The hubbub around Mark at the summit continues. The president of Panama
stands in front of the press with Mark to announce Internet .org’s entry into
Panama, and other heads of state are reaching out to ask for Internet.org in
their countries. Everyone’s talking about the importance of connectivity.
Telecom operators who’d refused to engage with us in the past now want to
host Internet.org. It’s like Internet.org has become the new cool thing no
one wants to be left out of, among these national leaders. It’s a very
different conversation from what we were having before the summit and
way better than we’d dreamed. Thirty new partnerships for Internet.org are
put in play during the summit. Mark and Javi generously give me the credit
for this and report back to Sheryl that I’m a “policy badass.” They’re so
impressed with my ability to pull strings around the world that when a
massive container ship emblazoned with the words NEW ZEALAND appears in
front of us during our tour of the Panama Canal, they’re sure I had
something to do with it.
We have other adventures in Panama. Drinks at a spectacular rooftop
bar. An unexpectedly fun, drunken dinner in a historic building where Javi
mistakes the word “delicacy” for “delicatessen” and Mark has to patiently
explain that delicious food is not described as a “delicatessen.” This is the
trip where we go to the state dinner with the scantily clad people at the
archeological site. Mark messages me to thank me—which is completely
uncharacteristic; he doesn’t usually thank his own staff—for making the
road trip productive “and also fun,” with a smiley emoji. It occurs to me,
when does Mark ever get to have much fun?
In the midst of all this positivity and goofing around, a few strange
things happen that I register as odd and potentially troubling. The first is
Mexico. We thought we had convinced the Mexican president to launch
Internet.org after our meeting last year but, like so many of the Internet.org
launches, it has stalled out. Even more worrying is the president of Brazil.
We learn that she has serious concerns about Internet.org that we need to
address. In fact, the meeting with her becomes the most important of the
summit, because Brazil is our biggest target in this hemisphere. It’s the
largest nation in Latin America and half its population is still offline, which
makes it critical for Facebook and for Internet.org.

Brazil is also at the forefront of internet regulation globally. It’s one of
