the few countries that was quick to grasp the risks of social media and
swiftly move to regulation. Instead of accepting Facebook’s line that the
government doesn’t have authority over us, they’ve passed internet
regulation that’s comprehensive and has teeth, far ahead of any other
country. It gives them explicit jurisdiction over Big Tech on everything
from tax to privacy. They back it up with enforcement. When their courts
declare they will block our service, we believe them, because they do.
To top it all off, Brazil’s president Dilma Rousseff is someone other
leaders in the region listen to and respect. If she turns against Internet.org
publicly, it could kill the whole thing. The Brazilian press is reporting that
she’s going to make her decision soon—either to partner with Facebook on
Internet.org or to “protect” internet users in Brazil by keeping it out. We’ve
heard that activists are set to protest if she picks us. And despite all our
efforts, we still don’t know which way she’s leaning.
It was difficult to get any time on Rousseff’s schedule for an
appointment, but I wrangle an hour at 4:00 P.M. on Friday, the last day of the
summit.
And then … an impromptu meeting with President Obama is added to
the schedule, to start at 3:45. Which is exactly when we’re supposed to be
driving to President Rousseff. I find out about this minutes before it
happens. Someone from the White House must’ve offered it, and I’m sure if
anyone on our team asked Mark, he’d have said yes.
Mark had originally wanted Obama to come with us on our side trip to
the Panama Canal. Andrea messaged me and Joel, “Any chance that he
would visit the canal with us? POTUS I mean? That could be epic  …
leaders, standing in the middle of physical connectivity and innovation.” As
if I somehow have the ability to swing a cameo from President Obama
whenever Mark might want it. Joel politely pointed out that since Mark is
suggesting this less than a week before the summit, he’d be very surprised
if Obama’s schedule would allow for a road trip to the Panama Canal.
Instead, this impromptu presidential meeting happens in a secure area of
the convention center where they’re holding the summit. I deliver Mark into
the room before Obama gets there, hoping he’ll say “stick around” like he

does so often. Not this time. I wait in the corridor. When Obama arrives, he
leaves his people outside also.
I wait. We should be in our van right now, I think.
Soon it’s 4:00. Our meeting with President Rousseff is supposed to be
starting. I get a message from the Brazilians that their president is waiting
and wants to know where Mark is. It’s excruciating.
I message Derick—Mark’s communications guy—who’s closer to the
room, chatting with some Secret Service guys: “Please get him out asap.”
He responds, “They are behind closed doors.”
I obviously know that they are behind closed doors. I’m standing less
than ten feet away from Derick. I just don’t want to be the person who
interrupts this meeting.
“Knock on the door,” I message.
He ignores my message. I march over to where Derick is standing
beside a scrum of security guys and pull him away, saying, “You have to go
in there and get him out.”
“I can’t do that. He’s with the president of the United States. There’s a
Secret Service agent right here blocking the door. I’m not going to interrupt
them. You do it.”
“Derick, I’m not fighting with you. He simply can’t keep the president
of Brazil waiting any longer. It’s a disaster.”
“Good. I’ll watch you do it.”
I move toward the door where Mark’s bodyguard Brooks Scott is
standing watch, next to a Secret Service agent.
“You need to go into that room and get Mark out,” I urge Brooks. “I
don’t have time to get into it but for protocol reasons it is critical you
retrieve Mark now.”
I’m obviously trying to make this sound as official as possible, but he
doesn’t buy it. He knows he doesn’t take orders from me. We’re all in a
standoff, looking from one to the other—me, Derick, Brooks—when I hear
the unmistakable noise of a door handle being pulled down. I don’t even
know if it was my hand that did it. The door swings open and Brooks enters
the room so quickly I barely see him move. That’s instinct and training; if

someone can get to Mark, he has to get there first. I follow him. I look back
and see Derick standing in the door frame.
I imagine both President Obama and Mark are surprised and unused to
this sort of interruption, but honestly, my mind goes blank today when I try
to conjure the exact moment. I remember them sitting toward the back of
the room at a table covered by a white tablecloth with blue detail. Obama
perched at one corner of the table and Mark close beside. Plain chairs. Both
completely relaxed and somehow unsurprised to see me. I don’t hear what
they’re saying, just the pounding of blood in my ears. I walk over and say
something—I don’t remember what—along the lines of “We gotta go.”
Mark has no sense of urgency about the president he has waiting. He
continues to shoot the shit and loiter with this one for a little bit longer. I do
remember it’s agonizing, watching him slowly summon himself to go.
Finally I get him out of there and rally the rest of the team to get out of the
conference hall as quickly as possible.
Of course we’re late to meet President Rousseff, but she’s gracious about it.
Treats it like no big deal. This is a woman who’d been tortured by a military
dictatorship, she’d been a guerrilla leader, so I frankly didn’t expect her to
be the kind of person who’d engage in a lot of chitchat. But she talks to us
with warmth, asking with genuine interest about our trip to the Panama
Canal (without Obama). When Mark presents her with a Facebook hoodie
with a Brazilian flag sewn on, she seems genuinely tickled and puts it on
right away.
“I came here to Panama just to meet you,” Mark says, which is
awkward, given how long we’ve kept her waiting while he hung with
Obama. She doesn’t bat an eye. He presses on. “Brazil is so important as a
leader for the internet and is so influential. Facebook can help you achieve
your goals to bring the benefits of the internet to all the Brazilian people.
Our program is called Internet.org.”
Unsurprisingly, she already knows the name, and as they get into the
substance, Rousseff transitions from charm to a steely grasp of the technical
aspects of internet regulation. A trained economist, she asks pointed

questions that Mark has a hard time answering about zero rating—where
services like Internet.org get subsidized by telecoms, which underpins the
whole project. She deflects Mark’s efforts to get her to endorse or partner
with us to launch the Internet.org app and instead asks for real ways to
provide free internet in Brazil. She wants infrastructure. She wants
