investment. She wants drones deploying the internet to remote parts of the
Amazon.
And she’s right. Facebook could have offered these things. Facebook is
investing in internet drones and is currently building a prototype. But when
we message the team to see if we can agree to testing the drones in Brazil,
they tell us no: “Right now we need to stay focused on making sure this
thing flies.” I think they already suspect the drones are not going to happen.
Mark starts to get desperate. “I think we could get there quickly by
launching the Internet.org app instead this quarter. My schedule is tight but
I will come to Brazil in June to launch with you.” He offers e-government
services and local content. “I have a team ready to make that happen.”
President Rousseff is inscrutable. She warmly welcomes Mark’s offer to
travel to Brazil and says some positive things about the Internet.org app but
doesn’t commit to anything. And before we know it her team are insisting
she has to leave.
Days later she tells the press that she and Mark limited their
conversation to Facebook building internet infrastructure in Brazil and
didn’t discuss Internet.org or zero rating. Not true at all, but at least she’s
giving a clear signal where Internet.org stands with her. She says that Mark
will come to Brazil in June to negotiate a partnership but that “we have to
think in our interests.”
I share this with the Facebook team. Joel responds, “Oh man. Cold feet
already. The battle is joined and we need to start fighting back.”

24
California Time
One of the unexpectedly stressful things about traveling with Mark is the
repeated questions about why I’m not based in California, closer to him and
the teams. These are friendly, teasing, but I know he’s serious about this.
Three weeks after Panama, I’m back with Mark and our friend,
Japanese prime minister Abe, at Facebook’s Menlo Park headquarters.
Abe’s made good on his promise to visit us, dropping by after his state visit
with Obama. He’s now one of many heads of state who want to stop by
Facebook’s HQ.
“This is success,” I explain to Mark as we discuss the Abe meeting.
“Facebook and meeting with you is becoming a standard thing for heads of
state to do, when they visit the president. Like a West Coast White House.”
“You’re going to be out here all the time, then,” he says. Mark’s not
someone who jokes, but this is his version of an amused poke at me.
“I already am,” I respond.
“Then save yourself the trouble and just make it permanent. I don’t see
what’s so great about New York.…”
“Then you don’t know New York.…”
“I grew up there.”
“New York City, not the suburbs, Mark.”
“What would you know? You’re from New Zealand.”
I don’t take the bait and we move on. No one from the policy team is
based in California. They all see the world’s center of power as Washington,
DC. And Mark hasn’t asked anyone from the team to move to California, so

I figure it will all blow over. But part of me worries that Mark has
understood what I see, that power is shifting and Silicon Valley is starting to
assert itself on its own terms. A place political power players have to visit.
A few weeks later, completely out of nowhere, I receive this message:
From: Mark Zuckerberg
Sent: Friday, May 29, 2015, 5:54 P.M.
To: Sarah Wynn-Williams
Subject: Thank you
Sarah,
Thanks for all that you are doing around the world to build important relationships for
Internet.org.
You’ve set up many critical meetings with Heads of State, which is pretty much impossible to
do. You created a rally in Indonesia, got the meet and greet with Kirchner [the president of
Argentina] and you’ve worked hard to keep things moving forward despite our challenges.
I’m really optimistic that we’ll achieve our goals, and you work [sic] is a really important part
of connecting the world.
Mark
Every fiber of my being wants to stay in New York with the life we’ve built
there, but when I read this I know we have to move to California. It may not
look like much. An encouraging email from a boss. But like I said, Mark
doesn’t send these. He thinks that if you work directly with him regularly
you should know you’re good at your job. You don’t need affirmation. And
combined with the drumbeat of comments about moving, I assume this
email is his way of saying it’s time to relocate. And he’s choosing to flatter
me into it, rather than force me. But he’s capable of either.
Weeks later when I’ve sorted the logistics and let him know I’m
relocating, he sends the sort of gracious email that would be normal from
another sort of boss but surprises me from him.
From: Mark Zuckerberg
Sent: Thursday, July 02, 2015, 1:39 A.M.
To: Sarah Wynn-Williams
Subject: MPK [Menlo Park]

I’m glad you’re moving to MPK and I’m looking forward to working together more closely.
Thanks again for everything you’re doing. We’re going to have a big impact all over the
world.
Mark
Note the timestamp. Typical.

25
Muppets and Monsignors
September 2015 ends with a big week for Mark on the two projects most
important to him: China and Internet.org. He also gives the keynote speech
at Oculus Connect, the conference we’ve organized to promote Facebook’s
investments in virtual reality. Each of these disparate threads represents a
different vision for Facebook’s future. If any one of them comes through,
we’ll be a very different company.
First up during that week is Chinese president Xi Jinping.
I was confused months earlier when Vaughan and the China
cheerleaders inside Facebook announced that President Xi would begin his
state visit to the US at Facebook’s headquarters, to announce our entry into
China. A Facebook page that Vaughan and the China team helped establish
just for the visit, #XiVISITUSA, had somehow amassed over five million
followers. I found that odd. More people are into this visit than the entire
population of my country? Who are they? Facebook isn’t even available in
China. What exactly had been done to the algorithm to boost the audience?
