Will we be offering this incredibly valuable service to other heads of state?
Don’t we need to be honest about it?
The team apparently put a lot of effort into protecting the page. Something
other heads of state, like the Mexican president hit by the poop emoji storm,
would have loved. And the team worked toward offering VIP service for
other Chinese Communist Party pages.

Then, in mid-August, we hear from Condoleezza Rice’s consulting firm
—which we’ve hired to help with China—that the Chinese president will
not be visiting Silicon Valley on his visit. This is news to Vaughan and the
rest of Facebook. Joel responds in an email, “If accurate, seems like a
strong signal they aren’t on a late September timetable” to announce our
entry into China. Debbie forwards me his email with this comment:
“Exactly what you said.” She’s another China skeptic.
Xi chooses Seattle, the home of Amazon and Microsoft, to start his visit.
Ouch.
Vaughan keeps hopes alive of a meeting between Mark and Xi in
Seattle, suggesting it will be the time and place where Facebook’s entry into
China is announced. Then this is scaled back to a “pull-aside” at a group
meeting and no announcement, and finally a “longer than normal
handshake,” which Mark is prepared to fly to Seattle for. They’re desperate.
The handshake does happen, but in a particularly galling setting: the
Microsoft campus, during Xi’s tour of the facilities. I’m not with them, but
watching the video, it’s hard to tell if it’s “longer than normal.” They’re
together for less than a minute. In contrast, Xi holds a closed-door meeting
with thirty American and Chinese CEOs, including Jeff Bezos and Tim
Cook. Mark is not invited.
Having invested so much to get this handshake, Mark posts a photo of it
on his Facebook page, making it sound like he actually was allowed to
attend the meeting with the other CEOs:
Today I met President Xi Jinping of China at the 8th annual US-
China Internet Industry Forum in Seattle. The Forum is an
opportunity for CEOs of technology companies to meet with
government officials from the US and China to discuss common
issues for the future of our industry.
He adds at the end:
On a personal note, this was the first time I’ve ever spoken with a
world leader entirely in a foreign language. I consider that a
meaningful personal milestone.

But there’s a problem with the photo he posts. It’s from an angle where
you see Mark’s face, and the back of President Xi’s head. This is a breach
of protocol. I’m not there because I try to avoid all things China. But the
moment I see it, I know there’s going to be trouble, and sure enough, panic
ensues at forty thousand feet on Mark’s private jet when the Chinese
government contacts them over the spotty internet connection to let him
know they’re furious about it. Instead of creating a positive first impression
with the president of China, they’ve created a diplomatic crisis. We’re
banned from China, barred from the meetings with the other tech CEOs,
confined to a one-minute handshake, and even that, they’ve screwed up.
Next come agonizing discussions about whether to leave the photo up.
But every person on that jet has been on the receiving end of requests to
remove embarrassing things from Facebook, and they’re all acutely aware
that taking something down can attract way more attention and controversy
than simply leaving it up. They continue debating the entire flight, and as
they land the realization hits that the photo is already everywhere across the
internet. The damage is done. They leave it up.
Two days later, at a state dinner in the White House, Mark gets another
chance to speak with Xi. In Mandarin, he asks Xi if he’ll do him the honor
of naming his unborn child. Xi refuses.
The next day, Saturday, September 26, Mark addresses the United
Nations, hoping to rouse excitement for Internet.org. As always, I try to get
him the most high-profile speaking slot possible. At the UN that means the
morning. The earlier you are, the more important you are. I manage to book
him between the president of Argentina and the prime minister of the UK,
and then Mark’s assistant Andrea nixes it. The United Nations isn’t
important enough for Mark to do an event before noon. He still doesn’t like
getting out of bed early. We compromise with a later slot. The day before
the event at the UN, when Elliot sees which presidents are scheduled to
speak before and after Mark, he suggests pulling out. This is before tech
companies were engaging with the UN, and I find no one on my side in
wanting Mark to speak there. The whole thing is being treated as if Mark
was indulging me by agreeing to do it in the first place, like he was visiting
my hometown as a favor or something. “These heads of state are not

particularly impressive, no?” Elliot writes. I feel myself bristle, as a citizen
of one of those “not particularly impressive” nations. In the end, he decides
that a photo of Mark addressing the UN will be worth the indignity, and we
don’t cancel.
We’re going to the UN because we’re trying to influence their
Sustainable Development Goals. They update these every fifteen years.
They’re targets to do things like reduce global poverty and illiteracy and
inequality, and promote gender equality. Back when I first started at
Facebook, Marne and I tried to get the United Nations to add internet access
(or any reference to the internet) to the UN’s seventeen development goals.
At first, we were literally laughed at — “You mean you’re here from some
internet site to tell me that giving people the internet is more important than
ending child mortality? Or eradicating hunger?” But now the draft goals for
2015 include a few references to connectivity. Internet access is definitely
not a UN priority. But at least they’re acknowledging it.
To push them further in this direction, I pitch a “Connectivity
Declaration.” It’s a petition anyone can sign online, stating that “internet
access is essential for achieving humanity’s #globalgoals” and pointing out
that “half the people on this planet don’t have access, especially women and
girls.” It calls on “leaders and innovators from all countries, industries and
communities to work together as one to make universal internet access a
reality by 2020.”
In my mind, we’re not just doing this because it’ll create more
Facebook users and promote Internet.org. It really seems like a tangible
way we can use our power to make the world a better place. In retrospect,
staggeringly naive.
Facebook spends over $1 million on full-page advertisements
championing the Connectivity Declaration in the New York Times, the Wall
Street Journal, and other publications around the world, and I’m astonished
how many people take it seriously and sign up. We get a bizarre bedfellows
party of celebrity endorsements from Shakira, Stephen Hawking, George
