Takei, Bill Gates, and Charlize Theron. Real NGOs like the United Nations
Foundation sign on. We partner with Bono’s ONE Foundation, because
Bono is a friend of Sheryl’s, and write an op-ed for Bono and Mark to place

in the New York Times setting out our connectivity agenda in more detail.
Everyone’s surprised when Bono wants to edit it.
We spend millions more building a giant “innovation pop-up” in the
plaza right in front of the UN, a big glass structure with screens depicting
the connected world and videos of people who’ve recently gotten the
internet, along with an array of VR headsets, an Instagram wall, and the
extremely large wing of a drone prototype that we’re hoping will someday
deliver internet from the air.
Mark delivers his speech to the United Nations General Assembly and
gets generally glowing press for it. CNN’s website: “Mark Zuckerberg:
Internet Access Can Eradicate Extreme Poverty.” Reuters: “Facebook
Founder Calls for Universal Internet to Help Cure Global Ills.” Wired:
“Zuckerberg to the U.N.: The Internet Belongs to Everyone.” I’m thrilled
these things no one else wanted to do have all worked.
But then we have a lunch at the United Nations Private Sector Forum,
with Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and German chancellor Angela
Merkel. Mark’s nervous sitting next to Merkel, because Germany has
several open investigations into Facebook privacy issues dating back to
Marne’s Holocaust meeting with the German ministerial delegation, and has
been one of the most suspicious and effective regulators of the internet.
Before the speeches, Merkel is caught on a hot mic pressing Mark to
remove antirefugee posts from Facebook in Germany. She’s just opened her
borders to hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees, she’s under significant
political pressure, and the torrent of racist anti-immigrant posts is damaging
her popularity and making her job that much harder. Mark is heard on mic
agreeing, “We need to do some work” on this hate speech.
Then, when he gets onstage to deliver his keynote, it’s a surprise to
everyone including me when Mark announces that Facebook will be
“working with UNHCR [the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees] to bring the Internet to refugee camps.” I’ve never heard anyone
breathe a word about this at Facebook. Neither, apparently, has Elliot,
Facebook’s policy head, who sends out an email to the team asking, “Does
anyone know where the offer of wifi to refugee camps came from?”

No one does. Even the head of Internet.org, Chris Daniels, was
blindsided by this and writes, “We would appreciate a discussion on these
announcements before they are announced.”
Apparently Mark made this up.
Maybe he’d been planning to announce this for days, and for some
reason didn’t want to discuss it with all of us. But it also seems possible that
it was an ad lib, made up on the fly to quiet some inner discomfort after
Angela Merkel scolded Mark for worsening the refugee crisis. Maybe he
thinks everyone just freestyles at the United Nations.
At the luncheon, there’s no time to think through what Mark’s refugee
camp announcement means. We need to show Bono around our innovation
pop-up and then rush across Manhattan to Central Park.
Central Park is mobbed. It’s the annual Global Citizen Festival, and
sixty thousand people have shown up on the Great Lawn for a kind of
thinking man’s Davos music-and-ideas concert. The lineup includes
Beyoncé, Coldplay, and Stephen Colbert.
I think Mark will love this: crowds, celebrities, young idealistic
attendees. He’s talked about wanting to play a stadium. But I’m the only
one who wants him to do it. Elliot, Joel, Andrea—everyone else is
adamantly opposed. There’s too much happening this week with Xi’s visit,
the state dinner, and the United Nations. They want me to let it go. But I
know they haven’t asked Mark, and I’m convinced this satisfies something
he’s been wanting ever since his request for a riot, so I don’t let it go.
To make the timing work and get Mark a slot onstage after the UN
luncheon and the pop-up, I’d asked the festival organizers to move Big
Bird. They initially said no, insisting that my Big Bird problem created
issues for Malala and Beyoncé. Then they relented and moved Big Bird so
he’s right before Mark. Big Bird’s fine with this, but the Facebook team
does not think that this sets the right tone—Elliot doesn’t want Mark to
follow a giant yellow Muppet—so I need Big Bird moved again. I’m still
scrambling to solve that when Mark emails saying that the pope’s going to
be in New York that same day and, on top of everything else, he’d like an
audience with His Holiness.

I email a monsignor I’ve worked with in the past to ask about meeting
the pope, and ask Big Bird if he can swap with Bill Nye the Science Guy.
That would work for Mark, Malala, Beyoncé, and maybe the pope. But my
hopes are dashed when I’m informed that Big Bird can’t take the stage after
dark, and that Big Bird and his team are not prepared to do any more
accommodating for Mark Zuckerberg.
Andrea latches onto the idea that all our scheduling problems will be
solved if Mark simply provides a video for the Global Citizen Festival
rather than appearing in person. She proceeds to get the video filmed. I
continue to push for Mark to do it in person and beg her not to submit the
video, but the most I can secure is a promise that we’ll make a decision on
the day of the event. Which seems unnecessarily fraught to me. My position
is that Mark will definitely want to get in front of a huge crowd. Her
position is that it’s going to be chaos getting from one place to another in
New York during UN week. Meanwhile, the pope’s representative responds,
“Send Mark to Rome if he wants an audience with the Pope.”
I guess we’re all staking out our positions.
When we arrive at Central Park, we’re ushered into the penned-off area
for the performers. Common is laughing with Olivia Wilde in the corner
and Usher is casually taking photos of some of the beautiful women
lounging around. Leonardo DiCaprio is sharing our green room, talking to
Mark about some charity thing he wants Mark to support. But I can enjoy
none of this because I’m utterly exhausted. I’m three months pregnant with
my second child and have felt sick for every day of those three months. I’m
also worried I’m going to bump into Big Bird, who I hear is mightily pissed
at me about the whole schedule thing.
I excuse myself to get a front-row position for Mark’s speech and leave
Andrea and Mark in the green room.
As Bill Nye the Science Guy wraps up, having successfully switched
the slots, I watch the steps where Mark will take the stage. There seems to
be some sort of weird commotion between Andrea and the stagehand; she’s
arguing with him and he seems to be giving as good as he’s getting. I race
over, but before I get there I see Mark bouncing up the steps onto the stage
and surveying the crowd of tens of thousands. They all seem weirdly
