
excited by the Science Guy or Mark. I can’t really tell. Perhaps both. Out of
the corner of my eye, I catch sight of Big Bird backstage and immediately
feel every muscle in my body tense.
Mark takes the microphone and seems to be looking for the
teleprompter, and maybe that makes him miss a beat or maybe the setting
sun is in his eyes, but just as he starts his speech there’s some weird
feedback. His words are repeating but they’re a little bit different. What is
happening? He stops talking and just stands there, frozen, but his voice
keeps going. I realize to my horror that somehow a giant projection of his
face is speaking. It’s the video Andrea submitted. It’s booming out and
Mark is now looking around desperately, like an animal in a trap. The
audience is confused. I want to throw up. I can’t look at him in case he
makes eye contact with me. I start to call every person I have ever
connected with at the festival to tell them to stop the tape. No one picks up.
What is a very short video feels like it grinds on for eternity. Mark
awkwardly looks at the crowd. They stare back at him. I wonder, just for a
moment, if Big Bird is behind this. The video ends and I wait for Mark to
crack a joke or say something to the audience. But no, he just quietly backs
down the stairs on the side of the stage while still facing the crowd. It
reminds me of the GIF of Homer Simpson backing away through a hedge.
“What happened????” I rush over to him and Andrea.
“We needed to do his face and change his shirt.…” I mentally kick
myself. I know about his sweating issue. Along with a change of T-shirt,
Andrea now carries these blotting papers with her everywhere and blots
Mark’s face when he sweats. “I told them to wait while he changed.”
“But they can’t wait,” I interrupt her. “They squeezed us in. They need
to set up the stage for Beyoncé and Malala.”
I’m not sure why but this guts me. Maybe because I’d pushed so hard to
make it happen. Maybe because I’m utterly exhausted and not quite in
control of my emotions, thanks to the pregnancy. I’m worried I might cry,
and I know that would not be professional or proportionate.
“Look, this is my fault, I should have stayed with you,” I say. Knowing
that I had, somewhat shamefully, left them alone by the stage to avoid Big
Bird.

“Sarah, Dre, look, this is my fault,” Mark says earnestly. He’s looking
deep into my eyes. “No, seriously, it’s my fault.”
“It isn’t,” I insist. “I should have been able to stop the video.…”
“Look, Sarah, if I was good at speaking or even improvising this
wouldn’t be a big deal. I would have said something. I would have engaged
the crowd. I need to work on this stuff. It’s me, not you. Really.”
If I was worried about crying before, I’m even more worried now that
I’ll cry at his kindness. He’s never tried to comfort me before. He’s
surprisingly … tender?
“You’ve done an amazing job, really. I would never have thought we
could do any of what we’ve achieved today. Focus on all the impact you’ve
had, Sarah.”
As we transfer from van, to helicopter, to private jet, Mark continues to
reassure me—it’s the most human he’s ever seemed—and by the time
someone cracks a Big Bird joke at my expense, I’m fine.
Monday morning Mark emails the team, wanting a Facebook post about
his United Nations announcement, his plan to bring Wi-Fi to refugee camps.
He suggests we use a photo he’s found of a grinning white engineer
surrounded by refugees in Tanzania.
I don’t want to be the only person pushing back against this terrible
idea, so I ask Dex Torricke-Barton to point out the white-savior problem to
Mark. He emails Mark, “Would not use this photo—optics problematic for
diversity (prosperous white guy saving the poor black kids).”
I respond as politely as I can manage on the bigger problem—Mark
announced an initiative at the United Nations that doesn’t seem to exist.
The way I put this is that it’s not the time to post, as we’re “right at the
beginning of this program with limited substance.” Everyone agrees not to
post for now.
Elliot meets with some of the Internet.org people to discuss how to
implement what Mark promised and get Wi-Fi into refugee camps. They
decide we shouldn’t be giving away Wi-Fi for free but should instead create
a “sustainable business model” where refugees will pay. Joel hears about

this, and he writes the group, “Apologies for the ignorant question, but do
the refugees in these camps have a source of income?”
This is when it really hits me. There’s not going to be any meaningful
Wi-Fi delivered to refugee camps by Facebook, like Mark has announced at
the UN. When we left New York I’d never felt more connected to Mark,
and now I feel stupid. The United Nations still means something to me.
Despite its flaws. I’m the one who suggested he go there to lay out his
vision for making the world a better place, and it feels weirdly personal that
he’d be so cavalier or cynical to make this announcement there without it
being ready to roll out. In fact, he has not even discussed it with his team
before he speaks. Like, what kind of person does this—promises to help
people most in need without a plan in place or having discussed if it will be
possible?
At this point I’m still a true believer in Facebook’s mission to change
the world. And I had thought my role in it—my contribution—would be to
get Mark to engage internationally, meet with real heads of state. I thought
that would teach him to exercise political power responsibly. Make
reasonable compromises when needed, on privacy, protecting children, and
whatever mattered. Build a company that would make money, sure, but also
be a good citizen of the world.
But now it occurs to me that maybe Mark isn’t on the same page at all.
Somehow, introducing him to global leaders and putting him on the world
stage at the United Nations is having the opposite effect of what I’d hoped.
He seems to be giving less of a damn. Saying things because they sound
good. Posting things because they look good. Looking back now, I regret
having enabled this.
It gives me a bad feeling in the pit of my stomach.
What unfolds next with Internet.org only makes the feeling worse.

26
The Wicked Witch of the West
Sixty-seven digital rights groups around the world have joined forces to
oppose Internet.org. They summarize their objections in an open letter to
Mark Zuckerberg. For starters, they point out—correctly—that Internet.org
doesn’t actually deliver the full internet. Instead, users get access to a
handful of apps and websites that have been approved by Facebook and
local service providers. This violates basic principles of net neutrality, the
