idea that everyone should have equal access to all the information and
services on the internet, and the ability to create content and innovate
without asking anyone for permission. Reducing the internet to a few
stripped-down apps also makes it that much easier for any government to
control and censor the information reaching its citizens.
There’s a hastily organized videoconference between Chris Daniels,
who runs Internet.org, and digital rights representatives. It doesn’t go well,
full of accusations, anger, and vitriol on both sides.
The problems identified by the digital rights groups are so cartoonishly
awful that I initially assume they have it wrong. But I discover they are
right. They point out that none of the websites on Internet.org—including
the stripped-down version of Facebook—have the basic kinds of security
and moderation we use everywhere else. So terrorism, hate speech, fraud,
spam, and sexual content all go unchecked. You could be organizing a
terrorist attack or inciting people to violence on Facebook. Internet.org
prohibits encryption that could protect users from government surveillance
or fraud or cyberattacks. There’s no two-factor security protecting people’s

data and identities. It pushes all these problems onto the people least able to
solve them.
In short, Internet.org entrenches the digital divide between the haves
and the have-nots, by delivering a crap version of the internet to two-thirds
of the world. The two-thirds least digitally literate and able to cope with it.
What Mark’s running, in the digital rights groups’ view, is a bait and switch.
He’s pretending in his lofty speeches that this is all about connectivity and
handing people the tools they need to better their lives, when in fact he’s
delivering nothing even close. The whole thing, in their view, is a power
play to sign up more people to Facebook.
When they lay this out, Chris feels personally attacked, outraged that
they’re questioning Facebook’s good intentions. The way he sees it,
Facebook choosing which websites can be accessed from Internet.org is just
like Apple’s App Store or the Google Play Store dictating what apps are
available there. We’re making an app and negotiating a deal so people can
get it for free—what’s so evil about that? By the end of the meeting he’s
red-faced and angry and telling the digital rights groups that “they’re trying
to dictate the content of Internet.org,” which is exactly what they’re
accusing Facebook of.
The meeting rooms in Facebook’s offices all have cutesy names (Guns
’n’ Rosegarden in DC, I’ll Be Bak Choy in Singapore), and our goal of
convincing human rights groups of Facebook’s good intentions is perhaps
not helped by the fact that the name of the meeting room, Wicked Witch of
the West, is displayed, without explanation, under Chris’s talking head for
the entire meeting. (I point this out to him afterward, and within days the
name of the meeting room has been changed.)
I leave the meeting convinced that we’re on the wrong side of this one. I
feel like Mark is wrapping himself in a cloak of moral superiority when he
pitches Internet.org, pretending it’s advancing human rights and solving the
digital divide, and what he’s delivering is so far from that. It’s ugly. This
isn’t Facebook as a force for good or Mark acting responsibly. I, perhaps
foolishly, write an email to the leaders of Internet.org arguing that we
shouldn’t pretend that we’re trying to save the world with Internet.org. Let’s
just admit we’re doing it to get more users. Elliot quickly shoots back:

I think any move away from “public good” will be frustrating for Mark, since he views
internet.org as both a growth [get more users] AND a brand [philanthropic/good for the world
branding].
At the very least, I argue, we should change the name. The digital rights
groups are right when they say the name is deceptive. That’s so much of
their problem with this project. Internet.org isn’t the internet, and “.org”
suggests that it’s a nonprofit enterprise, which it isn’t. Let’s be honest about
what this is and is not. Also: we’ll never get into one of our key countries—
Brazil—if we don’t change the name. Their Ministry of Justice has declared
the name is misleading and barred us from using it in Brazil.
I bring this up with Mark many times. He deflects, blames me for not
doing a better job managing the Brazilians, or tells me the name Internet.org
is his choice and he has good reasons for choosing it.
The tussle grinds on for weeks. I keep pushing and after weeks of
meetings, marketing research, PowerPoints, product road maps, and fights
with every layer of Internet.org leadership, we end up in a tense showdown
with all the Internet.org guys in Mark’s personal meeting room at
headquarters. Mark doesn’t disguise his anger at the situation and lack of
progress on Internet.org. He’s combative, and at times surly, rehearsing all
the arguments I’ve heard ad nauseum over the months we’ve been debating
this, but it feels personal because I’m the only one opposing him. I’m the
only one urging compromise with our opponents on this issue. And,
unsurprisingly, I’m the only woman in the room. I try to convince Mark that
by giving in on this point, we’ll score wins that are more important to us.
He can’t accept the need to concede on anything. He wants to win it all.
After railing against the name change for over twenty long minutes while
we sit in silence, he ultimately concedes to changing the name in Brazil
only. He suggests the name Free Apps (and freeapps.com).
The problem is that in Brazil the app isn’t free; users have a minimum
balance requirement and tax payment. It takes another month of arguing
before we arrive at our new name: Free Basics. That’ll be what Internet.org
is called, not just in Brazil but everywhere.

27
Street Fighter Tactics
The problems in Brazil are bad, but the problems in India are worse.
Facebook launched Internet.org in India in February 2015. At that time, of
the four billion people in the world who weren’t connected to the internet,
one billion lived in India (although that changed rapidly in years to come).
India was always a top priority for Internet.org. But after a promising start,
things quickly unraveled. The government’s Telecom Regulatory Authority
(TRAI) started to flex its significant power and announced it was going to
look into programs like Internet.org and get the public to weigh in on
whether they should be banned. Some of our Indian partners on Internet.org
—like Flipkart (India’s Amazon) and NDTV (India’s CNN)—knew this
meant we were probably doomed, and hurriedly pulled out of the app.
Sheryl tried to reassure the Facebook leadership:
Our policy team is directly engaged with the government, include
[sic] Prime Minister Modi’s office. We’re lucky this is happening in
a place where we have very deep senior relationships in the
government, but it’s still going to be hard. If we lose this in India it
will send all the wrong signals in Latin America.
Angry at losing on the name change to free basics, Mark keeps
