instructing the team to “go on the offensive” against governments. No one
really understands what he means, but I have a sinking feeling that it’s not
going to be good.

On August 21, 2015, Mark assembles all the senior men working on
what’s now called Free Basics and me in his conference room named the
Aquarium. The guys are pretty tense and Mark addresses the group like a
general addressing his troops—one who is displeased with their
performance.
Mark opens the meeting by talking admiringly about what he calls
“street fighter tactics” that Uber is employing against politicians around the
world and how successful they’ve been. I’d thought there was a general
agreement that Facebook didn’t use these underhand tactics and we
certainly didn’t admire them.
Uber weaponizes their drivers and riders, creating strikes, protests, and
transportation chaos, forcing authorities to the table. They’re sponsoring the
soccer teams of the children of key Brazilian senators responsible for
decisions that impact their business, insisting on having UBER plastered
across their kids’ uniforms. They propose compiling opposition research on
journalists. It’s dirty. But what becomes clear the more Mark speaks is that
not only does he not judge what Uber is doing, he’s judging us for not doing
it. Mark believes Facebook could have a lot more leverage with politicians
than Uber ever could, and we’re failing him by not using these tactics.
He launches into a spiel about Emperor Augustus, his favorite emperor,
who led the transformation of Rome from a republic to an empire. He talks
about “offense.” He wants to mobilize Facebook users. He wants pro-
Facebook activists. He wants protests.
Then he talks “defense.” He wants lists of adversaries, whether they’re
companies, individuals, organizations, or governments. He wants to know
how we can use the platform and tools we have to win against these
adversaries. He doesn’t want us to constrain ourselves to our usual
Internet.org tools. He wants us to leverage all of Facebook to find the right
things to offer our enemies in order to pull them over to our side. He wants
us to invent ways to use the platform and the algorithm to pressure them.
He wants to establish a team within Facebook to figure out how to build the
tools that will use the algorithm and platform to pressure adversaries,
including politicians who oppose us, to bolster the policy team.

I try to catch Joel’s eye to see if he’s also shocked by what he’s hearing.
He won’t look at me. He looks chastened, not surprised. As if he’s heard all
this before.
“When you say ‘adversary,’ who do you mean?” I raise my hand and
ask tentatively, a little concerned about what will happen to anyone on one
of these lists.
“Anyone who opposes us is an adversary,” Mark responds firmly. Not
acknowledging that when it comes to Free Basics, that’s basically everyone.
All I can think is how horrified politicians would be if they knew Facebook
was harnessing the platform and its power to put the screws to their thumbs.
He’s angered nearly every human rights group we work with, they’re
now on the list of adversaries, and he’s about to torch all the trust we’ve
spent years building with politicians and leaders around the world. And he
doesn’t care. In fact, he’s doubling down and compiling an enemies list,
going after anyone who raises reasonable concerns about Internet.org. After
years at the company, I’d never seen him go on the offense like this, with
such ferocity and hostility. There’s no idealism there at all, not about
Facebook or Free Basics or anything. This isn’t the revolution I signed up
for. This isn’t who I thought Mark would become, when I first tried to coax
him into international politics. I don’t want to be part of any of that. But I’m
pregnant and showing and it’s no time to start looking for a job. So I make a
decision. Up till now, I’ve done everything I could to help Facebook grow.
But now is a turning point. For the first time since I pitched this job to
Facebook, I won’t exhaust everything I have to deliver what my bosses
want. I won’t do all I can to develop creative strategies to advocate and
convince governments and civil society that they’re wrong because I don’t
think they are. Instead, I’ll focus my efforts on Facebook’s leadership, keep
raising objections in meetings and emails at Facebook. I’ll execute Mark’s
orders halfheartedly—focusing on the ones I agree with and not putting
particular effort into the others. I’ll no longer try to do the impossible to
make things happen for Facebook. When civil society groups and the
Brazilian government point out problems with Free Basics, I won’t try to
buy them off with “thoughtful partnerships.” I will keep bringing their
issues—that there’s no encryption, no privacy policy, and no moderation of

content on Free Basics—to the teams responsible for them at Facebook,
knowing they probably won’t fix them. And they don’t.
This feels so weird to me. I know how much Mark wants Internet.org
and believes in it. But I tell myself I joined Facebook because I believed the
platform was a force for good that would change the world. I didn’t join for
Mark.
It doesn’t take long for an actual “war room” to be established. But just for
India, because I refuse to do it for Brazil.
Soon they’re cranking out advertising campaigns across TV,
newspapers, cinemas, radio, and billboards in India. Spending tens of
millions of dollars, not including the dark-post (targeted nonpublic posts for
specific users that only they would see) advertising on Facebook itself,
which is aiming to reach over 50 percent of adult users in India. There are
separate SMS campaigns. Their strategy—laid out in an “India Action
Plan”—calls for them to “galvanize actual (or at least the appearance of)
public support,” the italics give the game away somewhat here. So there are
op-eds. User stories. They organize protests—or riots, as some in the
marketing team joke—in support of Free Basics. When I ask that team how
they managed to get people there, why on earth Indians would feel so
strongly about a poorly designed Facebook product with many flaws that
they would march in the streets for Internet.org, one of them tells me it was
by promising free T-shirts. I don’t know if he’s joking. They activate the
megaphone that Mark wouldn’t let Sheryl use for organ donation. It warns,
“Free Basic Services are at risk in India,” and tells users to show their
support by liking the page. Mark writes to Prime Minister Modi trying to
arrange a meeting. Sheryl calls the minister in charge of the internet; Joel
and the India team organize outreach to other politicians. There’s lots of
travel back and forth to India.
The Indian regulator, TRAI, has a new chairman and in mid-November he
announces that he wants to make a quick decision after the agency has

dithered for nearly a year. For the second time, the regulator asks the public
to comment on four questions concerning net neutrality and zero rating,
