which together will determine whether Free Basics lives or dies.
We have six weeks. Mark had told the team to leverage every tool
Facebook has, so all Indian Facebook users now see a pop-up when they
log in:
Unless you take action now, India could lose free access to basic
internet. Tell the TRAI you support Free Basics and digital equality
in India. A small, vocal group of critics are lobbying to have Free
Basics shut down on the basis of net neutrality. Instead of giving
people access to some basic internet services for free, they demand
that people pay equally to receive access to all internet services—
even if that means 1 billion people receive no services because
access costs too much.
The megaphone has a large purple button prompting all Indian
Facebook users to email the regulator. Clicking on this sends a form letter
supporting Free Basics into the official “public consultation.”
To create virality, the team designed it so that clicking on this would
also notify a user’s friend list that they had submitted a letter to the
regulator. As if this were not intrusive enough, many users complain that
even if they declined to send the message, merely lingering on the page
caused Facebook to send all their friends a notification saying they had
written to the regulator. This feat of engineering resulted in nearly 17
million submissions to TRAI by January 7, 2016. Well, 16,987,204 emails
to be precise.
So there’s shock and panic on Sunday, January 10, when TRAI
announces that it’s received only 1.4 million submissions.
“So the reported numbers are off by a factor of 10?” Joel queries.
The guy responsible for the campaign tells him yes. “We were
monitoring logs on this and as far as I know 16.9M emails were all actually
delivered.”
This prompts further digging. Then a discovery. It looks like something
stopped the emails from actually being sent out. Some sort of technical

glitch. They’re trying to figure out what happened but it’s a complex
system.
The period to comment has ended and the team agrees there’s no way
TRAI will accept more comments after the deadline. The atmosphere at
Facebook’s headquarters is funereal. Everyone’s like, “Someone’s gonna
get fired. Don’t know who it’ll be. But someone’s gonna get fired.” Leaders
leave crisis meetings to “comfort their teams.” There are bouts of collective
disbelief. How, after spending tens of millions of dollars, the war room, the
advertising campaigns, the daily crisis meetings, Mark’s many visits to
India, Modi’s visit to Facebook, how had Facebook stumbled right at the
finish line by messing up the technology to deliver these comments? We’re
a technology company.
A few days later, a breakthrough. The team figures out what happened.
Someone at TRAI—whoever controlled the email address for the public
comments—simply opted out of all emails from Facebook. This happened
back on Wednesday, December 16, between 9:00 and 10:00 P.M. PST.
There’s a record of it on Facebook’s logs. In the hour before they opted out,
over 200,000 emails were sent to them. In the hour after, it dropped to 251.
Mark and some of the brightest tech minds in the world devoted months
to this, and some low-ranking official in India outfoxed them simply by
clicking an opt-out box.
Elliot immediately flies to India to try to convince TRAI to take the 17
million submissions. He reports back to Mark and Sheryl, “This was a
contentious discussion with lots of anger and frustration by TRAI’s team—
they felt that we exploited our position as gatekeeper.” The regulator was
furious that Facebook’s viral submissions didn’t actually answer the four
questions the regulator had asked. Why should they accept them as actual
public comment? The TRAI felt like Facebook had reduced a democratic
public consultation to a popularity contest and abused its platform and
power. Nonetheless, Elliot convinces them to accept all 17 million
comments—which of course are all the same exact comments, 17 million
times over—on a flash drive. He returns to California confident that he’s
won this, and writes to Mark and Sheryl, “It’s difficult to believe that TRAI

will come out with a blanket prohibition of zero rating.” Free Basics will
survive in India.
A few weeks later, on February 8, 2016, the regulator published its
decision. Free Basics was banned. Completely struck down. A blanket
prohibition of zero rating. Effective immediately. Which feels like a special
“fuck you” because it means Facebook has to figure out how to shut it
down in a day. They could’ve given the team a small grace period to turn
the thing off.
In our meeting when we learn the news, Elliot looks defeated and
humbled in a way I’ve never seen him. It takes him weeks to shake it.
We’ve never lost a fight this big.
Internet.org has two other priority projects, and they both crash and
burn—literally—within months. In June, the Aquila prototype, a drone the
size of a jet airplane that is supposed to deliver Wi-Fi and stay in flight for a
year, smashes to earth during a test flight. A National Transportation Safety
Board review of the accident said it crashed because it was flying in
stronger winds than it was built to handle. The website the Verge showed
this report to an aviation expert who criticized the fact that Mark was there
for the maiden voyage, saying it put pressure on the engineers to fly despite
the high winds. “I never would have approved flying in those conditions—
and certainly not having the CEO coming in to witness it.”
Three months later, on September 1, Elon Musk’s SpaceX rocket
explodes on the launchpad, completely destroying the Internet.org satellite
it’s supposed to be putting in orbit. Mark posted,
As I’m here in Africa, I’m deeply disappointed to hear that
SpaceX’s launch failure destroyed our satellite that would have
provided connectivity to so many entrepreneurs and everyone else
across the continent. Fortunately, we have developed other
technologies like Aquila that will connect people as well.
Aquila, of course, was the drone that crashed on its maiden flight.

After this, Free Basics doesn’t die immediately. It launches in a few more
countries: Nigeria, Madagascar, Algeria, Belarus, and unfortunately
Myanmar. (That becomes a particular disaster that I’ll get to in a bit.) But
there are no more daily crisis meetings, no more war room. Mark and the
other senior leaders simply disappear from the effort and turn their attention
elsewhere.

28
Lean In and Lie Back
