Sheryl’s absence from the Internet.org fiasco is not unusual. By this time
she’s absent from a lot. What’s more surprising is that it’s a twenty-six-
year-old who steps into her role.
Rather than appointing an experienced chief of staff, Sheryl hires a
number 
of 
young 
graduates 
who 
fulfill 
a 
hybrid
administrative/advisory/personal assistant role. These positions attract
ambitious graduates who want to be close to power. Part business, part
lady-in- waiting. Over time they begin to wield significant power
themselves, becoming more of a consigliere than an assistant.
Of these hires, Sadie is the gold standard. An Ivy League graduate,
good-looking, with a ruthless efficiency in building the perfect résumé. She
took a creative and apt shortcut to the job by working at Sheryl’s Lean In
Foundation. If anyone embodies leaning in, it’s Sadie.
I like working with her and we become friends. She’s smart, charming,
and way funnier than most of the self-serious superachievers we work with.
She thrives in the role, confiding with delight, “You would not believe the
things Sheryl’s delegated to me to decide.” We live in the same
neighborhood in San Francisco and commute to and from the office
together. Weirdly, Mark has his San Francisco house not too far from ours.
When I ask him why we never see him in the neighborhood, he explains it’s
because he can’t get planning permission for a place to park his helicopter
so he rarely uses the house. We might live in similar places, but we are
living completely different lives.

I’m delighted when Sadie announces she’s coming to Davos with Sheryl
in 
2016. 
I’m 
surprised 
when 
someone 
from 
Mark’s 
personal
communications team shows up midway through a Davos planning meeting
to discuss Sheryl’s social media strategy for the trip. I ask Sadie what he
does and she whispers that I do not want to know. I promise to leave it
alone if she lets me know the general area. She pauses and carefully
chooses her words.
“He manages engagement for Mark and Sheryl’s social media using all
of Facebook’s tools,” she says evenly. “You don’t want to know any more
than that.”
“Does this explain why they have millions of followers and ridiculous
amounts of engagement on their posts? Are they gaming the algorithm?”
“You don’t want to know,” she says.
The expectation to Lean In sits heavy, particularly now that I’m in the
final stages of pregnancy. The doctor wants to induce me at some point in
the next few weeks. I raise the possibility of skipping Davos, given the risk
of flying to Europe when I’m on the cusp of giving birth, and the response
from Sheryl’s office is being told I should make sure I have a doctor’s note
clearing me to fly, which is not the outcome I’m hoping for. Travel is taking
a toll more generally. When I explain this to Tom, he insists on coming to
my doctor’s appointment and once there explains I’ve been traveling and
working too much. He tries to convince my doctor not to write the note. He
fails. So, one more time, I try raising my concerns about traveling so late in
my pregnancy with my bosses. In response, I get an email from one of
Sheryl’s assistants:
The flight attendant assigned to the trip worked previously in the medical field and has credits
towards her nursing degree. The private jet operator also has MedAire and there are medical
kits on board.
I write back:
Thank you! I’m really hoping that none of this is necessary.…
Her response:
You and me, sister.

Not very reassuring.
This year everyone at Davos is focused on terrorism. This is just two
months after suicide bombers and gunmen killed 130 people in Paris,
including 90 at a concert in the Bataclan theater. Sheryl emails the
leadership team from Davos breathlessly highlighting how terrorism is
working to Facebook’s advantage: “Terrorism means the conversation on
privacy is ‘basically dead’ as policymakers are more concerned about
intelligence/security.” In other words, this is a moment when governments
are more interested in surveillance than people’s privacy. Which is good for
Facebook’s business.
A “good visit with the boys” is how Joel summarizes our meeting with
British prime minister David Cameron and George Osborne. Joel
emphasizes that he and Sheryl “made the case that we were doing a lot on
terrorism” and got a chance to rant about how Facebook’s competitors were
not, which Joel acknowledges is “admittedly a cheap shot but felt good.”
Joel’s pleased that both politicians try Oculus and that Osborne particularly
is impressed with Facebook’s drones, though Joel notes, “not as much as
Blair … Brits do seem to love a good unmanned aircraft.” But the point
when I realize that Facebook’s meetings with politicians are changing is
when I see that Cameron and Osborne don’t want to confront Joel and
Sheryl about any regulatory issues. What they want to talk about—and
ultimately request—is Facebook’s support against the Brexit vote.
They’re not alone. More and more politicians are explicitly requesting
that Facebook put its thumb on the scale. The causes range from reelection
to indigenous broadcasting content, but the expectation is clear. Some are
less delicate than others and accompany the request with a threat to regulate
if the request is refused. All the requests speak to the changing power
dynamic.
Once we’re airborne on the flight back from Davos, Sadie and I start to
churn through meeting notes, thank-yous, follow-ups, and a first draft of the

“lessons from Davos” email Sheryl will circulate to leadership. There’s a
separate room with a large bed in it, next to the main cabin, which is very
much Sheryl’s domain. Sheryl emerges from this room and announces that
