she’s going to sleep and that we should all sleep now so we adjust to the
California time zone. Sadie and I exchange a look because we both know
that even if we work hard for the twelve hours it’ll take to get back to
California, it’ll be tough to complete all the work we have to do before we
land, and Tom and Sasha are not going to be happy if I arrive back from this
trip and then try to work throughout the weekend. We politely decline.
Sheryl seems miffed that we’re not taking her advice but returns to her
room, and we return to our work.
We’re an hour out of Zurich when Sheryl emerges back into the cabin in
her pajamas.
“What are you doing? I’m going to bed.” As if it isn’t obvious that
we’re preparing all the emails that’ll go out under her name.
“Lots to do,” I say cheerily.
“But it’s better if you rest now so you can get back on California time,”
she insists.
“I’m okay,” I respond. There is only one bed in the jet and Sheryl is
obviously using it.
“Sarah, come to bed.” Her tone hardens.
I look around at the others to check if they heard what I did.
I shake my head and she repeats her instruction. “Sarah, come to bed.”
We’re at a stalemate. I look around desperately for support from the
others but everyone’s looking away.
On the long drive from Davos to Zurich for the flight, Sheryl and Sadie
had taken turns sleeping in each other’s laps, occasionally stroking each
other’s hair, while I tried to make myself as small and invisible as possible,
feeling uncomfortable with what I was seeing. I hoped my enormous bump
made it clear that my lap was not available for my coworker or boss.
Regardless of motivation, it was not a position I felt I (or anyone else
working with Sheryl) should be put in. I make pleading eyes at Sadie
hoping she might be up for another close moment with Sheryl. Sadie shakes
her head.

Sheryl sees this silent exchange and snaps, “Sadie’s slept over lots of
times and I’m not asking Sadie. I’m asking you.”
I don’t want to do this for all the obvious reasons—it wouldn’t be right
for a male COO to ask for this and it’s not right for a female one to—but
one thing that popped into my head, I’ll confess, is that I’m scared of
something that happened on a flight a few weeks before this, from Tokyo to
San Francisco. So exhausted by work and pregnancy, I fell asleep before the
flight even took off, and woke up with a start. Everything around me was
white. I couldn’t get my eyes to focus and I couldn’t see a thing. Just white.
It reminded me of what I saw during my father’s leisurely drive to the
doctor after the shark attack when I really thought I wasn’t going to make it.
I go into a complete panic. Maybe I’d pushed myself to my limit and had a
medical emergency, maybe it was a pregnancy side effect, or maybe I was
having a breakdown. Maybe I shouldn’t be flying so heavily pregnant. I tear
at whatever my white confines are and as they fall and the interior of the
aircraft reappears, a flight attendant rushes over. In the most exquisitely
polite terms, she explains that I had been snoring so loudly that I was
disturbing other passengers, and the enterprising Japanese crew had erected
a small white tent around me to try to muffle the sound. I was mortified. I
tried to explain to her that I never normally snore, it’s only because I’m so
uncomfortably pregnant.
As Sheryl is insisting that I get into the bed with her, I’m worried about
many things, including that I’m so exhausted after working around the
clock for Davos that there’s a reasonable chance I would horrify Sheryl by
falling asleep and snoring at antisocial levels.
I look at Sadie for guidance. Her face is completely blank, as if she has
vacated her body. I’m on my own here. No; it is simply impossible for me
to get into bed with Sheryl. I’m resolute.
I tell her no, I can’t. But people say no to Sheryl so rarely, she doesn’t
know what to do with this. She retreats to her bed, making no effort to hide
her frustration and resentment.
I know something has broken between us. I know consequences will
follow, but I don’t know what they’ll be.

Sadie tries to console me, she tells me things will be fine, but there are
unspoken rules with Sheryl about obedience and closeness. Those closest to
Sheryl are rewarded. Marne and Sadie often appear in her unwanted
designer clothes; both assumed plum seats on boards that Sheryl had been
asked to serve on. There are courtside basketball tickets and introductions to
celebrities. Sheryl lends them the keys to her vacation homes.
Sadie is very conscious of the benefits of being Sheryl’s “little doll,” as
she calls it and having Sheryl tell her she loves her. She’s the one who
explained to me the benefits of “being on the pedestal.” She’s acutely aware
of others she shares that with. But she’s also very aware of the expectations
that come with it. How carefully calibrated the rewards and demands are.
Sheryl recently instructed Sadie to buy lingerie for both of them with no
budget, and Sadie obeyed, spending over $10,000 on lingerie for Sheryl and
$3,000 on herself.
When Sadie tries another of the bras Sheryl purchased her for the first
time, she emails her.
“This bra is INCREDIBLY beautiful and fits perfectly. So grateful. This
is my breasts equivalent of flying privately for the first time.”
“Happy to treat your breasts as they should be treated,” Sheryl responds.
Sadie confides she’s never spent this much on single items of underwear
in her life, messaging Sheryl that the experience is “a total Pretty Woman
moment (the good one not the one where they kick her out). I feel like the
fanciest twenty-six-year-old in the world.”
Sheryl responds by asking her twenty-six-year-old assistant to come to
her house to try on the underwear and have dinner. Later the invite becomes
one to stay over. Lean in and lie back.
At times Sadie shares with me how stressed out she is about her
relationship with Sheryl. I urge her to find a new job somewhere else,
where her life would be less enmeshed with Sheryl’s. She says she’s shared
her concerns with Elliot and another senior manager, and they’ve also
counseled her to escape from Sheryl.

When the plane lands in California, it’s pouring rain. We stand scattered
around the jet with Sheryl’s black car idling nearby and the rest of us
scanning the Uber app and juggling umbrellas while waiting for our
luggage to be returned by the overworked staff. Sheryl walks purposefully
toward me. I think she’ll make a conciliatory gesture or extend a thank-you
for what was a challenging but successful week at Davos. I raise my
umbrella politely and she leans in close.
“You should have got into bed.” Then she turns her back and stalks off
