toward the waiting car. I just stand there, rain soaking into my hair and
running down my cheeks, my protruding belly collecting raindrops.
Oh, I think to myself. I’m probably going to have to leave this job.
Almost all policy at Facebook runs through Sheryl. If she writes me off, I
won’t be able to get anything done. Problem is, I really can’t quit right now.
I’m weeks away from giving birth. At this moment, it doesn’t seem like
much of a choice.
Alert to the new danger Sheryl poses, when she sends me an email
thanking me for my work at Davos on Monday and Joel echoes it, I decide
it’s best to tell him what happened in the plane. After I do, he simply
instructs me not to tell that story to anyone. So I tell his boss, Elliot, who
laughs nervously and then gives me essentially the same advice. I decide to
confide in Debbie, who is underwhelmed by my fears, telling me that “half
the department” has been in Sheryl’s bed by now. She is joking, like, hey,
this is less of a big deal than you think (and you’re less of a big deal than
you think—classic Debbie) and trying to reassure me. But it doesn’t help. I
start to notice Sheryl icing me out.

29
Citizen Sanchez
On some level my life was going “Americanly.” I was living “the American
dream,” bootstrapping from nothing to private jets with tech titans.
Although the reality of that dream was darker than I expected.
A few days after we arrive back from Davos, I report to the US
Citizenship and Immigration Services offices in a filthy part of San
Francisco. The place is run-down, with chipped paint and cheap carpet, the
staff carefully protected behind thick glass windowpanes. It feels like a
cross between the visitor’s room in a prison and an airport departure lounge,
with a list of case numbers on an electronic screen, enforced silence,
bureaucratic posters, and overtly heavy security presence.
For a variety of complicated reasons, I urgently need to secure
American citizenship. Facebook’s legal team have helped me with the
process, but now I need to ace the exams. While I genuinely enjoyed
learning about the aspirational foundational documents of the United States
of America, I’m worried about the civics portion of the test. Ten questions
that could be on anything from American history of the 1800s to American
holidays, constitutional rights, or national symbols. The practice questions
include things like, “What is one promise you make when you become an
American citizen?” the correct answer being to “give up loyalty to any
other country.”
I’ve told Joel I’m taking off the day for the test and that I’m worried
about getting the questions wrong. While I sit there, I get an email from
him. I’d responded to an administrative request from Joel’s assistant,

reminding her and Joel that I had taken time off for my Americanness test
but would respond as soon as that was done. Joel removes his assistant from
the email chain, replying:
Did you get the dirty sanchez question? I hear that is on the test like 10 percent of the time.
I don’t know what “dirty sanchez” means and I make the mistake of
googling it. I immediately regret doing that.
It’s not the first time he’s said something to make me uncomfortable. In
Panama when we rounded a corner too quickly and I accidentally bumped
into his hip, he said, “Don’t worry, you didn’t touch anything precious.”
After he approves a new position on my team, he emails me, “Who is your
sugar daddy?” (Which I guess is Republican policy wonk for “Who’s ya
sugar daddy?”) Another time he writes me saying, “I will personally buy
you ‘something nice’ (niceness TBD by the beholder/buyer) if you
responsibly spend” all your budget. As these things go, they’re all pretty
mild, but his dirty Sanchez question is a new low, totally inappropriate, and
I think, this is getting worse.
This all hits as I’m stewing in anxiety about the citizenship test,
desperately trying to memorize the foundational texts and the more perfect
union that US citizens strive for but sometimes fall short of. All the
aspirations they contain.
I get the first question wrong. It’s the date of our wedding. Trying to
start things off positively, the officer examining me allows me another
guess. Wrong again. Cautiously, he offers me a third opportunity to tell him
when my husband and I were married, and when I fail to guess correctly he
moves on.
The mood in the room has definitely darkened.
I manage to answer all the other questions correctly, and at the end the
officer seems genuinely happy for me. Nice guy. He leaves to print out
something to get me to the next step of this process, and then returns to the
room looking like someone has died.
“There’s a big problem,” he says. “When did you arrive in California?”

Turns out the State of California requires me to be a resident for ninety
days before I can become a citizen, and I’m seventeen days short. This is
something Facebook’s lawyers should’ve noticed. I should’ve just waited to
apply. Now I’ll have to start the entire process over again. We only have
five months before Tom’s visa runs out and he has to leave the country.
That’s way less time than the citizenship process usually takes, so
Facebook’s lawyers will have to apply for some sort of special rush petition
with Citizenship and Immigration Services. Whether we get to stay in
America depends on them.
Just one more reason I can’t quit my job right now.

30
Poker Face
It’s February 2016, and just weeks ago in Davos, leaders from around the
world were very explicit with Joel and Sheryl and me. They worried
terrorists were being radicalized on Facebook, hate speech was
proliferating, and Facebook was not partnering with them to figure out what
to do about it. They wanted to find new ways to tax Facebook. Internet.org
is basically dead at this point because it couldn’t get past governmental
scrutiny.
We’re in shit with governments all around the world.
Joel, Sheryl, and Elliot agree that things are bad enough that the board
needs to know. We need to get their attention and make them understand
that the threat of regulation is real; there will be pain and it’s coming soon.
Internet.org proved governments are one of the few things that can change
Facebook’s growth, products, and business overnight.
I’m still clinging to the ever-diminishing hope that we’ll drop the street
fighter tactics and start to engage in a much more open conversation with
governments about how social media should operate in their countries. In
other words, grow up. I know Joel and Sheryl and Elliot see this differently.
