They’d play hardball way more than I care to (and maybe they’re right
about that in some cases). But even they see that something has to change.
Maybe Facebook’s board of directors can be the turning point and put us
back on the right path.
I’m authorized to write up a presentation for the board. We’ll make the
threat of regulation and its impact on the business real for them, and then

ask them for $55 million and sixty new staff members for the policy team
around the world.
The board meeting is held in a conference room at headquarters that we use
all the time. It looks out over the parking lot and scrubby marsh. A
decidedly unglamorous setting for some of the most powerful people in
Silicon Valley. It’s way more casual than I expected, almost disturbingly so.
I’d pictured it more like a Wall Street boardroom, or maybe the jury room in
Twelve Angry Men, people in suits earnestly and thoroughly sifting through
reports, spreadsheets, and data. Instead it’s more like a coffee break at a
college campus. Sheryl is perched cross-legged on her chair in yoga pants,
and Mark wanders the room in his standard jeans and T-shirt, occasionally
pausing to scroll through his phone. There’s no fear in the room. No
uncomfortable power dynamics. No tension. Probably because the structure
of the company gives Mark complete and utter control, dual class shares,
and a voting majority, making him basically untouchable. Mark and Sheryl
speak to the board the same way they speak to me. They’re the ones in
charge here.
Before they get to my item on the agenda, I watch them, fascinated by
the roles that each of the board members carves out. PayPal cofounder Peter
Thiel, who is more all-American clean-cut than I expected, plays the role of
provocateur. Former White House chief of staff Erskine Bowles takes a
scholarly approach, weighing his sparse words and interventions. Netflix
cofounder Reed Hastings is the sober businessman. Gates Foundation CEO
Sue Desmond-Hellmann—who looks like she just finished a hike—is like a
commonsense schoolteacher speaking up to get the discussion back on
track. Venture capitalist Marc Andreessen acts as if he found his way into
the room by accident and spends most of the meeting playing with his
phone. Physically bigger than anyone else, he has a boyish air that seems
out of context in a board meeting.
Joel, Elliot, and I don’t even stand to give our presentation. We lay out
our case that things are bad and about to get much worse, especially outside
America. Politicians and governments see a borderless internet as a threat.

Facebook is seen as competing against homegrown industries like
publishers, telecom operators, and local tech companies. And they’ll use
everything from antitrust regulation to privacy regulation to crush
Facebook.
Our goal is to frighten the board into dramatic action, but they don’t
seem very frightened. Their response is “deals.” What do these different
players want? Especially the decision makers, the regulators, and
politicians. And what can Facebook “offer them”? What will head off
regulation and change the global narrative on Facebook? This is very
different from the vision I had of our teams around the world constructively
working with governments and not trying to buy them off. We tell them,
basically, give us the money and the people and we’ll figure it out. They say
yes.
Then the board gets into a conversation about what other companies or
industries have navigated similar challenges, where they have to change a
narrative that says that they’re a danger to society, extracting large profits,
pushing all the negative externalities onto society and not giving back.
People suggest various analogues that don’t seem to fit very well and then
Elliot finally says out loud the one I think everyone’s already thinking about
(but not saying): tobacco.
That shuts down the conversation and they move on to the next agenda
item.
A few days later I have my performance review. It’s all going well until Joel
starts talking about how I’m confusing to him. “In many ways you fly under
the radar,” he says. “Like in all the Internet.org stuff, you know. You show
up, you understand all the complexity, and you’ve got this amazing poker
face and you’ll just sit there taking it all in, and when the moment’s right
you drop in the perfect advice or the reality check or whatever it is that we
need at that time. It’s amazing. And then sometimes it’s just the complete
opposite and you have absolutely no poker face.”
He pauses and I try to control every muscle to make the perfect poker
face, and say in an expressionless, even tone, “Could you perhaps give me

an example?”
He pauses, thinks, and then says, “Oh yeah, I’ve got a great one.”
I can tell he’s thrilled with whatever he’s about to say next. I use all my
self-control to not react and to keep my poker face anchored in place. I pick
up my pen and indicate I’m ready for him to go on.
“The board meeting. That was a classic.”
“Could you say more?”
“Yes,” he enthuses. “You’re in a meeting with Mark, Sheryl, and the
entire Facebook board and there were a couple of times where I saw you, in
fact the whole room saw you, rolling your eyes.”
“Do you happen to know when that was?” I ask as neutrally as possible,
keeping my eyes straight on.
He pauses and thinks but can’t seem to place it. We sit in silence until I
decide, perhaps injudiciously, to speak.
“Was it maybe when one of our board members was suggesting to our
largely Jewish leadership team that Facebook needs to get much closer to
the far-right political parties in Europe because that is where the power is
shifting to?”
This was the proposal that we should use the election support and
campaign tools we were offering to US presidential candidates (and that
Donald Trump was using aggressively in his 2016 campaign)—and offer
them to the Alternative für Deutschland, the far right in Germany, and to
Marine Le Pen and the Front National, the far right in France. Getting
closer to these political parties and helping them into government would be
the most effective way to stop governments from regulating Facebook.
I say this realizing that my poker face is slipping.
“Well sure,” Joel says. “But whatever it was, you can’t be rolling your
eyes and making faces at the board.”
That’s true and I apologize for it. By way of explanation, I tell Joel that
I understand that some board members think fascists could solve our
regulatory issues and we need to cozy up to them right away. And that I’d
expected more pushback from the rest of the board.
Other than that, Joel tells me, great review!
