I do not roll my eyes in response.


31
A Heartwarming Story
In March 2016, a Facebook vice president in Brazil, Diego Dzodan, is
arrested on the way to work. This is because WhatsApp—which Facebook
owns—refused to hand over messages in a Brazilian drug trafficking case.
I’d worked closely with Diego, a charismatic Argentinian, and liked him.
Smart, savvy, and a genuinely nice guy with an impeccable sense of style.
A few months before his arrest, WhatsApp had been blocked for two
days by the Brazilian courts for similar reasons, and during those two days,
Telegram (a rival messaging app) picked up 1.5 million users in Brazil,
reaffirming Mark’s conviction that Facebook must avoid being blocked at
any cost. After that block, Mark wrote a Facebook post to rally Brazilians,
saying, “Please make your voice heard and help your government reflect
the will of its people.” People did what he asked for and started contacting
President Rousseff’s office, which was unfortunate because she had nothing
to do with this block. It was ordered by a Brazilian court. The president’s
chief of staff reached out to express the president’s displeasure.
I relayed this message to Mark and recommended he delete the post or,
at the very least, edit out the line urging people to contact the government.
After he struck the line, the president’s office leaked to the press that Mark
had changed his post at their request. Which was embarrassing. Mark was
furious they talked to the press and made him look weak. So there was bad
blood between the two sides, even before one of our executives was sitting
in a jail cell in São Paulo.

That post has come back to haunt us now, in Diego’s case. Before Diego
was arrested, our legal team went in front of a judge and argued that he
should not have a Facebook employee arrested for something WhatsApp
did. They’re separate companies. Diego has nothing to do with WhatsApp.
The judge doesn’t buy it. He says of course Facebook and WhatsApp are
the same company, and as proof, in his ruling he quotes Mark’s December
Facebook post calling on Brazilians to “make your voice heard” after
WhatsApp was blocked. So it’s fine to arrest the most senior Facebook
employee in Latin America for something WhatsApp did.
He really wants those WhatsApp messages.
At the request of the head of sales, Mark somehow manages to get a
Facebook Messenger message through to Diego, who responds quickly,
“Thank you Mark! It’s an honor to receive this note. Everything is fine here
and the legal team is doing a great job. This is our part in making the world
more open and connected.… Count on me!”
Mark loves this and emails a few of us:
Diego’s reaction (“you can count on me!”) to being arrested for upholding our stance on
protecting our community is deeply heart-warming.
Do you have an issue with me writing this up as a short story to post on my page? I think this
story says a lot about our protection of our community, our culture and our technology.
I mean, I guess it does, but not in the way he thinks. Instead of helping
figure out how to do everything possible to get Diego out of jail, Mark
wants to turn this into a teachable moment for users and governments
around the world.
He puts together a draft post:
I have a heartwarming story to share.
To protect our community and keep you safe, all messages you send
on WhatsApp are encrypted. This means your messages are so
secure that we couldn’t access them even if we wanted to, and
neither can governments or hackers.

Of course some governments that want access to your messages
don’t like this, and yesterday Brazilian police arrested Diego
Dzodan, the leader of our Sao Paulo office, for protecting someone
in our community and not turning over messages we couldn’t access
ourselves.
Hard for me not to interrupt here to point out that “someone in our
community” is an accused drug trafficker who’s threatened to assassinate
the judge in this case. In an email, Elliot points out to Mark that “we will
face criticism couching this as ‘safety for our community.’” Mark went on
to draft the rest of his post.
As soon as I heard about Diego’s arrest, I immediately sent him a
message to let him and his family know we were doing everything
we could to get him freed. He sent me the most amazing reply from
jail:
“Thank you Mark! It’s an honor to receive this note. This is our part
in making the world more open and connected. Count on me!”
Wow. So powerful. That’s from someone on our team in jail for
protecting our community.
I know I can count on Diego, and hopefully you can also feel a little
safer communicating with your friends because you know people
like Diego are fighting for our community and you know you can
count on them too.
We all try to explain to Mark why posting this is a terrible idea. For starters,
it’s hard to frame our actions as “protecting our community” when the
government wants these WhatsApp messages to prosecute a criminal
organization that murders and kidnaps people. To say nothing of the active
assassination threat they’ve made against the judge.
And from a legal point of view, the post would be disastrous. In an
email, our general counsel says this is not the moment for Mark to pick a
fight with Brazilian law enforcement:

This risks inflaming LE [law enforcement] in Brazil and heightens the risk that Diego
personally faces (the case is still active) and all other employees in Brazil face. The situation
there is fluid, the judge is unpredictable, and this could get worrisome quickly.
Elliot points out that if Mark posts this message, he’d be destroying our
main defense to get Diego out of jail. They’ve concluded that our best shot
is to go into court and again argue that WhatsApp is a different company
from Facebook, so it’s wrong to jail a Facebook employee over WhatsApp
messages. In his post, Mark’s admitting the two companies are the same
company, with him at the head. The general counsel says that if the judge
saw Mark’s post, it would sink that line of defense and “make it harder to
release the next person who gets arrested.”
I read those words and get a chill. The next person who gets arrested?
Now these guys are building that into their business plan?
Mark is not bothered. He still wants to post. Elliot sends him a
breathless email stating, “The consensus (rare) among your advisors is to
NOT post this—too complicated in Brazil and may meaningfully jeopardize
