Diego and our teams in the country.” Mark pushes back and asks Elliot to
draft an alternative post that might not be as damaging, which Elliot sends
him, advising again that even the alternative “risks triggering a negative
reaction from the court” and “the danger created by sharing this post in
Brazil outweighs its benefits outside the country.”
Throughout all of this, Mark could not be more disappointing. Despite
saying in his note that “we are doing everything to get him free,” he doesn’t
seem to be worried about Diego in the slightest. He seems to see this, first
and foremost, as an opportunity to write a great Facebook post. A
heartwarming story. If he cared even slightly about Diego’s welfare, or felt
responsible for him as his boss, he wouldn’t be insisting on posting his little
message to the world, something that could do great harm, before he goes
out to dinner. He’d be doing everything possible, calling Brazil’s president,
calling the many Brazilian legislators I introduced him to when he was
lobbying for Internet.org, and begging them to make public statements
supporting Diego’s release. Doing all the things I’m doing. That kind of
pressure coming from him would be more effective than coming from me. I

make this case with Elliot, who’s talking to Mark, telling him a general
should stay on the field with his troops.
While everyone’s arguing about the post, Diego has his day in court.
It comes down to an appeals court that thankfully issues an order at 3:30
A.M. releasing Diego, less than one full day after he was arrested.
I come away from this feeling disgusted with Mark, and truly seeing him
differently. That could’ve been me in jail—in Myanmar, South Korea,
Thailand, or any of the other places I’ve traveled for Facebook. Or it could
have been any member of my team. And I guess I had this last vestige of
hope that at the moment one of us was locked up, the cavalry would come
to save us. Or at least one of the world’s richest men would do everything in
his power. But when it happens, when one of his employees is sitting in jail,
instead of doing everything he can, as the most powerful person at the
company, Mark obsesses over some stupid post and then goes out to dinner.
This seems such an obvious failing of a basic test of normal human
decency.
Five years earlier when I arrived at Facebook, Mark didn’t have a
theory of how he and the company should be in the world; he didn’t really
have developed opinions about policy or politics, beyond “sign up more
users.” The rest of Facebook’s leadership wasn’t very different. Mark really
couldn’t be bothered to care. Now he’s developed priorities, and they’re
mostly pretty horrible and ignorant of the human costs.
My original hope that when he started to exercise power on the world
stage, meeting with presidents and prime ministers, it would be an
education in responsibility and accountability—that’s really turned out to be
a bust. He disappoints again and again.
This thing with Diego confirms something I didn’t want to admit to
myself: I have to leave Facebook. I start calling around looking for a new
job. For so long now, I’ve been able to convince myself that I can do more
good inside Facebook than outside, but now I understand I probably can’t.
My problematically pregnant state makes this complicated. Realistically,

how am I going to land and then start a new job when I’m days away from
giving birth? I feel trapped.

32
What to Not Expect When You’re Expecting
One of the random places I’d traveled in service of Facebook was João
Pessoa, a remote city in northeastern Brazil. I hadn’t thought about it much
since. Not until I read a New York Times article tracking the development
and discovery of something called the Zika virus. This was before there was
a lot of interest in Zika, but because I’m pregnant I read the article in detail.
There’s something about it that unsettles me but I can’t place it.
It’s later in the day when I’m unloading the dishwasher that I connect
the discomfort with the trigger. The article was focused on mothers and
babies in Paraíba State, which had seemed vaguely familiar. Tentatively I
type “João Pessoa State of Brazil” into my phone and Google quickly
returns, “João Pessoa, port city, capital of Paraíba state.” I immediately feel
a stabbing, sick feeling in my stomach—not from the baby kicking.
This place is remote. It took more than twenty hours of flying to get
there from San Francisco. I force myself to reread the newspaper story. It
describes the mothers of Zika babies as “ghosts—mute, expressionless
figures in corridors holding babies whose foreheads seem to have
vanished.” I’m typing different queries into Google hoping I’ll find
something to convince me there’s nothing to worry about, but it does the
opposite. João Pessoa is at the heart of the Zika outbreak, there are
hundreds of cases, and the number of children with suspected microcephaly
is increasing tenfold weekly.
I can’t even think about how I’m going to tell Tom. He didn’t want me
traveling to all these weird places when I was pregnant, and I’d blithely

assured him he was wasting his worry on nothing. I’d had no idea I was at
any risk. Of course I wouldn’t have gone if I was.
It feels like this job is taking too much from me, permeating everything,
poisoning everything.
It takes a while to get an appointment with my doctor and the wait is
agony. When I don’t feel the baby’s kicks for a few hours, I convince
myself it’s because of microcephaly. Being pregnant is already an
experience full of fear and guilt for me—am I eating right, doing enough
exercise, getting enough rest? And now there’s this searing, sleep-depriving
knowledge that I’d unintentionally put my baby in harm’s way, and the
crushing fear and guilt that go with that.
It’s hard to think about anything else.
When I finally see my doctor, I can tell she’s underwhelmed by my
concern. She explains that ever since the New York Times piece, she’s been
inundated with middle-class mommies who’ve been to Florida or Mexico
on vacation who are worried they now have a Zika baby.
“But I was in João Pessoa earlier in my pregnancy.”
She’s unmoved.
“It’s the epicenter of the outbreak.”
“Did you even have a mosquito bite?” she says, still skeptical. I pull up
a photo of my body covered in them that I’d sent to Tom during the trip,
worried that I’d been bitten by bedbugs.
Still unimpressed, she grudgingly books me in for an ultrasound. She
cautions that they still don’t really know much about the disease and that
means both diagnosis and treatment are difficult.
The day of the ultrasound, as I lie prone on the chair, feet in stirrups, the
technician peppers me with questions about why I traveled somewhere so
