dangerous. I bristle and tell her I didn’t know about the risk, and we fall
into an awkward silence.
“How do you diagnose it?” I ask.
“We haven’t diagnosed any here. I don’t think there’s been a Zika baby
born in the US yet.…”
That “yet” hangs in the air.
“What are you looking for?”

“Calcification around the eyes, head size, anything abnormal. You
heading back into work?”
Why was she trying to change the subject? What was she seeing on that
screen?
In the end, they don’t spot anything, but they also tell me that they
probably wouldn’t be able to diagnose it while the baby’s still inside me. As
one of the doctors put it, “We don’t really know exactly what we’re looking
for anyway.”
After months of quiet Zika-related terror, just a week after Diego’s arrest,
I’m more than relieved to deliver a healthy, Zika-free baby girl in March
2016.
But as she’s placed in my arms I can’t stop shaking, and as I keep trying
to grip her more firmly the shaking intensifies. Worried I’m going to drop
her, I quickly hand her back to Tom. I try to stop the shaking, but after
many hours of labor I’m exhausted and can’t seem to control my body.
The nurse who was there for the hardest parts of the delivery, Lauren, is
still around. With long brown hair and a kind face, she’s been a source of
comfort throughout.
“It’s okay,” I reassure her. “I’m actually okay. I’m just tired.”
She doesn’t accept my assurances and instead gets more blankets and
remains in the room, ostensibly tidying things, but something feels off. Why
is she still here?
“Lauren—is the baby okay?” She strolls over to perform a cursory
check on the sleeping newborn.
“She’s beautiful and she’s okay.” She returns to tidying. I feel so broken
that I can’t even remove my feet from the stirrups they were in during the
delivery. I sink into an exhausted silence. Eventually, under questioning
from Tom, Lauren admits that she’s worried about the amount of blood I’m
continuing to lose. She starts to weigh the towels that have been placed
around me to collect the blood that continues to flow and calls for the
doctor on duty. After that doctor, others arrive. My shaking evolves into
convulsions.

By now I know it’s serious; Lauren keeps cleaning up the blood but it’s
flowing thick and fast. I feel drained and hollow, beyond exhaustion. The
basics of existing—breathing, listening, and feeling—are thick, heavy,
almost insurmountable tasks.
The room fills with various doctors and nurses who barely acknowledge
me as they plunge needles and attach me to machines. A new nurse pushes
Lauren to the side when she arrives, but I manage to grab Lauren’s hand
and beg her with my eyes not to leave the room. I periodically remove my
oxygen mask to ask Tom and Lauren to check on the baby, who remains
peacefully in the corner.
Time slows down as pain expands. It radiates from my swollen belly but
I can see that all of me is swelling up. The new nurse attached a blood
pressure cuff to my arm when she arrived; it feels like it’s burning through
my swollen skin. Every time I summon the energy to remove the mask and
try to speak, to tell her to fix the cuff, she scolds me, dismissing me and
replacing the mask without even glancing at the cuff.
The medical team keep pushing Tom back into the corner but he fights
his way forward. I manage to nod toward my arm, and Tom immediately
grasps what’s going on when he sees the cuff like a rubber band depressed
between red swollen skin that looks and feels as if it is about to burst. The
nurse also dismisses him when he tries to call her attention to it. He hauls
the lead doctor into the corridor and insists that this nurse is removed and
Lauren is returned to my side. I keep thinking how awful it must be for him
to sit watching all of this unfold.
Eventually one of the medical staff remembers the baby and asks to
have her removed. I try to protest, removing the oxygen mask to object, my
body still craving to hold her, feed her, see her.
But I’m silenced, the mask replaced, and the baby removed. I feel like
I’m starting to succumb. It’s hard to breathe, even with the oxygen mask.
I motion for Tom to come and remove my mask. “Get Debbie, get
Sadie, get them to come here, for you, for the baby.” As I start to consider
how bad this might get, I want someone here to look after Tom. I don’t want
Tom to be alone for what I suspect is about to happen. I’m dying.

I hear my doctor ordering lots of blood product and threatening to go and
get it herself if it doesn’t arrive faster.
I fight to stay conscious. What no one tells you about those final
moments as you battle to hold on is how seductive unconsciousness is.
How, when you’ve reached the end of exhaustion, there’s something so
wonderfully inviting in succumbing to the sleepy comfort of numb
unconsciousness. The respite. How each time you fight to pull yourself out
of the calm nothingness, you’re plunged back not just into consciousness
but physical torment. Bright lights, frantic voices, the struggle for each
breath, and complete searing pain. I fight with everything I have to try to
stay awake. The idea of never holding my new baby is too awful. Of never
seeing Sasha again. To say nothing of leaving Tom alone.
I reopen my eyes in an operating room.
“I think she’s back with us,” I hear someone say, and I start to look
around for Tom and Lauren but my head is heavy and I can’t bring anything
into focus. My doctor comes into view and welcomes me back, saying
something about how an anesthesiologist was about to knock me out so it’s
lucky timing that I joined them now. As if I’d just arrived at a neighborhood
barbeque.
I ask repeatedly for Tom, I need him, and wheeze, “No anesthetic.”
My doctor looks confused, then explains that I’m in an operating room
undergoing emergency surgery and it’s very serious. I summon all my
energy to say, “If you have general anesthetic … you can’t breastfeed … for
three days.” This urgent need to breastfeed; funny how raw and powerful
these basic maternal instincts are. Even when I am incapable of anything
else.
“Sarah, I don’t think you understand the situation.” My doctor pauses—
maybe not wanting to tell me I’m dying? She then explains that Tom has
already consented on my behalf.
“I have to feed my baby. You need consent. My consent. Not his.” I’m
desperate to stay conscious and see and hold and feed my baby. “Not his,” I
