insist.
“Sarah, you’re very, very sick.…” I can tell my very capable doctor is
both bemused and frustrated, arriving at an impasse that will rob her of

precious time. She tries a different approach.
“Someone give her a pen,” she says.
And before I know it a pen comes into my line of vision. I reach for it
but realize I can’t control my body. My hands won’t connect with the pen.
When I get close to it my fingers can’t grasp it.
“Sarah, are you able to get that pen and sign those forms?”
I’m frozen, my voice is stuck, and I feel thick, suffocating terror.
Defeated, I shake my head no. An anesthesiologist moves into position and
before I can register what is happening, a numb dark blackness moves
through my body, stifling the thoughts and feelings I’m desperately clinging
to as signs of life.
The next thing I see are white walls. As my eyes focus I see a clock on the
wall and a whiteboard with the message “Call Sadie” scrawled on it. There
are incessant beeps and dings but everything else is enveloped in a thick
silence.
The pain cuts through the grogginess but it’s a different type of pain. I
feel almost as if I’m choking. My stomach is an empty bump. Where’s
Tom? Where’s my baby? I’m alone.
Sadie emerges through a curtain. She seems completely at ease, as if
she’s been here for days.
“You’re awake!” she exclaims excitedly.
“Where’s Tom? Where’s the baby?” I gasp frantically. She strains to
hear me. “The baby, where’s the baby?”
Sadie shakes her head. Then, very slowly, as if talking to an elderly
relative, she says, “I can’t hear you. You have a machine in your throat
helping you breathe. You’re in intensive care. You’re on life support. You’re
very sick.”
I try to say “baby” loud enough to break through the pipe in my throat,
but she continues to shake her head. “Tom,” I try. “Where’s Tom? Tom.”
Sadie shakes her head again.
It doesn’t make sense. Tom should be here. The only reason he wouldn’t
be here is if there was something seriously wrong with him … or the baby.

Panic spurs a burst of adrenaline and I hoarsely yell “baby, baby, baby”
into the void of the ventilator. Sadie tries to placate me by putting together
words in sentences that make no sense. She says nothing about the key
point of where Tom and the baby are. Maybe our baby’s dead? The very
thought of it makes me claw at the machines, trying to remove the
ventilator from my throat so I can leave and find my baby. Before I can,
medical professionals hurriedly appear and I realize too late that, in their
rushing and pushing of buttons and turning of switches, I’ve been sedated.
When I wake again Debbie’s sitting beside my bed.
She pulls a notebook and pen from her stylish designer handbag. I reach
for it and my hands fail me, again. Debbie pushes the pen into my hand and
the notebook under it. I know I have to play it cool or I’ll be knocked
unconscious again. I can barely move my hands but I scratch out, “Am I
tied to bed?”
Debbie nods. Two clear plastic restraints tie me to the bed. All I want to
do is leave this ICU and see my baby.
“I worried about her. Can I hold her?” I write strenuously but trying to
play it casual.
Debbie gently but firmly shakes her head no. I don’t know if that’s
because of me or because of the baby. I feel as if the floor is falling out
from under me.
Soon Tom walks in. I’m so relieved to see him I can feel tears in my
eyes, but the ventilator makes it difficult to actually do the other parts of
crying; sobbing makes me choke against the tube in my throat. When Tom
looks at me he starts to cry. I’ve rarely seen Tom cry.
“I’m sorry; I don’t know why I’m crying. I haven’t throughout
everything,” he reassures me, as if I would somehow think less of him. “It’s
just they told me to be prepared because you might not…” He breaks off as
his tears well up. “But you made it. And Xanthe’s okay.”
I’m confused.
“Xanthe?” I write.
Tom looks down, a hint of shame in his face.
“You named the baby?” I write, incredulous. I can feel Debbie shift
silently on her chair, suddenly uncomfortable.

“Um, Xanthe Juliet, middle name for my mother, but … we can change
the name,” he says hurriedly.
At that moment, his phone buzzes and I can see a notification saying,
“Xanthe is due for her next feed.” And I know, in that instant, that her name
will never be changed.
Tom fills me in on some of what I missed while I was in the coma.
Apparently, I’m in an intensive care unit at a completely different hospital
from where I was when I was last conscious in the operating room after
giving birth. From what I piece together, at some point before, during, or
after labor I suffered an amniotic fluid embolism. He explains that means
something entered my bloodstream—either amniotic fluid or some part of
the baby like fetal cells or hair—and stopped the blood from clotting.
He tells me I had more than thirty-five blood transfusions, the entirety
of all the blood currently in my body more than three or four times over.
Tom says they just kept pumping more blood and blood products into me
but the blood just flowed out. After hours of doing this, nothing was
working. It was just after midnight, and they tried one last intervention.
Something went right and my body started responding. He tells me I’m
lucky, the doctors saved my life.
After a few days, I’m finally reunited with Xanthe. The moment I ached
for, holding her properly for the first time, but instead of relief, I’m
overpowered by a sense of guilt. That from the outset I’ve failed this sweet
defenseless baby who has been in the other hospital’s nursery all the time I
was in the ICU; both of us in the care of strangers.
Dying in childbirth while working in Silicon Valley is like being killed
by a horse and carriage or consumption or a duel. Something that belongs in
a different century or a different country. Weeks before this I was playing
ping-pong in virtual reality with Mark Zuckerberg and the prime minister of
Singapore. How did I go from that to nearly dying the sort of silent death
you see in a nineteenth-century novel?
And yet it’s not. In fact, it’s a very modern American way to die. The
US has the highest maternal mortality rate in the developed world.
Shockingly, it’s on the rise.

