When it’s time to go home, I’m rolled out of the hospital in a wheelchair
because I still can’t walk. Lauren, who helped get me and Xanthe through
so much, sends me a note:
“I hope that someone tells her one day how hard you fought for her life
and your own.”
I have no idea how we’ll cope. I can’t walk, because my back was
somehow damaged when I was moved between hospitals. I’m still losing
blood and incredibly weak from that. Tom’s exhausted and due back at
work soon, our families are both in other countries, we barely know anyone
in San Francisco. I have no idea how we’ll look after a newborn and a
toddler.
It’s still only a few weeks after Diego’s arrest and I know I should be
looking for another job. Coming so close to death only reinforces my
feeling that I have to leave Facebook. I think about it constantly. But it’s
hard to move that forward when I need to give all I have to this sweet baby.
When I’m physically wrecked. How do I do it?
After less than a week at home, I hemorrhage while putting Sasha to
bed. Tom finds me in the bathroom in a small pool of blood and calls an
ambulance. After two days, I check myself out of the hospital, but I
continue to lose blood every day. I hide the extent of it from Tom because I
can tell he’s already at the breaking point, but each time I use the bathroom
there’s so much blood I feel like I need to roll out crime scene tape. Lacking
that, I just carefully wipe everything in the bathroom clean, to hide the
evidence that something is very wrong.

33
Do We Have to Go into This?
I’m not well. I continue to lose significant amounts of blood for months and
struggle to do basic activities. I get to the supermarket with the baby and
toddler and realize I don’t have the strength to walk through the aisles, so I
head home, stopping on benches to rest along the way. There’s a quiet
desperation to everyday life.
None of this seems to matter to Joel. He knows full well that I’m still on
maternity leave, sick and on strong pain medication, and yet messages and
emails from him and his assistant pile up daily. Less than two weeks after
I’ve discharged myself from the hospital, they set up a weekly meeting with
me. Because I’m in California and he’s in Washington, DC, they’re
videoconferences, but he starts to take them sprawled across his bed rather
than in his office. He’s in a T-shirt and who knows what else. I tell myself
the family photos surrounding his bed are proof he’s a family man and I
shouldn’t feel weird about it.
“Does me being in bed when we chat make you feel uncomfortable?” he
asks repeatedly, and it’s hard not to feel that’s the point.
One day he pushes further. On one of our regular video calls during my
maternity leave, he asks me how my health is. I keep my answer brisk and
professional: I’m still very sick, I’m going to need more surgery.
“But where are you bleeding from?” he asks.
My mind races. There is no way he doesn’t know.
“Seriously? Um, well, it’s the same place I’ve been losing blood from
all along.”

“What place?” he presses, insistent.
“Do we have to go into this?”
He stares me down from his bed, propped up by voluminous pillows,
and asks again about where the blood is coming from.
“I’m not really comfortable.”
“Come on, Sarah,” he pushes.
“Well, it’s not my eyes.…”
He starts to get angry.
“I have to go.” I exit the videoconference and call Tom. Then I call
Debbie and tell her too. I trust her and she’s been at Facebook for years.
She has no advice for me.
Elliot, Joel, and others in senior leadership chip in together for a night
nanny for a few weeks, which on one level is so thoughtful—it’s thousands
of dollars that we absolutely couldn’t afford—and on the other feels like a
message of “get back to work.” Tom suggests we refuse the gesture but that
feels rude.
During maternity leave, Joel presses me to join a “leadership offsite” in
Hyderabad, India, that’s scheduled a few weeks after I’ll return to work. It
looks like a waste of time. The focus is team building—it’s lots of tourism
and meals—not making any real decisions.
And honestly, I’m scared. The blood loss continued for a long time,
months after the baby was born. I’m very weak. The doctors didn’t know
why; they suspected an artery had been incorrectly fused to a vein during
the crisis, but they couldn’t tell without operating. By the time my return-to-
work date nears I’m postsurgical but recovering slowly, and I don’t want to
do it. My body isn’t strong. There are still unresolved issues. I’m still losing
blood; medical professionals struggle to draw blood at every regular blood
draw and no one knows why. It’s a twenty-hour flight. I’m afraid of
hemorrhaging again, and the medical advice is that I should not wean the
baby, whom I don’t want to leave, until I’m fully healthy.
Raising this with Joel is excruciating.
“On India,” I start nervously. “I know you want me to, so I’m planning
to go, if I can figure out a way not to wean my daughter. Although if you
don’t need me, I’d prefer to stay.”

“You mean breastfeeding?” he asks.
“Yes,” I say.
“Explain breastfeeding to me.” He looks expectantly at me.
“What?”
“Explain breastfeeding to me.”
Ugh. This, again.
“I need to keep up my supply in order to continue breastfeeding,” I say
as neutrally as possible, trying to keep things professional. But this doesn’t
satisfy him. He continues to push.
Eventually, I shut the conversation down by telling him I’ll explain my
concerns directly to his assistant. I tell her how badly it went with the breast
pump in Turkey and my worries for India. This persuades no one. I’m sent a
breast pump and booked for India.
I return to work in August 2016. My first day back, Joel decides to do a
performance review, as he says “it’s performance review season.” A quick
Google search confirms my suspicion that you are not supposed to be given
a performance review of your maternity leave. In fact, I understand that
pushing someone to work during their maternity leave is against the law.
Nevertheless.
“You weren’t responsive enough,” he says.
