“In my defense, I was in a coma for some of it.”
“It’s not just me, Sarah. Some of your other colleagues found it
challenging to engage with you.”
“I mean, you know, I was in hospital, in a coma and near death, but I
accept that this did make it hard to engage with me at times.”
Irrespective, this leads him to conclude that there were “issues limiting
my effectiveness” and both he and my peers say I was “difficult to work
with during this period.” Sadly, he notes that he is unable to put a formal
performance rating in the system to accompany this feedback because I was
“out of the system” for most of the performance cycle, but he wants me to
know that if he could, it would be bad.
I don’t really understand what is happening and it’s only the first day
back, so I reach out to the policy team’s HR person, Stacey Tomey. Over

Zoom I see that her home office is decorated with framed menus from
Michelin-star restaurants she’s dined in.
“I’ve had to work a lot during maternity leave.”
“I’m aware,” she responds. It takes a minute for that to sink in. They
knew. I’d thought Joel was doing this and no one knew.
“I’m worried about India, especially pumping.” I explain my fear that
I’ll start hemorrhaging again during forty hours in the air. I let her know
that the idea of me traveling to India while I’m still having medical issues is
causing a lot of stress in my house. I don’t reveal the extent of Tom’s
distress.
“You can fly with me,” she offers. “That way if anything goes wrong
you’ll have someone onboard.”
That might be helpful only if Stacey could obtain a medical degree
before the flights. Otherwise, what exactly is she going to do if there’s a
postsurgical medical emergency?
“You can lean on me and Joel’s assistant.” This is her solution to both
the medical issue and Joel’s behavior. When the two of us meet up with
Joel’s assistant in India, she christens the three of us “the tripod” and sets up
a “tripod” group chat.
At the opening “strategy meeting” in Delhi, Joel gathers his leadership
team and asks us each to identify the biggest risks for the company over the
coming year. Predictably Erin Egan, head of privacy, says “privacy.” Kevin
Martin, who’s in charge of Internet.org and connectivity efforts, says
“internet connectivity.” And so on.
When it’s my turn, I try to talk about a disturbing new trend in how
politicians are using Facebook. The day before the offsite started, the
Filipina journalist Maria Ressa published a groundbreaking series. It
outlined how the new president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte, had
weaponized Facebook to propel himself into power. He was an outsider
candidate running against insiders, but using paid ads and a network of
social media volunteers, his campaign chipped away at facts, with political
pages masquerading as credible sources of information to pump out half-
truths. Combined with the power of bots, fake accounts, and trolls on social
media, they fabricated an alternative reality that manipulated people by

sowing fear, uncertainty, and doubt. The campaign harnessed Facebook’s
algorithm, which optimizes for eyeballs and doesn’t distinguish between
fact and fiction.
Maria Ressa brought all this information to my team before publication
while I was on maternity leave, but my bosses didn’t really get it. They did
nothing.
Duterte is a brutal political figure who said he would enforce law and
order by allowing—or possibly collaborating with, given he claimed to
have thrown someone out of a helicopter—death squads who’ve killed over
a thousand people. He’s praised the murders publicly. And he’s far from the
only leader using Facebook in troubling ways. Juntas in Thailand and
Myanmar are using enterprising methods to suppress speech, incite fear,
and spy on their citizens. They falsely claim that Facebook shares user
information and data with them to suppress dissent on the platform.
The Facebook presidents are no longer “good guys” and “friends of the
United States” like Joko Widodo, Enrique Peña Nieto, and Justin Trudeau.
Regimes that want to control and censor their populations now understand
the power of Facebook to monitor what’s being said about them and who’s
saying it. Duterte’s playbook of misinformation and trolling has been so
successful, of course others will imitate it. We’ve been cozying up to these
candidates and happily making money off of them, and we really need to
rethink. By this time Brexit has already happened and the leadership at
Facebook are steadfastly avoiding acknowledging any role Facebook may
have played in that. There are some important elections coming up,
including the US election next month.
That’s the moment I lose the room. It’s blank looks everywhere. Joel
listens, eyes darkening.
“Thanks, Sarah, I think we’ve got a few more immediate things to
worry about. We’ll let the US team handle the US election.”
I know that the way he sees it, US politics is outside my expertise and
very different from whatever I’m seeing in what he calls “tin pot” countries
like the Philippines, Myanmar, and Thailand. Also, and maybe more
importantly: everyone in this room understands we’re making record
amounts of money off the Trump campaign, with all its misinformation and

trolling. As far as Joel’s concerned, Facebook doesn’t need to worry about
outsider candidates like Trump. In fact, they’re great for Facebook because
of how much money they bring in, and Joel cares about that. If they’re
peddling outrage and stretching the truth, well, Joel understands that
outrage and stretching the truth are just part of the game, part of politics.
Joel was at the Brooks Brothers riot, after all.
Outrage is a lucrative business for Facebook right now, a month before
the election, and Joel’s determined that his team contributes to Facebook’s
bottom line. I remember seeing his name as the first one to like an internal
post from our political ads team—the one he created—celebrating the
record spending by Republicans in the Iowa caucuses. And when the team
posted that Ted Cruz’s Facebook strategy has “put money in all of our
pockets and that’s what we call sweet, sweet coin,” underneath it read, “Joel
Kaplan and 22 others like this post.”
If anything, Facebook rewards outsider candidates who post
inflammatory content that drives engagement. We charge less money for
ads that are more incendiary and reach more people. Trump is using our
system the way it’s designed to be used. From my point of view, that’s
incentivizing and rewarding the worst kinds of political ugliness.
Joel doesn’t seem to care at all, it’s all money. And what harm does it
do? He tells us it’s clear Clinton’s going to win anyway.

