34
The Facebook Election
Joel’s wrong. Everyone’s wrong. So I’m curious to walk into Facebook
headquarters a month later, the morning after Trump’s victory.
There’s a hastily called meeting for the policy and communications
teams to discuss how everyone feels about the outcome. I’m surprised that
Joel and Elliot have thought to do that. It shows a sensitivity to people’s
emotions that is normally notable by its absence. Joel later confides that
they set it up because there was an ugly situation in the London office after
the Brexit vote a few months before. Most of the policy team was openly
devastated and it wasn’t handled well. The few who wanted Britain to leave
the EU felt personally attacked by the rest of the team, and it spiraled,
leaving bad blood between the two groups. Joel wants to avoid a repeat now
with Trump, between the Republicans who dominate his office and the rest
of Facebook, which is mostly Democrats and a lot of libertarians.
All the policy and communications teams in Silicon Valley are crammed
into a meeting room that’s too small, with the DC office projected on the
large white wall at the end of the room. Elliot struggles to find the right tone
for the political operatives assembled, some of whom have been embedded
with Trump’s election campaign, and settles on some vague opening
monologue about the importance of democracy and tolerance. Joel is upbeat
—visibly happy about Trump—and struggles to contain his disdain for the
collective outpouring of grief in the Silicon Valley headquarters. We’d all
walked by crying young staffers on our way in.

A Republican on the DC team had told me that Joel had “cut checks for
everyone except Trump.” And Joel admitted that he hadn’t voted for Trump.
So I ask him later in our one-on-one why he was so joyful on the call when
he was a very public Jeb Bush supporter.
“You’re looking at the election all wrong.” Joel’s tone is mildly
patronizing. “If you look at Trump’s agenda it’s the Republican agenda. It’s
the things we want. The things I want. It’s tax cuts. It’s less government.
He’ll get it done. Trump’s got the Senate. He’s got the House. It’s a decisive
victory. He can do things. Great things. Not only that, it’s going to be great
for tech and for business. Hands off, all systems go.”
He pauses, as if to check that I understand that this is good.
“Sure, there are some things on the margin thrown in that I’m not wild
about,” he concedes. “But the bulk of it is what the party wants, what I
want.”
I nod. Which he takes as acceptance of his point.
“My actual issue with the election is that Trump won’t go far enough on
the things that really will make a difference.”
“What are those?” I ask, already knowing but wanting to hear him say
it.
“Cutting entitlements,” he responds firmly. “The biggest weakness with
Trump is that without touching Social Security, Medicaid, Medicare, he’s
not going to meaningfully change that much. That’s the biggest
disappointment with this president. But on the whole, it’s a great outcome.”
In contrast to Joel, some of the senior distraught Democrats who
address the assembled group talk about their grief, pain, and fear of the
future following Trump’s win. It’s hard to ignore the eyerolls exchanged by
some of the Republicans on the DC team who forget that their faces are
being magnified and projected on the wall.
One of the younger employees in California raises her hand and says
timidly, “I worry for my friends who are Black and Hispanic.”
She doesn’t mention how “All Lives Matter,” a slogan created as a
negative rejoinder to “Black Lives Matter,” keeps popping up on the
Facebook graffiti walls all across campus (or that Mark and Sheryl’s
response was that “we have to assume positive intent”), or the TRUMP

SUPPORTERS WELCOME posters that materialized everywhere. Most of the
employees at headquarters are in their twenties, they’re on Facebook all the
time posting their political opinions, so there’s been a roiling political
tension at the company for months. There’s a prolonged silence, with Elliot
and Joel both avoiding any eye contact, before a white, bearded guy in his
early twenties stands up and says, “I want to be an ally.”
As he continues, sharing his feelings about the election and his thoughts
about being Black, or gay, or Muslim, or a woman in America in 2016, the
faces of the DC office projected across the wall are exquisite contortions. I
find myself inadvertently making eye contact with others in headquarters
who—like me—are scanning the room, forensically searching for a Black
or Hispanic face among the sea of fresh white faces, hoodies, and Patagonia
vests. There are only a few.
Instead, Joel shuts down these concerns, stating firmly, “There are a lot
of good guys in the Trump administration who want to do what’s best for
America.”
Another question comes from a young woman who probably has a
different idea from Joel about what’s best for America: “I’m worried about
what’s going to happen to immigration. What do we do about people who
don’t have immigration status?”
Elliot praises the question and makes a few bland statements. I’m lost in
thought about how many men there seem to be in the DC office projected
on the wall and whether they would also describe themselves as “good
guys” and how they’re still struggling to contain their shocked delight at the
outcome of the election when I tune in to hear, “Sarah will have some
thoughts on this, as she’s had difficult immigration challenges.”
There’s a moment of silence and everyone turns to me. I don’t respond
because I assume he must mean some other Sarah who would be qualified
to address the question in some way. Then I realize he means me. He’s
throwing the ball to me so he doesn’t have to talk any more about Trump’s
immigration plans.
“I don’t think the issue is New Zealand immigration,” I say. “But I do
know—”

Joel jumps in, alert to the fact I’m going off script, and assures everyone
that Facebook will look into this.
From the crush of people in the back corner of the room in
headquarters, someone asks, “Is it our fault? 2016’s ‘the Facebook
election.’”
It’s a relief to hear someone give voice to what I had been thinking. In
the lead-up to the election, this was the constant message inside the
company. We called it “the Facebook election” internally, and the company
had committed to dominating this election like no other. We all know
hordes of people across policy, communications, sales, product
management, and engineering who’ve been working full time on elections.
In presentations everyone’s been talking for months about how powerful
