Facebook is and how effective it is as a tool to influence people and change
minds. How we’re in the “business of democracy.” Not to mention Joel’s
constant quest for our teams to be adding to the bottom line of the company
by selling political ads.
And yet Elliot looks baffled. He pushes off the question as if the mere
suggestion is preposterous.
“Facebook’s role and our role as employees is to make the world more
open and connected. That’s never been more important than it is now,”
Elliot concludes, and then shuts down the meeting before any follow-up
questions are asked.
They’re sentiments that are echoed by Mark onstage at the Techonomy
conference days later. Where he states categorically that the suggestion fake
news on Facebook influenced the election is a “pretty crazy idea” and then
follows up by saying that the “idea that that had any impact in the election
is pretty out there.”

35
Angry at the Truth
Mark Zuckerberg is mad. When he arrives at the airport, he’s fuming about
the suggestion he had any responsibility for the election results. We’re due
to leave for Peru, for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
summit.
I’m nervous. It was my idea that Mark should travel to Lima for APEC.
While I was on maternity leave, he’d emailed me, finally taking the
initiative on foreign policy. Specifically, he’d been thinking about how the
world is governed:
I’d like to learn more about this area—how the UN and the different international governance
institutions came into existence, what power and levers do they have to get things done, what
are their limitations and whether these are intentional or these organizations are being
marginalized, why they’re set up as a federation of nations as opposed to a democratically
elected international body, etc?
One specific topic I’m interested in is why no one is arguing for a significantly stronger
international government or system. That is, today’s system seems relatively weak—it has a
small budget, it is beholden to nations as opposed to being elected or controlled directly by
people globally, etc. Today it seems there are two primary proposals for how large countries
want to interact with the international system: continue as is, or increasing isolationism. I’m
curious why there isn’t a serious third option of strengthening this system further, and what
would be potentially required to make that happen. I’m looking for any recommendations on
how to learn about this: book recommendations, people to talk to or invite over for dinner, or
other resources to check out.
What I take from this is that he’s feeling Facebook’s rising power globally.
He has politicians from around the world wanting to come see him and kiss
the ring—the way they do with, say, Rupert Murdoch. He has this global

network, more political capital and more wealth than he can possibly spend,
and he’s wondering what he can use it for. What are the other institutions
that cross national borders? What powers do they have, compared with
Facebook? His speeches increasingly talk about “global community.” He
knows Facebook has a budget that’s larger than many nations’ GDPs and is
not “beholden to nations.” He could buy all the politicians of a country or
many countries if he chose to wield this power freely.
And so, I thought, if he’s thinking about using Facebook to do
something else, something more, in countries around the world, and he’s
wanting to understand how the international system works—or doesn’t—he
needs to see it up close. With that in mind, I pitch going to APEC. It’s
bigger than the international conference I took him to in Panama. Vladimir
Putin and Xi will be there, and this time Mark wouldn’t be showing up as a
salesman, trying to push Internet.org or Facebook. I wanted to put him in
situations that he’d be in if he were a head of state. I’m quietly hoping these
leaders will knock him around a little, get real with him about their
problems with Facebook, so he’s forced to grapple with the harmful effects
it has in many countries.
Mulling over what Mark seems to be imagining for himself on the
global stage, a vision popped into my head of Mark presiding over all the
heads of state in a meeting at APEC. A session where Mark and the most
powerful leaders around the world have some sort of reckoning and forge
agreement about some basic rules of the road for the internet. It was
preposterous to even think of it. No one would agree to elevating just one
CEO, raising him to the level of the most powerful heads of state in the
world, and having him preside over them. The White House had nixed him
even being onstage for a panel at the last big summit he attended. But I told
myself it was a good starting position for the negotiations with APEC on
how Mark would participate. If I ask for that, once they stop laughing,
they’re at least going to consider giving me some of the other things that I
actually stand a chance of getting.
So I was shocked—after months of negotiations—to get what I’d asked
for. As we prepare to take off for Peru, I still can’t believe it’s actually

going to happen, Mark running a meeting of presidents and prime ministers
exactly as I saw in my original vision.
Although we’re actually not about to take off because Mark didn’t bring
his passport.
A small group of Facebook executives mill around the bland, beige
terminal, which looks like a place that dispatches rental cars to middle
managers rather than private jets to tech titans. Mark’s pissed off. By now, I
can’t work out whether it’s just about the blame Facebook’s getting for the
election result, Trump’s election, the forgotten passport, or having to go to
Peru in the middle of it all. I worry it’s the last one. He was up for it when I
pitched it. He even suggested that we should see if the Obamas wanted to
do a trip to Machu Picchu with him.
Irrespective, he blames other people for all of those things, including
forgetting the passport. I guess that’s what it’s like to live in a bubble, like
Mark does. But a bubble implies flimsy transparency, a diaphanous space
where you can see a normal life just beyond your grasp. And what Mark
inhabits is more like a thick opaque dome, a murky fortress that separates
him from the rest of the world. When you have so many other people doing
things for you professionally and personally, you stop taking responsibility
for any of it. Max Weber said that dealing with unintended consequences of
your actions is what political responsibility is. This guy can’t even take
responsibility for leaving his passport at home, let alone influencing the US
election.
Andrea throws herself on the grenade, declaring that it’s all her fault the
passport isn’t here and that she should be supervising “Mark’s home staff”
more closely. Notable by its absence is any suggestion that it could have
occurred to Mark that a passport might be helpful to visit South America.
Elliot suggests, “Sarah, could you contact the president of Peru to see
