whether we can get Mark in the country without his passport?”
“Yes,” Mark agrees quickly, “that would be good.”
“Even Mark Zuckerberg still needs a passport,” I gently tease Mark. It
doesn’t go over well. Fortunately, before I’m peer-pressured into making
the call to the president of Peru, Mark realizes he doesn’t have some

medication he needs. The decision is made to push back the flight departure
time while someone, not him, goes to get it.
This isn’t the first medical crisis to hit the trip. And not just because of
my ongoing medical issues. One Sunday a few months earlier during
“maternity leave,” I received an urgent call from Elliot.
“It’s Peru, it’s in trouble,” he informs me gravely. “Mark and Priscilla
are trying to conceive,” he shares in a whisper, never mind the fact we’re on
a phone call and no one can overhear us.
This immediately feels too intimate. Like we’re courtiers of conception
admitted into the royal bedroom.
“Riiiight,” I say warily.
“Well, you can guess the problem,” he says conspiratorially. I’m
guessing the dates of the summit don’t work out with the dates of ovulation,
but that is way too much information for me. CEO conception plans are
definitely not part of my job description. I let his statement hang there
unanswered.
“Zika,” he says. There’s no way that Mark can expose himself to Zika
or push back his plans for a second child. Mark had once told me that he
wanted a “tribe” of kids, so I understand his reluctance to delay.
Elliot had been talking to Mark and the current guidance was to wait
three months after travel to a Zika-infected area before trying to conceive,
so either the trip should be canceled or we should look at serious measures
to protect him from exposure.
At this time, Lima barely had any Zika. Neither Elliot nor I mention that
Facebook sent me to ground zero of the Zika outbreak while I was
pregnant, but it hangs in the air. Elliot asks me to see what the Peruvian
president’s office can do to stop Mark from getting Zika. Confidentially, of
course.
I assure him I’ll do everything I can.
In reality, I don’t even know how one broaches the idea of asking a
presidential office to safeguard your CEO’s sperm. Particularly when
you’ve already asked them for quite a lot lately. I raise it in the vaguest of
terms and make it sound like it’s me that’s worried about Zika and
conception. The lovely people I’ve been working with from the government

of Peru seem confused, knowing I have very recently given birth, have been
gravely ill, and at the time am supposedly on my maternity leave—like,
what sort of person am I? It’s very awkward, but I decide to let them
believe I am fecund and wanting a third child. It seems easier despite the
shame. Naturally, there’s little they can do to help, despite best intentions.
And so Facebook is considering extreme measures, or “operation
perfect sperm.” After a meeting about Zika risk that I’m not included in,
Andrea sends me a photo of a head-to-toe netting “bug suit” from an army
supply shop that the team thinks Mark should wear. I picture Mark meeting
with President Obama, Mark’s face obscured behind the gauzy net of the
costume, the president pausing briefly to remark on the texture of the net
and novelty of the net handshake, making some dad joke about “nothing but
net.” I respond like Andrea’s suggestion is a joke and hope that it is.
After Mark talks through every possible Zika mitigation method with
the head of the Centers for Disease Control and other experts, things get
more extreme. We change our plans to reduce time on the ground to an
absolute minimum and decide to build a “controlled structure” on the site of
the APEC conference center where ventilation, exposure to others, and bug
mitigation can be overseen by Facebook. Limited exposure to the outdoors,
sealed rooms, and controlled air supply. I think they’re joking about this
too, but before I know it I’m negotiating with the Peruvians for some land
near the conference to be dedicated to Facebook.
We’re a company that’s been accused of “digital colonialism,” and
recently board member Marc Andreessen fired off a series of tweets
suggesting that India was better off under British colonial rule. Constructing
a Silicon Valley replica in Peru on the grounds of the APEC conference to
meet with the heads of state of the world’s most powerful nations is not a
good look. But any concerns I raise are dismissed.
A large Facebook pop-up is dutifully erected onsite next to the
conference center. It’s grander than any of the places that heads of state are
meeting in. It replicates Mark’s meeting room in Menlo Park down to the
exact snacks stocked in the “micro kitchen.” If the bubble Mark lives in was
previously metaphorical, the Facebook pop-up makes it a real physical
structure.

At the airport, after a few hours, we finally board the private jet. Mark
sits in his leather chair, incensed. He cannot stop talking about the election.
It’s him, Elliot, a woman from the comms team, and me in a little quad of
chairs that face each other. Mark and Elliot have it out. Everyone else in the
cabin is pretty quiet.
Elliot’s communications team had briefed Mark going into the
Techonomy conference, and Mark’s still seething at how his remarks there
—that it’s a “crazy idea” that Facebook influenced the election—have been
universally rejected, even mocked. A headline in the New York Times that
week sums it up: “Mark Zuckerberg Is in Denial.” I agree. Mark still stands
by what he said. He believes it! It’s remarkable that a person who founded
one of the most powerful companies in the world, a business premised on
the notion that it can influence the brand of toothpaste you buy, has such
difficulty accepting that the platform where the president-elect spent vast
sums of money had any influence on the election. But this is where he is.
Having tried and failed with the “let Mark be Mark” communications
approach, Elliot’s mission for the flight is to pull him out of this denial and
figure out what in the world he should say about all this, going forward. He
can see the crisis in a way Mark can’t.
Over the course of the ten-hour flight to Lima, Elliot patiently explains
to Mark all the ways that Facebook basically handed the election to Donald
Trump. It’s pretty fucking convincing and pretty fucking concerning.
Facebook embedded staff in Trump’s campaign team in San Antonio for
months, alongside Trump campaign programmers, ad copywriters, media
buyers, network engineers, and data scientists. A Trump operative named
Brad Parscale ran the operation together with the embedded Facebook staff,
and he basically invented a new way for a political campaign to shitpost its
way to the White House, targeting voters with misinformation,
inflammatory posts, and fundraising messages. Boz, who led the ads team,
described it as the “single best digital ad campaign I’ve ever seen from any
