advertiser. Period.”
Elliot walks Mark through all the ways that Facebook and Parscale’s
combined team microtargeted users and tweaked ads for maximum
engagement, using data tools we designed for commercial advertisers. The

way I understand it, Trump’s campaign had amassed a database, named
Project Alamo, with profiles of over 220 million people in America. It
charted all sorts of online and offline behavior, including gun registration,
voter registration, credit card and shopping histories, what websites they
visit, what car they drive, where they live, and the last time they voted. The
campaign used Facebook’s “Custom Audiences from Custom Lists” to
match people in that database with their Facebook profiles. Then
Facebook’s “Lookalike Audiences” algorithm found people on Facebook
with “common qualities” that “look like” those of known Trump supporters.
So if Trump supporters liked, for example, a certain kind of pickup truck,
the tool would find other people who liked pickup trucks but were not yet
committed voters to show the ads to.
Then they’d pair their targeting strategy with data from their message
testing. People likely to respond to “build a wall” got that sort of message.
Moms worried about childcare got ads explaining that Trump wanted
“100% Tax Deductible Childcare.” Then there was a whole operation to
constantly tweak the copy and the images and the color of the buttons that
say “donate,” since slightly different messages resonate with different
audiences. At any given moment, the campaign had tens of thousands of ads
in play, millions of different ad variations by the time they were done.
These ads were tested using Facebook’s Brand Lift surveys, which measure
whether users have absorbed the messages in the ads, and tweaked
accordingly. Many of these ads contained inflammatory misinformation that
drove up engagement and drove down the price of advertising. The more
people engage with an ad, the less it costs. Facebook’s tools and in-house
white-glove service created incredibly accurate targeting of both message
and audience, which is the holy grail of advertising.
Trump heavily outspent Clinton on Facebook ads. In the weeks before
the election, the Trump campaign was regularly one of the top advertisers
on Facebook globally. His campaign could afford to do this because the
data targeting enabled it to raise millions each month in campaign
contributions through Facebook. In fact, Facebook was the Trump
campaign’s largest source of cash.

Parscale’s team also ran voter suppression campaigns. They were
targeted at three different groups of Democrats: young women, white
liberals who might like Bernie Sanders, and Black voters. These voters got
so-called dark posts—nonpublic posts that only they would see. They’d be
invisible to researchers or anyone else looking at their feed. The idea was:
feed them stuff that’ll discourage them from voting for Hillary. One made
for Black audiences was a cartoon built around her 1996 sound bite that
“African Americans are super predators.” In the end, Black voters didn’t
turn out in the numbers that Democrats expected. In an election that came
down to a small number of votes in key swing states, these things mattered.
Mark quietly takes it all in. At first, he’s skeptical and pushing back, but
that gradually turns into curiosity. He starts to ask questions, trying to
understand the mechanics of it all. He doesn’t seem upset that the platform
would be used this way, not in the slightest. If anything, there’s admiration
for the ingenuity of it. Like, these tools were there all the time for anyone to
use this way. How smart that they figured it out.
I’m horrified to hear it laid out like this. I’d heard it before, a few days
after the election, at Sheryl’s business operations meeting, and had the same
reaction, a sense of sticky personal revulsion, knowing I work at the
company that did this. I can’t imagine how I would feel if I had created the
company. I honestly think I’d have a nervous breakdown right there on the
private jet, trigger an emergency landing somewhere over Mexico. It’s so
ugly. What a thing to be responsible for.
When all this was explained to Sheryl at that business operations
meeting, once she grasped what Trump’s campaign did, her immediate
response was not horror but that it was brilliant and innovative and do you
think we might have a shot at hiring Trump’s guy Brad Parscale to come
work at Facebook? No one said anything. After an awkward moment,
chastened, she shifted gears: “Of course that’s silly. He can have his pick of
jobs right now.” A pause. “But maybe there are others from the Trump
campaign we could bring inside Facebook?”
Mark appears to reach an altogether darker conclusion, but not
immediately. Through this whole flight, he’s still mulling over everything

Elliot laid out for him. Still occasionally pushing back but definitely
intrigued.
But before we land in Peru, Elliot doesn’t just need Mark to accept how
central and instrumental Facebook was in putting Trump into office. He also
needs to convince Mark to tell the world that he understands the role
Facebook played in the election—and that things are going to change. Elliot
wants Mark to post this on his Facebook page when we land, and he wants
him to include a concrete action plan listing changes that Facebook will
make to address misinformation. That’s what the world knows about and
people are upset about, all the fake news on the platform.
Mark is adamantly opposed to doing a post, but starting about halfway
into the ten-hour flight, he starts to engage Elliot about what he could say.
They begin drafting. By the time we land in Peru, Mark and Elliot are still
locked in battle. Mark’s fighting back against every one of the measures
that Elliot is pushing. They argue as we get off the plane. They argue in the
car to the hotel. They argue in the elevator up to Mark’s suite. They
continue arguing in his suite. Mark sees the very idea of this post as bullshit
capitulation. A shakedown by the press, which blames Facebook for
“stealing their livelihood.” As far as he’s concerned, the press keeps
inventing one fake Facebook scandal after another, trying everything they
can think of to damage the company, because of how it’s decimated their
businesses, and they’ve finally found something that might stick.
Elliot tells Mark that if he thinks that’s the real issue, then we should
beef up the profit sharing Facebook’s doing with news organizations. Buy
them off. Or at least be a little fairer. A year before this, Facebook created
something called Instant Articles, which shared ad revenue with newspapers
that posted content on the platform. We could go a lot further, Elliot tells
him. Mark’s not into that.
A few staffers watch them argue and offer suggestions. But I’m silent.
What’s the point? Mark sees how Facebook threw the election to Trump,
and now he’s arguing over a bunch of possible changes at Facebook that
won’t get to the heart of the matter anyway.
Hours after we get to the hotel, Mark’s post goes up and it’s almost
