laughably on the nose:

The bottom line is: we take misinformation seriously.… We’ve been
working on this problem for a long time and we take this
responsibility seriously. We’ve made significant progress, but there
is more work to be done.
It’s a very equivocal post. With this next sentence, for instance, the first
half is all Mark and the second half Elliot: “While the percentage of
misinformation is relatively small, we have much more work ahead on our
roadmap.” But Mark does state plainly in the post that Facebook has to do a
better job catching misinformation and can’t rely on users to complain
about it first. Elliot pushed Mark to announce that we’d work with
journalists and fact-checking organizations. Mark doesn’t commit to that.
Instead there’s a vague promise to “learn from” fact-checking organizations
and to “work with journalists and others in the news industry to get their
input,” particularly about fact-checking. He also doesn’t commit to labeling
stories that we know are false but says that we’re “exploring” it. When
some commenters notice the timestamp on his post, he decides to address
them: “For those asking why I posted this at 9:30pm, that’s when I landed
and got into in [sic] Lima last night.”
Part of my pitch for attending APEC was the opportunity for Mark to
meet with President Xi of China. By this point, Mark had been trying to
meet him formally for years, with no success, and his eagerness to make it
happen was only increased by the screw-up in Seattle where Mark posted
the photo of the back of Xi’s head. While I didn’t believe in Facebook’s
strategy for entering China, I did see value in a meeting between the two, if
only as a reality check for Mark.
A formal bilateral meeting wasn’t going to happen. But maybe I could
wangle some kind of “spontaneous encounter” or “pull-aside.”
To achieve a spontaneous encounter, I had to get Mark in close
proximity to President Xi. State dinners were obviously out after our
experience in Panama. And President Xi, like the pope, wasn’t going to
come to Mark. But I was able to negotiate Mark a slot for a keynote speech
right before President Xi’s keynote speech and convince APEC to make the
“connectivity revolution” the theme. Even more important, I was able to

secure dressing rooms next to each other. This gives us the best opportunity
in years for Mark and Xi to meet. We game out different ways of making it
happen, rehearse multiple times what to say, and get to the venue
unreasonably early to give us as much time as possible to make the
connection. I’m primed and ready to be wingman again, only this time
without the mojitos.
When our security team lets us know that Xi is on his way, we move
outside our dressing room, into the cavernous event space, poised for our
“spontaneous” encounter. Mark braces himself—ready for one of the more
consequential moments of his career—as Xi’s security detail arrives. It’s a
phalanx of men, in identical gray uniforms, marching in formation past us.
Mark stares in disbelief, mouth open. They just keep coming, dozens and
dozens of them. It’s almost comical. Just when you think there could not be
any more, more step in.
As Xi approaches, the thick line of men moves into a formation. They
create an impenetrable dividing line between his dressing room and ours,
one that stretches all the way down the hall to the entrance. A human
Chinese wall.
President Xi is so obscured that he doesn’t even have to risk making eye
contact with Mark. The troops are now still and silent enough that we can
hear Xi’s footsteps as he goes by. Soon he’s safely ensconced in his
dressing room and the door is shut, and the human wall silently files out,
leaving Mark, me, and the rest of the small Facebook group loitering
outside the dressing room wondering what we just witnessed.
I find it hard not to admire Xi for so completely outmaneuvering us. The
Chinese clearly went to the organizers just like I did and asked, “Where will
the president be backstage? Who else will be around?” And when they
learned it would be Mark Zuckerberg, they took serious precautions. I’m
about to compliment their foresight and their sheer commitment—the boots
on the ground—that made that happen. I’ve never seen anything like it. But
then I realize Mark’s feelings are hurt. His pride is wounded. He’s not used
to people avoiding him so overtly.
“Uh, I guess that pull-aside isn’t going to happen,” he laments
awkwardly. No one knows what to say in response.

Mark gives his keynote. Hours later we head to a different stage, the one
where Mark will preside over a group of heads of state. We’ve scheduled
some time to head back and prepare in our bubble beforehand, but Mark has
no interest in doing that. Gone are the days where he would pepper me for
information about voting systems, term limits, agenda, and the motives of
presidents and prime ministers. We’re back to the early days when Mark
would tolerate no more than a sentence or two whispered to him before he
entered a room or a written briefing no longer than a text capable of being
read with one glance at his phone. Inside the Facebook bubble there’s a
constant churn of presidents, business executives, and continued election
fallout chat. No one is paying any attention to Diego Dzodan, Facebook’s
vice president of Latin America, who stays in close proximity waiting to be
noticed. I’d asked Diego to travel here from Brazil, partly because he’s our
most senior employee in the region, but mostly because he went to jail on
behalf of the company and he deserves some face time with the CEO. Like
meeting the Chinese, I see value in Mark grappling with the issues Diego
represents in person.
When Mark’s meeting room clears, I bring Diego in. I guess I’d been
expecting Mark to go over and greet him. It’s immediately clear that Mark
has no idea who Diego is. I introduce them and Diego gets the standard wan
smile. This poor guy had literally put his body on the line and gone to jail in
Brazil for Facebook, and Mark effectively blanks him until I remind him of
this fact. There’s then a supremely awkward exchange where Mark thanks
him in a stiff and perfunctory manner with none of the passion that was in
his “heartwarming” Facebook post. He doesn’t really want to take the time
to talk to Diego, and everyone can feel it.
Diego’s soon shuffled to the side in favor of some new crisis that
requires Elliot. Someone remembered that Ivanka Trump is scheduled to
present an award at the Breakthrough Prize, Mark’s award ceremony
designed to turn scientists into rockstars. Suddenly, after Trump’s election,
Mark doesn’t want her there, but no one knows how to disinvite her.
They’re gaming out different ways to get a message to her using some
combination of Yuri Milner, Jared Kushner’s brother, and Karlie Kloss, his
brother’s girlfriend. Diego returns to his corner.

