When we arrive at the Grand Hall for the roundtable with presidents and
prime ministers, the first leader to approach us, fittingly, is New Zealand
prime minister John Key. So much has changed in the five years since Mark
stood outside his conference room and told me and John Key that he didn’t
want to meet John Key. So much has changed since the time when world
leaders made Mark scared and sweaty, since he doubted their relevance to
him or Facebook.
Key now tries to cut in as Mark and Elliot continue to discuss the
Facebook post about the election, and it seems to take Mark minutes to
register that John Key is speaking to him, not just mumbling beside him.
“What is he saying?” Mark asks me, while John Key continues to talk at
him, perhaps wanting me to translate his New Zealand accent into
American English.
“Tax, Mark. He wants you to pay tax in New Zealand.”
“Oh.” Mark nods blandly, and turns back to Elliot. The president of
Mexico joins our group.
“Have you met the president of Mexico?” I ask John Key.
“Enrique, Sarah, please,” President Peña Nieto chides, as he interrupts
John Key to get Mark’s attention. He’s double-booked for the session and
came by to personally apologize to Mark for missing it and to get a photo
with him. Canadian president Justin Trudeau approaches and also asks for a
photo, as does Australia’s prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull. It’s like
Mark’s a kingmaker, and they’re there to bend the knee.
I drag Mark into the Grand Hall for the session he will chair. It’s a vast
space, with large red screens reminiscent of the Chinese flag projecting the
APEC logo. In the middle of the room a circle of wooden tables has been
assembled, with microphones, chairs, and nameplates for each of the
presidents and prime ministers. At the center is Mark Zuckerberg. I sit
directly behind Mark, with Elliot perched beside me.
Once we’re settled in with all these heads of state, it’s surprising how
many are familiar faces. People I’ve met either with Mark or in my own
role. We know that many of the global leaders we’ve built relationships
with are coming to the end of their terms; some are already gone, and in
some cases we’ve already successfully transitioned to their successors. I’m

struck by the impermanence of importance. And yet Mark could
conceivably continue to hold his place chairing world leaders for another
fifty years. He’ll see these leaders off and the generations of leaders that
follow them. Like the queen.
After Mark’s opening remarks, I’m expecting a rough ride from the
assembled presidents and prime ministers. A few had told reporters they
saw the session as a chance for “confrontation with Mark Zuckerberg”
about taxes, misinformation, the decimation of local journalism, privacy,
and online harm to children. And that was all before Donald Trump was
elected with Facebook’s help. I am braced for a reckoning.
It is not a rough ride. It’s a bubble bath.
“How do we build the next Facebook in our country?” softballs a prime
minister.
“How does connectivity help in actual day-to-day governance? Why
should it be a priority for my government?” queries Michelle Bachelet,
president of Chile, one of the first to formally oppose Internet.org.
Before Mark has the opportunity to address this, the solicitous Canadian
prime minister Trudeau jumps in to explain how the internet can be used to
deliver social programs electronically, how there are productivity gains if
benefits can be paid directly into bank accounts without the need for going
to a bank, how social infrastructure is moving online. He’s repeating some
of the talking points we’d said to him in our chat before the session.
As other prime ministers and presidents intervene to show their tacit
support for Mark, I notice that the newly elected president of the
Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte—who credited Facebook with his election—is
conspicuously napping.
What’s odd is that no one raises Trump’s election and the role Facebook
played. But I belatedly realize it makes sense. These leaders are all in the
business of getting elected. They, like Elliot, Sheryl, and basically everyone
except Mark (although he seems to be changing his position), probably
believe Facebook was instrumental and they don’t want to piss off the guy
who made that happen. I’m sure that Trump’s election elevated Mark in
their eyes. He’s the powerbroker and they want to stay in power. They
understand that one of their most important assets—their voice—is political

capital that is ultimately controlled by Mark. So they spend the session
complimenting Mark and suggesting ways they can work together with
Facebook.
But Mark doesn’t seem to absorb it. As he sits in the chair leading this
conversation with heads of state, it’s like his mind is elsewhere. He seems
preoccupied and barely listening. When he does listen, he’ll turn to me and
ask me for the answer to the question and sometimes the question itself.
He’s phoning it in. Suddenly, I’m leading a Q&A with the leaders of the
free world. I can’t believe this is happening.
It’s strange. Instead of enjoying what should be the pinnacle of my
career, I’m also preoccupied. I spent so long trying to help Mark get
comfortable with presidents and prime ministers and get him operating as a
global player. Presiding over a room full of the most powerful people in the
world should have been a career highlight for both of us. But what I’m
seeing is that the more comfortable he gets, the less he cares. As his
importance compounds, his regard diminishes. He sails through the whole
session, presiding over some of the most powerful people in the world as if
none of it matters. Uninterested.
Obama hadn’t made it to the roundtable. When we told Mark he was
double-booked, Mark responded, “I guess it doesn’t matter, he’s a lame
duck anyway.” Which sounded like he didn’t care but we all knew better.
When we first started planning this trip to Peru, Mark was fixated on
traveling to Machu Picchu with President Obama as a “farewell road trip.”
As if I could just add in a presidential jaunt to one of the Seven Wonders of
the World on the side of a roundtable with the leaders of the free world.
Before I know it, Mark offers to leave his Zika control bubble and drive
across Lima to meet Obama.
We arrive at the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru, where Obama
was doing a town hall, one of his last international public events. After the
slick Facebook APEC pop-up, the place seems gargantuan and dilapidated,
buildings with peeling paint and rotting wood. With Obama soon to be out
of office and Mark fresh off chairing APEC’s heads of state, Mark
definitely has a little swagger on the way in. The power balance is shifting.

We’re not allowed to accompany Mark into the meeting. So a few of us
are loitering outside when Mark bursts out of the building and strides off
