even angrier than he was at the start of the trip.
It’s a walk across the university campus to get back to where our vans
are parked. Mark is moving quickly, silently fuming. By the time we crowd
back into the van, he’s raging. There’s a scramble to fit us all back in, but
no one makes the usual “But, but, but … I’m the president of Guatemala”
joke. We had prepped him for a meeting that would focus on Obama’s
legacy, but we ended up with a meeting focused on Mark’s.
“Fake news, he kept going on about fake news and misinformation,”
Mark steams. “He doesn’t get it. He’s got it totally wrong, totally out of
proportion. He said that Facebook’s playing a destructive role globally. And
I think he actually believes that.”
Elliot shakes his head sympathetically.
“‘Not taking it seriously.’ That’s what he said. I’m not taking these
threats seriously enough.” Mark quivers, furious. “I told him fake news
wasn’t a big thing on Facebook. It’s less than one percent of what’s on the
platform. That it wasn’t fake news that swung the election for Trump. And
that realistically there’s not an easy solution. I mean, what does he want me
to do?”
Elliot agrees. “I think we’d very quickly run into free speech issues with
any action we take.”
“And you know what Obama’s focused on?” Mark says incredulously.
“The next election … already.”
“They’ve only just lost this one,” Elliot says.
“Yeah, he said he was ‘warning me’ that we need to make serious
changes or things are going to get worse in the next presidential race,”
Mark says.
“Warning me,” he repeats, incensed. Angry that Obama had taken him
to task on the role Facebook had played in the election and beyond.
Mark replays fragments of the conversation as if trying to beat them
into submission. He’s blindsided by Obama’s criticism and inflamed,
reiterating again and again how Obama’s a lame duck, as if that’s the salve

to the wound. But it seems to me that’s what allowed Obama to speak his
mind so freely.
Under his anger, I can tell Mark’s genuinely hurt. I think he likes and
respects Obama. He’s also completely unused to frank criticism from
anyone more powerful than him. There are so few who fit that description
anyway.

36
Rosebud
Mark broods for much of the flight. When he suggests a board game, I
agree to play explicitly on the condition that I don’t have to let him win. He
thinks I’m joking. When I trounce him at Ticket to Ride, he accuses me of
cheating. This irks me. I mean, I understand that he’s used to everyone
going easy on him, so it’s logical to him that anyone who beats him must be
cheating, but does he really think I wouldn’t be able to beat him fair and
square?
He challenges me to Settlers of Catan. A couple of other staffers join. I
win. He does it again.
“You definitely cheated that time,” he says loudly. I see members of the
team who are pretending to sleep covertly tune into what is happening. I
know he’s competitive and not used to losing, and he’s working out his
anger over Obama and being blamed for throwing the election results for an
entire country. But still.
“I didn’t cheat,” I hear myself say before I can stop myself. “And
actually, right up until that last move, you were going to win. You had
multiple ways to win.” I pause to demonstrate on the board the moves I
thought he was going to take or, more accurately, the moves I would have
taken in his position. I see him sit back, for the second time that day getting
some unexpected pushback (or the third, if you include Xi avoiding him), as
he takes in the different strategies I lay out.
“But this is like everything,” I say ill-advisedly. “You’re so focused on
winning every single battle you forget the war. You were so focused on

winning the longest road just then, you weren’t paying attention to the rest
of what was happening on the board.” I fail to stop. “Sometimes you have
to lose something to win the more important thing. If you try and win
everything, you end up losing. You could be strategic about giving some
things up. I mean, some people call it compromise, but if you don’t like that
word you can think about it as a ‘strategic loss’ or ‘strategic retreat’ or
whatever. But this is why we keep having massive issues. You’re so used to
being the winner who takes all.”
“An example,” he challenges me. “Give me an example.”
“Sure, there are too many to choose from.” I mean this with all my
heart. We seem to be in a constant can’t-see-the-forest-for-the-trees
situation. I think about Facebook’s refusal to cooperate in sharing even the
smallest amount of data with researchers or compromising just a little on
taxes or actually educating regulators about our products rather than taking
advantage of their lack of understanding of our technology. All of which
would build some trust and goodwill.
“Just pick one,” he presses.
“No problem. How about changing the name of Internet.org? How
many times did we have to come to you and say it was a problem and it was
going to attract regulatory scrutiny and make everything harder and it didn’t
need to? And how many times did you push back? You wanted to win that
battle so badly, and it’s just a name, and by the time you realized that and
actually agreed to call it Free Basics, it didn’t really matter. We’d burnt up
all the goodwill we had with regulators and they were against the whole
thing. If you’d just lost that battle upfront, accepted that regulators have
some actual real power, and accepted we needed to change the name, we
would have stood more of a chance of actually making Internet.org
happen.”
He leans back in his seat and considers this. There’s a tense silence. By
now, those who were pretending to doze to avoid the board games have
given up the pretense entirely. I’m filled with regret for having been goaded
into this confrontation and not showing the deference generally expected
from women who work for Mark, but the accusation of cheating pushed me
over the edge. Finally, he speaks slowly.

“That’s fair,” he says.
Nothing more. That’s the end of the conversation.
Instead, talk returns to legacy. It’s a familiar topic. Mark has become
increasingly obsessed by his own legacy in recent years. Things he can be
remembered for besides Facebook. This is what’s occupying him so much
of the time I’m around him, and fills his conversations, not new products he
