wants to launch or new places he wants to drive Facebook. His foundation,
the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, launched less than a year ago.
“I want to talk about purpose,” he declares. “For the commencement
speech.” He’s giving the commencement speech at Harvard in a few
months, and he’s focused on that more than any Facebook issue or product.
In fact, for months he’s been raising this commencement speech. It seems to
be the only thing that brings him joy. The comms team staffers start taking
notes as he riffs on high-minded themes, global connection, and freedom.
This seems to cheer Mark up. By the time he brings up his personal
challenge, he’s having a great time.
Each year Mark does a public “personal challenge” that is heavily
promoted on Facebook. Previous years included learning Mandarin or
eating only meat he’s killed himself. This year, for his 2016 challenge, he’s
made an AI assistant for his home. To show it off at the end of the year, he
wants to put out a “humorous video” with the AI voiced by a celebrity. The
more he talks, the bigger the idea grows.
“We should do the video from my perspective,” he declares. “We’d need
to film it pretty fast. We’re nearly at the end of the year. It would be good to
do another video from…”
“Priscilla’s perspective?” Derick suggests.
“I was going to say the AI’s perspective, but that could be funny. Maybe
Priscilla would learn that the AI only listens to my voice. Like she’s trying
to command it in different places around the house and it just ignores her.”
I have thoughts on “Priscilla not having her voice heard” in her own
home but I know enough about expectations of women at Facebook to keep
silent. Mark thinks it’s hilarious.
“Maybe we can have users vote on who should be the AI’s voice?” he
says, eyes lighting up. The team keeps trying to lower his expectations,

given the tight deadline.
The conversation switches to what he’s going to announce for his 2017
challenge, which he wants to do soon. I’m only mildly curious about this.
Maybe he could focus on all the pressing problems confronting Facebook?
Do something about the way misinformation spreads, or the way populists
are using the platform, or how the two issues combine with authoritarian
and populist leaders using misinformation to trigger violence in the real
world, like in the Philippines? But it turns out he’s already decided.
“I know what my 2017 challenge is going to be,” he says firmly. “I’m
going to visit as many states as possible. Get on the ground. Meet people.
Understand what they’re looking for.”
My antenna goes up. Mark is not someone who particularly enjoys
travel or, in fact, people. And I know he’s hoping to have another baby in
2017, so this doesn’t make any sense as a personal challenge.
“Are there any states in particular you want to go to?” I ask tentatively.
“Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania.”
Ugh. The traditional stops for presidential candidates. Someone asks if
there’s a particular time he’s looking to go to those states and he responds
that he’d like to start as soon as possible. I can’t bring myself to ask
directly, “So you’re going to run for president?” Like saying the words will
bring it into existence. So I go instead with the only slightly more veiled,
“You’re not looking to go eat fried butter or whatever at the Iowa State
Fair?”
“Yes,” he pronounces. “I’m going to Iowa.” There’s a moment as this
sinks in. It feels as if all the air has been sucked out of the plane. “Can we
do that first?”
The comms team staffers start to quickly enable. Logistical questions:
How fast can they launch this tour, how many early-voting states can they
reasonably cover, what order, what do they do in each state, what
stakeholders do they need to reach out to, what images do they want to
convey? I keep trying to catch Elliot’s eye but he avoids me. I move to the
empty seat beside him.
“He can’t run for president,” I whisper when I think Mark is sufficiently
distracted. Elliot’s the one person on the plane with an air of fatherly

authority; he seems like the best person to quash this quickly. “Elliot, he
listens to you, he just told us he’s planning to run for president of the United
States. You have to stop this.”
Elliot shifts back in his seat and shakes his head.
“This is a horrible idea,” I press.
Elliot shrugs and says, “Mark gets to decide his own personal
challenges. It’s not for us to intervene, Sarah.”
I think he’s telling me to be quiet, to drop it, to know my place. And I
realize that everyone around Mark is like this. No one’s going to try to talk
him out of it.
Mark’s still bothered by the Facebook post Elliot made him write about
the election. He doesn’t want to move the company closer to the media
industry or allow it to assume more media-like functions, such as editing or
fact-checking.
Mark starts talking about how the lesson from the 2016 election is that
the mainstream media failed and blaming Facebook is just opportunism by
a media ecosystem that wants to scapegoat Facebook for its own failure,
and its own problems.
Talk turns to how he would solve it. He wants to remake the American
news media. What’s unsaid is that he already has remade the American
news media, by inserting Facebook at the center of it, driving down ad rates
for newspapers, and distributing their stories using their content to boost
time spent on Facebook. But I guess he wants more. Presumably more
control over the media would be helpful with any presidential run. He
doesn’t want to just buy a paper like other billionaires. Maybe Facebook
should buy Twitter? He’s tempted. After all, Facebook is already a news
source for nearly half of all Americans.
“Why are you guys recommending compromising with traditional
media? It’s an industry locked in a death spiral. We don’t need to
accommodate. You’re not thinking big enough,” Mark says, chiding Elliot
for pushing partnerships and profit-sharing models with media. Concessions
for the culprits. “You’re compromising with a dying industry rather than
dominating it. Crushing it.”

Mark has this will to survive above everybody, and it feels like he is
always plotting to kill off those things that get in his way to ensure his
survival.
“You don’t want to go to war with these guys,” Elliot says.
Mark disagrees. He doesn’t hide his frustration with Elliot as he
explains that the way digital technology is going will ultimately result in the
extinction of the media industry as we know it now. “The way I see it,
we’ve got three obvious options: I buy the ‘failing New York Times,’ the
