paper of record, and remake the news ecosystem through that, but putting
Facebook at its heart. Make it truly digital. Fix it from the inside out. Make
it the first effective digital publication. The other option is to come at it the
other way to try and rebuild the fourth estate. I don’t buy a newspaper, I
make one. From the ground up. Hire engineers and journalists and rebuild it
at Facebook. Remake the entire news ecosystem here. Maybe I put in some
Chinese walls for independence or maybe I don’t.”
“Make it truly ‘digital first,’” Elliot ponders, absentmindedly playing
with the zipper on my portable breast pump case.
“Yes. Appoint a Facebook editor, but make something new. Not the
fourth estate, a fifth estate. But a fifth estate that has Facebook at its center.
You know—something that recognizes and grows the role Facebook plays
alongside these other power structures in society.”
“A digital fifth estate.” Elliot’s warming to it. “A home for everyone
now that we’ve removed these gatekeepers.”
“Or your option, this terrible status quo. Facebook continues on this
path of compromising around the edges with these failing media entities,
we continue to play an increasingly large role in controlling and directing
traffic and wait for them to die off over time. I don’t see what this gets us.
We’re just losing time.”
The sheer scale of the contemplated power grab silences us all. He’d
control how the news is made, as well as the algorithm that targets and
distributes it. What stays up and what doesn’t. Who is on the platform and
who isn’t. Which would certainly come in handy if he runs for president.
I try to piece together how we got to this point in the less than forty-
eight hours since we set off for Peru. What I settle on is this: Mark had no

intention of running for president when he arrived at the airport without his
passport. I think he really was blindsided by the accusation that Facebook
was responsible for Donald Trump winning the election, and his anger at
being blamed was real. But on the flight to Peru, as Elliot painstakingly
explained piece by piece how the Trump campaign used Facebook to win,
Mark became convinced that Facebook did play a decisive role. That
realization was forefront in his mind as he played at world leader at APEC,
chairing that bubble-bath session with all the prime ministers and
presidents, realizing the extent to which he and his platform truly were
kingmakers and how he would outlast almost everyone there. Sought after
for selfies by men who run countries. He already thought of himself as the
most well-known person of our generation in the world, and this experience
supercharged that belief. Obama’s dressing down provoked a “who does he
think he is” response in Mark, petulance rather than introspection, a desire
to flex power, not contrition. As Mark contemplated his future—his legacy
and the coming year’s personal challenge—I think he came to this dark
conclusion: if Trump can do it, so could he.
After all, not only does Mark now have Trump’s playbook, he owns the
tools and sets the rules. And he has something no one else has, the ability to
control the algorithm with zero transparency or oversight. The power to
control what Facebook users see. To throw someone like Trump off
Facebook. He already has his personal team “maximizing his reach and
engagement” or whatever euphemism is appropriate for whatever it is they
do. I assume they’re the reason he has four times more followers than
Trump and more than any other political leader in the world.
Also, he’s loaded. He could run for president and never ask anyone for a
dime.
Mark goes back to planning the various states he wants to visit. He
wants to go to a farm, a factory, a church, a community center. He wants to
meet with Black leaders, opioid addicts, autoworkers. He wants to eat fried
foods in Iowa and barbeque in Texas. He wants to go to a rodeo, drive some
heavy machinery, wear a hard hat.

The jet staff tell us to get ready to land. As I take my seat next to Mark and
the plane starts to descend, Mark asks me what I think. I feel my insides
tumbling. I want to tell him this is the beginning of the end for me. I had
fooled myself into thinking APEC might be some kind of reckoning. In fact,
it was the opposite. I’ve seen some hard truths I can’t unsee, about Mark
and where he’s going. This is the last foreign trip I invent for him, the last
time I travel with him. I’ve spent many years now, flying around the globe
and helping him learn how to navigate the world of prime ministers and
presidents. I don’t want this to become who I am. I didn’t sign up for where
he is now trying to go. I know I can’t do it anymore.
This trip is one of many moments where Mark could have gone a
different way. Could have been convinced by a different path. But
something else kicked in. After all the headlines saying he was in denial
about the election, after being shit on by Obama, he dug in. He’s not built to
take criticism like that and genuinely try to understand and fix the problems
the 2016 election exposed, wield his power responsibly. That’s not who he
is. He’s defiant. He’ll show them. And in the middle of all that, he stands on
a stage full of the most powerful people in the world, and they dote over
him like some boy king. All of that came together and solidified in this new
vision of himself that’s both comforting and sort of thrilling. He’d run for
the most powerful job on earth. If Facebook can propel someone into the
White House, why not him?
And now we’re sitting here side by side on a plane and he’s asked me
what I think. Where to even begin? Do I try to talk him out of this plan to
run for president? Do I point out all the ways it probably won’t make him
happy or end well for anyone? Do I tell him how he’s changed since first
met him? He was a single-minded maniac, sure, but it was all about
building something, making a tool to change the world. The way he saw
politicians back then—he had no time for them, would never want to be one
of them—I prefer that to the way he is now. Over these five years, I feel like
I’ve seen him face so many choices and lose touch with whatever
fundamental human decency he had when we started. Do I say that? How?
How can I say any of these things to him?

The plane is descending. Time’s running out. Here we are. Mark’s
looking at me expectantly. What do I think, he’s asked me.
I look him in the eyes, panic, and say, “Rosebud.”
Mark gives me a blank look.
“What are you talking about?”
“You know, Rooooosseeeebuuud.”
Mark looks baffled. Oh god. This was a very bad idea.
“Citizen Kane?”
Nothing from Mark.
“Citizen Kane. You know, the movie,” Elliot says. He’s sitting across
from Mark. We’re in a pod of four facing chairs. Strapped in for landing.
Still Mark doesn’t get it.
