“Hearst,” I say, by way of explanation.
Mark cocks his head and looks at me quizzically.
Elliot clearly can’t believe I’ve gone down this road, but tries to help me
out. “I think what she’s saying is that if you do this and you control the
publishers and you run for office, that makes you a modern-day William
Randolph Hearst,” he explains. “You know, with the publishing and the
politics and the…”
“Oh,” Mark says softly. “Is that a bad thing?”
What a question. Neither of us takes that one on. Mark smiles wanly,
still confused, but shakes it off as the plane touches down on the runway.
We’re back on the tarmac, where we were forty-eight hours before.
Everything’s the same but everything’s different.
“Good trip, everyone. Lots to think about,” he says.
We all unbuckle our seatbelts and wait for him to go. After he exits, we
gather our things and leave the plane ourselves.

37
Man of the People
In the months that follow, Mark sets out on a road trip through the small
towns of Iowa; works a Ford assembly line outside Detroit, Michigan;
celebrates Pride in Omaha, Nebraska; attends Sunday service at Emanuel
African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, South Carolina; drives
a tractor at a dairy and beef cattle ranch in Blanchardville, Wisconsin; visits
a shrimp boat in Bayou La Batre, Alabama; does NASCAR ride-along laps
with Dale Earnhardt Jr. in Charlotte, North Carolina; sits with a group of
recovering heroin addicts in Dayton, Ohio; and tours a drilling rig at one of
the main fracking sites in Williston, North Dakota.
Each stop is carefully scouted by an advance team. And then beautifully
documented by one of Mark’s photographers, including Charles
Ommanney, whose job for nine years was photographing George W. Bush
and Barack Obama. The results of these efforts are posted to Mark’s
Facebook page and then “optimized” to ensure his many millions of
followers see them. Mark’s also started to optimize himself, eschewing the
fatty fast foods for fresh cut fruit and putting time into working out every
day.
Officially he denies he’s running for president, but what else is this very
time-consuming side hustle? Why the focus on battleground states? He
hires the consultants who got Obama and Bush elected—David Plouffe and
Ken Mehlman—to his foundation. He publishes a six-thousand-word
manifesto full of global aspirations.

His speeches take on a new tone, like what a kid thinks a president
sounds like:
Our greatest opportunities are now global—like spreading
prosperity and freedom, promoting peace and understanding, lifting
people out of poverty and accelerating science. Our greatest
challenges also need global responses—like ending terrorism,
fighting climate change and preventing pandemics. Progress now
requires humanity coming together not just as cities or nations but
also as a global community.
And,
The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the
occasion. As our case is new, so we must think anew, act anew.
If I had any doubts about Mark’s intention to become a presidential
candidate, his response to some bad press in Hawaii wipes them away.
Mark owns a lot of land in Hawaii. He started with seven hundred acres of
beachfront property in Kauai. Then he launched lawsuits against hundreds
of Hawaiians who may have held titles to small plots on his estate, under an
old Hawaiian law, to force them to sell their land to him. Many do not wish
to sell. Mark was doing all this quietly, through three shell companies, but
then the fact that he owned the companies was revealed by the Honolulu
Star-Advertiser. “This is the face of neocolonialism,” a law professor
pronounces in one of the articles. The Vanity Fair headline reads, “Man of
the People Mark Zuckerberg Sues to Keep Native Hawaiians Off His Kauai
Estate.” An Inertia editorial says, “So now it looks as though not only is
Zuckerberg suing a bunch of native Hawaiians over land that’s been in their
families for generations, but he’s suing DEAD people. What a dick move!”
This is the sort of media coverage that months ago Mark would have
brushed off. I’ve seen him weather all sorts of bad press, going back years,
and he never seemed to care. But now he’s on the phone to Elliot, all
worked up. I overhear them. Mark tells Elliot to do something about the
headlines and Elliot explains that would be difficult because they seem to

be true. (Ha!) Then Mark declares he’s just going to get rid of the entire
estate, sell everything he has in Hawaii. He just wants to make this go away.
Elliot’s confident he’ll change his mind; Mark’s not used to giving up on
things he wants. He’s never okay losing any battle, and he cares way more
about his home in Hawaii than he does about Settlers of Catan or Ticket to
Ride.
Sure enough, within days he’s found a workaround. He officially
announces that he’s dropping the lawsuits, and Elliot tells me they have a
plan. Later I learn that a retired professor has purchased the disputed land
from his own cousins for millions of dollars. He openly brags of being paid
$6,000 a month by Mark Zuckerberg to do the deals and keep people off the
land, the cousins tell reporters.
So the attempt to quash the bad press is not entirely successful. But he
tried. Over the years, I’ve seen Mark take a lot of criticism, but I’ve never
seen him so concerned about how he’s being seen by the public. Just like,
you know, a politician.
He also has Facebook’s board approve a new stock structure that would
allow him to run for office. The filing with the Securities and Exchange
Commission expressly allows Mark to leave Facebook for up to two years
without losing control of the company if his absence is “in connection with
his serving in a government position or office.” I assume the two years
would cover the period Mark would be taking on the—presumably time-
consuming—endeavor of campaigning to be president of the United States.
Then, if he won, he’d step down as CEO. A lawsuit subsequently reveals
that some of Facebook’s board members were concerned about the time
commitment of this side gig and told Mark they were struggling with “how
to define the gov’t service thing without freaking out shareholders that you
are losing commitment,” but Mark fought hard and won. He’s wedded to
his plan. The day the special committee recommended that Facebook’s
board approve the new system, according to court documents, board
member Marc Andreessen texted Mark, “The cat’s in the bag and the bag’s
in the river.”
Mark replied, “Does that mean the cat’s dead?”
