Andreessen answered, “Mission accomplished,” adding a smiley face.

And while Mark continues to look at other jobs, so do I. Calling people
I know, having conversations about positions at Google, Cloudflare, and
think tanks. Nothing solidifies and I can’t quit Facebook without a place to
go, because I need the health insurance. In the year since Xanthe’s birth, my
medical situation has gotten pretty frightening. My body is producing
precancerous growths in my bowel. Doctors cut them out, but as soon as
they do, more form. I had twelve growths cut out soon after Sasha’s birth.
But still they continue to grow. This shouldn’t be happening to someone my
age, they tell me, but they really don’t understand what’s causing it. I
wonder if this is some kind of legacy from my shark attack, because the
shark ripped through my bowel, but the doctors say no.
My doctors send me to a “genetic counselor” who says that it appears I
have something called Lynch syndrome. I’ll need some more tests to
confirm but I’m told that if they don’t remove my bowel, I’ll get bowel
cancer. I’m given pamphlets that start,
A diagnosis of cancer raises complex emotions and questions.
Among these are questions such as “What caused my cancer? Will I
have to face cancer again? Are my family members at increased risk
of cancer?”
The way the specialists speak so casually of the likelihood of cancer
makes living without health insurance inconceivable, especially with two
children.

38
Let Them Eat Cake
The day Donald Trump is inaugurated, I’m flying home from Davos with
Sheryl, Elliot, Sadie, and other Facebook staffers.
By now, Tom has a spreadsheet. Every time I announce I have to leave
him and the girls for another work trip, he says, “Well this is going in the
spreadsheet,” in a determined way before conspicuously updating it. He
never tells me what the spreadsheet is for or what happens if there are too
many entries. But I know it won’t be good. To make matters worse, he’s
concerned by everything going on within Facebook, but can’t report on it at
his newspaper because of the conflict of interest obligations he’s under.
He’s set a deadline for leaving San Francisco, which we both know really
means leaving Facebook, but with the ongoing health stuff, the incessant
work, and the tiny children, I’m finding it hard to make the time to figure
out a way out and still deliver what everyone needs day-to-day.
Thankfully, Davos has become routine. The hardest part these days is
managing Sheryl’s ever-increasing desire to be in the spotlight. After
months of negotiations, I’d secured a lineup she was satisfied with, making
sure she was on the right panels, went to the right parties, and had more
time with the microphone than her female frenemies. All of us
accompanying Sheryl are well trained enough to know Sheryl’s expectation
that we sit in the front row, applaud loudly, and provide admiring feedback
on her words or, as I’ve come to think of them, her emperor’s clothes. Any
deviation from this risks her chewing you out after.

But on this trip, I decide I won’t sit in the front row and won’t praise her
after each event. It’s one of my tiny acts of resistance. It feels rebellious. I
know it aggravates her. Autonomy disturbs a certain kind of powerful
person, and Sheryl has never accepted independence among her advisers.
Even those she is icing out. Her team races to be the first to craft
complimentary comments on her Facebook posts even after we’ve drafted
them ourselves, to share any positive feedback from “important people”
after a public appearance, and to be as obsequious as possible about her
events. It creates a strange reality around her.
And so I’m surprised at this 2017 Davos when—during Sheryl’s final
panel—some of her closest advisers start a WhatsApp group while sitting in
the front row to complain about how bored they are and include me. They
joke about livening up the panel by asking about filter bubbles or
Facebook’s role in news monetization and the other hot-button issues for
Facebook right now. Then they turn to criticizing Sheryl, her scowl, how
she always pivots to the same three inane anecdotes about people using
Facebook, including an Indian small business called Pigtails and Pony. It’s
jarring because these are some of her most trusted lieutenants, her most
obsequious cheerleaders.
Afterward, they rush up to her, quick to heap praise, telling her how she
eclipsed Christine Lagarde, Meg Whitman, and the other panelists.
Over the time I’ve been at Facebook, I’ve watched people who disagree
with Sheryl and Mark become marginalized and exit. The people who
enable remain and Sheryl rewards them with an astonishing amount of
money. Perhaps I was expecting some kind of honor among thieves. I didn’t
realize that they do say what they think, just not to her.
That’s another thing that’s weighing on me, the money. Like most tech
companies, Facebook offers equity grants. And since the time I joined pre-
IPO, these have become seriously valuable. My bosses earn astonishing
amounts of money, the sort of money that ensures they will never need to
work again. My equity grants are definitely not at that level (probably
because I didn’t know what equity was when I started at Facebook and so
never negotiated or asked for more), but after years at Facebook they are
worth serious money. Potentially millions of dollars. Meted out over four-

year cycles. But only if I stay at the company. That’s hard to grapple with as
the main earner in our household. Leaving could potentially mean losing all
of that.
Maybe that’s why they do it. Either way, open dissent isn’t an option
with Sheryl. People actively hide bad news or situations they know she
won’t like because they’ve seen her shoot the messenger.
Unfortunately for Sheryl, Facebook is generating a lot of bad news.
Elliot and Joel are quick to tell me that I shouldn’t mention these things to
her, whether it’s the fact we still haven’t resolved the issue that led to her
arrest warrant in Seoul years ago or we still haven’t found a way to launch
Facebook for kids—“Project Family.” No one wants to get shot.
We’re in Sheryl’s private jet flying home from Davos. It’s my first time on a
plane with her since the flight—one year ago—where she asked me to bed
with her. She’s been chilly with me since then. I’ve worked with her a lot
less, and every interaction feels loaded.
Soon after takeoff, she approaches the younger women—Sadie, me, and
another one of her assistants—inviting us to the bedroom at the back of the
jet. At first, none of us respond. Then, strangely, Elliot says he wouldn’t
mind a nap. What is he doing? Anything seems possible, including that he
just wants a nap.
Sheryl calls Sadie over. They whisper for a bit, then Sadie comes back
