to me and confides that Sheryl finds Elliot “creepy,” before tidying up her
stuff, closing her computer, and going back to the bedroom with Sheryl.
She’s calling Elliot creepy while asking her subordinates to go to bed
with her?
While we work, extraordinary scenes are unfolding at Donald Trump’s
inauguration in Washington, DC. Hundreds of thousands of women in the
streets protesting there, with many more in hundreds of cities around the
country, the largest single-day demonstration in US history. And it all
started with a Facebook post.

When Sheryl emerges from the bedroom hours later, I’m excited to fill
her in on the largest women’s protest in our lifetimes. She’s fresh off a
Davos panel about women’s leadership where Elliot called her the
“unofficial self-appointed world dean of women.”
Sheryl picks over some fresh cut fruit that’s been arranged for her, still
in her pajamas, which are silky and perfectly tailored. I breathlessly start to
tell her about the history she missed while she slept. She looks bored
immediately. I press on about the Women’s March, how people are
marching everywhere, tiny towns, red states and blue, and not just in
America. She cuts me off, changing the subject to her weekend plans,
meeting up with friends, the possibility of going dancing sometime in the
future, redecorating her ski house, something about her apartment in Los
Angeles, and some story about her boyfriend Bobby and how he’s trying to
buy a private jet or staff for a private jet or something. She seemingly could
not care less.
Sadie passes champagne and cake around this private jet. One of
Sheryl’s three assistants arranged this to toast a “successful Davos.” Sadie
used to work at the Lean In organization, and I try to enlist her help in
getting Sheryl to show some interest in the Women’s March.
Sadie starts in with, “Don’t you think it’s amazing?” when Sheryl shuts
her down. She’s not even a little bit curious.
“You’re gonna come dancing with us, aren’t you, Sadie?”
Sadie gives me a look that tells me to drop it. There’s silence while
Sheryl sips her champagne and picks at the cake.
“What was she wearing?” Sheryl asks. I’m so relieved that she’s
engaging that I don’t totally understand the question. I start to tell her about
the pink hats that are showing up in marches all around the world. Sadie’s
making eyes at me to stop.
“No, no, not that,” she scolds. “What did Melania wear?”
Here she is on her private jet, champagne in her hand, her back to a big-
screen TV showing thousands of women with signs and banners. It takes all
my self-control not to exclaim, “Let them eat cake!”
“I don’t know,” I answer. It had not occurred to me to look at what
Melania Trump was wearing.

“Sadie, will you find out?” she says.
I retreat to the back of the jet and stay silent for the rest of the flight
home.

39
Facebook Feminist Fight Club
It turns out I’m not the only one who noticed Sheryl’s silence on the
Women’s March. Far from it. Nearly two hundred female employees who
work under Sheryl have recently created a secret Facebook group, the
Feminist Fight Club (FFC).
The existence of the FFC is a relief. I’m not alone. Unhappy workplaces
are conspiracies of silence. But once you get outside the sycophantic
leadership bubble, this place is roiling with discontent. The ethos of
Facebook, like America, is one of rugged individualism right down to the
product, which personalizes, atomizes, and weaponizes despite being based
on community and networks. Similarly, Lean In is premised on personal
responsibility in the face of structural issues. But the FFC is different. And
how stupid of me to think I was alone in this. I’m working with incredibly
smart people who are facing the same systemic issues I am. Of course, there
is some form of group or collective. In this one, you can watch its members
try to reconcile the Facebook they hoped for and the Facebook they
experience.
The FFC manages to make enough noise on women’s issues that
management is forced to respond, and naturally they do this in the most
Facebook way possible. They announce #ally bot, a “bot that promotes ally
behaviors within the company by letting you thank your colleagues for
being allies.” A top aide for the chief technology officer explains that the
bot is for men to use when they see other men supporting women. “If I’m in
a meeting and I see another dude be an ally I could say ‘hey that was great

keep that up.’” The bot “gives the recipient a shiny new Ally badge on their
internal Facebook profile” once their name has been added with the hashtag
#ally in the #ally bot.
The bot keeps score and is linked to the performance review system—
meaning men will be receiving a highly visible input to the system that will
affect pay, promotions, and stock options and can be easily gamed by any
men who decide to hand each other #ally hashtags. When the FFC figures
this out—how it’s intended to incentivize and reward men and not women
—the comments pick up a tone of incredulity and despair. One woman
posts, “Doesn’t it seem like this is an undue amount of credit for men who
are hitting the bare minimum of decency?”
“You don’t get a cookie for not being a scumbag,” another FFC member
writes.
“Where’s my ‘I got sexually harassed at work’ badge?” someone else
posts.
Thanks to the FFC, women are starting to talk more openly about the
harassment at Facebook. When I take a business trip to one of our overseas
offices, one of my coworkers pulls me aside as soon as I arrive. We’d
worked together for years and I’d noticed her cheerful personality change
when she was moved under a new boss, a balding pale man around the
same age as Joel. She closes the door and issues a quick warning about him,
her face reddening as she says, “Don’t be alone with him. Stick to the open-
plan office and don’t let him talk to you about sex stuff.” Later, the same
man begins an affair with a young coworker who wanted to join the team he
was leading. She subsequently left the company. He’s still there.
I know that an open office or even being thousands of miles apart won’t
spare anyone from having your boss “talk to you about sex stuff,” and
because of the FFC we know that this is happening office to office and in
between. I heard about incidents from Korea to India to Australia to
California and beyond. The worst of which involved hospitals and police
reports, coupled with prepared statements that “Facebook takes these issues
