seriously.” The bulk of the rest protected by a silence. A silence born of the

knowledge of what happens to those women who speak up beyond these
urgent whispered warnings. It doesn’t help them advance, let’s just say.
That’s why these whispered warnings have developed. The belief that the
people who do this will be protected is part of what enables powerful
people to go on abusing that power. There’s a growing realization among
the FFC that we’re going to be saved not by the captains of Facebook but
by the crew. If we’re going to be saved at all, that is.
I decide I have to do something about how Joel is making me feel. I’m
hearing so many stories from other women about complaints they have
made. I am concerned that others may have complained about Joel and that
my silence would also impact them and ensure nothing changes. I can’t do
nothing. I want to be able to do my job without having to google “dirty
sanchez.”
I decide to talk to Elliot. I know HR will just protect Joel. Mark’s out
running for president. And Sheryl, who advocates for women in the
workplace day after day, in bestselling books, TED talks, and panels around
the world? I remember her once writing in a message,
I always believe that when companies and people have to say things
over and over it is because they want them to be true but they are
not. When I was at McKinsey, they always said they were “non-
hierarchical” because they were so hierarchical. Google is “not
political.” One of our favorite candidates who almost joined us was
“highly ethical.”
So that’s obviously complicated.
I tell Elliot about Joel’s behavior, Joel’s scheduling meetings and work for
me during maternity leave, and the systemic problems of sexual harassment
across his department. Elliot seems both unsurprised and unconcerned. He
listens to me, nods along, says next to nothing. When I’m done talking, he
tells me he’s sure all of this is solvable and will work itself out. And the
meeting’s over. He couldn’t make it clearer that he doesn’t want any part of
this. I rise and walk to the door. Elliot starts typing on his laptop.

“And if it doesn’t work itself out?” I ask.
Elliot looks up from his laptop and stares me straight in the eyes. “Well,
that would be a shame, but I’d be happy to write you a reference.”
It lands like a physical blow.
Weeks pass, and I worry Elliot’s going to fire me at any moment. Then I
spot another way I can take action. Separate from all this, Facebook’s
lawyers are looking into some things Facebook’s doing in the Philippines
after I raised concerns about whether the company violated the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act. During that investigation, I realize there’s an
opportunity to put some things on the record, with company lawyers. Just in
case I am fired.
I tell them about Joel’s behavior and the fact that he made me work
during maternity leave. I tell them I’ve informed Elliot.
Within days, one of Joel’s team invites me out for a drink. This person
is often Joel’s mouthpiece so the invitation scares me, but I decide to say
yes, understanding that a message is going to be delivered to me one way or
another. We meet at a bar not far from where I live. It doesn’t take long to
get to the point.
“How’s the investigation going?” they ask casually.
Since the investigation is supposed to be strictly confidential, I play
dumb, hoping my poker face comes through for me.
Undeterred, they say, “Joel is loyal to his people. He looks after them.
He’s a marine. He values loyalty.”
The message seems to be: Joel won’t fire me if I keep my mouth shut.
Days later, the person running the investigation asks me what I want
them to do about Joel. Do I want the investigator to look into the issues
related to Joel that I put on record? I’m surprised at the question, because I
naively assume that if Facebook’s lawyers are aware of his behavior, they’d
have some sort of protocol that would tell them whether they have to
investigate. They wouldn’t be asking me.
Before responding to the investigator, I go back to Elliot. I ask him
directly: If I shut down this investigation right now, then Joel’s creepy

behavior will stop? He nods yes.
I go back to the investigator and tell him that Joel sent a message about
the investigation and the importance of “loyalty” and “looking after people
who are loyal,” and for that reason, if it’s up to me, I do not wish to trigger
an investigation.
It feels like retaliation from Joel begins almost immediately. He informs
me that he’s halving my job. I can choose between running Asia or Latin
America, but no longer both. There’s no explanation given, other than that
he has made a decision, although it is obvious to me.
Of the two options, there’s no question which one has more
responsibility, growth, and importance for the business. It’s Asia. But Joel
insists that if I pick Asia, I have to run China as part of the job. He knows
how strongly I oppose Facebook’s China policy and that I don’t want
anything to do with it.
I can’t bring myself to work on China. I shock Joel and Elliot by
choosing to run Latin America and Canada. It’s less responsibility and
importance.
This surprises them. They really had expected me to take on China.
They want to force me to submit. They counter that they’ll only give me the
smaller job if I lead the search to find someone to run Asia. So, for the time
being, I continue to run Asia.
The real kicker, though, is China. Even in this interim period, they insist
that I work on China.

40
Greetings from Beijing
In the past, when I expressed dissent about what Facebook was attempting
in China, I was removed from the China team. Now, in a totalitarian move I
suspect the Chinese leadership would admire, as a result of dissent in other
areas, I am being installed to run it, against my will. A test of loyalty to the
regime.
China has always been first in the “things I don’t want to know” about
Facebook. I’d rather not know the worst about this place I’ve devoted so
many years of my life to. My plan is to hire someone and get out of
Facebook.
It’s January 2017. Only weeks since Mark’s trip to Peru and his decision
to start his US political tour. Joel, Mark, and Vaughan all travel back and
forth between the US and Beijing and have been doing so for years. Joel
would send emails titled “Greetings from Beijing.” I didn’t pay much
