this far.

41
Our Chinese Partner
Aldrin” was the code name given to the project to get into China. They
named it for Buzz Aldrin, the astronaut who landed the first manned
spacecraft on the moon. After the Chinese government decided that
Facebook needed a Chinese partner if it wanted to operate in China, Hony
Capital, a Chinese private equity firm, was brought in and given the code
name “Jupiter.”
Hony would store all Chinese user data in China and Hony would
establish a content moderation team that would be responsible for working
with the Chinese government. That team would censor a blacklist of banned
content and deliver user data that the Chinese government requested. Hony
would monitor all the content in China, with the authority to remove that
content even if it did not originate in China. Facebook would build facial
recognition, photo tagging, and other moderation tools to facilitate Chinese
censorship. The tools would enable Hony and the Chinese government to
review all the public posts and private messages of Chinese users, including
messages they get from users outside China. This seems particularly
outrageous. What followed was years of exchanges and visits between
Facebook and Chinese representatives hashing out the particulars of facial
recognition, photo tagging, and other moderation tools. Briefings from
Facebook’s experts about artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and
augmented reality. Facebook invites Huawei—a company that’s widely
accused of being a tool of Chinese government surveillance—to join
Facebook’s Open Compute Project. Facebook offers to teach China about

internet infrastructure, so Chinese companies can compete better with US
firms like IBM and Cisco (Cisco’s the American company that built China’s
internet firewall).
Under direction from Mark, Facebook assembled a large team,
including some of its most senior and respected engineers, to work up what
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) wanted. They start building new
censorship tools for Hony to use to scour through people’s messages and
posts and converting everything into simplified Chinese.
I find detailed content moderation and censorship tools. There would be
an emergency switch to block any specific region in China (like Xinjiang,
where the Uighurs are) from interacting with Chinese and non-Chinese
users. Also an “Extreme Emergency Content Switch” to remove viral
content originating inside or outside China “during times of potential
unrest, including significant anniversaries” (like the June 4 anniversary of
the Tiananmen Square pro-democracy protests and subsequent repression).
Their censorship tools would automatically examine any content with
more than ten thousand views by Chinese users. Once this “virality
counter” got built, the documents say that Facebook deployed it in Hong
Kong and Taiwan, where it’s been running on every post.
And there’s a draft letter for Mark to send to the head of the Cyberspace
Administration of China (CAC). In it, he’s solicitous:
We have already worked with the San Francisco Chinese Consulate
to take down terrorist sites that are potentially dangerous for China,
and we will be happy to work more closely with all of your
Embassies or consulates around the world to fight against terrorism
around the world.
What horrifies me is that the sorts of things that China considers
terrorist sites are human rights advocates or Uighurs or Falun Gong or
people supporting Tibet. The CCP even purchases Facebook advertisements
to spread propaganda designed to incite doubt about human rights
violations against the Uighurs. Facebook should not be allies in China’s war
against what it considers “terrorism.” I hope this letter was never sent.

At the other end of the scale, I find an email where a team member
admits that a lot of the censorship might be pretty petty:
How much and what types of Chinese user-generated content are we preventing the world
from seeing? Very likely, much of the relevant content not only does not violate our
Community Standards, but is not even illegal in China, just objectionable to the authorities
(e.g., names and commentary casting high party officials and their families in a bad light).
Breaking Facebook’s fundamentals on content is one thing; data is another.
As Vaughan writes to Elliot, “Filtering content is important, but having
server/data in China is even more important so the Chinese government
would be able to control/see it.”
From the start, the Facebook team agrees that Facebook will store
Chinese user data in China under their terms. When other countries have
asked for this—Russia, Indonesia, Brazil—Facebook has refused. I
personally had told presidents and officials at the highest level of
government that we would never do this, reproachfully adding that we only
locate our servers and data centers in countries where we believe the
government would never try to access them or seize them.
When it comes to the Chinese government getting access to all the data
in Facebook’s data warehouse, a report offers drily, “Note that this will
happen.” This is the kind of government access to user information that
we’d aggressively fought against providing to the US government, even
after receiving National Security Letters demanding it in specific cases.
When Edward Snowden revealed that the NSA had hacked into Facebook to
spy on its users in 2013, Mark called President Obama to express his
frustration over government surveillance and “the damage the government
is creating for all of our future.” He and Joel went to the White House to
meet with Obama about it, with Mark saying, “The government kind of
blew it on this. They were just way over the line.” Not long after, he was
offering a much better deal to the Chinese.
The infrastructure that underpins the internet is on such a big scale—
submarine cables, data centers—that it requires significant investment,
planning, and execution. When Facebook started its major projects to get
into China, it also started working with Google and a Chinese firm, Pacific
Light Data Communication, to build an undersea cable that would land in

China to support its Chinese operations. Facebook would be pioneering the
first undersea cable to directly connect China and the US. It was clear there
would be very significant risks that China would intercept this data. And not
just Facebook’s data. The cable was designed to carry a large chunk of all
internet traffic. It’s why no one else had ever connected the two countries in
this way. Facebook knew this and didn’t care. Well, more than that, they
wanted it for Mark’s number one priority: China. They invested serious
money building a data pipeline to China, a project the US government
blocked over concerns about the CCP’s access to data many years later.
One of Facebook’s few supposed red lines is that China will not get any
