access to the data of users who are located outside China. But,
unsurprisingly, the documents tell a different story.
Facebook “will deploy Points of Presence (PoP) servers with the goal of
speeding up the experience for users in China.” Facebook has PoP servers
like this all over the world. Basically, they speed up service by bringing
data closer to users. As I understand it anyone outside of China who’s in
touch with someone in China could have their data stored on a PoP server.
Under Chinese law, the government could access those servers.
That wasn’t the only worry about non-Chinese user data being exposed
to the CCP. Another document, titled “Aldrin Security Risks,” outlines the
risks that the Chinese content moderators could feed data on non-Chinese
users to the government either directly or by sharing their credentials. This,
coupled with espionage reaching further into Facebook’s network, was a
real concern. Facebook’s leadership had been briefed on recent activity
attributed to Chinese espionage, including attempts to compromise the
corporate networks of WhatsApp and other messaging services. And
attempts to compromise Facebook account passwords, penetrate secret
groups, and install malware on mobile devices and desktop computers.
Facebook’s risk assessment experts say all those things are not just possible
but highly likely to happen.
The complicity with the Chinese government is so extensive that the team
concludes it’s highly likely that the US government will see the data

warehouse in China as a target for its own intelligence collection and
compromise it. I’m stunned at this. Facebook is working so closely with
China that now it’ll have its own government breaking into its systems as if
it were a foreign adversary? And that’s just a given of doing business, rather
than a serious red flag that you’re on the wrong path?
As I read through page after page, I see the sort of briefings that would
warm the hearts of every government I work with. We never share this type
of information, and believe me they’ve asked. But here are detailed
explanations of precisely how the technology functions, of algorithms and
photo tagging and facial recognition. All the secrets of the trade that I
thought would never be revealed to anyone outside Facebook. Facebook is
providing engineers to demonstrate, offering ideas on how to adapt the
settings to meet the Chinese government’s needs. It’s white-glove service
for the CCP.
The ugly fact is that these are many of the things Facebook has said are
simply impossible when Congress and its own government have asked—on
content, data sharing, privacy, censorship, and encryption—and yet its
leadership are handing them all to China on a silver platter.
They know none of this looks good. Facebook was so worried about a
leak, they wanted a contact at the CAC for “leak co-ordination.” Because
“if it leaks we won’t be able to keep doing what we’re doing.” One risk
assessment document contemplates how word might get out:
A disgruntled current or former employee leaks additional details
about how we are treating data to highlight differences in what we
say to the public vs what we do.
But what did they mean when they worried about highlighting
differences in what we say to the public versus what we do?

42
Respectfully, Senator
They needed a plan to deal with the problems they’d have if the world
found out about what they were doing in China. The problem was they
knew they couldn’t tell the full truth. And how to solve this conundrum in
difficult situations, like being questioned by Congress? That’s what makes
these documents so intriguing.
They got very close to launch. There’s a detailed rollout plan for
Facebook’s entry into China. It starts with the announcement of a Facebook
Representative Office in China, supported by a Nicholas Kristof column
they hoped to get him to write for the New York Times with a “simple and
modest argument”: internet is not going to change China, exposure to the
rest of the world will, and what we’re doing will contribute to that.
The Facebook team appears to be aware of how bad its plans for China
might look. So much so that when they worked up some hypothetical
headlines for what the news coverage might be, they included these gems:
“Chinese Government uses Facebook to spy on its citizens”
“Facebook hands over data on Chinese citizens to the Chinese
Government”
“Facebook grants backdoor access to Chinese user data”
“China now has access to all Facebook user data”
Worried about damaging Facebook’s brand with users, advertisers, and
lawmakers, they ran focus groups on these headlines and others, with

Facebook users in Atlanta, Phoenix, London, and Berlin. My favorite
finding in all of the consumer research decks was this:
“The idea that Facebook cares about people’s privacy is not
believable anywhere.”
Millions of dollars are siphoned into China launch efforts. There’s
money to give to groups who will be supportive, groups they want to fund
in order to “neutralize” organizations that might criticize Facebook like
Human Rights Watch, Reporters Without Borders, and Freedom House.
When the team asks Mark what he’d consider a successful launch in
China, he’s conservative:
If we look at one of the worst countries we’re performing in
(Russia), even getting 20% of the internet population in China will
equate to more users than Russia.
Congress would want to know what technological advances Facebook is
briefing the CCP on, what technological information has been transferred
since they first started secretly working together in 2014. China is
renowned for its development of homegrown copycat technologies.
Congress needs accurate information to develop regulations and policies on
national security and technology. The stakes are high. And Joel knows this.
That’s why he identified “managing opportunities in China with
consequences for brand, relationships with government and the Internet” as
one of the biggest challenges of his role.
To anticipate the reaction from Washington lawmakers, Joel’s team
work up a United States Impact Analysis. It warns that “it’s good politics
for members of Congress to be tough on China and to look like they’re
protecting ‘the more than 50% of each Member’s constituents who use
Facebook.’”
We should expect intense criticism on Capitol Hill and hearings in at
least the Foreign Affairs, Judiciary, Commerce, and Intelligence and

Homeland Security Committees, in both the House and the Senate,
