as well as letters from multiple Members.
The team points out that “members of the intelligence community who
opposed us on surveillance reform will attack us for hypocrisy,” perhaps
remembering Mark’s outraged call to President Obama after the Snowden
leaks and his other protests about US government surveillance.
They’ll claim we rolled back US intelligence actions that were
privacy protected, and didn’t result in human rights abuses, but now
we are willing to hand data to the Chinese government if we can
profit off it.
With these criticisms and others in mind, Mark’s talking points were
prepared. He would argue, basically, “that our service in China operates
under the same constraints as other Chinese social media platforms.” The
Chinese users would know better than to post anything dangerous on
Facebook or anything they didn’t want the government to see.
Which may be true for some Chinese users. But who knows? It’s not
like Mark or Joel or Vaughan has spent enough time in China to know how
well people will censor themselves in their social media posts and private
messages to each other. And it misses a bigger problem. Totalitarian
regimes move the line on what’s admissible. Something that seems safe to
post on Facebook today—support for some idea or leader or book or
musician or movie—could change tomorrow or in a year and users would
pay the very steep price. Whatever we and they believe today may not be
the case tomorrow. There is no security for anyone to rely on in a regime
like this.
The goal for companies is, as I understand it, to answer the questions
Congress has without committing perjury. Mark prepares for the mock
congressional hearings, or “Murder Board sessions,” with questions he’s
likely to face. The questions are tough, and the team coaches him to
sidestep nearly every one. Even with this evasive approach, Vaughan is not
satisfied and instructs the team, “On balance, I think we should be less
emphatic about how clear our disclosures will be.”

The team’s advice is that Mark should not directly admit that Facebook
wrote the censorship software in collaboration with the Chinese Communist
Party.
Is it true that you’re writing, controlling, and applying the
censorship software?
i) No, that is not entirely accurate. Our partner, Jupiter, will
make decisions on content restrictions in accordance with Chinese
laws and obligations. [Jupiter is the code name for Hony Capital,
Facebook’s joint venture partner.]
ii) For the security of our users around the world and the
integrity of our service, Facebook will own the technology that
Jupiter will use to manage content review in China. This is the same
kind of technology we use to enforce our community standards
around the world.
It’s not the same kind of technology Facebook uses around the world.
The whole answer definitely feels like stretching the truth, given that
Community Standards around the world do not require a “Chief Editor” and
a staff of hundreds of people to enforce government censorship and protect
the families of leadership on software created by Facebook.
On this next question, Mark is to say that it’s not what he would prefer
but Facebook’s mission comes first.
Why are you willing to give the Chinese de facto bulk data access to
China user data, but you fight U.S. requests aggressively even where
the data might be needed to protect U.S. national security?
Facebook opposes bulk data access by any government.…
Although the law on this issue in China—as well as other countries
—is not what we would prefer, we believe in our mission of
building bridges and connecting people globally. To do that, we
offer our service in countries whose policies we sometimes find
objectionable.…

There are a number of questions gamed out about what Facebook will
do if China takes certain actions. For example, what if it demands code or
encryption keys? One question reads, “Do you have any ‘red lines’ you
won’t cross?” To all these questions, Mark is coached to say, basically,
Facebook will evaluate those things if and when they happen.
In response to the very pointed question, “How is this not providing a
gateway into your network and making your non-China user data more
vulnerable to hacking?” they suggest Mark stonewall. He’s to tell them that
the only data that’ll be stored in Chinese data warehouses will be that of
Chinese users, and that the Chinese won’t have access to the rest of
Facebook’s data. Which obviously ignores the whole issue of the access to
US and other citizens’ data on PoP servers. But if Congress says the specific
magic words and he’s asked directly, “Will any non-China user data be in
China?” he will concede and acknowledge the existence of the PoP servers:
Like most companies who operate a large global network
serving millions around the world, we use a variety of systems to
make our service faster, and some of these will be deployed in
China. As a result, there may be instances where some pieces of
content from non-China users are located on these systems for short
periods of time.
Or will he say this? Joel tags these bullet points in a comment, saying
first, “Not sure we need to say this yet”—meaning, maybe don’t admit this.
Then he leaves a comment, “For further discussion.” No one suggests
telling the truth, that his own security and legal experts have said that China
will have access to the PoP servers and there’s nothing Facebook will do to
protect US and other citizens from that.
There seems to be no compunction about misleading Congress.
Presumably because the team assumes they’ll never be caught out. Senators
will need to ask exceptionally specific questions to get close to any truth.
At one point, the team genuinely considers the possibility that the US
Congress will compare Facebook’s entry into China to being complicit with
the Nazis. If Mark is asked if he’s abetting crimes against humanity, he’s
basically supposed to say, “That hurts my feelings.”

How is this different from being complicit with the Nazis?
Respectfully, Senator, that is an unfair comparison and I resent
the implication that doing business in China is akin to abetting
crimes against humanity. China is one of the United States’ largest
trading partners and has lifted millions of its people out of poverty
and grown its economy quickly.
Mark is eventually asked about China in a Senate hearing in April 2018.
Senator Catherine Cortez Masto, a Democrat from Nevada, asks,
The Chinese government is unwilling to allow a social media
