platform—foreign or domestic—to operate in China unless it agrees
to abide by Chinese law. First, a social media platform must agree to
censor content and conversations in line with directives from
China’s information authorities. And second, businesses that collect
data from Chinese individuals can only store that data in China
where, presumably, it would be easier for the Chinese government
to access, via legal means or otherwise. You’ve made no secret of
your desire to see Facebook available once again in China. Could
you please reveal to the Committee whether you are willing to agree
to either of these requirements?
Mark’s answer is mostly a lot of blahblahblah about how, because
Facebook is blocked in China, “we are not in a position to know exactly
how the government would seek to apply its laws and regulations” to the
platform. This is not true. The Chinese Communist Party has told them
exactly how it would apply its laws and regulations. And Facebook has
developed technology and tools to meet their requirements and tested them
together with the CCP. Then he says,
No decisions have been made around the conditions under which
any possible future service might be offered in China.
He lies.
After the congressional hearing Facebook’s stock price rises.


43
Move Fast and Break the Law
When Mark is asked by the China team how long Aldrin will be a priority
for Facebook, he says, “The longer we don’t get in, the more important it
becomes as a priority for the company as we knock out other hi-pri issues.”
I need to hire someone as fast as possible and then get out.
But who do you hire for this role? I struggle with this. Whoever steps
into this job will be the person working most closely with the Chinese
government contacts for anything related to Facebook. They’ll live in
China. Ideally, they’ll be a Chinese national.
One of the documents I found said that a risk with this project is that the
“Chinese government arrests a Facebook employee who has access to the
blacklist and is accused of sharing the list under the State Secrets Law.
Facebook employee spends the rest of their life in prison or worse.”
The person I’m supposed to hire is definitely at risk. Should I ask them
if they’re prepared for that? They’re leverage. And by now, I’ve seen
enough to know how little Mark weighs the interests of Facebook’s
incarcerated employees.
And I think even Vaughan gets where I’m at. I’m not even told when
Vaughan’s team does their regular meetings with the CAC to discuss
Facebook’s China entry, but I find the notes from these meetings later. The
official they’d been meeting with before everything blew up in 2015 is
gone. That man—Lu Wei—was the head of the CAC. Mark referred to him
as “our guy” and thought he’d be the one to get Facebook into China.
Vaughan told everyone Lu Wei had staked his career on the Facebook deal

and the Asia team said, “Minister Lu Wei is hanging his hat on this
endeavor just like Mark is and  … this decision will shape his career for
better or worse.” But Lu Wei abruptly stepped down in 2016. And was
imprisoned shortly after on corruption charges. The photo of Lu Wei
visiting Facebook’s headquarters and viewing President Xi’s book on
Mark’s desk was included in a lot of the state media coverage of his
downfall. This is the same book, The Governance of China, that Mark gave
to a number of his top lieutenants.
Apparently, Facebook wasted no time in resuming negotiations with the
new director of the CAC, Zhao Zeliang. As Sheryl framed it, the focus of
Facebook’s work at this time was strengthening “our government relations”
with the Chinese Communist Party. Detailed briefings with CCP officials on
the new tools it’s building for the Chinese Communist Party. Zhao wants to
know how Facebook will cooperate with the Chinese government to “arrest
bad people if Facebook can’t identify whether a person is good or bad.” In
this scenario, Facebook needs to “cooperate with the CAC to block content
from (not yet legally bad person) from showing up in the feed.” The team
sets to work on this, knowing that this content is probably just protecting
CCP officials and their families. Before long they are fulfilling Zhao’s
request to show that the censorship tool can do keyword and entity
blocking, part of the extensive testing the CCP is setting Facebook.
Zhao appears to be less of a fan of Facebook than Lu Wei, lecturing the
Facebook team that “since US election last year [2016], many say [the]
social networks especially Facebook influence [the] outcome with fake
news.” He tells the team that China is different from the United States and it
does not want unverified information sources to affect its political
processes.
Something he does want is: Guo Wengui. Guo is an exiled Chinese
billionaire businessman who became a political activist and frequently
criticizes the Chinese government. Zhao asks whether the content on Guo’s
Facebook page counts as fake news. If so, and if a complaint is made, will
measures be taken? He tells the China team there are people who don’t
want Facebook in China:

So we need to take measures and do more in such situations to
demonstrate we can address mutual interests.
He explains that Facebook needs to tell them what it can do about Guo,
and there are three possible responses:
1. There is nothing we can do
2. There is something we can do
3. We can do even more than expected
In case that is not clear enough, he states explicitly that if there’s
nothing Facebook can do about Guo’s page, it’ll “impact on our
cooperation,” but “if handled well, this can be a force to help our
cooperation.” Zhao explains that there are people who ask him why he is
pushing this deal with Facebook if Facebook can’t do anything about Guo.
The meeting notes then list three possible options:
1. Shut down the account
2. Block his content from Chinese users
3. For specific articles or video posts, if a Chinese organization
reports, can we remove or do anything?
Zhao tells the team about GitHub, a site with very active discussion
boards, owned by Microsoft. He tells them that he knows GitHub’s
leadership and when someone “started slandering” President Xi, the CAC
filed a report with the GitHub CEO, the content was removed, and GitHub
let them know it was because of their relationship with the Chinese
government.
