I wondered why Zhao is even bothering to meet with Facebook. But in
this particular meeting, he says the quiet part out loud. Guo is not in their
control, and he is “just one example.” He explains,
Last year a BBC article said the most influential organization today
is not a newspaper or tv. Facebook is not just a technology platform.
The content on Facebook guides public discourse.

Later he elaborates,
Facebook is the most influential platform (or let’s say media) in the
world so China should have access.
For China, that’s the upside of continuing to actively negotiate with
Facebook for access to China. They get a lever they can pull on the “most
influential media in the world” to shut down the things they don’t like—
including the free speech of activists living abroad—and Facebook will do
its bidding. And with Guo, they are using the leverage they have created,
linking it directly to Facebook’s ability to enter China.
Facebook blocks Guo’s page in April 2017. I don’t hear about it till I
read it in the New York Times. Facebook doesn’t tell the Times about the
pressure—or the quid pro quo—from the head of the CAC. They explain
the shutdown of Guo’s account as an accidental act of God. Their story is
that it’s a random bug in the software that coincidentally struck exactly the
person China said would need to be suspended to help it’s “co-operation
with Facebook.” That is until the Times started asking questions:
A Facebook spokeswoman said that the company’s automated
systems had erroneously suspended Mr. Guo’s account and that once
the company was able to investigate the error, it had restored the
profile. The precise reason for the suspension would be difficult to
determine, the spokeswoman said, adding that publicizing the
reasons could allow others to manipulate the system.
Perhaps they were aiming for irony on the question of being public
about manipulation of the system.
The Times also notes, “Some Chinese activists have complained about
accounts being sporadically suspended on Facebook and other sites without
explanation.” Hmm.
On this occasion Guo’s account is restored within days.

Five months pass, and then Guo’s thrown off Facebook permanently in
September 2017. This happens around a week after China blocks WhatsApp
—one of Facebook’s most important bets for growth internationally. I know
the fundamental challenge that an important country blocking Facebook
presents to Mark. A member of the China team tells me the removal of Guo
from Facebook was Mark’s decision. He’d initially wanted a middle
ground, a temporary suspension, but given China’s demands and the stakes,
he ultimately decided to do the full suspension.
Weeks later, Facebook’s general counsel is asked under oath about
Facebook’s treatment of Guo’s account by the Senate Intelligence
Committee.
Senator Rubio: My question—so what I want to be clear is, was
there any pressure from the Chinese government to block his
account?
Colin Stretch: No, Senator. We reviewed a report on that account
and analyzed it through regular channels using our regular
procedures. The blocking was not of the account in its entirety, but I
believe was of specific posts that violated our policy.
Rubio tries again:
Senator Rubio: But you can testify today that you did not come
under pressure from the Chinese government or any of its
representatives, or people working for them, to block his account or
to block whatever it is you blocked?
Colin Stretch: I want to make sure I’m being precise and clear. We
did receive a report from representatives of the Chinese government
about the account. We analyzed that report as we would any other
and took action solely based on our policies.
This is not precise or clear. Facebook was under direct pressure from the
Chinese government. Told explicitly there would be a quid pro quo, that the
way they handled Guo would affect whether Facebook would be allowed
into China. The reports were not analyzed “as we would any other.” Actions

were not taken solely based on Facebook’s policies. China demanded
action. Raised Facebook’s China project. And Mark blinked. And blocked.
In May 2017, I’m told that Facebook has launched two apps in China. This
is surprising news because Facebook and its apps have not been licensed or
authorized to operate in China in any way, despite every effort from Mark
and the team. What’s more surprising is that the only reason I’m told about
this is that a New York Times reporter has somehow learned about these
apps and is preparing a story. I’m supposed to help the comms team figure
out what to say to him. When Vaughan lays out some facts in an email to us,
one of my favorite comms people writes just to me,
“Oh Jesus. I just read it. WTF am I supposed to do with THAT?”
For years, Facebook had tried and failed to get a Wholly Foreign-
Owned Entity (WFOE) license or a representative office that would allow
Facebook to operate in the country. Apparently, this is no deterrent to the
team. They created a shell company incorporated in Delaware named
Leaplock. Leaplock creates a subsidiary in China. They call it IvyCo after
Ivy Zhang, Facebook’s head of business development in China—who’s a
Chinese citizen and has only been working for the company a few months.
They obscure Ivy’s employment arrangement by taking her off of
Facebook’s payroll and making her an employee of a Chinese human
resources company. Neither Leaplock nor IvyCo has a WFOE or a
representative office. Officially, Ivy is the owner of IvyCo, and the only
employee of IvyCo.
Facebook takes two apps it has deployed around the world—Moments
and Flash—and makes minor adjustments to remove Facebook’s name from
everywhere in the apps and Terms of Service. Then it launches them in
China.
Moments is a photo-sharing program that is renamed Colorful Balloons
for China. Flash is Facebook’s Snapchat clone. They modify the logos of
the apps, but not very much despite Vaughan claiming these apps were
“designed for China.”

It’s unclear if they’re storing user data for these apps in China but I
doubt they are. Facebook already has a global infrastructure to serve
Moments and Flash. Moments gathers facial recognition data of all its
users, but there seems to have been no consideration about whether they’d
be turning this data over to the Chinese government if asked, or whether
they would censor content at the request of the Chinese government. If I’m
