right about this, the level of illegality is staggering. It would mean that the
user data is stored on Facebook’s servers outside China, in violation of
Chinese law. And that Facebook has launched apps in China without any
disclosure to investors, employees, the Federal Trade Commission, or even
Congress, all of whom have taken a close interest and asked questions about
what Facebook is up to in China. Facebook keeps saying it is “studying and
learning about China,” not telling the truth that it is operating apps there.
As soon as I learn about all of this, I go straight to Joel, assuming he’s
unaware that this has happened. The series of decisions that led to such a
clownish attempt at subterfuge are incomprehensible to me. And I’m not
alone. I know that one of the senior lawyers at Facebook has flagged
concerns about the launch of apps in China. But Joel’s fine with it.
“Are Mark and Sheryl okay with it?” I ask.
He admits that they weren’t aware of it. I tell Joel that they need to
know. He tells Vaughan to write a memo for Mark and Sheryl. The draft
begins, “Over the past couple months we’ve quietly released Moments and
Flash in China.” Turns out these are not even the first apps we’ve launched
in China. Facebook has also released Boomerang, Layout, Hyperlapse, and
MSQRD. Again, in all cases they have completely hidden this.
I am surprised to read, “We’ve done this with the tacit approval and
encouragement of the CAC.” He also states,
The CAC unofficially and verbally recommended that we not use
the Facebook name, and that the distributor be a Chinese entity for
social apps. The CAC has implied that they want us to succeed—but
they don’t want the apps to attract undue public attention, and could
shut them down if that were the case.

Reading this I wonder if it’s true that the Chinese know about the apps;
it’s entirely possible they knew and are in cahoots with this subterfuge. But
it’s also completely plausible that the “tacit approval” from the CAC is the
barest possibly-lost-in-translation head nod from a random official. I like
Vaughan, but he can be a cowboy sometimes.
The memo to Mark and Sheryl gets delivered. In my regular weekly
meeting with Joel, I ask, “Has Vaughan been fired yet?” He tells me Mark
and Sheryl are fine with what Vaughan’s doing.
Of course they are.
The secret launch of Flash then becomes, in Vaughan’s words, “a
priority for Mark.” The way Mark sees it, “the biggest risk is that Facebook
gets stuck with a small business in China and all the costs outside China,”
so he’s aggressively pushing every lever to get in, no matter how dodgy.
The way Vaughan’s memo frames things, the big issue with these apps
isn’t the Chinese government but “critical media attention from the Western
press.” To be ready for this, the comms team puts together a plan.
This reactive comms plan is here in prep for the worst case scenario
when and if we have investigative journalists sniff out all the
information on the points below.
The plan starts with some possible headlines we might be facing when
the news breaks:
“Facebook sets up sketchy shell companies in an effort to get inside
China”
“Zuckerberg will stop at nothing to get into China. Inside the story
of the web of deceit that Facebook has spun to get a piece of the
world’s most lucrative market.”
“Facebook will do anything to get into China, except use the name
Facebook”
This is bad. It gets worse. As the New York Times reporter is about to
publish his story I learn two things: someone at Facebook is leaking to the

New York Times, and something is very wrong with the documentation used
to register the company that is launching the apps in China. I go straight to
Facebook’s lawyers. I explain that the New York Times has discovered that
the address used in the registration documents for this Moments/Colorful
Balloons app is fake. There’s no office there. And there’s a bigger issue
with the registration documents. IvyCo’s subsidiary Youge Internet
Technology, which is officially launching this Facebook product, also has
Ivy’s husband as a registered director. Unbelievably, it appears they have
registered this shell company as a couple. I have no idea who her husband
is, but he is definitely not employed by Facebook and no one at Facebook
appeared to anticipate his involvement at all. There’s some suggestion that
he’s trying to get business with Facebook, and I guess registering yourself
as a director of a product being illegally launched would give you some
leverage in those endeavors.
In the hours leading up to publication of the New York Times story,
everyone involved in the China project is in full-blown panic. Debbie
messages me, “OMG this china thing is a shit show.”
“Yes—how can I help?” I respond.
“One: Represent me when I kill Vaughan. Two: Bring rosé to my
house.”
One of those instructions is easier to follow than the other. The story
publishes. But it doesn’t have some of the key details and is not as bad as
Facebook feared.
I’m told that Chinese officials are upset about the leak to the New York
Times and that “Facebook has to get its house in order.” The apps are shut
down. But months later Ivy’s name is added to more Facebook applications
with the Chinese government: applications for an Oculus license in China
and a start-up incubator Facebook sets up in 2018 to give out $30 million to
small businesses in China. After all, it’s worked for them so far. This is after
Facebook had simply launched Oculus and its apps in 2014 with the
strategy of not seeking a license and “playing dumb.” China eventually
grants a license for Oculus years later when Ivy applies and approves
registration for the Facebook subsidiary designed to give out tens of
millions to China’s small businesses, although the subsidiary’s registration

disappears from the public record under mysterious circumstances. I don’t
know what happened to that $30 million.
Beyond all this, Facebook’s chief financial officer has flagged serious
concerns from the tax team around public statements the company’s making
about Facebook’s China advertising revenue, its second-largest market after
the United States. Which Vaughan is forced to concede “is challenging”
because “what we do in accounting will impact the important tax
negotiation we hope to have shortly.” The CFO’s also concerned about all
the hiring Facebook is doing in China.
This leads me to discover yet another issue, this one with our employees
in Beijing. Facebook’s chief representative in China—who used to report to
Joel and now reports to me—is working there illegally. They don’t have the
correct work permit and—beyond that—Facebook is required to have a
