local subsidiary if it wants to employ anyone in China, which it does not. I
ask one of our lawyers to look into this, and she writes explaining that if
Facebook’s chief representative in China decides to point out the ways
Facebook is breaking the law to Chinese authorities, they could cause
“significant harm” to Facebook.
As I see it, they have the ability to “bring the house of cards down”
by simply raising a grievance—any grievance—in relation to their
employment in China, e.g. failure of FB to pay appropriate social
security contributions, incorrect tax reporting, absence of company
regulations, claim for additional bonus, etc.
What’s strange is that no one seems to have considered how hiring
Facebook’s chief representative in China this way might “bring the house of
cards down.”
I guess no one’s considered it because Facebook’s chief representative
in China is not the only one; other parts of Facebook are staffing up teams
in China. Facebook has had office space for employees in China for years
now. In response to concerns from Facebook’s CFO, Vaughan claims this
has all been “blessed” by legal, but this is quickly shot down by one of
Facebook’s most senior lawyers with a “clarification” that it was “*not*
blessed.”

Facebook is operating illegally in China. One of America’s biggest
publicly listed companies is completely indifferent to the rules.

44
Emotional Targeting
By now, it feels like the day-to-day at Facebook is lurching from one
dismaying shit show to the next. Mark and Sheryl seem completely
removed. Focused on presidential runs or promoting new books or
commencement speeches or whatever.
In April 2017, a confidential document is leaked that reveals Facebook
is offering advertisers the opportunity to target thirteen-to-seventeen-year-
olds across its platforms, including Instagram, during moments of
psychological vulnerability when they feel “worthless,” “insecure,”
“stressed,” “defeated,” “anxious,” “stupid,” “useless,” and “like a failure.”
Or to target them when they’re worried about their bodies and thinking of
losing weight. Basically, when a teen is in a fragile emotional state.
Facebook’s advertising team had made this presentation for an
Australian client that explains that Instagram and Facebook monitor
teenagers’ posts, photos, interactions, conversations with friends, visual
communications, and internet activity on and off Facebook’s platforms and
use this data to target young people when they’re vulnerable. In addition to
the moments of vulnerability listed, Facebook finds moments when
teenagers are concerned with “body confidence” and “working out & losing
weight.”
At first blush it sounds pretty gross, sifting through teens’ private
information to identify times when they might be feeling worthless and
vulnerable to an advertiser flogging flat-tummy tea or whatever other
rubbish.

But apparently Facebook’s proud of it. They’ve placed a story in
Australia explaining how the company uses targeting based on emotions:
“How Brands Can Tap into Aussie and Kiwis [sic] Emotions: Facebook
Research,” which touts how Facebook and Instagram use the “emotional
drivers of behavior” to allow advertisers to “form a connection.” The
advertising industry understands that we buy more stuff when we are
insecure, and it’s seen as an asset that Facebook knows when that is and can
target ads when we’re in this state.
It’s a reporter for an Australian newspaper who’s gotten his hands on
one of the internal documents about how Facebook actually does this, and
he reaches out for a comment from Facebook before publishing. That’s
when I hear about it. I didn’t know anything about this and neither did the
policy team in Australia. It’s an advertising thing. I’m put on a response
team of communications specialists, members from the privacy team and
measurement team, and safety policy specialists that’s supposed to figure
out what to say publicly.
No one in that group, other than me and my Australian team, seems
surprised that Facebook made an advertising deck like this. One person
messages the group, “I have a very strong feeling that she [the Australian
staffer who prepared the deck] is not the only researcher doing this work.
So do we want to open a giant can of worms or not?” And they’re right. At
first, we think the leaked document is one Facebook made to pitch a gum
manufacturer to target teenagers during vulnerable emotional states. Then
eventually the team realize, no, the one that got leaked was for a bank.
There are obviously many decks like this.
The privacy staffer explains that teams do this type of customized work
targeting insecurities for other advertisers, and there are presentations for
other clients specifically targeting teens. We discuss the possibility that this
news might lead to investigations by state attorneys general or the Federal
Trade Commission, because it might become public that Facebook
commercializes and exploits Facebook’s youngest users.
To me, this type of surveillance and monetization of young teens’ sense
of worthlessness feels like a concrete step toward the dystopian future
Facebook’s critics had long warned of.

A statement is quickly drafted and the response team debates whether
Facebook can include the line, “We take this very seriously and are taking
every effort to remedy the situation,” since in fact this is apparently just
normal business practice. A comms staffer points out what should be
obvious: that “we can’t say we’re taking efforts to remedy it if we’re not.”
This prompts other team members to confirm his take, revealing other
examples they know of. Facebook targets young mothers, based on their
emotional states, and targets racial and ethnic groups—for example,
“Hispanic and African American Feeling Fantastic Over-index.” Facebook
does work for a beauty product company tracking when thirteen-to-
seventeen-year-old girls delete selfies, so it can serve a beauty ad to them at
that moment.
We don’t know what happens to young teen girls when they’re targeted
with beauty advertisements after deleting a selfie. Nothing good. There’s a
reason why you erase something from existence. Why a teen girl feels that
it can’t be shared. And surely Facebook shouldn’t then be using that
moment to bombard them with extreme weight loss ads or beauty industry
ads or whatever else they push on teens feeling vulnerable. The weird thing
is that the rest of our Facebook coworkers seem unbothered about this.
My team and I are horrified; one of them messages me, “Also
wondering about asking my apparently morally bankrupt colleagues if they
