But the leadership at Facebook doesn’t seem to get it. Sheryl despairs
after meeting with the new crop of interns that they’re focusing on the
wrong questions, with their insistence on asking about morality and culture.
She is seemingly unaware of the generational shift as Generation Z enters
the workforce. “Why aren’t they asking about the business?” she fumes.
“Not a single question on that.”
Management meetings now regularly include discussions of how to
manage mental health and morale issues. Elliot holds a “fireside chat” (sans
fireside) to boost morale on his team—which is now hundreds of people.
During this pep talk, a few weeks after Davos, he declares that the elites at
Davos are out of touch but Mark and Sheryl are different from other
business leaders because of their “moral authority.” He’s grasped that the
issue of moral authority is being discussed by the people who work at

Facebook; what he’s missed is that the employees are wondering where it
is. That’s how clueless he seems to be about how we’re feeling. “A fish rots
from the head,” whispers a friend after she catches me rolling my eyes.
After Trump begins his term, Joel and Elliot set up “diversity brown bag
sessions” to address the growing discontent over race and gender bias.
When Joel attends these sessions, he’s visibly uncomfortable. Usually he
takes up space, his body languid and voice commanding, but here he’s
angular and awkward, his voice deferential, back to Bush’s “angular dude.”
Mostly these meetings are pretty bland. Issues are raised in the most
noncombative language possible, when they’re raised at all. It’s a room full
of very political people who are not fools. This is less a forum to boldly
hash out the diversity issues facing the department and more of a
pantomime pretending to do that.
So it’s quite surprising in the middle of one of these brown bags when
an FFC member speaks up. “What responsibility does Facebook have when
one of its employees has sexually harassed another?”
It’s as if a current of electricity goes through the room. Joel looks
stricken. FFC members catch each other’s eyes, like, okay, now it’s on.
Before Joel can answer, one of the other senior men in the room jumps
in. “When will women focus on work and stop talking about diversity
already?”
That shuts it down. The room seems to deflate. One of the HR staff
launches into some boring process response about who to report sexual
harassment to and how seriously Facebook takes it and we move on.
Nothing is going to change.
I think many of the employees are fine with that. Most of the company
is made up of white and Asian men who don’t seem to have a problem with
how things have been going. The entitlement in the Facebook offices flows
as freely as the prosecco from the Prosecco Tap that’s installed in one of the
Facebook office kitchens. When there are complaints of gentrification
around Facebook’s Menlo Park campus, driving up rents and forcing
longtime residents out, they post things that could have been lifted from the
pages of Atlas Shrugged, like, “I take exception to think that I am part of

the problem, I won’t be villainized for my own successes in life.” And,
“These people just want our gobs of money.”
At Facebook, the veil of civility is very thin.
When Charlottesville happens—with neo-Nazis marching and a woman
killed—a few people propose questions about it for Mark’s weekly Q&A
session. Mark answers the questions that get the most votes, and a question
on the overcrowding of the Facebook campus gym gets far more than
Charlottesville, the rise of the alt-right, and the new challenges those pose
for Facebook. A year earlier, the Southern Poverty Law Center had provided
Facebook with a list of two hundred hate groups with Facebook pages, most
of them in violation of Facebook’s Terms of Service, which prohibit hate
speech. But Facebook had done next to nothing. The Unite the Right
Facebook page promoting the Charlottesville rally was up for a month
before Facebook removed it, the day before the event. The FFC wants to
hear Mark address all this, but we don’t have the votes to make that happen.
Most of the company would rather talk about the gym.
Mark and Sheryl, meanwhile, respond to the public outcry against
Facebook—the deluge of headlines that say we’re making the world worse
—by calling it a “witch hunt” or “scapegoating.” People who criticize
Facebook employees “just didn’t understand.” They act like we’re the
victims.
It reminds me of the way a nationalist movement responds to criticism.
Nationalism always begins with the claim that you’re on the principled,
moral, righteous side of things. That’s always just a given at Facebook.
You’re an insider. Even now, there’s a lot of self-congratulatory talk about
how we’re connecting the world and not everyone understands our mission.
And Mark often uses the weekly company Q&A, which some wanted to
rename “Question Mark,” to mythologize the past. He tells stories about
how people thought he was crazy not to sell Facebook when Yahoo offered
him a billion dollars, or how the company introduced the newsfeed and
everyone was so upset but ultimately people learned to love it. How he was
so clever to buy WhatsApp (he doesn’t mention the spyware Onavo that
showed him which apps to buy by giving him confidential usage data,
making acquisitions like shooting fish in a barrel). It’s us against the

outsiders and haters, whether that’s the media, academics, or other
companies. It’s us versus them. And as with nationalism, there’s something
cleansing in this narrative pushed from the top, something comforting about
being in the right, an organized innocence.
So the schism widens between employees who feel that Facebook is
wronged by its critics and those who feel that Facebook needs to right its
wrongs in the world.
Despite its public statement to the contrary, Facebook was long aware that
its research, models, and programs sought to optimize user engagement at
all costs. Facebook employed a series of “addictive by design” features
specifically targeted and tailored to exploiting the vulnerabilities of young
users, while hiding the risky and harmful nature of such features. Forcing
every lever to drive engagement and drive that addiction.
There is one hope. The powerful algorithms that are contributing to
atomized societies could be weakened because they have the potential to
cause so much harm that they hurt the bottom line. In an internal memo
titled “Mapping a Vector Space in Motion,” Facebook’s chief technology
officer, Andrew Bosworth, urges senior management to change Facebook’s
focus on engagement at all costs, pointing out that it is irresponsibly
influencing behaviors, including negative behaviors. Acknowledging
Facebook’s centrality in all of it.
We [Facebook] make the weather.…
Lately, however, we have been thinking more deeply about how
