
Following a presentation from a famous Silicon Valley venture capitalist
who tells us it’s great that governments around the world are starting to
regulate technology because that will entrench Facebook’s advantage, the
offsite culminates with a blowout dinner and karaoke session at the Hiller
Aviation Museum. I deliberately arrive late, wanting to limit my in-person
exposure to Joel to the bare necessities. We’re almost finished with the team
photos when I feel Joel staring at me. I’m standing with some of the women
in our team. Joel calls out, “Sarah Wynn-Williams is looking sultry
tonight.”
I freeze. I’m not. In fact, it’s hard for me to think of a time in my life
when I’ve looked less sultry. I’m vampirish from sleep deprivation. Up at
all hours doing calls with Asia, plus a one- and three-year-old at home who
don’t like sleeping. Work life and home life are punishing. I haven’t lost the
weight from the second pregnancy. I’m dressed like a nun and devoid of
makeup to avoid any unwanted attention from my boss. But I guess that’s
not the point. This is as much about power as anything else. In fact, Sheryl
later posts,
The 1992 presidential race was once summed up in a pointed
phrase: “It’s the economy, stupid.” Today, as headlines are
dominated by stories about sexual harassment and sexual assault at
work, a similar phrase comes to mind: “It’s the power, stupid.”
And in this situation, I have none.
I try to get as far from him as I can, and head to the middle of the dance
floor. The white, libertarian Ayn Rand fanboys and Republican politics guys
from the policy team are taking turns onstage with embarrassing stilted
karaoke renditions of the raps from Hamilton.
One of the senior women in our team comes over.
“Did you hear Joel call you sultry?” she says, looking concerned.
“Yeah, I’m trying to just ignore it,” I tell her, but it’s a relief to know
that others can see what’s blatantly obvious, right in front of them.
She says something sympathetic, which I can barely hear over the rap
battles, about not being sure if she likes drunk Joel and places a hand on my

shoulder. I feel grateful. Then she drifts away to another part of the dance
floor.
Then Joel comes over, beer in hand, doing some pretty embarrassing
dad dancing. It doesn’t take very long before he’s behind me, grinding into
me.
I feel like an abject object. I momentarily disassociate and in my mind
I’m transported to crowded subway cars in New York on hot sticky days
where bodies are crammed together and it takes moments for your head to
isolate the different body parts pressed against you. Moments more for the
alarm to register.
I flee as fast as I can to the safest place I can think of, which is right
next to Stacey, the HR person, who’s standing by the bar, wine in hand. She
confesses that it’s not her first and invites me to continue drinking at her
place after the offsite, then instructs me to look around.
It’s a writhing mass of drunk corporate lobbyists and staffers. Stacey
pulls me in closer.
“You would not believe the things these people tell me,” she confides.
“Just because I know exactly how much every last one of them is paid, they
think they’ve got to tell me everything. Unbelievable things. Like whatever
you think, worse. Things you shouldn’t tell me or shouldn’t tell anyone.”
Maybe she’s had a few wines and is about to spill some amazing gossip.
Or maybe she has sensed what I wanted to tell her. Maybe she saw me and
Joel on the dance floor and is warning me off discussing it, because she
doesn’t want to do what she’d have to, if I told her. Whichever it is, that
moment convinces me not to confide in her now about Joel.
But I can’t let it go. I feel sick. Because I feel it isn’t going to stop.
There’s an inevitability to it now. If Joel behaves like this in front of our
coworkers, calling me sultry, pushing himself up against me basically in
front of everyone we work with, it means more is likely to come. Surely, it
will only get worse. This isn’t the end. Standing there on the edge of the
dance floor, I decide I have to get out immediately. No more
procrastinating.
While I redouble my efforts to find a job elsewhere, in the meantime I
ask Javi if I can move to his department, the growth team. Javi loves the

idea and sets up interviews with his team, who are all supportive and
anxious for me to start as soon as possible. It’s just a few months since
Trump’s election, and I suggest we could focus on fixing Facebook’s
systems for elections—for content moderation, geoblocking, and more—
before elections in Germany, which are fast approaching. People aren’t
focused on the collision of technology and elections yet. Like when I
pitched to Marne, they don’t really see it as a job. But they’re worried
Facebook isn’t complying with German election law. These are problems I
know I can help fix, and I’m able to convince Javi and his team that I would
bring value to their team beyond just Germany.
I know something’s up when things don’t move fast.
At the same time I pitch this transfer, Eric Holder’s report on sexual
harassment at Uber is getting a lot of attention in Silicon Valley. This came
out in the wake of the revelations by a whistleblowing engineer named
Susan Fowler, who wrote a blog post detailing how she’d been treated by
her bosses at Uber, and the failure of Uber’s HR department to help her.
One of Holder’s big recommendations is specifically about allowing people
to transfer away from bosses who they report are harassing them. At Uber,
supervisors were blocking transfers, trapping women with those they were
complaining about. I assumed that with this in the news, and Sheryl
Sandberg still one of our most visible executives, my transfer would go
through.
I was wrong.
Javi and I try everything to make the transfer happen quickly, but
eventually Javi says the only way through is to plead directly with Elliot so
he unblocks it. I don’t know if it’s Joel or Elliot who’s stopping the transfer,
but it never happens.
Elliot and I meet in his office. He admits that he “knows it’s been tough
for me with Joel.” Then he blindsides me by asking whether my new role
with Javi will involve working with the policy team at all, because “that
might be a problem.”
That’s when I understand he’s not going to let me do this.
“I don’t want to put you in a bad position,” I tell him. “I’m trying to do
the best thing by everyone. You know me. I’m just trying to do my job. I’ve

behaved with integrity throughout all this, and I don’t think that can be said
of everyone, and it seems unjust that I should have to leave my job with
