nothing to go to because of Joel’s behavior.”
I mean every word. It doesn’t seem fair that I should have to sell our
house, which we had purchased based on the equity I had been granted but
would not receive if fired; move our children again after moving here at
Mark’s request; go back into the insecurity of renting. Losing the equity is
punishing financially. And it seems unjust that I should have to worry about
health insurance with everything going on with my health, which Elliot is
very aware of. It seems such a steep price to pay for someone else’s
behavior. But I know I am entirely at the mercy of Joel and his bosses.
“You know I’m going to have to let HR know,” Elliot says, meaning, I
assume, he’s going to dismiss me.
I tell him that I thought we had a deal. I’d keep doing my job, I’d shut
up about Joel’s behavior, kill the HR investigation into him, and Elliot
would make the behavior stop. But things have gotten worse.
Elliot doesn’t take the bait. All through this conversation, he’s careful to
say very little.
I tell him it’s not just me. It’s a much broader problem at the company.
“I need to understand what has gone on here,” Elliot responds, which is
surprising because he knows exactly what’s been going on.
Elliot turns his back to dismiss me and the conversation is done.
I leave that meeting and, in an act of extravagance, get an Uber to Sonoma,
where friends have organized a long weekend away with our families. Tom
and the girls are already there.
The driver drops me off and I’ve not quite finished punching in the
security code on the gate when I feel a stabbing pain behind my left knee.
It’s quickly followed by another and another, like a fistful of knives
thrusting in and out of the soft unprotected flesh below one of my best
professional dresses, which I carefully selected for my meeting with Elliot.
It’s soft white; I wanted the visual association of innocence and purity that
white conveys.

Reaching down, I feel firm bodies and crunchy wings and realize that
I’m being attacked by a swarm of wasps that are now zeroing in on the
backs of both my knees. I try to swat them away and get stung on my hand.
Then I attempt to pick them out of my flesh one by one, but they
overwhelm me and I crash down to the ground, writhing in agony. I’d been
brought low by a lot of things, but it’s the wasps that bring me to my knees.
Or rather they’re in my knees and behind my knees and I have no choice
but to drop farther still. I roll in my beautiful white dress on the dusty
country ground, kicking my legs in the air and screaming.
Eventually, I’m relieved to hear movement behind the gate. Tom’s
walking toward me surrounded by children who are screaming and crying.
He gets in our dilapidated car alone and edges carefully out of the main
gate. I think he’s going to open the car door and pull me in and away from
the wasps. The crippling pain in both my knees means that I can’t walk or
even stand. So I drag myself along the ground toward the car, part human,
part wasp swarm.
Just as I reach the car, Tom accelerates, driving off down the narrow
dusty road. The large metallic gates clang shut in automatic efficiency,
leaving the children behind, their screams still in the air.
At this point it is perfectly plausible to me that Tom has simply had
enough of trying to support me through painful situations that are out of his
control and is driving off into the sunset. I almost don’t blame him.
As the wasps continue to attack, the venom from their stings behind my
knees causes my skin to redden, swell, and throb hot with pain. I allow
myself to consider whether this is rock bottom. I stop trying to remove the
wasps or prevent their stings. It doesn’t matter what I do; I’m
outmaneuvered, overpowered, overwhelmed.
Eventually Tom and the car come back into sight. He drives up, leaning
over to open the car door. Apparently, the only way he could open the gate
and keep it open long enough for us to enter was to get the car outside a
certain distance from the gate and push the remote. He helps drag me into
the front seat, wasps and all. I quickly shut the car door, trapping some of
the wasps in the car.

“Sorry, I meant to mention the aggressive wasp nest before you got here
but I’ve been dealing with the children’s wasp stings and a child’s near-
drowning situation.”
I take in the fact that this could have been avoided and turn to him
slowly.
“Would you believe this isn’t even the worst part of my day?” I respond.
As the truth of that statement hits me, a tear escapes. Tom looks at me,
incredulous, and then down at my dirty, swollen, red body, white dress
covered in grime. He takes in what I just said and we both start to laugh.
My tears don’t stop. I’m no longer sure if I’m laughing or crying.
Friends who have fallen for Sheryl’s Lean In schtick earnestly recommend
going to her with my concerns. I get where they’re coming from—this is an
issue she’s chosen to take a high profile on. Around this time she is quoted
in a Bloomberg article recommending a zero tolerance policy to harassment
and saying, “I think it’s great when people lose their jobs when it happens,
because I think that is what will get people to not do it in the future. And I
think it’s a leadership challenge. As a leader of a company, there needs to be
no tolerance for it. People respond to what is tolerated and what is
encouraged.” But having witnessed how she treats her own staff—not to
mention her intimate relationship history with Joel, a relationship where he
often stays at her house when he visits the Valley—and how often her
actions differ from her words, I know that’s not viable.
Heidi Swartz, the company’s chief employment lawyer, tells me that
they’re opening an investigation into my experience with Joel. Elliot then
lets me know he has concerns about my performance. My research has
prepared me for the likelihood that speaking up might lead to this, but the
reality of it still stings.
Oddly, Elliot and Stacey say the main performance issue is that I didn’t
hire people and expand my team fast enough. Over the years I’ve hired
many people and built a large team around the world without incident, but
recently Joel, as the final decision maker, has been actively blocking my
hires. Not just the human rights job in Myanmar but a half dozen others.

I put together a deck documenting all the hires Joel has blocked and
pass it on to Elliot and Stacey. When I meet with them, Elliot admits he
hasn’t looked at it, or any of the regular recruiting updates I’ve sent him,
and I realize what a farce this is. The fix is in.
The investigation rolls out as badly as you could imagine. Very quickly
it seems to switch from an investigation of Joel, or the facts, to an
investigation of me. For example, the “sultry” comment. People who were
there confirm he said it. But then the investigator tells me in an accusatory
