way that Joel was looking at a photo of me when he said it. As if that would
make the comment okay rather than weirder, and I was somehow at fault for
not knowing or disclosing this fact.
I start to provide the investigators with documents and names of
witnesses they can talk to. So I’m genuinely shocked when the investigator
emails her findings, letting me know that the investigation has cleared Joel.
Their position is that the review he gave me was not actually a review, but
that he was sharing feedback for the period before I went on maternity leave
(even though nearly all of what was discussed occurred during maternity
leave, and even though Joel acknowledged the timing was “not ideal”).
Because I had asked to “stay involved” in certain matters at the start of my
maternity leave it was felt okay that I had been asked to work during my
maternity leave (I am fairly sure most employers would have not contacted
me after I had come near to death and been in a coma but who knows!).
Apparently, Joel did not remember asking me about breastfeeding or my
bleeding (hard conversations to forget, you’d have thought) and as there
was no one to evidence these comments—nothing to see here! Oh, and
apparently they had been discussing the separation of APAC and LATAM
for years—the fact that it was only after I complained that this was actioned
felt not worthy of too much investigation. In summary, my “challenges”
with Joel were found to be a result of communication issues and “concerns
around my performance.” I’m stunned.
I tell the investigator how surprised I am that they closed out the
investigation before they’d received or reviewed all the documentation and
information I said I would supply or spoken to the people who would
corroborate that information. I hadn’t even handed over the dirty Sanchez

email yet. The speed with which they closed out the investigation and the
way they glossed over my complaints about behaviors certainly suggested
that anything I did now supply would not have made any difference.
Not long after receiving the investigation report, I have my regularly
scheduled six-month performance review. This one’s with Elliot, not Joel
like usual, and then I realize Heidi is joining it. For a minute it doesn’t
compute. Then I realize why the company’s chief employment lawyer is
sitting there for my “performance review.”
It’s less of a savage attack on my career and more of a quick euthanasia.
Elliot and Heidi fire me in a perfunctory manner moments into the meeting.
Elliot doesn’t even look sheepish. My laptop is confiscated. I’m not allowed
back to my desk to retrieve the personal items that had built up over the
years at the company. I ask about a reference. I’m told that’s a question for
my manager. Joel. I ask to say goodbye to my team and beloved assistant
and I’m told no. Instead, I’m walked out of the building by a security guard.
Standing in the driveway in front of the building, waiting for a taxi to take
me home, I have an awkward conversation with the company’s chief
security officer, Alex Stamos, who has no idea why I’m standing there
stunned. He asks me if I’ve figured out a way to stop working on
Facebook’s entry into China. He knows my views on Facebook’s plans
there.
“You could say that, yes,” I tell him.
“Congratulations!” he exclaims, and my taxi pulls up.
I get in and the driver quickly pulls onto the Bayfront Expressway.
Through the rearview mirror I take one long last look at Facebook’s
gargantuan headquarters as we speed past the scrubby marshland
surrounding it and onto Highway 101.
I’m stunned by the firing. I saw the possibility, sure. But it’s all so
abrupt.
Mostly I’m scared about what comes next for me and my family.

48
Just Business
So that’s how it ended for me at Facebook. I faced the behavior so many
women at Facebook and other tech firms have faced. I wasn’t silent enough.
But if they hadn’t thrown me out, I wouldn’t have lasted much longer at the
company anyway. I had told myself I could do more on the inside than the
outside, but realistically, being the grit in the machine wasn’t working.
I think all the time about how the company looked to me before I joined.
All the possibility of it, the promise of connecting everyone in the world.
How I was so sure that Facebook would change the world for the better.
The Facebook I saw then has been corrupted.
In the early days, when I traveled anywhere in the world with Mark, people
would approach us and pour out heartfelt stories of how the platform
changed their lives; how they reconnected with someone who became their
husband or wife; how they made new, life-changing friendships; how it
helped them start their businesses; how they were all alone—immigrants to
a new country like me, gay kids in conservative towns, people with rare
diseases and no one to talk to about their care—and found community on
Facebook. It felt promising and vast, and sometimes actually historic.

Now I’m consumed by the worst of it. The grief and sorrow of it. How
Facebook is helping some of the worst people in the world do terrible
things. How it’s an astonishingly effective machine to turn people against
each other. And monitor people at a scale that was never possible before.
And manipulate them. It’s an incredibly valuable tool for the most
autocratic, oppressive regimes, because it gives them exactly what those
regimes need: direct access into what people are saying from the top to
bottom of society.
It really didn’t have to be this way. I can’t state that strongly enough. If I
had to sum up what seven years of watching the people running this
massive global enterprise taught me, it’s that something else was possible.
They really could have chosen to do it all differently and fix so much of
what’s been destructive about Facebook. At every juncture, there was an
opportunity to make different choices; China, Myanmar, elections, hate
speech, vulnerable teens. They could’ve made it right again. A different
path was possible. And in the long term, it would’ve been in their own self-
interest too. Facebook, the business, the brand, and the company, would be
better off. We all would be better off.
And my bosses seemed deeply and blindly unconcerned about any of
this. In fact, just the opposite. Turn after turn they encouraged it. In China,
they specifically built the software to order. In America, they put staff in
with the Trump campaign to help them stage the war of misinformation,
trolling, and lies that won him the election. And in Myanmar, they enabled
posts that led to horrific sexual violence and genocide. A lethal carelessness.
That’s what this company is, and I was part of it. I failed when I tried to
change it, and I carry that with me.
You’d hope that people who amass the kind of power Facebook has
would learn a sense of responsibility, but they don’t show any sign of
