having done so. In fact I see the opposite. The more they see of the
consequences of their actions, the less of a fuck Mark and Facebook’s
leadership give. Instead of fixing these things, this ongoing suffering they
caused, they seem indifferent. They’re happy to get richer and they just

don’t care. It feels crude to put it that way, but it’s true. They profit from the
callous and odious things they do. Which seems so crazy. They could’ve
tried to fix these things and still been insanely rich and powerful. They were
in the rare situation where the money was there in abundance. They could
have afforded to do the right thing. They could have told the truth. They
could have exercised basic human decency. It was all within their power.
Instead, they focused on commencement speeches, vanity political
campaigns, vacation properties, raising artisanal Wagyu beef from
macadamia-eating cows, whatever their latest plaything was.
And it seemed that none of these choices, these decisions, these moral
compromises, felt particularly momentous to Facebook’s leadership.
They didn’t seem to lose sleep over any of it.
It’s simply what they did day-to-day.
Just business.

Epilogue
The next time I laid eyes on Joel was nearly a year later. Brett Kavanaugh’s
Supreme Court nomination hearing. Where Kavanaugh’s grilled by
Congress over allegations of sexual assault. Christine Blasey Ford’s
testifying when the TV camera pans out. Joel’s two rows behind
Kavanaugh; his wife, Laura, is in the front row. He’s there showing support
for Kavanaugh. On company time, of course. I wasn’t the only person
watching coverage of the hearing who noticed. This provoked something of
an outcry at Facebook among the rank and file. So, Joel apologized and said
he was grateful for the feedback from employees. And then the day after
this apology he and Laura threw a celebratory party for Kavanaugh at their
palatial home. Friends from Facebook got in touch to see how I was feeling.
Facebook’s lawyers got in touch to warn me to be silent. Joel’s still at
Facebook, now Meta. Promoted and even more powerful. Central to core
decisions like what to allow on Facebook in the lead-up to the January 6
riots or how Facebook should engage in the efforts to engineer a ban of
emerging rival TikTok. Running the largest lobbying effort by a public
company in the US. Mark’s chief consigliere in Washington, DC.
Elliot’s gone. He fell on his sword after reports emerged that Facebook had
hired a Republican opposition research firm, Definers, to covertly sway
public opinion against competitors, activists, and policy experts who have
spoken out about Facebook. Part of Facebook’s broader efforts to dig dirt
on people who criticize the company. They attacked George Soros,
smearing him with anti-Semitic conspiracy theories. It later emerged that,

despite denying any knowledge of dirty PR tactics and Elliot taking
responsibility, Sheryl Sandberg had been involved in Facebook’s efforts to
target Soros.
Sheryl’s gone too. For someone who built her profile leaning into her
career, it’s not clear what her next career step is or why she left. There were
reports that in the months before her departure in June 2022, she was facing
“internal scrutiny” for multiple things including her use of corporate
resources for personal projects such as her Lean In foundation and
Facebook employees’ work writing and promoting her book. The Wall
Street Journal characterized it as a “broader review of Ms Sandberg’s
personal use of Facebook’s resources over many years.” The allegations
under investigation also reportedly included Sheryl using Facebook
resources to kill a story about her then boyfriend Activision CEO Bobby
Kotick, which would have surfaced allegations of harassment (which
Kotick had always denied) and a temporary restraining order (lifted shortly
after it was made). Sheryl is now campaigning against the silence around
sexual assault following the October 7, 2023, attacks in Israel.
Mark? He’s done apologizing. Instead he’s wearing shirts with EITHER A
ZUCK OR NOTHING emblazoned across them in Latin, commissioning
sculptures of his wife “in the Roman tradition,” and vowing to fight Elon
Musk in a cage match. Beyond that, Mark’s main preoccupation has been
the metaverse, Facebook’s play in building and colonizing the next digital
frontier, augmented and virtual reality. Mark went all in on the metaverse,
so committed to it he changed the name of the company, spending tens of
billions of dollars on its creation. And now that is his brand. Which is
curious. The metaverse is looking more like Internet.org, or Facebook’s
efforts in hardware—the Facebook phone, the Facebook Portal, Building 8
—or Facebook’s crypto currency. Although building Facebook more than
two decades ago proved he could have the right idea at the right time, these

subsequent efforts (the ones where he builds rather than acquires based on
data from spyware) show he is also capable of the opposite.
No matter—like everyone else, he’s into AI and Facebook’s, now
Meta’s, stock is being carried along in the bubble.
And this matters. But I’ll come back to that.
As for me … Another baby. I know. The medical professionals were aghast.
Telling me “there’s no literature,” which wasn’t actually a sign to write this
book as I initially thought, but a way of letting me know that there is no
medical research on how to approach birth after an amniotic embolism. Or
as one doctor bluntly put it, “Everyone who has what you had is dead, and
if they’re not dead, there’s no way they’re having another baby.” Obviously,
this did not please Tom, who very selfishly was against me dying, as well as
decisions that might increase the likelihood of this, like a high-risk
pregnancy. And, like Zika, it made me feel like I was carrying a grenade
alongside my baby. The baby’s birth is another story. But now this baby is
here. And healthy. And has brought so much joy. Exhausting joy.
What else? After my friend and former Facebook coworker Ifeoma Ozoma
cowrote and cosponsored California’s Silenced No More Act, legislation
that protects employees who speak about harassment and discrimination
even if they’ve signed a nondisclosure agreement, I reached out. We worked
with advocacy organizations Open MIC and Whistle Stop Capital to run
shareholder resolutions on this issue at major tech companies including
Apple, Google, Amazon, Microsoft, and of course Facebook. They seek to
hold companies to account. I also advanced a shareholder resolution on
issues related to Facebook’s engagement with China over the last decade.
But it’s very difficult when the company has this much centralized power.
Mark has unassailable majority control through dual class share structure.
I also submitted an extensive whistleblower complaint to the Securities
and Exchange Commission. I believed that the government needed to know
the truth. That Congress, shareholders, employees, and all of us were lied

