chance of success if they’re male, older, white, and a Harvard graduate.
Facebook’s leaders want someone just like them. The ultimate trump card is
if they’re friends with Joel, Elliot, Marne, Sheryl, or especially Mark. A few
years ago, one of the Republicans in the DC office—an old Capitol Hill
veteran with a dry sense of humor—sat me down to explain.
“Sarah, you know your boss Joel. He’s a Jew who went to Harvard.”
“Yes,” I said uneasily, worried that we’re drifting into some anti-Semitic
conversation I don’t want to be part of.

“And his boss.”
“Elliot.”
“Yes—a Jew who went to Harvard; and his boss … a Jew who went to
Harvard. And her boss…”
“A Jew who dropped out of Harvard?” I venture.
“You’re catching on,” he said. “So you see, one of these things is not
like the other.”
“You mean me?”
“Yeah,” he said. “You’re not like these people. And you’ll never be like
them. And the sooner you grasp this, the better.”
Facebook is an elite product, born in an elite college, fronted by elite
Harvard grads who show up for other elite Harvard grads, who are decision
makers in all sorts of places. A pragmatist accepts that and moves forward.
And so, back in 2016, I decided that until I walked out the door for the last
time, I would try to work the system, because for so long I still believed I
could do more good inside than out, by doing things like hiring good
people. I accepted that I failed to get the changes Myanmar needs, and I’d
probably continue to be ignored, but I started the process to hire a Harvard
man who might be able to fix Facebook’s problems in Myanmar in a way
that I can’t. Someone who could focus exclusively on Myanmar without
responsibility for hundreds of other issues. Someone who’d wake up every
day and devote all their efforts to the problems Facebook is causing in
Myanmar. Someone leadership would listen to. Hiring someone with
responsibility for Myanmar is obviously the right thing to do.
The guy I find is a human rights expert based in Thailand, with a
master’s from Harvard, and—bingo!—a friend of Elliot’s. Years before this,
Elliot had suggested I try to find work for him at Facebook. He’s dated a
member of the policy team and she vouches for him, satisfying the
requirement of casual nepotism that runs through most of the senior team,
and we have an opening in Thailand that I can expand to include Myanmar,
getting around the sad fact that it would be impossible to convince
Facebook’s leadership to hire someone just for Myanmar.

The process of hiring this guy drags on for months. Finally, I’m in my
regular weekly meeting with Joel in February 2017. Everyone else has
signed off on hiring him. I come back to Joel and say it’s time to make this
happen. Things in Myanmar seem darker and more confusing each day.
We’re good to go. The candidate is good to go. Let’s do it.
For the first time since I started this long process of trying to hire
someone for Myanmar in 2015, and with this particular Harvard man since
May 2016, Joel levels with me.
He tells me it’s time to move on and get over it. He concocts a
bureaucratic reason to say no: that it would be wrong to “install my guy” in
this job because I’m only in charge of Asia temporarily. Never mind that I
started this hire long before there was any suggestion I was temporary.
Never mind that we need someone in-country and we’re not going to find a
more qualified candidate. He tells me not to raise the issue again.
Over the next few months, the hate speech and inflammatory posts in
Myanmar only increase. Journalists and activists are being arrested for
things they post on Facebook. Civil society groups raise an alarm about the
rampant misuse of Facebook services in Myanmar, saying things like,
I think it’s critical to recognize that Facebook is being used
deliberately, systematically, and very effectively to target not just
peace and interfaith activists, but also journalists and anyone who
deviates from the dominant [junta] narrative.
Facebook’s security team documents a widespread pattern in which
people’s accounts are being hacked and taken over in Myanmar. They
discover a secret Facebook group with 571 members that seems to be a site
for planning and sharing information for spearfishing attacks on verified
users and pages. This group seems to be doing another thing the civil
society activists warned Facebook about: they’re taking over the verified
accounts of anyone in Myanmar with a large following and pumping out
content, lurid photos, fake news, incendiary memes, and propaganda,
pretending to be them. Spreading rumors to both Muslim and Buddhist
groups that an attack from the other side was imminent. Anything that
would spread hatred and fear, making people vulnerable and wanting the

protection of the military. And of course Facebook would elevate all this
content because it received so much engagement.
So Facebook knows this is happening, but it doesn’t mean it does
anything about it. When my team recommends taking down posts that are
destabilizing or coded hate speech—or posts that might lead to real-world
violence—the content operations team often throws up its hands, saying the
posts don’t violate local laws, so there’s no reason to take them down.
When a fake news story goes viral in June 2017, saying that the
democratically elected president of Myanmar is resigning, my team
recommends as usual that we take it down, worried it’ll further destabilize
the country. And as usual, the content team and legal team leave it up.
Frustrated, the person on my team handling Myanmar responds,
There is a commonly held belief that the military or someone is
trying to undermine democracy in Myanmar. We have identified
hundreds of accounts trying to destabilise things. Security
operations is currently reviewing.… Are we going to let our service
be used to destabilise…?
The answer is apparently yes.
The unthinkable happens. In late August, the military launches a
campaign of atrocities against the Muslim population that the UN later
describes as genocide and crimes against humanity. At least ten thousand
people are murdered. The clinical language of the UN report on this
somehow makes it all seem more horrible. They interviewed over eight
hundred eyewitnesses and victims of the violence.
Children were killed in front of their parents, and young girls were
targeted for sexual violence.… Rape and other forms of sexual
violence were perpetrated on a massive scale.… Sometimes up to 40
women and girls were raped or gang-raped together.… Rapes were
often in public spaces and in front of families and the community,
maximizing humiliation and trauma. Mothers were gang raped in
