to. Another story. But, at the risk of leaving this story incomplete, one I
won’t go into here.
What else? Like the early days of Facebook, I’ve been drawn to AI, which
is wild with geopolitical and policy issues. And will be the next great clash
of technology and governments. Since the end of my time at Facebook, I’ve
thrown myself into working on different aspects of AI policy, but the one
where this clash was most apparent was between China and the United
States.
I began working on something called “the Track II Dialogue on Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in National Security Development and Application of
Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Military Systems.” The jargon disguises
something much more interesting: unofficial negotiations between the US
and China on AI weapons. Trying to answer some of the most fundamental
existential questions: Should a human be involved before nuclear weapons
are triggered? Should lethal or nonlethal AI weapons operate under human
oversight or control? or What rules need to be in place to avoid inadvertent
escalation with the use of AI enabled weapons systems in Warfare? All
questions humans have never had to deal with before.
And this is vital because the rapid rate of development of AI weapons
systems has outpaced any agreement on how they should be used. At the
same time as geopolitical tensions have ratcheted up.
Anyone who has worked closely with technology can tell you how
buggy it can be. How an innocuous snippet of code can break a robust
system. How technology can behave in ways that the humans in charge
could never expect. How technology can create unexpected harms.
That’s one thing when it’s a social media platform that serves over three
billion people. And quite another when it’s second-strike capability in the
South China Sea. That is, the automated ability to launch a devastating
nuclear retaliation after absorbing a disarming first strike.

We live in an era when intelligent weapons can autonomously identify
and kill human targets without human input.
Before this hot war, there is a cold battle over AI already being fought. At
the heart of it is whether closed AI models or the open-source model
pursued by Mark, Meta, and others is the best path for humanity.
There’s no question about what China would prefer; as Facebook’s
China team used to say, “The Chinese love open source.”
Some AI experts in the West see a closed model as critical. They believe
that an open model like Facebook’s will allow China to overtake US
dominance in AI. Sam Altman says, “China will force U.S. companies and
those of other nations to share user data, utilize AI to develop new ways of
spying on their own citizens or create next-generation cyberweapons to use
against other countries.”
Mark disagrees: “Some people argue that we must close our models to
prevent China from gaining access to them, but my view is that this will not
work and will only disadvantage the US and its allies. Our adversaries are
great at espionage, stealing models that fit on a thumb drive is relatively
easy, and ‘most tech companies are far from operating in a way that would
make this more difficult.’”
To work out the safe way forward, we need to understand the
relationship that Facebook actually has with China, its second-largest
source of revenue behind the US. To have an honest and open accounting of
what technology and what data they’ve already shared.
These are still the same careless people. They’ve changed the name of
the company from Facebook to Meta. But leopards don’t change their spots.
The DNA of the company remains the same. And the more power they
grasp, the less responsible they become. I experienced the first tentative
meetings between Mark and world leaders. And witnessed the exploration
and embrace of power that has continued to expand. Now Meta is one of the
world’s most powerful companies. The direction it sets continues. And now
we’re living in the world that has been shaped by these people and their
lethal carelessness.

To say nothing of the future. If we don’t address what has been covered
up, we’ll repeat Facebook’s mistakes.
This time the stakes are too high.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to the people who decided that this mattered to them and did
whatever it took to make it happen.
To Christy Fletcher, who skillfully navigated more than her fair share of
twists and turns, along with her UTA team of Claire Yoo, Melissa
Chinchillo, and Yona Levin. Thank you for your counsel and steadfast
support.
To Cathryn Summerhayes and the brilliant Curtis Brown team of Edina
Imrik, Georgie Mellor, Annabel White, and Katie Harrison.
To Megan Lynch, who had such conviction in this from the first word.
Her grit, ambition, and expertise made the impossible happen. Whatever the
publishing version of statecraft is, Megan and her Flatiron team of Marlena
Bittner, Malati Chavali, Kara McAndrew, Kate Keating, Morgan Mitchell,
Chris O’Connell, Tim Greco, Jennifer Edwards, John Edwards, Christine
Jaeger, Tom Stouras, Louis Grilli, Jon Yaged, and Deb Futter have perfected
it.
To Mike Harpley and the outstanding Macmillan team of Poppy North,
Kim Nyamhondera, Ríbh Brownlee, Lyndon Branfield, Stuart Dwyer, and
Joanna Prior.
To Professor David Runciman, who always advocated for the book even
when I didn’t. Thank you for the Tocqueville anecdote and your insight.
To my friends from Facebook, thank you for your decency during dark
times and beyond.
To Ifeoma Ozoma, for doing something about it.
To Catherine Nicol, so much of this grew from work stories I both loved
and hated telling you. And that continued throughout this process where

your trusted advice was essential. Thanks for being such a great friend
throughout it all.
To my friends and first readers Tamineh Dhondy, Dr. Katharine Smales,
Jamie Joseph, Rebecca Jenkin, Chloë Østmo, and Ruth Wynn-Williams,
both my life and this book are so much better because of you.
And, of course, to Tom and our three little pistols, thank you for
everything.

About the Author
Sarah Wynn-Williams is a former New Zealand diplomat and international
lawyer. She joined Facebook after pitching a job and ultimately became
director of global public policy. After leaving the company she has
