Abstract thinkers strive for ways of steering it back.
Instead of theoreticians imagining matter waves of the de Broglie-Schrodinger type
oscillating on the atomic level, many now envision strings, filaments, and membranes,
surfaces of energy vibrating at much more minuscule scales.
These strings and membranes are purely geometric structures that,
through their twisting and jiggling, generate the known particle properties.
String theory is a vast subject. Let's take a brief look.
The initial impetus for string theory was an unsuccessful attempt by Japanese physicist
Yoichiro Nombu and others in the late 1960s and early 1970s, before the gluon idea took hold,
to model the strong interaction by connecting particles together via flexible, energetic strands.
Such bosonic strings, as they were called, acted like a dog's leash,
confining a particle to a tiny region, nuclear scale, while offering freedom within those bounds.
In 1971, French physicist Pierre Ramon discovered a way of modeling fermions as strings as well.
He developed a method called supersymmetry, in which bosonic strings could be transformed
into fermionic strings by a kind of rotation through an abstract space.
His breakthrough inspired theoreticians John Schwartz and André Neveu to develop a comprehensive theory
of both building-block fermions and force-wielding bosons, using strings vibrating in different manners.
Such all-purpose strands were dubbed superstrings.
One peculiar aspect of superstring theory is that it is mathematically complete,
lacking terms seen as unphysical, only in a space of ten dimensions or more.
Earlier that year, physicist Claude Lovelace had shown that bosonic strings require twenty-six dimensions.
So needing only ten seemed like an improvement.
By the mid-1970s, physicists were cracking open textbooks and articles
that described the Kaluza-Klein theory in higher dimensions, hoping to learn how to handle them.
A primer Berkman wrote about general relativity in the 1940s, with an introduction by Einstein,
helped reacquaint the theoretical community with methods for dealing with more than four dimensions.
Oscar Klein's old idea of compactification, wrapping up extra dimensions so tightly that they cannot be observed,
underwent a revival.
Theorists found ways of looping the six additional dimensions around tiny, tightly bound spaces,
like minute balls of twine.
Mathematicians Eugenio Kalabi and Shintung Yu would develop a classification scheme for such twisted-up spaces,
called Kalabi-U manifolds.
Excitement built among the physics community in 1975 when Schwartz and French physicist Joël Scherk
proposed a way of explaining gravity using supersymmetry.
They showed how gravitons, the hypothesized bosons conveying gravitational attraction,
would naturally emerge in their theories by applying methods of supersymmetry to other types of particles.
Gravitation, the researchers argued, was thereby the natural consequence of a union between bosons and fermions.
Wed the two types, and gravitons are born.
Some researchers, particularly French theorists Eugène Kramer, Bernard Julia, and Scherk,
working at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris,
Dutch physicist Bernard de Witt, working with German physicist Hermann Nikolai,
Dutch physicist Peter von Neuenhausen's group at Stony Brook,
and others applied supersymmetry to a standard, one not utilizing strings, quantum field theory,
in an approach called supergravity.
Kramer, Julia, and Scherk showed how much a theory could ideally be housed in an eleven-dimensional space-time,
with seven of the dimensions compact.
Despite initial promise, supergravity ran into problems representing certain aspects of the particle world.
Working with British physicist Michael Green, Schwartz continued to explore the properties of superstrings.
In 1984, Green and Schwartz announced that they had developed a ten-dimensional model
that was free of anomalies, mathematical bugs.
Moreover, unlike QED, electroweak theory, and other standard quantum field theories,
superstring field theory produced finite values,
and therefore did not require the canceling of infinite terms through renormalization.
Their results, dubbed the Superstring Revolution, offered much cause for celebration.
Perhaps through superstrings, many physicists thought,
Einstein's quest for unity could finally be fulfilled.
Just as Einstein, Schrodinger, and others had discovered that there were many ways to extend general relativity,
Green, Schwartz, and other researchers, such as brilliant theorist Edward Witten of the Institute for Advanced Study,
who proved key theorems, came to appreciate the many types of superstring theory.
In fact, there was an embarrassment of riches.
Superstring theory soon became a labyrinth with myriad possible roots.
Who would supply the Ariadne's thread leading to a single, comprehensive theory of nature?
At a 1995 conference in California, Witten declared a second superstring revolution,
this time involving supplementing strings with membranes.
He dubbed the new approach M-theory,
enigmatically saying that while the M could signify membrane,
it could also stand for magical or mystery.
M-theory united several different kinds of string theory,
along with supergravity, into a single methodology.
One innovation, explored in the late 1990s by Nima Arkani-Hamed,
Savas Dimopoulos, Gia Dvali, Lisa Randall, Raman Sundrum, and others,
was the idea that one of the extra dimensions could be large,
meaning not microscopic, but inaccessible to all types of fields except gravitons.
That would explain why gravity is much weaker than the other natural forces.
Unlike the standard model and general relativity,
nary a shred of evidence has turned up in support of supersymmetry,
superstring theory, M-theory, or extra dimensions.
Why, then, do these ideas have so much backing among theorists?
Factors such as mathematical beauty, symmetry, and completeness,
strikingly similar to some of Einstein's criteria, all come into play.
Plus, there aren't many other credible alternatives.
Loop quantum gravity, developed by Abhay Ashtakar, Carlo Rovelli, Lee Smolin, and others,
offers perhaps the most widely supported method for quantizing gravity, other than strings.
Like Schrodinger's general unitary theory, it emphasizes the primary role of the affine connection,
which is modified and used as a quantum variable.
Space-time becomes replaced with a kind of geometric foam.
String theorists often point out that loop quantum gravity does not offer a theory of everything,
just a quantized theory of gravity.
Loop quantum gravity supporters argue back that string theory treats gravitation both as a background,
the space-time metric in which fields move,
and as a field, gravitons, rather than as a unified whole.
Their goal is to understand quantum gravity first,
before trying to wed it to other interactions.
Exploring the full implications of string, m-theory, and loop quantum gravity
would require an excursion to the Planck scale,
the minuscule domain in which quantum theory and gravity meet.
Such tremendous energies are well beyond current reach.
Fortunately, high-energy theories often have low-energy implications,
thus the Large Hadron Collider could well detect particle states
that offer a window into physics beyond the standard model.
An example would be supersymmetric companion particles,
mates of fermions with bosonic properties, or vice versa.
The discovery of such would offer powerful evidence for supersymmetry
and possible dark matter candidates.
While none have turned up so far,
many physicists continue to be hopeful that super-partners will emerge in collider data
once enough of it is collected and analyzed.
Faster Than Light
A Cautionary Tale
Researchers, students, funding agencies, science aficionados, writers,
and others interested in what lies beyond the standard model
are waiting eagerly for the tiniest hint of new, unexplained phenomena.
With so much time and money invested in the Large Hadron Collider
and other big science experiments,
no wonder there is much anticipation of groundbreaking results.
Physicists need to be careful, though,
not to offer hasty announcements of success,
no matter how tempting.
The teams that identified the Higgs boson
waited patiently for statistics to rule out other possibilities,
even if that process took many months.
They offered a lesson in perseverance.
However, there are sometimes cases of researchers jumping the gun,
making claims before other groups supply critical corroboration.
Although the Einstein-Schrodinger debacle took place in the 1940s,
its lessons ring true today.
Tight funding often requires scientists to justify the importance of their research,
typically through press releases.
A premature announcement of an unverified finding
can leave a lasting impression that taints future research in that area.
Even if that claim is refuted,
the public might long remember it as an actual breakthrough,
rather than as a false report.
Take, for example,
a research group's claim in September 2011
that they had detected faster-than-light particles
at a facility in Gran Sasso, Italy.
While much of the scientific community was dubious,
or at least cautious,
the assertion was widely reported in the international press.
A debate began in the media about whether Einstein's special theory of relativity
needed to be modified.
Reports wondered if the results would open the door to new physics
beyond the standard model.
Overlooking decades of experiments confirming special relativity
and its light-speed limit,
the claim was presented as a litmus test for relativity
and the sanctity of the law that every effect must be preceded by its cause.
For example, a piece in the British newspaper,
The Guardian, reported,
Scientists at the Gran Sasso facility
will unveil evidence that raises the troubling possibility
of a way to send information back in time,
blurring the line between past and present
and wreaking havoc with the fundamental principle of cause and effect.
The alleged evidence for faster-than-light travel
was put forth by a group called OPERA,
Oscillation Project with a motion-tracking apparatus
that tracked streams of neutrinos
emanating from the CERN Accelerator Laboratory
near Geneva, Switzerland, about 450 miles away.
After a three-year run,
the team measured the neutrinos' times of arrival
to be approximately 60 billionths of a second earlier
than they would have been at light speed.
Assuming that their experimental apparatus was accurate.
This result comes as a complete surprise,
announced OPERA spokesperson Antonio Ereditato
in a press release.
After many months of studies and cross-checks,
we have not found any instrumental effect
that could explain the result of the measurement.
The press release and news reports
emphasized that the findings required independent verification
and should not be taken at face value.
However, the monumental implications of such a discovery
soon had the Internet, including the Twitter social network,
abuzz with speculations and corny jokes.
As the Los Angeles Times headlined just days after the announcement,
neutrino jokes hit Twittersphere faster than the speed of light.
The accompanying article included examples such as,
we don't allow faster-than-light neutrinos in here, said the bartender.
A neutrino walks into a bar.
Songwriters soon joined in on the craze,
including an Irish band, Corrigan Brothers and Pete Creighton,
with their neutrino song.
Was old Albert wrong?
Asked one of the verses.
That fabulous theory of relativity is being debunked.
If Einstein's theory had been shattered,
theoretical physics would have faced an unexpected challenge.
Perhaps it would have taken a new Einstein to pick up the pieces
and assemble a more durable theory.
But as has often been the case,
reports of the demise of relativity were greatly exaggerated.
In June 2012, CERN issued an Emily Littella-esque
never-mind with a press release stating that
the original OPERA measurement can be attributed to a faulty element
of the experiment's fiber-optic timing system.
Neutrino velocities, as confirmed by OPERA and three other experiments,
do not exceed the speed of light.
That is what we all expected deep down,
stated CERN Research Director Sergio Bertolucci.
By the time of the curtain call for the OPERA episode,
the faster-than-light neutrino meme had long faded
from the Twittersphere and other media.
Yet without a doubt,
the original announcement had generated
unnecessary public confusion about science.
On the Google search engine, for example,
queries about neutrinos have continued to suggest
faster-than-light as a common related expression.
Who knows how many students doing research for essays
have encountered some of the early reports
in their search results
and mentioned faster-than-light particles
as a distinct possibility.
As a result of the incident,
Adeditato and OPERA physics coordinator
Dario Utiero decided to step down
after a majority of the team
voted against them in a no-confidence ballot.
The vote and their subsequent resignations
reflected a feeling that the leaders' announcements
had been far too premature.
The Road Ahead
Patience is not a hallmark of the press,
especially in the Internet age of rapid-fire news reports.
The media hungrily gobble content
as long as they can make the case
that it is new and interesting to the public.
Unpublished reports, speculations,
preliminary results, and other findings
not yet verified through the scientific review process
sometimes become as newsworthy
as meticulously verified conclusions.
Patience is also not an attribute
politicians are often known to have,
particularly during election years.
We see how de Valera's political fortune
depended to some extent
on whether the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies
and his other pet projects
turned out to be smashing successes
or money-draining boondoggles.
That knowledge drove Schrödinger
and de Valera's mouthpiece,
the Irish press,
to trumpet his preliminary calculations
as if they were the sacred tablets
handed down from Mount Sinai.
Schrödinger leapt to announcements
only weeks after he completed
his mathematical manipulations
and well before any review process
checked them over.
In modern times,
science budgets have become easy targets,
placing added pressure on researchers
to proclaim their achievements.
Yet patience is precisely the quality needed
during what looks like a long slog ahead
for fundamental physics
to reach its next milestones.
Who knows when the first evidence
will be found of phenomena
transcending the standard model?
What will be the cost of success?
How many years of data collection
and statistical analysis
will be necessary
before proof positive of new physics
will be established?
We've seen the hazards
of hasty reporting
that downplays the time-tested process
of verification.
It confuses the public
and ultimately doesn't help scientists.
While both Einstein and Schrödinger
fell victim at times
to a mixture of wishful thinking
and unwarranted publicity
for their highly speculative
unification hypotheses,
in their quieter moments,
they emphasized the need
for a deep, reflective,
sober-minded reading of science.
We would do well
to read their writings,
as well as those of the scientists
and philosophers who inspired them,
to contemplate the current state of physics
and where to go from here.
This concludes the reading of
Einstein's Dice
and Schrödinger's Cat
How Two Great Minds Battled Quantum Randomness
to Create a Unified Theory of Physics
by Paul Halpern, Ph.D.
Copyright 2015 by Paul Halpern
This book was read by Sean Rennett.
This unabridged recording
was published by Arrangement with Basic Books,
a member of the Perseus Books Group,
and was produced in 2015
by Blackstone Audio, Inc.,
which holds the copyright.
Neither this recording
nor any portion of it
may be reproduced or used
for any purpose
without prior written authorization
from Blackstone Audio, Inc.
If you would like to obtain
a monthly update
telling you about our new releases,
call 1-800-SAY-BOOK.
That's 1-800-729-2665.
For a complete listing of our titles,
visit our website at www.downpour.com.
Thank you.
Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.
