bell money would at least give her a chance for basic comforts.
After his divorce was final, Albert married Elsa on June 2nd.
Months later, following Eddington's eclipse announcement,
she realized that she had exchanged vows with the most famous scientist in the world.
Elsa relished standing by her husband's side as he traveled around the world,
met with celebrities, and received honor after honor.
Mileva's savvy request would pay off handsomely.
Einstein would receive the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics, accepting the award the following year.
With her ex-husband evermore in the limelight, she and their two sons retreated from the public eye
and lived off the prize money. Secure in his academic position, awash with fame,
and ceding all domestic concerns to Elsa, Einstein was as free as an eagle
to soar toward the lofty peaks of unification.
Chapter 3 Matter Waves and Quantum Jumps
If you have to have these damn quantum jumps, then I wish I'd never started working on atomic theory.
Erwin Schrödinger, reported by Werner Heisenberg
Please do not misunderstand me. I am a scientist, not a teacher of morals.
Erwin Schrödinger, Mind and Matter
If lacking free will is like being in prison, general relativity is the ultimate jailer.
By fusing time with space, it melds the past, present, and future together into a solid block.
Time's landscape is as frozen as a Siberian gulag.
All of history is forever locked in place. We just haven't yet served our time.
Extending general relativity to include other forces would cement our fate even further.
A unified theory that explained electricity along with gravity
could, in principle, map out the neural connections of everyone who has lived or ever will live.
We'd be condemned to think thoughts and take actions that have forever been ordained.
Once the equations of eternity were set, our destinies would be sealed.
As famously versed in the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam,
The moving finger writes, and having writ, moves on.
Nor all thy piety nor wit shall lure it back to cancel half a line,
Nor all thy tears wash out a word of it.
Fate can be cruel.
After the First World War ended, many of the returning soldiers needed to heal their souls.
While Schrödinger was fortunate enough to have made it home safely,
his beloved professor, Fritz Hasenero, had been blown up by a grenade.
Schrödinger and the Viennese academic community were stunned.
In late 1919, Schrödinger's father died.
Soon thereafter, the Austrian economy was decimated by stark inflation
that wiped out many families' savings, including theirs.
Times could not be harder.
Schrödinger turned inward and began to think about his own life's direction.
Schrödinger found much emotional solace in female companionship.
He kept a diary of the women with whom he'd had relationships.
In that logbook, he recorded meeting Anna-Marie Ani Bartel,
a jovial, unpretentious woman from Salzburg, sometime in 1919.
Although she was not an intellectual, she respected his bookish interests.
Unlike couples that fit together like a hand in a glove,
Ervin and Ani were in some ways a mismatch.
For example, they feuded about music.
She loved playing piano, but he wouldn't tolerate it.
While ultimately neither would see their relationship as exclusive,
they always enjoyed each other's companionship.
Thus, it was a relationship based on familiarity and comfort.
They soon became engaged and planned two weddings,
one Catholic and the other Protestant,
to respect the different faiths in their families.
Both ceremonies took place in the spring of 1920.
During his post-war malaise, Schrödinger plunged into philosophy
and became obsessed with the writings of Schopenhauer.
In detailed notebooks, Schrödinger offered his comments and impressions
of everything he read, describing Schopenhauer as the greatest savant of the West.
Stimulated by Schopenhauer's many references to Eastern philosophy,
Schrödinger also delved into the Vedic writings of Hinduism,
referring to them using the Sanskrit term Vedanta
and other classics of Eastern thought.
He briefly thought about switching his career to philosophy,
but decided to remain in physics and pursue the subject as a sideline.
Over the years, he wrote several books expressing his own philosophical views,
including My View of the World,
based in part on a treatise he completed in 1925 called
Quest for the Path.
Schrödinger was particularly intrigued by Schopenhauer's explanation
of passion and desire in the face of a mechanistic universe.
Looking around him in the aftermath of the Great War,
Schrödinger could see nothing but contrasts.
While science and technology had leapt to unprecedented heights,
culture, as he saw it, had sunk into Dante-esque depths,
what he called a decay of the arts.
Our condition, Schrödinger noted,
bears a frightening resemblance to the final stage of the ancient world.
Of course, given that he and Ani would maintain an open relationship
throughout their married life,
Schrödinger was hardly a Puritan.
But when he looked in the mirror,
he saw the modern-day equivalent of Plato or Aristotle,
a polymath and Renaissance man
who happened to be trapped in a prurient age of decadence and violence.
In The World as Will and Representation and other works,
Schopenhauer offered an explanation for the driving force of emotions
that can lead to calamity.
Drawing from the Hindu notion of karma and the Buddhist concept of suffering,
he described how will is a universal force
that compels people to carry out tasks.
It is the desire that generates the action
that brings about the inevitable.
Just like other natural forces,
it leads to predictable outcomes.
However, the agents experiencing such compulsion
fully believe it is their own volition producing the results.
Neurotically, they can become immersed in their own longings,
constantly feeling unfilled,
because whenever a goal is reached,
a new desire bubbles up.
Therefore, as Buddha noted,
desire is suffering.
One antidote is to eschew all goals and emotions
and live an ascetic existence,
something like a monk.
Another possibility is to subsume your desire
into aesthetic pursuits such as art or music.
Instead of fruitless longing,
write a stirring composition.
But if you give in to desire,
you should not be either condemned or praised,
because you are just responding to a universal force.
Thus, if you fall in love with someone,
it is not that you chose that person.
Rather, it is that your love is the agent
carrying out the procedure
of bringing you and the other person together
according to your mutual destinies.
From that vantage point,
saying that Ervin and Ani chose each other
has as much meaning as saying that
Earth decided to pull the moon around it last month
because of their fervent attraction to each other.
He thereby saw no moral reason
to abide by the traditional rules of marriage
or to justify his impulsive decisions in general.
From that point on,
Schrödinger wove philosophical motifs
into his conceptual discussions of physics.
The sense of wholeness that he gleaned
from Schopenhauer's writings
and the Vedic philosophy underlying those works
would lead him to discount jumpy,
incomplete descriptions of nature
in favor of those with continuity
and fuzziness in favor of certainty.
Ultimately, Schrödinger believed
everything in nature must be connected,
flowing from one moment to the next
in a continuous stream.
Note that he did explore the possibility
of a-causality in some of his writings,
but the main thrust of his work
favored causal connections.
Such considerations would end up
playing a major role
in his attitude toward the ambiguities
of quantum mechanics.
The Heretic's Bible
There was considerable overlap,
albeit with different emphasis,
between Schrödinger's philosophical interests
and Einstein's.
Although Einstein, too, read Schopenhauer,
he was much more strongly influenced
by an earlier philosopher,
Baruch Spinoza.
Spinoza would be his guide
to looking for a seamless, unified explanation
of the universe,
one in which chance played no fundamental role.
Because Spinoza was one of Schopenhauer's
key influences,
Schrödinger had read a great deal
of Spinoza as well.
Spinoza was born in 1632
to a Sephardic Jewish family in Amsterdam.
After an Orthodox childhood
in which he studied the Scriptures,
he developed a radical reinterpretation
of God's role in the universe.
The Sephardic community
deemed his notion of the deity
so heretical
that it decided to excommunicate him,
an exceedingly rare event in Judaism.
In traditional monotheistic religions,
God plays an active role
throughout history,
starting with creating the world
and bringing about life.
As Creator,
God is separate from the world,
but he may choose to intervene
whenever he wants.
Not every decision is made by him, however.
He endowed humans with free will
so that they can make their own choices.
There are, of course,
many theological differences
regarding how often God intervenes
and what the nature of human free will is.
In faiths espousing predestination,
humans' fates are sealed
and their choices are preordained.
Therefore,
an evil person is doomed
to make bad decisions,
rendering free choice
and exercise in showing
why that individual
is truly unworthy.
In such a view,
God's judgments and interventions
have long been set in stone,
perhaps forever,
so that anything that happens
was fated to occur.
In other faiths,
choices are completely free,
but a poor choice
may lead to a punishing afterlife
or, perhaps,
bad luck later on in life.
A good choice
may make one feel closer to God
and would likely be rewarded,
though the manner depends
on the particular faith.
A personal God
gazes down at what people do
and reacts accordingly.
Starting in the 17th century,
a more limited notion
of God's intervention
emerged in Europe,
in which God's role
is restricted
to creating the universe,
fashioning its laws,
and stepping in
only when needed
to make adjustments.
In that way,
God behaves
like a kind of clockmaker
who creates his masterpieces
and tinkers with them
or resets them
only as needed,
the Great Flood
being an example
of a resetting of history.
Newton ascribed
to such a view,
imagining God
fashioning the law of gravity
and other natural principles,
setting the planets in place,
and watching
his beautiful creation
proceed on its own,
but reserving the right
to intervene as needed
to keep it running perfectly.
The modern notion
of a miracle
involves the supposition
that while occurrences
stem from natural principles,
sometimes God
circumvents them
to do good.
Spinoza's take on God
and the universe
was very unusual
for his time.
He rejected the notion
of a personal God
and the idea
that God
could selectively intervene
in human affairs
or in the natural world.
Prayers,
he believed,
were a futile exercise
because no one
is listening.
Rather,
God is the substance
that fills the universe itself,
an infinite entity
that pervades everything.
All people and things
are glimmering facets
of a glorious,
indestructible diamond.
Because,
according to Spinoza,
God is infinite
and perfect,
his nature
is unchangeable.
He has no choice
whatsoever
about how the universe
takes shape
because its properties
simply flow
from his attributes.
All events transpire
from divine laws
designed in the ideal way.
Consequently,
the history of the universe
rolls out like a carpet
that has been loomed
with a timeless pattern.
As Spinoza wrote
in his Ethics,
in nature,
there is nothing contingent,
but all things
are determined
from the necessity
of the divine nature
to exist
and act
in a certain manner.
As Einstein
moved away
from the tangible
and toward the ethereal,
away from theories
based on experimental questions
and toward those
shaped by abstract principles
and aesthetic concerns,
he began to invoke
the name of God
more and more
in his statements
about physics.
This God
wasn't the fatherly figure
of the Bible,
however,
actively involved
in human
and worldly developments.
Rather,
it was Spinoza's deity,
the perfect,
timeless entity
from which the laws
of nature
have sprung.
As Einstein
once responded
to a rabbi's query
as to whether
he believed in God,
I believe
in Spinoza's God
who reveals himself
in the orderly harmony
of what exists,
not in a God
who concerns himself
with fates
and actions
of human beings.
In a much-discussed article
that appeared
in the New York Times magazine
on November 9, 1930,
Einstein would name
Democritus,
St. Francis of Assisi,
and Spinoza
as the three
greatest contributors
in history
to a cosmic,
religious sense,
a feeling of awe
about the workings
of the universe
based on scientific
investigation.
The naming
of Democritus
showed Einstein's belief
in the importance
of atomism.
In the case
of St. Francis,
Einstein identified
with his
humanitarian concerns.
Of the three,
however,
Spinoza was the maverick
and the most
controversial choice.
Einstein's revelation
of his views
would spur much debate
among religious scholars
and clergy
about the validity
of cosmic religion.
Einstein's belief
in Spinoza's concept
of cosmic order,
perhaps along with
his traditional
Newtonian education
in physics,
led him to embrace
strict determinism
in his theories
and reject any
fundamental role
for probability.
After all,
how could the rolling
out of divine perfection
happen in multiple ways?
Every effect
must have a clear cause,
which in turn
stems from an earlier
cause,
and so forth,
a trail of fallen dominoes
ultimately traceable
to a supreme cause.
His rejection
of chance
in quantum physics
and his decades-long
search for a seamless,
unified field theory
would be clear
ramifications
of his zealous
adherence
to Spinoza's ideas.
A critical difference
between the beliefs
of Einstein
and Schrodinger
was the latter's
devotion
to Eastern thought.
None of the figures
Einstein mentioned
in his piece
about religion
were from the
Eastern tradition.
He only briefly
referred to Buddhism.
He had little interest
in any form
of mysticism
or spirituality.
Schrodinger,
on the other hand,
had a deep sense
that people share
a common soul
and that everything
in nature
is really
a single entity.
He distinguished
this Vedantic belief
in a kind
of universal consciousness
from Spinoza's view
that humans
are facets
of the divine.
The difference,
Schrodinger emphasized,
is that each of us
is not a part
but rather
the whole,
not a piece
of an eternal,
infinite being,
an aspect
or modification
of it
as in Spinoza's
pantheism,
for we should have
the same baffling question.
Which part,
which aspect
are you?
What objectively
distinguishes it
from the others?
No,
but inconceivable
as it seems
to an ordinary person,
you and all
other conscious beings
as such
are all in all.
Both Einstein
and Schrodinger
were driven
to a quest
for unity
in science,
but they had
different motivations.
For Einstein,
it was the search
for the divine principles
underlying nature,
that is the simplest,
most elegant
set of equations.
For Schrodinger,
it was looking
for the commonalities
in all things,
a lifeblood
running through
the veins
of everything
in the cosmos.
Because Einstein's
belief was more rigid,
he would never
accept random elements
as fundamental.
Schrodinger
would remain
far more open-minded
about randomness,
seeing luck
and chance
as possible
manifestations
of universal will.
Ironically,
because of
the power of will,
a seemingly
chance event
could lead someone
down a path
he or she
was meant to follow.
Moreover,
as he learned
from his study
of Boltzmann,
the laws of
thermodynamics
derived from
statistical averages
of the sporadic
behavior of
myriad atoms.
Billions of
scattered droplets
can produce
a sea change.
Along with
a striving for unity,
a critical
common element
in Einstein
and Schrodinger's
scientific philosophies
was a belief
in continuity.
Such a conception
was grounded
in the classical
physics they grew up
with,
such as fluid mechanics,
and enhanced
by their shared sense,
common to
Spinoza's philosophy
as well as
Vedic philosophy,
that events
flow like a river
from one moment
to the next.
Something couldn't
simply vanish
and reappear
somewhere else,
or exert an instant
unseen influence
over a distance.
Nature's garment
must be sewn
together by tight
threads,
both in time
and space,
lest it shred
into a pile of
tatters like
a moth-eaten cloak.
Discontinuity
was a hallmark
of Bohr's
planetary atomic
model,
which both Einstein
and Schrodinger
saw as a major
weakness in a theory
that was otherwise
a key step forward.
Why should
electrons
instantly jump
from orbit
to orbit
in an atom
when that
never happens
with planets
in the solar
system?
I can't imagine
that an electron
hops about
like a flea,
Schrodinger was
known to say.
Moreover,
if electrons
leap in atoms,
why do they
behave as a
continuous stream
in free space,
within the empty
interiors of
cathode ray tubes,
for example?
Stimulated by
the unification
proposals of
Weill,
Kalutza,
and later
Eddington,
by the early
1920s,
Einstein had
started to
contemplate
ways of
explaining
electron
behavior
through an
extension
of general
relativity
that included
electromagnetism
as well as
gravity.
The jumps,
Einstein thought,
must be
mathematical
artifacts of
an otherwise
deterministic
continuous
theory.
Stimulated by
discussions with
Einstein,
Schrodinger would
independently
develop his
own idea of
electron continuity,
eventually resulting
in his
groundbreaking
theory of
wave mechanics.
Not everyone
in the physics
community saw
discontinuity as
a vice,
however.
While the
rudiments of
wave mechanics
were taking
shape, a
pioneering young
physicist from
Munich,
Werner Heisenberg
proposed an
abstract mathematical
theory called
matrix mechanics,
in which instant
jumps from state
to state were
de rigueur.
Where else could
such an abstract
theory be proposed
than in
Göttingen's
rarefied
environment?
Heisenberg was
inspired by a
remarkable set of
talks in that
city by Bohr.
The Pathfinder's
Quest
In June 1922,
Hilbert and
several other
faculty members of
the University of
Göttingen, including
Max Born, a
bright young
physicist, invited
Bohr to deliver a
series of lectures
about atomic
theory.
By enthusiastically
accepting the offer,
Bohr broke an
informal boycott
against German
academic institutions
that had been in
place since the
First World War.
Aside from
Einstein, whose
image was trumpeted
internationally, the
Germans' scientific
reputation had greatly
suffered because of
the conflict.
The ghastly
repercussions of the
German development of
poison gas by
chemist Fritz
Haber, a colleague
of Einstein, and
aerial warfare left
deep psychological
wounds among the
survivors.
Bohr's talks, dubbed
the Bohr Festival
after a recent
Handel Festival, held
in the same city, helped
open the door to
renewed cooperation in
science between Germany
and other European
nations.
It had been almost nine
years since Bohr had
first proposed his
theory.
In the intervening years,
his proposal had been
greatly enhanced by the
contributions of Arnold
Sommerfeld, working in
Munich.
In particular, Sommerfeld
complemented Bohr's
enumeration of energy
levels with two additional
quantum numbers, total
angular momentum and the
component of angular
momentum along one of the
coordinate axes, usually
taken to be the z-axis.
These allowed electrons with
the same energy to orbit in
different shapes and
directions.
The situation in which two
states with different
quantum numbers have the
same energy is called
degeneracy.
Degeneracy is something like
tossing a bunch of
horseshoes at a stake and
having all of them land so
that they are leaning
directly on it, but at
different angles.
Because all of them would
be touching the stake, they'd
be counted as equal, despite
the variation in how each
horseshoe is tilted.
Similarly, electrons in
degenerate states have equal
energies, but different tilts
and shapes to their orbits.
In 1916, Sommerfeld, along with
Dutch chemical physicist Peter
Debye, demonstrated that his
enhanced version of the Bohr
model, known as the Bohr-
Sommerfeld model, could
explain an enigma called the
Zeeman effect.
First observed by Dutch
physicist Peter Zeeman in
1897, the effect involves
placing a gas of identical
atoms in a magnetic field and
observing the spectral lines
produced.
As the magnet is turned on,
some of the spectral lines
split up.
Instead of one line at a
certain frequency, suddenly
there are three, five, or even
more around that frequency.
It is like tuning into a
certain radio station that
dominates its frequency range,
scanning for new stations, and
unexpectedly finding two more
with close, but not exactly the
same, frequencies.
Sommerfeld showed how the
Zeeman effect was the result of
interactions between the applied
magnetic field and the angular
momentum of the electrons orbiting
the atomic nucleus.
These tugs of the magnetic field
make it so that orbits with
different angular momenta,
instead of being degenerate and
having the same energy, instead
have slightly different energies.
Because different energy levels
lead to different frequencies of
the light given off as electrons
hop from state to state, the split
in energies causes the divergence in
spectral lines.
Sommerfeld was fortunate to have two
brilliant physics students, who
would each go on to make a mark in
quantum theory.
One of them was Wolfgang Pauli, the
Viennese godson of Mach.
He was a true wunderkind, impressing
older physicists with his precocious
insights.
At the tender age of twenty, when he had
been a university student for only two
years, Sommerfeld invited Pauli to
contribute a review article about
relativity to an encyclopedia of
mathematical sciences that he
edited.
Pauli complied, writing a masterly
summary of the topic.
Pauli became known not only for his
erudition and quick take on subjects,
but also for his brutal directness.
He felt obliged to tell his colleagues
his honest opinion of them and their
research, even if his comments
sometimes dug in like a knife.
He called, for example, Sommerfeld's
numerical theories about atoms, atom
mysticism.
The other quantum virtuoso trained by
Sommerfeld in the early 1920s was
Heisenberg.
Heisenberg was a strapping young man,
equally at home with pencil and paper
or tramping along rugged mountain
paths.
He came into Sommerfeld's group as a
member of the Pathfinders, in German
Fattfinder, a German equivalent of the
Boy Scouts that had, at the time,
strong nationalist elements.
Heisenberg had a deep respect for
Einstein and was fascinated by
relativity.
He was impressed and delighted whenever
Sommerfeld read one of Einstein's
letters out loud during class.
However, Pauli helped persuade Heisenberg
not to pursue studies in that area.
After finishing his encyclopedia article,
Pauli was convinced that there weren't
many basic problems yet to be solved
in relativity that could be easily
tested by experiment.
Therefore, relativity, as Pauli saw it
at the time, was not ripe for progress.
The real hot area, he advised Heisenberg,
was atomic physics and quantum theory.
In atomic physics we still have a wealth
of uninterpreted experimental results,
Pauli explained to Heisenberg.
Nature's evidence in one place seems to
contradict that in another, and so far
it has not been possible to draw an even
halfway coherent picture of the
relationship involved.
True, Niels Bohr has succeeded in
associating the strange stability of
atoms with Planck's quantum hypothesis,
but I can't for the life of me see how he
could have done so, seeing that he, too,
is unable to get rid of the contradictions
I have mentioned.
In other words, everyone is still groping
around in a thick mist, and it will
probably be a few years before it lifts.
In the summer of 1922, Einstein was
invited to give a talk in Leipzig about
general relativity.
Sommerfeld strongly encouraged Heisenberg to
attend and offered to introduce him to
Einstein.
Heisenberg was thrilled.
However, anti-Semitic threats against
Einstein caused him to cancel and send Max
von Lauer in his place.
Not knowing that Einstein wasn't there,
Heisenberg traveled to Leipzig's assembly
hall anyway.
He was startled to see students of a Nobel
laureate in physics, Philippe Léonard,
standing in front of the hall, handing out
red leaflets, denouncing Einstein and
relativity, claiming it to be Jewish science.
Léonard had started an anti-Semitic campaign
to eliminate any form of science that wasn't
purely German.
Little did Heisenberg know at the time that
Léonard's credo would, in less than a decade
and a half, become national policy under the
Nazi regime.
Another speaker Sommerfeld urged Heisenberg to
see was Bohr.
They decided to go together to Bohr's event.
Attending the Bohr festival was a kind of
homecoming for Sommerfeld, who had received his
doctorate at Göttingen.
By then, Pauli was also at that university,
serving as Bohr's research assistant in a
post-doctoral position.
After a pleasant journey to Göttingen,
Sommerfeld and Heisenberg took seats in the
crowded lecture hall to hear Bohr speak.
It was a glorious season for Göttingen to roll
out its welcome mat for the international
scientific community.
Beautiful, sunny summer weather brought out the
charm of the city, with its medieval buildings,
market stands, and streetcars.
Gorgeous flowers lined the paths leading up to
the auditorium.
Joviality and excitement filled the hall as the
Bohr festival began.
Bohr's lecture style was not for casual ears.
He was very soft-spoken and often used abstruse,
enigmatic language.
However, in some ways, these difficulties added to his
mystique as a kind of high priest of quantum theory.
Just like the Delphic Oracle, who spoke cryptically,
Bohr's inscrutable style of lecturing allowed audience members
to construct their own interpretations.
For example, although Bohr never explicitly explained the
physical principles behind his angular momentum quantization
rule, many physicists assumed that it must have had a logical
origin, and that he had some way of justifying it through
classical mechanics.
Heisenberg, though, wasn't so easily satisfied.
As he listened intently to the lecture, he started to doubt that
Bohr had thought his theory through completely.
When it came time for the question period, he shocked many of
the professors in the audience by confronting Bohr about the
differences between the classical and quantum idea of orbital
frequencies.
In Bohr's model, Heisenberg pointed out, the frequencies of electrons have
nothing to do with their rates of orbit.
Could Bohr justify that?
Also, Heisenberg wondered if Bohr had made any progress studying atoms with
multiple electrons.
Was his theory still only applicable to hydrogen atoms and single electron
ions?
The audience, no doubt, was stunned by Heisenberg's comments.
At that time, it was almost unheard of for a student to raise questions in a
public talk about a professor's theory, let alone challenge the internationally
famous Bohr.
Bohr took the comments in stride and invited Heisenberg to go for a long walk with
him in the nearby hills to discuss the issue.
Bohr confided during the stroll that aspects of his theories were based on
intuitive ideas rather than physical principles.
Heisenberg was gratified that such a noted thinker would reach out to him so
warmly.
It would be the first of countless walks that they would take together to mull over
the philosophy of the quantum.
Reality's Matrix
Heisenberg's interactions with Bohr helped inspire him to develop his own theory of
atomic transitions.
After all, if Bohr didn't have all the answers, the field was ripe for a more
comprehensive vision of the atom.
Working without preconceptions, Heisenberg was unafraid to set aside widely accepted
beliefs, such as the notion that quantum numbers must be whole numbers.
Using spectral data that he had obtained from Sommerfeld, Heisenberg had earlier
constructed a system called the core model that used half-integer as well as integer quantum
numbers.
The half-integers helped explain doublets, spectral lines that appeared in pairs.
Sommerfeld had snappily dismissed Heisenberg's hypothesis, advising him that quantum numbers
one-half, three seconds, and so forth were absolutely impossible.
Bohr had similarly rejected the idea.
However, Heisenberg's ideas would resonate with Bohr, with whom he would have a chance
to collaborate.
As a youthful faculty member of a university known for challenging convention, Bohr was open
to radical suggestions.
He had been tinkering with alternatives to the Bohr-Sommerfeld model himself.
As fate would have it, during the 1922-1923 academic year, Sommerfeld took a leave to travel
to the United States and teach at the University of Wisconsin.
During his absence, he dispatched Heisenberg to Göttingen to work with Bohr.
Completing what had become a quantum triangle of Munich, Göttingen, and Copenhagen,
Pauli shifted north to become Bohr's assistant.
When Heisenberg arrived in October 1922, Bohr advised him to focus on variations of Bohr's theory
based on principles from astronomy and orbital mechanics.
They worked together on trying to match planetary models with the spectral lines of ionized helium,
helium with a single electron, the simplest system beyond hydrogen.
In May 1923, Heisenberg headed back to Munich to complete his doctoral program and his final
oral defense.
Despite Sommerfeld's excellent theoretical contributions, the emphasis there was still
on the practical side of physics.
Unlike Schrodinger, Heisenberg had little experience with, or inclination toward,
experimentation, and ended up doing very poorly in that part of the defense.
His marks for the theoretical and experimental sections averaged to something like a C.
None the less, Sommerfeld still held a Ph.D. party in his honor.
Embarrassed by the mediocre score, Heisenberg left the party early, bolted to the railway station,
and hopped on the midnight train to Göttingen to resume his collaboration with Bohr, this time
as a paid research assistant.
There was much for Heisenberg to do.
New data about spectral lines were pouring in, with curious patterns suggesting increasingly
intricate structures, necessitating more and more changes to existing models.
Heisenberg tried in vain to adapt his core model to the novel data.
By early 1924, Born began to realize that their efforts to apply a planetary analogy to electrons
had failed.
Traditional orbital mechanics, combined with quantized energy and angular momenta, simply couldn't
explain how electrons in ionized helium behaved.
If helium, a relatively simple system, couldn't be modeled, what hope was there for understanding
all the complex atoms that made up the periodic table?
Tossing classical mechanics aside when it came to atoms, Born declared the need for a wholly
novel quantum mechanics.
The key difference was that quantum mechanics would be discrete rather than continuous, operating
on the basis of instantaneous jumps rather than smooth transitions.
Mapping out the behavior of electrons would thereby require treating the atom like a black
box with cloaked inner workings, rather than as a classic physical system.
Born's move was unprecedented in the history of physics.
Since the time of Newton, physicists had treated the laws of motion as sacrosanct.
Einstein's special theory of relativity had modified the definition of momentum and energy,
but not changed the basic premise that these quantities are strictly conserved, by including
relativistic mass as another form of energy, and that nothing simply vanishes somewhere and
reappears elsewhere.
In Newtonian physics, every instant of time must be accounted for.
Hidden moments happen experimentally, but not theoretically.
Born could well have said that we don't understand the mechanism for electron jumps because of
observational limits or the noise created by the interference of complex processes.
Instead, he's surgically excised any causal connections between an electron's situation before and
after a leap.
All that could be known are transition rules.
If classical mechanics was something like a miser who tracks every penny of his savings at every
moment, quantum mechanics presented like a mutual fund customer who just cares about the
prospects for his money to grow.
If he even bothered to inquire about his investment, he'd be told,
Don't ask.
It just happens.
Likewise, in quantum mechanics, there is no direct mechanism for electron jumps.
They just follow a rulebook involving initial and final states.
Similarly frustrated by the limitations of classical mechanics, Heisenberg was primed for a wholly
new approach.
Throughout 1924 and early 1925, part of which time was spent as a visitor to Bohr's Institute
in Copenhagen, he tinkered with various ways of matching orbital electron behavior to complex
spectra.
After consulting with Pauli, Bohr, and others, Heisenberg decided to abandon the idea of describing
electron orbits.
Instead of trying to visualize the paths that electrons take, he felt it would be more productive
to focus solely on quantities that could be measured directly, known as observables.
A breakthrough came in June 1925, when Heisenberg enjoyed two weeks of uninterrupted thought on
the island of Heligoland in the North Sea.
Severe hay fever had brought him to that refuge.
The sea air offered him relief from the sniffles.
There he developed a system for calculating the amplitudes related to the likelihood of jumps
between electron states that would produce particular frequencies of emitted or absorbed light.
He developed a kind of spreadsheet that tallied these amplitudes for all possible atomic transitions.
He also showed how mathematical operations based on these tables could be used to determine
the probabilities that electrons would have certain positions, momenta, energies, and other
observable quantities.
Hence, such physical quantities would be known not exactly but probabilistically, like the odds
of getting twenty-one when dealt a hand of cards in the game of blackjack.
Returning to Göringen, Heisenberg presented his table of amplitudes to Born, who soon recognized
it to be a type of matrix, a mathematical entity with numbers arranged into rows and columns.
Born recruited one of his doctoral students, Pascual Jordan, to work with Heisenberg and him in
exploring the mathematical implications of what became known as matrix mechanics.
Born was well familiar with the property of matrices that multiplying two of them together
produces different answers depending upon their order.
Unlike standard multiplication, in which two times three is the same as three times two,
in matrix multiplication, A times B is not generally the same as B times A.
If the order does not matter, the quantities are said to commute.
Those that depend on order are called non-commutative.
Because in Heisenberg's system non-commutative matrices are used to determine physical properties
such as position and momentum, the order of operation matters for such measurements.
Thus, if the position of a state is measured first and then its momentum is measured, the result
is different than if the momentum is assessed first and the position second.
Heisenberg would later show that this non-commutivity leads to an uncertainty principle that makes
exact simultaneous measurement of certain paired quantities impossible.
For example, the position and momentum of an electron cannot both be known precisely at
once.
If one is pinned down, the other must be murky.
It is like a photograph in which either the foreground or background can be in perfect
focus, but not both.
If the photographer tries to sharpen an image in the foreground, the background would become
shadowy.
The converse is also true.
Similarly, if a physicist constructs an experiment designed to reveal the pinpoint location of
an electron, its momentum would become smeared out over an infinite range of values.
That is, it couldn't be known at all.
The abstraction of matrix mechanics did not endear it to the experimental physics community,
with its bent toward the tangible.
Only after its sister theory of wave mechanics appeared, and the two were shown to be equivalent,
did the united theory of quantum mechanics become widely accepted.
Einstein's belief in Spinoza's clockwork deity drove him to recoil from one of the startling
implications of Heisenberg's theory.
If position and momentum can never be measured simultaneously and precisely, then it is impossible
to plot out the locations and velocities of all things in the universe and predict their
future development.
Such an omission did not bother Heisenberg and Born, who had become comfortable with the
probabilistic mechanics instead of an exact classical mechanics.
Einstein battled vehemently against dropping such strict determinism in favor of a kind of
particle roulette.
Counting photons
It is curious that Einstein, one of the fathers of quantum theory, would flee from his own
creation.
However, we must distinguish the original idea of a quantum, which simply means a discrete
unit of energy or other physical entity, from full-blown quantum mechanics, a system
that replaces deterministic classical mechanics on the atomic scale.
In Einstein's photoelectric effect, for example, an electron absorbs a discrete amount of energy
in the form of a photon, but then uses the boost to escape the surface of a metal and move
continuously and deterministically through space.
Einstein objected to the contrasting idea that an electron would gulp down a photon and then
instantly vault to a completely different location.
Seemingly discreet, random jumps must have continuous causal explanation through a deeper
theory, Einstein surmised.
Einstein saw no problem with randomness as a tool rather than as a fundamental aspect of
nature.
Statistical mechanics, Einstein knew, needed randomness as a way to account for the aggregate
behavior of myriad atoms interacting with each other and with their environment.
Classical mechanics adeptly handles simple interactions between pairs of objects, but falls short in
addressing complex systems with large numbers of components.
That's where chance comes in, Einstein believed, not as a basic element, but rather as a way of
representing a hodgepodge of motions.
Einstein's last major contribution to quantum theory, before he switched camps and became its
best-known critic, was a quantum statistical theory of ideal gases.
An ideal gas is a large set of molecules, generally housed in a container, that for simplicity's sake are
presumed not to interact with each other.
In classical statistical mechanics developed by Boltzmann and others, assumptions of random
motion leads to a simple relationship between pressure, volume, and temperature, called the ideal gas
law.
Einstein updated standard statistical mechanics to encompass the notion that energy is quantized.
The impetus for Einstein's final venture into the quantum realm was a remarkable paper he received
from Indian physicist Sotiendra Bose that derived Planck's black-body radiation law from quantum
statistical principles.
Einstein translated the paper into German and published it in the August 1924 issue of the prestigious journal
Zeitschrift für Fusik.
Bose looked at photons as something like identical ping-pong balls in a container, carrying discrete
energies that, following Planck's law, depend on their frequencies.
Einstein generalized Bose's idea to monatomic gases, those containing a single type of atom.
Therefore, the quantum statistics of certain types of identical particles, including photons,
is known as Bose-Einstein statistics.
That's where the term Boson, recently applied to the Higgs particle, arises.
In September 1924, one of the most important scientific conferences of the interwar years,
the Naturforscher Farsamlung took place in the beautiful alpine city of Innsbruck, Austria.
While Einstein did not present a talk at the meeting, he attended its sessions and had the
opportunity to discuss his ideas on quantum statistics informally with various participants,
including Planck.
Schrodinger also attended the conference.
It offered him the opportunity to meet Einstein and Planck, two of the physicists he most respected,
and, of course, two of the most famous physicists in the world.
He had seen Einstein lecture at the 1913 Vienna meeting and had exchanged articles with him
about general relativity, but up until that point he had not spoken with him, at least not in depth.
The meeting of Einstein and Schrodinger at Innsbruck would prove not only the start of their
long, fruitful friendship, beginning formally but warming over time, but also a key juncture
in the history of modern physics. Einstein's valedictory efforts in the area of quantum
statistics discussed at the meeting would inspire Schrodinger to engage him in correspondence and
eventually learn from him about French physicist Louis de Broglie's notion of matter waves.
That lead, in turn, would stimulate Schrodinger to construct his own wave equation, one of the
key pillars of quantum mechanics. At Innsbruck, Schrodinger also welcomed the chance to catch up
with his Austrian colleagues, as he was then working in Switzerland, and breathe the clean
mountain air. The latter was important because three years earlier he had developed lung problems
due to a severe bout of bronchitis followed by a case of tuberculosis. He also smoked heavily,
which didn't help his breathing. The past few years had been turbulent for Schrodinger in general.
After he married Ani, he had become quite a vagabond scholar. Although offered a position at the
University of Vienna, he decided to move in succession to the German cities Jena, Stuttgart,
and Breslau, the last now the Polish city of Wrocław, for brief academic positions at each,
from late 1920 until late 1921. Salary was a great concern for him, as inflation was beginning to
ravage Germany. He watched with horror as his widowed mother, once proudly middle class,
lost her home and lived in squalor after his father's death. She passed away from cancer in
September 1921. Erwin was determined to land the most lucrative and secure academic position he could
find, hoping to offer Ani a comfortable lifestyle and spare her from any chance of poverty.
Such an opportunity arose late that year when a position opened up at the University of Zurich.
Switzerland offered Erwin and Ani a stable, peaceful environment, free of the economic problems and
unrest facing Germany and Austria. Once settled in the position, and after dealing with the
aforementioned bronchitis and tuberculosis attacks, he began to publish articles extending the classical
ideas of Boltzmann to the quantum domain. One question that concerned Schrödinger during his
early years in Zurich was defining in quantum terms the entropy, or amount of disorder, for an ideal gas.
Boltzmann defined entropy in terms of the number of unique microstates, particle arrangements,
for each macro state. However, if particles are indistinguishable, such as in a quantum gas,
there are fewer unique states. It is like counting the number of arrangements of a set of pennies,
each minted in a different year. If you distinguish them by their dates, they have many more unique
configurations than if you treat them as identical. Therefore, quantum estimates of entropy are
different from classical measures. Before Bose contributed his seminal paper on photons and
Einstein extended his treatment to include ideal gases, many physicists were perplexed about which
factors to include in expressing the entropy for quantum systems. A well-known equation for entropy
contained a controversial correction term that no one, until Bose, could fully explain.
The correction term was added to rectify problems with Boltzmann's formula, as applied to quantum
gases. But not everyone believed in its validity. Schrödinger published a 1924 paper that left out the
correction term and led to what turned out to be an erroneous expression for entropy.
Given Einstein's newfound methods, Schrödinger's encounter with him in Innsbruck and their subsequent
correspondence were eye-openers. Einstein's insights inspired Schrödinger to think about quantum
statistics in a whole new way, setting aside his classical misconception that rearranging particles
always leads to different microstates. It took a little while, though, for the implications to sink in.
At first, Schrödinger thought there must have been a mistake in Einstein's calculations,
because they disagreed with Boltzmann's methods. His initial letter to Einstein in February 1925
pointed out the supposed error. Einstein patiently responded by explaining Bose's idea that photons can
share identical quantum states. Schrödinger revised his definition of entropy based on the new statistics
and presented his work to the Prussian Academy of Sciences in July 1925.
A theorist cannot anticipate which section of a research article might prove the most stimulating.
Sometimes even a tangential mention can trigger the imagination and unleash a cascade of fruitful ideas.
A reference in one of Einstein's quantum statistics papers to the work of de Broglie would inspire
Schrödinger to develop his greatest contribution to science, the Schrödinger equation of wave mechanics.
As physicist Peter Freund pointed out, without Einstein's endorsement of de Broglie's work,
the Schrödinger equation might have been found quite a bit later.
Matter waves
A particle and a wave seem to be entirely different things. One is concentrated and the other is spread out.
One bounces off walls and the other slinks around corners. One seems to be a tiny part of matter
and the other presents itself as ripples through space. What could they possibly have in common?
Photons, as first shown by Einstein, represent a hybrid of both. Like particles, they carry parcels of energy and momentum,
which they can dole out in collisions. Like waves, they have peaks and valleys,
which can line up with each other in the striped images called interference patterns.
In his 1924 doctoral thesis, based on calculations completed the previous year, de Broglie imaginatively
applied such duality to everything. Not just photons, he hypothesized, but all types of substances
have both particle-like and wave-like aspects. In particular, an electron wriggles with a wavelength
that is Planck's constant divided by its momentum. The beauty of de Broglie's concept is that it
naturally leads to Bohr's quantization of angular momentum and to a generalization by Sommerfeld
called the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rules, the key to stable orbits. De Broglie imagined an
electron's orbit in an atom to be something like a plucked guitar string, only circular. Just as a guitar
string can vibrate in different modes with various numbers of peaks and valleys, an electron wave in
an atom similarly can undulate with various wavelengths. Because momentum in de Broglie's formula is
inversely proportional to wavelength and angular momentum is momentum times radius, that leads to
a rule that confines angular momentum to discrete values. Thus, a simple calculation produces the
critical constraint on electrons that Bohr couldn't adequately explain himself, yet which is all
important to his theory. In one of his papers on the quantum statistics of monatomic gases,
Einstein drew upon de Broglie's matter-wave idea as an explanation for how, in a low-temperature gas,
atoms move in lockstep, thus making them more orderly and decreasing their quantity of entropy.
The notion that atoms, like photons, could behave as waves drew a vital connection between the atomic
gas of Einstein and the photon gas of Bose, upon which Einstein based his theory. Einstein also praised
de Broglie for his innovative solution to the angular momentum quantization problem, which had been an
embarrassing gap in Bohr's model. When Schrodinger perused Einstein's paper and found the reference to
de Broglie's thesis, he itched to get his hands on it as soon as possible. Ironically, he didn't seem to
realize that its major results had already been published and had been available for some time at the
University of Zurich library, right under his nose. Instead, he wrote to Paris and obtained the actual
dissertation. Primed by his reading of Schopenhauer and Spinoza to look for unifying principles,
Schrodinger found his imagination stirred by the brilliance of de Broglie's thinking on common
aspects of matter and light. Suddenly, the Bohr-Zommerfeld model of the atom transformed from a flawed solar
system analogy to a pulsating, beating heart of matter, throbbing in natural patterns that determined its
properties. On November 3, 1925, Schrodinger wrote to Einstein,
A few days ago, I read with the greatest interest the ingenious thesis of Louis de Broglie, which I
finally got hold of. Encouraged by de Bay, who was then at ETH, Schrodinger offered a colloquium about
de Broglie's matter waves. The seminar wonderfully showed the revolutionary implications of the idea.
At the end of the talk, de Bay suggested that Schrodinger investigate what kind of equation
could model such waves, showing how they developed over time and space. Just as electromagnetic waves
are explained by Maxwell's equations, could there be a mechanism to produce matter waves that match
the physical constraints of any given situation? For example, how would electrons behave when they are
subject to the electromagnetic field created by protons in atomic nuclei? How would they behave
outside of atoms as they moved through empty space? Schrodinger spent the next few months in a frenzy,
trying to find the right equation that would generate matter waves and explain the behavior of
electrons, both in and out of atoms. Frustrating his early efforts was an intrinsic property of electrons
that hadn't yet been recognized, called spin. First identified in 1926 by two of Ehrenfest's students,
Samuel Gautschmidt and George Uhlenbeck, spin is a quantum number that expresses the behavior of a
particle in an external magnetic field. Spin up means that the particle is aligned in the same direction as
the field, and spin down means that it is situated in the opposite direction. Many types of particles,
including electrons, possess spin values that are half-integer quantities, such as one-half or negative
one-half. These half-integer spin particles do not obey Bose-Einstein statistics, because they cannot share the
same quantum state. Rather, as Pauli proposed, electrons and other half-integer spin particles must obey
an exclusion principle, mandating that each must occupy its own quantum state. Particles of that type,
now called fermions, cannot bunch up like concert-goers in a mosh pit. Rather, each has its own seat.
The term fermions derives from Fermi-Dirac statistics, the proper description for the
collective behavior of particles of half-integer spin. Named after Italian physicist Enrico Fermi and
British physicist Paul Dirac, who each contributed to the theory, it tallied particle states differently
than Bose-Einstein statistics did. Dirac would later come up with the correct relativistic equation for
fermions, called the Dirac equation. It would require a new type of notation involving complex numbers.
Schrodinger began his calculations without knowing all this, and soon developed an equation for
matter waves that made use of special relativity. It was a solid, important equation, later rediscovered
by Swedish physicist Oskar Klein and German physicist Walter Gordon, called the Klein-Gordon equation.
The trouble was, it didn't quite apply to electrons and other fermions, because of their half-integer
spin. It would work for spinless bosons, but he was trying to describe electrons, not bosons.
To his great disappointment, when he tried to model the Bohr-Zomerfeld atom, his predictions were off the
mark. After flogging the dead horse for some time, Schrodinger decided that he needed a break.
The Christmas holidays were coming up, and it would be the perfect time to get away and think
deeply about matter waves. He let Ani know that he would be heading to a villa in the scenic alpine
village of Arosa, Switzerland. The village was familiar to him, because he had convalesced there
after his lung infection. Meanwhile, he wrote to one of his ex-girlfriends from Vienna, whose name is
unknown to history, as his diary from that year is missing, and invited her to join him. Ani would stay
behind in Zurich.
Christmas Miracle
In his personal philosophical essay, Quest for the Path, completed in 1925, Schrodinger identified
with Schopenhauer's idea of will as a shared force that drives all people and things toward their
destinies. He used the analogy of a sculpture to show that while the end product is solid,
beautiful, and timeless, it takes thousands of tiny, apparently haphazard and destructive
whittles to a stone in order to produce it. At every step we have to change, overcome, destroy the form
which we have had hitherto, Schrodinger wrote. The resistance of our primitive desires, which we
encounter at every step, seems to me to have its physical correlate in the resistance of the existing
form to the shaping chisel. Schrodinger was proudly impulsive, feeling that risks were essential to
growth. As the world bid adieu to 1925, he checked his old girlfriend and himself into the Villa Hervik,
surrounded by gorgeous mountain scenery, preparing himself for an intense period of calculations.
Whatever he did there seemed to work, as the two-week holiday would inaugurate the most productive
period of his life, generating an entirely new approach to physics that would gain him a Nobel
prize. As Hermann Weill, who knew the Schrodingers well and apparently had inside world about the
liaison, described the period to scientific historian Abraham Peiss, Schrodinger did his great work during
a late, erotic outburst in his life. The late refers to the fact that Schrodinger was thirty-eight at the
time of his prolific interval, far older than the boy geniuses Heisenberg and Pauli, who commanded the
other quantum flank. Sad to say, few theorists, at least in modern times, make major contributions in
their late thirties or older. Einstein offers another exception to the rule. He completed general
relativity at the age of thirty-six, and his contributions to quantum statistics at the age of
forty-five. However, unlike Schrodinger, his Nobel citation was for work completed in his twenties,
the photoelectric effect, not his thirties. Primed with an unexpected burst of youthful energy,
Schrodinger barreled toward his destination. After continuing to toy with a relativistic wave
equation, he decided to switch to a non-relativistic version. Instead of E equals MC squared, he invoked
the older Newtonian formula for energy. Combining the classical expression for kinetic energy,
energy of motion, with that of potential energy, energy of position, he cleverly rewrote these as
a mathematical function called the Hamiltonian operator, similar to Hamilton's formulation
mentioned earlier, but expressed in terms of derivatives and other functions. In what is now a famous
equation, Schrodinger applied the Hamiltonian to an entity called the wave function, also known as
the psi function, and demonstrated how the former transformed the latter. A wave function,
according to Schrodinger's conception, represents how an elementary particle's charge and material are spread
throughout space. To find the stationary states of a particle with fixed energy, for example, the stable
electron states of an atom, simply look for all the wave functions for which application of the Hamiltonian
produces a number times the wave function. Each number for which that equation is true represents
an energy level, and each wave function represents the stationary state corresponding to that energy
level. Let's use a basic analogy to understand how Schrodinger's method works. Suppose you were a banker
living in a country where there are many counterfeit banknotes. You develop a scanner that looks for the
real notes by looking for a number in one of their corners that indicates their true value. If a note
doesn't have that number, it is declared counterfeit and worthless. On the other hand, if the scanner does
detect the number, an indicator lights up with the note's value, and the note is placed in one of
several piles according to that worth. Think of the Hamiltonian, then, as a scanner that processes wave
functions, and in some cases reads out their energy value and keeps them, while in other cases it
discards them. The mathematical terms for the results of such a sorting process are called
eigenvalues. The term means proper values, and eigenstates, proper states. The Hamiltonian applied
to an eigenstate, the stationary state wave function, yields an eigenvalue, the energy, times that eigenstate,
change. Schrodinger was, of course, keen to solve the hydrogen atom problem with his new method.
He noted that the electric field of an atomic nucleus radiated outward in all directions,
which gave the problem a kind of spherical symmetry. Exploiting that symmetry, he produced a set of
solutions that could be classified by three different quantum numbers, precisely those proposed by Bohr
and Sommerfeld. To his delight, his revised formula, now listed in every modern physics textbook as the
Schrodinger equation, yielded the correct results, marvelously reproducing the Bohr-Sommerfeld atom.
By the end of January 1926, Schrodinger's first paper on the topic, Quantization as an Eigenvalue
problem was finished. Completing such an important breakthrough in only a couple of months was a
virtually unprecedented feat. He sent a copy to Sommerfeld, who was staggered by his brilliant
accomplishment. Sommerfeld replied that the paper hit him like a thunderclap. Given his great respect
for Planck and Einstein, Schrodinger waited eagerly for their reactions as well. Fortunately,
these were largely positive. As Ani recalled, Planck and Einstein were very, very enthusiastic from the
start. Planck said, I'm reading it like a child reads a puzzle. Schrodinger thanked Einstein in
a personal note. Your and Planck's approval are more valuable to me than half the world. Besides,
the whole thing possibly never would have existed, not from me at least, if your work did not make
obvious to me the importance of de Broglie's ideas. By then, several papers by Heisenberg,
Born, and Jordan, outlining the theory of matrix mechanics, had already been published.
Dirac had also developed a clever mathematical shorthand for describing quantum rules using
bracket symbols that rendered matrix mechanics much more elegant and straightforward.
The natural question arose as to the connection between wave mechanics and matrix mechanics,
given that each deftly handled the hydrogen atom question, but in a different way.
Schrodinger was careful to emphasize that his theory had been independently developed
and was not based at all on Heisenberg's work.
Despite the independent origins of his and Heisenberg's theories and his natural preference
for the former, Schrodinger realized the importance of demonstrating their equivalence.
Sommerfeld sensed right away that the theories were compatible, but that compatibility needed
to be proven mathematically. Schrodinger soon supplied the proof, which was seconded by an
even more rigorous proof by Pauly. With both theories shown to be equally valid, Schrodinger began to
argue that his was more tangible and physically reasonable. After all, it described how electrons
behave in space and time, rather than how they transform in an abstract world of matrices.
In the Realm of Ghosts
Born thought hard about the implications of both theories,
and started to see cracks in each, even the one he helped develop.
He was well aware of the criticism that matrix mechanics was too abstract.
The wave approach was indeed more concrete and visualizable.
It modeled well processes that happened in real physical space, such as collisions.
Born had to concede its elegance, clarity, and value.
On the other hand, wave mechanics offered an untenable vision of electrons being distributed
over entire regions of space. Such a picture did not match experimental observations that
showed them behaving sometimes as point particles. As vivid as the image of an electron oscillating
in space seemed, there was no observational evidence that its material and energy were actually
spread out. To reconcile the two approaches, Born proposed a third way. To imagine the wave
function as a ghost field that guides the true electron. The wave function would possess no physical
characteristics of its own, neither energy nor momentum. It would reside in an abstract space,
now called Hilbert space, rather than real space, making its presence known only indirectly when
electrons were observed by supplying information about the likelihood of certain outcomes.
In other words, it would serve in similar fashion to Heisenberg's state matrix as a reservoir of data
about probabilities. Born demonstrated how different observable quantities could be found using the
wave function in its ghostly, behind-the-scenes role. Every time a measurement was taken, the probabilities
for different outcomes would depend on the eigenstates of a particular operator, mathematical function,
applied to that wave function. For example, to measure the most likely location of an electron,
find the eigenstates of the position operator and use these to calculate the probabilities of every
possible position. To find its most likely momentum, do the same with the momentum operator and the
momentum eigenstates. A precise measurement of either position or momentum meant that the electron
wave function matched one of the position or momentum eigenstates, respectively. The strange thing was,
because the position and momentum eigenstates formed different sets, you could never measure position
and momentum simultaneously. You needed to choose an order, either position first or momentum first.
As with matrix mechanics, the order of operations produced different results. You could also use wave
functions in Born's interpretation to determine the likelihood that an electron would convert from one
quantum state to another, for example, to leap suddenly between two energy levels of an atom.
Such a quantum jump would be instantaneous and unpredictable, except for its odds of happening.
The only way to see the jump would be to observe the impact on the atom's spectrum, either the release or
absorption of a photon. You wouldn't actually observe the electron's movement through space.
In short, Born's approach transformed Schrodinger's wave functions from physical waves into probability waves.
In their updated role, they could tell you only how likely it would be that electrons would have certain
positions or momenta, and what were the odds that these values would change. You could never pin down
both values at the same time. Because you would never know at any given moment both where a particle is
and how it is moving. You could never predict exactly where it would be at the next instant.
Thus, Born turned Schrodinger's deterministic description into a probabilistic, indeterminate
series of quantum jumps from state to state.
Heisenberg strongly agreed with Born that electrons could not literally be waves spread throughout space.
The only point he saw to wave mechanics was to provide an alternative means of calculating the
matrix components of his own theory. To imagine electrons as kinds of undulating blobs surrounding
atomic nuclei seemed ridiculous to him. No quantum experiment showed electrons as distended objects.
Therefore, he welcomed Born's interpretation as a way of distilling the useful results from
Schrodinger's calculations while discarding the hokum of bloated electrons.
The House of Bohr
Matters came to a head in October 1926 when Schrodinger visited Copenhagen at Bohr's invitation to present his
results. Bohr's Institute for Theoretical Physics had become a holy temple of quantum pontification,
with Bohr as the chief pontificator. Surrounding Bohr was an enthusiastic cadre that included,
at the time, Heisenberg, Dirac, and Oscar Klein. Klein was particularly interested in wave mechanics as he
had developed his own take on the subject. He, too, had read de Broglie and wanted to construct a wave
equation based on the idea of matter waves. Trying several different approaches, he independently
developed a form of Schrodinger's equation in late 1925, but because of illness never had the chance
to submit it for publication. By the time he was well, Schrodinger's first paper had already appeared.
Klein did get credit, however, along with Gordon, for the relativistic version of the equation.
Klein also independently reproduced Kalutza's theory of extending general relativity by an extra
dimension with the goal of bringing electromagnetism and gravity under the same banner. Like his
predecessor, Klein hoped to develop a unified theory of nature that would explain how electrons move
through space under a combination of forces. In contrast to Kalutza's theory, though, Klein's was
grounded in quantum principles. It made use of de Broglie's notion of standing waves,
but treated them somewhat differently. Instead of being wrapped inside an atom, the waves were
curled around an unseen fifth dimension. Klein equated the momentum of the fifth dimension with electric
charge. Using de Broglie's idea that wavelength is inversely related to momentum, he connected the
maximum size of the extra dimension with its minimal amount of momentum and linked the latter in turn with
the minimum electric charge. The tiny magnitude of an electron's charge, he found, led naturally to a
minuscule size for the fifth dimension. Consequently, the fifth dimension would be far too small to detect.
The undetectability of Klein's fifth dimension is like standing on a high ladder and observing a needle
on the ground that is wrapped tightly with thread. From that high vantage point, the thread's thickness
wouldn't be apparent, and the needle would seem like a simple straight line. Similarly, because the fifth
dimension would be coiled so snugly, it would be unobservable. After completing his work, Klein was shocked to hear from
Pauli about Kalutza's similar idea for unification. Pauli was one of the few who could keep track of all
the developments and theories in general relativity and quantum physics, and he served as a font of
information for others. Despite his disappointment at not being the first to consider five-dimensional
unification, Klein decided that his theory was unique enough to publish. In later unification models,
including some of Einstein's ventures, Klein's notion of a tiny, wrapped-up fifth dimension would
prove to be a vital component. As a result, higher dimensional schemes for uniting the natural forces
are often called Kalutza-Klein theories. Klein's approach had little impact on the Copenhagen community
at the time, however. Bohr steered the group toward forging a consensus about the nature of the atom
and of the quantum. That common ground included acceptance of the atom as a probabilistic mechanism.
Neither Klein's five-dimensional idea nor Schrodinger's interpretation of waves as charge
distributions included the notion of sudden quantum jumps, and so they were excluded from the emerging
canonical view. Schrodinger's October visit was thus like a seminary student of one faith
speaking to an assembly of devout supporters of another and trying to defend his minority creed.
Though his views often turned out to be fluid, the proud, stubborn Viennese physicist would not be
quick to concede. He changed his mind on his own terms, not through cajoling.
Schrodinger arrived by train on the first of the month. After the long journey, he met Bohr at the station
and was immediately bombarded with questions. The interrogation didn't cease until he gave his talk
and started off on his trip home. Even when he developed a cold during his visit and was sick in bed,
Bohr continued to probe his views. He was staying at Bohr's house, so he really had no choice.
Despite the barrage of queries, everyone in Copenhagen was friendly and gracious,
especially Bohr's wife, Margrethe, who always made sure guests felt most welcome.
Nestled in the warm, cozy household, Schrodinger came under intense pressure by Bohr, Heisenberg,
and others for him to accept Bohr's interpretation and discard the idea of physical waves.
Schrodinger resisted with all his intellectual strength. He didn't want his visionary theory
to become simply an abacus the Matrix supporters could use to carry out their calculations.
The crux of Schrodinger's rebuttal was to declare that random quantum jumps simply weren't physical.
He argued for a continuous, deterministic explanation instead. That was somewhat of a turnabout,
given that in his inaugural address for the Zurich appointment, echoing ideas expressed by his
mentor Franz Exner, Schrodinger had emphasized the role of chance in nature and dismissed the need
for causality in science. Schrodinger had also written to Bohr, applauding how a theory of radiation
he had helped develop, called the BKS, Bohr-Kramer's Slater theory, had circumvented causality.
Einstein had been vehemently opposed to the BKS theory, precisely because of its randomness.
On that matter, he and Schrodinger had been on opposite sides of the fence. But that was in 1924,
before Schrodinger had his own causal, continuous, deterministic equation to defend.
As chance would have it, by late 1926, mutual opposition to the notion of random quantum jumps
forced the two of them into the same anti-Copenhagen camp. The alliance would be forged once they
realized that they were among the few vocal critics of Bohr's reinterpretation of the wave equation.
After returning to Zurich from Copenhagen, Schrodinger continued to defend his disdain
for quantum jumps, on the basis that atomic physics should be visualizable and logically consistent.
Bohr maintained hope that Schrodinger would come around to the consensus view,
simply because wave mechanics, in its probabilistic form, meshed so well with matrix mechanics.
At that point, quantum theory was still gelling, so divergent interpretations did not hinder its progress.
A larger problem for Bohr's goal of achieving harmony was Einstein's far more vehement and vocal opposition.
Does God Play Dice?
By the end of 1926, Einstein had drawn a stark line of demarcation between himself and quantum theory.
Irritated by the lack of attention paid to the notion of continuity, which he saw as a logical part of nature,
he began to draw on religious imagery to make his case.
Why religion? Einstein had grown up in a secular Jewish household and certainly wasn't devout.
Nevertheless, he was often reminded of his Judaism in a negative way by the anti-Semitic attacks on his work
by right-wing German nationalists, and in a positive way by the movement for a Jewish homeland in Palestine,
to which he had lent his support.
Despite Einstein's philosophical differences with Born, the two of them were close friends.
They enjoyed intellectual discussions and playing chamber music together, and kept up a steady correspondence.
Born came from a similar secular Jewish background.
Given their commonalities, it is perhaps not surprising that Einstein appealed to Born,
trying to convince him that quantum physics required deterministic equations, not probabilistic rules.
Quantum mechanics yields much that is worthy of regard, Einstein wrote to Born,
but an inner voice tells me that it is not yet the right track.
The theory hardly brings us closer to the old one's secrets.
I, in any case, am convinced that he does not play dice.
As we have seen, the old one was one of Einstein's shorthand expressions for God.
Not the God of the Bible, but rather the God of Spinoza.
That was not the last time Einstein would make that point.
For the rest of his life, in his explanations of why he didn't believe in a quantum uncertainty,
he would reiterate again and again, like a mantra, that God does not roll dice.
The quasi-religious tone of his statement was an appeal to reason and common sense,
rather than a call to replace science with faith.
He could well have said,
My sense of natural order informs me that the laws of physics are not random.
But he opted for the more dramatic statement.
Indeed, the saying,
God does not play dice,
has reverberated in a way that natural laws are not random,
would not have.
The dramatic quality of his pronouncement
pointed to a growing confidence about the import of his statements.
He had started to become used to his words being picked up by the press
and broadcast to the public.
Perhaps that is why, even in a private letter,
he was theatrical in his plea.
As another way of trying to rebut
Bourne's interpretation,
on May 5, 1927,
Einstein delivered a talk at the Prussian Academy
purporting to prove
that Schrodinger's wave equation
implied definitive particle behavior,
not just dice rolling.
The following week he wrote to Bourne with a sense of triumph.
Last week I presented a short paper to the Academy
in which I showed that one can ascribe fully determined motions
to Schrodinger's wave mechanics
without any statistical interpretation.
Will appear soon.
Einstein submitted the paper to a prestigious journal.
However,
perhaps because he was unsure of his results,
Einstein retracted it only a few days later.
And it was never published.
Only the first page of his aborted proof
has been preserved for history.
Despite his prominence,
Einstein's entreaties had little impact
on the quantum faithful.
Experiment after experiment
showed that quantum mechanics
was a highly accurate theory of atomic behavior.
It matched prediction after prediction
on the mark.
Young researchers,
unschooled in,
or at least unmoved by,
the philosophical considerations
that motivated Einstein and Schrodinger,
witnessed the empirical verifications
and saw quantum mechanics
as the only road forward.
They were loath to argue
with experimental success.
Unmoved by Einstein's arguments,
Bourne continued to advocate
his probabilistic interpretation.
He cringed at the notion
that everything in nature
was predetermined.
Why welcome a world
without choice or chance?
Meanwhile,
Heisenberg began to codify
the indeterminacy
in the quantum process
of measurement
with an influential paper
that he sent to Pauli
in February 1927
and published later that year
on the perceptible content
of quantum theoretical
kinematics and mechanics.
The title and theme
of the article
reflected Heisenberg's desire
to combat Schrodinger's ardent call
for visualizability
with his own analysis
of what could and could not
be observed in nature.
Heisenberg's paper
is notable for his introduction
of what he dubbed
the indeterminacy principle,
now usually called
the uncertainty principle,
referring to the inability
to measure certain pairs
of observables simultaneously.
Position and momentum
form one such set.
Time and energy
constitute another.
In each pair,
the more precisely
you measure one quantity,
the fuzzier the other.
Although the mathematical reasoning
behind this idea
was developed earlier,
the fact that order
of operations matters
for the matrices
representing the paired quantities,
it was in the 1927 paper
that Heisenberg first tried
to explain what was happening
physically.
Heisenberg showed
that if you wanted to measure
the position of an electron,
you would need to observe it
with light.
The minimum amount
of light required
would be a single photon.
Yet that solitary photon,
aimed at the electron,
would collide with it,
disturb it,
and lend it extra momentum.
Thus, at the instant
an electron's location
was known,
its momentum would be disrupted
by an unknown amount.
Heisenberg also described
the process that became
known as wave-function collapse.
Before a measurement
is taken of any quantity,
such as position,
the wave-function
consists of a super-position,
weighted sum,
of eigenstates.
As soon as the reading occurs,
the wave-function
immediately transforms
into one of the component
eigenstates,
ridding itself
of all the other possibilities.
Its position,
or any other quantity,
is then set
to the particular eigenvalue
corresponding to that eigenstate.
We can think of the collapse process
by imagining
a delicate house of cards
positioned so that
each of its sides
faces a different compass direction.
It teeters
in a super-position
of north,
south,
east,
and west.
Now picture a strong breeze
coming along
from a wholly random direction.
By touching the structure,
it is in some sense
taking a measurement.
The house of cards
topples over
in one of the directions,
collapsing into one of its
constituent eigenstates.
The process of measurement
has triggered a collapse
from the super-position
into a single position.
Hungarian mathematician
John von Neumann
would later show
that all quantum processes
obeyed one of two types
of dynamics.
The continuous,
deterministic evolution
governed by a wave equation,
either the Schrodinger equation
or a relativistic version
such as the Dirac equation,
and the discrete,
probabilistic repositioning
associated with
wave-function collapse.
Schrodinger himself
would continue to believe
in the former process,
arguing vehemently
against the latter.
While largely
an ally of Heisenberg
in the battle
for interpreting
atomic processes,
Bohr differed with him
at first
about the uncertainty principle.
He didn't think
it was useful
to frame quantum philosophy
by looking at
measurement errors.
Rather,
he thought that
a deeper analysis
was needed.
He began to advocate
a way of bringing
all the different aspects
of quantum theory together
in a kind of
yin-yang approach
called complementarity,
which considered
electrons
and other subatomic particles
to have both
particle and wave properties,
each of which
is brought out
through different
kinds of measurements.
Bohr's complementarity
considered the design
of an observer's experiment.
If a researcher
was probing wave properties,
such as interference patterns,
he or she would plainly
see such zebra stripes.
On the other hand,
if he or she were recording
a particle property
such as position,
that quality
would come into view
through something
like a dot on a screen.
Such contradictions,
Bohr came to believe,
were a fundamental
part of nature.
Soon, though,
Bohr and Heisenberg
agreed to present
a united front
about quantum measurement,
with complementarity
and uncertainty
being alternative ways
of looking at the same thing.
Their combined views,
including the idea
of wave function collapse
triggered by experimentation,
eventually became known
as the Copenhagen
interpretation
of quantum mechanics.
Their unity
was tested
at the 5th Solvay Conference
on Electrons and Photons,
held in Brussels,
in October 1927,
when Einstein
startled Bohr
and his supporters
with his zealous
antipathy
to their views.
Ehrenfest,
who was friends
with Bohr
as well as Einstein,
chided the father
of relativity
for being too closed-minded
about another revolution
in physics.
He accused Einstein
of opposing
quantum mechanics
the same way
orthodox critics
attacked relativity's
novel aspects.
However,
Einstein would not
cede ground.
The debates
at the conference
about quantum philosophy
between Einstein
and Bohr
were largely informal,
taking place
mainly during breakfast
rather than during
the sessions themselves.
Each morning,
Einstein would bring
to the table
a hypothetical situation
in which quantum
indeterminacy
could be avoided.
Bohr would think
it over for a while,
construct a careful
rebuttal,
and inform Einstein.
The next day,
the process would repeat.
By the end,
Bohr had successfully
defended quantum theory
against all
of Einstein's objections.
Einstein returned
to Berlin
a far more isolated
figure in the
scientific community.
While his world fame
continued to grow,
his reputation
among the younger
generation of physicists
began to sour
as they derided
his objections
to quantum mechanics.
With experimental
findings continuing
to support
the unified quantum picture
advocated by Bohr,
Heisenberg,
Born,
Dirac,
and others,
Einstein's dismissal
of their views
seemed petty
and illogical.
Schrodinger
was one of the few
who sympathized
with Einstein's doubts.
They kept up
a conversation
about ways
to extend
quantum mechanics
to make it
more complete.
Einstein complained
to him
about the dogmatism
of the mainstream
quantum community.
For example,
he wrote to Schrodinger
in May 1928,
the Heisenberg-born
tranquilizing philosophy,
or religion,
is so deliberately
contrived
that for the time being
it provides
a gentle pillow
for the true believer
from which he cannot
very easily
be aroused.
So let him
lie there.
But this religion
has damned
little effect
on me.
In his retreat,
Einstein endeavored
to develop
a unified field theory
that would supersede
quantum mechanics.
Given the success
of the quantum equations,
few physicists
were interested
in Einstein's attempts.
Einstein's papers
soon became
more widely covered
in the press
than noted
by the physics
community itself.
In retrospect,
Einstein's contributions
after Solvay
made little impact
upon science.
They were largely
mathematical exercises
in exploring
different possibilities
for unification.
Noting that Einstein
developed no major theories
after 1925,
Peiss quipped,
In the remaining
thirty years of his life,
his fame would be
undiminished,
if not enhanced,
had he gone
fishing instead.
Although the physics
community relocated
to the realm
of probabilistic
quantum reality,
leaving Einstein
the lonely occupant
of an isolated
castle of determinism,
the press
still bathed him
in glory.
He was the
wild-haired genius,
the celebrity scientist,
the miracle worker
who had predicted
the bending
of starlight.
He was something
like a ceremonial king
who had lost
his influence
over the course
of events.
The media
were more interested
in him
than in the lesser-known
workers
actually changing science.
His every proclamation
continued to be reported
by the press,
if largely ignored
by his peers.
The perception
that Einstein
still had tricks
up his sleeve
persisted for the rest
of his life.
His unification theories
developed in Berlin
in the late 1920s
helped keep him
steadily in the public eye.
Jilted by the
mainstream physics
community
who increasingly
viewed him
as a relic,
he remained
the darling
of the international media.
Chapter 4
The Quest
for Unification
This Einstein
has proven
a great comfort
to us
that always knew
we didn't know much.
He has shown us
that the fellows
that we thought
was smart
is just as dumb
as we are.
I think this Dutchman
is just having
a quiet laugh
at the world's expense.
Will Rogers
Will Rogers
takes a look
at the Einstein theory.
Working in Berlin,
Einstein was surrounded
by constant activity.
Not only was the city
a major center
for science
and technology,
it was also
a haven for the arts.
Unter den Linden,
the main thoroughfare
in central Berlin,
offered in the late 1920s
one of the most
concentrated hubs
of culture
in the world.
Stretching from
the famous
Brandenburg Gate
to the central cathedral,
city palace,
and statue-packed
museum island,
it was home
of the state library,
state opera,
and the main buildings
of the University of Berlin.
Although inflation
had racked Germany,
Berlin had many
bragging rights.
The sprawling city
boasted that it was
the largest inn area
in the world.
Pulsing new neighborhoods
were popping up
everywhere,
packed with
department stores,
restaurants,
jazz clubs,
and other venues.
Operetta companies
were thriving,
capturing from Vienna
the title of
best light opera scene.
Berthold Brecht
and Kurt Weill
skillfully mixed opera
with street language
and jazz
in their masterpiece
The Three-Penny Opera,
which opened
at the Theater
am Schiffbauerdam
in August 1928.
Late in 1927,
Planck retired
from the University
of Berlin.
With the involvement
of Einstein,
Schrödinger was invited
to fill the prestigious
professorship.
While Zurich
held many attractions,
particularly its proximity
to the mountains,
he was delighted
to receive an offer.
Returning to German soil
once again,
he and Ani
happily moved
to the bustling capital.
Ani recalled
the excitement
of those times.
Berlin was the most
wonderful
and absolutely
unique atmosphere
for all the scientists.
They knew it all
and they appreciated
it all.
The theater
was at the height,
the music
was at the height,
and science
with all the scientific
institutes,
the industry,
and the most famous
colloquium.
My husband liked it
very much indeed.
Situated in the German
capital,
not only did Schrödinger
become a central figure
in the scientific community
and have easy access
to lectures
and discussions,
but he also started
to enjoy a measure
of international publicity.
It was just a smidgen
of the monumental
attention awarded
to Einstein,
but it still gave him
a taste of fame.
For example,
in July 1928,
Scientific American
published an article
that presented
Schrödinger's view
as being the canonical
replacement
for the Bohr model.
The New York Times
took note
and informed its readership
that Schrödinger's theory
was the new fashion.
Bohr's work,
it reported,
was as out of style
as ankle-length skirts.
Savvy readers
would need to
acquaint themselves
with Schrödinger's
wave theory
of the atom instead.
While Schrödinger
began to enjoy publicity,
Einstein started
to detest it,
except when it proved
useful to the charitable
causes he supported,
or earned him
extra pocket money
from popular articles
and books
that he published.
Although Einstein
felt that the public
should be informed
about science,
he was dubious
that many people
could really understand
his theories.
Perhaps his bluntest
expression of this
was an unfortunate
set of remarks
that he made
right after his 1921
visit to the United States,
in which he accused
Americans of being
boorish.
His odd speculations
about why they were
interested in his work
produced this headline
in the New York Times.
Einstein declares
women rule here.
Scientists says
he found American men
the toy dogs
of the other sex,
people colossally bored.
Einstein was quoted
as suggesting
that American women
do everything
which is the vogue,
and now,
quite by chance,
they have thrown
themselves on the
Einstein fashion.
It is the...
