involving the compression of space itself in the direction of motion,
rather than a squashing of matter.
While those observers moving in tandem with an object would experience its proper length,
others traveling at a different constant speed would measure its length to be shorter
along the direction of its movement.
To help comprehend this idea, imagine that the space passenger decides to play light ping-pong
against the front wall of the ship, in the direction of the ship's motion, instead of the ceiling.
Placing a mirror on that wall and aiming his light generator toward it,
he bounces the beam horizontally back and forth.
Multiplying the time elapsed by the speed of light,
he determines the total length of the path the beam traveled.
On Earth, his sister aims her super-powerful telescope at the ship
and measures the length of the beam's path as well.
Because the ship is racing in the same direction as the light beam, before it bounces,
she records the time required for the beam to bounce back and forth
as being quicker than her brother's estimate.
Consequently, she observes its path length to be shorter.
A follow-up paper about the special theory of relativity
showed what would happen to mass at high speeds.
Einstein proposed that relativistic mass was a form of energy
linked by the now-famous equation E equals mc squared.
An object starts with a certain quantity of rest mass,
its birthright, so to speak.
By moving faster, it accrues additional mass
linked to its energy of motion.
The closer it gets to the speed of light,
the higher its mass.
To actually reach the speed of light,
an object would need to convert an infinite amount of energy
to mass, an impossibility.
Thus, for material bodies, the speed of light is unreachable,
unless the object is already at that speed.
The Union of Space and Time
After Einstein published his extraordinary results,
the German scientific community began to take notice.
It would be a while, however, before he would acquire international fame.
One early supporter was the physicist Max von Lauer,
then an assistant to Planck in Berlin.
In the summer of 1906,
von Lauer took the time to schedule a visit with Einstein at the patent office.
He sat in the waiting room,
eagerly awaiting the chance to meet the prodigious successor to Newton's throne.
The young man who came to meet me, von Lauer recalled,
made so unexpected an impression on me
that I did not believe he could possibly be the father of relativity theory.
So I let him pass,
and only when he returned from the waiting room
did we become acquainted.
Von Lauer did much to publicize Einstein's theory of relativity
and explore its implications.
He would write the first primer about relativity,
published in 1911.
Einstein greatly appreciated his friendship and support,
which lasted throughout their lifetimes.
Another cheerleader for Einstein was Minkowski,
whose view of his former student took a 180-degree turn.
Astonished that his lazy dog student
had solved the long-standing puzzle
of the interpretation of Maxwell's equations,
Minkowski decided to reframe the theory
in a more mathematically rigorous way.
By then, he had been appointed to a position
in the mathematical mecca of Göttingen,
where the influential logician and geometer David Hilbert
had assumed Klein's mantle
as the chief exponent of innovation in the field.
In that center for all that is beyond Euclid,
Minkowski was well placed
to take advantage of groundbreaking geometric approaches.
Minkowski brilliantly determined
that Einstein's theory would look far more elegant
dressed up in the garments of four-dimensional geometry.
He fashioned an alternative to Euclidean space
that had two key differences.
The first was that time,
multiplied by the speed of light to get the units right,
was included as a fourth dimension.
Length, breadth, and height
were joined by duration as ways of describing nature.
He called this amalgamation space-time.
The second change involved adding a negative term
to the Pythagorean theorem used to determine distances.
Its standard version,
used for millennia to find the hypotenuses of right triangles,
states that the sum of the squares
of the sides of a right triangle
equals the square of its hypotenuse.
For example, in a right triangle
where the sides are 3, 4, and 5 units,
3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared.
Minkowski modified this to include time
by stating that the sum of squares of spatial distances
minus the square of the fourth coordinate,
time multiplied by the speed of light,
equals the square of the space-time interval.
The space-time interval
is the shortest path length in four dimensions,
a generalization of spatial distance
that takes both space and time into account.
It represents the proximity of two events,
things happening in different places and different times,
by measuring the minimal four-dimensional route
linking one to the other.
Knowing the space-time interval between events
tells you whether or not they are causally connected,
meaning one could affect the other.
If the space-time interval is zero,
called light-like or negative,
called time-like,
the earlier event might influence the later one.
On the other hand,
if the space-time interval is positive,
called space-like,
no causal communication is possible,
as that would require a faster-than-light signal.
So if an actress dressed in a certain style
during the 2016 Oscars ceremony,
and a Proxima Centurion four light-years away
adopted the same style in 2017,
she couldn't be accused of being a copycat,
as the interval between them would be space-like,
with no possibility of causal communication.
A signal would have taken a minimum of four years,
not one year.
The Centurion fashion statement
would merely be cosmic coincidence.
By framing the special theory of relativity
as a four-dimensional theory set in space-time,
Minkowski showed how time dilation
and length contraction
could be construed as rotations
that transform space into time.
To see how such rotations occur,
we can think of the space-time interval
as something like a weather vane,
with north representing time
and east representing space.
Switching between two different perspectives
is like a turning of the vane
from east-northeast to north-northeast,
taking away some of its easterly component
and replacing it with a more northerly component.
Similarly, a spin of the space-time interval
might take away some of the spatial distance
between two events
while increasing their separation in time.
Minkowski triumphantly announced his findings
at the 80th Assembly of German natural scientists
and physicists in Cologne,
emphasizing their revolutionary nature.
The views of space and time,
which I wish to lay before you,
have sprung from the soil of experimental physics,
and therein lies their strength.
They are radical.
Henceforth, space by itself
and time by itself
are doomed to fade away into mere shadows,
and only a kind of union of the two
will preserve an independent identity.
While Einstein at first dismissed
Minkowski's reformulation of his theory
as too intellectually demanding,
within a few years,
its brilliance would soak in.
It would have a profound influence
on his mode of thinking,
helping him realize the critical importance
of higher-level mathematics
and advancing physics.
In 1908,
the same year as Minkowski's announcement,
Einstein received his habilitation
and began to teach
at the University of Bern.
The following year,
he was appointed to a position
at the University of Zurich.
There he began to plan out a sequel
to the special theory,
a comprehensive theory of gravitation
called the General Theory of Relativity.
To do so,
he would need to rethink his views
about higher mathematics.
It was time to move beyond
the limitations of childhood.
The worn geometry book
with its plainer Euclidean mathematics
had served the young Einstein well,
but to advance his theory,
he would need to embrace
non-Euclidean geometries
and a fourth dimension.
Einstein's progression
would in turn inspire Schrodinger,
whose childhood fascination
with astronomy,
exemplified by the dance
of the planets with his aunt,
would deepen into an interest
in the relativistic approach
to gravitation.
The two would find themselves
grappling with theoretical questions
in the midst of a turbulent age
for Europe.
War,
economical collapse,
political turmoil,
and more war.
Chapter 2
The Crucible of Gravity
A patriot fiddler
composer of Luton
wrote a funeral march
which he played with the mute on
to record,
as he said,
that a Jewish-Swiss
Tuten
had partially scrapped
the Principia of Newton.
Limerick,
published in Punch,
1919.
While Newton's theory
of gravitation
was elegant
in its simplicity,
Einstein found it
fundamentally unattractive.
It treated gravity
as an instant,
invisible connection
between two distant masses.
Unseen threads
of gravitational force
somehow guided
the celestial bodies
through space.
Agreeing with Mach
that nature
should be measurable
and observable,
Einstein sought
a deeper explanation.
Moreover,
the special theory
of relativity
set an upper limit
to the swiftness
of causal communication.
The speed of light.
Newton's theory
didn't obey
such a rule.
If the sun disappeared,
the theory predicted,
Earth would immediately
follow a straight path
through space,
even before the last rays
of sunlight arrived.
How would it know
to do so
even before the sun's
absence could be
communicated?
Einstein realized
that gravitation thereby
needed to be recast
in the language
of relativity.
As an ardent
appreciator
of Maxwell's
approach to
electromagnetism,
which was based
on the concept
of fields,
Einstein similarly
wanted to compose
a field theory
of gravitation.
A field
is a mapping
of a force's
potential impact
with particular values
for each point
in space.
The field's strength
at a certain location
helps determine
how much force
a particle placed
there would experience.
An electric field,
for example,
sets out how much
electric force
an electron,
proton,
or other charged body
would feel
at any given place.
A magnetic field
does the same
for magnetic force.
Consider,
for instance,
a field that represents
the strength
and direction
of waves
throughout the ocean.
A hapless sailor
who found himself
in a place
where the field
was exceptionally strong
might witness
his vessel rocked
by overwhelming forces,
resting him off course.
Even if he didn't know
the source
of the powerful waves,
such as an undersea earthquake,
he would experience
its terrifying impact
firsthand.
Thus,
while the cause
of the disturbance
might be distant,
the field would act
as a conduit
and the impact
would be local.
Seeing marked similarities
between electromagnetism
and gravitation,
such as the fact
that their strengths
drop off
with the square
of the distance
between objects,
Einstein set out
in the early 1910s
to identify
gravity's field equations.
The result would be
his masterly
general theory
of relativity.
By making an analogy
between the forces,
he would set the stage
for his eventual efforts
to try to unify them.
In the middle
of his struggle,
Einstein would come
to Vienna
and deliver
a progress report.
His stirring
conference talk
would inspire
young Schrödinger,
then in his mid-twenties,
to turn from
practical topics
such as the measurable
properties of light
and radiation
to more fundamental
questions,
such as the riddle
of gravitation
and the properties
of the universe itself.
The connections
Einstein drew
between electromagnetism
and gravitation
would plant the seeds
for Schrödinger's interest
much later in life
in finding
a unified theory
of the natural forces.
The Vienna Conference
of 1913
would prove
a turning point
in his career.
With Einstein
as his role model,
nothing in the cosmos
would seem beyond
the grasp
of his clever mind.
Twilight of an Empire
The shining imperial capital
of the Austro-Hungarian Empire
was about to lose
its luster.
Its central fire
would soon be extinguished
and its satellite subjects
released like embers
to the wind.
Its extinguishing
would arrive as quickly
and completely
as a solar eclipse.
Yet not all
was dire.
In such moments
of darkness,
stars that would
never be seen
by day
have a glorious chance
to sparkle.
The Habsburg city
was throwing a party,
a festive meeting
of minds
that, as it turned out,
would serve
as a farewell
to Vienna's golden age.
Invited were thousands
of the finest
German-speaking scientists
in Europe.
From Prague
to Budapest
and from Berlin
to Zurich,
young and old
congregated
to seek word
on astonishing new theories
about particles,
atoms,
light,
electricity,
statistical physics,
and other topics.
There were notable absences.
Planck and Arnold Samerfeld,
the esteemed director
of Munich's Physics Institute,
did not attend.
However,
enthusiasm
for new findings
in physics
made the last waltz
of Austro-Hungarian physics
a gala to remember.
No luxury
was spared
for that year's assembly
of German natural scientists
and physicians,
the same group
Minkowski
had addressed
half a decade earlier
in Cologne.
It met from
September 21st
to 28th,
1913,
in the spanking
new headquarters
of the University
of Vienna's
Physical Institute,
near the little street
of Poltsmanngasse.
Franz Exner
had insisted
on the construction
of the new building
as a condition
for remaining director.
After sessions
at the building's
grand lecture hall,
the more than
7,000 conference members
had the option
of attending
a sumptuous reception
hosted by
the Imperial Court,
a banquet held
by the Vienna City Government,
and a party
graciously arranged
by the Viennese physicists
themselves.
Surely no one complained
about being underfed.
Among the topics
of discussion,
radiation
and atomic physics
were all the rage.
One of the speakers
was German physicist
Hans Geiger,
inventor of the
Geiger counter,
proposed in rudimentary form
in 1908,
and a former co-worker
of famed New Zealand-born
physicist Ernest Rutherford.
In 1909,
under Rutherford's
supervision
at the University
of Manchester,
Geiger and Ernest Marsden
had conducted
an artful experiment
designed to probe
the atom.
Bombarding gold foil
with alpha particles,
a type of radiation
identical to helium ions,
they discovered
that almost all the particles
passed unhindered
through the foil.
However,
a small fraction
bounced back
at sharp angles,
like superballs
ricocheting off
a concrete wall.
From these
unexpected results,
Rutherford deduced
that atoms
are mainly
empty space,
but have tiny,
positively charged
cores,
called nuclei.
His 1911
rudimentary model
of the atom
as something
akin to the solar system,
with negative electrons
orbiting a positive nucleus,
fundamentally altered
the concept
of the atom.
No longer
could atoms
be thought of
as indivisible
and solid,
like tiny marbles.
Rather,
they were
intricate bodies,
principally composed
of pure emptiness.
Geiger's talk
at the meeting
focused on
practical ways
of detecting
alpha and beta
particles,
the latter
another type
of radiation
later identified
as electrons.
As a young
researcher
working at
Exner's
Physical Institute
and the nearby
Institute for Radium
Research,
Schrodinger
had become
interested in
detecting radiation
too.
One month earlier,
Schrodinger
had gone to
the village
of Zeam
on Lake
Obertrumer
near Salzburg
to record
the amount
of a radium
decay product
called radium
A
in the atmosphere.
Taking
almost 200
measurements
using collection
tubes and an
electrometer,
he calculated
how the
atmospheric content
of radium
A changed
over time.
Curiously,
he showed
that even
at its peak,
radium A
accounts for
only a fraction
of atmospheric
radiation.
Based on his
and other
readings,
many scientists
had concluded
that other
sources,
such as gamma
rays,
must supply
the rest.
Researchers
had begun
to probe
possible causes
of the extra
radiation.
Relevant
went to his
work,
and ideally
located in
his home
city,
the late
September
conference
was just
perfect for
him.
He could
listen to
talks describing
the latest
findings about
radioactivity,
the atomic
nucleus,
and related
topics.
One such
talk,
by astrophysicist
Werner
Kohlhorster of
Halle,
Germany,
described balloon
flights miles
above the
ground equipped
with radiation
detection
equipment.
Confirming
earlier results
by Austrian
physicist
Victor Hess,
he reported
how penetrating
radiation,
apparently from
extraterrestrial
sources,
increases
significantly
at high
altitudes.
We now
call this
radiation from
beyond Earth
cosmic rays.
Because of
this confirmation,
science historians
Jegdish Mehra
and Helmut
Reckenberg have
suggested that
the conference
was the
birthday of
cosmic radiation.
At the
conference,
many of the
attendees,
including
Einstein,
learned for
the first
time about
Bohr's
remarkable
theory of
atomic
structure,
proposed
earlier that
year.
Einstein
thought that
Bohr's
achievement was
one of the
greatest
discoveries.
While none
of the
research talks
specifically
mentioned the
Bohr model,
word of the
triumph arrived
informally via
the personal
account of
Hungarian
physicist
George
de Heveshy,
who had
witnessed its
development
firsthand.
De Heveshy
had been in
Manchester in
1912 when
Bohr was a
visiting postdoctoral
scholar working
with Rutherford.
He saw how
Bohr and Rutherford's
collaborative efforts
had proven most
fruitful in advancing
an atomic theory.
Then de Heveshy was
appointed to the
Institute for Radium
Research in Vienna,
where he was in an
ideal position to
convey the exciting
news about Bohr's
work to interested
conference participants.
Bohr took Rutherford's
planetary scheme for
the atom and used
the notion of the
quantum to explain
its stability and
its pattern of
spectral lines.
At face value,
electrons should not
have stable orbits
around an atomic
nucleus.
Rather, because of
their electrical
attraction to the
positive core, they
should eventually
spiral inward, emitting
radiation as they
plummet toward the
center.
The frequency of this
radiation, if
classical physics is
any guide, should be
synchronized with the
frequency of the
orbits.
However, that's not
what happens at all.
Atoms are relatively
stable.
Something must explain
why electrons like to
remain in steady
orbits.
Bohr brilliantly
deduced that electrons'
angular momenta must
come only in discrete
values, whole number
multiples of a constant
known as h-bar.
Defined as Planck's
constant divided by the
quantity 2 pi.
In other words, angular
momentum, like energy, is
quantized.
Angular momentum is a
physical quantity that
depends on an object's
mass, velocity, and
orbital radius.
It comes into play when
anything is spinning
around, such as a ballet
dancer pirouetting or a
galaxy revolving.
In classical physics, it is
a continuous parameter,
meaning that it can take
on any value.
If a dancing coach tells a
dancer to spin or partner
a bit faster, she might
pull a bit harder on his
hand to give him the
impetus, technically known
as torque, to increase his
angular momentum.
Remarkably, Bohr found that
you can't make electrons
revolve at just any rate or
at any orbital radius.
They can change states only
by ingesting or expelling
finite chunks of energy and
angular momentum.
Thus, rather than adjusting
their locations or velocities
continuously, the electron
dancers suddenly switch from
one position to another, like
movement under a strobe light.
Changes in an electron's
energy level happen whenever a
photon is absorbed or emitted.
The energy of a photon is its
frequency times Planck's
constant.
That quantum of energy is
gained or lost whenever a
photon is acquired or
expelled, respectively.
Surprisingly, as Bohr
demonstrated, the frequency of
radiated photons has nothing
whatsoever to do with the
electron's orbital frequency,
how many times it circles per
second.
Rather, it is an independent
quantity that depends only on
the size of the energy level
jump with which the photon is
associated.
Bohr's hypothesis of quantized
angular momentum and energy
enabled, for the first time,
accurate predictions of the
orbital radii and energy levels
of electrons in a hydrogen atom.
It offered a set of Kepler's
laws, rules for planetary motion,
for the atomic solar system.
Although it certainly was
incomplete, it addressed only
hydrogen atoms and didn't justify
its assumptions of quantized
angular momentum and energy.
It fit existing data well.
Its major litmus test, which it
passed with flying colors, was
matching the Rudbaria formula for
the wavelengths of hydrogen's
spectral lines.
Proposed in 1888 by Swedish
physicist Johannes Rudbaria, the
Rudbaria formula is a simple
algorithm for deducing the patterns
of wavelengths in atomic spectra.
It predicts several distinct
sequences of lines in hydrogen
spectrum, known as the Lyman
series, the Balmer series, the
Poshin series, and so forth.
Bohr showed that these series, and
the Rudbaria formula in general,
derived precisely from his set of
assumptions about electrons and
photons in hydrogen atoms.
Each spectral line's wavelength
matched the predicted value for a
photon given off during an
electron's transition between two
different energy levels.
Bohr's model is now called the
old quantum theory.
His ad hoc assumptions advanced our
understanding of atoms, but could
not be explained through any known
physical principles.
It would take the careful work of
Schrodinger, Louis de Broglie,
Werner Heisenberg, and others in the
1920s to place quantum theory on a
much firmer footing.
Sketches of a Revolution
The most anticipated talk of the
1913 Vienna Conference was a lecture
by Einstein on the morning of Tuesday,
September 23, and titled The Present
Status of the Problem of Gravitation.
The great lecture hall was packed with
those eager to hear the man who had
published so many remarkable papers in a
single year speak about his new theories.
Einstein did not disappoint the crowd.
He delivered one of his most important
scientific addresses, a sketch of his
ideas about a new explanation of
gravitation that would transcend Newton's
laws.
Offering tantalizing morsels of Machian
philosophy, bite-sized portions of higher
mathematics, and an enticing prediction
about starlight during solar eclipses, he gave the
hungry audience a taste of what would become his
exquisite general theory of relativity.
Einstein began his talk with a brief history of
electromagnetism, starting with Coulomb's inverse
square law of the electric force between charges.
He showed how in the nineteenth century the
contributions of Faraday and others demonstrated
deep connections between electricity and
magnetism, culminating in Maxwell's equations.
These ties formed a kind of unified field theory,
Einstein emphasized, uniting two natural phenomena,
once thought to be unrelated, in a single theory.
Maxwell's equations, he pointed out, set a maximum rate
of communication, the vacuum speed of light.
To accommodate classical ideas about relative velocity to
the new reality of an invariant light speed, the special theory of
relativity was developed.
Now the time was ripe, Einstein continued, to tackle nature's other
fundamental force, gravitation.
At that point, gravitation was just at the stage that electricity had
been when Coulomb's law was proposed.
Newton's inverse square law of gravitation, with its notion of action at a
distance, was analogous to Coulomb's idea, and similarly incomplete.
It was time, Einstein emphasized, to develop a full field theory of all the
natural forces, including gravitation, which did not involve the archaic idea
that interactions happened instantaneously across vast distances.
Special relativity mandated that gravitation could not be transmitted
instantly between two remote massive bodies.
The interaction certainly could not happen faster than the speed of light.
Gravitation needed to be reframed, therefore, as a local field theory that
respected nature's upper speed limit.
By making an analogy between electromagnetism and gravitation,
Einstein was clearly sowing the seeds for a unified explanation of both of them.
He wanted to continue Maxwell's program of melding different forces together by
blending gravitation into the mix.
Explaining gravity by itself would only be the first step.
Schrodinger listened intently to the words of the man who would come to be his mentor.
Einstein's crystal-clear explanation of the deep connections between the forces
opened his eyes to the stunning possibilities of fundamental theoretical physics.
Subsequently, Schrodinger would see no limit to the kinds of problems he could tackle,
including cosmic questions much broader than the atmospheric radiation measurements
on which he had been focused.
At that time, Schrodinger was one of the few scientists who appreciated the full scope
of Einstein's ambition to unify the natural forces.
The conception Einstein put forward, he would later write,
embraced from the outset, and not only by the numerous subsequent attempts to generalize it,
every kind of dynamical interaction, not just gravitation only.
In tandem with his broader ambitions in physics, Schrodinger would soon begin to read much philosophy.
His eyes became focused on signs of unity in nature.
An ensuing search for unifying principles would lead him to the work of the nineteenth-century
German philosopher, Arthur Schopenhauer, Eastern mystics, and others who sought to explain
the underlying mechanisms of the universe.
Certainly, Schrodinger could well relate to Einstein's interest in the philosophy of Mach,
who was sickly and long retired, but still actively interested in science.
Einstein molded Mach's critique of the Newtonian concept of inertial frameworks,
constant speeds relative to absolute space, and his vague alternative idea that distant
pulls from the stars cause inertia, into a specific connection between mass and inertia.
In Einstein's interpretation of Mach, the collective mass of all bodies in the universe exerts an
influence on objects, causing them to move naturally in straight lines at constant speeds.
Hence, inertia is an aggregate effect of the distribution of mass in the universe,
something like the dim, nocturnal haze that is the combined influence of street lamps in a city.
When the conference wasn't in session, Einstein would visit Mach in his Vienna apartment and
discuss mutual scientific interests with the elderly, gray-bearded philosopher.
In the most technical part of his talk, Einstein proceeded to sketch his ideas,
developed in mathematical form with Grossman, for a way of connecting the mass distribution in space
to its four-dimensional geometry, and finally, to the local motions of objects in the form of what
we call gravitational acceleration. He pointed out that his theory rests on the idea that inertial mass,
how an object accelerates in response to forces, is precisely equal to gravitational mass,
how an object is attracted to others through gravity. This leads to a cancellation in the equations of
motion of an object's own mass, meaning that at a particular point of space, any massive object
would display the same behavior. Consequently, an object's location, and the geometry of space at
that point as shaped by the mass distribution in the universe, governs its behavior.
The culmination of Einstein's talk was a bold, testable prediction about the bending of starlight by the sun.
He forecast that the sun's massive presence would warp the geometry around it, causing everything in its
vicinity to move in curved paths, from our perspective, rather than straight lines.
Even the light emitted by distant stars would bend as it neared the sun. Tracing these rays backward,
we would perceive these stars to shift to different positions than they would appear at if the sun's
bulk wasn't there. Naturally, because we normally can't observe the stars by daylight, we wouldn't
ordinarily witness this gravitational light-bending effect. However, during a total solar eclipse,
Einstein pointed out, the relocation of stars would be eminently observable. He suggested that this
distortion be measured and matched against his theory during an impending eclipse due to take
place over Eastern Europe in August 1914. The Vienna Conference deeply impacted Schrodinger's career.
Veering away from experimental measurements of radiation, he began to move in a theoretical direction,
examining fundamental questions about physics. However, before he could delve deeply into research in
atomic physics, gravity, and the other topics he was exposed to during the conference, fate would
intervene. On June 28, 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, designated heir to the Austro-Hungarian crown,
was visiting Sarajevo, Bosnia, when Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip fatally shot him and his wife.
One month later, the First World War began, and Schrodinger received his marching orders.
He served loyally on the Italian front, performing various duties, such as commanding a battery.
While Germany joined the war, fighting on the side of Austria-Hungary,
Einstein adamantly opposed the conflict and refused to participate.
Returning to Vienna in spring 1917, Schrodinger continued his military obligations by doing
meteorological work alongside his friend Hans Turing. Sadly, the war had delayed Schrodinger's
academic career by about a third of a decade, a frustratingly long time for a young researcher.
Back in Vienna, he was eager to make up the lost time by resuming his theoretical endeavors and
teaching. The war would also delay the testing of Einstein's light-bending prediction.
German astrophysicist Erwin Finley Freundlich, a student of Klein and ardent follower of Einstein's
theories, enthusiastically mounted an expedition to the Crimea, where the solar eclipse would be
prominent, with hope of recording the phenomenon. But before he could take the measurement, the Russian
army captured and interned him as a prisoner of war. It would take another half-decade, after the war
was over, for such a test to be performed, and Einstein's hypothesis confirmed. In the interim,
Einstein would continue to develop his theory of gravitation.
The Happiest Thought
The roots of the general theory of relativity date back well before the 1913 conference.
In 1907, only two years after his special theory was published, Einstein had what he later called
the happiest thought of his life. As he recalled, I was sitting in a chair in my patent office in
Bern. Suddenly, a thought struck me. If a man falls freely, he would not feel his weight.
I was taken aback. The simple thought experiment made a deep impression on me. It was what led me
to the theory of gravity. Einstein had stumbled upon the principle of equivalence, a simple but powerful
idea that became the bedrock of general relativity. It derives from the idea that because inertial mass,
mass equals gravitational mass, all objects accelerate equally under pure gravity.
Legend has it that Galileo dropped a stone and a feather from the leaning tower of Pisa to test
whether this was true. Because it is, free-falling objects accelerating downward at precisely the
gravitational acceleration appear to be weightless. That's because if an object were falling along with
the scale directly under it, both would journey downward at the same rate, so the scale would
not feel a weight on it. Roller-coaster enthusiasts note such a sensation of weightlessness during
downward plunges. Einstein took this idea a step further by stating that no physical experiment could
distinguish a free-falling body from one that is at rest, assuming that no other forces such as air
resistance interfere. Therefore, if a girl plummeting straight downward in a free-fall ride in an
amusement park were juggling bowling pins, shuffling cards, or stacking building blocks,
she would find the task just as simple or challenging as the case may be as performing the same feat while
at rest. That's because everything would be accelerating downward along with her at precisely the same
pace. Einstein brilliantly realized that it would be possible to patch together a comprehensive
theory of gravity from free-falling reference frames, treating each as if it were at rest.
Within each framework, he noted, each object would move in a straight line unless deflected by external
forces. However, when viewed from another framework, those straight lines might appear curved.
That is why we see bodies taking curved paths because of gravity, because we are viewing their
motion from our framework, not theirs. To understand how this works, let's revisit the light-ping-pong
analogy mentioned in Chapter 1. Imagine that an astronaut is bouncing a beam of light off a mirror on one
side of his transparent spaceship, while his sister is using a hypothetical ultra-powerful telescope to watch
him from Earth. Suppose his ship is free-falling toward a planet. From his perspective, the light ray would
travel across his ship in a perfectly straight line. If he transmitted the light horizontally across the
ship from a height of three feet, it would hit the mirror at a height of three feet as well.
However, from his sister's point of view, the ship would be falling, and the light would be bending
downward. By the time the light reached the mirror, the ship and mirror would be much lower. Thus,
the light would take a curved path, from a high starting point to a much lower bounce off the
mirror. This phenomenon led Einstein to make his prediction about starlight curving near the sun
during an eclipse, even before he had the mathematical skills to beef up his theory with a solid geometric
framework. At first, he tried more moderate tweaks to the special theory, including the idea of making
the speed of light vary from point to point. However, he couldn't get the math to work as he wished.
He started to think about more sophisticated mathematical methods, such as changing the metric,
the components of the formula for calculating distances, but didn't yet have the knowledge to complete his
scheme. Sometime in late 1912, Einstein became aware of a body of experimental results published
by Hungarian physicist Baron Laurent Roland von Utwosch about the equivalence of inertial and
gravitational mass. Einstein had suggested such an experiment himself before learning about Utwosch's
extensive studies. Over the course of many decades, Utwosch had perfected an instrument called
a torsional balance, designed to pick up even subtle differences between masses' inertial and
gravitational values. In various versions of the experiment, he reached higher and higher precision,
and still found absolutely no discrepancy. For Einstein, Utwosch's work showed that the principle
inspired by his happiest thought was not just an abstraction, but rather a deep, empirical truth
about nature. The old one, as Einstein often personified his notion of an equation-developing
deity, had left a vital clue. And it was his job to solve gravity's sphinx-like riddle.
Pulled Out of the Quagmire
In July 1912, after working for about a year at the University of Zurich, and a little more than a
year at the University of Prague, Einstein returned to the city of Zurich to begin a position at his
alma mater, ETH. One of the main attractions, along with being in his beloved Switzerland,
was working alongside his friend Grossmann, who was a math professor.
The new position turned out to be fortuitous for the development of general relativity.
Einstein was sinking quickly into the quicksand of confusion about higher mathematics and needed a
strong grip to pull him back to safety. The same former classmate who had assisted him with his math
in college proved indispensable in his quest to understand gravity geometrically. Grossmann had
little interest in physics, but became passionate about Einstein's project. He gave Einstein a crash
course in the works of Riemann, including how to manipulate tensors that describe the properties
of non-Euclidean, higher-dimensional manifolds. Recall that tensors are mathematical objects that
transform in a certain way, and that manifolds are surfaces that can have any number of dimensions.
He also introduced Einstein to the papers of German mathematician Elven B. Christoffel,
Italian mathematician Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro, and Ricci-Curbastro's student Tullio Levi-Civita,
each of whom had contributed to the differential calculus of curved geometries.
Grossmann's extensive assistance gave Einstein new optimism about overcoming his difficulties in
expressing his ideas mathematically. Einstein worked on the theory with a fevered intensity,
temporarily abandoning all of his other scientific interests.
When Sommerfeld invited him to Munich to give a talk about quantum theory, he declined, writing back,
I am now occupied exclusively with the gravitational problem, and believe that I can overcome all
difficulties with the help of a local mathematician friend. But one thing is certain. Never before in
my life have I troubled myself over anything so much, and that I have gained great respect for
mathematics, whose more subtle parts I considered until now, in my ignorance, as pure luxury.
Compared with this problem, the original theory of relativity is childish.
At one point Einstein came to Grossmann's apartment so often in the evening,
the latter's elderly maid grew weary of running down the stairs to open the front door.
Einstein's solution was to ask Grossmann to leave the front door open so that the old girl won't
have to bother. Within a year, Einstein and Grossmann had worked out the preliminary version
of their theory that Einstein would present at the 1913 Vienna Conference. Historians refer to this
early form as the Entwurf, or outline, from the name of a paper they published around that time,
outline of a generalized theory of relativity and theory of gravitation. It contained many,
but not all, of the elements of what became general relativity.
In special relativity, observers traveling at constant velocities relative to each other
experience identical laws of physics. For example, Maxwell's equations appear the same for both.
One of Einstein's key goals in formulating general relativity was to extend the concept of universal
laws to observers accelerating relative to each other. Unlike Newtonian mechanics, which favors inertial
or non-accelerating frameworks, Einstein wanted his theory to be one-size-fits-all.
A researcher in a lab that happens to be on a train grinding to a halt or on a carousel spinning in a
circle should be able to describe her experiment by means of the same physics as one who is working
in an ordinary stationary brick-and-mortar facility. Mathematically, that means that the equations should
have the same form for accelerating coordinate systems, including speeding up, slowing down,
or rotation, as for non-accelerating coordinate systems. Einstein called this condition general
covariance. Unfortunately, Einstein came to realize that the Entwurf didn't meet his objective of being
independent of the coordinate system. It did not live up to his Machian goal of abolishing the
preference for inertial frameworks altogether and establishing a kind of democracy for all kinds
of motion, including acceleration. Rather, there was still an elite in which certain kinds of
coordinate systems were favored. Einstein turned to another former classmate,
Michele Beso, for advice on the scientific validity of the Entwurf. If the theory was physically correct,
perhaps he could live with certain mathematical limitations, such as a lack of general covariance.
Einstein was doggedly persistent about his ideas, but would abandon them in a flash if he could see a
more economical way forward. He tried to persuade himself, for a time, that general covariance was
not necessary for a complete theory, as long as the equations were simple and produced physically
valid results. Besso and Einstein decided to see how the Entwurf treated a benchmark of astronomy.
The rate of precession, advancement in the direction of rotation, of Mercury's perihelion,
closest point to the Sun. As the innermost planet, Mercury feels the Sun's gravity the strongest,
and is therefore the most sensitive to tests of gravitational theories. While Newton's
gravitational theory describes very well the motions of the other planets in the solar system,
it fails to account for the spirograph-like turning of Mercury's elliptical orbit, advancing slowly over
the eons, retracing the same pattern once every three million years. Einstein hoped that the Entwurf would
produce some more accurate prediction. To his dismay, calculations performed by Besso indicated that
his theory still generated an inaccurate precession rate. Another prediction Einstein and Grossmann made in
the Entwurf, the deviation of starlight because of the Sun's massive influence would have been tested by
Finley Freundlich during the 1914 solar eclipse if he hadn't been captured. If he had been able to take
that measurement, he likely would have found that the Entwurf offered inaccurate results for that value, too.
The theory clearly needed an overhaul, forcing Einstein to struggle with the equations much longer than he
had anticipated. The struggle would need to proceed without Grossmann by his side, and also without
Mileva. Because of Albert's focus on his work, to the exclusion of his family life, and Mileva's plunge into a
deep depression, their marriage had been crumbling for some time. A career move back to Germany proved
the final straw. He received an offer from Max Planck and physicist Walter Nernst to take on three
important positions in Berlin. Member of the prestigious Prussian Academy of Sciences, professor at the
University of Berlin, and director of a newly established physics institute. One of the perks would be that he would
no longer have to lecture. He could research his theories to his heart's content. After reluctantly
following Albert to Berlin in April 1914, Mileva stayed there miserably for a few months, before deciding
to move back to Zurich with the children. After some time, they began to negotiate for a divorce, a process
that would take years. Albert, meanwhile, had a new flame. His first cousin, Elza Leventhal, to whom he
would eventually get married. She was much more domestic and nurturing than Mileva. She often treated him
like a child who needed to be fed, groomed, and generally cared for, for example, taming his unruly hair.
She also proudly took care of maintaining his social calendar, relishing any opportunity to show him
off in public. In turn, he was relieved to have his basic necessities attended to without fuss or
argument, so that he could focus on his calculations. He abided no interruptions in his tireless efforts
toward a theory of gravitation, save the sweet strains of violin during his music breaks.
The Race to the Summit
Just before Einstein gaspingly reached the summit of his aspirations, he sensed that David Hilbert was
racing to climb the same peak. In June 1915, Einstein spoke to an eager audience in Göttingen,
including Hilbert, about his progress toward the general theory of relativity and the obstacles
that remained, including the general covariance issue. Intrigued by the challenge of describing
a non-Euclidean spacetime shaped by its matter and energy, Hilbert decided to pursue finding the
field equations of general relativity himself. Suddenly, Einstein faced the heat of competition.
He was mortified that one of the ablest mathematicians in the world was eyeing the trophy he had been
seeking for years. The race was close, but Einstein planted his flag first. By late autumn,
he had joyously arrived at the correct formulation.
As a kind of consolation prize, however, Hilbert is recognized as being the author of an alternative
way of framing general relativity, called the Lagrangian formulation. Mathematically, a Lagrangian
is the difference between the kinetic energy, energy of motion, and the potential energy, energy of
position, of a mechanical system, written in the form of a function of its coordinates.
One can picture the distinction between potential and kinetic energy by thinking about a spring gun.
Push the spring back, and the potential energy increases, indicating that it has more potential
to fire. Release the spring, and the kinetic energy increases, meaning it actually fires.
The potential energy of position converts into the kinetic energy of motion.
Now subtract the potential energy, expressed in terms of the position variable, from the kinetic
energy, expressed in terms of the velocity variable, and you have a Lagrangian.
As the brilliant nineteenth-century Irish mathematician and astronomer William Rowan Hamilton showed,
one can integrate, sum up through calculus, the Lagrangian over time, to form a quantity called
the action. Then, as Hamilton proved, any mechanical system evolves in such a way to minimize the action,
or, in some cases, to maximize the action. This idea, called the least-action principle,
naturally leads to equations of motion, called the Euler-Lagrange equations.
Therefore, in short, by knowing the Lagrangian of a system, you can determine how it develops.
In classical mechanics, a simple example of this is an object, such as a box of Tang,
discarded by astronauts decades ago, moving slowly through empty space without any forces on it.
Its kinetic energy is just half its mass multiplied by its velocity squared.
Its potential energy is zero due to the lack of forces and the uniformity of empty space.
Therefore, its Lagrangian is just its kinetic energy.
The least-action principle shows that the object's path of minimal action is simply a straight line.
Plug the Lagrangian into the Euler-Lagrange equations, and the result is an equation stating that the
velocity is constant.
Therefore, the Tang box's rather simple Lagrangian dooms it to travel at constant speed in a straight
line indefinitely.
Hilbert's contribution, called the Einstein-Hilbert-Lagrangian, leading to the Einstein-Hilbert
action, is fairly straightforward, too.
However, it is rich enough mathematically to generate Einstein's field equations of general
relativity.
Moreover, if you have the inclination to alter general relativity in a physically reasonable
way, tweaking the Lagrangian offers a means of doing so.
We'll see that Schrodinger, in his efforts toward extending general relativity to encompass
other forces, would eventually do just that.
Hamilton developed another way of describing mechanical systems, called the Hamiltonian
method.
Instead of subtracting the potential energy from the kinetic energy, the two quantities
are added.
This sum, called the Hamiltonian, can then be used with a set of equations to explore how
a system's position and momenta relate to each other.
Like the Lagrangian method, the Hamiltonian method has also come to play a vital role in
modern physics, including, as we'll see, Schrodinger's formulation of quantum mechanics.
The Hamiltonian toolkit can similarly be applied to general relativity, as Einstein showed when
he finally wrapped up his theory.
A Glorious Edifice
Einstein debuted his masterpiece in nearly its final form at a meeting of the Prussian
Academy on November 4, 1915.
He was delighted to present the field equations for a comprehensive theory of gravitation based
on space-time geometry.
On November 18, he gave another talk to the same group, in which he offered his solution
to the age-old problem of Mercury's orbital procession.
Two months later, after calculations had conclusively verified his theory, he wrote to his friend
Paul Ehrenfest,
Can you imagine my joy at the feasibility of the general covariance with the result that
the equations of the perihelion movement of Mercury prove correct?
I was speechless for several days with excitement.
By the time Einstein published the final version of his theory in the prestigious Annalen der Fusik
on March 20, 1916, German physicist Karl Schwarzschild, while serving as a soldier on the Russian
front, had already come up with the first exact solution.
Remarkably, he had read a report of the November 18 talk and computed the case of the gravity of a
massive spherical object, such as a star.
Amidst the darkness of war, Einstein's gleaming creation lit up the sky even brighter than a
mortar, offering hope and inspiration to at least one soldier.
Sadly, Schwarzschild developed a fatal autoimmune disease and died on March 11, 1916, at the age of 42.
Many decades later, the Schwarzschild solution would be used to describe black holes.
Since then, numerous other exact solutions of Einstein's equations of general relativity have
been found.
Einstein's golden temple is built on a gritty foundation, the material and energy content of
the universe.
Start with any matter and energy distribution, expressed in the form of what is called the
stress-energy tensor, T mu nu, and the field equation of general relativity tells you the
components of another mathematical entity, representing the geometry of space-time, called the Einstein
tensor, G mu nu.
The equation G mu nu equals 8 pi T mu nu, which can be written in various ways, is considered one
of Einstein's most important contributions, along with the E equals mc squared and the equation
for the photoelectric effect.
All three equations are carved into the Einstein Memorial in Washington, D.C., as testimony to
his brilliance.
An anecdote once told by acclaimed physicist Richard Feynman illustrates the ubiquity of Einstein's
field equations in modern discussions of gravitation.
Feynman was invited to the first American conference on general relativity, in Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
in 1957.
When he arrived at the airport and was about to take a taxi to the conference, he didn't
know whether it was being held at the University of North Carolina or North Carolina State.
So he asked the taxi dispatcher if he had noticed any people looking distracted and muttering,
G mu nu, G mu nu.
The gist of the Einstein equations is that the geometry of a region, expressed by the Einstein
tensor, is determined by its matter and energy content, expressed by the stress-energy tensor.
In other words, mass and energy warp space-time, telling it where and how to curve.
The shape of space-time, in turn, governs how things move within it.
Hence, Einstein's equations beautifully connect the stuff of the universe with the shape of the
universe.
Any tensor can be written in terms of its components in the form of a matrix or array,
something like a chessboard.
The Einstein tensor and stress-energy tensor can each be expressed as four-by-four matrices.
They have sixteen components each, but not all the components are independent.
That is because a symmetry rule requires that if a component with a certain row and column
number, the third row and fourth column, for instance, has a particular value, the component
with those row and column numbers switched must be identical, the fourth row and third column.
It is like arranging the pieces of a game of chess so they seem like they are reflected in
a mirror along the diagonal of the board.
We call such tensors symmetric.
With the symmetry rule in place, the Einstein tensor has ten independent components.
So does the stress-energy tensor.
Therefore, Einstein's equations that associate the two tensors lead to ten independent relationships
between components.
These show how matter and energy affect different aspects of space and time.
Some of the relationships might lead to stretching or compression.
Others might lead to twisting or turning.
Anything that might happen to space and time, due to the gravitational effects of matter and
energy, is there in the equations.
If Einstein's equations are so simple and elegant, why did it take him so long to develop them?
As the saying goes, the devil is in the details.
You can't just take the Einstein tensor and directly plot out the motions of astronomical
objects such as planets or stars.
The way things move is determined by yet another mathematical entity, this one called the metric
tensor.
To proceed from the Einstein tensor to the metric tensor is not at all obvious and requires several
distinct steps.
Suppose you know the mass-energy distribution in a region and wish to determine how objects
move through it.
Here are the steps involved.
First, use Einstein's equations to find the Einstein tensor from the stress-energy tensor.
Both the Einstein tensor and the related Riemann curvature tensor—the former is a kind of shorthand
for the latter—encode information about the curvature of space-time from point to point.
Then, use either the Einstein or Riemann tensor components to construct geometric objects called
affine connections, also known as Christoffel connections.
These dictate how the components of vectors—objects with magnitude and direction—transform as you
move them as parallel to themselves as possible, from point to point.
Next, use the affine connections to reveal the components of the metric tensor.
The metric tensor sews together the fabric of space-time by specifying how to measure the
distances between points.
It offers a variation of the Pythagorean theorem for curved space-time.
Finally, use the metric to determine the most direct paths objects can take through space.
Because of the warping of space-time, these are generally curved, such as planets' elliptical
orbits around the Sun.
Although the mathematics of general relativity can challenge even Ph.D. students, let's use
an analogy to illustrate its different layers.
Start with a flat, boundless desert, representing empty space-time.
Upon the desert sand, we scatter rocks of various sizes and weights, symbolizing the variety of
massive objects in the universe, such as stars and planets.
We find that the heavier rocks press down upon the sand far more than the lighter rocks, creating
much deeper indentations.
The areas without rocks remain flat.
Hence, the more mass in a particular region, as recorded by the stress-energy tensor, the
more it dips, representing greater curvature as measured by the Einstein tensor.
Now, imagine that in our analogy, you can't walk on the sand or rocks.
They are too hot.
Therefore, we need to construct a sturdy canopy above it, supported by a structure that
respects the topography.
We gather numerous poles, local coordinate axes, and bars, affine connections, to create
the skeletal structure.
The bars connect different poles in a way that guides how they are oriented.
Similarly, affine connections determine how coordinate axes vary throughout space, in a
configuration that depends on the rising or dipping of the base.
Finally, we weave a firm canopy designed to fit snugly upon the structure.
In some places, we need to sew neighboring points tighter together to make the fabric bend
in certain ways.
In other places, neighboring points are much more loosely connected.
The sewing pattern that determines how to stitch together the canopy in just the right way to
match the skeletal structure just below it, and the rises and dips in the sand beneath that,
symbolizes the metric tensor.
Hence, we see how the metric tensor stitches the fabric of space-time in a manner governed by the
affine connections, which in turn depend on the Einstein tensor that is shaped by the stress-energy
tensor.
Got that?
Let's now take a walk on space-time's canopy.
We strive to take the fastest route possible, so we aim for a straight line.
However, the canopy dips where there is a massive group of rocks underneath it, making even the
most direct lines veer in various directions.
Consequently, we follow a curved path, ringing around the indented area, tracing out an oval shape.
Curiously, we have gone into orbit, like young Schrodinger around his aunt when they played
their planet game.
The Forever Universe
Once his general theory of relativity was complete, Einstein decided to apply it to the universe
in its entirety.
His goal was to show that the universe is a relatively stable collection of stars and other
bodies.
True, the stars move, he realized, but they do so slowly.
Einstein's proposed cosmology would offer the permanence and steady framework of Newtonian
absolute space without resorting to what he, following Mach, viewed as fictitious.
Einstein decided to begin his cosmological calculation with the basic assumption that space is isotropic,
meaning uniform in all directions.
He chose a simple four-dimensional geometry called a hypersphere to represent the shape
of space.
A hypersphere is a generalization of a sphere to an extra dimension.
If you live in a hypersphere and journey in any direction, you will eventually return to
your starting point, just as if you circled the equator on Earth.
The advantage of the universe having a hyperspherical profile is that it would be finite but free of
boundaries.
Only someone standing beyond the universe would notice its surface.
Within space, there would be no limits, just repetition.
The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges would wonderfully represent this concept in his imaginative short
story, The Library of Babel, in which he envisioned the cosmos as a vast but finite and repetitive
collection of books.
Einstein attempted to find a static solution to his field equations, but soon realized that
there was a problem.
The only solution he found was unstable.
If nudged a bit by changing the distribution of matter slightly, it would either collapse
or expand, like a balloon being popped or inflated.
To replicate an eternal, stable universe, such a solution certainly wouldn't do.
Edwin Hubble's discovery of cosmological expansion, what we now call the Big Bang, would be more
than a decade in the future.
Therefore, Einstein reasonably believed that space was static and saw expanding models as
unphysical.
To remedy the situation, he took the rather drastic step of adding an extra term to the
geometric side of his equations to produce what he saw as credible solutions.
Known as the cosmological constant and symbolized by the Greek letter lambda, the term acts as a
hedge against gravitational instability by stretching the geometry of space in the opposite direction.
He didn't assign the cosmological constant any physical meaning, but at the time he saw it as
essential to the integrity of his theory.
In our desert canopy analogy, imagine that the entire structure we had constructed was slowly
sinking into the sand.
Rather than rebuild the structure from scratch, we might elect to build mechanical devices around
the periphery that grab the canvas and stretch it outward.
We wouldn't win any architecture awards for our design, but it would do the job.
Similarly, the cosmological constant term, though inelegant, performed the task Einstein set out to
accomplish—preserving cosmic stability.
In 1917, Einstein published his Static Universe model, including the cosmological constant as part of
his field equations.
However, he couldn't rightfully claim that his solution was unique.
Dutch mathematician Willem de Sitter cleverly demonstrated that in the absence of matter,
Einstein's field equations produced solutions that would blow up exponentially, driven ever out of
by the cosmological constant.
De Sitter's model showed that as long as the cosmological constant exists, emptiness is unstable.
Given that he added the cosmological constant term as a stopgap rather than based on scientific
observation, Einstein did not take De Sitter's model very seriously.
He conceded, however, that progress in understanding the dynamics of the universe would require far more
astronomical measurement.
Luckily, Hubble would do just that, with his giant reflecting telescope on Mount Wilson in
Southern California, ultimately revealing a cosmos that was expanding rather than static.
Anticipations of Dark Energy
One might argue that Ernst Mach, who died in 1916, would have dismissed the idea of adding a term to the
equations of general relativity that had nothing to do with sensory experiences.
Just as Newton introduced absolute space just to define inertia, Einstein's inclusion of a
cosmological term was decidedly un-Machian.
It took another follower of Mach, Schrodinger, to suggest a more tangible alternative.
Schrodinger first became aware of Einstein's complete field equations of general relativity in late
1916, when he was commanding a battery at Prosecco during the war.
By the time he returned to Vienna in spring 1917, he found that many of his colleagues at the university,
including Turing, were busy trying to find ways of interpreting and applying Einstein's theory.
For example, along with Austrian physicist Josef Lentze, Turing showed how rotating objects affect the space-time around them,
a result known as frame-dragging or the Lentze-Turing effect.
In November 1917, Schrodinger submitted two papers to the German journal Physikalische Zeitschrift,
exploring different aspects of general relativity.
The first dealt with the question of defining gravitational energy and momentum from point to point
in a way that is independent of the choice of coordinate system.
He examined Schwarzschild's solution and showed that one way of framing gravitational energy
produced the surprising result that the object had no energy at all.
Interestingly, the issue Schrodinger brought up anticipated decades of debate
about the question of defining energy consistently in general relativity.
Schrodinger's second work, concerning a system of solutions to the generally covariant equations for gravitation,
addressed head-on the issue of the physicality of the cosmological constant.
He questioned the placement of an extra term on the geometric Einstein-tensor side of Einstein's equations,
arguing that the same effect could be achieved through a modification of the material-stress-energy-tensor side instead.
As Schrodinger noted, the completely analogous system of solutions exists in its original form
without the terms added by Herr Einstein.
The difference is superficial and slight.
The potentials remain unchanged.
Only the energy tensor of matter takes a different form.
The extra-tension-stretching term Schrodinger posited
served to counteract the gravitational effect of matter by adding a kind of negative energy
and making the mass density effectively zero.
With a zero mass density throughout space,
the universe would no longer be compelled to experience gravitational collapse
and would thereby maintain its stability.
He justified the zero mass using a Machian argument
that mass is noticeable only when it is excessive.
The argument is akin to saying that we generally notice black and white hues
only when they are contrasted with other colors.
We might refer to a perfectly black or white sky as having no color at all.
Einstein soon published a reply to Schrodinger's cosmology paper,
the beginning of a scientific dialogue that would take many twists and turns over multiple decades.
He pointed out that Schrodinger's hypothesis allowed for two options,
a new constant term or a new type of energy with negative density
that varied from point to point.
The former case, Einstein argued, was equivalent to the cosmological constant term,
only on the other side of the equations.
The latter, on the other hand, would be unphysical
because it would have a negative energy density, and tricky to map out.
As Einstein wrote,
one not only has to start out from the hypothesis
of the existence of a non-observable negative density in interstellar spaces,
but also has to postulate a hypothetical law
about the space-time distribution of this mass density.
The course taken by Herr Schrodinger does not appear possible to me
because it leads too deeply into the thicket of hypotheses.
Interestingly, the concept of a substance with negative energy density,
or alternatively negative pressure,
has emerged in recent years
as a possible solution to a cosmological puzzle.
In 1998, two teams of astronomers augmented Hubble's discovery
with their own finding about cosmic growth.
They discovered that not only is the universe expanding,
but the rate of expansion is speeding up.
Some unknown agent is causing the universe to accelerate.
University of Chicago cosmologist Michael Turner
dubbed that entity dark energy.
Curiously, the suggestion made by Schrodinger
and discussed by Einstein
about a substance counteracting gravity
would do the job just nicely.
For that reason, science historian Alex Harvey
has recently suggested that Einstein
discovered the concept of dark energy.
Discovered may be too strong a word,
given that there was no real physical motivation at that time.
More precisely, in 1917,
he envisioned that such a negative energy substance
was within the realm of possibility,
never dreaming that the universe was actually accelerating
due to some unknown cause.
Nevertheless, it is interesting
that the groundwork for such a notion
was laid down so early.
World Famous
When the First World War ended on November 11, 1918,
it left behind a Europe that was barely recognizable.
Empires fell, borders changed,
new leaders emerged,
and conditions began to develop
that would set the stage for another world war.
The Austro-Hungarian Empire
was replaced by a number of smaller states,
including Austria,
originally called German Austria,
Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.
A democratic but much weakened Weimar Republic
controlled much of what had once been the German Empire.
The victorious Allied powers
were determined that Germany should pay the price
for the bloody war of attrition.
It was forced to cede some of its territory,
limit the size of its army,
and pay extensive reparations,
leading to much resentment and economic depression
that would contribute to the rise of the Nazis.
During the war,
Einstein had little chance to test his hypothesis
about the gravitational bending of starlight by the sun.
Finley Freundlich's inability to complete his expedition
was a great disappointment to him.
Einstein quietly began to correspond
with a British astronomer,
Arthur Eddington,
who was keenly interested in verifying Einstein's theory.
According to several widely reported stories,
Eddington was known at the time
as one of the few people
who truly understood general relativity.
A Quaker and a pacifist,
Eddington, like Einstein,
was opposed to the war
and in favor of international scientific cooperation.
Naturally, during the bloody conflict,
open cooperation between British and German scientists
was close to impossible.
The armistice opened up a grand opportunity
for Eddington to help test Einstein's theory
and thus rekindle the trust
between scientists of their respective nations.
Eddington and Frank Watson Dyson,
astronomer royal of Britain,
realized that an ideal opportunity
to measure gravitational light bending
would arise on May 29, 1919.
On that day,
a solar eclipse would occur
over part of the southern hemisphere
just when the sun was passing
in front of the Hyades star cluster,
a particularly bright formation.
Dyson appointed Eddington
to be the organizer of a project
to observe the eclipse,
a move that helped save the latter
from internment as a conscientious objector.
In January 1919,
to set a baseline for the observation,
Eddington carefully measured
the unaltered positions
of the Hyades stars.
Then he organized two expeditions
to record their sky positions
during the eclipse.
The first team,
led by Eddington himself,
traveled to Principe,
an island in the Gulf of Guinea
off the west coast of Africa.
As a backup in case of inclement weather,
a second group was sent to Sobral, Brazil.
The two teams carefully photographed
the new positions of the stars
and brought their data back to Britain
for a detailed comparison
with the original results.
Completing his analysis on November 6,
Eddington was delighted to announce
that the angular deviations,
averaging 1.61 arc seconds for Principe
and 1.98 arc seconds for Sobral,
came close to Einstein's
general relativistic prediction
of 1.75 arc seconds,
and were far greater
than an estimate based on Newtonian theory
of half that amount.
At a meeting of the Royal Society,
chaired by Dyson,
a packed audience hailed the results,
acknowledging them,
along with the Mercury procession findings,
as important proof of general relativity.
In an age of political revolution,
the eclipse results showed that science, too,
had been swept up in colossal changes.
For a group of British scientists
to acknowledge one year after the war's end
that a German physicist had overthrown Newton
was truly extraordinary.
As Thompson proclaimed,
These are not isolated results.
It is not the discovery of an outlying island,
but of a whole continent
of new scientific ideas
of the greatest importance
to some of the most fundamental questions
connected with physics.
It is the greatest discovery
in connection with gravitation
since Newton enunciated that principle.
It is an emblem of how little Einstein
was known internationally
before the announcement
that a New York Times article
about the discovery
referred to him simply as
Dr. Einstein,
professor of physics
in the University of Prague.
Not only did the article
fail to mention his first name,
it also got his affiliation wrong,
as it had been more than seven years
since he had stepped down
from his Prague position.
In a flash,
Einstein became world famous.
By toppling Newton,
he had become a celebrity
in his own right.
Fame in the twentieth century
was a far bigger deal
than it had been in Newton's time.
News traveled much faster
in the age of wireless
than in the era
of the hand-cranked printing press.
Newspapers around the world
echoed the message
of the stunning Times of London's
three-banner headline,
Revolution in Science,
New Theory of the Universe,
Newtonian Ideas Overthrown.
The Lofty Clouds of Pure Geometry
The paint was barely dry
on Einstein's masterpiece
when he began to perceive
its imperfections.
As he stared at his achievement,
the two sides of his field equations
seemed imbalanced.
On the left-hand side
was a delicate representation
of gravity's geometric patterns.
On the right side,
all types of matter and energy,
including the energetic effects
of electromagnetic fields,
were coarsely lumped together
in the stress-energy tensor.
Einstein had the utmost respect
for Maxwell's equations
of electromagnetism
and didn't like seeing them
have a secondary role.
He came to believe
that electromagnetic fields
should be rendered
through geometry
much the way gravity was,
instead of merely being included
in the stress-energy tensor.
Memories of the geometry primer
of his youth
and the love of geometry
he had developed
through his contacts
with Grossmann and others
motivated him to write
all of nature's laws
through geometric principles.
Extending the sequence
of special and general relativity,
Einstein believed
that a third breakthrough
would be needed
to complete the transformation
of natural law
and unite electromagnetism
with gravity.
Maxwell's equations
and gravitational theory
would then be special cases
of a complete unified field theory,
constructed wholly
through geometric relationships.
Schrodinger would come
to agree
with Einstein's view
that general relativity
was incomplete
as long as electromagnetism
was omitted
from the geometry side.
We are in patent need
of field laws
for the electromagnetic field,
Schrodinger would write,
laws that one would also conceive
as purely geometric restrictions
on the structure
of space-time.
These laws,
the theory of 1915,
does not yield,
except in this simple case
of purely gravitational interaction.
As Einstein began
to embrace pure geometry
instead of geometry
guided by material effects,
his interest in experimentation
started to wane.
While his general relativity papers
and talks strongly emphasized
the need for experimental verification
through the mercury procession,
the bending of light,
and another effect
called the gravitational redshift,
his movement
toward a unified field theory
would see him changing
his rhetoric
to more abstract arguments.
Ironically,
the university student
who had loved being in the lab
and had skipped many of his classes
in higher mathematics
because they seemed irrelevant,
had grown into an advocate
of using mathematical beauty
and sheer reasoning
to guide his theories.
As he would state
in a lecture
on the method
of theoretical physics,
experience remains,
of course,
the sole criterion
of the physical utility
of a mathematical construction.
But the creative principle
resides in mathematics.
In a certain sense,
therefore,
I hold it true
that pure thought
can grasp reality
as the ancients dreamed.
Researchers associated
with the Goettingen
school of thought,
which emphasized
pure geometric reasoning,
helped shape
Einstein's growing interest
in more abstract
mathematical constructs.
For example,
Ehrenfest,
a friend and confidant
who had become
so close to Einstein
that they were like brothers,
was a key influence.
Ehrenfest had studied
in Goettingen
and taken courses
with Klein.
He and his mathematician wife,
Tatjana,
whom he had met
in one of Klein's classes,
were greatly interested
in the relationship
between geometry
and physics.
They offered their home
in Leiden, Holland,
as a refuge
where Einstein
could escape Berlin,
ponder theoretical dilemmas,
and relax
by playing chamber music.
Einstein on violin,
Ehrenfest on piano.
Adept at asking
poignant questions
that revealed
the essence of problems,
Ehrenfest lent
a ready ear
as Einstein struggled
to incorporate electromagnetism
into general relativity.
Klein himself,
though retired,
took an interest
in the treatment
of gravitational energy
and momentum
in general relativity.
Like Schrodinger
in his first paper
of November 1917,
Klein thought
that these quantities
needed to be defined
in a way
that didn't depend
on coordinate systems.
All observers,
he argued,
should measure
the same values
of gravitational energy
and momentum.
Klein corresponded
with Einstein
in 1918
about the question.
While Einstein
wouldn't budge
on his definition,
Klein's comments
likely further
motivated him
to place gravity
and electromagnetism
on equal footing.
Having different
definitions of energy
and momentum
for the two forces
was a quick fix
and by no means
a satisfactory
long-term solution.
Hilbert,
Klein's prize appointment
and arguably
the greatest systematizer
of geometries
since Euclid,
certainly had a profound
influence on Einstein.
Einstein took note
that Hilbert's formulation
of general relativity
attempted to unify
gravitational
and electromagnetism
along the lines
of a suggestion
made by German physicist
Gustav Mee
that the electron
is a kind of stable bubble
within the electromagnetic field.
Following Mee,
Hilbert argued
that matter
didn't exist independently,
but rather was the result
of clumpiness
within energy fields.
These fields,
in turn,
could be described
geometrically.
Einstein didn't accept
Hilbert's arguments
at first,
but gradually
came to believe
that geometry
was more fundamental
than matter.
Looking at electrons
and other matter particles
as the products
of geometry
is akin to explaining
knots in ropes
by understanding
how they tangle.
Imagine a girl
finding a curiously shaped knot
in a ball of yarn
and thinking it is
something separate
from the yarn.
She asks her mom
for a box of knots
to play with.
Her mother,
who happens to be
a professor at Göttingen,
patiently points out
that knots
aren't separate things
and shows her
how the yarn
can be twisted up
to make more of them.
Yarn is fundamental.
Knots are not.
Similarly,
Hilbert and me
envisioned a natural order
in which the geometry
of fields
is foremost
and twists
manifest themselves
as particles.
One of Hilbert's
most gifted students
was German mathematician
Hermann Weill,
known to his friends
as Peter,
who received his doctorate
from Göttingen
in 1908.
After receiving
his habilitation
in 1913,
Weill was appointed
to ETH in Zurich,
where he and Einstein
were briefly colleagues
and came to know each other.
In 1918,
Weill published
an epic account
of general relativity
and its possibilities,
entitled Space,
Time,
Matter,
which he would update
several times
in revised editions
as his ideas developed.
He sent an early copy
to Einstein,
who called it
a symphonic masterpiece.
Gratified by Einstein's
praise for his book,
Weill hoped that a new paper
he had written,
Gravitation and Electricity,
would draw the same
enthusiastic reaction.
The article offered
a means of tweaking
general relativity
to include Maxwell's equations
as a consequence.
He sent Einstein
the manuscript,
hoping it would be
recommended for publication.
While at first
Einstein was pleased
that Weill seemed
to have found a way
of sneaking electromagnetism
into the theater
of gravitation,
he drew back
when he saw
how much the intrusion
would disrupt the show.
Weill's idea
involved modifying
the idea
of how vectors
behave in a process
called parallel transport,
being moved
parallel to themselves
from point to point.
In standard
general relativity,
the affine connections
that define
how vector components
transform
and the metric tensor
that determines
how space-time intervals,
four-dimensional distances,
are measured,
depend on each other
in a direct
mathematical relationship.
In our desert canopy analogy,
that's a direct link
between the scaffolding
and the tarp.
Weill tampered
with that linkage
by adding an extra factor,
which he called
the gauge.
Just as railroads
in different countries,
such as Russia
and Poland,
have different gauges,
in that meaning
the distance
between the rails,
Weill envisioned
changing the four-dimensional
distance standard
from point to point
in space.
The bonus was
that the addition
of the gauge factor
produced an effect
equivalent to the
electromagnetic field.
However,
Einstein thought
changing the distance
standard was
unphysical,
and he couldn't
sanction such a radical
change to his theory.
Weill was extremely
disappointed that
Einstein rejected
his idea.
Although it was
never incorporated
into general relativity,
Weill's gauge idea
was later applied
to a different domain,
particle physics,
where it found
much success.
In the modern concept,
instead of actual space,
the gauge factor
pertains to a kind
of abstract space.
Contemporary interest
in the Higgs boson,
essential for explaining
the rest mass
of certain particles,
owes much to Weill's
gauge concept.
Adventures in the
Fifth Dimension
Yet another
Göttingen graduate,
Finnish physicist
Gunnar Nordström,
had proposed
his own unified theory
in 1914.
It was remarkable,
because it was
the first theory
to include
a fifth dimension,
supplementing
the three dimensions
of space
and the dimension
of time.
Nordström found
that adding
the extra dimension
offered the extra
space in the theory
needed to include
Maxwell's equations
of electromagnetism
along with gravity.
The theory
was not based
on general relativity,
however,
leading Nordström
himself to abandon
the idea
two years later,
after he acknowledged
the superiority
of Einstein's approach.
While there is
no indication
that Einstein
took heed of Nordström's
notion for unification,
another five-dimensional
idea left an indelible
impression on him.
In April 1919,
Einstein received
a letter from
Theodor Kulutza,
a little-known
Privatdocent
at the University
of Kernigsberg.
In the German
academic system,
a Privatdocent
is an instructor
who earns his living
by offering lectures
to which tickets
are sold,
rather than being
paid by the university.
At that low rank,
which he held
for twenty years,
Kulutza barely earned
enough to support
his family.
Cognizant,
perhaps,
of the modest
beginnings
of his own career,
Einstein gave
his full attention
to the note
despite its
sender's humble status.
Although he was,
at that time,
far afield
from the mainstream
community,
Kulutza had once
experienced
the mind-bending
atmosphere
of Göttingen.
He had spent
a year there
in 1908
during his student days,
becoming thoroughly
infused with the
geometric visions
of Klein,
Hilbert,
and Minkowski.
He also met
future fellow
unifier,
Vile.
The seed was planted
in Kulutza's brain
for a unique approach
to unification
that would sprout
eleven years later.
Kulutza's letter
outlined an idea
that had come to him
as a kind of revelation.
One day when he was
sitting in his study,
it had occurred to him
that by adding
an extra dimension
and extra components
to the tensors
of general relativity,
the machinery
of Einstein's
equations would
crank out a version
of Maxwell's
equations in addition
to the gravitational
factors.
Instead of being
a four-by-four array,
the Einstein tensor
would become
a five-by-five
matrix.
Rather than having
sixteen components
with ten of those
independent
because of symmetry
reasons,
it would have
twenty-five,
of which fifteen
would be independent.
That means
there would be
five additional
independent components,
four of which
could be used
to describe
electromagnetism.
The fifth
was basically ignored.
A simple change
in the number
of dimensions
seemed to allow
enough room
for unification.
As his son,
who was in the room
with him at the time,
recalled,
Kulutza was so excited
that he froze in place
for a few seconds,
then jumped up
and started humming
a tune from
The Marriage of Figaro.
Both Nordstrom's
and Kulutza's
schemes,
derived independently,
relied on the idea
of extending
space-time
by an extra dimension.
For mathematicians
or mathematical
physicists
accustomed to breathing
the heady air
of Göttingen,
envisioning higher
dimensions
was as simple
as counting.
One dimension
is for lines,
two is for squares,
and three is for cubes.
Add one more
spatial dimension
and you get
hypercubes.
Just as a cube
is a three-dimensional
object bounded
by six squares,
a hypercube
is a four-dimensional
object bounded
by eight cubes.
Tack on the
dimension of time
and you have
a five-dimensional
entity,
with time
typically marked
as the fourth
dimension
and the extra
spatial dimension
as the fifth.
Yet for a
mainstream
experimental
physicist
of that era,
the concept
of a fifth
dimension
would have
seemed like
something
from the pages
of H.G.
Wells
or a pulp
magazine
rather than
genuine science.
Aside from time,
there was no
direct visual evidence
for any dimensions
beyond length,
width,
and height.
A theory
using five dimensions
would have seemed
like postulating
a way of walking
through walls
or conjuring gold
from thin air.
Kalutza anticipated
the naysayers
by placing
a cylinder
condition
in his theory
that would
make direct
observation
of the fifth
dimension
impossible.
Just like a
hamster
spinning a
wheel
beneath its
feet
and getting
nowhere,
in Kalutza's
theory,
all observable
quantities are
fixed with
respect to
changes in
the fifth
dimension.
As much as
the fifth
dimension cycles,
there is no
noticeable effect
except for its
indirect action
in bringing
electromagnetism
into general
relativity.
The whirling
is safely
behind the
scenes,
forestalling
any objections
by experimentalists.
Einstein's
first reaction
was to praise
Kalutza's paper
as being far
superior to
Weill's.
Unlike Weill's
theory,
it didn't seem
to tamper with
known facts
about the
universe,
such as the
magnitudes of
space-time
intervals.
However,
after he
performed some
calculations based
on Kalutza's
theory,
Einstein's
enthusiasm faded.
In trying to
describe how
electrons move
under the
combined influence
of electromagnetism
and gravity,
he couldn't find
a reasonable
solution.
Instead,
he crashed
into the
mathematical
barrier known
as a singularity,
a place where
one or more
quantities blow
up and become
infinite.
Somehow,
like an aching
tooth,
the sore point
needed to be
extracted.
By pointing out
the shortcoming
of Kalutza's
theory,
Einstein highlighted
a new impetus
for trying to
extend general
relativity,
developing a
theory of how
electrons move
through space.
Bohr's atomic
model matched
the main spectral
lines of simple
elements,
such as hydrogen,
by showing how
quantizing angular
momentum and
energy restricts
electrons to
particular orbits.
However,
it did not offer
a complete theory
of how electrons
behave otherwise.
For example,
when streaking
through cathode
ray tubes.
As he began
to explore the
ramifications of
various unified
approaches,
Einstein used
the electron
dilemma as a
touchstone.
Eddington fully
agreed with
Einstein on the
importance of the
electron problem.
Using Weill's
theory as a
starting point,
Eddington proposed
an alternative
unified theory,
based on altering
the affine
connection and
establishing a
four-dimensional
geometry, distinct
from Riemann's.
Still, he wasn't
sure if his theory
adequately explained
electron motion.
As Eddington wrote,
in passing beyond
Euclidean geometry,
gravitation makes its
appearance.
In passing beyond
Riemannian geometry,
electromagnetic force
appears.
What remains to be
gained by further
generalization?
Clearly the non-Maxwellian
binding forces which
hold together an
electron.
But the problem of
the electron must be
difficult, and I
cannot say whether
the present generalization
succeeds in providing
the material for its
solution.
Embarking on the road
to unification, the
question for Einstein
became how to choose
between Weill,
Kalutza, and
Eddington's theories.
Although he found none
of the theories
satisfactory, he would
borrow from them to
construct his own
models.
All the while, he
would keep his eyes on
the prize of describing
the electron through a
modified version of
general relativity.
As 1919 drew to a
close and the roaring
twenties began,
Einstein's life was
fundamentally changed.
He was now in his
forties, well past the
typical age of major
achievements in
theoretical physics.
Yet his burning ardor
to cap off his general
theory of relativity with
a unified description of
forces and matter had
only been ignited.
He finally obtained a
divorce from Mileva,
ironically, on
Valentine's Day, on
the condition that if he
ever won the Nobel Prize,
he would cede the money
to her.
Nothing could compensate
her for her lost hopes,
but the Nobel Prize
