mysteriousness of what they cannot conceive which places them under a magic spell.
American men, on the other hand, take an interest in absolutely nothing at all.
Elsa generally welcomed publicity and saw one of her roles as controlling and promoting Einstein's
image. Nevertheless, as she discovered during a chilling encounter on January 31st, 1925,
major public figures often attract the unwelcome attention of deranged individuals.
That day, a Russian widow, Marie Dixon, forced her way into their apartment building.
Brandishing a weapon, by some accounts a loaded revolver, by others a hat pin,
she threatened Elsa and demanded to see the professor. Reportedly, Dixon was under the
delusion that Einstein had been an agent of the Tsar. She had previously threatened the Soviet
ambassador in France, served three weeks in prison, and then been deported. She had headed
straight to Berlin to target Einstein. Knowing that her husband was up in his study,
Elsa concocted a clever subterfuge. She pretended he was not at home and offered to call him.
Dixon calmed down, left the house, and said she would come back later.
Once she stepped out, Elsa phoned the police. Five police detectives arrived and were waiting
for Dixon when she returned. After a violent struggle, they arrested her and sent her to an
asylum. All the while, Einstein was safely up in his study, immersed in his theories,
not knowing until afterward that Elsa may have saved his life.
Although Einstein may have been indebted to his wife, they often quarreled. His lack of interest in
his appearance rattled her. He famously hated haircuts, which she had to persuade him to sit
through, and also refused to wear socks. Given their elite status, she wanted him to look reasonable
for photographers. But he couldn't have cared less. Maintaining a certain public image was just
added pressure for him, and he preferred to be alone with his projects. He complained to her,
in turn, about the folly of her expensive clothes. By the time the Schrodingers arrived in Berlin,
stress, mixed with lack of exercise, overindulgence, and a heavy pipe-smoking habit, had begun to take
a toll on Einstein's health. In March 1928, while visiting Switzerland, he collapsed and was diagnosed
with an enlarged heart. After returning to Berlin, he was put on bed rest and a strict salt-free diet.
He was incapacitated for many months, using that quiet time as an opportunity to work on a new
unified field theory. That May, Einstein excitedly informed a friend,
In the tranquility of my sickness, I have laid a wonderful egg in the area of general relativity.
Whether the bird that will hatch from it will be vital and long-lived, only the gods know.
So far, I am blessing my sickness that has endowed me with it.
Secrets of the Old One
Einstein's jubilee birthday year of 1929 was celebrated both publicly and privately.
Publicly, it roughly coincided with the announcement of his first widely reported
attempt at a unified field theory, spawned during his time of incapacitation.
He had previously published other attempts at unification, to little fanfare.
Turning fifty, producing new work, and being Einstein would award his novel approach ample
press coverage. Throughout the 1920s, other researchers' unification theories had whetted
Einstein's appetite for unraveling the secret formula of the Old One that would describe how
all the forces of nature meshed together. Gravitation and electromagnetism seemed to have too many
similarities to be independent. Both were forces that weakened with the square of the distances
between objects. General relativity's limitation was that it could accommodate only one of the
forces, gravity. Its equations needed extra terms on the geometric side to make room for the other
force. Adding additional factors to a successful theory was not a step to be taken lightly.
There needed to be clear justification, if not through physical principles, then through
mathematical reasoning. Einstein had dabbled with variations of Kalutza's, Viles, and Eddington's
ideas, but was not happy with the results. Try as he might, he couldn't find physically realistic
solutions that resembled particles. He even produced a paper similar to Klein's five-dimensional theory,
only to realize that Klein had beaten him to the punch.
Pauli had told Einstein about the similarity, prompting him to include an awkward note at the
end, acknowledging that its contents were identical to Klein's.
Then, starting in mid-1928 and persisting for several years, he turned to an idea called
distant parallelism, also known as teleparallelism and absolute parallelism.
His new approach juxtaposed Riemannian geometry with Euclidean geometry, making it possible to
define parallel lines between two distant points in space. Starting with General Relativity's curved
non-Euclidean space-time manifold, he associated with each point an extra-Euclidean geometry,
called a tetrad. Because the tetrads have a simple, box-like, Cartesian coordinate system,
Einstein noted that it would be very straightforward to see if lines within those structures are
parallel or not. Such comparisons of distant parallel lines would add extra information that
is not present in Standard General Relativity, allowing for the geometric description of
electromagnetism along with gravity.
In Standard General Relativity, because of space-time's curvature, each point has a
differently-oriented coordinate system, tilted differently from place to place. It is like
looking at Earth from space. You wouldn't expect a rocket blasting off from Australia to head in the
same direction as one launched from Sweden. Similarly, the directional arrows in the vicinity of
one region of space-time would be different from those in another. Consequently, in Standard General
Relativity, one cannot determine whether distant lines are parallel or not. One can define distances
between lines but not their relative directions. Distant parallelism, with its box-like additional
structure, makes it possible to specify the relative directions of any two straight lines,
along with the distance between them. It adds a navigation system for the universe that
supplements the basic road map supplied by Standard General Relativity. For that reason,
Einstein judged it more comprehensive.
Einstein's initial goal with each of his unified field theories was to reproduce Maxwell's equations
of electromagnetism in a geometric way, bringing them under the umbrella of general relativity.
He was pleased he could accomplish that with distant parallelism, at least in the case of empty
space. He didn't, however, make testable experimental predictions, as he did with general relativity,
or identify credible physical solutions. He also didn't achieve his goal of reproducing the quantum
rules. Starting in the late 1920s, for each of his unified proposals, he hoped that the equations would be
overdetermined, meaning more equations than independent variables. Such redundancy, he hoped, would force the
solutions to have discrete types of behavior, something like quantum levels. An example of
overdetermination would be writing down the equations for the motion of a baseball and adding an extra
condition that its vertical position must have a certain height. While without the condition the
baseball would have continuous motion, tracing a curved path through the air, including the condition,
would restrict its position to only two discrete values. It would reach that height once on the way up
and once on the way down. Thus, the continuous equations, in tandem, would produce discontinuous values.
Similarly, Einstein hoped that an overdetermined unified field theory would force electrons into
particular orbits, similar to the Bohr-Zomerfeld model, and the eigenstates found via the Schrödinger
equation. However, he couldn't achieve that goal. In general, distant parallelism failed to reproduce
either the classical or quantum behavior of particles, as much as Einstein tried to do so. Therefore,
his proposal was largely a mathematical exercise rather than a rigorous physical theory.
Even the math for his theory wasn't novel. As Einstein belatedly learned, French mathematician
Élie Cartin and Austrian mathematician Roland Wietzenberg had already published on the topic.
Cartin reminded Einstein that they had once discussed distant parallelism at a 1922 seminar,
an encounter that Einstein apparently had forgotten. Einstein would eventually give Cartin credit for
the mathematics underlying his theory. As it turns out, it is relatively easy to tweak general relativity
to include a version of Maxwell's equations by tampering with its rules about lengths, directions,
dimensions, and other parameters. Einstein thought at the time that distant parallelism offered a
reasonable modification. His criteria included simplicity, logic, and mathematical elegance.
However, as Pauli and others advised him, discarding general relativity's successful predictions,
such as the bending of starlight, was a radical move that shouldn't be taken lightly.
To his colleague's dismay, Einstein's growing interest in abstract notions had pushed aside the need to
match experimental data.
Walking on air
In January 1929, Einstein prepared to release a short paper describing his new scheme for unification.
Despite the lack of physical evidence, he issued a short press statement emphasizing its scientific
importance and highlighting its superiority to standard general relativity.
As soon as the international press learned of the imminent publication, more than a hundred journalists clamored for
an interview, hounding him for a simple description of his novel idea.
Not realizing how abstract and unphysical the paper was, they sensed a breakthrough akin to relativity.
Einstein refused at first to offer further comment, hiding from reporters.
Eventually, he offered more detailed, popular explanations, published in the Times of London,
the New York Times, Nature, and elsewhere.
The Nature piece quoted him as stating,
Now, but only now, we know that the force which moves electrons in their ellipses about the nuclei of
atoms is the same force which moves our Earth in its annual course about the Sun, and it is the same
force which brings to us the rays of light and heat which make life possible upon this planet.
The announcement of the theory set off an avalanche of publicity, comparable, perhaps, to the 1919 eclipse
announcement. Given its abstruse, hypothetical nature and lack of experimental verification,
the amount of press it received was staggering. Almost a dozen articles referring to the theory
were published in the New York Times alone. Scientists around the world were asked to comment on and
interpret Einstein's results. Enthusiasm abounded, despite the dearth of proof. Among the unjustifiably
eager reactions was that of Professor H. H. Sheldon, the chair of New York University's physics
department, who speculated wildly that such things as keeping airplanes aloft without engines or
material support, as stepping out of a window into the air without fear of falling, or of making a trip
to the moon, are avenues of investigation suggested by this theory.
The theory also seemed to strike a cultural chord. A number of clergy members remarked about its
theological implications. One pastor, the Reverend Henry Howard of Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church
in New York, compared its message to St. Paul's preachings about nature's unity.
Humorists, such as lasso-twirling satirist Will Rogers, joked about its incomprehensibility.
Another jested that the theory could be used to test golf balls.
Massive media attention to a theoretical physics article was virtually unheard of before Einstein.
Einstein made even the most abstract, far-flung theory seem sexy, mysterious, and earth-shattering.
The fact that his hypothesis offered a lifeless set of equations lacking experimental vital signs
did not scare off coverage. Einstein's moving hand, as he carefully composed his mathematical
arrangements, provided the press with all the vital evidence it needed.
Einstein cringed at his celebrity status. He clearly wanted the spotlight to be on his theories
and their implications, not on him personally. Needless to say, the press focused on the physicist
himself, to which his only recourse was to try, often unsuccessfully, to hide out.
In stark contrast to the booming public hype, the reaction of the theoretical physics community
was barely audible. By that time, largely because of the quantum revolution,
Einstein's ideas were rapidly losing relevance to the mainstream physics community.
Among the most active quantum theorists of the younger generation, only Pauli kept up a keen
interest in his work. While Einstein remained respected personally, his rapid-fire production
of seemingly irrelevant unification proposals became seen as a joke. For instance, young physicists
in Copenhagen mocked his ideas in a humorous production of Faust, in which a king, Einstein,
was besieged by fleas, unified field theories. Pauli was not an easy audience to please. Keeping up his
reputation for bluntness, he threw a sobering splash of ice-cold water Einstein's way. Commenting on an
essay published about distant parallelism, he wrote in a letter to the editor,
It is indeed a courageous deed of the editors to accept an essay on a new field theory of Einstein for
the results in the exact sciences. His never-ending gift for invention, his persistent energy in the
pursuit of a fixed aim in recent years, surprise us with, on the average, one such theory per year.
Psychologically interesting is that the author normally considers his actual theory for a while
as the definite solution. Hence, one could cry out, Einstein's new field theory is dead.
Long live Einstein's new field theory. Privately, Pauli commented to Pascual Jordan that only American
journalists would be gullible enough to accept Einstein's distant parallelism. Not even American
physicists, let alone European researchers, would be that naive. And Pauli bet Einstein that he would
reverse course within a year. Meanwhile, in contrast to the publicity granted to Einstein's results,
little noticed at the time was Weill's pivotal work at Göttingen, showing that his old idea of gauge
could be applied to electron wave functions and explain the electromagnetic interaction in a natural
way. The reason is that including the extra gauge factor along with the electron's description
mathematically requires the addition of a new gauge field that propagates through space.
That extra field can be identified as the electromagnetic field, offering a gauge theory of
electromagnetism. One can think of the gauge factor as a kind of fan that is free to point in any
direction as it is spinning around. To keep it spinning requires the wind of an influx of electromagnetic
field lines. Despite the brilliance of Weill's quantum gauge theory of electromagnetism,
it would take another two decades before the physics community began to make use of it.
Pauli, who was very astute, would be one of the first to recognize its importance.
Rabbi Onion's Blessing for Unification
Once he got the word out to the public about his unification scheme, Einstein hastened to close
the floodgates and push back the rising tide of paparazzi.
His birthday was coming up soon, and he desperately needed to escape. Much to the confusion and dismay of
the press, on March 12, two days before he would turn fifty, he elected to flee the official
celebrations and hide out in a secret location. Even his most intimate friends will not know his
whereabouts, reported the New York Times, which pointed out that he had been driven crazy by questions
about his unified field theory. Somehow, one anonymous reporter did locate Einstein's hideout
and file a story about his private celebration. The savvy journalist found out that Einstein's wealthy
friend Franz Lem, known as Berlin's shoe-polish king, was lending out his villa in the woodsy district of
Gatto for the occasion. Far from the glare of Berlin's city center, Einstein was celebrating his birthday
quietly, quietly, with his family. When the reporter walked in, Einstein was peering intently through a
gift microscope, gazing with wonder at a drop of blood that he'd extracted from his own finger.
Casually dressed in a floppy sweater, informal pants and slippers, stopping on occasion to take a puff
from a pipe, he exuded childlike contentment. Perhaps he recalled his childhood gift of a compass.
Other presents he received included a silk gown, pipes, tobacco, and a sketch of a yacht friends
were planning to have built for him. Perhaps the most unusual tribute was a doll created by his
stepdaughter, Margot, that depicted a rabbi holding an onion in each hand. Margot's passion was sculpture,
and she specialized in mystical images of clerics. Shaping the rabbi figure for her dear stepfather was a
labor of love. Proud of her work, she read him a poem about it. Rabbi Onion. Rabbi Onion, Margot explained,
was an extraordinary healer. Onions, according to traditional Jewish lore, are good for the heart.
Einstein had attempted such a cure during his recovery the year before. She had fashioned the
mystical sage with his magical onions to bless him with a long, healthy life. That way he could
compose many more unified field theories. Einstein winced at the thought of churning out more and more
unification proposals, which turned out to be an accurate prediction. When Einstein returned to his
Berlin dwelling he found a mountain of gifts waiting for him. Foremost among his presents was a generous offer
by the Berlin city government to obtain a house and land for him near the Hoffel River and the lakes it
flows through, so that he could enjoy the serene landscape and go sailing. The city offered him free
use of a mansion on the Neu Klado estates, recently procured from a wealthy gentleman. However, when Elsa
arrived to inspect the residence, the former owner informed her that his sales agreement included the
right for him to stay there indefinitely. Without mincing words, he asked her to get off the property.
Red-faced about the botched present, the city government scrambled to find a solution.
After months of civic wrangling about the right plan for Einstein, the scientist decided to take matters into his
own hands and buy his own property in Kaput, near Potsdam, right at the intersection of two lakes,
Shvilo and Templin. He hired an ambitious young architect, Konrad Wachsman, to design and build a
comfortable wooden cottage for him and his family, just a short walk to forested trails and the lakes.
During its construction, his eagerly awaited sailboat arrived, called the Tümler, Porpois.
Once the house was finished and they moved in, he was truly in paradise.
By the banks of Lake Shvilo
Kaput was a perfect place for Einstein to go hiking or sailing, which allowed him to escape into his
thoughts and forget about the burgeoning demands on his time. In the sylvan retreat, he was as casual
as possible, often going barefoot and either in pajamas or shirtless, never dressed formally.
He deliberately didn't have a telephone, so those who visited him often stopped by unannounced.
One time, when a group of dignitaries was visiting, Elsa implored Albert to dress up. He refused,
stating that if they wanted to see him, he was there, but if they had come to see his clothes,
they were in the closet.
One of the frequent visitors to Einstein's cottage who didn't mind the casual atmosphere
was Schrodinger, who similarly hated formal attire. While professors in German universities
of that era were expected to wear a suit and tied to class, Schrodinger almost always wore a sweater.
On sweltering days in summer, he would sometimes come in wearing just a short-sleeved shirt and pants.
One time, a guard wouldn't even let him through the university gate because he looked so scruffy.
A student had to rescue him by attesting that he really taught there.
In another incident, Dirac recalled that the hotel staff hesitated before letting Schrodinger
into his fancy accommodations for the Solvay meeting because he looked like a backpacker.
In July 1929, the Prussian Academy of Sciences honored Schrodinger by inducting him into its ranks.
As the ceremony was a white-tie affair, Schrodinger dressed up. He gave a well-received talk about
chance in physics, taking a balanced stance that did not either endorse or condemn the
Heisenberg-born view. He had learned to tread lightly around that touchy issue. In that way,
he invited both the determinism and non-determinism camps to use his equation the way they wished.
In general, Schrodinger was delighted to be part of such a prestigious organization as the
Prussian Academy. However, he came to share with Einstein a feeling that the Academy was rather
stuffy. Both of them would much rather be hiking or sailing than suffering through dry meetings.
Consequently, it was on the trails and waterways of Kaputs that they truly bonded and became close
with his friends. In their walks in the woods and jaunts on the lake, Einstein and Schrodinger
came to appreciate their common interests. Perhaps only Schrodinger's disdain for music
prevented them from growing even closer. Einstein loved to perform chamber music with his dearest
friends. At that point in the two men's lives, they shared a deep fascination with the philosophical
ramifications of physics. Each was more at ease talking about how Spinoza's or Schopenhauer's
views applied to modern science than about the latest experimental findings.
Einstein was much steadier in his opposition to the mainstream interpretation of quantum mechanics,
though. Schrodinger's attitude was so changeable that in a talk held at a Munich museum in May 1930,
he practically adopted the Heisenberg-born interpretation of the wave equation, though he
would retreat again several years later. Einstein's firm position was expressed in a March 1931 interview
in which he affirmed his belief in causality and opposition to indeterminacy.
I know very well, he stated wryly, that my conception of causality as part of the nature of things will be
interpreted as a sign of senility. I am convinced, however, that the concept of causality is instinct
in matters related to natural science. I believe that the Schrodinger-Heisenberg theory is a great
advance and am convinced that this formulation of the relationships of quanta is nearer the truth
than any previous attempts. I feel, however, that the essentially statistical character of this theory
will eventually disappear, because this leads to unnatural descriptions.
The clash between the two friends' views on cause and effect was featured in a news story published in the
Christian Science Monitor in November 1931. The piece was likely the first to mention both physicists' outlooks.
Describing talks about quantum mechanics each delivered around that time, it compared Einstein's steadfast opinion
that the law of causality still applied, with Schrodinger's nuanced belief that physicists needed to become
more open-minded about various alternatives, such as the prospect of a-causality.
Evolving perspectives, Schrodinger argued, might transform our way of looking at nature's behavior,
including the possibility of rendering the law of causality obsolete.
We see that while both maintained an interest in philosophy, Einstein was more inclined to
favor Spinoza's rigid view that the world's laws were set from the beginning and might be logically
deduced, while Schrodinger favored a more malleable perspective, shaped by Eastern beliefs in the veil
of illusion, in which society's changing viewpoint molds truth.
What appears true today, Schrodinger argued, might be seen tomorrow as a misconception.
Therefore, it is possible that we might never find the ultimate truth.
Along with their mutual interests in philosophy and its application to science, the two physicists
had more mundane woes in common. Neither had a happy domestic situation. Each had multiple affairs.
Finding Elsa controlling, Albert sought ways to escape. She was dismayed when he attended concerts
and theater performances with a stunning heiress, Toni Mendel, who flamboyantly rode around in a
chauffeur-driven limousine. He also went out regularly with a blonde Austrian beauty, Margarete
Lebach, whom Elsa couldn't stand. Erwin and Ani had a strong friendship, but little sexual spark.
And they would never have children together. They had decided not to divorce, but rather to
maintain an open marriage. They continued to find too much comfort in each other's company,
to split up completely. In contrast to Einstein, who expressed regrets about his failures in married
life, Schrodinger romanticized his various trysts and kept a diary of his exploits.
Some of the affairs would last for many years. At one point he became smitten with a young woman whom
he'd tutored in math, E.T. Jünger. Their liaison led to her having an unplanned pregnancy. Though he
strongly wanted a child, he wouldn't leave Ani. Against his wishes, E.T. had an abortion and left him.
While that affair was cooling down, Schrodinger began a relationship with Hildegunde Hilde March,
the young wife of a physicist he knew from Innsbruck, Arthur March. Their passionate bond
would end up becoming something like a second marriage. Einstein and Schrodinger could not have
realized how fragile and special their time together in Berlin and Kaput would turn out to be.
The mirth, relaxed attitudes, and open-mindedness of those days would vanish without a trace once
Nazi boots trampled the Weimar Republic. Accustomed to a cozy, celebrated life, both scientists would
be forced into exile, never to sail the Haffel Lakes together again.
Ill Winds and Ocean Breezes
The early 1930s in Germany were marked by massive unemployment and unrest. The 1929 stock market
crash set off a chain reaction that toppled a succession of teetering economies around the world,
including the fragile German post-war engine. With the Nazi movement and other far-right groups
stirring the pot of nationalism, German resentment of the armistice terms became a rallying cry for
vengeance. Communists and socialists responded with calls for worker power, frightening many business owners
and mainstream conservatives, some of whom came to see the Nazis as the lesser evil and a bulwark
against communism. In Berlin, hundreds of thousands of unemployed laborers with nothing else to do
were ripe for recruitment to political movements on both ends of the spectrum.
A massive rally in Alexanderplatz, one of Berlin's main squares, was quashed by the police using tanks
to round up the demonstrators. The right and left battled for votes and supporters as weak coalition
governments rose and fell. While he wasn't active in any particular party, Einstein generally supported
the progressive socialist movement and favored greater worker rights. He considered himself an
internationalist, seeing nationalism as a dangerous force. As a pacifist, he supported the War Resisters
League. Generally straightforward about his views, he had no qualms about openly condemning the Nazis.
While at first he saw the support for them as an aberration, he soon came to realize,
even before they took power, the dire threat they posed. Schrodinger, in contrast, had no interest
in politics and tended to avoid such discussions. He didn't take the Nazi movement seriously until it
was too late. During the economic crisis, both physicists worried about their finances and were open
to opportunities to work abroad, at least temporarily. Einstein's chance came first. He was pleased
to get an invitation to travel to Caltech in Pasadena, California, in the winter of 1931, and visit
Mount Wilson Observatory, where Hubble had discovered the expansion of the universe. The stipend of $7,000
that Einstein was promised for just two months was incredibly generous for the time, about a full
professor's yearly pay. By then, Einstein had the help of two paid assistants, Helen Dukas, his secretary,
and Walter Meyer, his calculator, mathematical aid. Dukas handled Einstein's flood of correspondence and
extensive calendar of speaking engagements. Meyer performed the routine mathematical manipulations
required for Einstein's research, particularly in unified field theories. Einstein had started to
realize that Pauli was right, and that distant parallelism would not be physically viable.
Therefore, he began to pursue other avenues for unification.
Before departing for the west coast of the United States, Einstein published the New York Times magazine
commentary piece mentioned in Chapter 3, declaring his views on science and religion, and advocating the
Spinozan concept of a deity. The essay generated heated debate and helped focus public attention on
Einstein's. Massive crowds, like those that would greet a visiting king or queen, welcomed the arrival
of Einstein and his entourage in the port of San Diego on December 30, 1930. His companions disembarking
from the great ship Belgenland included his wife, Dukas, and Meyer. Elsa proved a critical translator.
Her English was far better than Albert's. Meyer was always on hand whenever Einstein had a free
moment for calculations. Once at Caltech, the physics faculty, led by famed experimentalist Robert
Millikan, began to discuss with him the possibility of a permanent position. But given his attachment to
Berlin, and the kaput lifestyle in particular, the discussions were premature. Nevertheless, Einstein loved
Southern California, especially Pasadena's beautiful gardens and mild weather. One highlight of his
stay was meeting Hubble and seeing the Mount Wilson telescope. He and Elsa also took some time to hobnob
with Hollywood stars such as Charlie Chaplin. A great fan of his movies, Einstein was honored to be his
guest at the world premiere of City Lights. The following winter, Einstein was invited to Caltech again
for another two-month visit. The question of a permanent appointment resurfaced. Given all the
problems in Germany and the frightening prospect of a Nazi-led government, Einstein was starting to
consider emigrating. However, by then he had begun to receive other offers, including the possibility of
an Oxford professorship. In Millikan's wooing of Einstein, he made one fatal mistake. He introduced
Einstein to educator Abraham Flexner, who had come to Caltech to discuss the establishment of an Institute for Advanced
Study, IAS, in Princeton, funded by wealthy benefactors and dedicated to fundamental research. Flexner ended up recruiting
Einstein for a position that was meant, at first, to be only part-time. He offered Einstein a whopping salary of
$15,000 a year, which would make him one of the highest-paid physics professors in the country.
Einstein insisted, as an added condition, that Meyer be established in a second, permanent position for
assistance with his unified field theory calculations. Flexner was stunned by Einstein's demand, but
eventually relented. Einstein, in turn, committed to the Institute appointment.
Around the same period, Einstein took the time to nominate Schrodinger and Heisenberg, in that order,
for the Nobel Prize in Physics. As a noblest, Einstein had the privilege of suggesting candidates
for that high honor. In his nomination, he ranked Schrodinger first, because, in his opinion,
Schrodinger's findings were more far-reaching than Heisenberg's. Still, Einstein was generous to
nominate Heisenberg at all, considering his opposition to Heisenberg's probabilistic views.
He realized that many physicists placed the two of them on par, as co-founders of quantum mechanics.
Therefore, he felt that it was logical to include both, with his personal preference duly noted.
In December 1932, the Einsteins and their companions set sail to Southern California for their third
and final visit to Caltech. The visit was bittersweet, partly because Milliken was miffed about Einstein's
new commitment, and partly due to the growing realization that Adolf Hitler, who was then
Deputy Chancellor in a coalition between a conservative party and the Nazis, was on the brink of leading
Germany. As they stepped out the door of the Kaput Cottage, Albert reportedly told Elsa it was the
last time she would see it. Still, part of him must have thought there was a chance they would return,
as he had written his colleagues in Berlin about plans there for the following year.
Ironically, Milliken had earlier booked Einstein to give a speech shortly after his arrival extolling
German-American relations. The purpose was to court a donor. Not wanting to disappoint his host,
Einstein delivered the speech, which he read in English from a translation of his own text.
He used the opportunity to promote the idea of tolerance for opposing political views and religious
beliefs, both in the United States and in Germany. The mention of the United States alluded to public
complaints by a right-wing group called the Woman Patriot Corporation that a known revolutionary,
such as Einstein, was allowed into the country. Although nothing would come of it, the FBI began a file on him
that for decades accumulated similar questions about his patriotism.
In stark contrast to Einstein's message of tolerance, about one week later, on January 30, 1933,
Paul von Hindenburg, the President of Germany, appointed Hitler as Chancellor.
With a notorious racist and anti-Semite, backed by hundreds of thousands of brown-shirted
paramilitary thugs called the Sturmabteilung, SA, or stormtroopers, grasping the reins of the German
state, opponents braced themselves for caustic rhetoric at the very least. People wondered if
Hitler would turn his hateful words into actions, or were they just political poses designed to attract
bands of hooligan supporters. Fire in the Reichstag
German politics was so changeable in the early 1930s that many pundits thought Hitler's
chancellorship would be a passing phase. Moderate conservatives quietly expected that he would trump
Labour's support for the Communists and move toward the center. As the economy improved, many thought that
voters would come to their senses, elect more sensible politicians, and temper extremism.
Even right after Hitler assumed his post, Einstein still harbored some hope of returning to Berlin.
Schrodinger, though despising the Nazis and their intolerance, wasn't even concerned at first.
Then came a turn of events that no pundit had anticipated. On February 27, arsonists set fire to the
Reichstag, the German parliament building. Although historians believe that the culprits were probably
members of the S.A., Hitler immediately pointed a finger at the Communists. Parliament passed a law
suspending civil rights and permitting indefinite detention of suspects. Communist politicians and
other members of left-wing movements were summarily arrested and eventually sent to concentration camps.
A new election was held on March 5, in which the Nazis became the largest parliamentary group.
Around the time of the Reichstag fire, Einstein came to realize that he couldn't return to Germany
while the Nazis were in power. He wrote to Margarete Leibach that he had canceled a talk he was supposed
to give to the Prussian Academy because he was afraid to set foot in the country.
After leaving Pasadena by train and traveling to New York, newspaper reports that the Nazis had rummaged
through his kaput house horrified him further. In Manhattan, he gave speeches to various organizations
decrying the Nazi assault on freedom. These were picked up by the German press, which slammed him for
disloyalty. In New York, Einstein and his entourage boarded the Belgenland for the return voyage to
Europe. During the ocean journey, he wrote a polite letter to the Prussian Academy, thanking them for
their previous support, but asking to withdraw his membership, citing the political situation as a
reason to step down. Then, upon arrival at the port of Antwerp, Belgium, Einstein handed over his German
passport to the consulate and renounced all of his ties to that country. For the second time in his
life, the first being when he was a student in Switzerland, he was a man without a country.
Luckily, Einstein had many friends in Belgium and neighboring Holland who offered him assistance.
Queen Elizabeth, who had been born in Bavaria and married into the Belgian royal family,
was particularly supportive. Einstein held bank accounts in Leiden and New York that proved
indispensable after the Nazis confiscated the money he had deposited in Berlin banks.
Though homeless and stateless, he had a secure future abroad.
Einstein was fortunate to have left Germany in time. The Enabling Act, passed on March 23rd by the
German Parliament, suspended all right to dissent, effectively granting Hitler complete power.
The Nazis soon dissolved all provincial assemblies, solidifying their iron rule.
The twelve-year dictatorship would be the most brutal the world has ever seen.
The Einsteins searched for a place to live temporarily until the IAS appointment was ready.
They found a small house in Lecox-sur-Mer on the North Sea to rent for the time being.
The seaside cottage, though not as comfortable as Caput, proved a cozy refuge for his months in
Belgium until he could leave for America. It was a sad period for Einstein in many ways.
Around the time he had been forced to flee his native land, two of his dear ones met tragic fates.
His son, Eduard, nicknamed Teta, who had done brilliantly in school and wanted to be a psychiatrist,
began to suffer from schizophrenia and was committed to a mental institution in Zurich.
Having corresponded with him about the world of psychology and the works of Sigmund Freud,
Einstein had high hopes for his career and was devastated when it was cut short.
Then, in September 1933, Paul Ehrenfest, who had been one of Einstein's best friends,
committed suicide. Before Ehrenfest killed himself, he had shot his own son, Vasek,
who had Down syndrome, with the delusional motive of sparing his wife the expense of caring for the
child. The cold blue Atlantic would soon separate Einstein from Europe and its suffering.
He would watch the situation from abroad, observing the lives of his former compatriots go from bad
to worse. Never would he forget their plight, even when permanently exiled in the New World.
Although he would never return to Europe, his pained heart and anguished thoughts would always remain
there.
Chapter 5 Spooky Connections and Zombie Cats
Cases might be quoted where the decision is really difficult, serious, painful, bewildering,
when we are down on our knees to the Almighty to forego it. But in this he is inexorable. We must
decide. One thing must happen, will happen. Life goes on. There is no wave function in life.
Erwin Schrödinger, Indeterminism and Free Will
Schrödinger was a brilliant man, but not a particularly brave one. He earned to be admired
by his peers, by the public, and by the women in his life, and would often shape his words to help
win over his target. Never wanting politics or religion to serve as a barrier between him and
others, he tried to stay as neutral as possible on sensitive issues. While he did express philosophical
views in his essays, these were framed as intellectual ruminations, not as doctrine.
Nonetheless, the rise of the Nazis and their worship of male Teutonic superiority was so
antithetical to Schrödinger's character that he could not possibly keep his feelings hidden.
Unlike, for example, Heisenberg, he disdained any form of nationalism. He loved foreign languages,
religious diversity, and exotic cultures. He saw no reason to elevate the Germanic tradition
and people above any others. Ani recalled that Erwin's revulsion at Nazi practices once brought
him face to face with irate stormtroopers. He strolled to Wertheim's, one of the largest
department stores in Berlin, only to discover that it was being boycotted because of its Jewish
ownership. The Nazis had declared March 31, 1933 to be a national boycott of Jewish merchants.
Thugs with swastika armbands blocked customers from entering the store and picked fights with
anyone they thought was Jewish. According to Ani, Erwin argued with the thugs, not realizing the danger,
and was nearly beaten up. In the nick of time, young physicist Friedrich Muglisch, a Nazi supporter,
recognized him, and intervened. Schrodinger had started to avoid the meetings of the Prussian
Academy, perhaps sensing that it would become involved in the political situation. Indeed,
it did. On April 1, responding to Einstein's announcement that he was cutting ties with the
organization and Germany in general, its leadership issued a harsh rebuke. In a widely publicized
announcement, it openly condemned Einstein's anti-German behavior. Horrified by the action,
Max von Lauer, who was an active member, called for a vote to rescind the Academy's statement.
But none of the other leading members would stand up for Einstein, not even Planck, who had been a
strong supporter. The vote failed, and the statement was never withdrawn. Absent from the discussions,
Schrodinger did not publicly take a stand. Einstein would never forgive the Academy's
cowardly act. Aside from von Lauer, Schrodinger, and, to some extent, Planck, who had expressed his
support in private but not publicly, the Academy members' abandonment of him was a bitter pill.
The Academy's refusal to defy the Nazis was one reason he would never set foot on German soil again,
even after the war. The Academy's censure of Einstein was a tremor that signaled a much larger
earthquake ahead. On April 7th, the German Parliament passed the heinous Law for the Restoration of the
Career Civil Service, which barred Jews and political opponents from public positions,
including teaching and academics. The only exceptions, at first, were veterans of the First World War,
who had served at the front, those who had lost relatives in the war, and those who had held
their positions since before the war. Those exemptions would prove short-lived.
The university affected most by the Nazi ban was Göttingen, which had many Jewish faculty members.
Max Born, though one of the lions of quantum physics, was informed that he had to step down.
Mathematicians Emmy Noether and Richard Courant, similarly, were dismissed. Nobel Prize-winning
experimentalist James Franck resigned before he was asked to leave his position.
Once again, von Lauer tried to enlist support from his colleagues to condemn the Purge,
but to no avail. Planck, whose voice would have carried much weight, refused to protest the Nazi
moves openly, though privately he was aghast at the developments.
Recruiters from universities and other countries soon realized that Germany's loss could well be
their gain. The first to recognize the opportunity was Oxford physicist Frederick Lindemann, who set out
to snare some notables to beef up his department's research. Thanks to J.J. Thompson, Ernest Rutherford,
and others, Cambridge had leapt far ahead of Oxford in the sciences, and Lindemann hoped to make the
situation at least somewhat more balanced. The haughty, posh, much-disliked Lindemann had set his
eye on Einstein for a permanent position. But Einstein would commit only to brief yearly visits.
The anti-Semitic law meant that others would likely follow Einstein's path out of Germany.
Perhaps, Lindemann thought, they could be persuaded to make Oxford their new home.
Born in Germany and having studied at the University of Berlin, Lindemann was familiar
with the country and followed its politics intently. Sensing immediately that the Nazi
regime would pose a threat to the world, he shared his apprehension with Winston Churchill,
one of his closest friends. During the Second World War, Churchill, as Prime Minister,
would appoint him chief scientific advisor, and help arrange for him to be admitted to the British
peerage as Lord Charwell. Lindemann would prove very influential in British military policy,
famously, or infamously, depending on one's viewpoint, advocating the bombing of German
working-class civilian housing. Ironically, given his future wartime role, around Easter 1933,
Lindemann had little trouble riding in his chauffeur-driven Rolls-Royce freely around Germany
and meeting with a variety of academics. At Sommerfeld's suggestion, Lindemann decided to pursue
Fritz London, an accomplished quantum physicist who had developed key theories about how atoms bond into
molecules. Visiting Schrodinger's house, the Oxford professor mentioned offering London a position.
Much to Lindemann's surprise, Schrodinger asked that he be kept in mind if London decided not to
accept. Lindemann hadn't considered the possibility that non-Jewish academics such as Schrodinger would
consider leaving, but he agreed to broach the subject with potential funders of new Oxford positions.
A Call for Assistance
Schrodinger was well aware at that point of Einstein's success in procuring positions in other
countries. Given his financial worries and animosity toward the Nazis, a post at Oxford sounded
attractive. Like Einstein, however, Schrodinger made his acceptance contingent on hiring someone else
to assist him. Schrodinger's equivalent of Meyer was Arthur Mark. He asked Lindemann if Mark could be
given an Oxford appointment as well so they could work together. There was a huge difference, though,
between Einstein's and Schrodinger's motivations for wanting an assistant. After the age of fifty,
Einstein had lost much patience with the nitty-gritty of calculations. Meyer was essential to his
productivity. The situation with Mark was different. Schrodinger discussed the possibility of writing a book
with him, but they never really collaborated. Rather, along with Arthur came his wife, Hilda,
with whom Erwin was deeply smitten. Lindemann returned to England and scampered to get funding
for all the positions he had agreed to, including ones for Schrodinger and Mark. Meanwhile, conditions
in Germany deteriorated even further. May was even worse than April. More dismissals of Jews took place.
On Bebelplatz, right in front of the University of Berlin, a massive burning of books by Jews and
other banned authors showed how much intellectual life had deteriorated. Born left for Italy with
the promise of a position at Cambridge. In part to escape the mayhem, the Schrodinger's and the
Marx decided to spend their summer in Switzerland and Italy, including visits with Paoli, Born, and
Weill. Weill had earlier been appointed to a position at Göttingen, but because his wife was
Jewish, he had decided to step down and flee Germany. He would move on to a position at Princeton's
Institute for Advanced Study. In mountainous northern Italy, Erwin persuaded Hilda to take a long
bicycling trip with him, just the two of them. During their excursion, their relationship became
passionate. Sometime around then, Hilda got pregnant with Erwin's child. Rather than divorcing their
spouses, they decided to work out an unusual relationship, essentially a complex marriage.
Lindemann met with Schrodinger again in September, in the beautiful village of Malchisina,
on the shore of Italy's Lake Garda. He was excited to report that a British firm, Imperial Chemical
Industries, had agreed to fund several positions, including a two-year post for Schrodinger and a
separate visiting appointment for Macht. Schrodinger would be associated with Oxford's prestigious
Madeleine College. Although the specific salaries were still being determined, Schrodinger had no
desire to return to Berlin, and warmly accepted. He, Annie, and Hilda moved to Oxford in early November.
Arthur needed to negotiate a leave from Innsbruck, where he held a position, so he went back there
for a time. Schrodinger's departure from Germany angered the Nazis. He was the most senior non-Jewish
physicist to leave. Heisenberg, though not a Nazi Party member or supporter, was upset that he had
abandoned Germany. In Heisenberg's view, loyalty to the German homeland and to German scientific progress
transcended politics. One should wait out the regime and hope for a more reasonable government,
he believed, not just take flight. To Heisenberg's credit, though, he strongly opposed the view,
held by Philippe Lennart and Johannes Stark, that all Jewish physics, such as the work of Einstein and
Born, should be banned in favor of German physics, meaning physics by non-Jewish Germans.
Heisenberg continued to maintain friendly contacts with Jewish physicists right up until the war
began, and he resumed them afterward. He urged German-Jewish physicists, such as Born, to try to
stay as long as possible to keep scientific life active. In his eyes, therefore, Schrodinger's decision
was a defeat for the German scientific community. The Berlin that Schrodinger left bore little
resemblance to the city he loved. Less than a year earlier, the German capital had been full of life,
artistic, scientific, political. Its avant-garde theater and operettas attracted international
attention. It welcomed people of all faiths and viewpoints. By late 1933, however, it had become a
cultural wasteland, open only to regime-sanctioned art, music, and theater. Discussing Einstein's
contributions to theoretical physics had become taboo. The press was so regulated that only one
newspaper noted Schrodinger's exit. Soon came news that threw more sand in the Nazis' face while
pumping up Lindemann's already inflated ego. Shortly after Schrodinger arrived in Oxford, he learned that
he had been awarded the 1933 Nobel Prize in Physics for his wave equation. The award would be shared with
Dirac. Lindemann paraded his trophy around Oxford while asking Imperial Chemical to bump up his stipend.
All was well until months later, when Hilda gave birth to Erwin's daughter, whom they named Ruth.
Oxford was abuzz with the news that money had been channeled to allow one of its members to have a
mistress. There was little hope from that point on for Schrodinger to obtain a permanent position at
Oxford, even with his shiny new Nobel. Subtle, but not malicious.
After spending much of 1933 in Belgium under the protection of its royal family, Einstein needed to
bid farewell to Europe. Forever, as it turned out. Albert, Elsa, Helen Dukas, and Walter Meyer set sail on
the Belgenland one final time, arriving in New York on October 17th. No crowds or reporters greeted his
arrival this time. To avoid potential sabotage by Nazi spies after they disembarked from the ship,
Einstein and his entourage were whisked by small boat to New Jersey and taken directly to Princeton.
As designated buildings for the Institute for Advanced Study had yet to be built, Einstein and
other members shared space with the Mathematics Department in Princeton University's Fine Hall.
One comfortable feature of the building was a seminar room with a large fireplace.
Above the mantle was carved an expression of Einstein's in its original German.
Translated, it read,
The Lord is subtle, but not malicious.
Einstein was expressing the hope that God would not mislead researchers to believe in a false
theory of nature, even if finding the correct solution was challenging. Einstein still hoped
to discover the ultimate theory that would unite all the forces.
One pressing issue Einstein faced was to find help with his calculations. Though he had gotten
Meyer hired for precisely that purpose, his calculator decided to pursue his own mathematical research,
much to Einstein's disappointment.
To make matters worse, because Meyer's position was permanent, Flexner refused to provide Einstein
with another assistant. Because of Flexner's paranoid need to micromanage Einstein's schedule
and keep him focused on his duties to IAS, the two of them soon became enmeshed in conflict.
Einstein was mortified to discover that Flexner was censoring his mail and turning down invitations
without consulting him. Flexner even turned down an invitation for Einstein to meet with the
Roosevelt's at the White House, although eventually Einstein got word and accepted.
Einstein felt like a prisoner, trapped at IAS with seemingly no one to help him with his calculations.
Fortunately, IAS hosted a steady stream of brilliant young researchers, eager to make their mark
work and work with established scientists. Two such youthful minds, Russian-born physicist Boris
Podolsky, who had recently completed his Ph.D. at Caltech, and American physicist Nathan Rosen,
who had studied at MIT, were ripe for productive theoretical work. Einstein seized the opportunity,
and they began to collaborate in a critical examination of quantum physics.
Despite his dislike for Flexner, Einstein was well aware of the dangers of returning to Europe.
He realized that IAS, with its quiet location and freedom from teaching, offered him the best
opportunity to pursue a unified field theory, tie up the loose ends of general relativity,
and engage in other research close to his heart. So he decided to remain indefinitely.
One nice feature about Princeton was its relative proximity to the beach locales where Einstein
could go sailing. He bought a boat, which he named the Tinef, colloquial German and Yiddish for
junk, and spent most summers in various communities on Long Island Sound and Saranac Lake in the Adirondack
mountains of upstate New York. As he didn't know how to swim, when occasionally his boat tipped over,
he'd have to be rescued by local youth. That happened in the summer of 1935, when they were
staying in Old Lime, Connecticut, inspiring the New York Times headline, Relative Tide and Sandbars
Trap Einstein. He runs his sailboat aground at Old Lime. In another sailing incident on Saranac Lake
in 1941, a little boy may have saved his life when Einstein was underwater with his foot caught in
netting. As the then ten-year-old rescuer, Don Dusso, reported many years later,
he was down for the count. If I had not been nearby, he probably would have drowned.
Knowing that they would likely reside in Princeton for a long time, he and Elza began to look for a
house. They found the perfect location only a few blocks from the university, and the temporary
location of IAS, allowing him to walk or bicycle to his office. The shingled house they bought in
August 1935 was at 112 Mercer Street. The upper floor was converted into his study and lightened
up with a new picture window that looked out on the trees. Downstairs, the rooms were furnished
with antiques they managed to have sent over from their former Berlin abode. He soon wrote to Queen
Elizabeth of Belgium that, although he felt alienated from society life, Princeton is a wonderful little
spot. I have been able to create for myself an atmosphere conducive to study and free from
distraction. To make the place even cozier, they acquired a terrier named Chico and several cats.
Chico was the front line in the battle to guard his owner's privacy. As Einstein remarked,
The dog is intelligent. He feels sorry for me because I receive so much mail. That's why he tries
to bite the postman. One correspondent Einstein was happy to open letters from, however, was
Schrodinger. They maintained a warm exchange, growing even closer philosophically in their
isolation from their native lands. Einstein also continued to correspond with Born, whose opinions
he greatly valued, despite their sharp differences about probabilistic quantum mechanics. He tried to
get Flexner to invite both of them to IAS, but to no avail. Flexner had washed his hands of helping
Einstein. Take my wives, please. Schrodinger did have the opportunity to visit Princeton,
but through the university's physics department rather than IAS. The chance arose because of an
endowed faculty position called the Jones Professorship, established by brothers who were Princeton graduates
and wanted to expand research opportunities in math and science at the university.
The invitation dated back to October 1933, when a committee of the physics department met
secretly to decide whom to award the professorship. The chair of the committee, Rudolf Latenberg,
was a German émigré atomic physicist who was very familiar with the work of Heisenberg and
Schrodinger and keen to invite them over. They decided to make the full offer to Heisenberg,
but also used some of the funds to invite Schrodinger for a period of one to three months.
Schrodinger accepted, but Heisenberg declined, citing the political situation in Germany as a
reason not to venture abroad. Taking a break from his Oxford post, Schrodinger visited Princeton in
March and early April 1934. Over the years he had developed an impressive, eloquent lecturing style
with a great use of vivid analogies. His literary interests, such as poetry and theater, served him
well to help bring difficult scientific concepts to life. His extensive knowledge of ancient history
and philosophy enriched his discussions of contemporary issues. Plus, he was perfectly fluent in English,
clear and resounding, with virtually no trace of an Austrian accent. Einstein, in contrast,
could at that point lecture in English only if he read haltingly from prepared remarks.
And he had a thick South German accent. The department was pleased enough with Schrodinger to suggest to
the Dean of Science, Luther Eisenhard, that he be appointed to the Jones professorship as a full-time
scholar. After returning to Oxford, Schrodinger thought hard about Princeton's offer,
but decided in the end to turn it down. The great attraction of Princeton would be working and
residing in the same town again as Einstein. He had hoped that Flexner, prodded by Einstein,
would make an IAS bid as well. But that was not to be. Eyeing Einstein's high salary and generous
benefit of not having to teach, Schrodinger aspired to something similar, and to his disappointment,
Princeton's offer, though generous by any standard, didn't match up. In wanting a position akin to
Einstein's, Schrodinger didn't realize how unusual Einstein's situation was. Einstein was earning about
fifty percent more than what prestigious universities such as Princeton were paying their senior physics
professors. Citing salary as the main reason, he wrote to Ladenburg in October with his regrets.
Aside from financial reasons for not moving to Princeton, Schrodinger had to deal with his unusual
family situation. Given his love for Hilda and his hope of spending time with baby Ruth,
the child he had always longed for, he certainly didn't want to live across the ocean from them.
He wondered how Princeton society would react if he brought them over, along with Annie.
Could he even be prosecuted for bigamy? Reportedly, he had mentioned the situation to the president of
Princeton, John Hibben, and was disappointed by Hibben's negative reaction to the idea of a family with
two wives and shared child care. In a parallel universe, Schrodinger would have accepted the
Princeton position, become even closer to Einstein, and spent the rest of his life in comfort and safety.
Maybe he could have found a way for Hilda and Ruth to emigrate discreetly.
Instead, he would choose to move back to Austria just before it was about to be invaded and annexed by the
Nazis, a development that would put him in peril and force him to escape.
But causality depends on the past, not the future, and he had incomplete data, so his usually sharp mind
made a very poor calculation.
Spooky Connections
By 1935, many quantum theorists, satisfied that their basic vision was correct, had moved
on to the study of the atomic nucleus. With quantum theory considered settled, nuclear theory was
where the action was. That year, Japanese physicist Hideki Yukawa proposed a model for how nucleons,
protons and neutrons, interacted via other particles called mesons in what eventually became known as the
strong force. Yukawa's theory attempted to explain how atomic nuclei hold together. We now know that
gluons, not mesons, serve as the intermediaries. A little more than a year earlier, Italian physicist
Enrico Fermi had begun to map out a process called beta decay, the transformation of neutrons into
protons through the emission of electrons and other particles. That interaction, which explains certain
types of radioactivity, ultimately became incorporated into the theory of the weak force.
While Schrodinger was interested in these developments, Einstein essentially ignored them. He preferred to
focus on scoring a medley for the duet of his youth, gravity and electromagnetism, rather than
introducing untested instruments and making it a trio or quartet. Hence, by the mid-1930s, his attempted
unified field theories could no longer be construed as theories of everything. Rather, they combined
some, but not all, of the natural forces. Meanwhile, Einstein continued to be troubled by the mainstream
quantum approach. His last encounter with Bohr had been at the 1930 Solvay Conference, where they had
wrangled about the uncertainty principle. As in the Solvay meeting of 1927, Einstein had proposed a thought
experiment purporting to contradict quantum notions, which Bohr, after much pondering, had refuted.
Einstein's hypothetical device was a radiation-filled box, equipped with a timer, designed to release a
photon at a precise moment. By weighing the box before and after the release, one could calculate the exact
energy of the photon, he argued. Therefore, in contradiction to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle,
one could determine both the release time and energy of the photon simultaneously.
However, as Bohr cleverly realized, Einstein had forgotten to include the effects of general relativity.
Using Einstein's own theory against him, he rebutted that the process of weighing the box,
on a spring scale, for example, would slightly shift its position in the gravitational field of Earth.
In general relativity, the time coordinate of an object in a gravitational field depends on where it is
located. Therefore, the position shift would lead to a smearing of the time value, consistent with the
uncertainty principle. With quantum logic vindicated, Bohr outwitted Einstein once again.
Five years later, Einstein certainly hadn't forgotten his debates with Bohr.
In a series of discussions, he brought up some of his quantum quibbles with Podolsky and Rosen.
By that point, Einstein readily conceded that quantum mechanics accurately matched experimental
results about particles and atoms. However, as he pointed out to the young researchers,
it could not be a complete description of physical reality. The reason was that if paired quantities
such as position and momentum were real descriptions of nature, in principle they should have definite
values for all times. Lack of knowledge of such values meant that quantum mechanics was not a
comprehensive model of nature. Alternatively, if, when position was measured, momentum actually became
fuzzy and unknowable, that would mean that it somehow blinked out of reality. Therefore, according to
Einstein, the haziness of the uncertainty principle pointed to a limitation of quantum mechanics in
matching theory to reality. Another issue Einstein brought up was non-locality, or spooky action at a
distance. Any remote, instantaneous influence from one particle to another would violate what he called
the separation principle. Causality, he argued, was a local process involving interactions between
adjacent entities, spreading through space from one point to the next at the speed of light or slower.
Distant things must be treated as physically distinct, not as a linked system. Otherwise, a kind of
telepathy could exist between an electron on Earth and one on, say, Mars. How could each immediately
know what the other is doing? By then, John von Neumann had formalized the notion of wave-function
collapse, originally suggested by Heisenberg. In that formalism, a particle's wave-function can be
expressed in terms of either position eigenstates or momentum eigenstates, but not both at once.
It is something like slicing an egg. You could slice it along its length or across its width,
but unless you want it to be diced instead of sliced, you'd only do one or the other.
Similarly, when you slice the wave-function of a particle, you are forced to choose between
position and momentum components, depending on which of those factors you are trying to measure.
Then, upon measuring the position or momentum, the wave-function instantly collapses with a
certain probability into one of its position or momentum eigenstates.
Now, suppose the cause for such a collapse is remote. The researcher, without giving the particle
warning, decides which quantity to measure. How does the wave-function instantly and remotely
know which set of eigenstates it should be choosing from in its collapse?
The paper that resulted from the dialogue between Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen,
Can Quantum Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete,
commonly called the EPR paper, was written and submitted for publication exclusively by Podolsky.
Published in Physical Review on May 15, 1935, it created quite a stir among the quantum community,
particularly with Bohr, who had thought that the debate had long been over.
Bohr found himself having to defend quantum mechanics all over again, just when he had begun
delving into nuclear theory instead. The paper described a situation of paired particles,
such as a system of two electrons, that moved to different locations, such as after a
collision. Even though they are separated, quantum mechanics informs us that a common wave-function
would describe the joint system. Schrodinger would dub such a situation entanglement.
Suppose a researcher measured the first particle's position. The wave-function for the entire system
would collapse into one of its position eigenstates, instantly revealing knowledge of the second
particle's location as well. If, in contrast, the first particle's momentum were recorded,
the second particle's momentum would suddenly become apparent. Because the second particle
could not possibly know in advance what the researcher was planning to do, it must have
both eigenstates ready, position as well as momentum. With its position and momentum eigenstates
both existing at once, the second particle would find itself in a situation prohibited by the
uncertainty principle. Rather than a seamless garment, the paper suggests, quantum measurement theory
is a patchwork of contradictions. Schrodinger soon wrote to Einstein, applauding the results.
I was very pleased that you openly seized dogmatic quantum mechanics by the scruff of the neck,
something we had already discussed so much in Berlin, he said.
However, as philosophers of science Arthur Fine and Don Howard each have pointed out,
Einstein was careful to distinguish his personal views from the arguments expressed in the EPR paper.
Surprisingly enough, for such an established figure, Einstein never reviewed the paper before it was
submitted. Therefore, he had some qualms about the way Podolsky constructed his line of reasoning.
As he replied to Schrodinger, the paper was written by Podolsky after many discussions,
but it didn't come out as well as I actually had wanted. The essence was buried by erudition.
Einstein did not want the emphasis to be on the truth or falsity of the uncertainty principle.
Rather, he wanted to stress the need for natural laws that offered local and complete descriptions
of all physical quantities. Quantum mechanics, as championed by Heisenberg, von Neumann, and others,
appeared to have non-local and ambiguous aspects that called out for a more comprehensive explanation.
All physics describes reality, he explained to Schrodinger, but this description may be
complete or incomplete. To elucidate his point, Einstein described to Schrodinger a situation
in which a ball could be in one of two closed boxes. Taken at face value, probability theory
would suggest that it is half in one and half in the other. However, it couldn't really be split
between both. It must be in one or the other. A complete description would state unambiguously
where the ball is at any given time. Even before the paper was published,
Einstein let the world know about his views. On May 4, 1935, the New York Times offered the
jolting headline, Einstein Attacks Quantum Theory. The article explained Einstein's view that,
while it is correct, it is not complete. Einstein's Gunpowder
We've seen how, time after time, Einstein helped shape Schrodinger's ideas and career.
From his interests in theoretical physics to his development of the wave equation,
from his Berlin appointment to being awarded the Nobel Prize. True, Schrodinger had a brilliant,
original mind. As the public today well knows, he developed the clever thought experiment of a
cat in a box. However, Einstein inspired that, too. Einstein's EPR experiment helped reignite
Schrodinger's antipathy to certain fuzzy aspects of quantum measurement. Schrodinger found a new zeal
to explore inconsistencies in the standard view. In return, Einstein found in Schrodinger an eager
ear for his qualms. You're actually the only person with whom I really like grappling. You look at
things as required, inside and out, Einstein wrote to him on August 8. Almost everyone else,
he felt, was wedded to the new dogma without objectively considering its disturbing implications.
No doubt Schrodinger was delighted to have become Einstein's chief confidant on matters quantum.
In the same letter, Einstein went on to describe a paradoxical situation involving gunpowder.
Experience tells us that gunpowder, assuming it is combustible, either has already exploded or hasn't
exploded yet. But, as Einstein pointed out, by applying the Schrodinger equation to the wave
function representing a heap of gunpowder, it could evolve into a form where it is a bizarre
mixture of the two possibilities. It would be exploded and unexploded at the same time.
Hence, in Einstein's conception, large familiar systems, expressed in the language of quantum mechanics,
could well become monstrous hybrids that combine contradictory truths into a logically inconsistent
reality. Logical inconsistency, including self-contradictory statements, was the fuel for
Austrian mathematician Kurt Gödel's assertion, published in 1931 and presented at a Princeton
IAS talk in 1934, that Hilbert's mathematical system was incomplete. Similarly, Einstein asserted
that quantum mechanics contained self-contradictions that would topple its methodology.
A Cat's Strange Tale
Based in part on Einstein's gunpowder idea, with a measure of Einstein's ball-in-the-box thought
experiment thrown in, Schrodinger crafted his feline thought experiment in a manner designed
to highlight the ambiguities of quantum measurement. He acknowledged his debt to Einstein in a letter
dated August 19th, in which he announced that he had developed a quantum paradox that resembles
your exploding powder keg. As Schrodinger described the imaginary experiment to Einstein,
a Geiger counter and a tiny amount of uranium that could trigger it are enclosed in a steel
chamber, such a small quantity that within an hour there is equal likelihood that the counter
would or wouldn't register a nuclear decay. An amplifying relay ensures that if atomic decay
occurs, a flask containing poisonous hydrocyanic acid would be smashed. Cruelly enough, a cat is also
included in the steel chamber. After an hour, in the system's combined psi-function, equal parts of
the living and dead cat would be blended. Pardon the word.
The implication is that before the box is opened and its contents revealed, just as the uranium has
equal chances of having decayed or not, the cat would have equal chances of having been poisoned
or spared. Therefore, the combined wave-function representing both the Geiger counter-reading
and the cat's state would be in a strange juxtaposition. Half decayed, half not, half dead,
half alive. Only once someone opened the box would the combined wave-function collapse into one of the
two possibilities. By positing a cat whose wave-function is an equal mixture of life and
death until an experimenter opens the box it is in, Schrodinger highlighted a situation even more
implausible than Einstein's gunpowder scenario, hoping to show that quantum mechanics had become a kind
of farce. Why a cat? Schrodinger enjoyed creating analogies involving familiar things,
such as household objects or pets, to draw out the absurdity of situations by making them more
tangible. It was not that he had a grudge against any particular feline. On the contrary, as Ruth
recalled, he loved animals, or that there was one he wanted to immortalize.
Could any two things be in an entangled state, no matter how dissimilar or distant? Might the
wave-function formalism, originally applied to electrons on a minute scale, be used to characterize
anything at all? The mere idea of linking the fates of living beings and particles, he suggested,
was ludicrous. Quantum mechanics had strayed far from its original mission if it could be applied to
breathing, purring creatures. Einstein wrote back to Schrodinger, heartily expressing approval.
Your cat example shows that we agree completely with respect to assessing the character of present-day
theory, he said. A psi-function in which both the living and the dead cat are included just cannot be
regarded as the description of a real state. Much to Bohr's dismay, Schrodinger, in tandem with Einstein,
seemed to be mocking a successful theory without providing a more credible alternative. What about
a unified theory that superseded quantum mechanics? In no way, shape, or form would Bohr consider
Einstein's, and later Schrodinger's, quest for a unified field theory credible, as the models Einstein
advanced weren't based on atomic data and didn't even reckon with nuclear forces. Nevertheless, Bohr was
always polite and patient, even with his detractors. Schrodinger's Kitty Conundrum was published in
November 1935 as part of a paper on the present situation in quantum mechanics, the same article in
which he had coined the term entanglement. As we discussed in the introduction, the thought
experiment was scarcely known by the public until many decades later. At that point, only the physics
community had the opportunity to laugh, shriek, or grumble at Schrodinger's bizarre hypothetical
scenario. One of the motifs of the cat paradox is the clash between what goes on at the microscopic
and macroscopic levels. As Schrodinger described in his paper, uncertainty on an atomic scale becomes
linked with fuzziness on a human scale. Because such macroscopic murkiness is never observed,
microscopic indeterminacy similarly mustn't exist. Schrodinger argued that probabilistic quantum
rules could not apply to living beings. He was troubled by some of his contemporaries' assertion
that quantum dice-rolling explained the choices made by sentient creatures. Unlike with particle
behavior, he pointed out, one could not develop a probability chart for actions made by people.
In the paper Indeterminism and Free Will, written in English and published in July 1936 in the
prestigious journal Nature, Schrodinger addressed the differences between particle interactions and
human decision-making, refuting analogies made between them. In my opinion, the whole analogy is
fallacious, he wrote, because the plurality of possible actions is a self-deception. Think of cases
such as the following. You are sitting at a formal dinner with important persons, terribly boring.
Could you, all at once, jump on the table and trample down the glasses and dishes, just for fun?
Perhaps you could. Maybe you feel like it. At any rate, you cannot.
In other words, pre-set factors, such as manners and personality, determine what decisions people end
up making. Such a concept of free will seems closely tied to Schopenhauer's notion that seemingly
spontaneous actions are really inevitable. If you knew people's underlying motives and background,
you could generally predict what they would do under certain circumstances. However, there wouldn't be
a case, according to Schrodinger, where you would say that they'd have a 75% chance of doing one thing
and a 25% chance of doing another. Rather, you'd either anticipate correctly what they would do
or you would fail to predict it correctly, depending on how well you knew them and the situation.
Schrodinger ridiculed the idea that Heisenberg's methods could be used to calculate how often people
do certain things. If my smoking or not smoking a cigarette before breakfast, a very wicked thing,
were a matter of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, he wrote, the latter would stipulate between the
two events a definite statistics, which I could invalidate by firmness. Or, secondly, if that is
denied, why on earth do I feel responsible for what I do, since the frequency of my sinning is
determined by Heisenberg's principle? An offer he should have refused.
No historian has developed an algorithm that could accurately explain Schrodinger's decisions,
not using the uncertainty principle or any other method. At the end of 1935, he found out that his
position at Oxford would be funded for only two more years before it expired. He would need to move on.
But to where? Meanwhile, Arthur Mark took Hilda and Ruth with him back to Austria.
Hilda was depressed and needed treatment at a sanitarium. With the mother of his child gone,
Erwin took on yet another lover, Hansi Bauer Bum, a Viennese Jewish photographer who was then living in
England. Like Hilda, she was a married woman, but she was far more confident and assertive. After they had
spent many months together, she let him know that she planned to move back to her native city.
With one of his lovers in Austria and the other soon to return, perhaps the die was cast for him
to venture back there, too. As chance, fate, or the mysterious mechanisms of academic decision-making
would have it, Schrodinger received a tempting joint offer from two Austrian universities—a
professorship at the University of Graz, coupled with an honorary professorship at the University of
Vienna. His old friend from his student days, Hans Turing, arranged the latter.
The only other offer on the table was a professorship in Edinburgh, which he briefly considered until he
learned how low the salary would be. So he accepted the Graz offer, and the Edinburgh position went to
Born, the second choice.
In hindsight, moving to Austria right before the Anschluss, its annexation by Nazi Germany,
was an incredibly foolish move, especially for someone who had already angered the Nazis by
leaving a prominent position in Berlin. As Ani remarked, anybody who thought a bit about politics
would have told, don't go to Austria. It is already very much in danger.
The Austria that Schrodinger returned to was far different from the one he had left a decade and a half
earlier. Since March 1933, it had come under one-party fascist rule, governed by a nationalist movement that
became known as the Patriotic Front. Similar in spirit to the Italian fascists under Benito Mussolini, the party
suppressed the social-democratic left, as well as the Austrian Nazi right. Engelbert Dolfus headed it at first.
Until in July 1934, Austrian Nazis assassinated him in an attempted coup.
The plotter's goal was unification with the German Reich under Hitler.
When the coup failed, Kurt Schuschnigg took over as chancellor. He resisted pressure for Austria to align itself with
Hitler, advocating its continued independence. However, the Austrian Nazi movement continued to grow.
Like the German Nazis, it organized angry, unemployed workers and other supporters into a formidable
paramilitary force. They were encouraged by statements Hitler, who was born in Austria,
had made, supporting a greater Reich that included all German-speaking people.
In July 1936, Schuschnigg signed an agreement with Hitler that, on the face of it, seemed to guarantee
Austrian independence. Austria and Germany promised to respect each other's sovereignty and not to
meddle in each other's internal affairs. In return, Schuschnigg promised to ensure that his foreign policy was
appropriate for a German state and to let some Nazi-leaning politicians into his government.
These seemingly innocuous clauses provided a Trojan horse for Hitler to include his supporters in the Austrian
leadership and begin to exert pressure from within for subjugation.
Schrodinger started his Graz professorship in October of that year.
Once again, he tried to ignore politics, focusing on his research. He had become intrigued by recent
proposals by Arthur Eddington for uniting quantum physics with general relativity and explaining
uncertainty through cosmological arguments. Thus, in the midst of Austria's turmoil, his gaze was
fixed on his equations. The Quantum and the Cosmos
Eddington's role in the late 1910s and early 1920s as a leading defender, interpreter, and tester of
general relativity had won him much respect in the physics community. However, starting in the mid to late
1920s, his research had become increasingly focused on explaining the properties of nature through
mathematical relationships that connected the very large and very small. Although he was in many ways a
visionary who was one of the first to blend particle physics with cosmology, many physicists dismissed his
later theoretical work as numerology rather than science. For example, British astrophysicist Herbert
Dingle referred to his work, along with other speculative theories, as the pseudoscience of
invertebrate cosmetology. On the other hand, Einstein and Schrodinger greatly respected Eddington's
independent-minded thinking. Like them, he was certainly not one of the herd. While they did not
agree with his prescriptions, they appreciated his clinical look at the ailments of quantum mechanics
and how to make it better. Two of the most important relationships in modern physics are
Schrodinger's wave equation and Einstein's equation of general relativity. Strikingly, their domains are very
different. While Schrodinger's equation describes the distribution and behavior of matter and energy
throughout space and time, Einstein's equation shows how the fabric of space and time is itself
molded by the distribution of matter and energy. One key distinction between the two equations,
therefore, is that in Schrodinger's equation, space and time are passive, while in Einstein's,
they are active. Another is that, at least in the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics,
the solutions of Schrodinger's equation, wave functions, bear only an indirect relationship to
what is actually observed. As the cat paradox so starkly depicts, observed quantities manifest
themselves after an experimenter takes a measurement and causes the wave function to collapse into one of
its constituent eigenstates. Naturally, no experimenter is needed for general relativity to produce
definitive values. Otherwise, who would have been the observer during the 13.8 billion years of cosmic
evolution? Reshaping the Schrodinger equation to match up with special relativity turned out to be
fairly straightforward, as demonstrated by Dirac in 1928. The Dirac equation, designed to describe
fermions, particles with half-integer spin, yield solutions called spinors, similar to vectors,
but with a different way of transforming when rotated through abstract space. The algebra for
dealing with spinner solutions of the Dirac equation, involving the multiplication of objects called
Pauli matrices, is a bit more complicated than for wave function solutions of the Schrodinger equation.
The Dirac equation leads to an astonishing prediction that electrons have counterparts with opposite
charge, but the same mass. Dirac thought these were holes in the energy sea of the universe,
left over when electrons emerged. Rather, they turned out to be actual particles called positrons,
the antimatter versions of electrons. Carl Anderson first identified them in 1932 through a study of
cosmic rays. Compared to its reconciliation with special relativity, linking quantum mechanics with
general relativity turned out to be a far more formidable problem. Throughout the 1930s, many
physicists attempted unsuccessfully to merge the two. Even Einstein, who generally stayed away from quantum
matters except to critique them or attempt to supplant them, tried his hand. In his final years in Berlin,
1932 to 1933, he and Meyer worked on a way of expressing general relativity using four component
mathematical objects related to spinors, called semi-vectors. Part of Einstein's motivation was to
construct a unified field theory that allowed for oppositely charged particles of different mass,
protons as well as electrons. All of his earlier unified field theories, including the distant parallelism
approach, could handle only particles of the same mass, electrons. To bring protons into the picture,
he and Meyer hoped to generalize the Dirac equation so that it conformed to general relativity and also
predicted particles of different mass. Unfortunately, like his previous unified approaches,
Einstein's semi-vector method failed to produce physically reasonable results.
Once he moved to Princeton, Meyer didn't work with him anymore, and he decided to abandon the
semi-vector approach. It would be another in his used car lot of theories taken for a multi-year test
drive, found to be a clunker, and then traded in for another. Eddington was similarly intrigued by
Dirac's equation and tantalized by its bridge between quantum physics and the four-dimensional realm of
special relativity. Along with Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, which appeared the
previous year, it motivated him to develop a fundamentally new vision of the universe from
the top down. In his analysis, he started with a few basic propositions, such that the universe is
curved and finite, similar to Einstein's original model of the universe with a cosmological constant,
and that all physical quantities are relative. To measure physical quantities, such as position
or momentum, Eddington suggested, a researcher must compare it to the values for other reference
points. This comparison, within the context of a spacetime warped by gravity, introduces a measure
of fuzziness, leading to the uncertainty principle. Because it is harder to measure smaller things by
relating their positions and momenta to those of other known objects, uncertainty is much greater
at the atomic level than at the astronomical level. Therefore, quantum uncertainty is not a
fundamental feature of nature, but the result of human inability to measure everything in the
universe with absolute precision. Regarding wave functions as composites rather than fundamental,
Eddington used general relativity, modified by his idea of relative physical quantities,
to map out distributions of positions, momenta, and other quantities for collections of particles.
Then he combined this data.
