but rather an integral self-reflexive component of the given act. In this
way we may avoid the problems of recently fashionable “higher-order”
theories of consciousness. Nonetheless, we should recognize a gradation
from elementary sentient consciousness to more complex forms of consciousness, recognizing that it is these “higher” forms that involve inner
awareness.
Consciousness in Action
Since Descartes’s revolution, turning philosophy inward to the subjective
sphere and then arguing for a metaphysical distinction between mind
and body, it has been widely thought that the focus on consciousness
in itself leads to the separation of mind and body. From Locke, Hume,
and Kant to Husserl in his transcendental phenomenology, it has seemed
that the connections of mind and body have been cleanly severed. Yet a
careful phenomenology of the experience of acting – of conscious volitional bodily action – leads instead to a subtle ontological intertwining of
consciousness and body, and so of mind and the world in which it occurs.
Overview: A Story Line 5
Cogito ergo sum leads to ambulo ergo sum: inner awareness in embodied
action leads to discrete awareness of one’s own body and one’s natural
surroundings and to the connections between them. The phenomenology of action thus leads into an ontology of consciousness embedded
in nature, in one’s body, and – with futher empirical studies in neuroscience – in one’s brain. We are beginning to turn our attention in this
regard to the substrate of consciousness, to the natural, physical conditions
on which our own consciousness depends.
Background Ideas
Our conscious experience is not only embedded in our bodily comportment in our natural environment; our experience is also embedded in
our social environment. A close study of intentional content or meaning
shows that our most familiar ideas – everyday concepts and rules of practice – presuppose very basic conceptual and practical structures that are
extant in our surrounding culture. There is thus a deep dependence of
our intentional contents on background ideasthat virtually define the everyday world as we know it. Only by a sort of phenomenological-semantic
archaeology, however, do we begin to appreciate this type of dependence.
We may launch our study of this deep background of our intentional experience by starting with Husserl’s conception of a “horizon” of background
meaning and practice, Wittgenstein’s notion of “ground propositions,”
and Searle’s account of “background” capacities. However, we need to
place these notions of background within a proper ontology of dependence. Here lies a crucial part of the substrate of consciousness – in the
culture surrounding us, rather than in the neural processing within us.
Indeed, background ideas have a life and status of their own, not in a
Platonic or Fregean heaven of ideal meanings but in a realm of ideal
meanings extant in our culture in the life world.
Intentionality Naturalized?
Contemporary philosophy-of-mind and cognitive science are largely wedded to a naturalism that assumes a functionalist physicalist ontology of
mind. But functional-physical analyses of mind – of the physical inputs
and outputs of different types of mental states – do not account for the
crucial phenomenological features of consciousness: intentionality (and
meaning), inner awareness, sensory qualia. What we need instead is a
wider and more fundamental ontology that gives consciousness and nature their proper places in the structure of the world. A worthy start is
Husserl’s distinction between formal and material ontological categories.
6 Mind World
In Husserl’s ontology, for instance, the formal structure of states of affairs applies to entities in the material domains of nature (the physical),
consciousness (the intentional), and culture (the social). We may thus
begin to rethink the basic categorial structure of the world by considering
fundamental categories of mind and world. We must distinguish different material types of properties of mental activity: those of consciousness
(intentionality, etc.), those of nature (the physical causal conditions of
consciousness), and those of culture (the social conditions of consciousness). But we must also distinguish different formal types of properties
of mind: for instance, intentional relations of consciousness to its objects
and causal relations of an event of consciousness to its causes and its effects. Without a fundamental ontology that draws such distinctions we
cannot develop a unified account of mind and the world of nature, an
appropriate phenomenological ontology.
Consciousness and Actuality
To understand the structure of the world in general, and the structure
of consciousness in particular, we need to rethink our most familiar ontological concepts, which began with Plato and Aristotle on universals
and particulars. A radically different type of ontology was envisioned by
Whitehead, an ontology that would replace Aristotelian substance (centered on predication) with a fundamental type of process more attuned
to twentieth-century physics. Today we might look to something like dynamic states in a relativistic quantum field (if we could understand such
entities). Whitehead held that the most basic “actual entities” of the world
are something like point events in a field of constant flux – out of which
everyday objects emerge in great complexity. However, Whitehead distinguished what we may call temporal and ontological becoming. Whereas an
“occasion” is formed by the process of temporal transition, any “entity” is
formed by the process of becoming an entity, wherein an entity is ontologically dependent on a variety of other entities. This highly abstract form of
becoming suggests a more fundamental kind of ontology, which may apply
in instructive ways ultimately to the special case of consciousness.
Basic Categories
The doctrine of ontological categories began with Aristotle’s list of ten.
Husserl’s distinction between formal and material categories ramified the
very notion of ontological category, and of the categorial structure of the
world, with instructive details applied to consciousness, nature, and culture. Whitehead’s ontology of process, especially ontological becoming,
Overview: A Story Line 7
suggests a deeper ontology of levels – or, as I prefer, “modes of being.”
We may begin to specify a more up-to-date category scheme by reflecting on
these types of ontology. Three-facet ontology (distinguishing the form,
appearance, and substrate of any entity) organizes three basic categorial structures, but there is more to the story. Marking various formal
ontological distinctions, and organizing them in a structured system of
categories, we may begin to frame a more systematic account of the order
of things in general and of consciousness in particular.
Such is the story line that I mean to weave through and around the
essays to follow.
Notes
1. That theory of intentionality is detailed in Smith and McIntyre 1982. A shorter
version of the theory is presented by the same authors in 1989.
2. See Searle 1983.
3. Details on “indexical” content are found in Smith 1989. My account there
extends and modifies traditional Husserlian phenomenology. Kindred spirits are at work in two books not directly linked with the phenomenological
tradition: Searle 1983 (see the chapters on perception and action) and Perry
2001 (see Perry’s account of “reflexive” content).
References
Perry, John. 2001. Knowledge, Possibility and Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Searle, John. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, David Woodruff. 1989. The Circle of Acquaintance. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Smith, David Woodruff, and Ronald McIntyre. 1982. Husserl and Intentionality.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
1989. “Theory of Intentionality.” In J. N. Mohanty and William McKenna, eds.,
Husserl’s Phenomenology: A Textbook, pp. 147–79. Washington, D.C.: University
