Press of America.
The Picture
Many of us think visually, even when we conceptualize highly abstract phenomena. This is a phenomenological observation about the practice of
phenomenology and ontology (for those like “us”). Indeed, I often draw
pictures on the board while lecturing on the topics pursued in this book:
structures of consciousness (intentionality, background, inner awareness,
self-awareness) and structures of the world (ontological categories, the
form of intentionality itself).
What follows, accordingly, is a pictorial organization of the structures
of world and consciousness that are pursued in the essays to follow.
My students will recognize many of the elements of The Picture.
8
The Picture 9
1
Three Facets of Consciousness
Abstract: Over the past century phenomenology has ably analyzed the basic structures of consciousness as we experience it. Yet recent philosophy
of mind, concerned more with brain activity and computational function,
has found it difficult to make room for the structures of subjectivity and
intentionality that phenomenology has appraised. In order to understand
consciousness as something that is both subjective and grounded in neural activity, we need to delve into phenomenology and ontology. I draw
a fundamental distinction in ontology among the form, appearance, and
substrate of any entity. Applying this three-facet ontology to consciousness,
we distinguish the intentionality of consciousness (its form); the way we
experience consciousness (its appearance, including so-called qualia); and
the physical, biological, and cultural basis of consciousness (its substrate).
We can thus show how these very different aspects of consciousness fit together in a fundamental ontology. And we can thereby define the proper
domains of phenomenology and other disciplines that contribute to our
understanding of consciousness.
The Problem of Consciousness
Lately, philosophers and scientists have been looking for mind in all the
wrong places. Physicalists of all stripes have focused primarily on the physical conditions of consciousness, from neural activity to computational
I am indebted to my colleagues in the PACIS project: Charles W. Dement, President of
Ontek; Stephen DeWitt, John Stanley, and Anthony Sarris, all of Ontek; and Peter M.
Simons of the University of Leeds. Thanks to Tony Sarris for the ISO reference. Thanks
further to Chuck Dement for numerous discussions of systematic formal ontology. I bear
responsibility, nonetheless, for what is made of the three-facet distinction in the present
chapter.
10
Three Facets of Consciousness 11
function.1 Meanwhile, humanists – historicists, postmodernists, culture
critics – have looked primarily to the cultural conditions of our discourse,
as if consciousness did not exist in its own right (expressed in art and literature) but is “theorized” in a cultural tradition of phenomenology or science or humanistic discourse. Obviously, we have much to learn from the
empirical sciences about boson, atom, organism, evolution, and brain –
and from humanistic observations in art, literature, and cultural history
and criticism. But this learning is informed by further disciplines that are
not “empirical” or “naturalistic” or indeed “humanistic” in the received
ways. If we are to understand the mind, we must understand more clearly
the philosophical disciplines of phenomenology and ontology, because
these disciplines define the place of mind in a world further detailed
by the scientific disciplines of neuroscience, evolutionary biology, and
quantum physics, as well as the humanistic disciplines of literary, artistic,
and cultural criticism.
Let us begin with a fundamental principle of ontology. The nature of
any entity, I propose, divides into three aspects or facets, which we may
call its form, appearance, and substrate. In an act of consciousness, accordingly, we must distinguish three fundamentally different aspects: its
form or intentional structure, its appearance or subjective “feel,” and its
substrate or origin. In terms of this three-facet distinction, we can define
the place of consciousness in the world. The aim of this chapter is to lay
out this distinction in the nature of consciousness, and to draw out its
implications for phenomenology and ontology, as distinct from purely
naturalistic philosophy of mind. (I do not focus here on humanistic theory, although I think the morals to follow have relevance for humanistic
as well as naturalistic theory of mind.)
Consciousness is the central concern of phenomenology. Although
there is more to mind than what we consciously experience, our theory of mind must begin with the salient part of mind, conscious intentional experience. Consciousness is characteristically a consciousness
“of” something, as Husserl stressed circa 1900, and this property of directedness he dubbed intentionality. The literature of phenomenology –
in Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Ingarden, Føllesdal, and
others, with roots in Kant, Hume, Descartes, and still earlier thinkers –
has analyzed a rich variety of structures of intentionality in perception, imagination, thought, language, and action, along with properties of subjectivity, intersubjectivity, temporality, and the unity of the
subject or self. For the discipline of phenomenology, there is no problem about the nature or existence of consciousness: we experience it
12 Mind World
firsthand throughout our waking life, and we have ways of studying it
carefully.
For recent philosophy of mind, however, consciousness has seemed
problematic, either in its nature or in its very existence, because it seems
to escape the story told by the physical sciences. “Consciousness is what
makes the mind-body problem really intractable,” Thomas Nagel observed, rightly, wryly, and presciently in 1974 (Nagel 1974). As cognitive
science developed over the next two decades, moving from artificial intelligence into neuroscience, consciousness regained center stage. The
function of mind in mediating behavior, in problem-solving computation, in evolutionary adaptation, and the like did not seem to involve
the subjective qualities of sensation, dubbed qualia, or the felt character of consciousness as directed toward objects in the world around one.
Nonetheless, by 1990 neuroscientists were measuring properties of neural activity (such as spiking frequency) associated with consciousness, and
so consciousness became a respectable phenomenon of scientific investigation.“Consciousness studies” emerged with large interdisciplinary conferences in Tucson in the 1990s. Still, amid the excitement even in popular media, David Chalmers (1996) echoed Nagel’s sentiment in declaring consciousness the “hard” problem for our theory of mind. Chalmers
struck a nerve.
Yet is it not odd to find consciousness problematic? What if someone
declared that we do not know what language is, or that its existence is
uncertain? We all speak a language such as English or Japanese. Grammarians have charted its basic forms such as the verb or noun phrase,
and linguists have analyzed its “deep” structure. How the brain functions in the production and understanding of language is a further matter of empirical neuroscience; how speech and writing emerged in our
species is a matter of evolutionary biology; how our language shapes
our society and politics is a matter of social-cultural theory. But the
syntax and meaning of modern English are familiar, more or less, to
its speakers. Similarly, the shape and meaning of our everyday experiences of perception, thought, and action are familiar to us all, more
or less. These forms of consciousness have been studied by phenomenologists, much as linguists have studied forms of language. How the
brain functions in consciousness, how our forms of experience evolved
in the species Homo sapiens sapiens, how our consciousness is shaped
by our language, culture, and politics – these are further matters. But
how can consciousness itself be thought problematic or its basic forms
obscure?
Three Facets of Consciousness 13
There is a widespread opinion that science alone will explain the workings of the world, including our own minds and thus consciousness. This
idea goes under the positive banner of “naturalism” or meets the pejorative charge of “scientism.” This attitude is expressed with characteristic verve, in his recent book Consilience (1998), by biologist Edward
O. Wilson, famous for his studies of ants and for his conception of sociobiology. Let us quote at length (the only way to evidence “attitude,” albeit
