in the way of humanists):
Belief in the intrinsic unity of knowledge ...rides ultimately on the hypothesis
that every mental process has a physical grounding and is consistent with the
natural sciences. The mind is supremely important to the consilience program
[of unity] for a reason both elementary and disturbingly profound: Everything
that we know and can ever know about existence is created there.
The loftier forms of such reflection and belief may seem at first to be the proper
domain of philosophy, not science. But history shows that logic launched from
introspection alone lacks thrust, can travel only so far, and usually heads in the
wrong direction. Much of the history of modern philosophy, from Descartes and
Kant forward, consists of failed models of the brain. The shortcoming is not the
fault of the philosophers, who have doggedly pushed their methods to the limit,
but a straightforward consequence of the biological evolution of the brain. All
that has been learned empirically about evolution in general and mental process
in particular suggests that the brain is a machine assembled not to understand
itself, but to survive. Because these two ends are basically different, the mind
unaided by factual knowledge from science sees the world only in little pieces. It
throws a spotlight on those portions of the world it must know in order to live to
the next day, and surrenders the rest to darkness. (Wilson 1998, 96)
What we have here is failure to communicate, between philosophers and
scientists. (1) It was philosophers – Descartes, Kant, and Husserl – who
taught us the principle, “Everything that we know and can ever know
about existence is created there [in the mind].” (2) The history of modern philosophy includes much more than failed models of the brain;
Descartes and Husserl developed successful models of consciousness, of
mind as experienced, precisely what is now found “hard” for empirical
neuroscience. (3) Although the brain did not evolve to understand itself, in humans it seems to be on the verge of producing, Wilson thinks,
a scientific theory of its own physical and evolutionary function – and,
I think, a philosophical theory of consciousness. (4) Most of the great
modern philosophers – notably Descartes, Kant, and Husserl – theorized in the face of factual knowledge from science cum mathematics
in their day; they also appreciated, however, the importance of introspection when attending to the mind. (5) It is a hallmark of modern
14 Mind World
philosophy – and ultimately philosophy of science – to delimit knowledge
of empirical fact and that of logic and mathematics, and thus to define the
limits of both a posteriori and a priori knowledge; today in philosophyand-science of mind we need to understand the boundaries and interrelations between the more empirical and the more “formal” aspects of
consciousness.
A different view, from the formal side of natural science, is proposed by
mathematical physicist Roger Penrose in Shadows of the Mind (1994). From
Kurt Godel ¨ ’s incompleteness theorem in mathematical logic, Penrose
argues that consciousness cannot be a process of computation in the
technical sense originally defined by Alan Turing; then, from considerations of quantum mechanics and the microstructure of neurons in the
human brain, Penrose argues that we need a noncomputational quantum physics to explain how consciousness can arise in neuronal activity.
I cannot evaluate the controversial speculations in Penrose’s book, but
if he is right then consciousness is defined by a very different kind of
“formal” mathematical structure than anything philosophers of mind
have been considering previously. What I like in Penrose’s vision is this
type of abstraction. The mathematical form of a piece of physical theory is
integral to its content, and mathematical form is suggestive of ontological
form. The subtitle of the Penrose book is A Search for the Missing Science of
Consciousness. When we have finished the “science” of consciousness, its
physics and its evolutionary biology, there will still be something missing
in our account of consciousness. What is missing in all current “naturalistic” thinking about consciousness is the relevant phenomenology and
ontology, and their integration.
The “loftier forms” of naturalism are what attract the philosopher. I
believe in the unity of knowledge. I believe, moreover, in the unity of
the world: one world in which physical, mental, and cultural phenomena
take their interweaving places. And I believe that every mental process
has a physical grounding and is consistent with the natural sciences. (In
fact, I am quite partial to the metaphor of “ground” in ontology, as we
shall see.) So far, naturalism: both methodological and ontological (these
need to be distinguished).
However, the structure of intentionality – call it “formal” or “transcendental” or something else – does not flow easily from empirical, “naturalistic” studies of the brain or bodily behavior or physical system alone.
The “logic” of intentionality in phenomenology, methodically launched
from introspection alone, has a powerful thrust and carries us far (contrary to what Wilson claims in the preceding quotation). However, I must
Three Facets of Consciousness 15
concur, the theory of intentionality carries us in different directions than
empirical science: into structures of consciousness in phenomenology,
and indeed into structures of thought and inference in logic and semantics (concerning how we reason and represent things in thought and language). “Formal” ontology, too, moves in different directions, positing
fundamental categories of existence such as Individual, Property, Relation, Number, Part, and so forth. Both phenomenology and ontology
are crucial to a unified system of knowledge – of a unified world. And
both carry us beyond naturalism: their results should be consistent with
natural science, but the proper results of phenomenology and ontology
are not simply amassed in empirical investigation in the natural sciences
alone.
When we want to see the world as a whole and not in the “little pieces”
so effectively modeled by physics, chemistry, and biology – when we want
to see the unity of the world – we must inform natural science with fundamental ontology. Much as physics needs mathematics to structure its
empirical content, so natural science in general needs ontology – or
metaphysics – to structure empirical content. And when we turn to the
nature of mind itself, the empirical analysis of our own consciousness is
pursued expressly and methodically by phenomenology. Moreover, it is
ontology that must define the type of relation that holds between mind
and its grounding in brain activity. This is a matter of formal ontology
rather than of empirical investigation per se.
Wilfrid Sellars (1963) contrasted two ranges of theory that define respectively the “manifest” image and the “scientific” image of man, that
is, ourselves and our world as understood by common sense and as described by modern science. Similarly, in The Crisis of European Sciences and
Transcendental Phenomenology (1970b/1935–38) Husserl distinguished the
“lifeworld” from the “natural world,” that is, the world as we experience
it in everyday life and as we “mathematize” it in physics. Mathematical
physics (in all its well-earned glory) is an abstraction, Husserl held, from
the world as experienced in everyday life. Consequently, Husserl said, we
must confront “the paradox of human subjectivity”: how can I be both
subject and object of consciousness, both a conscious subject and an object in nature? Husserl did not clearly foresee the “mathematization” of
thought in the computer model of mind. Yet today’s controversy about
mind as computer (whatever the architecture, classical or connectionist) is but the application of mathematical modeling or “mathematizing” to mind as opposed to physical activity like planetary motion. Thus,
Husserl’s “paradox” foreshadowed what today is the “hard” problem of
16 Mind World
consciousness: how can consciousness be both a subjective character of
experience and an objective property of the brain – a computational structure implemented in neural networks evolved over the natural history of
the human species on the planet Earth in the cosmos that took shape
since the Big Bang over 12 billion years ago amid fields of gravity, electromagnetism, and quantum superposition?
