world such as our own). Thus, the entity itself is distributed in its being
through these three aspects of form, appearance, and substrate: that is
its nature or essence.
There are other fundamental divisions in the structure of the world.
But the division < Form, Appearance, Substrate > marks one crucial
ordering in the nature of things. To appreciate its significance, we shall
work through some examples.
Importantly, the division among form, appearance, and substrate is a
division of structure in the nature of an entity rather than a division among
three intrinsically distinct types of property. In principle, the same thing
might be part of the appearance, form, and substrate of an entity. The
green of a leaf – say, of a California Live Oak tree – is part of its appearance
to the human eye, part of its intrinsic form, and part of its evolutionary
history (in the role of chlorophyll). Thus, the property green plays three
differentroles in the form, appearance, and substrate of the leaf, and these
three facets are themselves defined by the roles played. That is, Form,
Appearance, and Substrate are defined by roles played in the nature or
essence of an entity.
An instructive parallel to the three-facet distinction can be drawn in
biology: in systematics, the science of diversity among living things (Mayr
and Ashlock 1991). Thus, biologists today define a species by principled
reference to its character, its observed specimens, and its evolutionary descent. (Exactly how a species is defined in these terms has been vigorously
debated; I abstract the terms of debate only.) Imposing our terminology:
the form of a species is its genotype, its appearance (to the scientific
community) is its phenotype or observable traits (starting with a definitive specimen called its holotype), and its substrate or origin consists in its
path of phylogenetic descent from ancestor species. These three aspects
of a species are given canonical places in defining the species in modern biological theory, and we may see in this empirical theory something
more like a “formal” division in the nature of all things, not just of evolving species of living things. (N.B. In biological systematics, a “category” is
defined not as a high-level grouping or summum genus, as Aristotle originally used the term, but rather as a rank of taxa or groupings. In the long
run I too would define the term “category” in a more special way, but for
20 Mind World
present purposes let us mean by the term simply an important group or
classification of things.)
Insofar as biological systematics provides one model of three-facet ontology, we are abstracting or factoring out from the empirical theory of
species the formal structure of three facets, which we would apply to any
kind of entity at all (in a world such as our own). This kind of abstracting
is the proper work of formal ontology, and the three-facet distinction is
a formal ontological distinction, applying by hypothesis to any kind of
entity whatsoever. The significance of the three-facet distinction lies in
the different ways in which something can be defined in its being, in its
fundamental nature, by its form, appearance, and substrate.
Husserl is one systematic philosopher who recognized what we are
calling the three facets of an object. The form of an object Husserl called
its “essence” (Wesen, from Was-sein). The sensible qualities of a material
object Husserl called its“appearance” (Erscheinung), or more generally its
“way of being given” to consciousness, which aligns with the “object as intended.” And the substrate of an object encompasses what Husserl called
its “horizon,” its Umwelt (surrounding world), and indeed its ontological
“foundation,” that on which it is “founded” (by Fundierung). What is unusual in Husserl’s philosophy is the principle that the essence of any object
includes the ways in which it can be known or intended, the ways it is
“constituted” in consciousness. It was Husserl who first explicitly defined
“formal” ontology, as specifying categories (“formal essences”) that apply to different “regions” (“material essences”) such as Nature, Culture,
and Consciousness. (The details are drawn in D. W. Smith 1995.) The
three-facet distinction belongs to formal ontology in this sense. However,
Husserl himself did not join the three facets into the canonical division
I am proposing.
The three-facet distinction, then, is a higher-order formal structure
that orders the nature or essence of an entity. Because this structure applies to consciousness itself, we can use the three-facet distinction to look
at the ontology of consciousness. But first we must address the distinction
generally.
The Three Facets of Diverse Entities
To see how the three-facet distinction works, and to begin to appreciate
its scope, let us apply it to some very different kinds of entities.
Consider this piece of quartz found in my garden. Its form includes its
shape, its color, and its type, quartz. Its appearance includes what it looks
Three Facets of Consciousness 21
like from various angles and under various lighting. And its substrate
includes its physical crystalline structure, as well as its geological genesis
from great heat and pressure in the crust of the planet Earth.
Consider now an electron. Its form includes its mass, charge, and
spin. Its appearance includes its observable position and momentum,
its electron-microscope image, and so on. And its substrate includes the
matter field (from which it emerges per quantum field theory). So even
a basic physical particle has its three facets.
Now consider this pencil. The form of the pencil is its structure of
graphite in wood plus its function in writing and drawing. Its appearance includes what it looks like and what it feels like in my hand in
writing. The substrate of the pencil is its origin. It is made of certain materials, including wood, graphite, paint, tin, rubber. Each material has its
physical-chemical structure. Moreover, these materials are produced only
in specific parts of the world, in specific cultures, their trade following
established routes. Furthermore, the substrate of the pencil includes the
historical development of writing, writing instruments, and the invention of the pencil. So the pencil’s substrate includes not only its physical
composition (down to quantum structure) but also its cultural genesis.
Next consider the tool of the century: the computer. The International Organization for Standardization has defined what is called the
ISO three-schema architecture for database design, distinguishing a
computer program (“conceptual schema”), its implementation in hardware (plus operating system, etc.) (“internal schema”), and the user’s
presentation of what the program does (“external schema”). These three
aspects of a computer system are precisely what we are calling its three
facets: its form, the program; its substrate, the hardware; and its appearance, the user interface. This familiar distinction, we now begin to see,
reflects a deep ontological distinction in the nature of things far beyond
computers.
Finally, consider a human being, an individual such as Napoleon. His
appearance is well known: his facial structure, his small stature, his posture
with hand in vest. His form is his individual character as a person, an
intentional subject living in a culture in the natural world, his body having
various traits. And his substrate is what makes this individual possible: his
genetic heritage, his birth on Corsica, the French Revolution, and the
army in which he developed his power – as well as the wider physical,
biological, and cultural conditions of humanity.
Observe how naturally the three-facet distinction applies to such diverse kinds of entities. The concepts of form and appearance are relatively
22 Mind World
familiar; the concept of substrate is not. Indeed, notice how wildly different are the things that serve as substrate for different entities: materials
