or parts from which an object is composed; the field in which a physical
particle exists; the genesis of an individual through time; the evolutionary
track (or “clade”) of a biological species; the cultural history and use of
an artifact; the hardware that implements a computer program; the life
trajectory of an individual human being; even the cultural genealogy of
our values (in Nietzsche’s idiom) and of our language games and other
forms of life (in Wittgenstein’s idiom). What these things share, what
makes these things play the role of substrate in very different entities, is
the form of ontological derivation or emergence (in different ways!) from
things more fundamental, the form of ontological foundation or dependence on things in the wider context of the entity. Again, the three-facet
distinction belongs to “formal” ontology.
Now let us apply the three-facet distinction to – of all things – consciousness itself.
The Three Facets of Consciousness
An act of consciousness – my experience of thinking, seeing, or doing
such and such – is an entity with three facets:
1. Its form is its structure of intentionality, its being directed from
subject toward object through a content or meaning, with inner
awareness of itself (“apperception”).
2. Its appearance is how I experience it, “what it is like” for me to live
or perform this act of consciousness.
3. Itssubstrateis its origin or background in conditions including brain
activity, psychological motivation, cultural ideas or practices, and
the biological evolution of this form of mind.
The three facets of an act of consciousness are mapped in a diagram in
Figure 1.2.
According to this three-facet ontology, an act of consciousness is distributed in its nature through its form, appearance, and substrate. This is
not to say there are three kinds of entities bound together, say, items of
brain, meaning, and “feeling.” Rather, a particular mental act is one entity
with a nature that divides into three fundamentally different aspects or
facets. There are systematic relations, including dependencies, among
Three Facets of Consciousness 23
 STRUCTURE OF INTENTIONALITY
 SUBJECT ACT CONTENT >OBJECT
 INNER AWARENESS
FORM
|
ACT OF CONSCIOUSNESS
/ \
SUBSTRATE APPEARANCE
NEURAL-PHYSICAL-BIOLOGICAL CONDITIONS PHENOMENOLOGICAL CHARACTERS OF
PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS PERCEPTION, THOUGHT,
CULTURAL CONDITIONS EMOTION, VOLITION ...
figure 1.2. The three facets of an act of consciousness.
these facets, but that is a further story. First we must appreciate the fundamentally different roles these facets play in defining consciousness.
As we bring out these differences in facets, we can carve out the role of
phenomenology in understanding mind and its place in the world.
The Structure of Intentionality and Inner Awareness
I am assuming a basic theory of intentionality (elaborated in Smith and
McIntyre 1982). This account of intentionality draws on a long history,
but the main ideas were synthesized adequately first by Husserl. In recent
work in philosophy of mind and cognitive science, Searle (1983) comes
closest to this model of intentionality.
Consciousness occurs in concrete states or events called “acts” of
consciousness: when I see that bird overhead, when I think that Plato
was ironic, when I feel angry about the president’s speech, when I run
with the volition to catch a bus, and so on. Such an act of consciousness
is intentional, or directed toward something, called its object (the bird,
Plato, the speech, my catching the bus). As we say, it is“of” or“about”that
object. The object is prescribed by the content of the act. And the act is
experienced or performed by a person, called its subject. This structure
is analyzed by laying out cases and marking distinctions among subject,
act, content, and object (for detail, see Smith and McIntyre 1982). The
point to consider here is where this structure plays in the ontology of the
act of consciousness, in the three-faceted nature of the act.
24 Mind World
The fundamental structure of intentionality, we assume, is this:
subject — act — content ——> object.
The act is distinct from the object (unless the act is self-referential). The
subject is distinct from the act, and from the stream of consciousness
in which the act occurs as a transitory part. The content is an idea,
image, concept, thought (proposition), volition, and so on: a “meaning”
that Husserl called noema, updating the ancient Greek term for “what is
known.” Importantly, the same object can be “intended” through different contents in different acts.
In practicing phenomenology, when I reflect on an act of consciousness as experienced, I“intend”the act in a second act of reflection focused
on the first act. In this reflection the first act“appears”to the second. Classical phenomenology was much exercised about the best methodology
for reflecting on our experience. However we do it, let us assume, I carry
out an act of reflection – or introspection – on my own conscious experience. And in phenomenological reflection the intentionality of the
given act is part of its “appearance” in the reflective act. So the given
act’s intentionality is part of its form but also part of its appearance in
reflection.
Furthermore, we may directly experience the intentionality of an act
of consciousness, without retreating into a reflection on it. For when I
am conscious of something, say in perception, I have a prereflective inner
awareness of this consciousness-of-something. On this neoclassical view,
consciousness is consciousness-of-something and eo ipso consciousnessof-itself. In inner awareness, then, intentionality “appears”to me in having
a conscious experience of such and such. So intentionality is part of the
appearance of the act already in inner awareness. (This form of inner
awareness is analyzed in D. W. Smith 1989.)
By contrast, we do not directly experience (in inner awareness) the
substrate of an act of consciousness, notably its grounding in brain process and cultural history. Nor does the substrate of an experience submit
to phenomenological analysis in reflection or introspection. In modern
times we all have some knowledge of the fact, empirically discovered
and pursued in neuroscience, that what we are thinking, perceiving, or
dreaming depends on what is happening in our brains. And in postmodern times we all have some appreciation of the fact, frequently observed
in the wake of Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud, that what we think and value
depends on long-standing cultural conceptions, assumptions, linguistic
practices, and political institutions. But these background conditions
Three Facets of Consciousness 25
must be distinguished from the intentional structure of consciousness
itself, thus separating the form and appearance of consciousness from its
