substrate. (Compare D. W. Smith 1999b on “background ideas” in the
cultural substrate of intentionality.)
The Ontology of Form and Appearance
Given the preceding model of intentionality, we can say more about the
ontological status of the form and appearance of an entity.
The form of an entity, we said, consists of its kinds, properties, and
relations. These are “universals” in the traditional sense. I shall not here
address the full range of issues about the existence of universals (ably
and succinctly assayed by Armstrong 1989, 1997), but a couple of points
stand out in present discussion. First, some universals depend for their
existence on intentional acts of consciousness and associated cultural
practices, although most do not. The property of being a fork, for instance, could not exist unless people had developed the tradition of eating with a utensil of that shape. (See Thomasson 1999, on similar issues
of dependence.) Moreover, if I am using a fork to pry open a box, it is not
in that context bearing the property of being a fork. Second, a universal
is distinct from any concept that represents it. The property of being an
electron does not depend for its existence on anyone’s having a concept
of it; when someone thinks about an electron, the concept “electron” is
part of the content of the act of thinking but is distinct from the property of being an electron. Universals rather than any associated concepts
make up the form of an entity. Third, a universal is distinct from its instance in a particular entity. Aristotle called such instances “accidents”;
Husserl called them “moments”; recent philosophers (following Donald
Williams’s usage) call them “tropes.” Strictly speaking, the form of an
entity – in the three-facet distinction – is realized in a complex comprising moments or tropes that are instances of universals. For simplicity,
however, in this essay I shall simply speak of an entity’s form and its constituent kinds, properties, and relations. (Still, the distinction between
moments and universals, or “ideal” essences, does important work in a
Husserlian philosophy of mind pace D. W. Smith 1995.)
The appearance of an entity, we said, consists of how it is known or,
we may now say, “intended” in appropriate acts of consciousness. This
talk of “how” is ambiguous between the properties that appear or are
intended and the contents through which they appear. (Husserl carefully
distinguished these: see Ideas I, 1913, §42.) When I see that green leaf,
26 Mind World
for instance, the content “green” in my visual experience is one thing,
and the color itself in the leaf is another thing. Science tells us that the
color green is dependent not only on the wavelength of the light reflected
from the surface of the leaf but also on the interaction with the observer.
Nonetheless, the color in the leaf is distinct from the sensory-conceptual
content in my experience. Moreover, as Husserl noted, the same color
will “look” different under different lighting conditions. The properties
in the appearance of the leaf, in its three-facet nature, are distinct from
the concepts or sensuous qualities (so-called qualia) that are part of my
visual experience that intends the leaf and presents it as green.
Clearly, appearance is to be studied in different philosophical disciplines, in phenomenology (addressing its role in intentional consciousness) and in ontology (distinguishing an appearing color itself from the
intentional contents that present it).
Bearing in mind these amplifications of form and appearance in general, we turn to phenomenology as the study of the form and appearance
of consciousness.
“Transcendental” Phenomenology and the Study of Consciousness
Consciousness has seemed difficult to study in a disciplined way because
it is hard to separate in a disciplined way the different features of consciousness. The distinction between three facets of consciousness helps
to define the domains of different disciplines that study consciousness.
Purely descriptive phenomenology describes the appearance of consciousness in our own experience: the character of consciousness as we experience it in different types of experience. Analytic (“eidetic”) phenomenology analyzes the form of consciousness: the formal structures of
intentionality (already noted in description of our experience). Empirical sciences investigate the substrate of consciousness: the conditions in
which it arises in different forms (noted, roughly, in phenomenological
analysis). Neuroscience develops the theory of how neural activity gives
rise to consciousness in different forms, taking these forms somewhat for
granted. Evolutionary biology develops the theory of how different life
forms evolved, including animals (and plants?) with the capabilities of
consciousness, which begins in sentience and response in low-level organisms (perhaps even in DNA structures themselves if we are to believe
some abstractions about the transfer of “information” in very different
levels of physical reality). Cultural history develops the theory of how particular forms of consciousness evolved in human history, including the
Three Facets of Consciousness 27
types of conscious and often collective thinking that we call storytelling,
philosophy, mathematics, and empirical science.
Ontology – formal ontology – distinguishes not only the three facets
of any entity but the fundamental structures of the world, and so ultimately the place of consciousness in the world, including its relation to
brain, species, culture. In this way, ontology defines the parameters of
the different disciplines that study consciousness in very different ways.
In particular, the three-facet distinction in ontology provides a way
of defining phenomenology that preserves its original insights without
contravening the wonders of today’s neuroscience, not to mention evolutionary biology, cosmology, and cultural history. There is no denying
the relevance of brain, biology, physics, and culture to consciousness. Yet
phenomenology is a different discipline than the empirical natural sciences and the hermeneutic “human sciences.” Husserl labored hard to
distinguish phenomenology as a “rigorous science” that is distinct from
both the natural and cultural sciences. He called this discipline “transcendental.”
In practice Husserl (1912–13) defined “pure” or“transcendental” phenomenology as the study of consciousness while bracketing the surrounding world of nature and culture. This methodology Husserl allied with an
ontology of distinct essences or “regions” called Consciousness, Nature,
and Spirit or Culture. To these “material” essences Husserl applied the
“formal” categories of Individual, Moment or Instance-of-Essence, and
State of Affairs. Phenomenology studies intentionality, the central feature in the essence of an act of consciousness (formally an individual).
But what is “transcendental” about this phenomenology and attendant
ontology?
Dagfinn Føllesdal (1969/1982) focuses phenomenology on the “meaning” things have for us in intentional experience. Husserl called this
meaning or content the noema of an act of consciousness.“Transcendental” phenomenology then focuses on meaning. Meaning is, on this view,
an objective content of intentional experience that can be shared by other
acts and, in some ways, expressed in language or in pictures or other
media of expression and communication.
J. N. Mohanty (1985) has expounded transcendental philosophy and
phenomenology, looking to Kant, from whom Husserl appropriated the
term “transcendental.”In the spirit of Kant, phenomenology would study
the basic conceptual and sensory structures of our experience. More
precisely, transcendental phenomenology is “reflection upon consciousness in its object-constituting role” – that is, intentionality, beginning by
28 Mind World
“delineating the structure of a noema” (p. xix). What is “transcendental” are the noematic meaning structures through which consciousness
intends objects. However, we can no longer hold with Kant that such
structures are necessary and a priori (p. xxix).
Robert Sokolowski (2000) traces the definition of “transcendental”
from Kant back to the medieval philosophers. For the Scholastics, “transcendental” categories apply not to concepts but to beings: the categories
of Unity, Being, and the like are “transcendental” because they pertain to
absolutely everything. Kant revised this notion, with his Copernican revolution, so that what is “transcendental” are our fundamental concepts:
the categories of the understanding, through which alone we can conceive of objects in the world. (Kant explicitly revised the AristotelianScholastic categories by pulling them up from objects into concepts.)
Phenomenology then transcends the Scholastic and Kantian conceptions
