science will “explain” mind, consciousness, even the arts and humanities,
even the natural sciences themselves as disciplines that have evolved in
human cultures in the blink of cosmic time here on Earth. And philosophers such as Ruth Millikan (1984) and Daniel Dennett (1991, chap. 7)
are right that, in some sense, intentionality and human consciousness will
be “explained” by principles of biological evolution. These kinds of studies of consciousness, however, are limited to the biological substrate of
consciousness. The intentional-subjective form and appearance of consciousness must be “explained” in different ways, in a phenomenological
ontology that observes the three facets of consciousness.
The form and appearance of consciousness, featuring structures of intentionality, are simply different from its substrate, physical and cultural.
This was the force of Husserl’s long argument in the Crisis (1935–38); I
resituate the claim, however, in terms of the three-facet distinction in categorial ontology. In recent philosophy of mind, John Searle (1992) has
sharply separated the irreducibly subjective properties of consciousness
and intentionality from their “background” of neural capacities, arguing thus against the prevailing physical-computational models of mind
in cognitive science; again, I would resituate these differences within the
three-facet ontology.
Here I want to stress that the form and appearance of consciousness
are to be studied in their own right in phenomenology cum ontology,
whereas the substrate of consciousness is to be studied in relevant disciplines in the physical, neural, biological, and cultural sciences. Given
the three-facet distinction, we see what is wrong with the familiar ontological proposals in recent philosophy of mind, from reductive to eliminative materialism, from functionalism to computationalism to causal
externalism to evolutionary psychosociobiology. These “naturalistic” theories are all looking for intentionality, qualia, subjectivity in the wrong
places, in parts of the substrate of consciousness, rather than its form and
appearance.
32 Mind World
The Ontology of Substrate
To understand more clearly what counts as the substrate of consciousness,
we need to address the ontological structure of substrate in general.
Every entity, we assume, has a substrate, initially defined as its “foundation” or “origin.” But different entities may be founded or originated in
very different ways, as our examples showed, and this fact may distract us
from the basic ontological form involved. Fundamentally, the substrate of
an entity consists of what it depends on for its existence, where A depends
(ontologically) on B if and only if A could not exist unless B existed. This
notion of dependence we must now consider.
For Aristotle, a quality in a substance cannot exist apart from the substance. Expanding on this notion, Husserl defined a dependent part as a
part that cannot exist outside the whole, so that the part “requires foundation” by the whole.2 But we need to separate part and dependence,
because something may be dependent on an entity of which it is not a
part. Thus, from Husserl’s complicated scheme, we may distill the following definition of dependence:
A depends or is founded on B if and only if A could not by essence exist
unless B exists, that is, necessarily, by virtue of essence, A exists only if
B exists.
We can also say that A is grounded on B, or B is the/a ground of A. While
Husserl often used the term “foundation” (Fundierung) instead of “dependence” (Unselbstandigkeit ¨ ), I prefer to speak of dependence because
the term “founded” suggests one-way dependence, yet two things may
each depend on the other (neither could exist without the other).
There are different kinds of dependence: physical, biological, cultural,
among others. But, on this analysis, the form of dependence is always the
same: A could not exist unless B existed. Husserl adds the qualification
“by essence,” and Kit Fine (1995) further explicates dependence in terms
of his own conception of essence. However, there are different kinds of
conditions on which something can depend – for example, causal physical circumstances, evolutionary biological circumstances, social cultural
circumstances. Moreover, there seem to be different kinds of “coulds,”
different modes of possibility or necessity – for example, what is physically
necessary, biologically necessary, psychologically necessary, legally necessary. On the Husserl-Fine analysis, these differences may be attributed to
essence: “necessarily, if A has essence EA and B has essence EB, then A exists only if B exists.” These details of essence and necessity lie beyond the
Three Facets of Consciousness 33
scope of the present study; for present purposes let us assume the basic
account of dependence as defined earlier. (Remember that “essence” in
Husserlian idiom means what something is, not what it is necessarily or
“essentially.”)
Many of the central problems of metaphysics involve ontological dependence. The in re theory of universals holds, with Aristotle, that a
quality can exist only if instantiated in an individual (or “primary substance”). Causation may be analyzed in terms of dependence, as A is
caused by B just in case A is physically dependent on B, or it is causally
necessary that if B occurs then A occurs. Classical idealism holds with
Berkeley, and realism denies, that material objects depend on their being perceived or otherwise projected by minds: that is to say, a material
object, by its essence, can exist only if perceived or otherwise intended in
consciousness. Kant’s transcendental idealism holds that certain conceptual categories and certain forms of sensibility are the “necessary conditions of the possibility” of our knowledge of the empirical world around
us. I would reconstrue this epistemological claim in the idiom of ontological foundation: our familiar forms of intentionality, or knowledge of
objects in the world around us, could not occur unless we had acquired
or inherited a certain repertoire of conceptual and sensory structures –
that is, our familiar forms of intentionality depend or are founded on
these conceptual-sensory structures. More recent philosophers – from
Husserl (1913) and Heidegger (1927, as interpreted in Dreyfus 1991)
and Wittgenstein (1953) to John Searle (1983, 1992) – have stressed the
background social practices that condition our experience. Searle posits
a “background” of acquired skills or practical capacities (realized in neural structure) on which our intentional states rest; as Searle puts it, these
capacities “enable” our intentional states to represent what they do. I
would explicate this enablement in the idiom of ontological foundation:
our intentional states could not represent or “intend” what they do, our
intentional relations could not obtain, unless these capacities existed in
our “background.” (Compare D. W. Smith 1989, chap. 6, and 1999b.)
An influential view in recent philosophy of mind and cognitive science
holds that mental states are “supervenient” on physical states of the brain
(Davidson 1970 and Kim 1994, 1998). Supervenience has been variously
defined; however, the issues at stake here are covariance and dependence:
the mental varies with the physical so that every mental state occurs along
with an appropriate brain state and could not occur unless such a brain
state occurred.3 The core definition is, I think, best formulated as a doctrine of ontological dependence: every mental state is said to depend on
34 Mind World
some brain state in such a way that mental state types covary with physical
state types.
David Lewis (1986) uses supervenience in the metaphysics of possible worlds. David Armstrong (1997) holds that a state of affairs (that
an individual has a property or that two individuals stand in a relation)
supervenes on its constituents (the individuals and universals involved).
But Armstrong holds that supervenience brings into the world no new
entities beyond those on which the supervenient ride: supervenience offers an “ontological free lunch,” as Armstrong has put it.4 Thus, a state of
affairs would not be an entity in addition to the individuals and universals
of which it is composed. And if mental activity supervenes on brain activity, there would be no new, distinctly mental entities beyond the physical
entities, the brain states, on which mind supervenes. In the theory of ontological dependence outlined earlier, however, there is no free lunch.
It does not follow from the preceding definition of dependence that A
is not another entity beyond B. Quite to the contrary, in the cases that
concern us, A and B are distinct entities between which a relation of
dependence obtains, so that A can exist only if B exists.
