An important but neglected form of dependence is one I discern in
Alfred North Whitehead’s ontology. In Whitehead’s Process and Reality
(1929), as commonly interpreted, the Aristotelian notion of substance,
or enduring material object, is replaced by the notion of process (see
Rescher 1996). However, Whitehead himself distinguished what I would
call“ontological” becoming from temporal becoming. Every actual entity,
Whitehead maintains, is constituted by its relations (of “prehension”) to
other actual entities in its process of “becoming,” or “concrescence.” But
Whitehead distinguishes two types of “flux”: the temporal flux by which
a new entity emerges from others in the “transition” to the novel entity, and the “concrescence” of one entity formed out of many on which
it depends. This latter notion I call ontological becoming (D. W. Smith
2000a). Whitehead’s conception of concrescence I want to cast as a very
fundamental form of dependence: one actual entity depends on a number of other entities in its existence, its “internal constitution.” Indeed,
the doctrine of logical atomism in Russell and Wittgenstein affords another instance of ontological becoming: a state of affairs is “logically”
formed out of individuals and the properties or relations they bear. This
complex entity depends ontologically on its constituents. But these are
not like automobile parts, which are put together in a spatiotemporal
relation to make the whole. A state of affairs is rather put together by
“logical” relations of property instantiation. Whitehead did not adopt
Three Facets of Consciousness 35
Russell’s “logical” atomism; instead, he elaborated an “atomism” where
entities are put together by another kind of bond called “prehension.”
Thus, pace Whitehead, the ultimate substrate of any “actual” entity
or occasion, including an act of consciousness, is its “deep” ontological
structure. In this way phenomenological structure rests on ontological
structure (this, on the model adumbrated in D. W. Smith 2000a).
The Substrate of Consciousness
The substrate of consciousness is that aspect of an act of consciousness
which consists not in how it is intentionally directed (its form), or in
how it feels to its subject in inner awareness (its appearance), but in
how it comes to be, how it originates ontologically, how it depends or is
founded ontologically on various conditions in the surrounding world.
In the normal course of events, I could not see or think or will what I do,
in a given act of consciousness, unless certain background conditions obtained. That is, the act could not be directed as it is – from subject through
content to object, with an inner awareness of the act built in – unless these
background conditions obtained. The substrate of the act consists in its
dependence on these background conditions. This pattern of relations
among the substrate, form, and appearance of an act of consciousness
may be depicted as in Figure 1.3 (where the T-bar stands for ontological
dependence and the three facets are given a slightly different look).
As noted earlier, an act of consciousness may depend in different ways
on a wide variety of things in the world. But we seek order in this variety.
It seems that there are certain kinds of background conditions on which
consciousness depends in systematically different ways. Thus, I propose,
the substrate of an act divides into its patterns of dependence upon:
1. The psychological or personal history of the subject, which conditions his or her experience, making it more or less likely that she
will see or think or feel or do things as she does.
figure 1.3. Intentionality and the three facets of consciousness.
36 Mind World
2. The cultural context or social history of the subject, which conditions his or her consciousness, affording her relevant concepts,
values, and “forms of life” including language.
3. The neural activity in the subject’s brain, including processes of
computation in the neural network, which make possible this form
of consciousness, and which in turn depends on appropriate physical and chemical processes.
4. The biological processes of evolution that allow the emergence of
this form of consciousness, which thus condition the consciousness
in still another way, and which in turn depend on the cosmological
processes by which life itself evolved.
I believe these are the most basic, and fundamentally different, realms
of being on which consciousness depends, in different ways. One might
argue for a different organization of the substrate of consciousness, but
my aim is first to organize the nature of an act of consciousness into
form, appearance, and substrate, and then to look into the organization
of the substrate. In fact, the preceding division of substrate – into psychological, cultural, neural, and evolutionary conditions of dependence –
reflects a fundamental division of labor among the disciplines that have
studied mind over the past century or two. Each of these four domains
of study has developed as a rich and even revolutionary field: psychology,
from psychoanalysis to cognitive science; cultural analysis, from social
science to humanistic critical theory; neuroscience, becoming its own
science in recent decades; evolutionary biology, again gaining salience
in recent decades. If you will, this fourfold division in the substrate of
consciousness is simply a classification of the chief empirical results, or
“material ontologies,” in the theory of mind. But these four areas in theory of mind are framed, here, by a distinction in formal ontology: the
three-facet structure of form, appearance, and substrate, applying this
structure to consciousness.
The philosophy of mind in recent decades has divided into theories
that stress particular features of mind that I would systematize in the
preceding division of the substrate of consciousness. Various naturalistic theories, we noted, stress causal, computational, neural, or biological conditions of those mental states we experience as consciousness.
Culturalistic theories stress the origins of mental life in social conditions and human history. And psychologistic theories stress the contingent psychological origins of experience, rather than (as Husserl
demanded) their meaning, or logically formed intentional content.
Three Facets of Consciousness 37
Phenomenological theories have, by contrast, distanced themselves here
and there from precisely these tendencies. Now, all these dialectical crosscurrents fall into place if we adopt a systematic ontology of the nature of
consciousness: first distinguishing its form, appearance, and substrate,
and then distinguishing these four regions of dependence within its
substrate.
This diverse structure of the nature of mind comes into relief only as
we look systematically at form, appearance, and substrate. And the special
roles of ecological conditions of consciousness come to prominence only
when we bring out the role of ontological dependence in the substrate
of consciousness. We must not, then, identify the nature of consciousness
with one of these types of conditions in its substrate, with brain, or computational function, or causal role, or cultural role, or evolutionary role.
To depend on something, even deeply and fundamentally, is not to be
identical with it.
The Return of Phenomenology
Consciousness is indeed what makes the mind-body problem difficult,
when we look to the results of natural science – or indeed cultural theory.
It is also what makes life worth living and philosophy, since Descartes and
Kant and Husserl, so exciting.
We will not fully “understand” consciousness until we see how it fits
