perspective. (The substrate of consciousness, in brain and culture, is
addressed in later essays. The terms “form,” “appearance,” and “substrate” are used here in the technical sense introduced in the preceding
essay.)
There is something dead right, and very much alive, about the cogito:
Descartes’s epochal proclamation, cogito ergo sum. A conscious experience
(“I am thinking”) includes an awareness of itself, an awareness that makes
it conscious and gives its subject immediate evidence of the experience
and therein of his or her existence (“therefore I exist”). This principle
is independent of Descartes’s further doctrines (e.g., rationalism and
dualism), and it survives the many refutations and deconstructions of the
wider Cartesian corpus and their animus for the Cartesian animus (spirit).
It tells us something crucial about consciousness. Yes, consciousness and
some form of the self survive the transition from modern to postmodern
philosophy in our century. Indeed, consciousness is something of the
greatest importance not only to epistemology and psychology in the age
of science but to ethics and social theory and practice in this perilous age
on our planet. Without it, what are we?
Several different principles converge in the inference cogito ergo sum,
including phenomenological, epistemological, and logical – semantic or
pragmatic – principles that would ground the inference. Here I shall try to
articulate some of these enduring principles, beginning with Descartes’s
own astute formulations, which I suspect are still not fully appreciated. I
shall use “cogito” as an umbrella term for these several principles.
The Cogito in and out of (Descartes’s) Context
I propose to study the cogito within the context of late twentieth-century
philosophy, drawing on both continental and analytic traditions. I would
start with a careful interpretation of Descartes’s own formulations of the
cogito, but I shall extract it from the wider context of Descartes’s own
times, concerns, and motivations.
Most philosophers – and mathematicians and scientists – would agree
that Descartes’s larger philosophical programs have not panned out. His
beautiful course of argument in the Meditations, including one form of the
cogito, has brought centuries of critique but has not yielded the foundation he sought for all knowledge, a foundation in the absolute certainty of
reason, a certainty as strong or stronger than that he saw in mathematics.
Nor has an alternative, purely rationalist epistemology emerged with
the tremendous growth in mathematics, logic, and the natural sciences
44 Mind World
since his time, despite Descartes’s seminal influence on these fields. His
metaphysics of mind-body dualism seems passe, although the mind-body ´
problem – so sharply defined by Descartes – is still very much with us,
with no convincing solution, resolution, or dissolution in sight. And his
theological assumptions do not seem of our time. Furthermore, his focus
on the individual subject leaves unaddressed the social, cultural, historical side of the self – the subject of insightful work long after Descartes
(for instance, in the writings of Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, and
Foucault).
Nonetheless, Descartes’s writings remain well worth close study. Not
only do they show the genius and precision of a great philosopher at
work at a certain point in history, but they remain admirably clear foils
against which to view our subsequent heritage in epistemology, metaphysics, phenomenology, philosophy of mind and language, cognitive
psychology, and artificial intelligence. In particular, his own discussions
of the cogito are as precise as they are prescient of more recent developments in the logic and phenomenology of the cogito. Accordingly, we
turn to Descartes’s own presentation of the cogito.
Descartes’s Cogito
Different principles are discernible in Descartes’s discussions of the
cogito. In the Discourse on the Method (1637)1 he wrote:
[T]his truth “I am thinking, therefore I exist” was so firm and sure that all the most
extravagant suppositions of the sceptics were incapable of shaking it [i.e., it was
indubitable]. (CSM I, p. 127/AT, p. 32)
By contrast, in the Meditations (1641) he wrote:
[T]his proposition, I am, I exist, is necessarily [i.e., indubitably] true whenever
it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind. (CSM II, p. 17/AT, p. 25;
“proposition” translates the Latin pronuntiatum)
elaborating:
I am, I exist – that is certain [i.e., indubitable]. But for how long? For as long as
I am thinking. (CSM II, p. 18/AT, p. 27)
Thus, the first formulation concerns an inference about thinking,
whereas the second concerns not an inference but a principle about
thinking. What did Descartes count as thinking? All the main types of
mental activity (especially those we today call intentional). As he wrote
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 45
in the Meditations: “What is [a thing that thinks]? A thing that doubts,
understands, affirms, denies, is willing, is unwilling, and also imagines
and has sensory perceptions” (CSM II, p. 19/AT, p. 28).2
Put in the present tense, Descartes’s claim in the Discourse is that the
inference, or inferential proposition, “I am thinking, therefore I exist”
is indubitable (and hence indubitably true). Let us call this claim the
“cogito inference principle.” By contrast, Descartes’s claim in the Meditations – in the first-person, present-tense – is that the proposition “I
exist” is indubitable (hence, indubitably true) whenever I think it. Let us
call this claim the “cogito principle.” Of course, Descartes’s program was
to ground all our knowledge in propositions that are absolutely certain,
where a proposition is certain if it cannot be doubted (it is indubitable,
hence indubitably true). And the cogito was his first principle – formulated first as an inference in the Discourse and then as a principle in the
Meditations.
To be precise, the two passages quoted from the Meditations articulate
two different cogito principles. The first quotation formulates what we
may call the special cogito principle.
Whenever I am thinking the proposition “I exist,” I am certain [I cannot doubt] that I exist, that is, the proposition “I exist” is indubitable
(for me in so thinking).
The second quotation formulates what we may call the general cogito
principle.
Whenever I am thinking, I am certain that I exist, that is, the proposition “I exist” is indubitable (for me in so thinking)
– no matter what I am thinking. Behind both of these principles lies
a different principle that Descartes seemingly took for granted in the
Meditations, what we might call the protocogito principle.
Whenever I am thinking, I am certain that I am thinking, that is, the
proposition “I am thinking” is indubitable (for me in so thinking).3
(As in Descartes’s own formulations, these principles involve secondorder propositions – propositions about propositions. Thus, the special
cogito principle concerns not only the epistemic proposition “I am certain that I exist” but the second-order, semantic proposition “the proposition ‘I exist’ is indubitable [for me . . .].” Differences will emerge between
the claims here separated by “that is.”)
46 Mind World
