Because the cogito inference principle does not specify any particular
content of thinking, it aligns with the general cogito principle. But we
might distinguish two cogito inferences too. The general cogito inference
principle would say:
The inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist” is indubitable, that is,
whenever I perform it, it is indubitable (for me in so performing it).
Whereas the special cogito inference principle would say:
The inference “I am thinking the proposition ‘I exist,’ therefore I
exist” is indubitable, that is, whenever I perform it, it is indubitable
(for me in so performing it).
It would be Descartes’s claim, in either case, that what is indubitable is
not only the validity of the inference but also the truth of its premise – the
proposition “I am thinking” or “I am thinking the proposition ‘I exist’” –
and hence the soundness of the inference.
There can be no doubt as to which form of the cogito Descartes took
to be fundamental for his purposes. Even in the Discourse, just a few lines
before declaring the inference indubitable, he had put aside logic (reasoning, demonstrative proof) as open to doubt. Then in the Meditations
what he claimed is indubitable is not the inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist,” but the simpler proposition “I exist.” At that point in his
course of meditation, the evil-demon hypothesis had rendered logic dubitable. Moreover, in his Replies to critics of the Meditations (also 1641), he
explicitly rejected logic as the ground of certainty even for the inference –
at least the Aristotelian logic of his day, namely the theory of syllogism.
He wrote:
When someone says“I am thinking, therefore I am, or I exist,” he does not deduce
existence from thought by means of a syllogism, but recognizes it as something
self-evident by a simple intuition of the mind. This is clear from the fact that if
he were deducing it by means of a syllogism, he would have to have had previous
knowledge of the major premiss “Everything which thinks, is, or exists”; yet in
fact he learns it from experiencing in his own case that it is impossible that he
should think without existing. (Second Replies, CSM II, p. 100/AT, p. 140)
So it is “a simple intuition of the mind” that gives one certainty of one’s
existence: one learns the certainty of one’s existence “from experiencing
[it] in his own case.” This certainty does not come from a logical intuition of the inference “Everything that thinks, exists, and I am thinking,
therefore I exist” (an intuition recognizing the validity of this inference,
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 47
or the logical truth of the inferential proposition). Nor, presumably, does
it come from a logical intuition of the simpler inference “I am thinking,
therefore I exist.” The cogito inference may well be valid and its validity
recognizable in a logical intitution, an intuition bearing the certainty of
logic. But that is not the sort of certainty Descartes was seeking for one’s
own existence. Furthermore, Descartes clearly thought the cogito inference is not only valid but sound, and its lone premise “I am thinking”
indubitable for the thinker. And the indubitability of the proposition “I
am thinking” when one is thinking comes not from logic, or logical intuition, but from the experience of thinking, from a “simple intuition” of
one’s thinking.
Descartes’s fundamental claim is explicit in yet another of the
Replies:
It is true that no one can be certain that he is thinking or that he exists unless he
knows what thought is and what existence is. But this does not require reflective
knowledge, or the kind of knowledge that is acquired by means of demonstrations;
still less does it require knowledge of reflective knowledge, i.e. knowing that we
know, and knowing that we know that we know, and so on ad infinitum. This kind
of knowledge cannot possibly be obtained about anything. It is quite sufficient
that we should know it by that internal awareness which always precedes reflective knowledge. This inner awareness of one’s thought and existence is so innate
in all men that, although we may pretend that we do not have it if we are overwhelmed by preconceived opinions and pay more attention to words than to their
meanings, we cannot in fact fail to have it. Thus, when anyone notices that he is
thinking and that it follows from this that he exists, even though he may never
before have asked what thought is or what existence is, he still cannot fail to have
sufficient knowledge of them both to satisfy himself in this regard. (Sixth Replies,
CSM II, p. 285/AT, p. 422)
So, according to Descartes, even when one performs the (general) cogito inference, one’s certainty of one’s existence comes from one’s “inner
awareness of one’s thought and existence.”It does not come from “reflective knowledge” or, more specifically, from logical inference (“the kind of
knowledge that is acquired by means of demonstrations”). In short, the
source of certainty for one’s knowledge of one’s own existence – and even
for the validity of the cogito inference – is not logical but phenomenological
(to use a term not yet available in Descartes’s day). And that is the point
of the general cogito principle formulated here.4
Having explained the cogito principle in this way, Descartes might
have abandoned the cogito inference as at least misleading. Yet he reiterated the cogito inference in the Principles of Philosophy (1644): “[I]t is a
contradiction to suppose that what thinks does not, at the very time when
48 Mind World
it is thinking, exist. Accordingly, this piece of knowledge [this inference:
French version] – I am thinking, therefore I exist – is the first and most certain
of all to occur to anyone who philosophizes in an orderly way” (CSM I,
p. 195/AT, p. 7). Although this formulation is less precise than the
earlier ones (for one thing, it is cast in the third person), Descartes explicitly endorses the certainty of the cogito inference per se. This should
tell us that he does not want to eliminate the inference in favor of the
cogito principle. And the passages quoted previously tell us why: the principle underlies the inference, in that the principle explicates the source
of certainty Descartes claims for the inference itself.
This prereflective inner awareness of one’s thinking – the source of
certainty in the cogito – is a “perception” of one’s thinking, in a generalized sense of perception. As Descartes wrote in Passions of the Soul (1649,
a year before his death):
Our perceptions are ... of two sorts: some have the soul as their cause, others the
body. Those having the soul as their cause are the perceptions of our volitions and
of all the imaginings or other thoughts which depend on them. For it is certain
that we cannot will anything without thereby perceiving that we are willing it. And
although willing something is an action with respect to our soul, the perception
of such willing may be said to be a passion in the soul. But because this perception
is really one and the same thing as the volition, ... we do not normally call it a
“passion,” but solely an “action.” (CSM I, pp. 335–36/AT, p. 343)
Thus, one’s inner awareness of one’s thinking is “really one and the same
thing as” the thinking itself. Although Descartes’s action-passion distinction is not easy to explicate, his words are echoed in Sartre’s doctrine
of the prereflective cogito, the immediate knowledge one has of one’s
own consciousness, which Sartre says is “constitutive” of consciousness.5
What should we make today of these several principles that course
through Descartes’s discourse about the cogito – from the special and
general forms of the cogito principle to the cognate cogito inferences? I
shall approach these principles from different directions, seeking plausible grounds for them in relevant domains of phenomenology and logic
(including semantics and pragmatics) and addressing the more familiar
issues in epistemology and ontology from those perspectives.
The Phenomenology of the Cogito
The heart of the cogito is the phenomenological principle that we have an
