immediate awareness of our own current experience. This type of awareness gives one immediate evidence – and, so far as one can tell, immediate
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 49
knowledge – of the fact that one is so thinking and the fact that, in so
thinking, one exists. Whether this type of evidence yields the kind of
certainty Descartes sought – namely indubitability – is a further issue. This
phenomenological principle I propose to explicate in terms of a structural analysis of this “inner awareness” of experience.
The general, not the special, cogito principle has fundamental phenomenological force. Let us recast the general cogito principle in the
following form, incorporating the protocogito principle, thus making
explicit one’s certainty not only of one’s existence, but of one’s thinking
and indeed the content of one’s thought:
When I am thinking “p,” I am certain that I am thinking “p” and that
I exist.
We must restrict the principle, however, to conscious thought. Thus, the
general cogito principle should say:
When I am consciously thinking “p,” I am certain that I am thinking
“p” and that, in so thinking, I exist.6
(Because Descartes included under “thinking” all intentional mental activities, the principle should be generalized by replacing “thinking” with
a general term ranging over all intentional mental activities. However, for
easy reading, in the spirit of Descartes, we will retain the term “thinking.”)
Descartes did not appear to recognize unconscious mental activities. Indeed, the theory of the unconscious was to develop only later, especially
in Freud’s psychoanalysis and in today’s cognitive psychology. The cogito,
however, applies only to conscious mental activities: I have an immediate awareness – and therewith immediate evidence and arguably a kind
of certainty – of my own mental activity only if it is a conscious mental
activity. Indeed, the inner awareness I have of my current mental activity
is precisely what makes it a conscious mental activity. (Or so the present
author has argued on another occasion.)7 This conception of consciousness was no stranger to Descartes, even if the unconscious was. As quoted
earlier, Descartes himself explained the cogito principle in terms of “inner awareness of one’s thought and existence,” which is an “intuition of
the mind,” a “perception” of one’s own thinking. Moreover, in the Principles of Philosophy (1644) he wrote, “By the term ‘thought,’ I understand
everything which we are aware of as happening within us, in so far as we
have awareness of it” (CSM I, p. 195/AT, p. 7). In E. M. Curley’s translation, this reads: “all those things which, we being conscious, occur in
50 Mind World
us, in so far as the consciousness of them is in us,” drawing on the Latin
immediate conscii simus.
8
Thus, the cogito principle is fundamentally a principle about the nature and structure of consciousness per se, that is, the quality of being
conscious (being a conscious, as opposed to unconscious, mental activity). Elsewhere I have proposed an analysis of the defining structure
of consciousness.9 On that proposal, a conscious mental activity has
the following phenomenological structure (staying with the Cartesian verb
“think”):
Consciously I now am thinking “p.”
The structure of the quality “consciously” may be unfolded further as
follows:
Phenomenally in this very experience I now am thinking “p.”
Here we distinguish four relevant phenomenological features in a conscious mental activity: the phenomenal quality, or “quale,” of the experience; the reflexive character“in this very experience”; the egocentric character “I [think]”; and the temporal character “now.” The phenomenal
quality of an experience is the subjective character of what it is like as
experienced.10 The reflexive character of an experience is its character
of indicating itself as it is experienced. The egocentric character of an experience is its character of indicating its subject as having the experience.
And the temporal character “now” indicates the temporal position of the
experience within the stream of retained past and expected impending
experiences.11 My awareness of my thinking “p” lies in the reflexive character of my thinking, and my awareness of myself in thinking lies in the
egocentric character of my thinking. Fundamentally, it is this reflexive
awareness of my thinking that makes my thinking conscious, and this
awareness is qualified further by the accompanying egocentric, phenomenal, and temporal characters.
Importantly, these four features of an experience of thinking are not
part of “what” is thought, but part of “how” something is thought. What
is thought – the content of the act of thinking – is a proposition; how it
is thought is a modality of thinking. These four “modal” features of an
experience are proper parts of the experience. Thus, they are present in
the experience prior to any reflection on the experience, which takes
place in a separate, further mental act (either at the same time or
shortly thereafter). They are thus, in Sartre’s phrase, “prereflective.” Indeed, as quoted earlier, Descartes said inner awareness is not “reflective
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 51
knowledge” of one’s thought. Accordingly, if introspection is a separate act
of phenomenological reflection, as I think it is usually conceived, then
inner awareness is distinct from introspection.12
In terms of this analysis of phenomenological structure, we can now
explicate the general cogito principle. The principle of awareness – as we
may now introduce it – says:
When I am consciously thinking “p,” I am aware of my thinking “p”
and therein of myself.
My awareness of my experience lies in the reflexive character of the experience, and my awareness of myself lies in the accompanying egocentric character of the experience. These two forms of “inner” awareness ground
the general cogito principle, for they carry my immediate evidence of the
fact that I am so thinking and therewith the fact that I exist in so thinking.
Thus, the principle of awareness may be formulated alternatively as:
When I am consciously thinking “p,” I am aware and it is thereby evident to me that I am thinking “p” and that I exist (in thinking “p”).
And if the evidence of inner awareness amounts to certainty, then we have
here the general cogito principle that Descartes enunciated.
Let us be clear about the role of qualia in “evidence.” We have focused
on thinking in the sense of judgment, but Descartes included under thinking all intentional mental activities, including sense perception. Now, a
visual perception has an evidential character that is grounded partly in the
phenomenal character, or quale/qualia, of the perception. However, one’s
sensory evidence of the world before one is different from the evidence
of one’s experience that is part of inner awareness. And it is the latter
kind of evidence that pertains to the cogito principle.
The temporal character of experience – “I nowam thinking ‘p’”– complicates the issues of the cogito in an interesting way. For this character rings
in one’s sense of personal identity through time. As Husserl observed,13
drawing on his analysis of time consciousness, the “I” of whose existence
one is certain in performing the ego cogito is not a momentary I, but a temporally extended I. Likewise, the act of thinking of which one is certain
is a temporally extended process. In our terms: in my inner awareness
of my current experience, I am aware of my experience as unfolding
through time and I am aware of myself as an enduring subject of that
experience. The span of time so experienced is, however, relatively short:
it is what William James called the “specious present”; only if Husserl was
right does it have a somewhat greater spread owing to the structure of
52 Mind World
time consciousness in one’s fading “retentions” of the passed phases of
one’s experience.
Let us look more closely now at the problem of evidence in the cogito.
The Epistemology of the Cogito
The uncertainty in the general cogito principle, I submit, concerns the
