a exists,” or an implication of the form Fa → ∃x(x = a) in quantification
logic. For these principles merely formalize the presupposition that singular terms in the given language refer to existent entities. And the question
is whether (with Descartes perhaps) we can simply assume a logic with
this presupposition, as there are logics that are free of this presupposition
(they have come to be called “free logics”).18 Moreover, even if this form
of inference is valid, it does not help to explain what is special – or what
Descartes thinks is special – in cogito ergo sum, which concerns thinking.
Similarly, on an ontological level, critics have long charged that Descartes
tacitly assumed a Scholastic ontology of substance and attribute, reflecting a similar form of inference: if something has an attribute, then it is
a substance and so exists. But this interpretation does not explain what
is special about the cogito and its place in Descartes’s epistemology. And
similarly on a semantic level, Jerrold Katz has argued at length for an
updated notion of analyticity, given which cogito ergo sum expresses an
analytic entailment, as the concept or sense “thinking” entails the sense
“exist.”19 But, again, this interpretation does not deal with what is special
about the cogito in Descartes’s program.
Hintikka proposed, accordingly, that cogito ergo sum does not express
an inference of the usual sort but rather reflects the “performative”
character of the statement made by uttering the sentence “I exist,” a
statement whose denial is “curiously pointless” (p. 58) or self-defeating
(p. 60, n. 23). More precisely, where p is a sentence and a a singular term,
Hintikka defined p as existentially inconsistent for the person referred to by a to
utter if and only if the sentence “p; and a exists” is inconsistent (in the ordinary sense) (p. 57). The negation of such a sentence is then existentially
self-verifying for the speaker (p. 60). Thus Hintikka’s appraisal:
Descartes realized, however dimly, the existential inconsistency of the sentence
“I don’t exist” and therefore the existential self-verifiability of “I exist.” Cogito,
ergo sum is only one possible way of expressing this insight. Another way actually
employed by Descartes is to say that the sentence ego sum is intuitively self-evident.
56 Mind World
We can now understand the relation of the two parts of the cogito, ergo sum
and appreciate the reasons why it cannot be a logical inference in the ordinary
sense of the word. What is at stake in Descartes’s dictum is the status (the indubitability) of the sentence “I am.”...Contrary appearances notwithstanding,
Descartes does not demonstrate this indubitability by deducing sum from cogito.
On the other hand the sentence “I am” (“I exist”) is not by itself logically true,
either. Descartes realizes that its indubitability results from an act of thinking,
namely from an attempt to think the contrary. The function of the word cogito
in Descartes’s dictum is to refer to the thought-act through which the existential
self-verifiability of “I exist” manifests itself. ...It serves to express the performatory character of Descartes’s insight; it refers to the “performance” (to the act
of thinking) through which the sentence “I exist” may be said to verify itself.
(pp. 61–62)
So, on Hintikka’s analysis, there is no logical problem with the sentence “I do not exist”; it is not logically false, nor is the sentence “I exist” logically true. But there is a pragmatic problem with the statement
made – the speech act performed – by uttering the sentence “I do not
exist”: “[N]obody can make his hearer believe that he does not exist by
telling him so” (p. 58). Similarly, no one can make himself believe that he
does not exist by thinking he does not, by thinking the proposition “I do
not exist” (if we may here import the notion of propositions as thought
contents). “This transition from ‘public’ speech-acts to ‘private’ thoughtacts,” Hintikka adds, “does not affect the essential features of their logic”
(p. 59). Thus, to interpolate a bit, the proposition, or thought content,
“I do not exist” is not logically false, nor is the thought-content “I exist”
logically true; but the act of thinking “I do not exist” is self-defeating, and
hence the act of thinking “I exist” is self-verifying. Moreover, Hintikka
assumes, the “performance” through which the sentence “I exist” “may be
said to verify itself” is the act of thinking “I exist”: it is only through the
act of thinking “I exist” that the speech act of stating “I exist” – stating
that one exists by uttering the sentence “I exist” – is verified; and only
in that way is the sentence “I exist” self-verifying. Finally, the proposition
“I exist” is self-verifying insofar as its truth is (in Hintikka’s phrase) intuitively self-evident in performing the act of thinking “I exist.” And thus
is the proposition “I exist,” pace Descartes, indubitable for the subject in
the act of so thinking.
If Hintikka’s analysis is on the right track, the logic of the cogito concerns not the validity or soundness of the form of inference “I am thinking,
therefore I exist,” but the self-verification of the act of thinking “I exist”
and on that basis stating that one exists by uttering the sentence “I exist.”
So the purview of logic must be extended to include not only sentences
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 57
(in syntax and semantics), but also speech acts (in pragmatics) and even
thought acts (in phenomenology). I believe this much is quite right and
consonant with the history of logic.20 As noted earlier, however, there
are really two cogito principles (plus two cogito inference principles) to
which this analysis must be applied, and Hintikka’s exact claim applies to
only one.
The special cogito principle, enunciated in Descartes’s Second Meditation (quoted earlier), says:
Whenever I am thinking the proposition “I exist,” I am certain (I cannot doubt) that I exist.
This is precisely the principle Hintikka’s analysis underwrites. By contrast,
the general cogito principle, enunciated in Descartes’s Replies (quoted
earlier), says:
Whenever I am thinking [thinking anything at all], I am certain (I
cannot doubt) that I exist.
This is the principle explicated earlier, based on the proposed phenomenology of inner awareness of thinking. Can this general cogito principle be underwritten by the logic of the cogito, in terms of the broader
conception of logic suggested by Hintikka’s appraisal of the cogito? To
this we shall turn shortly, joining the logic and the phenomenology of the
cogito. But notice that these two principles have very different grounds.
On the one hand, there is something specific to the proposition “I exist” that makes the act of thinking “I exist” self-verifying, and so grounds
the special cogito principle. On the other hand, there is something general about conscious thought (about inner awareness of one’s thinking)
that makes one certain of one’s thinking and of one’s own existence in
thinking, and so grounds the general cogito principle.
Regarding the special cogito principle, we should distinguish two “performative” characters that might ground the principle. Hintikka says the
transition from public speech acts to private thought acts does not affect
their logic, that is, their performative characters. But is that right? If I
say to you, “I exist,” my assertion is curious and self-verifying because I
am already visually before you, so what is the point of my saying that –
why will your hearing me say that help to get you to believe I exist when
you already see me before you? However, if I think to myself “I exist,” my
thought is curious and self-verifying, not because I am in a social circumstance, conversing with another, trying to convey beliefs by speaking, but
because I already have an inner awareness of my thinking and therein
58 Mind World
of my existence – so what’s the point of thinking (judging) “I exist”?
The pragmatics of these two acts, the overt speech act and the inner
mental act, are very different. If Hintikka’s analysis is correct for the public speech act, another analysis is still needed for the private thought
act – namely, analysis of inner awareness itself, not an analysis of the
pragmatics of conversation. And, indeed, as Hintikka himself suggested,
