and “I am thinking,” only then does the evidence of inner awareness –
together with these doctrines – dictate that I am a purely mental substance
and my thinking a purely mental attribute (or mode) of that substance.
But all that Cartesian machinery outruns the force of the cogito as explicated here. Still, the question remains whether there is a substantial “I”
in the limited sense of an entity that does the thinking disclosed in inner
awareness.
When Descartes proclaimed the cogito inference indubitable, he was
accused of presupposing the existence of a substance that has the attribute of thinking (in various modes). Does the semantics of the cogito,
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 67
as detailed here, presuppose something similar? According to that semantics, the proposition “I exist” is analytically true, and the sentence
“I exist” self-verifying, just because the relevant context is defined as including a subject or speaker: in defining the semantical relationships, it
is simply presupposed that an utterance of “I exist” is performed by a
speaker, or an act of thinking “I exist” is performed by a subject. Again,
the inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist” is valid (and sound)
just insofar as the semantics presupposes an ontology of subject and
thought. So the phenomenology of inner awareness presents one with
a subject of experience (in the form of awareness “I am thinking ...”),
and the semantics of thought codifies that deliverance of phenomenology. But we need to ask whether the ontology so presupposed – a subject
for every thinking – is a matter of metaphysical as opposed to logicosemantic necessity. Diverse thinkers – Hume, Sartre, and early Husserl,
not to mention the Buddha – have held that there is no substantial
self, that there is only the unified stream of consciousness. Without
here evaluating these claims, I would observe that the ultimate nature
of the “I” outruns the phenomenology, epistemology, and semantics of
the cogito: the cogito principles explicated here can accommodate a variety of metaphysical theories about the ultimate nature of thought and
subject.
The cogito principles leave undecided not only the ontological type of
the “I” and the “I think” (mental, neural, or what have you), but also the
ontology of the relations between the thought or subject and the context,
or environment, of thinking – if you will, the ecology of thought. The environment includes the physical, social, and even linguistic environment;
the relations to environment are sometimes called contextual relations.
Tyler Burge has argued that thoughts (acts of thinking) are individuated,
in psychological type and content, partly by their contextual relations (including relations to language used to express them).29 Thought and content, he argues, are not “individualistic” – individuated by factors solely
within the bounds of the individual thinker – but rather “relational” and
especially social insofar as they are individuated by environment. Addressing Cartesian intuitions, he has allowed that we have access to our own
thoughts such that we cannot be wrong about what we are thinking and
yet we can fail to know how those thoughts are individuated in relation to
the environment. I believe there is something right and something wrong
about Burge’s arguments, as I have explained elsewhere.30 Suffice it to
say here that the phenomenology of the cogito leaves open a good deal of
the ontology, including the ecology, of thought.31 Thus, inner awareness
68 Mind World
reveals the phenomenological structure or content of an act of thinking but leaves open the ways in which the thought itself depends on its
environment – for instance, on how the subject’s perceptions are caused
(where thinking about something one sees), how the thought is produced
in the subject’s brain (or depends on what is produced therein), how the
subject’s culture and language developed so as to shape the content of
the thought, and so on.
The Cogito Postmodern
From our vantage approaching the new millennium, I submit, the cogito
resolves into a number of principles articulating, as detailed earlier:
1. The phenomenology of inner awareness of one’s experience and
of oneself.
2. The epistemology of the evidence of inner awareness and the
reflective-introspective judgments it warrants.
3. The logic/semantics/pragmatics of the relevant speech acts.
4. The cognate “semantics” of the relevant thought acts.
These principles leave open much of the ultimate ontology of thought
and subject.
These principles define (or refine) the Cartesian intuitions of the original cogito ergo sum. Yet their motivations are non-Cartesian (they are not
addressed to the particular epistemic and cultural problems of Descartes’s
day), and they do not entail the rationalist, foundationalist, or dualist
doctrines of Descartes’s wider philosophy. Thus, they define the postmodern cogito. (If they are not congenial to some who seek after “postmodernism,” so much the worse for “isms.”)
Notes
1. In The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vols. I and II, trans. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1984–85), hereafter cited as CSM I or II. In the margins of the CSM
volumes are page references to the standard edition of Descartes’s works: Oeuvres de Descartes, ed. Ch. Adam and P. Tannery, rev. ed. (Paris: Vrin/C.N.R.S.,
1964–76). Page references to CSM are followed, after a slash, by the page references to the AT edition. Most of the passages quoted here are also found
in the one-volume abridgment of the two CSM volumes: Descartes: Selected
Philosophical Writings, trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald
Murdoch(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 69
2. Emotions belong in this list. In The Passions of the Soul (1649) (CSM I, pp. 325–
404/AT, pp. 323–488), Descartes classified thoughts as either “actions” or
“passions” of the soul (cf. p. 338/AT, p. 349), meaning active or passive
activities of the mind, and he went on to enumerate various mental activities
including many emotions.
3. In the Sixth Replies, Descartes explicitly extends one’s certainty to one’s thinking as well as one’s existence (CSM II, p. 285/AT, p. 422); the passage is
quoted and discussed here below. As Wilson (1978: 53ff.) presents the “naive
interpretation” of the cogito as inference, the indubitability of “I think” is “a
sort of datum.”
4. In fact, Descartes had a rich notion of intuition, connected with his doctrine
of “perceiving” clear and distinct ideas. Logical intuition might then be cast
either as an intuition of a complex idea, namely an inferential proposition,
or as an intuition of a temporal sequence of ideas had in entertaining a series
of propositions while performing a deduction. This form of intuition would
be different from the form of“perception” one has of one’s own experiences,
to be discussed later. In any event, a sufficiently general doctrine of intuition
would allow Descartes to assimilate the intuition that“I am thinking” and the
intuition that “I am thinking, therefore I exist.” I owe this observation about
the cogito to Clotilde Calabi, reflecting on the roles of attention and memory
in deduction as addressed by Descartes in Rules for the Direction of the Mind
(1628). In particular, see Rule Eleven (CSM I, p. 37/AT, p. 407), concerning
“intuiting a number of simple propositions... in a continuous... train of
thought,” and Rule Sixteen (CSM I, p. 66/AT, p. 454), concerning the use
of “concise symbols” so that “[i]t will be impossible for our memory to go
wrong.”
5. See Sartre 1966: introd., sec. III.
6. The content quotes around “p” in “I am thinking ‘p’” entail that expressions
in “p” occur in nonreferential or opaque position, citing contents rather than
