objects of thought. The basic issues – concerning intentional acts de dicto and
de re and their attributions – are treated at length in Smith and McIntyre
1982: chaps. 1, 7, 8. Indexical expressions in “p” raise further issues, some of
which are indicated later.
7. See Smith 1989: chap. 2, or, for a shorter version of the analysis, Smith 1986.
I was delighted to find the very words “inner awareness of one’s thought and
existence” in Descartes’s own explication of the cogito – and disappointed
that my own awareness of those words in Descartes occurred after the publication of said book.
8. Curley 1978: 179. Curley does a marvelous job of tracing the notion of consciousness as awareness of thinking through Descartes’s exchanges with various critics. It is abundantly clear that this notion is explicit in Descartes’s
thinking, although he vacillates on whether the awareness we have of our
own thinking is a distinct act of reflecting on thinking, that is, a separate act
of introspection.
9. See Smith 1986, 1989.
10. About the phenomenal quality of an experience little can be said: it must be
shown rather than said. Or, better, it must be experienced, and so indicated
70 Mind World
from the first-person point of view (through a reflexive character), as opposed to described, for the hearer and hence indicated from the hearer’s
third-person, or other-person, point of view. This is why “qualia” have seemed
so mysterious in discussions in philosophy of mind: the attempt to theorize about them takes place in language, which tries to describe them in
“objective,” “theoretical” terms. Importantly, qualia are not restricted to
sensory “feels” in perceptual experiences. That restriction, typical in the
literature, is a hangover from the British empiricist days of “sense-data.”
On the contrary, every conscious experience – even thinking “I exist” –
has a characteristic phenomenal quality: in the quotably phenomenological
jargon of Nagel (1987), “what it is like” to have that type of experience,
a quality that is to be described from the “subjective,” first-person point
of view.
11. The temporal structure of experience – part of its phenomenological structure – was ably chronicled in Husserl’s famous analysis of the structure of
“internal time.” See Husserl 1966; Husserl’s views are reconstructed in Miller
1984.
12. Descartes sometimes treated inner awareness as distinct from introspection,
or reflective thought about thought, and sometimes he treated them as the
same, in part to avoid problems of infinite regress (if thinking requires thinking about thinking, a regress appears to ensue). The vacillation is clearly detailed in Curley 1978: 177–87. Such problems of regress are raised by Sartre,
for instance, and are detailed in Smith 1989: chap. 2.
13. See Husserl 1960/1931: §§9, 18. For a detailed reconstruction of Husserl’s
phenomenology of our consciousness of time and the temporal character of
our experience, see Miller 1984.
14. See Husserl 1960/1931: §§5–6.
15. See Ryle 1965. Ryle himself used terms other than “incorrigible.” Ryle aptly
distinguished the “awareness” that makes a mental state or activity conscious from the attentive act of “introspection.” According to Ryle’s gloss
of “the official doctrine” of Descartes and followers, both immediate awareness and introspection give one a “privileged access” to one’s own mental
states and operations, and both are “immune from illusion, confusion or
doubt” (p. 14). A careful critique of Ryle’s gloss of Descartes in regard to
incorrigibility is found in Curley 1978: 171ff. Suffice it to say that Descartes
was not a “Cartesian” as Ryle reconstructed Cartesian theory. Nor was
Husserl.
16. Cf. Husserl 1960/1931: §§9 and preceding.
17. Hintikka 1962a. The essay is reprinted in Sesonske and Fleming 1965: 50–
76. Page references in text are to this anthology. Hintikka’s essay is a carefully
crafted piece that repays line-by-line reading, even where one would differ
(as I shall). Further essays on the cogito as inference or performance are
found in Curley 1978 and Wilson 1978.
18. A detailed survey of the issues of free logics is Bencivenga 1986.
19. See Katz 1987. Katz raises a host of important issues about the boundaries
and relations between logic and language. I raise still others about the
boundaries and relations between logic, language or linguistic theory, and
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 71
phenomenology. However, I am pressing the phenomenological and logical,
or semantic/pragmatic, sides of the cogito inference.
20. In this century it has proved useful – extremely useful – for logic to focus on sentences, in formally defined languages, studying their structure
and interpretation and relations of inference or entailment between sentences. In earlier centuries, however, logic often focused on judgments,
and indeed Frege’s semantics took sentences to express “thoughts.” Today we need to extend the logic of sentences to a formally precise logic
of not only speech acts but also thought acts and other forms of intentional mental activity such as volitions and desires. Of course, we already
have many studies in the logic of sentences about such activities, but I am
calling for studies in the logic of these activities themselves. Such a logic
(or logics) would be part of phenomenology and cognitive science, suitably
defined.
21. The more relevant sources for my purposes here are Hintikka 1962b, 1975;
Montague 1972; and Kaplan 1977, 1979. Relations between the logic or
semantics of sentences ascribing intentional attitudes and the theory of the
intentionality of the attitudes are appraised in Smith and McIntyre 1982.
What are the boundaries of the disciplines we call logic, semantics, and
pragmatics? Hintikka’s appraisal of the cogito called for widening the boundaries of logic to include speech-act theory and even mental-act theory (thus
phenomenology). Katz’s (1987) appraisal of the cogito called for widening
the boundaries of logic to include semantics, in particular, the theory of
sense and entailment. Kaplan’s appraisal of indexical language widens the
boundaries of logic (along lines charted by Richard Montague and Dana
Scott) to include the context-sensitive language of indexicals. Logic had
already widened, with the logic-cum-semantics of modal expressions, to include formal semantics, especially possible-worlds semantics. Pragmatics is
traditionally defined as that part of linguistic theory that concerns the use
of language, including the influence of the context of use. Kaplan’s and
Montague’s systems carry the bounds of logic through formal semantics into
formal pragmatics. Let us count as part of the logic of the cogito all the issues
indicated, broadening logic to include relevant issues of the form, meaning,
and use of language (normally assigned to the domains of syntax, semantics,
and pragmatics) and parallel issues of the form, content, and performance of
mental activities (normally assigned to phenomenology and epistemology).
If it seems strange today to think of logic as concerning mental activities, we
need only recall that inference is a movement in thought as well as language,
and in earlier centuries logic was primarily concerned with judgments rather
than sentences. Today, after a long and fruitful semantic ascent to the realm
of sentences and their“logic,” we can begin to return to the realm of thought
or judgments and their“logic.” Here I speak of the “semantics” of the cogito –
in language or in thought – because the issues addressed concern the meaning of the sentence “I exist” as used in a speech act or the proposition
“I exist” as used in a mental act. If you will, we are here addressing issues of pragmatics that fall within semantics, although other aspects of use
may not.
72 Mind World
22. As is well known, Russell’s semantics posited only one level of meaning, while
Frege’s semantics posited the two levels of sense and referent. Take the simple
sentence “I am tall.”In Russell’s system:“I” means (or refers to) the individual
