a who utters it, “tall” means the property of being tall, and “I am tall” means
the fact or “proposition” that a is tall – in effect, the state of affairs consisting
of the individual a and the property of being tall joined by instantiation. By
contrast, Frege’s semantics posited two levels of meaning: the “sense” and the
“referent” of an expression are distinct, the sense determines the referent,
and the sense embodies the “mode of presentation” of the referent. Thus,
in Frege’s system: “I” expresses a sense that determines the individual a who
utters it, “tall” expresses a predicative sense that determines the “concept”
(in effect, the property) of being tall, and “I am tall” expresses the “thought”
that is formed by combining the sense of“I” and the sense of“tall” and which
determines the truth-value True (as opposed to the state of affairs that a is
tall). For Frege, the indexical “I” expresses on each occasion of utterance an
appropriate descriptive sense (e.g., that of “the tallest Irvine philosopher”)
that determines the individual who utters “I” on that occasion. We cannot
here go into the many questions raised in the interpretation of Frege’s and
Russell’s systems, but the preceding gloss can serve as a foil for Kaplan’s
system.
23. Let us assume that existence is a property of individuals. There are, of course,
many problematic features of existence. Is it a bona fide property, or a different category altogether, as suggested by Kant’s dictum, “Existence is not a
predicate”? Is it a property of properties rather than individuals, `a la Frege?
Is it paralleled by the property of nonexistence, `a la Meinong? Is it an indexical property, namely, that of occurring in “this world,” a la David Lewis? Is it `
not a property (kind, quality, etc.), but a process, in our case – as Heidegger
stressed – the process of Being carried out by human beings? In order to
assess the cogito fully, we would ultimately have to develop an ontology of
the property of existence and its instantiation in thinkers and speakers. But
for our purposes here let us adopt a minimal assumption that existence is a
property of individuals.
24. An “intensional” logic is usually characterized as a system in which substitutivity of identity fails, for example, in contexts like “Necessarily ” or “s
believes that ,” and an “intensional” semantics is one which appeals to “intensional” entities, for example, properties or propositions (whatever the
latter are taken to be). The present “intentional” semantics invokes “intentional” contents of intentional activities like belief, thought, perception, or
intention. Cf. Smith 1981. The semantical scheme sketched here differs in
some ways from what I proposed there. (1) Here I make the character, or
rule of use, explicit as a level of meaning; there I left it implicit in the semantical system. (2) Here I use the term “proposition” for the sense (= content
of thought) expressed by a sentence; there I capitulated to Kaplan’s neoRussellian use of “singular proposition” for singular states of affairs, which
would be misleading in this essay, given Descartes’s use of “proposition” (in
translation in CSM), not to mention the wider phenomenological traditions
that differ from the Russellian use. (3) Here I sketch a parallel semantics
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 73
of thought; there I did not. (4) Here I skirt the use of “possible worlds” in
the semantics, which would take us too far afield from the Cartesian issues;
there I gave them an explicit place in the semantics.
25. The first-person mode of awareness “I” is studied in detail in Smith 1989:
chap. 2. Frege (1967) proposed that “I” expresses a different descriptive
sense on each occasion of utterance. Perry (1979) argued effectively against
Frege’s view. My account of the word “I” and the sense, content, or mode of
awareness “I” would join Perry’s suit against Frege’s claim.
26. Anscombe (1975) has argued, with inspiration from Wittgenstein, that “I” is
not a referring expression, from which one might infer that it does not serve
to express any mode of presentation of oneself. She argued basically that if“I”
refers, it must refer to a Cartesian mental substance, which is objectionable,
hence “I” is not a referring expression. Wittgenstein’s own remarks were
more subtle. Wittgenstein (1958: §410) said “I” is not the name of a person
(cf. §§398–428 on “I” and pain). In “The Blue Book” Wittgenstein (1965)
had argued, in more detail, that “I” is used in two ways: the use as object
in, for example, “I have grown six inches”; and the use as subject in, for
example, “I see so-and-so,” “I think it will rain,” “I have toothache,” and so
on (pp. 66–70). Wittgenstein referred explicitly to the cogito, writing:
We feel that in the cases in which “I” is used as subject, we don’t use it because we
recognize a particular person by his bodily characteristics; and this creates the illusion
that we use this word to refer to something bodiless, which, however, has its seat in
our body. In fact this seems to be the real ego, the one of which it was said, “Cogito,
ergo sum.” (p. 69)
More recent accounts of indexicals would grant that “I” is not used as a
name and does not rely on the speaker’s recognizing his bodily traits. A
cognate issue is the logic of sentences like “I believe that I have grown six
inches,” in which “I” is used once “as subject” and once again “as object.”
Castaneda ( ˜ 1966) stressed the special logic of “he himself” in “John believes
that he himself is a Wittgensteinian,” which ascribes a belief the subject would
report by saying, “I am a Wittgensteinian.” Perry (1979) followed Castaneda ˜
in arguing the irreducibility of indexicals. Although the issues are complex
and would take us far afield, I believe Wittgenstein’s remarks on the uses of“I”
are not inconsonant with an account of “I” geared to the phenomenology of
self-awareness: see the account sketched in the text, and consider a thought
whose phenomenological structure is articulated by “Consciously I now am
thinking that I have grown six inches,” which involves awareness of oneself as
subject (“I am thinking...”) and as object (“I have grown...”). The reader
who thinks Wittgenstein is wholeheartedly antiphenomenological should
study Hintikka and Hintikka 1986.
27. Again, this mode of presentation “I” is studied in Smith 1989: chap. 2. To be
exact, the distinction is there drawn between being presented oneself as in
thinking “I am tall” and being aware of oneself in inner awareness proper,
as “In this very experience I am thinking ‘Kareem is tall.’”
28. The term “second-order” is used in different ways. Thoughts about thoughts
are called second-order thoughts, propositions (= thought contents) about
74 Mind World
propositions are called second-order propositions, and quantifiers (linguistic
items) are called second-order quantifiers if they range over propositions,
whence sentences about propositions might be called second-order if they
involve second-order quantifiers.
29. Cf. Burge 1979. Burge (1988) later seeks to accommodate some Cartesian
intuitions.
30. See Smith 1990.
31. This “leaving-open” is precisely the role of what Husserl called the “horizon”
of an experience. Cf. Husserl 1960/1931: §§18–20 and Smith and McIntyre
1982: chap. 2.
References
Anscombe, G. E. M. 1975. “The First Person.” In S. Guttenplan, ed., Mind and
Language, pp. 45–65. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bencivenga, Ermanno. 1986. “Free Logics.” In D. Gabbay and F. Guenther, eds.,
Handbook of Philosophical Logic, 3:373–426. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
