awareness in consciousness.
Consciousness in Historical Contexts
The theory of consciousness, like most things modern, took root with
Descartes.
In his Meditations on First Philosophy (1641), in the Replies to Objections,
Descartes held that each thought includes a certain “internal thought”
(cognitione interna) of itself.1 This form of cognition is internal to the
original thought: it cannot be a second, reflective thought on pain of in-
finite regress (entailing thought of thought of . . .). (See my appraisal of
Descartes’s view in “The Cogito circa ad 2000” [1993], reprinted in Chapter 2.) The problem of how to understand this inner cognition, or inner
awareness, is the central motif in all that follows in the present essay.
Locke (1694) developed the conception of inner cognition much
more explicitly, in the following terms, which set the problem in a rich
phenomenological context:
[T]o find wherein personal identity consists, we must consider what Person stands
for; which, I think, is a thinking intelligent Being, that has reason and reflection,
78 Mind World
and can consider it self as it self, the same thinking thing in different times
and places; which it does only by that consciousness, which is inseparable from
thinking, and as it seems to me essential to it: It being impossible for any one
to perceive, without perceiving, that he does perceive. When we see, hear, smell,
taste, feel, meditate, or will any thing, we know that we do so. Thus it is always as to
our present Sensations and Perceptions: And by this every one is to himself, that
which he calls self. ... For since consciousness always accompanies thinking, and
’tis that, that makes every one to be, what he calls self; and thereby distinguishes
himself from all other thinking things, in this alone consists personal identity, i.e.,
the sameness of a rational Being: And as far as this consciousness can be extended
backwards to any past Action or Thought, so far reaches the Identity of that Person.
(1975/1694: 335)
Here in an early form are just the issues we shall be treating as we proceed,
not least as we turn to Brentano and Husserl.
Leibniz (1714) called inner cognition “apperception” or “consciousness,” implying a unique form of cognition: “[I]t is important to make
a distinction between perception, which is the internal state of a monad
[or mind] which represents external things, and apperception, which is
consciousness, or the reflective knowledge of that internal state.”2 Notice
that Leibniz calls this apperception “reflective knowledge” of the internal
state, and here is how he characterizes the mind:“Each monad [or mental
substance], together with its own body, makes up a living substance. ... A
living thing of this kind [with appropriate complexity of organs and feeling, memory, and reason] is called an animal, since its monad is called
a soul. And when that soul is at the level of reason, ... we count it as a
mind.”3 Leibniz’s words are eerily familiar today despite his seemingly
quaint notion of “monad.”4
In classical philosophy and psychology, however, the sharpest and
most detailed statement of the problem of consciousness as inner awareness is found in Franz Brentano’s Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint
(1874). And recall that Brentano was well versed in Aristotle, the medieval philosophers, the empiricists, Kant, and nineteenth-century psychology (English as well as German). Reviving the medieval notion of
intentio, Brentano put forth his famous thesis: every mental act contains
an object intentionally within it or (better) is directed toward an object
(pp. 88ff.). As we say today, every mental act isintentional. But Brentano adjoined to this thesis a second principle: every mental act also includes an
“inner consciousness” of itself (pp. 139ff. 160). Accordingly, Brentano
argued (in great detail) that every mental act is conscious and that each
act is a consciousness of its object and also of itself. Brentano struggled
valiantly to articulate this secondary inner consciousness as a dependent,
Return to Consciousness 79
inseparable part of the given act, and not a separate higher-order act
directed toward the act. Thus, “without any further complication and
multiplication of entities,” Brentano held (p. 154), my hearing a sound
is, in different respects, both a consciousness of the sound and a consciousness of the hearing. It has been argued accordingly (in Thomasson
2000) that Brentano’s position should be read and further developed as
a one-level theory, rather than a higher-order theory, of consciousness.
Here we have the modern problem of consciousness, which hovers with
us today: how to articulate such an inner awareness. We take a closer look
at Brentano’s analysis shortly.
Edmund Husserl extended his teacher Brentano’s analysis of
both intentionality and inner consciousness. In Logical Investigations
(1970/1900–1) Husserl drew (in fine detail for the first time) the fleet of
distinctions that characterize intentionality (Husserl introduced this term
of art): an act of consciousness, experienced or performed by a subject or
ego, is directed via a content or meaning toward an object (if such object
exists) – where the meaning characterizes the object “as experienced,”
resting on a background or “horizon” of associated meanings, variously
shaped by one’s culture and increasingly by the results of empirical science. But Husserl also held, like Brentano, that every act has not only
a primary intentionality but also a secondary intentionality: in the first form
of intentionality, the act is directed toward its object; in the second, toward itself. This secondary intentionality Husserl analyzed further, as we
consider later, in terms of one’s consciousness of the temporal flow of
experiences.
Recently, philosophers, psychologists, and neuroscientists working in
the tradition of cognitive science have rediscovered the classical range
of issues about consciousness, including issues about inner sense, apperception, or secondary intentionality gathered under the banner “higherorder monitoring.” A valuable and extensive compendium of writings in
this genre is the anthology The Nature of Consciousness (Block, Flanagan,
and Guzeldere ¨ 1997). It is important to stress that the problem of consciousness is phenomenological – a word, crystallized in the work of Husserl,
that appears with increasing frequency in recent philosophy of mind cum
cognitive science (as in Block et al.). Yet rarely is this citation of the phenomenological supported by either careful phenomenological analysis
or any reference whatsoever to the extant discipline of phenomenology, which has been a rich and going concern at least since Husserl’s
Logical Investigations of 1900, after the psychology of Brentano and also
William James (whose work Husserl had also read). Although James’s
80 Mind World
views are sometimes discussed and Brentano is occasionally cited, the rich
results of Brentano, Husserl, and subsequent phenomenologists are generally ignored (see Block et al.). An important exception is an emerging
European-American tradition that combines phenomenology with cognitive science, well represented in the substantial anthology Naturalizing
Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science
(Petitot et al. 1999).5 Here I join in that spirit.
It should be tautological that consciousness is what makes the mindbody problem difficult. Yet it was not obvious as Thomas Nagel (1973)
laid out this challenge at the beginning of the cognitive-science revolution. Subsequently, John Searle (1992) has argued doggedly for the irreducibly subjective character of consciousness and its first-person ontology.
David Chalmers (1996) has argued in close detail that the phenomenal
character of consciousness is the “hard” problem for cognitive science
today. And Charles Siewert (1998) has argued carefully and at length for
a “first-person” approach to consciousness. Because phenomenology is
classically defined as the study of consciousness“as we experience it,”from
the first-person perspective, we need today to return to phenomenology
as its own discipline within the wider theory of consciousness that includes
