experiences described that is our concern. This style of phenomenological analysis has been developed elsewhere in greater detail.13 I stress that
forms of language are not the issue at hand, even though we use words
to capture (however imperfectly) forms of mind. I interject this remark
because there has long been a tendency to conflate forms of language
with forms of world – and so, in philosophy of mind, first to conflate
intentionality with intensionality (the logic of our language about intentionality), and then to conflate intentionality with computationality
(the logic of computer simulations of intentionality, formulated in computer languages). (Perhaps that tendency even defines a certain narrow
conception of “analytic” philosophy, of philosophy as logical or linguistic analysis, sometimes assuming we never get beyond our language to
reality, mind, politics, or what have you.)
According to my own prior analysis of the structure of consciousness
(in Smith 1986, 1989), the form of inner awareness defines consciousness
per se, or makes a mental act or state conscious, in familiar forms of thinking, perceiving, desiring, willing. Following that analysis, we articulate
84 Mind World
the form of consciousness (staying with the simple example) in the phenomenological description:
Consciously I see this frog.
The character of consciousness, as assumed earlier, finds first-person phenomenological description here in the modifier “consciously.”
Importantly, on my analysis (1986, 1989), the character “consciously”
is not part of the mental act’s intentional relation to an object or its character of object presentation. That is, it is not part of the mode of presentation
of the object, embodying the content through which the act is directed
toward its object, the content “this frog” or perhaps “this poisonous red
tree frog.” Rather, “consciously” is part of the modality of presentation or
intentionality: the way the perceptual act is executed with its mode of
presentation and so its intentional relation to its object. The act’s modality (what Husserl called its “thetic character”) includes its act character
of seeing, as distinct from hearing, thinking, willing. The character “I
[see] ...” is a further character in the act’s modality, an egocentric character, its being directed from subject toward object. Now, on my proposal,
the character “consciously” is a further part of the act’s modality, modifying the act’s perceptual character so as to make it conscious. The significance of this claim will unfold along our way, distinguishing this modal
theory from alternative theories of consciousness.
In closer detail, my prior analysis factored the character “consciously”
into two characters ascribed as follows:
Phenomenally in this very experience I see this frog.
The character “phenomenally” embodies the phenomenal or qualitative
character of the experience, commonly now called its quale or (in plural detail) qualia. The character “in this very experience” embodies the
reflexive character of the experience, its self-reflexive character. The form
of inner awareness consists in this reflexive character modified by the
phenomenal character. Together they define the character“consciously,”
which modified the whole mental act. As we proceed we shall look more
closely at the reflexive character, contrasting it with various forms of highorder monitoring.
We schematize the form of the mental act in Figure 3.1, factoring its
overall intentional character into several intentional categories. The form
of inner awareness, on this analysis, is that of“in this very experience” modified by “phenomenally.” These characters together define the character
Return to Consciousness 85
INTENTIONAL CHARACTER
PHENOMENAL REFLEXIVE EGOCENTRIC
OBJECTACT-TYPE PRESENTATION
Phenomenally (in this very experience) (I) (see) (this frog)
MODALITY MODE
figure 3.1. The form of an act of consciousness.
“consciously,” on the present analysis, all within what I have called the
modality of intentionality or presentation as distinguished from the mode
of presentation. Let us be clear that inner awareness need not be infallible or incorrigible. Although Descartes sought demon-proof certainty in
the cogito, in my consciousness of my own thinking, we need not follow
him in that quest. (This I argued in “The Cogito circa ad 2000” [1993],
reprinted in Chapter 2.)
Of course, consciousness is present in many types of experience: in
seeing a frog, in thinking about Paris, in swinging a bat at a baseball, and
so on. Moreover, there are degrees and varieties of consciousness, issuing
in variations in the character “consciously.” If I am concentrating on this
frog and its movement, my perception is more vivid and more salient than
is my perception of a frog I am leaping over in a stream. Still less vivid
and salient in my experience are my passing feelings of annoyance at
my friend’s all-too-familiar mannerism. And psychiatry has long posited
feelings that are only vaguely conscious or even wholly unconscious and
repressed. For simplicity, and present purposes, let us stay with a familiar
case such as consciously seeing this frog or consciously thinking that this
frog will jump.
Inner Consciousness
The problem of inner awareness comes to maturity, we noted, in
Brentano’s account of what he called “inner consciousness” (inneren
Bewusstsein). (See 1995/1874: book 2, chaps. II and III.) Brentano’s
86 Mind World
critique of numerous arguments in prior psychology and philosophy
leads smoothly into the back-and-forth of today’s debates about the specifics of inner awareness (see Block et al. 1997; Siewert 1998; Thomasson
2000). Moreover, Brentano’s own positive account gives us a clear model
of what is at stake in the form of inner awareness – even if we reject all
the details of his theory.
Brentano distinguished mental phenomena – the domain of psychology – from physical phenomena in the following way:
Every mental phenomenon [or act] is characterized by ... the intentional (or
mental) inexistence of an object, and what we might call ...reference to a content, direction upon an object. ... Every mental phenomenon includes something
as object within itself, although they do not all do so in the same way. In presentation [Vorstellung] something is presented, in judgment something is affirmed or
denied, in love loved, in hate hated, in desire desired and so on.
This intentional in-existence is characteristic exclusively of mental phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it. We can, therefore, define
mental phenomena by saying that they are those phenomena which contain an
object intentionally within themselves. (1995/1874: 88–89)
In other words, every mental act is directed toward an object. But
Brentano’s conception of this directedness follows a theory – derived
from the Scholastics’ notion of intentio – that the object is intentionally
contained “in” the mental act itself. In this way he averted the distinction between content and object, which was pivotal in Husserl’s subsequent and much improved theory of intentionality. Brentano’s formal
analysis of mental acts distinguishes presentation, judgment, love, desire, and so on. For Brentano, we do not merely form a presentation of
an object; we also judge that the object exists or that it does not, and
we have feelings toward it, as in love or hate, whence we may desire it,
and so may will to do something with regard to it. Where presentation
presents an object (with certain properties), judgment affirms or denies
its existence, feeling (in love, hate, desire, etc.) colors it with emotion,
and will initiates action concerning it. Brentano’s successors (including
Husserl and Ludwig Wittgenstein) advanced the notion of state of affairs
(Sachverhalt), “that object A has property P” or “that A stands in relation
R to B,” whence Bertrand Russell put the logician’s eye on what he called
“propositional attitudes,” that is, intentional attitudes whose objects are
states of affairs.14 But Brentano, like Aristotle, focused on objects with
properties.
