With this structure of directedness behind him, Brentano proceeded
to a lengthy study of “inner consciousness” (inneren Bewusstsein), tracing
Return to Consciousness 87
the notion to Aristotle’s view in De Anima that we perceive our sensations, without perceiving such perceptions, averting an infinite regress.
Brentano argued roughly as follows. We sometimes “perceive” our own
acts of consciousness. This inner perception cannot be “observation,” because observation requires full attention, but we usually cannot attend to
our own consciousness while going through it (as in feeling angry about
something). Nor can inner perception be a second “judgment” to the
effect that the act occurs; for if this judgment were itself to be perceived,
an infinite regress would ensue. Nor can inner perception be a recollection or memory, which again would lead into an infinite regress. Whether
simultaneous with the act or following it, neither a judgment (thought)
about it nor a recollection of it – much less a regress of thoughts or memories – is part of our experience. And, of course, inner perception is not
a kind of sensory perception; it does not consist in a presentation of a sensory object such as a color or a tone, but rather accompanies and is part
of such a presentation. Inner consciousness, then, seems for Brentano to
take a form unto itself. Brentano considered at length whether this inner
consciousness is present in all mental acts, making all mental acts conscious. He concluded that it is because the intensity of inner consciousness is the same as that of the act in which it occurs, say, in hearing a
tone. This is an odd claim (what is the “intensity” of the inner consciousness as distinct from the intensity of hearing of the tone?). Beneath it
seems to lie the presupposition that the inner consciousness is somehow
coextensive with the primary consciousness of the tone. The basic question, then, is what form this inner consciousness takes, if it is somehow
an inseparable part of the act. The details of Brentano’s account are
instructive.
After criticizing previous theories of the form of inner consciousness
(in a tour de force of psychological theories from Aristotle through
the English and German philosophers and psychologists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries), Brentano summarized his own positive
account:
Every mental act is conscious; it includes within it a consciousness of itself. Therefore, every mental act, no matter how simple, has a double object, a primary and
a secondary object. The simplest act, for example the act of hearing, has as its
primary object the sound, and for its secondary object, itself, the mental phenomenon in which the sound is heard. Consciousness of this secondary object is
threefold: it involves a presentation of it, a cognition of it and a feeling toward
it. Consequently, every mental act, even the simplest[,] has four different aspects
under which it may be considered. It may be considered as a presentation of its
88 Mind World
primary object, as when the act in which we perceive a sound is considered as an
act of hearing; however, it may also be considered as a presentation of itself, as a
cognition of itself, and as a feeling toward itself. In addition, in these four respects
combined, it is the object of its self-presentation, of its self-cognition, and (so to
speak) of its self-feeling. Thus, without any further complication and multiplication
of entities, not only is the self-presentation presented, the self-cognition is known
as well as presented, and the self-feeling is felt as well as known and presented.
(1995/1874: 153–54, emphasis added)
A lot of structure is subtly crafted into this analysis of inner consciousness.
Recognizing this type of structure guides our investigation, even if we
reject the specifics of Brentano’s analysis.
Consider an experience in which I hear the tone middle C played on
a Steinway piano. The structure of this act of consciousness might be
articulated in a phenomenological description something like this, if we
assume for the moment Brentano’s analysis of four distinct elements in
consciousness:
I am conscious in presentation
[1] (externally) of the object Middle C and
[2] (internally) with a feeling of delight in a judgment affirming existence of this consciousness of that object.
Thus, the act of consciousness is directed (externally) toward the primary
object, Middle C, and (internally) with feeling and with judgment toward
the secondary object, the act itself. Notice that the character of aural
sensation is absorbed into the object, the sound middle C (with the special
timber of a Steinway grand piano, as it happens). In this simple act of
hearing there is a presentation of middle C, and that is all there is to
the consciousness of middle C. However, in real life this simple act is
part of a more complex act in which I judge that the heard tone exists
(as Brentano prefers to say, I affirm its existence) and, further, I feel a
soaring delight in the affirmed heard tone. There may be a problem
lurking here, as to whether the feeling attaches to the object or the act
or both. The point to note, in any event, is that we need to articulate
the structure of this consciousness into several components. And the act
itself plays two roles: first, it is that which is directed externally toward
middle C; second, it is itself that toward which it is directed internally.
Thus, the act of consciousness includes a consciousness-of-itself “without
any ... further multiplication of entities,” that is, without a second act
directed toward the first.
Return to Consciousness 89
Strictly speaking, on Brentano’s analysis, the object of consciousness is
a complex, a “double object,” comprising as primary object (here) the tone
and as secondary object the act of consciousness itself. The act of consciousness consists in its directedness toward this complex object. Because the
act intentionally “contains”its object, the act intentionally contains itself –
in a specific way. That way is the way of inner consciousness.
Brentano’s analysis is awkward because he treats directedness as
“containing”-an-object. Suppose instead we treat it, as I prefer, as an intentional relation with different modes and modalities of presentation
defining “content.”15 Then the component characters of the act of hearing are distributed over the intentional relation in certain ways, and not
over the object of consciousness. We might then revise Brentano’s analysis
into a form closer to my own analysis as follows:
Consciously I
[1] (am aurally presented this middle C tone and
judge that it exists and feel that its Steinway resonance is delightful) and
[2] (am herein presented this very act of consciousness and
judge that it exists and feel that it is pleasurable).
Inner consciousness, in this neo-Brentanian analysis, consists in the
act’s reflexive directedness through the indexical content “this very act
of consciousness” in the position of internal presentation marked as
“herein presented.” The full character [1] of the consciousness of the
tone is indicated by this internal presentation of the act itself. But the full
character [2] of inner consciousness includes, for Brentano, not only
that presentation of the act but also the judgment and feeling about the
act – because inner awareness takes the act itself to exist and (in the
case described) to be pleasurable. And the full character of the act,
comprising [1] and [2], is indicated by “this very act of consciousness”
within [2]. (The problem remains of whether there is pleasure both in
the consciousness-of-the-tone [1] and in the consciousness-of-the-hearing
[2]. But that problem is not our present concern.)
What should we learn from Brentano’s study of inner consciousness?
The key lesson, I think, is this: by parsing consciousness into several features of intentional structure, Brentano has shown that inner consciousness may be built into the structure of consciousness itself, as he says,
