Rosenthal’s account may be summarized, then, as follows (condensed
from pp. 741–43):
One’s mental state is conscious (intransitively), and thus may be conscious (transitively) of something, if and only if it is accompanied by an occurrent, assertoric
propositional attitude whose content is that one is, onself, in that particular state
and which is thereby conscious (transitively) of that state but not itself conscious
(intransitively).
Return to Consciousness 93
Let us articulate the higher-order thought model in terms closer to
my own. An assertoric, occurrent propositional state is a judgment – as opposed to a belief, which is dispositional, or a doubt, which is not assertoric,
or a perception, which is sensory. And the relevant content is indexical,
referring to “oneself” and to a particular mental state. In my idiom, the
form of higher-order thought that makes a mental state conscious, on
Rosenthal’s analysis, may be described as follows:
I now judge that I am now in this mental state.
Because this thought accompanies the mental state as it occurs, my overall
mental state may be described, in a simple case, as follows:
I now see this frog and (simultaneously) I now judge that I am now in
this mental state.
The underscored phrasing ascribes the form of higher-order thought
that makes the visual state itself conscious. The adverb “now” emphasizes
that the visual state and accompanying judgment about it are occurring
at the same, the present time. A mental state that is not conscious, then, is
not accompanied by such a higher-order thought. Its description would
be, say, “I now see this frog.”
Compare this analysis with a Brentanian analysis recast, in this case, as
follows:
Consciously I now see this frog and judge that I am now in this very
mental state.
The chief difference is that for Brentano there is only one mental state
and its structure includes a form of inner awareness, ascribed by the underscored phrasing, that is an integral part of that one mental state. The
form “in this very mental state” lies within the scope of both “judge” and
“consciously” (projecting the phenomenological form of the awareness
from the logical form of the description). By contrast, for Rosenthal there
are two mental states, where the second accompanies the first but is not
an integral part of the first. The “and”joins two mental acts on this model,
whereas on the Brentanian model the “and” joins two forms of directedness within one act – the one act is directed primarily toward its object
and secondarily toward itself.
Brentano himself, pressing for a more complete psychology, noted the
feeling that accompanies any mental state (on his hypothesis). Indeed,
this element must be addressed in a fully adequate analysis, but let us
simplify to focus on the form of the inner awareness and how it relates to
94 Mind World
the mental state it makes conscious. Then we note that Rosenthal joins
Brentano in holding that judgment is the type of attitude appropriate
to inner awareness. And, given recent logical theory, we can add the
indexical form of proposition as the content (there is more here than
meets the eye).16 Like Hume, Brentano rejected the self and so would
omit a form like “I am in ...” But there is a self (whatever the ontology,
I exist), and the indexical content “I” represents it. So let us allow, for
present purposes, the content “I am in ...” or “I now see this frog.”
What shall we make of these higher-order monitoring models of inner
awareness? It is indeed natural in the age of neuroscience and computer
science to say that the brain monitors itself in a kind of “perception” of
its own activity. And in the wake of modern logic it is natural to look for
both a form of judgment about the conscious act and an indexical form
of content that represents the act. Indeed, the indexical content “this
very mental state” invokes the respect in which higher-order “thought” is
already “higher-order perception”for Armstrong’s purposes (perception
is a form of indexical awareness).17 So if we follow out the two lines of
analysis drawn from Armstrong and Rosenthal, we find the basic analysis that we compared with an updated Brentanian account. But which
of these two broad views is preferable, the Brentanian model of inner
consciousness or the model of higher-order monitoring?
Inner Awareness without Higher-Order Monitoring
On the modal analysis I proposed originally (Smith 1986, 1989), inner
awareness is internal to a conscious state, as Brentano prescribed, but
does not involve higher-order monitoring (in judgment, perception, or
recollection); it takes a different form. The more recent discussions (in
Block et al. 1997) show what is at stake.
The problems facing the higher-order monitoring theory of consciousness were well detailed by Brentano and are addressed by Rosenthal in
his careful discussion. First, there is the threat of regress. The response
is to declare that only one level of higher-order judgment is needed: the
articulated form of judgment is what makes the mental state conscious,
and there is no further judgment about that judgment. I believe this
is an appropriate response within the higher-order monitoring model.
Second, there is the phenomenological observation that we do not experience a higher-order judgment (or inner perception) as distinct from the
state it is supposed to make conscious. There I think lies the real rub.
Rosenthal accepts this observation and even suggests (Block et al. 1997:
Return to Consciousness 95
742) that the theory predicts it. However, we must be more sensitive to
how we experience inner awareness.
Normally, we do not experience a second mental state of judging or
inwardly perceiving about our ongoing conscious state. Inner awareness
does not accompany a mental act as a second and second-order mental act.
Rather, inner awareness is experienced as an integral part of a conscious
experience: that is how we experience inner awareness. Brentano’s analysis
seeks to account for this fact of experience, while the theory of higherorder monitoring, whether thought or perception, does not capture this
phenomenological fact.
Rosenthal addresses this worry when he asks (p. 744), “Must the relationship between mental state and HOT [higher-order thought] be
closer than mere accompaniment? In particular, must we postulate a
causal connection between the two?” A causal link, he concludes rightly,
is too strong. However, the link we need is not causal; it is formal, a feature of phenomenological form. What is still missing in the higher-order
thought model considered here is a formal structure that places inner
awareness inside the mental state, rather than alongside it by accompaniment (“I see this frog and I judge that I see this frog”).
But the problem with higher-order monitoring is not only that it lies
in a second mental act we do not seem to experience; it is, if present,
strictly unconscious. In my essay (1986) I posed the rhetorical question:
how can an unconscious higher-order state make conscious a state it is
about? Addressing my question explicitly, Rosenthal answers:
A state of consciousness can be a conscious state, that is, a state one is conscious
of being in. Or it can be a mental state in virtue of which one is conscious of
