this conscious process is complex. For at one moment I hear one present
tone as part of that familiar melody, both retaining the sound of certain
past tones and anticipating the sound of certain future tones to come.
On Husserl’s analysis, the structure of my hearing this tone in “Yankee
Doodle” is a fusion of: (1) hearing this present tone (E above middle C),
(2) retaining some past tones (C, C, D), and (3) anticipating some future
tones (C, E, D). The whole experience includes as concurrent parts my
current hearing of E, the sequence of my “retentions” of past tones just
heard, and the sequence of my “protentions” (Husserl’s neologism) of
future tones about to be heard, if we assume the melody continues. And
there are mutual dependencies among these phenomena: my hearing E
in “Yankee Doodle” depends on those retentions and protentions, and
vice versa. (Husserl’s ontology of dependent parts would come into play
here.) Retention is different from recollection or memory; retention is
102 Mind World
very short term and an integral part of perception, not a distinct act of
recollection. And protention is similarly an integral part of perception,
as distinct from expectation proper.
As former assistant to the mathematician Weierstrass and so attuned
to the infinitessimals of the calculus, Husserl treated the flow of auditory
consciousness as a continuum of point-sounds in a temporal curve presented in a corresponding continuum of point-hearings. A more realistic
account of hearing a melody divides the experience into discrete tone
hearings, each with its presented duration, volume, and thus rhythm.
Needless to say, a conductor’s hearing his symphony’s performance of a
Beethoven work is a very complex perception, and a technician mixing
the sound of a synthesizer in a recording studio is also hearing a highly
structured sound, one that appears with a mix of continuous phrasings.
Husserl’s analysis is thus greatly idealized, yet it remains instructive.
Now, according to Husserl, retention has a “double intentionality”:
each retention of a past tone includes both a retention of the sound
just heard and a retention of the just-past hearing of the sound – that
is, a primary and a secondary intentionality (thus applying Brentano’s
doctrine to retention). And each protention similarly includes an anticipation both of the sound and of the hearing of the sound. (Husserl
distinguished more clearly than Brentano the hearing, the sound, and
indeed the appearance of the sound.) So my experience in hearing E, the
fourth tone in “Yankee Doodle,” is a complex whole consisting of hearing the present tone while interdependently retaining past tones and past
hearings and anticipating future tones and future hearings.
From this complex phenomenological structure, we can carve out a
distinctively Husserlian analysis of inner awareness as temporal awareness,
a successor to Brentano’s effort at appraising “inner consciousness.” The
analysis I see runs as follows.
At the moment I hear E, I have no concurrent secondary intention
of my hearing E. My experience includes at that moment, according
to Husserl, a “primary impression” of E but no secondary intention of
that auditory presentation or hearing of E. Part of my experience of
hearing E, however, is the pattern of secondary retentions of past hearings and secondary anticipations of future hearings. On the Husserlian
analysis I am suggesting: my inner awareness of my experience of hearing that tone is constructed from this pattern of secondary retentions and
protentions. Interestingly, there is a “blind spot” (or “deaf spot”) in this
inner awareness, as my experience includes no current awareness of hearing E. Nonetheless, because this experience is itself part of an ongoing
Return to Consciousness 103
process of auditory consciousness, in the next moment there will occur
a secondary retention of the just-past hearing of E. And so it goes, the
flow of auditory consciousness, including as a dependent part a flow of
secondary awarenesses of the process of consciousness. According to this
Husserlian analysis, my inner awareness of my ongoing experience of
hearing “Yankee Doodle” played on this piano reduces to this ongoing
flow of secondary awarenesses.
Husserl struggled, in the time consciousness lectures (1991/1893–
1917), to articulate this inner consciousness of temporally flowing experience in a way that would avoid suggesting any form of higher-order
consciousness:
There is one, unique flow of consciousness in which both the unity of the tone
in immanent time and the unity of the flow of consciousness itself become constituted at once. As shocking (when not initially even absurd) as it may seem
to say that the flow of consciousness constitutes its own unity, it is nonetheless
the case that it does. ... Every “retention” possesses a double intentionality: one
serves for the constitution of the immanent object, of the tone. ... The other intentionality is constitutive of the unity of this primary memory [of the just sensed
tone] in the flow. (§39, 84)
And still more precisely: In its process of being continously adumbrated in the
flow, it [the retention] is continuous reproduction of the continuously preceding
phases. (p. 390, from a text amplifying the text of a preceding quotation)
Husserl finds his results here “scandalous” (in the words of his translator
John Brough, p. XIX), asking how “constitution”is possible (p. 390). The
scandal being that, on this analysis, temporal consciousness “constitutes”
both its object-in-time and itself-in-time.
In Husserl’s neo-Kantian idiom, consciousness is said to “constitute”
its object: not that it creates the object, but that it “intends” or presents
the object through a certain meaning.25 Here Husserl claims that consciousness also simultaneously “constitutes” itself, that is, its own unity in
time. And yet, later in the text, Husserl insists that this self-“constitution”
does not form a further act:
Every act is consciousness of something, but there is also consciousness of every
act. Every experience is “sensed,” is immanently “perceived” (inner consciousness), although naturally not posited, meant (to perceive here does not mean to
grasp something and to be turned towards it in an act of meaning). ...
This present, now-existing, enduring experience ... is already a “unity of inner consciousness,” of the consciousness of time; and this is precisely a perceptual consciousness. “Perceiving” here is nothing other than the time-constituting
consciousness with its phases of flowing retentions and protentions. Behind this
104 Mind World
perceiving there does not stand another perceiving, as if this flow itself were again
a unity in a flow. (Appendix XII, 130; substituting “inner” for “internal” in the
translation)
Husserl is explicitly responding here to the familiar threat of infinite
regress. Note that he insists on the term “perception” for “inner consciousness,” yet explicitly denies that it is what philosophers today call a
higher-order perception. The “scandal” is really the problem of locating
inner awareness within the unified experience while keeping it from looking like a higher-order“perception” of the experience that steps back and
separately “intends” the experience.
We need a more effective way of articulating the form of “inner consciousness”that Husserl is trying to describe. Along these Husserlian lines,
may I suggest, a phenomenological description of the whole experience
might look like this:
Phenomenally (I now hear this present tone E in “Yankee Doodle” and
[interdependently] retain (i) past tones... and (ii) my past hearings
thereof and [interdependently] anticipate (i) future tones... and (ii)
my future hearings thereof).
The character“phenomenally” distributes over the whole structure of the
