resolve into the intentionality of a second act H (directed toward A in
its alternative worlds). Nor does it prescribe the object toward which A
is directed in a given alternative world (perhaps placing A alongside a
frog situation in a double object of A, as Brentano proposed). Rather,
the character “consciously” modifies, or modalizes, the presentation in
A (whose pattern of directedness is toward frog situations in alternative
worlds).
Assume that “consciously” resolves into “phenomenally in this very experience.” The higher-order content “this very experience” in A in W
reflexively indicates A in W. And A in W serves as an anchor for indexical
presentations such as A’s presentation of “this frog [actually now here
visually before me in this very experience].”29 But while the content “this
very experience” may be implicit in other forms of indexical awareness,
108 Mind World
including presentation of “this” or “this is a frog,” its role in A is not to
place A as part of the object of intentionality in A. Rather, its explicit presence in the modal character of A helps to define the character of inner
awareness in consciousness, according to the theory at hand. But this
role calls for further explication than we can provide within the familiar possible-worlds framework. The extensional analysis of intentionality
in terms of possible worlds is helpful in bringing out the pattern of directedness of a mental act but is not well suited to bringing out this
phenomenological character within the modality of presentation.
To develop the modal model of consciousness further, and so to add
warrant to the modal analysis of inner awareness, we would need to explore the ontology of modality along with that of intentionality. With that
discussion we would move from the phenomenology of consciousness –
our present concern – to its ontology.
Levels and Biases of Consciousness
It seems obvious that there are different levels of consciousness. Just
consider human consciousness as it varies from hunters, farmers, and
carpenters to mathematicians, musicians, and writers to Zen masters.
How does inner awareness distribute across such variations? Does the
form of inner awareness occur in all levels of consciousness?
If we place our own species in the variety of biological species on the
planet (let us not speculate here on extraterrestrial consciousness), it is
obvious that there are different levels of development of mental activity,
and such gradations ought to be found in consciousness itself. Surely then
the lowly snail has a low level of consciousness in its sentient response
to things it encounters: the rock is to climb, the leaf is to eat. Behaviorist and functionalist approaches to animal behavior would discourage us
from speculating on “what it is like” to be a snail. Rightly so, if the consciousness enthusiast were inclined to wonder what the snail is“thinking”
(reflectively?). Moreover, it would be inappropriate to speak of the “firstperson” perspective of a snail, because the snail is not a “person” (and
it will always be the “other”?). Still, the snail is somehow conscious of its
environment and its activity.
Ants and bees perform intricate tasks in a complex society of their
kin. Their specific movements and reactions are surely not founded in
reflection upon the challenges at hand. Biology, nature’s genetic engineer, controls most and probably all of their activity, and their“culture”is
entirely wired into their social activity in building and maintaining their
Return to Consciousness 109
colony. Yet some of their sentience and action surely involves, like the
snail, a low level of consciousness.
And then there are plants, which are said to respond to classical music,
without recognizing Mozart. Is their response to water, light, even sound
imbued with a strain of consciousness? Who knows?
Quite different, in any event, are paradigm human experiences of
consciously thinking, perceiving, desiring, intending. These are the cases
philosophers began with, notably and rightly, in the evolution of rationalism (Descartes), empiricism (Locke), the Enlightenment (Voltaire,
Jefferson), German idealism (Kant, Hegel), Austrian logically minded
phenomenology (Bolzano, Brentano, Husserl), and French existentialism (Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Beauvoir) – times of high reflection in our
“modernist” era. Philosophy packed into these human forms of consciousness a high degree of self-consciousness. Psychoanalysis (Freud)
articulated still more complex types and levels and dynamics of selfconsciousness: distinguishing conscious, preconscious, unconscious, and
repressed mental states of belief, emotion, and motivation.
And so, surely, in the variety of human activity, we experience forms
of consciousness embracing inner awareness as analyzed previously: that
has been the theme of this chapter.
Still, we must not press every consciousness into the mold of “inner
consciousness,” as important as it is in certain higher activities of consciousness. For we also experience very basic modes of consciousness that
lack “self-consciousness.” Heidegger’s phenomenology featured our habitual everyday “comportment” (Verhalten, or “relating”), as in hammering a nail, and Heidegger resisted Husserl’s emphasis on “consciousness”
(Bewusstsein, or being known). Similarly, Armstrong stressed the mental
state of the “unconscious” truck driver ably driving down the highway.
Now, I think we should not abandon the word “consciousness” in these
cases, even if it came to us originally as a semitechnical term of modern
philosophy. Instead, we should articulate different levels of consciousness.
I am not unconscious when I am unselfconsciously hammering a nail, or
driving down the highway, or choosing to hit the tennis ball crosscourt
rather than down the line, or even when I am moving mentally to the
next step in writing a proof in a logic class, or intently phrasing the
next point in this essay. Nonetheless, in these experiences I am not particularly conscious of my mental activity, or of myself. Inner awareness
seems to be lacking in some of these states of mind, even if they are
conscious. Indeed, we should allow that some of our perfectly human
experiences are, as it were, low-level sensory and motor activities that are
110 Mind World
conscious but lack a proper form of inner awareness. To develop this point
calls for close phenomeno-psycho-neuro-logical analysis, perhaps seeking
corroboration of the phenomenology from studies of our brains and our
evolutionary biology: but let us make room for the point here.
On the view now emerging, inner awareness is an integral part of
higher levels of consciousness, realized in humans and perhaps other
animals, but it is not present in lower levels of consciousness in humans
and other animals. If so, we must distinguish forms of consciousness with
inner awareness from those lacking it. This distinction runs counter to
the traditional Cartesian-Lockean-Brentanian conception (which I have
followed in 1986, 1989). Yet it may be naturally parsed from my initial
analysis (redeployed earlier): lower levels of consciousness have the character “phenomenally” without the character “in this very experience,”
whereas these characters are both present (and fused) in inner awareness at higher levels of consciousness. The problem now is to explicate
appropriate levels of consciousness and to specify where inner awareness
occurs in various levels.30
Whatever the empirical facts of consciousness, in various forms of
life, we may distinguish certain formal features of consciousness that de-
fine four basic levels of consciousness. Thus, we propose the following
(partial) scheme of categories of consciousness in four levels:31
1. Sentient-Motor Activity.
2. Indexical Awareness.
3. Conceptual Intentionality.
4. Symbolic Intentionality.
