not directly affect things and is not directly affected by the environment.
In ordinary human affairs, thought, perception, and volition or action
are interdependent. For what I see or do typically depends on how I
think about things, and what I think typically derives from what I see and
what I do.
In human perception, information is channeled in one of six sensory
forms: seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting, and kinesthetic sensing (of one’s bodily movement). And these sensory modes of perception
include qualitatively different forms of sensation: visual, auditory, and so
114 Mind World
forth. Sensation, we assume, is not a distinct form of consciousness or
mental activity but is a feature (a dependent part) of an act of perception. And we assume this sensory quality in an act of perception occurs
only where the act is conscious – unlike blindsight.
In human thought, intentional content follows the forms so much
discussed by classical philosophy, featuring conceptual, propositional,
logical forms familiar to us all and often shaped by our language. In
judgment a state of affairs is not only represented but posited as existing
or actual; in imagination, something is merely represented, with no stake
in existence.
In human action, bodily movement is initiated by volition and guided
by kinesthesis, typically framed by background ideas and expectations
that define what one is trying to do. There is considerable intentional
structure in action, beyond the scope of the present study. (See “Consciousness in Action” and “Background Ideas” in Chapters 4 and 5.)
Where does feeling or emotion enter the categorization of mind and
consciousness? Brentano, we saw, held that a character of feeling was
present in every mental act. If so, then emotion defines yet another
dimension of variation in the form of mental states. There will be different types of feeling and different ways in which it enters the form of a
mental act, especially a conscious one. One way emotion appears in consciousness is in connection with volition, as part of the motivation that
leads into a state of volition, which initiates action. Where perception
includes a quality of sensation, volition (and action) includes a quality
of emotion. But emotion also informs thought and perception. We cannot take up these issues here, but we note their relevance to a category
scheme for mind and consciousness.
If we put together the distinctions we have been observing, we may
begin the categorization of forms of mind and consciousness with the
following scheme:
A. Perception B. Thought C. Volition/Action
1. Sentient-Motor Activity
2. Indexical Awareness
3. Conceptual Intentionality
4. Symbolic Intentionality
Then different levels of consciousness characterize different biases of
mental state, as the two dimensions of variation cut across each other.
What I am suggesting in this brief outline is a categorization that organizes
Return to Consciousness 115
the kind of classifications observed in classical works of psychology by
Brentano and James and extended in classical works of phenomenology
by Husserl, Heidegger (terminology notwithstanding), Sartre, MerleauPonty, et alia. But the art of categorization should also reflect a wider
purview, an ontology of mind and consciousness. This purview takes us
much further afield. (A program of ontological categorization along such
lines is outlined in Chapters 6–8.)
Forms of Consciousness in Review
Regrouping results, we can distinguish and organize a variety of forms
of conscious (and unconscious) intentionality that we have encountered
in the preceding discussion. Staying with simple perceptions, where consciousness is palpable, and focusing on forms of awareness, we distinguish
the following forms of mental state or act, assuming their analysis in terms
similar to those in the preceding discussion:
1. Unconscious vision. Blindsight is perception without consciousness, wholly unconscious vision.
2. Conscious vision without retention. The long-distance truck driver
consciously sees the road ahead (and steers accordingly) but has
no immediate memory of his perception (and steering). His perception includes consciousness but little or no retention of his
ongoing vision (and steering) – and no awareness of seeing the
road (and steering) while doing so. In some moments of his trip
he may simply have no retention of what he saw (and did in steering) a few seconds ago, and yet he is and was consciously seeing the
road.
3. Conscious vision without inner awareness. The well-focused carpenter consciously sees the hammer and nail (and hammers the
nail) but has no inner awareness of his seeing (or hammering). His
perception (and action) include consciousness but no inner awareness. However, the perception may include retention even without
inner awareness. For, when asked what he was doing, he replies,
“Hammering this nail,” while of course seeing it, even though in
doing so he has no awareness of seeing (and hammering), no concurrent holistic awareness of “this seeing [and hammering].”
4. Conscious vision with inner awareness. When I see this statuette
beside my computer, I am quite aware of my “regarding” it as I
think of its African origin. My consciousness in seeing it includes an
116 Mind World
inner awareness of seeing it. And my perception includes retention,
which plays a role in grounding the inner awareness as I look at it
progressively from different sides, admiring the craftsmanship.
5. Conscious vision with inner awareness but without conceptual or
symbolic content. When I see something ahead on the road in
the fog, my perception is conscious, imbued with retention, and
endowed with inner awareness. But no interpretation of what lies
ahead is present in the content of my perception; there is no conceptual content and no symbolic content. I merely see “that,” not
“that stone” (conceptually presented) or “that Mercedes on the
Autobahn” (symbolically or linguistically presented).
6. Conscious vision with inner awareness and with conceptual content but without symbolic content. When I see “this gizmo,” part of
the machinery inside my computer, my perception is conscious, imbued with retention and inner awareness, but lacking in symbolic
content. I have formed a concept of this type of part, recognizing
it. But lacking expertise, I have no properly symbolic words for it,
words that would be part of the technical language used by electronic engineers in designing this part. (“Gizmo”is a dummy word,
even if I use it while pointing at the part.)
7. Conscious vision with only background conceptual or symbolic
content. When I see “this woman approaching,” my perception
is conscious, imbued with retention and inner awareness, and endowed with some conceptual content, but most of the relevant conceptualization (with or without symbolic linguistic articulation) is
not present in my experience but resides in the background of
my consciousness. I may recognize a human being, and his or her
gender, and even the person herself, without any further background content (much less silent words) streaming through my
experience.
8. Conscious vision with inner awareness and with symbolic content:
When I see “this man approaching, Jacques Derrida, the father
of deconstruction,” my perception is conscious, imbued with retention and with inner awareness, and endowed with content informed by extant, grammatically well formed language, and specifically written language (as the object of perception would himself
stress).
