is, willing that I pick up that shovel,
where “I am now willing that I pick up that shovel” articulates my volitional awareness-of-my-action and “in this volition” expresses my reflexive awareness-of-my-volition. A similar reflexive structure will be part of
my kinesthesis and again of my perception. (A useful analogy with inner awareness is the feature of promising described in speech-act theory,
where I say, “[Hereby, that is, in this very speech act] I promise to return
the car by noon.”)8
Thus, my overall experience in picking up the shovel is formed from
three forms of conscious intentional activity:
1. My volition to pick up this shovel, and therein my inner awareness
of my so willing.
2. My kinesthesis of my bodily movement, and therein my inner awareness of my kinesthesis.
3. My visual and tactile perceptions of the shovel’s movement, and
therein my inner awareness of my perceptions.
128 Mind World
The phenomenological structure of these forms of awareness-cum-innerawareness may be expressed in the following forms of phenomenological
description:
1.In this volition I am now willing that I pick up – grasp with my
hands and with my arms lift – this shovel that I am now feeling in
my hands.
2.In this kinesthesis I am now sensing my arms moving upward as if
lifting something and my hands closed as if around a shovel handle.
3a.In this visual perception I am now seeing this shovel in my hands
and rising with my arms.
3b.In this tactile perception I am now feeling this shovel’s handle in
my hands.
It is in virtue of the reflexive awarenesses expressed by “in this volition,”
“in this kinesthesis,” and “in this visual perception”that my volition, kinesthesis, and perception are conscious. (However, I am in no way attending
to my willing; I am attending to what I am willing and thereby doing,
namely, lifting the shovel. Nor am I in any way attending to my kinesthetic
sensations while lifting the shovel, although I might attend to these sensations if concerned with my technique of lifting, say, if I am concerned
not to strain my back. Nor am I attending to my perceptions, though
I am attending to what I see of what I am doing, namely, lifting the
shovel.)
My action itself is conscious insofar as I am aware of performing it. But
in what ways am I aware of my action per se, my picking up the shovel?
In light of the preceding, my awareness of my action consists in:
My willing my picking up the shovel.
My kinesthetic sensation of my bodily movement.
My visual and tactile perception of the movement of the shovel in my
hands and arms.
My inner awareness of my willing, my kinesthetic sensing, and my
perceiving.
Thus, I am aware of my action not only in my experience of acting per se,
which consists in my conscious volition of my picking up the shovel, but
also in my kinesthetic sensations of my movement and my perceptions of
the action.
As indicated earlier, my experience of acting is an experience of consciously executing the action. As I perform the action, I do not experience
(I have no awareness of) any difference between my action of successfully
Consciousness in Action 129
raising the shovel and my experience of acting. I simply experience my
volition as effective – unless, through perception or kinesthesis, I become
aware of failing to do what I am willing, say, if the shovel slips out of my
hands. (Similarly, in perception I do not experience any difference between my successfully seeing an object before me and my experience of
seeming to see such a thing – unless something happens to shake my
normal faith in my perception.)
Moreover, my experience of acting involves an experience of causation.
9
To flesh out the phenomenological structure of my volition:
In this volition I am now willing that I pick-up-this-shovel by so willing,
that is, that I pick up this shovel and this volition cause my bodily
movement in picking up this shovel.
Thus, the content of my volition prescribes – its conditions of satisfaction are – not only that my body move in a certain way but also that its
movement be caused by that very volition and, furthermore, that this
movement cause the shovel’s upward movement.10 I experience this causation precisely insofar as I experience the volition, and collaboratively
the kinesthesis and perception that attest to its causal efficacy, and these
I experience in virtue of the inner awareness that makes them conscious.
In this way I experience the whole causal process of volition bringing
about bodily movement bringing about shovel movement.
Notice that what I am willing – my action of picking up the shovel –
incorporates not only my bodily movement (my hands grasping and my
arms lifting) caused by my volition but also the shovel’s movement caused
by my bodily movement. In a tai chi exercise, however, what I am willing
is only a certain bodily movement and, through it, a certain mental state
of concentration; I am not willing any physical activity beyond my bodily
movement. In tai chi, of course, I pay more attention to my kinesthetic
sensation of my movement and very little to my surroundings or my perception of my environs. By contrast, in a ballet exercise I am willing my
bodily movement and watching my movement in the mirror, and then
I may attend more to my visual image than my kinesthetic image of my
movement.
Action, Experience, and Context
Having picked up the shovel, I am digging with it, digging a hole, where
I shall plant a rosebush, here in the garden. What are the boundaries of
my action of digging and my experience of digging; that is, what are the
130 Mind World
structural parts of the action itself, the experiences involved in acting, and
the context of action?
My action of digging consists in the complex process or event that
involves: (1) the digging itself, that is, my bodily movement plus the movement of the shovel in my hands and the earth in the shovel head; (2) my
volition in digging, that is, my willing “that I dig here by moving this shovel
[in a certain way] with my hands and arms” (which is accompanied by the
relevant kinesthetic and perceptual awarenesses); (3) the causal relation
between my volition and my digging movement; and (4) the intentional
relation between the volition and the action, that is, my volition’s willing,
or being a volition “of,” my digging. The relationship between movement
and volition in action is thus quite involved. Not only is the movement
both caused and willed by the volition, but, as noted, the causation is part
of what is willed and part of what is experienced in willing (and in the
kinesthesis and perception of moving).
My experience of acting is that part of the action in which I experience
the action. Thus, my experience of digging consists in my conscious volition of digging, in the company of kinesthetic and perceptual awarenesses, and my volition includes willing my movement with a reflexive
awareness of my so willing. As I perform the action, my digging just is –
