in effect, for me – my experience of digging, my consciously executing
my volition of digging. From my first-person, in-action perspective, there
is no gap between my action and my volition of acting.
When I am trying to do something very precise, as in executing a golf
swing, however, I may well not move my body in just the way I am trying, or
willing, to move. In kinesthetic awareness of my movement, or perceptual
awareness of the club’s or ball’s movement, I may then notice mistakes
or inefficacies in my action. In that case I am aware, in performing my
action, of the difference between what I am willing and what I am doing.
I become aware that I am trying as opposed to doing, willing but not
succeeding.
Indeed, the possibility of error in action requires that we distinguish
the experience of acting from the action itself, which includes my actual
bodily movement. For, in theory at least, if I were hallucinating, I might
have an experience of so acting – consciously so willing in the company
of appropriate kinesthetic and visual experiences – even if I move not a
muscle and so perform no such action. Normally, however, when I want
to move, I move: my volition is effective.
Although my bodily movement in digging is distinct from my volition
of digging, both are parts of the action. On the present account, however,
Consciousness in Action 131
my kinesthetic awareness of my digging motion is not part of the action
per se but is a kind of perception of my bodily movement. (Sometimes
this is called “proprioception,” meaning perception of self, that is, one’s
bodily self; the perceptual organ consists of neural networks that transmit
information about muscle activity rather than, say, ambient light or heat.)
Similarly, my perception of the shovel and its moving earth is not part
of the action but is a perception of what the action is achieving. My
accompanying kinesthetic and perceptual experiences are, thus, part of
the context of my action, part of the “background” phenomena on which
the action depends.
Furthermore, the kinesthetic and perceptual experiences are not part
of my experience-of-acting per se, which consists in my volition of digging. Nonetheless, these three forms of experience are integrally related,
as they are interdependent in various ways, and collectively they form my
overall experience in acting. Phenomenologically, my bodily awareness
and even my perception of the shovel’s moving earth seem inextricable
from my experience of digging. Indeed, the perception requires moving my head and eyes in the right direction, and that movement is an
integral part of my action of digging insofar as I must move my head
to look where I am moving the shovel. The neurophysiology of action
would support this integration, mapping the complex systems of feedback among motor control (volition), muscle feedback (kinesthesis), and
visual intake (perception). Reflecting this structure of interdependence,
our phenomenological description of my experience of acting sets my
volition of digging against the background of my accompanying kinesthesis and perception. In this way, kinesthesis and perception form part
of the proximal context of the volitional experience of acting.
So far, we have not distinguished volition and intention. But suppose
that I have for weeks intended to plant a rosebush in a certain corner of
the garden. Today, I am digging here in the garden, with the intention
of planting a rosebush there. My volition in digging is an event that is
a constituent part of my current experience (and part of my action) of
digging, but my intention is rather a state that is part of the background of
my current experience of digging. Thus, behind my volition in digging,
presupposed by my volition, is my intention to plant a rosebush there. The
willing is contemporaneous with the digging, but the intending stretches
further back in time. The state of intending is not itself causally effective,
producing the action; the event of willing is. Thus, the volition carries
out the prior intention it presupposes.11 The intention itself, moreover,
issues from my desire to put in a rosebush, coupled with my beliefs about
132 Mind World
how to do this.12 And my volition is further shaped by my emotions and
my mood, of the moment. (The cry “There’s a fire in the garage!” would
immediately change the course of my volition and my action.)
The intention, desires, emotions, moods, and beliefs behind my action
are part of the context of the action, specifically, the background of states
and events on which the action depends. In case the action is part of a
larger project, as in my digging while revitalizing our garden, my knowledge of that project and how the action fits into it – however vague that
knowledge may be – belongs to the background of the action. Also part of
the background is my know-how, including my manual skills exercised in
digging with a shovel. Still another part of the background on which the
action depends is my implicit cultural understanding, for example, my
understanding of the “significance” of digging in our culture, something
that may not even be explicable in terms of representational knowledge.
Still a different part of the background of the action is the structure of
cultural practices on which the action draws, for example, maintaining
gardens.13
As explicated earlier, the structure of my action, my experience in
acting, and the relevant context of my action may be schematized as
follows, the main features depicted in the accompanying Figure 4.1:
The action = (body movement + shovel-and-earth movement, volition,
causal relation, intentional relation).
The experience of acting = (volition).
The context of the action = (action, psychic context, physical context,
social context).
where:
The psychic context of the action = (volition, mental-event context,
mental-state context).
The mental-event context of the action = (volition, kinesthesis,
perception).
The mental-state context of the action = (volition, intention, desires,
emotions, moods, beliefs about means, motor skills, knowledge of
project, know-how involved in project, understanding of cultural
practices involved).
The physical context of the action = (agent’s environs, causal relations
between the action and other events).
The social context of the action=(action, social groups of agent, cultural
practices involved, cultural history).
Consciousness in Action 133
figure 4.1. The structure of action, experience, and context.
The intentional states or events within the context of an action include: the mental events of volition, kinesthesis, and perception; and the
mental states of intention, desire, emotion, mood, belief-about-means,
and knowledge-about-project. Nonintentional states within the context
