include know-how and cultural understanding. Within the context of
action, one’s consciousness in acting lies in three events: conscious
volition (with reflexive awareness), conscious kinesthesis (with reflexive
awareness), and conscious perception (with reflexive awareness). The
volition is part of the action proper, constituting the experience of acting, whereas the kinesthesis and perception are part of the context of
action.
134 Mind World
Importantly, we have included within the action itself, as opposed to its
context, both the causal relation between volition and movement and the
intentional relation between volition and action. The first makes the action
more than mere bodily movement (it is appropriately caused by my willing
it), and the second makes it “intentional” in the Brentano-Husserl sense
(it is what I will, what the content of my volition prescribes). Together,
these relations make the action properly “volitional”: a complex event
consisting in movements of my body and my shovel in both causal and
intentional relations to my volition.14
More Complex Actions and Awareness Thereof
Our actions vary greatly in complexity, and so do our experiences involved
in acting. Extremely simple actions may consist of volitional movements
with little experiential content and virtually no contextual involvement.
Turning my eyes leftward, for instance, I am willing and doing no more
than moving my eyes, and I am not aware of any kinesthetic sensation
or any perception of my eye movement. Doing a tai chi exercise, my action includes volition guided by paying attention to my body movements
in kinesthetic sensation, whereas my digging action includes body-andshovel movement and a volition guided by kinesthesis and even external
perception. Still more complex is my action of securing a loose shelf in
a cabinet, by holding a nail between the fingers and thumb of my left
hand, while pounding the nail with a hammer held in my right hand,
while focusing my eyes on the head of the nail (!), while propping myself
up on my right knee, while visualizing the intended angle of one board
vis-`a-vis another.
Or, consider the indescribable complexity in a ballerina’s performing a dance solo like “The Dying Swan,” her consciousness currently
focused on a certain form of movement, itself part of a lengthy piece
of choreography accompanied by the music and generating a certain
aesthetic mood for her and her fellow dancers in the wings and the
audience. How does the character of her action depend on its context, including the cultural significance of dance, the intentions of
the choreographer, and her interpretation of the choreography? And
how does the content of her volition in acting reach into these cultural formations? Such cases go far beyond the relatively simple cases
we have described. Yet even a simple case of digging calls for further analysis along these lines (although we cannot pursue the analysis
here).
Consciousness in Action 135
The complexity of one’s experience-of-acting depends not only on
one’s concerns, in what one is trying to do but also on the focus of one’s
attention. Thus, I may experience the same form of action in different
ways. Consider a complex and skilled form of action, for example, hitting
a serve in tennis. If all goes well, I am merely aware of hitting a spin
serve to the backhand corner (anticipating already a crosscourt return
to my backhand volley). But if I have not been serving well today, I may
pay more attention to the “feel” of the stroke, that is, the pattern of
kinesthetic sensations during the movement (am I dropping my elbow
too low again?). My volition may then be more complex: instead of trying
(willing) simply “to hit a spin to his backhand,” I try “to hit my best spin
serve by bringing my elbow up.” Or, if I break a racket string on impact, I
am suddenly aware – perceptually – of the impaired racket I am swinging
through the ball, and I may suddenly refine my volition, trying “to hit out
well through the ball with my broken-stringed racket.” Whereas, when
all went well, I was concentrating only on executing my volition “to hit
a spin to the backhand.” I was then aware of willing my performance of
that familiar movement, in one fell swoop (!), but virtually unaware of
the racket in my hand and virtually unaware of any kinesthetic sensations
of my movement or visual or auditory perception of the racket meeting
the ball.
Attention is, thus, a dimension of phenomenological structure we have
not stressed in the prior analysis. In particular, each form of awareness in
my experience of action carries a certain degree of attention distributed
over its objects. It is in this respect that I am “more aware” of this or that
in acting: of the shovel (in visual or tactile perception of it), of my arms
(in kinesthetic awareness of their movement), or my willing (in reflexive
awareness), or my kinesthetic sensations of my arms moving (in reflexive
awareness), or of my seeing the shovel moving (in reflexive awareness).
A more complete phenomenology of action would specify a measure of
attention and its structural distribution in these forms of awareness.
There are, then, very different levels of complexity in action and in
experiences of acting: from simply moving one’s eyes or hands; to digging,
moving the shovel through the earth with full attention on the parting
earth; to hitting a twist serve, mindfully keeping one’s elbow up to get
full stretch and full power; to performing a dance solo. These different
forms of action may invite very different approaches to the phenomenology of action and its intentionality, stressing the agent’s larger project
(cf. Sartre), or the cultural practices presupposed in acting (Heidegger),
or the essential embodiment of intentional action (Merleau-Ponty), or
136 Mind World
simply the kinesthesis involved in moving (Husserl). Indeed, extremists
might seek to reduce all intentional phenomena to one of these phenomena, for instance, reducing thought to modifications of social practice (an
extreme reading of parts of Heidegger).15 However, a sensitive theory of
the intentionality of action must explicate all these aspects and complexities of action and the experience of acting.
Practical Intentionality
How does the practical intentionality of action, or volition in action,
differ from the cognitive intentionality of thought and perception?
Consciously digging a hole with a shovel, willing one’s digging, seeing or feeling the shovel’s movement, sensing the movement of one’s
body in digging, thinking about digging a hole, thinking about oneself
(say, while digging) – these are all intentional activities. But they have
very different kinds of intentionality. In particular, the action of digging
is a practical activity, not a cognitive activity like thinking or perceiving or, indeed, kinesthetically sensing one’s movement. It is a practical
activity insofar as it is one of acting, and it is not itself a cognitive activity of thinking or perceiving or conceiving (although it depends on
such cognitive activities). Now, an action is intentional insofar as it is
performed through a volition. And the volition itself is a practical intentional activity, as opposed to a cognitive intentional activity, because
it is a willing rather than a thinking or perceiving (on which it may,
however, depend). But what sets the practical intentionality of volition
apart from the cognitive intentionality of thought, perception, and the
like?
The difference begins with content. My volition of digging has a volitional content:
