the most effective theory of ideas yet developed. Drawing on Brentano’s
revival of the medieval conception of intentio, and Bolzano’s distinction
between objective and subjective ideas, Husserl wove together two long
lines of theory: the theory of content in intentional acts of thinking,
perceiving, and the like, and the theory of content in logical assertion and
argument (both types of theory tracing back to Aristotle). On Husserl’s
theory, an idea is an objective, abstract (“ideal”) entity: not a universal (a
property or type) but a concept, proposition, image – a meaning (Sinn).
Its role in thought and/or language is to prescribe (semantically) an
object to which an act of thought or speech refers if this idea is its content.
This doctrine is foundational to Husserl’s phenomenology, and it leads
into the role of ideas in consciousness, knowledge, action, language, logic,
and (arguably in today’s computer languages) computation.
Yet ideas are notoriously difficult to get our hands on. Not only are
they abstract entities, nonspatiotemporal and nonperceivable, but they
are normally quite distant from our awareness: only in theoretical reflection do we focus on ideas themselves, in phenomenology or semantics or
psychology. What’s more, many of our ideas, about friends or family, are
never brought to consciousness, as Freudian psychoanalysis has argued.
Similarly, Nietzsche’s moral psychology unearthed cultural ideas of ressentiment and “nobility” with an ancient genealogy. Indeed, ideas of value
and culture shape our experience and behavior without our acknowledgment, in ways analyzed by Levi-Strauss, Foucault, Derrida, Kristeva.
More basically, our phenomenological sense of “being” and of “beingwith-others” lies at the periphery of our experience, in ways analyzed by
Heidegger and Sartre. Indeed, our fundamental ideas about the world
are seldom voiced or articulated in any way.
One’s thought or action is directed toward something in the world, as
Husserl said, by virtue of a particular content or idea in one’s mind. But
its intentionality is dependent on other ideas in the background of the
Background Ideas 149
act. These background ideas are at work around us all the time, yet we
are not aware of them without considerable effort. Such effort we find in
the theory of background and of background ideas, which exercise us in
the explorations to follow.
The Emerging Concept of Background
A mental act of perception, thought, volition, imagination, and the like
is said to be intentional insofar as it is “of” or “about” something, and
in that sense it “intends” or is directed toward something. On a broadly
Husserlian theory, each act of consciousness is performed or experienced
by a subject and directed via a content or idea toward some object (typically
outside consciousness). The act’s content Husserl called a “noema,” a
technical term (found in Aristotle) for what in modern English we call
“idea.”1
Now, an act can represent or intend something only against a background of other phenomena including beliefs, attitudes, norms, and
bodily skills. Convergent accounts of background have emerged, in
very different idioms, in writings of Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty,
Wittgenstein, and most recently John Searle and Hubert Dreyfus.2 I find
these accounts convincing but in need of a wider framework of ontology
cum phenomenology.
I shall lay out a theory of the background holding in brief that:
1. Our intentional acts presuppose a background of beliefs, skills, emotions, values, social practices, physical conditions including neural
states, and more.
2. A crucial part of this background is our fundamental, open-ended
background image of the world around us, indicating how things are
as well as how we do things, even how we use our bodies.
3. This background image consists of intentional contents, or ideas, including concepts, propositions, values, rules of practice, and items
of know-how presupposed in the activities of people in the relevant
community.
4. This relation of presupposition between an intentional act and its
background is a relation of ontological dependence.
The background is, then, part of the ground or substrate of intentionality: what makes it possible and enables it to work as it does, the
preconditions or conditions of the possibility of intentionality. In terms
of the notion of dependence or, in Husserl’s formal ontology, “founding”
150 Mind World
(Fundierung): intentionality depends or is founded on certain background
conditions, that is, the act could not be directed as it is – this intention
could not exist – unless these conditions existed.3
For Searle the background consists of practical capacities or know-how,
which takes over where intentional states like belief leave off. What Searle
has christened “Background” (with a capital ‘B’) – namely, know-how –
will emerge as only a part of a wider background of intentionality (we will
drop the capital B).
Searle’s inspiration was Wittgenstein’s On Certainty.
4 The crucial notion there was that of “fundamental empirical propositions” in our background “world picture.” Such “ground propositions” (for instance, that
here is a hand) form the foundation of our beliefs about the world around
us and merge with our rules of practice. To develop a proper conception
of the background, we must see that these ground propositions not only
are part of the epistemological foundation for various beliefs (conferring
evidence) but, along with cognate rules of practice, are part of the ontological foundation of various forms of intentionality. A related notion
(presumably unknown to Wittgenstein) was Heidegger’s notion of“basic”
or “ground” concepts, concepts of the ontological ground of human activity (our“being”).5 And the notion of ontological foundation or ground
was developed by Husserl, we noted, as part of his formal ontology (and
was known to Heidegger).
Wittgenstein’s notion of our background world picture can be developed further in terms of Husserl’s prior notion of the “life world” or
“human world”6 (a precursor to Heidegger’s notion of “world” as in human “being-in-the-world”). Our everyday “sense” of the world forms our
background world picture, which depicts the world as we know it in everyday life, the life world. In Husserlian terms, this world picture is a construct of intentional contents or“noemata,” embracing concepts, images,
propositions, and volitions, modified by attitudes (“thetic characters”)
of perception, belief, emotion, and the like.
Our background world picture is empirical and highly contingent. It
is in many ways a product of human activity, a cultural artifact developed
tacitly over thousands of generations. Accordingly, the ontological status
of our world picture, of its component ideas or images, is not that of
Platonic or Fregean “thoughts” cum norms in a Platonic heaven. Rather,
their status is akin to artworks as characterized by Roman Ingarden drawing on Husserl’s account of cultural objects: they are objectively existing
abstract entities (so far Platonic), yet they are brought into existence and
maintained in existence by acts of consciousness (no longer Platonic).7
Background Ideas 151
In the background of our everyday perceptions, thoughts, and actions,
then, are ideas wrought by prior human experience and practice, ultimately by prior intentional acts. Intentionality typically thus depends not
only on the subject’s states of belief, skill, and the like, realized in his or
her brain, but also on ideas that are extant in the subject’s community.
These background ideas have a life of their own outside any individual’s
mind: they are (a) abstract meaning entities and (b) cultural artifacts.
