Background Ideas 157
Background Capacities or Know-How
The “assumptions”that form the background of our everyday intentional
activities outrun the range of beliefs plausibly presupposed by our activities.
Searle defines the background, in cases similar to those we considered,
as composed of “capacities.” In Intentionality Searle wrote (1983: 143):
The Background is a set of nonrepresentational mental capacities that enable all
representing to take place. Intentional states only have the conditions of satisfaction that they do, and thus only are the states that they are, against a Background
of abilities that are not themselves Intentional states. In order that I can now
have the Intentional states that I do I must have certain kinds of know-how: I
must know how things are and I must know how to do things, but the kinds of
“know-how” in question are not, in these cases, forms of “knowing that.”
The term Searle prefers for elements of the background is “capacities” or
“practices” (p. 156). Terms like “assumptions” or “presuppositions” are
misleading because they make background capacities sound like representational states, whereas these capacities are rather a kind of “know-how.”
Yet these capacities, Searle insists, are “explicitly mental.”
In The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992) Searle modified his conception
of the background. Consciousness, he there argues, is the defining character of mind: though caused by and realized in the nervous system, it is
an irreducibly “subjective” property of the mental. Accordingly, the background consists of dispositions of the nervous system: states of know-how
are unconscious capacities and so are properly identified with neural
dispositions and only misleadingly called “mental.” And the network of
beliefs Searle now places within the background: what we have wanted
to call unconscious beliefs (from psychoanalysis to cognitive science) are
better cast as dispositions of the nervous system – dispositions to produce conscious intentional states of thought or judgment. (Ironically,
Searle notes, this turns Ryle upside down, or rather inside out, or outside in: “mental” states are dispositions to produce not behavior but
consciousness.)
Clearly, however, the mental background of intentional states is wider
than what are appropriately called skills or capacities. Searle takes a step
toward widening the background when, considering collective intentions,
he writes:19
In addition to the biological capacity to recognize other people as importantly
like us, in a way that waterfalls, trees, and stones are not like us, it seems to
me that the capacity to engage in collective behavior requires something like a
158 Mind World
preintentional sense of “the other” as an actual or potential agent like oneself in
cooperative activities.
Now, our “sense” of things – of ourselves, of others, of our times and our
life world – lies partly in our preintentional practices or ways of dealing
with things. But it also lies partly in our intentional attitudes toward things,
in our image of our world, which is not reducible to skills or know-how.
Accordingly, we need a wider notion of background than what Searle
dubs “Background,” or even background of skills cum network of beliefs.
I want to reclaim the term “background” for this wider range of enabling
conditions of intentionality.
Our Background World Picture
Wittgenstein’s On Certainty Searle declares “one of the best books” on the
background.20 Indeed it is, and it leads to a trenchant notion of background. What I find most illuminating, along with the many concrete examples, is Wittgenstein’s conception of our background “world picture.”
For only against our basic if inchoate image of things can our intentional
states represent as they do. To those who read Wittgenstein as deeply
antimentalist, however, as squeezing the intentionality out of language
and even thought, I shall be reading Wittgenstein against himself as I
extract his account of our world picture as background of intentionality.
In On Certainty (remarks dating from 1949 into 1951) Wittgenstein
considered the kind of empirical propositions (Erfahrungssatze ¨ ) that
Moore said we can know with certainty, for example, that“here is a hand.”
These fundamental empirical propositions, Wittgenstein observed, form
our background “world picture” (Weltbild).21 They are the “ground”
(Grund) of our language game of questioning or doubting, against which
our whole practice of so doubting makes sense; in this role they are immune from doubt. But the term “ground” has two meanings: our grounds
are our reasons or evidence for empirical beliefs, but they are also the
“foundation” (Grundlage) or “fundament” (Fundament) of our empirical
beliefs. In Husserlian terms, they are “founded” or depend on, and in
that sense are presupposed by, our intentional activities of dealing with
the world around us, for instance, in walking, in seeing a gliding turkey
vulture, or in consciously thinking or judging about a bird maneuvering
in flight.
Wittgenstein says that our fundamental empirical propositions merge
with rules of their language game, part of their form of life. That is, bona
Background Ideas 159
fide propositions shade into a background of practical rules or norms. For
Quine, there is no sharp boundary between analytic and synthetic propositions, between logical and empirical propositions. Similarly, according
to Wittgenstein, there is no sharp boundary between fundamental empirical propositions and rules – rules of practice concerning our speaking
about and our dealing with things described by such propositions. (Remember that Wittgenstein took mathematical and logical propositions
as conventions: not claims of truth but decisions on how to talk.) So, for
Wittgenstein, many of the fundamental empirical propositions that articulate our world picture are not really propositions. That is, what plays the
role of grounding our thoughts and actions regarding the world are not
propositions that are contents of our beliefs but rather something outside
us, namely rules of our language games, rules of practice in our community. We learn, usually not explicitly, to think and act in accord with those
rules, with the forms of life in our community. Only in that sense do we
all know that we have hands or that the earth has been around a long
time. To simplify, this knowledge begins in propositional knowledge but
blends into know-how.
To carry such a line of argument further, in a different vein than
Wittgenstein himself did: it is not that we could not explicitly think or
judge such things – we could. But those thoughts do not serve to ground
our actions. They are the philosopher’s retrospective reflections. Even
where we hold such bona fide beliefs, because we are either philosophers or articulate artisans, these beliefs are not engaged in our everyday
activities of moving about the earth. There is no need for our holding
such thoughts, even in the form of unconscious beliefs, in order to act as
we do. We simply evolved in accord with a world of which these propositions are true. We take these things for granted, but many of them we have
never thought about, nor have we need to. Thus our thought and speech
rest on a background that runs from fundmental empirical propositions
that “everyone knows” to propositions accessible only through belabored
reflection, and on to rules of language, thought, and action that no one
need ever formulate explicitly.
There is an important difference, however, between Wittgenstein and
Searle on the background. For Wittgenstein, the elements of the background that outrun bona fide propositions are rules of practice, norms extant in the individual’s community. For Searle, however, the background
that outruns beliefs consists of practical capacities realized in one’s nervous system – if we may put it so, as dispositions to act and indeed to
experience in ways governed by the community’s rules of practice. Of
160 Mind World
