course, the bona fide propositions that Wittgenstein finds in the background are intentional contents of the belief states that Searle initially
called the “network” and later subsumed under the “background.” However, the rules of practice Wittgenstein cites in the background cannot,
for Searle, be intentional contents of our background capacities, because
exercising these capacities cannot consist in following rules, on pain of
infinite regress (Searle following Wittgenstein on rule following). Accordingly, Searle repeatedly stresses, the background capacities that enable
intentional states to represent are themselves nonintentional, or preintentional. Thus, both background propositions and background rules
of practice lie outside the system of concrete mental-neural states that
Searle defines as “background.” Yet they are surely parts of the enabling
background of intentionality.
Wittgenstein’s notion of “form of life” (Lebensform) invites a still wider
conception of the background. The fundamental empirical propositions
that form our world picture might be cast as elements of communal
knowledge. Think of such propositions not in a Platonic-Fregean way
as eternal objects that represent states of affairs in the world. Think of
them rather as elements in a communal database, elements of knowledge
formed by one’s community as a whole. Sometimes they reside in explicit
beliefs in the minds of the experts, as in modern science or medieval
theology or Roman rhetoric. But often they reside rather in the practices of the community, available for explication by philosophers in due
time but normally only implicit in our forms of intentional activity, from
bodily and social behavior to speech to thought. The background of our
intentional activities, then, is our form (or forms) of life, embracing our
fundamental empirical propositions cum rules of practice. Of course, this
is something quite different in ontology than the neural dispositions that
realize our capacities to behave and indeed to think in conformity with
our form of life.
There are intimations of the background already in Wittgenstein’s first
work, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921). (On Certainty was written
during his final year and a half.) In the Tractarian model, the world
is built up from facts, or existing states of affairs, which we picture in
propositions, and a proposition represents a fact only if they both have the
same “logical form.” In Wittgenstein’s later view, “form” is transplanted
from logical form to form-of-life – cultural form, as language is taken as part
of a wider range of human activity. Now, whether form is a feature of
the world to which language and other activities conform, or whether
our forms of life, language, and even “world” are human artifacts, form
Background Ideas 161
is shown but not said. Form is thus presupposed but not represented in
thought, language, and action. In our terms here, forms of language or
life are part of the background of intentionality.22
So far we have unearthed very different kinds of entities in the background of intentionality: propositions in our world picture, rules of practice
that define forms of life and language in our community, and our individual practical capacities (the latter inscribed in our nervous system). There
are close connections among these things. All are involved in our basic
image of the world around us, an image that is largely communal, the
product of eons of human experience (and in some places informed,
increasingly, by the knowledge of experts such as scientists). And that
image, I submit, forms a crucial sort of background for our intentional
activities, without which our thoughts and experiences could not have
the intentional force they do.
But what sort of thing is our image of the world? Here I want to mark
out the background ideas that are so important to our daily lives.
Our Background Sense of the Life World
The notion of our background world picture grows clearer as we look at
Husserl’s account of what he called the “life world” (Lebenswelt) or the
“human world.”23
In the Crisis (1935–38) Husserl says the life world is the “ground” of
all human activities, theoretical or practical, whence the ground of all
(human) intentionality. What is the life world? It is the world as experienced – and assumed, merely taken for granted – in everyday life, in
everyday intentional activities, from perception, thought, imagination,
and emotion to action. But what is the world-as-experienced? There are
two candidates: the world in which we live, our surrounding world itself,
restricted to certain properties; and our conception or image of the world,
our “world picture” (Weltbild), as Husserl calls it. The world itself is external to consciousness, whereas our image of the world is a construct of
intentional content, what Husserl called “sense” (Sinn) or “noema.” Our
everyday, commonsense, life-world image of the world is the image that
informs our everyday activities. This is to be distinguished from our scientific image of the world, though our everyday life-world image both shapes
and is shaped by our scientific image. (Sellars’s influential distinction
between the “manifest image” and the “scientific image”24 recapitulates
Husserl’s distinction between our experiential, life world conception and
our theoretical, natural-science conception of the world.)
162 Mind World
Which then, according to Husserl, is the ground of our intentional
activities: the life world itself or our sense (conception) of the life world?
Husserl’s story is complex.
The principles of Husserl’s account of the life world were laid out in
his Ideas II (1912). In Ideas I, laying out his phenomenology and associate
ontology, Husserl distinguishes “sense” (Sinn) from “essence” (Wesen):
the essence of something consists of the properties that make it what it is,
whereas the sense of an intentional act is the content that represents or
prescribes its object as having various properties. In Ideas II Husserl describes one world of objects, which may have different aspects or essences,
that we experience or intend through different conceptions or ranges of
sense. Specifically, he analyzes our conceptions of the natural, cultural,
and subjective-intentional essences of things in the world. These very different ranges of essence Husserl calls Nature, Humanity or Spirit (Geist
in the sense of Zeitgeist), and Consciousness.25 Strictly speaking, then,
the Life World is neither the world in itself nor our everyday conception
(sense) of the world, but that aspect (essence) of things in the world
formed by those of their properties that we deal with in everyday life:
the properties that define the Human or “Spiritual” World. For instance,
this material object before me (a pen) is composed of quarks in a complex configuration: a naturalistic property. It also is used for writing:
a cultural property. It is not conscious, so it has no subjective properties, no intentional experiences (such as thinking of what I am writing
with it).
For Husserl, then, oursense of the life world prescribes the essence of the
life world, that is, the Life-World essence of things around us. According
to Husserl’s detailed analysis, the essences of things are stratified in the
following way,26 as things in the world around us may be respectively:
(i) spatiotemporal objects,
(ii) material objects in causal relations,
(iii) living things, including animals and humans with psychological
states,
(iv) human beings proper, or persons, bearing culture and ethics,
(v) cultural objects such as houses, books, laws, and institutions produced by human beings, or
