(vi) subjects of intentional activity or “pure” consciousness (as distinct
from natural, psychological, or cultural phenomena).
The essence Nature comprises levels (i)–(iii); the essence Life World
or Humanity, levels (iv)–(v); and the essence Consciousness, level (vi).
Background Ideas 163
According to Husserl, these levels of essence are prescribed by corresponding levels of sense, through which things are presented with properties belonging to these levels of essence. Thus, our everyday sense of the
world presents things with Life-World essences such as being a person or a
chair, while propositions in natural science present things with essences
of Nature, and propositions in phenomenology present mental acts as
having intentional structures or essences of Consciousness.
On Husserl’s account, there are relations of dependence among these
levels of essences – or, alternatively, among the instances of these essences
in particular objects. Husserl finds the later entries dependent on
the prior ones, and recent accounts of the “supervenience” of mental
events on physical events would concur, provided supervenience entails
dependence.27 The details of these dependencies, however, are highly
controversial. In his turn to transcendental idealism (Ideas I, §49), Husserl
claimed there is another dependence that runs in the other direction, in
the way consciousness gives meaning to what is intended, say, as a lump
of clay, an animal, a human being, or a book. In that way properties at
levels (i)–(v) depend on intentional properties at level (vi). This form
of transcendental idealism, or internal realism, is not our concern here.
Our concern is rather the ways in which intentionalities, at level (vi),
depend on various levels of properties of things, from (i) through (vi).
Thus, I cannot perceive a chair (have an experience with the intentional
property of seeing-a-chair) unless I have dealt with chairs (things with the
Life-World property of being a chair) and indeed acquired from my culture the sense “chair,” which prescribes the property or essence of being
a chair. In both these ways, then, intentionality is dependent inter alia on
the life world.
Now, our sense of the life world – our commonsense image of the world
as we encounter it in everyday life – is precisely what we have here called
our background world picture, the background of our familiar forms of
intentionality.28 Husserl’s detailed analysis thereof brings out crucial elements of our awareness of ourselves and others. Our bodily awareness
in kinesthesis and motor control or will come with our awareness of ourselves as animated beings along with other animals. Empathy with others
and thus social awareness enter with our awareness of animal life and are
crucial on the level of human beings or persons. And our sense of values
comes with our awareness of our selves and other persons living in a
culture.
In Husserlian terms, our background world picture would be a system
of background ideas – senses or noemata – that prescribe features of things
164 Mind World
in the world as we experience them in everyday life. This picture would
embrace all the features in (i)–(vi), and properties involved therein such
as kinesthesis, motor control, empathy, value, and more. Taking their
places in this picture are inter alia the “background” items stressed by
Searle and Wittgenstein: our practical capacities, including bodily, social,
and intellectual skills; the rules of practice in our forms of life, extant
in our culture; and our fundamental propositions about various kinds of
things, so far as these are either commonly voiced or reasonably accessible
on reflection. Our world picture should also include our fundamental
values, so far as these are involved in both our forms of life and our
assumed or voiced “beliefs” about what is important, obligatory, and so
forth.
Husserl sometimes characterized the surrounding world as the “horizon” of an intentional experience. To speak precisely, the horizon of my
seeing yonder house is the range of possibilities left open by the content of
my perception.29 These are possibilities for the world around me: starting with properties of the back side of the house, also the inside, and
ranging from physical to cultural and aesthetic properties, thus from the
Natural World to the Life World. These possibilities, Husserl said, must
be “motivated,” not “empty,” possibilities. In present terms that means
they must be compatible with our background world picture. But while
the horizon of an act goes on indefinitely, there are limits reflecting our
background world picture, which is open-ended and revisable, yet limited. Where Wittgenstein said our background knowledge runs out and
assumed propositions blend into rules of practice, Husserl said there
are potential lines of further experience, which prescribe the horizon by
specifying how knowledge can be extended through appropriate action
(walk around the side of the house and you will see if there is another
porch). Consequently, it belongs to the horizon of our experience that
we can develop new forms of action, practice, language, knowledge, even
perception. Accordingly, our basic sense of the world, our world picture,
which constrains the horizon of our experience, includes both practical and cognitive intentional contents indicating the revisability of our
background picture itself.
The Background as Ontological Foundation
How exactly is the intentionality of an act of consciousness related to the
act’s background? The act’s intentionality, I propose, depends or is founded
in certain ways on various parts of its background. So the relation between
Background Ideas 165
intentionality and background is that of ontological dependence, and the
role of background in intentionality is that of ontological foundation.
Drawing on Husserl drawing on Aristotle, we say:
A depends or is founded on B if and only if A could not exist unless B
existed, that is, necessarily A exists only if B exists.30
Dependence is not in general“causal.”Aristotle held that this whiteness in
this paper could not exist apart from the paper, but the paper is not a cause
of the whiteness in our modern sense of “cause.” B is a “causal” condition
of A only in case the necessity involved is physical, and a brain event B is
a “neural” condition of an intentional act A, pace Searle, only in case the
physical necessity concerns neural activity in the subject’s brain. Where
intentional activity depends on background ideas or rules-of-practice,
pace Wittgenstein or Husserl, the dependence is not causal and surely
not neural. The wide notion of ontological dependence, then, allows
us to define the dependence of intentionality on different background
phenomena, including background ideas and norms, without reducing
the dependence to causation.
Assume this traditional analysis of ontological dependence. Then, I
propose: the intentionality of an act of consciousness depends or is founded
on its background, in that the intentional relationship among subject, act,
content, and object could not exist – the act could not be directed as it
is – unless the background conditions or entities existed.31
We may schematize the ontology of intentionality, then, as shown in
Figure 5.1. The point of this figure is to stress the different roles of background and content in the intentional relationship of act to object: the
