culture. However, to articulate the mind’s place in the world of nature, we
need a broad and fundamental ontological framework. Yet the type of naturalism assumed in today’s philosophy of mind cum cognitive science cannot
Various participants in the Bordeaux conference where the material in this chapter was first
presented offered helpful comments, responding to my presentation of these ideas there.
I thank Charles W. Dement as well, for discussion of related issues and for comments on
the penultimate draft of this essay. My thanks also to Jeffrey Barret for comments on the
penultimate draft and to Dagfinn Føllesdal, Ronald McIntyre, Peter Simons, Andrew Cross,
and Martin Schwab for helpful discussion of several related issues.
176
Intentionality Naturalized? 177
make room for conscious, embodied, encultured intentional activities. In
this essay we look toward a wider and more fundamental ontology. We
turn thus to issues of basic ontology to be explored further in subsequent
essays.
With all its eyes the natural world looks out into the Open. Only our eyes
are turned backward, and surround plant, animal, child like traps, as they
emerge into their freedom.
Rainer Maria Rilke
Introduction
Intentionality in Nature
We must open up the conception of nature and naturalism au courant
in the philosophy of cognitive science. Consciousness and its intentionality are part of nature. But their essence is not exhausted by physical
composition or causal role or neural function or computation (classical
or connectionist) – as important as these be to their implementation.
We must widen “naturalism” accordingly so that our theory of mind and
cognition incorporates the characters of consciousness and intentionality
that are hard-earned results of phenomenology and ontology.
To that end I outline here an ontology that distinguishes diverse categories of the world and carves a place for consciousness and intentionality
in the world of nature. Intentionality is categorized within the world of
nature, and “naturalized” in that way, without reducing consciousness
or its intentionality to a causal or computational process along the lines
envisioned by current cognitive science.
The guiding assumption, which I call unionism, holds that there is
but one world, ordered and unified as “nature.” That world includes us,
our conscious intentional experiences, and a host of other things, from
rocks, trees, and bees to families, symphonies, and governments. These
things belong to diverse substantive or“material” categories such as Body,
Mind, and Culture, which are ordered by diverse “formal” categories
such as Individual, Quality, and State of Affairs. The world is unified by
the systematic ways in which formal categories interweave and govern
material categories.
This proposed unity does not preclude diversity of categories (think
of the classifications in biology, the table of elements in chemistry, the
fundamental forces and particles in physics). Yet diversity does not require
disjoint realms of beings delimiting, say, bodies, minds, and cultures (`a la
178 Mind World
dualism, materialism, idealism, historicism). In this way the world enjoys
categorial complexity without substance dualism. From quarks to quasars,
from consciousness to volition to cultural institutions, there is ontological
complexity, but all within this one world.
Among the formal categories of the world, I shall claim, are Intentionality and Dependence. But if these are distinct formal categories, it
is a mistake in fundamental ontology to identify intentionality – or consciousness itself – with a structure of causation, or dependence, realized
in a brain or computer. The life of mind is more complicated than that,
categorially.1
Naturalism in Phenomenology and Cognitive Science
Some ninety years ago Edmund Husserl developed a philosophical account of consciousness and cognition in Ideen (1912–13) on the heels of
his Logische Untersuchungen (1900–1). Husserl held that “intentionality”
(Husserl coined the term) is the central feature of consciousness. His
account of intentionality – including cognition in perception and judgment – was the foundation of“phenomenology,” Husserl’s new science of
consciousness. With Husserl the theory of intentionality and intentional
content thus came into its own, after a long prehistory.
Some twenty years ago, at the heart of the emerging discipline of “cognitive science,”Jerry Fodor outlined a philosophical account of cognition
in The Language of Thought (1975). Fodor held that “mental representation” – what Husserl called “intentionality” – is the central activity of mind
and analyzed its structure as symbolic computation in “the language of
thought.” More recently, Fodor and foes have debated whether this computation is “connectionist” in form, implemented by neural networks in
the human brain, whereas Fred Dretske, since Knowledge and the Flow of
Information (1981), has put the emphasis rather on the flow of physical
“information,” between environment and organism, in perception and
knowledge.
But Husserl and Fodor et alii take opposite positions on naturalism.
Expressing today’s conventional wisdom, Fodor in The Elm and the Expert (1994) says any “serious psychology” must be naturalistic. In kindred
spirit Fred Dretske in Naturalizing the Mind (1995) seeks to show how
consciousness might be captured in naturalistic terms. Husserl, however,
argued that any “rigorous science” of consciousness must reject naturalism. Of course, everything depends on how naturalism is defined. If
intentionality is naturalized in the way of Fodor et alii, then I stand with
Husserl against “naturalization.” But if naturalism is defined in the way
Intentionality Naturalized? 179
I shall propose, as unionism in a system of ontological categories, then
I accept a “naturalized” intentionality, and so I think could Husserl in
today’s debate as well.
In The Elm and the Expert Fodor updates his account of mental representation, now adopting Husserl’s term “intentionality” and drawing
what he thinks are consequences of naturalizing the theory of mind and
intentionality. In Naturalizing the Mind Dretske proposes to explicate the
crucial features of consciousness, including intentionality, qualia, and
introspection, in terms of external relations our experiences have to relevant objects in the environment, relations consisting in the causal flow of
physical “information.” Where Fodor, Dretske, and others would outline
a theory of mind within the bounds of a naturalism stressing computation
and causation, I want inversely to outline a form of naturalism within the
bounds of a theory of mind (inter alia) stressing its place in the categories
of a phenomenological ontology.2
The term “naturalism” outlives its usefulness, however, if it merely
connotes the honorific attitude, “Be scientific.” My aim here is to get
beyond such labels and dig into what would be required of an ontology
adequate to the phenomenology of consciousness and its intentionality.
Outlines of a Phenomenological Ontology
Ontological Categories
Systematic ontology begins by distinguishing fundmental kinds or categories of things in the world. Plato distinguished forms and particulars
that exemplify them (to various degrees of imperfection). Aristotle, master classifier and protobiologist, framed a more down-to-earth ontology
of “categories” (launching this term of art in philosophy: kategoremata,
literally “predicates”). Aristotle distinguished the following categories:
