Substance, including Primary Substance (Individual Thing) and Secondary Substance (Species), Quantity (Discrete or Continuous), Quality (Condition, Capacity, Affective Quality, or Shape), Relative (better
Relation), Where, When, Position (Posture), Having, Doing (Action),
Being Affected (Being Acted Upon).
If Plato’s forms reside in a heaven far above the world of particulars,
Aristotle’s categories – starting with Substance – are meant to structure
things in nature. Thus Aristotle went on to distinguish matter and form
within the constitution of a primary substance.
180 Mind World
For our purposes let us simplify and update Aristotle’s system of categories, as follows:
Individual, Species, Quality, Relation, Location, Quantity, Intentionality.
Species include natural kinds and, if you like, artificial kinds. Relations
form their own category (by contrast, many philosophers sought to reduce relations to monadic properties). Space and time fall under Location. Quantity leads into other mathematical structures (details to be
specified). Intentionality – following Brentano, Husserl, et alii – covers
not only purposeful action (and, inversely, being acted upon) but perception, imagination, thought, and other processes (significantly widening
Aristotle’s niche for acting and being acted upon).
We consider increasingly complex systems of categories, using this
modified Aristotelian scheme as a prototype and foil for further reflections. The issue, as we proceed, is the niche of mind in a world framed
by ontological categories. If Brentano was right that intentionality is the
distinguishing mark of the mental, then of course mental phenomena
would simply fall under Intentionality in the above scheme. But life is
more complicated than that, we shall see.
Classical nominalism began in Ockham with the goal of having only
the category Particular, or Individual, what Aristotle called “Primary
Substance”: all else becomes mere ways of talking or thinking (for
Ockham, thinking in a mental language). While I cannot argue the case
here, I think nominalism – better named particularism – is orthogonal
to naturalism. Our theory of nature assumes the categories Species, Spatiotemporal Location, and more. But whether these categories could be
somehow eliminated, or reduced to the category Individual, is a further
issue and would survive the denial of naturalism – as we saw in Berkeley’s
ontology of idealism (which would recognize only minds and ideas, two
kinds of particular).
Aristotle conceived his categories as the most general yet disjunct
kinds of things there are. This would seem to mean the categories themselves fall under the category Species. But that is not right. The categories
are not summa genera, species at the highest level in the genus-species
hierarchy: they are not species at all. Dog is a species of Mammal, but
Species, Relation, and the like are not species: they are categories. Thus, a
more systematic account of categories is needed, along the lines charted
by Husserl.
Intentionality Naturalized? 181
Formal and Material Categories
Husserl drew a distinction (with a nod to Leibniz) between formal
and material ontology, thereby distinguishing “formal” and “material”
categories.3 While the distinction is not easy to draw in general terms, it
becomes clear in particular systems of ontology, where it has sharp consequences for the ontology of mind. When we begin to think in such terms,
as we shall see, the reduction of intentionality to causal-computational
process looks like a serious category mistake.
According to Husserl, material ontology recounts material categories of
things according to their specific characters or “essence,” whereas formal
ontology recounts formal categories that apply to things of any material category. If you will, formal ontology posits forms or structures of
things in the world, and material ontology posits “matters” or domains to
which “forms” may apply. In this sense formal categories are topic-neutral.
Indeed, Husserl sometimes spoke of the ideal of a mathesis universalis
(Leibniz’s term), suggesting that formal ontological structure is to be
described ultimately in a unified mathematical framework. However, a
formal ontology is formal because it describes ontological form, not because it may ideally be expressed in a symbolic or mathematical language,
and not because forms are identified with mathematical entities such as
numbers and sets.
For instance, if Descartes were right that minds and bodies belong to
two distinct realms, both realms would still be characterized by the formal distinction between substances and their modes (things and their
properties). Applying Husserl’s distinction to Descartes’s ontology, we
would say that Mind and Body are two material categories, while Substance and Mode are two formal categories that apply to each of these
material categories. Thus the mental divides into mental substances
(minds) and mental modes (modes of thinking), whereas the bodily divides into corporeal substances (bodies) and corporeal modes (modes of
extension).
Or consider Husserl’s ontology.4 He recognized three material
categories: Nature, Culture, and Consciousness; and several formal categories including: Individual, Species, and State of Affairs. In Husserl’s system, the material categories are the highest genera under which species
can fall, and the formal categories are forms that apply within each material category, so that an individual’s belonging to a species (which falls
under the genus Nature or Culture or Consciousness) forms a state of
affairs. Thus each of the “regions” Nature, Culture, and Consciousness is
structured by the “forms” Individual, Species, and State of Affairs.
182 Mind World
In Husserl’s ontology the category State of Affairs (Sachverhalt) is formal and has a “syntactic” structure combining individuals and essences.
Wittgenstein adopted a similar view in Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
(1921). According to Wittgenstein, the form of the proposition “aRb” is
shared by the state of affairs (Sachverhalt) that objects a and b stand in
relation R – and the form of an object is the possibility of its occurrence
in various states of affairs. Wittgenstein’s famous Tractarian ontology is
thus a formal ontology in Husserl’s sense and indeed is centered on the
ontological form State of Affairs. Thus, the Tractarian forms Object, Relation, and State of Affairs would apply to any domain – mind, nature,
culture, or whatever material ontology posits.
Issues in philosophy of mind take their place in such an ontology of
formal and material categories. Thus, for Husserl, unlike Descartes, the
material categories do not define disjoint domains of “substances,” but
rather different ranges of essence, or species. Accordingly, for Husserl,
the same individual can belong to different species (have different
essences) under different material categories. Notably,“I” – this one individual – am a physical organism in Nature, a person in Culture, and an ego
in Consciousness. More precisely, the individual I includes these three different aspects or “moments” (particularized properties) that fall respectively under the material categories Nature, Culture, and Consciousness.
And there are dependencies among these moments, as my state of consciousness depends on what my brain is doing and what my culture has
done. Consequently, Dependence is a formal feature of entities falling
under these three material categories, and holding even between entities
in different material categories.
Furthermore, in Husserl’s scheme, intentionality (being-conscious-ofsomething as well as being-an-“I”) belongs to animal organisms in Nature,
to persons in Culture, and to “pure” egos in Consciousness. It follows that
Intentionality is a formal feature of entities bearing these three different
material essences. Husserl does not explicitly classify intentionality as a
formal feature, but I later consider reasons why it should be so classified.
For Husserl, intentionality is “pure” in consciousness but also “bound”
into nature and culture. Of course, intentionality is realized in nature not
in rocks but only in certain physical systems including animal organisms.
And intentionality is realized in culture not in buildings or machines but
