only in the persons who build and use them. In this view intentionality
is a formal property, in the sense that it applies to things in different
“material” domains. It is not, however, “formal” in the sense of a syntactic form of physical symbols. To say with Husserl that intentionality is a
Intentionality Naturalized? 183
formal feature in a formal ontology is not to endorse (with Fodor et al.)
the computational theory of intentional content as a syntactic form of
physical symbols processed by a brain or a computing machine. Quite
the contrary, as we shall see.5 Ontological form is not form of symbols
but form of entities – which may be represented by symbols in virtue
of their form (the structure of such representation being the purview of
semantics).
In logic we assume a distinction between logical forms and the expressions to which they apply in forming more complex expressions. For
example, the logical form “p and q” applies to different sentences that
may fill the positions of p and q; or the logical form “the F ” applies to definite descriptions that may be formed from different predicates “F.” The
distinction between formal and material ontological categories is like a
projection of this logical distinction onto the world – or vice versa, pace
Wittgenstein! But the point is that this distinction applies to structures
of the world as opposed to structures of language. In the spirit of W. V.
Quine, we might hold that our language and its logic go hand in hand
with our ontology, so that both are subject to revision in light of advancing theoretical inquiry. Nonetheless, our ontology is a further thing, and
in the spirit of Husserl formal and material categories together structure
the world.
Within the structure of language, Quine distinguished, as had Bolzano,
between logical forms and the expressions to which they apply. The correct logical forms, for Quine, are those in natural language as regimented
by first-order logic. According to Quine, the ontological commitments of
our language are expressed only by bound variables, or pronouns: only
expressions of that logical form genuinely posit entities; only through
so positing entities do we “reify” and individuate objects.6 So Quine’s
position yields in effect a formal nominalism, holding that all entities in
the world have the form specified by the logical form of variables, thus
recognizing only the formal category Individual. Husserl would say other
forms of language also carry ontological commitment, as predicates may
refer to essences or species and sentences to states of affairs. So Husserl’s
formal ontology is wider, recognizing the formal categories of Essence
or Species, State of Affairs, and Individual – which involve other formal
features including Dependence and Intentionality.
The formal-material distinction is not the analytic-synthetic distinction. Quine argued against a sharp distinction between analytic and synthetic statements, the former true by virtue of meaning alone. Yet he held
to a distinction between logical and nonlogical statements, the former
184 Mind World
true by virtue of logical form alone. Where Quine applied the logicalnonlogical distinction to expressions in a language, Husserl applied the
formal-material distinction to objects in the world and to grammatical
categories in language as a special case. For Quine our ontology is projected from our language, from our bound variables, and logical form is a
matter of convention. (The category of terms may be hard-wired into human language ability; thus Quine once remarked,“Man is a body-minded
animal.”) For Husserl our ontology is projected from our intentional experience, expressed or expressible in language, and that ontology applies
to language and intentional experience and content as well as to other
kinds of objects in the world.
Philosophers have often thought of the logical or conceptual as prior
to the empirical, and along these lines one might be tempted to think of
formal ontology as prior to material ontology. However, we must instead
posit formal categories together with material categories, in a unified ontology. For in practice we abstract formal features from material features
of things, and if we revise our material categories sufficiently, we may revise our formal categories that govern them. Similarly, Quine holds that
our logical and mathematical idioms are most central in the language
expressing our web of beliefs, yet even they are subject to revision.7 Indeed, some say quantum mechanics may require a different “logic” than
everyday affairs. Moving to the level of ontology, our formal categories
are more central and less variable than our material categories, yet the
formal and material work together, and our ontology as a whole is subject
to revision as need be.
The Ontology of Nature
As we distinguish formal and material categories, let us look toward a
categorial ontology of nature. Think of the material categories implicit
in physics and the formal categories that might govern these. As a model
(subject to revision) contemplate the following categorial ontology of the
physical world, the domain of physics:
Formal Categories: Individual, Species, Quality, Relation, Location,
Quantity, Dependence, Intentionality, State of Affairs.
Physical Material Categories: Body, Wave, Mass, Force, Space-Time, Gravitation, Electromagnetism, Quantum Field, Wave Particle.
What I want to stress is the architecture or systematics of such an ontology,
where the nature of things physical is structured by the interaction of
Intentionality Naturalized? 185
formal and material categories. On such an ontology, the world has a
systematic unity that consists in the way entities under material categories
are governed by formal categories that weave together in an ordered way.
In the ancient idiom “nature” (phusis) meant the order of things, and
ontological systematics focuses on such order, framed here by a system
of formal and material categories.8
These formal categories above are those recounted earlier as an updated Aristotelian scheme but supplemented here with the categories
State of Affairs and Dependence. The category State of Affairs serves to
bind together entities of other formal categories, as states of affairs are
formed by individuals of various material categories having appropriate
qualities, relations, locations, and so on. Thus, in its formal structure
the world is a world of states of affairs (following Husserl, Wittgenstein,
et al.).9 But the world is also bound together by dependencies. In this
ontology Dependence is posited as a formal category that may govern
material causal relations defined in terms of physical force, wave activity,
and the like. Thus, A depends on B just in case A could not exist or occur unless B does; this structure is realized in causation between physical
things or events in virtue of the mass, force, or other physical entities or
features that they involve. (Aristotle assumed such a notion in defining
qualities of substances, but it was Husserl who developed the ontology of
dependence in a detailed way.)10 Note that Intentionality is posited as a
distinct formal category, a point to which we return.
In the Cartesian and Husserlian ontologies sketched earlier, the formal
categories apply in the same way to entities in each material category. In
the present ontology, however, the relation between formal and material
categories is more complicated, with certain formal categories applying
to entities in certain material categories. Thus, a body is an individual
with a mass in a gravitational field, but an electromagnetic wave is an
individual with a certain mode of propagation in an electromagnetic
field. States of affairs are formed in various ways from formal categories:
as individuals belonging to species or having qualities or standing in
relations, or entities depending on other entities.11 The laws of physics,
