Because the same individual can fall under these three essences,
Husserl is a monist about substances but a pluralist about essences. In
today’s terms his metaphysics is a plural-aspect view: a form of substancemonism and property-pluralism – or essence-trialism.
On Husserl’s account, intentionality is a property of consciousness, or
part of the essence Consciousness, whereas force and mass and energy
and causation are properties of nature, or part of the essence Nature,
whereas value and empathy and community are properties of culture,
or part of the essence Culture. Husserl’s “transcendentalism” boils down
to just this distinction among three irreducibly distinct essences and the
properties that characterize them. According to Husserl, the “transcendental”region of consciousness does not reduce to the “natural”region of
physical causation or to the “cultural” region of community. For Husserl,
these three ranges of essence are presented through three distinct ranges
of sense or noema expressed in three distinct ranges of language about
the intentional, the physical, and the cultural. There are thus three grades
of “transcendental” involvement: at the levels of language, sense, and
essence respectively.
Given Husserl’s ontology, what is wrong with the causal-computational
view of mind is that it wrongly identifies two “moments” of an event
of thinking: those of its intentional character and its causal-neurocomputational role. These two moments may be parts of the same event,
and even interdependent, but they are numerically distinct. Notice that
it matters not whether the computational architecture is classical or
connectionist.
In Husserl’s idiom, “naturalism” is the ontology that reduces the essence of consciousness to the essence of “nature,” reducing the property
of intentionality to a form of spatiotemporal-causal connection between
act and object of consciousness. Naturalism in that sense Husserl rejected,
vehemently. There is however a different ontology of nature and consciousness, and thus a different conception of “naturalism,” that fits well
with principles of phenomenology and ontology along the lines articulated by Husserl and facilitates the results of cognitive neuroscience. The
202 Mind World
first section in this chapter sketched a model of such a phenomenological
ontology.
“Nature” Reborn with Consciousness and Intentionality
The ancient meaning of“nature”survives today in the distinction between
“nature” and the “nature of things.” Originally “nature” (phusis) meant
the nature of the world (kosmos), as the earliest Greek philosophers
posited an order to things in the world – the primordial assumption that
became science. Today “nature” means the world so ordered, and its order
is detailed by the “natural” sciences.
Where nineteenth-century naturalism stressed the organic character
of the world and our place in it, late twentieth-century naturalism has
stressed the physical character of the world, including the biological,
along with the methodology of the physical sciences. Yet “naturalism” in
current philosophy of mind (in Fodor, Dretske, and many others) takes
a much more specific form: embracing not only physicalism but computationalism, causalism, externalism. What we need now, to accommodate
the results of both phenomenology and cognitive neuroscience, is a naturalism endowed with metaphysical imagination.
The proper conception of nature begins with the recognition that our
intentional states of consciousness are part of nature, with the characteristics uncovered by phenomenological ontology. To see this, we must
recognize two points not adequately addressed by Fodor et alii: first, that
we experience states or events of consciousness, notably intentional states;
and second, that events of consciousness enter into relations of intentionality as well as relations of causation(glossing intentionality and causality as
relations). The first point is the crux of phenomenology, the second its
cognate in ontology. We must recognize unconscious intentional states
as well, but here let us focus on the conscious ones.
The fundamental insight of naturalism should be the view that there
is but one world, ordered and unified as nature. This view I have dubbed
unionism. The traditional term “monism” stakes a different claim, that
there is only one substance or one kind of substance. Unionism, by contrast, says there is only one (actual) world.32 Within the order of the
world, however, there may be different categories of things, including
fundamentally different kinds or properties. When we turn to mind, we
find that consciousness and intentionality are fundamentally different in
character from processes of causation and computation, and we should
not shoehorn them into the wrong category. Consciousness and intentionality depend on and enter into causal processes, both inside and
Intentionality Naturalized? 203
outside of the brain – notably in perception and action. And intentionality, at least in some forms, involves computation. But, while perfectly
“natural” and part of this one world, consciousness and intentionality do
not consist simply in causal or computational processes, as Fodor et alii
hoped. As with life in general, ontology is complicated and phenomenology plays its role.
John Searle has rightly stressed that the properties of consciousness
and intentionality are irreducibly subjective properties that nevertheless
occur in nature in biological events in human and animal brains.33 They
are not merely syntactic properties (whatever that may mean for neural
events as opposed to our linguistic symbols); indeed, syntax itself is in
the eye or ear of the beholder, a matter of convention. Consciousness
and intentionality have “internal” properties of representation, properties that do not reduce to causal sequence or the transmission of physical
structures called “information.” Their essence is not wholly “external,”
or “outside the head,” in either causal or social relations.
First we must recognize the existence of consciousness and its phenomenological structure; this requires the practice of phenomenology
(by whatever methodology works: let us not bog down over “¯epoch¯e,”
“hermeneutics,” etc.). Then we must get consciousness and intentionality into our ontology: we must place them properly, categorize them,
in our ontology. To distinguish “subjective” properties of consciousness
and intentionality from “objective” properties of stones and quarks is not
to lapse into a dualism of mental and physical substance. It is rather to
chart the distinctive features of things, recognizing a pluralism of categories of properties of various things – all in the one world in which we
live.
The naturalizing of mind proposed by Fodor, Dretske, et alii would
reduce intentionality and consciousness to the flow of physical “information” through a brain or of bits in a computer. What could motivate
the picture of mind – our own experience – as nothing but bits in the
void? I suspect two assumptions of perennial philosophy: there are only
particles in the void; all else is illusion. The first assumption is a simplistic materialism, the second a foolish metaphysics. Both have ancient
roots.
But consciousness is not an illusion.34 And intentional structure in
belief, desire, and the like is not (as the Churchlands used to suggest)
a theoretical illusion, an old wives’ tale from ancient folk theory. Conscious intentionality is, in fact, the medium of illusion: an illusion is the
presentation of something in consciousness that does not exist (outside
204 Mind World
the “intention”). If we know anything at all, it is that we have conscious
intentional experience of this and that. Such is the subject matter of phenomenology, and to deny it is folly. (See Chapter 2.) We cannot deny
consciousness and its intentionality in the name of science, one of the
great achievements of human consciousness, any more than we can deny
human language, the medium in which science is carried out. What we
can do instead is wonder how consciousness – along with language and
