thinking-in-language – is realized or implemented in the order of nature
described by recent science.
And twentieth-century physics, its foundations still unsettled, strongly
suggests that the world order is not that of particles in the void. In relativity theory, space-time itself has topological structure – it is not a “void.”
And in quantum mechanics, the things in quantum systems are not “particles,” but things in wavelike states that may collapse into particle-like
states. These eigenstates, for that matter (pun intended), may even be
states of consciousness: that much is perfectly compatible with quantum
physics. And on some interpretations of quantum mechanics, the collapse of the wave function is itself triggered by an observation, an act of
consciousness – in which case consciousness is implicated in the structure
of physical states below the level of what normally we call causal processes.
I do not mean to suggest that proponents of today’s naturalism are
ignorant of twentieth-century physics, not to mention biology and neuroscience. Quite the contrary. My point is that considerations of phenomenology and ontology along with physical and cognitive science lead
to a very different view of the role of consciousness and intentionality
vis-`a-vis causal and computational processes.
I do mean to suggest that we all carry vague background assumptions
that shape our theorizing in less than obvious ways. These attitudes are
part of the “background” of intentionality, unearthed by phenomenological reflection on intentionality itself.35 Perhaps they have the status
of “memes,” cultural ideas passed on like genes in the cultural realm.36
And I do mean to suggest that the reigning form of naturalism is led by
such background attitudes into the untenable reduction of the properties of consciousness and intentionality to causal and/or computational
properties.
What we need instead is a wider ontology behind naturalism, a unionism that places mind in nature without losing the distinctive characters
of consciousness and intentionality. This requires a sensitive metaphysics,
an ontology with appropriate formal, material, and phenomenological
categories – an ontology along the lines of that sketched here.
Intentionality Naturalized? 205
Conclusion: One World, with Consciousness and Intentionality
I have outlined a categorial phenomenological ontology according to
which consciousness and its intentionality, reflexivity, and qualia are part
of nature, yet carry their own distinctive characters. In such an ontology
the world has a certain unity, articulated by formal and material categories, within which consciousness takes its place. Everything there is,
from quarks to consciousness to governments and black holes, takes its
place within this one world.37
The lesson for philosophy of mind, from phenomenology to cognitive
science, is that “naturalism” looks dramatically different when we look
to such a phenomenological ontology, wherein mind cannot be “naturalized” by reducing consciousness or intentionality to a causal or computational process. Yet only through such an ontology can we ever hope
to understand the phenomena of consciousness and intentionality and
their role in the natural order of things.
Notes
1. The term “material”is used here always to contrast with “formal,” not to mean
physical, or composed of matter-energy.
2. In 1993 the inaugural Jean Nicod lecture on philosophy of mind and cognitive
science was given by Fodor in Paris, published in 1994 as The Elm and the Expert.
In 1994 the Jean Nicod lecture was given by Fred Dretske in Paris, published
in 1995 as Naturalizing the Mind. The aim of the conference in Bordeaux in
October 1995, for which this chapter was written, was to assess the challenges
of naturalization for principles of Husserlian phenomenology. I have used
these books by Fodor and Dretske, appropriately, to set the stage for my
project.
3. The following remarks about Husserl’s ontology rest on my reconstruction
thereof in D. W. Smith 1995.
4. Again see D. W. Smith 1995.
5. Compare McIntyre’s argument (1986).
6. Quine’s mature view of reification is found in his Pursuit of Truth (1992).
7. Compare Quine and Ullian 1978.
8. In biology systematics is the discipline of classifying living beings: distinguishing individuals, populations, species or taxa, and categories (Taxon, Family,
etc.) – distinguished in terms of phena (observable qualities), synapomorphs
(shared derived traits), and so on. Here I borrow the term “systematics” for
the ontological discipline of classification of entities. The distinction between
formal and material categories defines one type of ontological systematics.
I focus on the formal-material distinction as a device that increases “systematic” complexity in fruitful ways, but ultimately the goal is to use ontological
complexity to account for important distinctions concerning intentionality
206 Mind World
and other features of ontological structure. My conception of ontological systematics derives from discussions with Charles W. Dement and Peter Simons,
in connection with the PACIS project at Ontek Corporation.
9. Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) posited such a structure
in the world, at least the world as we find it, the world as represented in our
logical systems. David Armstrong (1996) has argued recently for such an ontology of states of affairs; see also Armstrong 1989. Prior to Wittgenstein’s
work, however, was Husserl’s conception of states of affairs as a “formal”
ontological category, in both his Logical Investigations (1900–1) and his Ideas
I (1913).
10. The ontology of dependence is launched in the Third of Husserl’s Logical Investigations (1900–1). Husserl’s basic notion is reconstructed and elaborated
in Barry Smith 1982 and Simons 1987. A detailed model of dependence is
developed in Thomasson 1995.
11. States of affairs are “formal” structures in Husserl’s ontology in Logical Investigations (1900–1). They play a similar role in Wittgenstein’s Tractatus LogicoPhilosophicus (1921).
12. These formal categories are transformed, for example, in Whitehead’s categorial ontology, where “actual occasions” are tied in nexus to “forms” as well
as to other actual occasions. See Whitehead 1978/1929. Whitehead’s actual
occasions replace Aristotle’s substances, and his demi-Platonic forms tied to
actual occasions do not reside in a Platonic heaven. Still, actual occasions
would count as individuals in the present formal-material categories (although Whitehead posits his own system of categories with many differences
from the simpler scheme sketched here). Thus, in the categorial ontology
we have so far sketched, it remains to specify the status of species, qualities,
relations, and so on. They might be treated as Platonic forms that can be
exemplified by particular natural objects, or as Aristotelian universals that
gain reality only insofar as they are instantiated, or as “tropes” or Husserlian
“moments” (particularized universals) falling under the categories Species,
Quality, and the like, or as Whiteheadian forms concretely tied into actual
occasions. Alternatively, Platonized naturalism might posit Platonic forms as
falling under the formal categories of Species, Quality, Relation, and so on,
in an ontology of natural objects. Compare Linsky and Zalta 1995, with a
specific formulation of a Mallian ontology that mixes abstract and concrete
objects in a systematic ontology.
13. See the account of the world of common sense in Barry Smith 1995.
14. Compare my reconstruction of Husserl’s ontology, where the same concrete
individuals or events – in the world of facts – may instantiate the very different ideal essences of Nature, Culture, Consciousness. See D. W. Smith
1995.
15. See Kim 1993.
16. See the works by Husserl and Searle cited in the References. My approach
(1989) defines a contextualist variant of internalism, which I now see as a
third way, neither internalist nor externalist, emphasizing dependence or
