entities and toward future (potentially) actual entities, always informed
by the realization-in-progress of potentials called forms.
There is, however, a second type of flux or“fluency,” which we consider
shortly: not the transition from past actualities to a presently unfolding
actuality but the concrescence wherein many actual entities come together
to form one actual entity (p. 210).
Consciousness and Actuality 219
Whitehead’s ontology seems apt for the world of twentieth-century
physics, for points of matter-energy in a field of space-time in a relativistic
quantum framework. But how does it apply to the everyday world of objects and properties, the world described by Aristotle’s metaphysics, which
is a more theoretical version of our commonsense ontology? Whitehead
did not simply throw out Aristotelian metaphysics. He said Aristotle’s
category of substance is not fundamental, but he wanted to preserve
everyday objects or “substances” as emergent from more fundamental
“actual entities.” Moreover, he preserved the Platonic category of form.
For Whitehead, actual entities have forms, as did Aristotelian substances,
but forms are potentials for actual entities.
Ontological versus Temporal “Becoming”
All things are in flux, “all things flow,” Whitehead proclaims (1978: 208),
echoing Heraclitus. Yet Whitehead immediately introduces a crucial, and
I think profound, distinction:
[T]here are two kinds of fluency. One kind is the concrescence which, in Locke’s
language, is “the real internal constitution of a particular existent.” The other
kind is the transition from particular existent to particular existent. This transition,
again in Locke’s language, is the “perpetually perishing” which is one aspect of
the notion of time, and in another aspect the transition is the origination of the
present in conformity with the “power” of the past. (p. 210)
Thus, Whitehead distinguishes two fundamentally different types of
“flux” in the process of “becoming.” We might say that transition from
one entity at one time to another entity at a later time defines temporal
becoming, as the later entity comes into being in time. And we might say
that concrescence of one entity out of others defines ontological becoming,
as the one comes into being on the basis of the others.
Suppose we treat the process of “flowing” as a function or operation in
the mathematical sense (Whitehead being a mathematician, after all).
Then temporal becoming is an operation that assigns to one set of occasions
{O1, ... , Ong another occasion O*. The occasions Oi in the original set,
which are the arguments of the function, are “prior” in time, “past” occasions relative to O*, which is “present” or “actual (now).” By contrast,
ontological becoming, or concrescence, is an operation that assigns to one
set of actual entities {E1, ... , Eng another actual entity E*. The entities
Ei compose the “datum” or “actual world” of E*. Notice that the term
“occasion” carries temporal connotations, whereas “entity” does not.
220 Mind World
Whitehead assumes “the ontological principle” (pp. 19, 24) that every
actual entity has its “reasons” or grounds, the entities out of which it
is formed by concrescence: “no actual entity, then no reason” (p. 19).
Clearly, this principle constrains ontological rather than temporal
becoming.
Although Whitehead’s language of “process” resonates with the sound
of transition through time, his ontology actually treats concrescence, or
ontological becoming, as what is fundamental. Indeed, extension in time
and space is itself something that must come into being, or become,
and its becoming is not temporal. That is, temporality becomes, but its
becoming is not temporal. In Whitehead’s words:
[I]n every act of becoming there is the becoming of something with temporal
extension; but ... the act itself is not extensive, in the sense that it is divisible into
earlier and later acts of becoming which correspond to the extensive divisibility
of what has become. (p. 69)
This extensive continuum [of time] is one relational complex in which all potential objectifications find their niche. It underlies the whole world, past, present,
and future. ...It is not a fact prior to the world; it is the first determination of
order – that is, of real potentiality – arising out of the general character of the
world. In its full generality beyond the present epoch, it does not involve shapes,
dimensions, or measurability; these are additional determinations of real potentiality arising from our cosmic epoch. (p. 66)
[T]he extensive continuity of the physical universe has usually been construed
to mean that there is a continuity of becoming. But if we admit that “something
becomes,” it is easy, by employing Zeno’s method, to prove that there can be no
continuity of becoming. There is a becoming of continuity, but no continuity of
becoming. ...In other words, extensiveness becomes, but“becoming”is not itself
extensive. (p. 35)
Thus, extension in time is a fully “general” structure of the world. And
that structure of temporality must itself become. It is in fact “the first determination of order”: first in ontological priority. Time is not, however,
the first thing to exist in time, first in temporal priority.
We can clarify Whitehead’s distinction of two kinds of flux if we distinguish between formal and material ontology. Temporal becoming is, in
these terms, a “material” process, and ontological becoming is a “formal”
process: concrescence, or ontological becoming, is the formal structure
that applies to all actual entities, in particular to the material domain
of entities in temporal becoming. Indeed, for Whitehead, concrescence
is the most fundamental formal ontological structure of the world: the
category of “the ultimate.”
Consciousness and Actuality 221
While the process of ontological becoming is the heart of Whitehead’s
ontology, the most salient application of the ontology is to temporal becoming, or “process” in the familiar sense, of which mental process is a
special case. This dual sense of “process” plagues the text of Process and
Reality. May I suggest a resolution of this interpretative quandary? If we
analyze the two types of flux in the manner outlined here, then the formal structure of ontological becoming is reproduced at a different level
in the material structure of temporal becoming. There is a recursion of
basic structure in this Whiteheadian analysis of “becoming”: not only is
temporal becoming the product of ontological becoming (time becomes,
takes ontological form), but its form is the same as that of ontological becoming, or concrescence. However, even if this form does recur at both
levels (and I am not sure it really does), it remains misleading to use the
same term “process” for both the becoming of a temporal transition and
the transitioning itself.
I share Whitehead’s appreciation of the pre-Socratic philosophers of
ancient Greece, whose concerns with truly fundamental issues like “the
one and the many” have been eclipsed in more recent philosophy. But
where Whitehead nods to Heraclitus on “flux,” I bow to Anaximander of
Miletus on “origin,” or ontological basis. In Anaximander’s metaphysical
vision, all types of beings in the world (including the most basic physicalchemical elements as he knew them) have their origin, or arche, in something he called the apeiron, the “nonlimited” or “nondetermined.” In this
vision I find roots of the notion of ontological becoming, whereby every
being or entity (ousia in Aristotle) is based in or arises from (what I like
