to call) primordial modes of being, which are not entities at all but rather
ways in which entities become entities, and so are the bases of beings.
I believe Whitehead’s “category of the ultimate” – Becoming – follows
this Anaximandrian architecture. Thus,“determinate” actual entities, extended in time and space-time, are constituted in ways of prehending that
are not themselves “determinate” entities.5
Prehension or “Feeling”
The ontological structure of an actual entity or occasion, for Whitehead,
is that of a complex defined by relations of prehension. Indeed, an actual
entity or occasion is a “cell,”in a sense akin to the biological. As Whitehead
puts it:
[T]he cell is exhibited as appropriating for the foundation of its own existence,
the various elements of the universe out of which it arises. Each process of
222 Mind World
appropriation of a particular element is termed a prehension. The ultimate elements of the universe, thus appropriated, are the already constituted actual
entities, and the eternal objects. The process itself is the constitution of the actual entity; in Locke’s phrase, it is the “real internal constitution” of the actual
entity. (1978: 219)
An actual entity is in this way “constituted” by its pattern of prehensions of
other actual entities, and also eternal objects or forms. Thereby it becomes
“one” actual entity, formed by concrescence out of “many” actual entities
and forms.
Prehension – called “feeling” or “experience” (if positive) – is not per
se a psychological phenomenon. Prehending something is not the same
as being conscious of something, what Husserl dubbed intentionality. As
we shall see, consciousness is a special form of prehension, and not vice
versa.
There are two primary species of prehension or feeling: physical
and “conceptual.” Physical prehension is what we think of as causation,
whereas conceptual prehension is what we think of as being informed by
a property or form. I say “what we think of” because Whitehead wants
to underwrite our familiar, Aristotelian metaphysics by a very different
ontology of prehension. In Whitehead’s words:
A simply physical feeling is an act of causation. The actual entity which is the
initial datum is the “cause,” and the simply physical feeling is the “effect,” and the
subject entertaining the simply physical feeling is the actual entity “conditioned”
by the effect. This “conditioned” actual entity will also be called the “effect.”
(p. 236)
A conceptual feeling is feeling an eternal object in the primary metaphysical
character of being an “object,”that is to say, feeling its capacity for being a realised
determinant of process. (p. 239)
Whitehead thinks of a Platonic form or “eternal object” – what we call a
kind, quality, or relation – as a potential or capacity for being determined
thus and so (p. 23), and this is what is felt “conceptually.” Rather than
residing in a Platonic heaven, it exists here in the one Heraclitean flux
that is the world. Its prehension Whitehead calls “conceptual”; “formal”
or “eidetic” would avoid the suggestion of a mental activity of conceptualization, but Whitehead’s terminology deliberately flouts the distinction
between the mental and the nonmental.
Now, every actual entity is formed by concrescence through prehensions of both actual entities and forms, as depicted in Figure 7.1. Note the
Consciousness and Actuality 223
actual entity < 
 actual entity
 form < 
figure 7.1. Concrescence.
mixing of mentalist and physicalist terminology as Whitehead makes this
point:
In each concrescence there is a twofold aspect of the creative urge. In one aspect
there is the origination of simple causal feelings; and in the other aspect there is
the origination of conceptual feelings. These contrasted aspects will be called the
physical and mental poles of an actual entity. No actual entity is devoid of either
pole; though their relative importance differs in different actual entities. Also
conceptual feelings do not necessarily involve consciousness; though there can
be no conscious feelings which do not involve conceptual feelings as elements in
the synthesis. (p. 239)
So every actual entity “feels” both physically and conceptually, feeling
both (other) actual entities and eternal forms. Feeling a form is called
“mental” but does not involve consciousness, or indeed what we think of
as mental activity in thought or perception. Here, in the most elementary structure of the world, Whitehead nails down the monism we noted
earlier – under the influence of Bergson rather than Spinoza (who assumed one substance). Furthermore, we begin to see the niche Whitehead
has in mind for consciousness: whatever is special about consciousness,
it consists in “conscious feelings,” and these always involve feeling forms.
Furthermore, all the world – from actual entities on up – is defined
by prehensions of both forms and actual entities: “Conceptual feelings
and simple causal feelings constitute the two main species of ‘primary’
feelings. All other feelings of whatever complexity arise out of a process of
integration which starts with a phase of these primary feelings” (p. 239).
Whitehead holds a kind of atomism (pp. 19, 35, 238), because actual
entities are atomic and everything complex is built up from prehensions
of actual entities and forms. But the atomism is not that of physics, where
elementary particles are bound together by physical-chemical bonds
(physical feelings of causation). Nor is the atomism that of logical atomism, as propounded by Wittgenstein in the Tractatus (1921) or Russell in
“The Philosophy of Logical Atomism” (1918), where objects and properties or relations are bound together by instantiation and the resulting
“states of affairs” or “facts” are then further bound together by logical
operations such as “and.”
224 Mind World
Propositional Feeling
The constitution of every actual entity includes prehensions of both actual entities and forms, and the process of concrescence constitutes the
entity through these prehensions. Now, concrescence itself takes place
in three phases that Whitehead calls reception, supplementation, and
satisfaction (1978: 211–15). The concrescence consists in “reception” of
a datum comprising other actual entities and forms, “supplementation”
of the reception by something like interpretation, and completion or
“satisfaction” producing the new actual entity. (These are not temporal
but logical or rather ontological “phases” of the process.) Concrescence
is not a psychological operation, yet Whitehead analyzes concrescence
into a structure like that of cognition, with a distinctly Kantian twist, and
it is in one phase of concrescence that consciousness itself may emerge in
some cases. Let us see how.
The supplementation phase of concrescence Whitehead analyzes into
two subphases called “aesthetic” and “intellectual” (pp. 213–14). Aesthetic supplementation “has welded the data into a new fact of blind
feeling,” and then, “This phase requires an influx of conceptual feelings
and their integration with the pure physical feelings.” This integration of
