the “datum” it prehends. The form of prehension in an actual entity is
“its complete formal constitution,” what defines it ontologically. In some
cases an actual entity is “conscious of some part of its... constitution.”
An actual entity has what we call “ideas of particular things” insofar as it
prehends those things and the pattern of prehensions falls in a region of
prehension “lit up by consciousness.”
In short, consciousness is a particular form of prehension. It consists
in a pattern of prehensions found in the formal constitution of some but
not all actual entities. To be conscious of something, to have an idea of
something, is to have this pattern of prehension. And this pattern is the
ontological form of the act of consciousness: the “formal constitution” of
an actual entity that is conscious.
It is important for Whitehead that consciousness is just another form
of prehension, and not something that exists in a world apart from the
physical in nature. As he writes:
Locke inherited [from Descartes] the dualistic separation of mind from body. If
he had started with the one fundamental notion of an actual entity, the complex
of ideas disclosed in consciousness would have at once turned into the complex
constitution of the actual entity disclosed in its own consciousness, so far as it is
conscious – fitfully, partially, or not at all. (p. 53)
Here is a dramatic statement of monism in Whitehead’s scheme. There is
but one fundamental ontological structure in every actual entity (not two,
one for the mental and one for the physical): the structure of prehension. And consciousness is a specific variation on this one fundamental
structure.
Consciousness and Actuality 231
What variety of prehension, then, is consciousness? Whitehead’s
answer begins after the analysis of propositional feeling:
The nature of consciousness has not yet been adequately analysed. The initial
basic feelings, physical and conceptual, have been mentioned, and so also has the
final synthesis into the affirmation-negation contrast. But between the beginning
and the end of the integration into consciousness, there lies the origination of a
“propositional feeling.” A propositional feeling is a feeling whose objective datum
is a proposition. Such a feeling does not in itself involve consciousness. But all
forms of consciousness arise from ways of integration of propositional feelings
with other feelings, either physical feelings or conceptual feelings. Consciousness
belongs to the subjective forms of such feelings. (p. 256)
The “subjective” form of a feeling is the form of the prehension as it
is absorbed, as it were, by the actual entity (pp. 22, 24), and consciousness is a prehension of a proposition. But there is more. Consciousness
originates, or begins to take form, in awareness of the yes and no, in affirmation and negation. And its final form involves the forms of perception,
imagination, judgment, and the like.
Whitehead finds the crux of consciousness in something utterly
fundamental:
Consciousness is the feeling of negation: in the perception of “the stone as grey,”
such feeling is in barest germ; in the perception of “the stone as not grey,” such
feeling is in full development. Thus the negative perception is the triumph of consciousness. It finally rises to the peak of free imagination, in which the conceptual
novelties search through a universe in which they are not datively exemplified
[that is, part of the datum prehended].
Consciousness is the subjective form involved in feeling the contrast between
the “theory” [or proposition] which may be erroneous and the fact which is
“given.” Thus consciousness involves the rise into importance of the contrast
between the eternal objects designated by the words “any” and “just that.” Conscious perception is, therefore, the most primitive form of judgement. (p. 161)
Notice that negative perception is a positive prehension of a negative fact;
it is not a negative prehension, or not feeling something.
Why is feeling negation at the foundation of consciousness?
Whitehead’s motive here lies in his particular conception of eternal objects or forms, and thus the ontology of propositions, and thus the variety
of propositional feeling that defines consciousness. An eternal object
or form is, for Whitehead, a capacity or potential, and a potential is a
232 Mind World
tendency that might or might not be realized. Accordingly Whitehead
writes:
In awareness actuality, as a process in fact, is integrated with the potentialities
which illustrate either what it is and might not be, or what it is not and might
be. In other words, there is no consciousness without reference to definiteness,
affirmation, and negation. Consciousness is how we feel the affirmation-negation
contrast. Conceptual feeling is the feeling of an unqualified negation; that is
to say, it is the feeling of a definite eternal object with the definite extrusion
of any particular realization. Consciousness requires that the objective datum
should involve (as one side of a contrast) a qualified negative determined to
some definite situation. (p. 243)
So consciousness, or “awareness,” always involves some feeling of the contrast between actuality and potentiality. This is the fundamental ontological
structure of consciousness: it is a prehension of this contrast. To embellish
Whitehead’s example (quoted earlier from p. 161): when I have a perception of “the stone as gray,” I have an awareness of the stone’s actually
being determined as gray and therein potentially being not determined
as gray (say, if the stone’s temperature changed sufficiently to alter its
color). Husserl would have said this awareness of potentiality is part of the
“horizon” of the awareness of actuality.8 Presumably, Whitehead thinks
this “horizonal” awareness of potential negative facts is characteristic of
consciousness but not other types of prehension.
Specifically, consciousness always involves feeling a proposition. And
on Whitehead’s analysis, the ontology of propositions is that of a contrast
between actuality and potentiality, namely, actual entities and forms:
[T]he many components of a complex datum have a unity: this unity is a “contrast” of entities. For example, a proposition is, in a sense, a “contrast.” The most
important of such “contrasts” is the “affirmation-negation” contrast in which a
proposition and a nexus obtain synthesis in one datum, the members of the nexus
being the “logical subjects” of the proposition. (p. 24)
When “different” actual entities are formed into a complex, the resulting
unity depends on the contrast between the entities combined. A proposition combines actual entities with eternal objects, which contrast with
each other precisely because the former are actual and the latter are not.
This is an ontologically fundamental contrast: between beings that are
realized (affirmation) and beings that are not yet realized (negation).
Whitehead claims, then, that consciousness arises most fundamentally in
“feeling” this contrast in the constitution of a proposition. The form of
Consciousness and Actuality 233
(form + actual entity) (propositional feeling) act of consciousness
proposition
negation-affirmation
figure 7.4. The form of consciousness.
consciousness is depicted in Figure 7.4, where an act of consciousness is
a type of actual occasion.
Formal and Material Ontology of Consciousness
