goal of PACIS is that of a “formal” ontology rather than that of a “material”
science like biology.
5. The extant ontology of PACIS develops this ontological architecture, in a
particular system of categories, with an eye to both Anaximander and
Whitehead. The PACIS scheme, and its Anaximandrian form, are expounded
in D. W. Smith 1997. There are important differences between the PACIS
system and the Whitehead system. I note one problematic feature of Whitehead’s treatment of forms: insofar as forms are prehended, they are entities;
but insofar as forms are “pure potentials” for determinateness, they seem to
be modes or ways of becoming. The PACIS system clearly distinguishes these
phenomena.
6. See Dretske 1981.
7. The case for nonpropositional intentional acts is detailed in Smith and
McIntyre 1982 and D. W. Smith 1989. The former book integrates a
Husserlian model of intentionality with Jaakko Hintikka’s model of propositional attitudes: compare Hintikka 1969. For Hintikka, intentionality is
analyzed as propositionality, so that an attitude of belief is in effect directed
toward a range of possible states of affairs or “worlds” (compatible with the
content of belief). Such doxastically possible states of affairs resemble the
“potentialities” that Whitehead speaks of. Even if seeing a lizard is not a
propositional act, though, it may be analyzed as embracing a “horizon” of
possible states of affairs in which a lizard is potentially before the perceiver.
8. See Smith and McIntyre 1982 for a detailed reconstruction of Husserl’s
notion of horizon.
9. This reflexive structure of consciousness is studied in D. W. Smith 1989:
chap. 2.
10. See Miller 1984 for a precise reconstruction of Husserl’s analysis here. On
the proposal I am noting, with an eye to Whitehead, what we experience as
a reflexive awareness within the act of perception is analyzed into smaller
“awareness” in the form of retentions and protentions. The problem for this
240 Mind World
proposal is that we really are not aware of these distinct phases of retention and protention, and so the reflexive character that we experience in
conscious perception is analyzed into “awareness” that we do not actually
experience. These issues are discussed in Chapter 3.
11. The alternative model of intentionality is developed in Smith and McIntyre
1982, integrating a Husserlian model of intention via sense and a Hintikkian
model of propositional attitudes as unfolding an array of possible states of
affairs or “worlds.” Compare Hintikka 1969. My concern here is how to understand what Whitehead means by “potentials,” if not something definable
in more recent modal ontology. In the PACIS ontology, sketched in D. W.
Smith 1997, intentional contents or meanings are treated as entities that are
dependent on acts of consciousness and do the work of “intending” entities
within consciousness.
References
Bergson, H. 1991. Matter and Memory. Translated by Nancy Margaret Paul and W.
Scott Palmer from the French 5th edition of 1908. New York: Zone Books.
French original, 1896.
Dretske, F. 1981. Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
1995. Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hintikka, J. 1969. Models for Modalities. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Mayr, E., and P. D. Ashlock. 1991. Principles of Systematic Zoology. 2nd ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
McTaggart, J. M. E. 1927. The Nature of Existence. Vol. 2. Edited by C. D. Broad.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, I. 1984. Husserl, Perception and Temporal Awareness. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Port, R. F., and T. van Gelder, eds. 1995. Mind and Motion: Explorations in the
Dynamics of Cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Russell, B. 1971. “The Philosophy of Logical Atomism.” 1918. In Russell, Logic
and Knowledge: Essays, 1901–1950, edited by Robert C. Marsh. New York:
Capricorn Books, G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
Smith, B., and D. W. Smith. 1995. The Cambridge Companion to Husserl. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, D. W. 1989. The Circle of Acquaintance. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
1995. “Mind and Body.” In B. Smith and D. W. Smith, eds., The Cambridge Companion to Husserl, pp. 323–93. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
1997. “Being and Basis.” Unpublished manuscript, extending my presentation
under the same title at the Second European Congress for Analytic Philosophy, Leeds, England, 5–7 August 1996.
Consciousness and Actuality 241
Smith, D. W., and R. McIntyre. 1982. Husserl and Intentionality. Dordrecht: D.
Reidel.
Whitehead, A. N. 1978. Process and Reality. Edited by David Ray Griffin and Donald
W. Sherburne. New York: Free Press, Macmillan. First edition, 1929.
Wittgenstein, L. 1994. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Translated by D. F. Pears and
B. F. McGuinness. London: Routledge. German original, 1921.
8
Basic Categories
Abstract. This essay pursues basic ontological categories. The strategy is to
develop a sense of systematic ontology by crafting a series of increasingly
sophisticated category schemes. We move from an austere scheme of physical
particles and sets to the traditional categories of substance and attribute,
to a modern view of modality and intentionality, to the distinction between
formal and material categories, and various candidates thereof, to a notion
of categorial “depth.” Along the way we keep an eye out for where mind
or consciousness falls in each category scheme. This study indicates that a
piecemeal ontology will not deal adequately with basic ontological structures, including the place of consciousness in the world. The methodological lesson to be learned is that the systematic organization of categories is
crucial to the practice of ontology.
Segue. In previous essays we explored structures of consciousness and
different types of ontology that might help to account for features of
Parts of this chapter follow a series of four lectures I gave at the 1997 Bolzano International
Schools in Cognitive Analysis at the conference “Categories: Ontological Perspectives in
Knowledge Representation,” Bolzano, Italy, 15–19 September 1997. The chapter also re-
flects a series of two lectures I gave as “Where Mind Meets World” in January 2001 at the
University of Miami. This chapter benefited from the discussion on those occasions. In
the background lie eighteen years of invaluable discussion with colleagues in the Ontek
research program in computational phenomenological ontology: my thanks to Charles W.
Dement, Peter Woodruff, Peter Simons, and Steve DeWitt, for wide-ranging discussions of
grand metaphysical issues.
See D. W. Smith 1997 on the ontology of “being and basis,” featuring basic “modes
of being.” See Simons 1994–95 with a partial list of the categories, which I call “modes
of being.” Both of these presentations sketch aspects of the system of ontology developed
