within the research program at Ontek Corporation in the early 1990s. Much of the groundwork for that system was developed in my weekly discussions with Charles W. Dement of
Ontek. The conception of ontological systematics evolved within the research at Ontek in
the 1990s.
242
Basic Categories 243
consciousness including its intentionality and its dependence on both neural activity and cultural background. In this essay we turn exclusively to the
problem of developing a detailed category scheme that allows us to deal
with a variety of structures of the world, including the fundamental ontological differences among causal relations in nature, intentional relations
in consciousness, social relations in culture – and ultimately with the organization of very basic categories or modes-of-being, including dependence,
intentionality, unity, and process.
In this chapter we explore a series of category schemes drawn, with creative interpretation, from prominent systems of ontology discernible in
Quine, Aristotle, Descartes, Husserl, and Whitehead. The point is to assess the categories and architectures in these schemes by studying the
systems in proximity to one another. Along the way, we note where mind
or consciousness would fit into each scheme, keeping an eye on where
phenomenology intersects with categorial ontology.
This series of category schemes looks toward the ideal of a comprehensive, up-to-date system of categories sensitive to the most basic structures
we find in the world around us, including our own conscious experience.
From this study we hope to learn something about ontological “systematics,” about the organization of categories in a basic ontology.
The notion of ontological categories once seemed to me the least illuminating part of philosophy: a mere list of broad kinds of things. However, by comparing different category schemes, with an eye to concrete
things in everyday life, we may come to realize that the organization we
posit among basic categories sharply defines the form of the world as we
know it. That strangely abstract level of reflection, I think, we need in
philosophy today, not least in order to reassess naturalism and our theory of mind. The explorations here are meant to proceed in this spirit of
developing a greater sense of system in ontology.
Systematic Ontology and Category Schemes
In biology systematics is defined as “the science of the diversity of organisms.”1 Systematics classifies organisms into species and larger (and
smaller) taxa, ranks taxa in categories, traces the evolutionary descent
of species, and decides what determines the identity of a species, a taxon,
a category, and so on. According to current evolutionary biology, each
species has a treelike path of descent from other species; this path of
phylogenetic descent is called its “clade.” There have been vigorous debates about whether a species is defined properly in terms of phenotype
244 Mind World
(observable characteristics), genotype (genetic constitution), molecular
constitution, or clade and about what determines various biological
groups and their organization. In biological systematics the term “category” is used not simply for important groups or taxa, but for “rank in a
hierarchy of levels to which taxa are assigned, such as subspecies, species,
and genus.”2 Thus, there is far more to biological systematics than a listing of species: the definition and organization of groups is crucial, even
in determining what makes a group of organisms a species.
Now, philosophy needs to develop its own ontological systematics, which
we may define as the theory of the diversity of basic kinds of entities in
the world – not just living things but anything at all. Such a “science of
diversity” is what this essay is exploring.
A basic ontology, let us say, is a theory about the most basic structures
of the world, of what there is, beginning with the most basic divisions
among things in the world. Within traditional philosophy, basic ontology begins with basic categories of entities, and in the idea of a scheme of
categories we find philosophy’s first approach to an ontological systematics.
The explicit conception of ontological categories began with Aristotle,
who posited the categories of“substance” and various types of“attribute.”
Many philosophers implicitly assume categorial distinctions, as between
universal and particular, or between mind and body, or between fact and
value. Ontology becomes systematic, however, when it organizes such distinctions, seeking a unified system of divisions that define very basic kinds
or categories of entities. A system or scheme of categories organizes such
fundamental divisions in the world, somewhat as biological systematics
organizes fundamental divisions in the biosphere.
Roughly, ontological categories are abstract kinds defining entities with
fundamental roles in the structure of the world. Logically, they are designated by general terms or common nouns such as “individual,” “attribute,” “relation,” “event,” and “causation.” It is the task of basic ontology to specify categories and their roles in defining the structure of the
world. We use terms like “entity” and “thing” in the widest possible sense
to cover anything in the world, including whatever falls under basic categories – things as diverse as relations and events, and not merely palpable
objects like stones or sticks or birds or people.
A well-formulated basic ontology will include a scheme of categories of
things in the world plus a system of principles about entities in the categories (and how they relate to each other, if they do). If a theory is
articulated as a formal axiom system, it is launched by a list of terms and
a list of axioms, from which logic permits the deduction of theorems.
Basic Categories 245
In principle, a basic ontology may be expressed in the style of a formal
theory, with a list of category words and a list of axiomatic principles.
In practice, however, ontologies (their categories and their principles)
are usually expressed informally, not least because we must capture intuitions whose axiomatization is itself in question, but also because we
do not understand categories initially – naturally and intuitively – in a
formal axiom system. An axiom system is something we aim for when
we seek a certain type of precision. In any case, whatever the style of
expression, a category scheme is concerned to map out the most basic
divisions among things in the world, divisions taken for granted in other
ranges of theory. Principles about things falling in these divisions then
ensue.
Because categories reflect the most basic divisions among entities, they
are the most basic part of the structure of the world, and so specifying
a system of categories is the most basic part of an ontology. However,
what counts as a category will itself vary with the system of categories.
For how we divide the world into basic categories of things-in-general
will depend on how we think the world is structured, even at the basic
level of categories. Is the world entirely composed of particles in physical
space-time? Is it composed rather of ideas in many minds or perhaps
in one great mind? Or is it composed, as some seem to imply recently,
of evolving modes of discourse or cultural practice, from the linguistic
to the political? Or is it composed entirely of temporal process itself,
rather than the discrete things we encounter in everyday business, either
physical objects or ideas or political institutions like traffic laws? What
types of distinctions among such things define categories?
When empirically minded philosophers and scientists attack “metaphysics,” it is usually on the assumption that metaphysics is an a priori
discipline putting forth speculations that precede and outrun all empirical observations, even in principle, or at least all current scientific results.
Is basic categorial ontology a priori and speculative in that way? I think
not. We begin with a large base of empirical knowledge, ranging from
our everyday, commonsense knowledge of things around us to our best
current science. The task then is to ferret out what seem to be the most
basic categories assumed, often implicitly, in that knowledge base. And
then the task is to organize these categories in a systematic way, thus
characterizing the basic structures of the world to the best of our current knowledge. Categorial ontology, carried out in this way, is not blind
speculation from the armchair; it is a form of theory in the best sense,
abstract theory about what there is in the world, but it is an abstraction
