246 Mind World
from empirically gained knowledge, spread out from common sense into
science.
Basic ontology is broadly empirical in this way, or a posteriori, because
we all have acquired a mass of knowledge from our culture and our own
experience long before we can begin to write out an ontology. Still, basic
ontology, beginning with categories, is not simply generated by making
observations or running experiments. Rather, with a range of experience
and experiments under our belts, we begin to fit an organization – a
structure of patterns – onto our knowledge of what there is in the world
around us. And this task is the proper business of ontology, as distinct
from either empirical science or journalism or humanistic interpretation
of cultural phenomena. Somewhat as physicists cast about for appropriate
mathematics to organize their results into a proper theory, so ontologists
cast about – at a high level of abstraction – for different categories and
organizations of categories. In this way ontology is broadly a priori. But
then ontology is to one extent a priori and to another extent a posteriori. As W. V. Quine has characterized knowledge formation, there is no
sharp distinction between those elements of knowledge that we might
call a priori and a posteriori. The more a priori principles concern abstract forms, including mathematical and logical forms, but also basic
ontological structures and categories. And the more a posteriori principles concern more concrete forms of entities we encounter, to begin with
in sense perception.3 The pedagogical problem for the philosopher in
modern culture is that ontology is often a more abstract kind of theory
than we are used to, even in mathematical physics. (Mathematical language is not the only measure of abstract thinking; witness the poetic talk
of “being” in the contemplative disciplines.)
Methodology aside, the best way to understand what is basic in ontology, and what constitutes an ontological category, is to study a variety of
category schemes.
Particles and Sets (Quine)
We begin with a lean and modern category scheme, abstracted from the
philosophy of Willard Van Orman Quine (1908–2000). This scheme will
serve as a foil to the more complex schemes we address along our way.
W. V. Quine has been the most influential of recent thinkers carrying
forth the philosophical legacy of modern logic (since Frege, Whitehead
and Russell, Godel, Tarski, et al.). Quine has put forth an extremely eco- ¨
nomical ontology reflecting a basic naturalism informed by the methods
Basic Categories 247
of logic in service to mathematics, itself in service to physical theory. To
parody:
The universe is composed of physical particles.
Their behavior is described by mathematics.
Mathematics is reducible to set theory plus logic.
Logic consists in transformations on sentences, which are patterns of
sound, ink, or information bits in brains or computers, all composed
of physical particles.
So all there is in the world are particles and sets.
Quine’s actual views are more nuanced.4 But for our purposes here, let
us address the austere variant of Quinean ontology, which is nearly a
commonplace world view for many philosophers today who seek hardnosed science governed by exact mathematics in accord with precise firstorder logic.
On the received view, all the sciences rest on physics, as our overall
physical theory builds from particles in fields to atomic and molecular
structures, to chemical interactions, to biological activities and evolution, to psychological and social phenomena in biological organisms and
species, and on up the scale to cosmological phenomena.5 In short, today’s naturalism holds that the universe in its entirety is composed of
physical particles in physical fields: in a gloss, “particles in the void” – as
the atomists of ancient Greece guessed. What distinguishes today’s physical ontology from the ancient (besides a lot of experimental detail) is
mathematics: the laws of gravitation, electromagnetism, quantum waveparticle superposition and collapse, and so on are formulated in terms of
mathematical structures (starting with the calculus). And on the standard
view, all mathematics reduces to set theory. And all mathematical proof
follows logic, which is systematized today in first-order logic. Accordingly,
the scientific ontologist structures this view of the world with the Quinean
category scheme of particles and sets.
The category scheme in this ontology is remarkably simple:
A Quinean Category Scheme
Categories
1. Particle
2. Set
The great virtue of this scheme is its economy. Ockham’s razor has
been deftly applied to our contemporary scientific world view. William
of Ockham, in the thirteenth century, pared the reigning Aristotelian
248 Mind World
ontology down to the lone category of “substance,” or concrete particulars. Quine, in the twentieth century, added one category of abstract
particulars – namely, sets – to accommodate modern mathematics.
According to this Quinean ontology, there are no universals (kinds,
qualities, relations) beyond sets and ordered tuples (universals “in extension”). And there are no modalities such as necessity (which apply
to entities such as propositions or states of affairs, whose identity conditions are for Quine too unclear to be acceptable). And there are no
mental events or ideas unless they reduce to the behavior of particles
in neurons or perhaps computers. Nor is there any mental representation or intentionality beyond physical processes in a brain or computer.
If consciousness is to be accommodated in this ontology, it will have to
be defined somehow in terms of patterns (defined in terms of sets) of
physical processes of particles in neurons in brains (or some other extraterrestrial physical processes).
Are there categories, then, in the world? If categories are high-level types
(kinds“in intension”), then the Quinean ontology posits no such entities.
Instead, there are two “categorial” supersets: the set of all particles (for
all space-time) and the set of all sets (enter set theory to resolve potential
paradoxes).
The preceding scheme can be seen as a twentieth-century mathematical-scientific heir to Plato’s original distinction between the concrete
and the ideal. As we work through more complex category schemes,
we may watch how further categorial distinctions bring in more and
more ontological structure. The challenge for this austere scheme is to
make the case that we can really do without these further ontological
distinctions. I think we cannot, contrary to our neo-Quinean naturalistic
Zeitgeist.
Substance and Attribute (Aristotle)
Categorial distinctions were already at work in Plato, not least in discussions of “the one and the many,” as in the Sophist. Yet the theory of
ontological categories began officially with Aristotle in the Categories (ca.
350 b.c.). The Greek term kategoriai originally meant what one can say
against someone in court. Aristotle offered a list of ten “types of predicate,” which he sometimes called simply “the predicates,” or kategoriai,
and which later philosophers came to call the “categories.”Thus, Aristotle
redefined the term for his purposes to mean the kinds of things one can
say about something (kinds of predication) and thus the basic kinds of
Basic Categories 249
CATEGORIES Examples
