We may draw the main outlines of Husserl’s system of ontological categories, then, as shown in Figure 8.5 (forewarning that Husserl used the
term “category” in a more limited way).
In this ontology, Socrates is or was a concrete or “real” (reale) entity in
space-time – a “fact” (Tatsache), in Husserl’s idiom, or, as we might say, a
“factual” entity. Socrates belonged to the species humanity. For Husserl
(like Plato), this species is an “ideal” (ideale) entity not in space-time –
an “essence” (Wesen, from was-sein, what is) or, in the older idiom, a “universal.” But for Husserl (somewhat like Aristotle), Socrates is a human
if and only if a concrete instance of humanity (an instance of the ideal
species) is “in” Socrates: according to Husserl’s ontology of parts, this instance is a dependent part, or“moment” (Moment), of Socrates. Meanings
(sense, Sinn) are also “ideal” entities not in space-time, but they are categorially distinct from essences. Where essences are properties (or kinds
or relations) of concrete individuals (or events), meanings are contents
CATEGORIES Examples
1. fact concrete entities: in time or space-time
2. essence ideal species: universals, eidos, forms
3. sense ideal meanings: intentional contents, propositions
figure 8.5. The basic Husserlian category scheme.
258 Mind World
of intentional acts of consciousness. Thus, the role of properties is to
qualify individuals, whereas the role of meanings is not to qualify or “determine” (bestimmen) individuals but rather to direct mental acts toward
their objects, to “present” or “represent” or “intend” objects “as” experienced. Specifically (to compare with semantics), the proposition (Satz)
“Socrates is a human” is a propositional sense (Sinn) that represents or
“intends” (meinen, vermeinen, intendieren) the state of affairs (Sachverhalt)
that Socrates is a human. This proposition is the content (Inhalt) of my
act (Akt) of thinking or judging that Socrates is a human, and it is thus expressed by the sentence “Socrates is a human” (an expression, Ausdruck,
or sign, Zeiche). The proposition in my thinking “intends” the state of
affairs, which I thereby think “of” or “about.”
Many analytic philosophers today (following Russell) take “propositions” to be made up of properties and sometimes individuals, so that a
proposition is in effect a possible or putative (“proposed”) state of affairs.
This terminology is unfortunate, for it ignores the distinction between
the content and the object of an act of thinking. As often observed, the
same object can be represented by different concepts: we can think of
Socrates as (under the concept) “the teacher of Plato” or as“the husband
of Xanthippe.” By the same token, the same state of affairs in the world
can be represented or intended by different propositions in various acts
of thinking: say, where I think “Socrates argued in the marketplace” and
you think “the husband of Xanthippe argued in the markeplace.” (Allow
that my concept “Socrates” is a type of concept tied to my background
conception of Socrates, formed from my studies and not reducible to
a descriptive concept “the so and so.”) We should thus distinguish ontologically the proposition that serves as content and the state of affairs
that serves as object of a propositional act or attitude. In the preceding
Husserlian scheme, propositions and their constituent concepts fall under the category Sense, whereas states of affairs are formed from properties falling under the category Essence and individuals under the category
Fact. (Russell used the English term “fact” where Wittgenstein used the
term Tatsache, for an actual state of affairs [bestehende Sachverhalt], with a
certain form, whereas Husserl used Tatsache for an actual concrete object
of any type and reserved Sachverhalt for a state of affairs.11 More on
states of affairs later.)
As in the Logical Investigations, Husserl took forms of language to express forms of sense carried as intentional content by experiences of
judgment and perception underlying speech acts of assertion. Husserl offered a complex philosophy of logic, well aware of the new logic of Frege
Basic Categories 259
et alii and the emerging set theory of Cantor et alii. But Husserl dug into
the cognate ontology more deeply than other philosophers of logic. In
any event, our concern here is with ontology rather than philosophy of
logic.
For our purposes, let us assume certain priorities in the preceding
category scheme. The most basic things in the world are concrete or
“factual” entities in space-time. Essences are essences of concrete entities. And senses are senses of various entities including concrete entities,
their essences, states of affairs (formed from concrete entities and
essences), and even senses. So essences presuppose or depend on “factual” entities, and senses presuppose or depend on facts and essences and
combinations thereof. (Husserl experimented with several orders of priority. One reading of his “transcendental idealism” says that everything
depends on intentional content or sense. These issues we leave aside
here, assuming a view of priority closer to Aristotle’s.)
Mind has a salient position in the basic Husserlian ontology, drawn
into the world with the category Sense. On Husserl’s general theory of
intentionality, an act of consciousness – a type of “fact” – is intentional,
a consciousness “of” something, just in case it has or is correlated with a
sense, where its sense prescribes or represents an appropriate object (if
such exists). Thus, an act of consciousness“intends” or is directed toward
an object x if and only if it has a sense that represents x. So consciousness
enters Husserl’s categorial scheme with the category of sense, or intentional contents. Of course, Husserl’s theory of intentionality via sense
is a hallmark of his work and one of his major innovations. Husserlian
phenomenology analyzes consciousness by analyzing the various structures of sense that we find in our acts of consciousness. Phenomenology
is, in Husserl, a logic or semantics of experience. In the preceding category scheme, if an act of consciousness (a concrete event) is directed via
a sense toward a state of affairs, then this relationship involves entities
from all three categories.
Formal and Material Essences (Husserl Ramified)
Husserl drew a crucial and innovative distinction between formal and
material ontology, specifically between formal and material essences. Although the distinction between form and content in language has been
familiar in logical and linguistic theory at least since Aristotle, a clear ontological distinction between the formal and material aspects of the world
took centuries to evolve. In Husserl the distinction is finally explicit. In
260 Mind World
Descartes there is a place for the distinction. In Leibniz and Kant there
are anticipations, but the distinction is limited to ideas or “phenomena.”
In Husserl, by contrast, the different levels of experience, content, language, and world are explicitly emphasized, and formal structure itself
appears in the world beyond language and thought.
Instructively, I think, the formal-material distinction is “shown but not
said”in Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921). Thus,
in Wittgenstein’s scheme, form – he calls it “logical form” – applies to
propositions and also to the states of affairs they “picture.” Indeed, according to Wittgenstein, the proposition (Satz) “Rab” pictures and so
represents the state of affairs (Sachverhalt) [Rab] precisely because the
proposition has the same form as the state of affairs it represents. We shall
not linger here with the problems in Wittgenstein’s picture theory of representation (which he famously abandoned). But those familiar with the
Tractatus should recognize the all-important role of form in the structure
of the world. Now, Husserl mapped out this terrain in greater detail some
twenty years earlier.12
Whereas Wittgenstein was attentive to details of logical form – from the
new predicate logic of Frege et alii – in distinguishing objects, relations,
states of affairs, and picturing, Husserl recognized these forms but was far
more expansive on how broadly logical form plays across the spectrum
of logic, ontology, epistemology, and phenomenology. Here I want to
bring out the structure of the rich ontology distributed through Husserl’s
