Types of Formal Essence (Husserl Ordered)
Husserl developed a wide notion of formal essence, or form, wider than
that explained just previously. He merged “pure logic” with formal ontology, under which he placed not only the formal categories of states of
affairs and their constituents but also mathematical forms of quantity and
order and ontological forms of part and dependence.13 With some creative interpretation, we may thus distinguish four types of formal essence.
Adding these distinctions, we may order the Husserlian category
scheme in the way shown in Figure 8.7. All these types are discussed
in Husserl’s texts, but their organization is unspecified. Husserl does
not offer an architectonic (say, like Kant’s diamond of four groups of
three categories in the Critique of Pure Reason, 1781/1787.) However,
we may develop the systematics of Husserl’s ontology, I propose, by organizing the categories in the preceding scheme. This architecture is
itself a theoretical hypothesis. The aim here is to build on Husserl’s results by explicitly positing a certain ordering or ranking of these various
categories.
A select group of formal essences in the Husserlian scheme are those
we may call predicative or syntactic essences:
Individual, Species, Property, Relation, State of Affairs.
These essences are ontological forms (=genera) that mirror logical forms of
expressions (names, predicates, and sentences). And Husserl’s discussion
264 Mind World
CATEGORIES
1. fact [concrete or real entity]
2. essence [ideal entity]
2.1. formal essence or form
2.1.1. predicative or syntactic form
1. individual
a. substrate [independent individual]
b. moment [dependent individual]
c. event [dependent occurence]
2. species
3. property/quality
4. relation
5. state of affairs
6. connection: and, or, not, if-then (in states of affairs)
2.1.2. mathematical form
1. unity
2. plurality
3. number
4. set
5. manifold
2.1.3. ontic form
1. mereological form: part, whole
2. dependence
2.1.4. intentional form
1. intentional character
2. intentional relation
2.2. material essence or region
1. nature
a. inanimate
b. animate
2. culture
3. consciousness
3. sense [meaning entity]
1. individual concept, percept,...
2. predicative concept, percept,...
3. proposition
4. connective: “and,” “or,” “not,” “if-then”
figure 8.7. An ordered Husserlian category scheme.
of formal essences (in Ideas I) rests on his extensive prior discussion of
logical structure (in Logical Investigations). Yet these “syntactic”formations
are ontological; they are not grammatical categories of expressions (or
of senses). Thus, Husserl explicitly talks of the “syntactic” form of states of
affairs, and he holds that we have a “categorial intuition” of states of affairs
and their“syntactic”structure. Whereas Wittgenstein in the Tractatus held
Basic Categories 265
that we can merely “show” such forms, Husserl held that we can in some
way “see” them, or grasp them intuitively, and of course we can “say” or
express them in language.
Yet Husserl’s conception of logic was wider than, say, that of Frege
and Russell and Whitehead.14 In the Prolegomena of the Logical Investigations, Husserl defined “pure” logic as a mathesis universalis, suggesting
that“mathematical”form is logic’s aim. Here is the core of the distinction
between formal and material “essence” (drawn in Ideas I). Still, mathematical forms such as Number and Set have their own ontological roles,
in quantifying and grouping entities in any material region. Husserl took
geometry to analyze the material essence of space-time or spatiotemporal
things; yet the mathematical form – of a physical shape of a physical object in space-time – ought to be a formal essence. Generally, for Husserl,
mathematical forms define a type of formal essence distinct from that
of the predicative (and connective) “syntactic” ontological forms that
structure states of affairs.15
In the second of the Logical Investigations Husserl addressed “ideal
species” (called “essences” in Ideas I), treating them rather like Platonic
forms. But if whiteness per se is an ideal species, this whiteness in this piece
of paper is a “moment” of the paper, rather like an Aristotelian universal.
Husserl borrows here from both Plato and Aristotle. Then in the third
of the Logical Investigations Husserl analyzed the formal essences PartWhole and Dependence-Independence, in terms of which a “moment”
is defined as a dependent part. He also uses dependence extensively
when he considers dependencies among the mental and the physical (as
mapped out in Smith 1995).
In the fifth of the Logical Investigations and again in Ideas I, Husserl
analyzed intentionality. Intentionality is part of the material essence
of an act of consciousness. Yet, I believe, its form must be a formal
essence. On Husserl’s analysis, an act’s directedness cannot be treated
as a proper relation to its object: because its object need not exist; because
the directedness involves a sense that represents the object, so the act is
“related”to its object only “under”that sense; because the directedness itself fans out into various possible circumstances; because the directedness
involves a “horizon” of further possibilities about the object “intended.”
Intentional directedness is thus “relation-like,” but it is not strictly a relation, which entails that intentionality has a distinctive form, or formal
essence.16
Factoring out different aspects of form in this way, we may divide the
Husserlian formal essences, or forms, into four types indicated above.
266 Mind World
1. The predicative or “syntactic” forms reflect logical syntax: Individual; Species, Property, Relation; State of Affairs; Connection.
