mathematics in the late nineteenth century. Indeed, that is what Husserl –
mathematician turned philosopher – brought into categorial ontology.
Accordingly, in the Husserlian category scheme reconstructed earlier, we
find much greater complexity than in prior ontologies. Emerging there
is a vision of higher-order categories interlinked by distinctive ontological
ties among entities in these categories – ties ranging from predication
to mathematical structuring to part-whole composition to ontological
dependence to intentional representation. Let us step back and appraise
this complexity.
The ordered Husserlian scheme begins with the distinction among
the categories of Fact, Essence, and Sense – requiring that these kinds
of entities be interrelated. Then Essence is divided into the categories of
Formal Essence and Material Essence – requiring that forms apply to entities in different material domains. Then Formal Essence is divided into
some four types of Form – requiring inter alia that various forms define
entities differently. So there are several importantly different types of types
of entities: categories of types of entities. These higher-order categories do
not emerge from a putatively exhaustive listing of entities posited in a
wide-ranging ontology. Rather, they emerge through systematic analysis
of quite different types of things: logical structure, mathematical structure, predication of universals in particulars, part-whole composition,
existential dependence, and (not least) structures of intentionality. It is
in Husserl’s appraisal of these diverse things that we begin to discern a
scheme of higher-order categories – emerging piecemeal without being
so christened. I believe this categorial complexity in Husserl’s ontology
is something new in the history of philosophy: this kind of ontological
systematics, with this degree of organizational complexity. (The story is
far from finished.)
For the Aristotelian, we noted, different categories may reflect different types of predication as we move from species to quantities to qualities,
and so on. What is remarkable, in the ordered Husserlian scheme, is the
complexity of the links (can we say “formal relations”?) among entities in
different categories.
Basic Categories 273
Consider the following basic principles that begin to articulate the
ontological links among entities in the different categories assumed in
the Husserlian scheme:
1. Essences are predicated of entities:
(a) of concrete individuals and events (“factual” entities have
essences),
(b) of essences (essences have essences),
(c) of senses (senses have essences).
2. Material essences “determine” or qualify entities that have them.
(a) Natural essences qualify entities in nature, in space-time.
(b) Cultural essences qualify entities in society, in cultural systems.
(c) Consciousness’s essences qualify entities in conscious experience.
3. Formal essences “define” or form entities that have them.
(a) Predicative essences form entities in states of affairs.
(b) Mathematical essences form entities in various mathematical
structures, such as numerical order, geometrical order, and
sets.
(c) Ontic essences form entities in dependencies.
(d) Intentional essences form entities in intentional structures: as
subjects, contents, or objects of intentional experiences.
4. Senses “mean” or represent entities.
(a) Acts of consciousness “contain” or “entertain” or invoke
senses.
(b) An act of consciousness is directed through its sense toward
that object (if any) which is represented by its sense.
The categories of Fact, Essence, and Sense are themselves defined largely
by such links. These fundamentally different links among entities distributed among the different categories – the links indicated by italics in
the principles in the preceding list – entail a complex structure in the
category scheme. Rather than a sequence of categories, then, we find a
matrix of several dimensions, as entities of different categorial type link
or apply to others in different ways. An exact analysis would be a next step
in spelling out the ontology – details far beyond the scope of the present
essay.
Whitehead, another mathematician turned philosopher, parsed the
structure of the world differently than the preceding. In the Whiteheadian category scheme, however, we find an important architectural principle. The category of Becoming is the most basic, the “deep” structure
274 Mind World
of all being, and other types of category are built up from there. Without lingering over the details, we can begin to regroup basic categories
with an eye to our reconstructions of both Husserlian and Whiteheadian
category schemes.
Whiteheadian forms and Husserlian essences group together, allowing subdivisions like those presented here. Husserlian senses are a more
articulate part of consciousness than Whitehead allowed (compare my
“Consciousness and Actuality” in Chapter 7). What I would like to stress
most, however, is the architectural principle. As Becoming is basic in the
Whiteheadian scheme, I submit that certain formal essences are basic in
the ordered Husserlian scheme: some categories are, in George Orwell’s
phrase, more equal than others. Of the many categories we have considered, I submit, the most basic include those of Predicative Form (being
thus and so), Ontic Form (Dependence, Composition), Mathematical
Form (Number, Set, . . .), and Intentional Form (Sense, Representation).
These types of form we may see as factoring Becoming: these most basic
forms are “modes of being” that formally define what it is to be an entity,
that is, of a type higher than these.(Compare D. W. Smith 1997.) Here in
Whitehead’s ontology we see another great leap in categorial complexity,
in ontological systematics. Unlike Husserl’s systematics, however, Whitehead’s organization and typing of categories are explicit – writing from
the heart of modern logic, cognizant of Russell’s type theory, but with an
eye to abstract metaphysics rather than logic and set theory. (A scheme
of basic modes of being is outlined in D. W. Smith 1997. See also Simons
1994–95.)
Whereas Whitehead recognized one form of “becoming” an entity,
defined by a pattern of prehension, I believe we need to recognize fundamentally different types of entity defined by different basic modes of
being. Essences (“eternal forms”), senses (“eternal” contents of thought
or experience), and concrete individuals and events – these importantly
different types of entities are defined differently by basic forms or modesof-being. Thus, concrete entities are formed by their place in space-time,
while essences (kinds, properties, relations) are formed by their place
in predication, and senses (intentional contents) are formed by their
place in intentionality (which is not properly a relation). In the next section we consider a category scheme that simplifies the results gathered
here.
What I hope is growing clearer and clearer is that a rich ontology –
an ontology rich enough in its systematics to capture the diversity of being
around us – requires a category scheme with a lot of structure ordering
