can talk about it: not by saying “this” while pointing a finger as if toward
a bug in one’s hair or head, but by using language in ways diagnosed
by Castaneda et alii, and by expressing phenomenological structures of ˜
experience appropriately.
Indeed, Wittgenstein’s own sensibility about consciousness resonates
eerily in contemporary philosophy of mind:
The feeling of an unbridgeable gulf between consciousness and brain-process:
how does it come about that this does not come into the considerations of our
ordinary life? . . . THIS is supposed to be produced by a process in the brain! –
as it were clutching my forehead. – But what can it mean to speak of “turning my
attention on to my own consciousness”? (Investigations, §412)
The mind-body problem, incorporating (in-corp-orating) today’s “hard”
problem of consciousness, remains puzzling even as we both embrace
neuroscience and turn in phenomenological reflection to the structure
Coda: The Beetle in the Box 287
of consciousness as experienced. This combination of phenomenology
and natural science occupied our attention in the preceding chapters.
And what it means to turn my attention to my own consciousness, and to
its typical structure, is: to practice phenomenology, as it has grown out of
its roots in Husserl’s work and as it has evolved in contemporary modes
of analysis. (Indeed, attention itself has a complex phenomenological
structure that commands our attention in phenomenology: see Gurwitsch
1985 and Smith 2003.)
There is a “picture” of consciousness that we undeniably and correctly
hold, as Wittgenstein explicitly stressed (Investigations, §§422–24). It is
the centerpiece of The Picture, the cartoon early in the present book.
That picture is a part of our background world picture: in precisely the
sense appraised in the essay in Chapter 5 called “Background Ideas,”
which drew on Wittgenstein’s conception of “background” (in On Certainty, 1972/1949–52). So familiar is the picture that our everyday cartoon form canonizes it. (And when did the cartoon idiom develop? How
long after the Cro-Magnon cave drawings?) That picture is a guide to the
phenomeno-onto-logical structures explored in these chapters. There we
find “the beetle in the box”: the content in an act of consciousness in the
surrounding world of nature and culture and language.
References
Bermudez, Jos ´ e Luis. ´ 1998. The Paradox of Self-Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Castaneda, Hector-Neri. ˜ 1966.“‘He’: A Study in the Logic of Self-Consciousness.”
Ratio 8: 130–57.
1968. “On the Phenomeno-Logic of the I.” In Akten des XIX Internationalen
Kongresses fur Philosophie ¨ , 260–66. Reprinted in Q. Cassam, ed., Self-Knowledge.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Gurwitsch, Aron. 1985. Marginal Consciousness. Edited by Lester Embree. Athens:
Ohio University Press.
Hintikka, Jaakko. 1962. Knowledge and Belief. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
1969. Models for Modalities. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Husserl, Edmund. 2001. Logical Investigations. Vols. 1 and 2. New edition, edited
with an introduction by Dermot Moran, and with a preface by Michael
Dummett. London: Routledge. Translated by J. N. Findlay from the revised,
second German edition. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970. German
original, 1900–1, revised 1913 (Prolegomena and Investigations I–V), 1920
(Investigation VI).
Milne, A. A. 1978. Now We Are Six. New York: Dell. First edition, 1927.
Perry, John. 2001. Knowledge, Possibility and Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
288 Mind World
Smith, David Woodruff. 1986. “The Structure of (Self-)Consciousness.” Topoi 5
(2): 149–56.
1989. The Circle of Acquaintance: Perception, Consciousness, and Empathy.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
2003. “The Formal Structure of Context and Context-Awareness.” In Lester
Embree, ed., Gurwitsch’s Relevance for the Cognitive Sciences. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Smith, David Woodruff, and Ronald McIntyre. 1982. Husserl and Intentionality.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1972. On Certainty. Edited by G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H.
von Wright. Translated by Denis Paul and G. E. M. Anscombe. New York:
Harper and Row. First edition, 1969; written 1949–51.
1997. Philosophical Investigations. Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford:
Blackwell. First edition, 1953.
Appendix: Background Conceptions of Ontology,
Phenomenology, Philosophy of Mind, and
Historical Philosophy
In the following remarks I try to outline the broad conceptual, methodological, and historical background assumed in the preceding chapters.
This background is part of the unity of views developing in the chapters
themselves, although the chapters are intended to be accessible without
digging into this background. Of course, one’s own background is often
the most difficult part of one’s philosophy to articulate.
The Theory of Consciousness and World in Recent Philosophy
The headwinds in philosophy are strong. They are the winds of fashion.
Metaphysics has been under suspicion for three centuries, first in the
age of science and recently in the era of cultural interpretation. Yet what
we need in philosophy today is a more systematic ontology, framing a wide
metaphysics that is cognizant of discoveries in physics, neuroscience, and
evolutionary biology alongside analyses of our own consciousness and
our cultural practices and institutions.
Phenomenology has been under suspicion for half a century, as philosophy turned away from conscious experience. The tradition of analytic philosophy turned toward language – ordinary language, symbolic
logic, then computer languages – and then toward naturalism, eyeing
the marvels of quantum mechanics, relativity theory, and evolutionary
biology. Continental philosophy too came to stress language, discourse,
text, and cultural practice over consciousness. Yet what we need today,
to understand the phenomena of consciousness much discussed in recent philosophy of mind oriented to cognitive neuroscience, is a more
289
290 Appendix
systematic phenomenology, framing a careful analysis of structures of
subjective experience.
The yearning for these perspectives is all around us. Famous scientists
wax philosophical in popular surveys of quantum physics, cosmology,
neuroscience, evolutionary biology, dynamical systems (“chaos”). Cognitive scientists, especially philosophers of mind, have rediscovered the
importance of consciousness, the hard problem for once promising functionalist models of mind in computers and human brains.
To deal with the basic forms of reality, philosophy must return to systematic metaphysics or ontology. The denunciations of metaphysics –
