use in these people’s language? – If so it would not be used as the name of
a thing. The thing in the box has no place in the language-game at all; not
even as a something: for the box might even be empty. – No, one can “divide
through” by the thing in the box; it cancels out, whatever it is.
That is to say: if we construe the grammar of the expression of sensation on the model of “object and designation” the object drops out of
consideration as irrelevant.
Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations
Friends of Pooh will know this poem. Friends of another teacher of children (who moved from Austria to England in Pooh’s time) will know
283
284 Mind World
the prose passage about a differently boxed beetle. (Would the serious
Austrian philosopher read English children’s poems? “Lewis Carroll” is
one of the few proper names in the index of the Investigations.)
With his play of the beetle in the box, some think, the Bard of Oxbridge
may have undercut (deconstructed?) the very discipline of phenomenology. I think not, for reasons emerging in the chapters in this volume, and
accordingly I should like to remark briefly, in closing this book, on our
familiar background picture of contents in the “box” of consciousness.
Wittgenstein continued, through the Investigations, to ponder questions of consciousness, privacy, introspection, and their role (if any) in
language – in ways not altogether uncongenial (surprise?) to the present
studies. Contrasting the following questions
“Are these books my books?”
“Is this foot my foot?”
“Is this body my body?”
“Is this sensation my sensation?”
Wittgenstein asked, “Which sensation does one mean by ‘this’ one? That
is: how is one using the demonstrative pronoun here? Certainly otherwise than in, say, the first example! Here confusion occurs because one
imagines that by directing one’s attention to a sensation one is pointing
to it” (1997/1953: §411). I find no such confusion in the careful practice
of phenomenology.
We do direct our attention to our own experiences of sensation,
perception, thought, volition: we do so in reflection in the practice of
phenomenology. And we may aptly use demonstrative pronouns in
phenomenological analysis, as we have in the chapters in this volume:
“In this very experience I see this frog.” When I use this sentence to articulate the structure of my own experience, the second occurrence of the
demonstrative (in “this frog”) articulates my perceptual intention of an
object, whereas the first occurrence of the demonstrative (in “in this experience”) articulates my inner awareness of my perceptual experience.
Notice that there is here no higher-order observation accompanying my
experience, wherein I observe “this experience,” as if mentally pointing
to it while I turn my attention to it, with you-my-reader as if peering over
my mental shoulder as I mentally point. Nor am I using the pronoun
“this” while I demonstrate my experience, say, by pointing to the top of
my head (indicating something happening in my visual cortex an inch
below my fingertip). No, carrying out the phenomenological analysis is
not like that. (“What is it like?”) It is not like looking and pointing at
Coda: The Beetle in the Box 285
the contents in one’s own private box of consciousness. Analysis of experience is rather more like attending to what you are saying and then
reflecting on its form and meaning. Thus, we have all experienced perceptions like that exampled. We may call upon our familiarity with such
experiences (by virtue of inner awareness) and our recollections of such
experiences. And we then try to describe, interpret, and analyze the form
and meaning or content of such experiences. One technique of explication and analysis is to formulate a phenomenological description of
the form: “In this experience I see this frog.” In using this sentence I
am relying on my readers’ familiarity with that type of experience, and
I am using that form of sentence to articulate that familiar form of consciousness, including the form of inner awareness of the experience. The
first-person methodology here spreads from the singular to the plural: I
am talking to you. Similarly, Marcel Proust’s first-person descriptions of
his own relived experiences, in In Search of Lost Time, invite the reader to
explore those types of experience as if they were the reader’s own. But
we readers don’t think Proust is pointing his finger at his remembered
experiences!
There is no confusion in either use of the demonstrative pronoun
in the phenomenological description,“In this experience I see this frog.”
Indeed, a number of philosophers have by now used the logic or grammar of demonstratives in the analysis of consciousness, assuaging
Wittgensteinian worries about our inner ostension of our own mental
states or their contents. (If we can’t point at them, we can’t talk about
them? And we can’t direct our attention to them either?)
After Jaakko Hintikka (1962, 1969) developed a modal logic of
(sentences ascribing) intentional attitudes including perception, HectorNeri Castaneda ( ˜ 1966, 1968) laid out an analysis of the use of “indicator”
and “quasi-indicator” pronouns in attributions of belief or perception.
Thus, when Hector says, “David thinks that he himself is a phenomenologist,” Hector ascribes to David a thought David would express by saying,“I
[myself] am a phenomenologist.” And when Hector says,“David sees that
this* frog [before David himself] is jumping,” Hector ascribes to David
a visual judgment David would express by saying, “This frog [before me
myself] is jumping.” Castaneda ˜ ’s aim was partly to resolve the quandary of
“private” language about mental states, by showing how our language allows us to attribute to others their own “private” perspectives, in ways that
are already familiar in ordinary language (regimented a bit for logical
purposes). Indeed, half a century earlier, Husserl had already begun the
appraisal of the use of “this” to express the content of one’s perception
286 Mind World
in saying “This blackbird flies up” (Logical Investigations, 1900–1; I,
§26, V, §5.).
Nodding to Castaneda, John Perry ( ˜ 2001) has recently studied “re-
flexive” thought contents, using “inner demonstratives” to indicate contents of one’s own thoughts whose truth conditions are tied to the mental state in which they occur. And nodding to Perry and Castaneda (as ˜
well as Wittgenstein), while drawing on cognitive studies of somatic proprioception, Jose Luis Berm ´ udez ( ´ 1998: 146) has used demonstratives to
characterize different types of self-consciousness, both bodily and
psychological.
Meanwhile, looking to phenomenological analyses begun by
Brentano, Husserl, and Sartre, I have been using inner demonstratives
(as here) to articulate the formal structure of one’s inner awareness of
one’s own passing experience: “In this experience I see this frog.” (The
background of this line of analysis is found in Smith 1986, Smith 1989,
and Smith and McIntyre 1982, with roots in the original debate between
Hintikka and Castaneda.) ˜
If these post-Wittgensteinian views of consciousness are valid, then
it remains perfectly appropriate to speak of experience as “inner” and
our immediate awareness thereof as “inner.” The question is what that
amounts to, and the chapters in this volume pursue just that question.
Indeed, we should now see that Wittgenstein’s worries about the “beetle in
the box” concern how our public language about experience works, and
not whether we have conscious experience, which Wittgenstein pointedly
affirms (Investigations, §§420, 423). Yes, there is a beetle in the box, and we
