work.
Husserl sharply distinguished formal and material essences (see my reconstruction in Smith 1995). That distinction ramifies significantly the
basic Husserlian – and broadly Aristotelian – category scheme given earlier, which canonized particulars, universals, and meanings. In fact, the
formal-material distinction is the most important metatheoretical notion
I want to bring out in this essay.
Adding the distinction (and key entries under it), we extend the basic
Husserlian scheme as shown in Figure 8.6. Husserl reserved the term “category” for high-level formal essences, including those listed previously.
For our purposes, however, we group all the preceding types of entity
as proper categories (and subcategories) in a Husserlian ontology. For we
are organizing different types of categories, featuring Husserl’s division
of essences into formal and material essences. The ellipsis indicates that
the scheme includes some further entries to be considered later.
Material essences, for Husserl, are reached by “generalization,” moving from fact to species to genus to the highest level of genus under
Basic Categories 261
CATEGORIES
1. fact [concrete or real entity]
2. essence [ideal species, etc.]
2.1. formal essence [“category”]
1. individual
a. substrate [independent individual]
b. moment [dependent part]
c. event [dependent occurence]
2. species
3. property/quality
4. relation
5. state of affairs
...
2.2. material essence [“region”]
1. nature
a. inanimate
b. animate
2. culture [“spirit” (geist)]
3. consciousness
3. sense [ideal meaning (sinn)]
1. individual concept, percept,...
2. predicative concept, percept,...
3. proposition (satz)
4. connective: the meanings “and,” “or,” “not,” “if-then”
figure 8.6. The ramified Husserlian category scheme.
which concrete entities occur. At the highest level of generality are three
“regions”:
1. Nature, embracing physical objects and events and also psychical
states (realized in brains in animal bodies).
2. Culture (or “Spirit,” Geist, as in Zeitgeist, “spirit of the times”), embracing social groups, artifacts, institutions, and values.
3. Consciousness, embracing acts of consciousness and their intentionality (abstracted from their dependencies on the natural and
social).
Formal essences are reached not by generalization, moving up a speciesgenus hierarchy, but by “formalization,” moving from fact and material
essence to formal essence, or form. At the highest level of formalization
are the formal essences: Individual, Species, Property, Relation, State of
262 Mind World
Affairs, et alia. Now, formal essences apply to material essences cum facts,
much as logical “form” applies to “content” in the logical composition
of propositions. Thus, the formal essences of Individual, Species, and
so on pertain to entities under each of the material essences Nature,
Culture, Consciousness. Under Nature, for instance, there are concrete
individuals – bodies, organisms, events – that have species, qualities, and
relations, forming states of affairs in “nature.” Under Spirit or Culture
there are facts – persons and communities – that have kinds, qualities,
and relations, forming cultural states of affairs. And under Consciousness
there are facts – acts – having species, properties, and relations, forming
states of affairs of acts being intentionally directed toward other things,
including natural and cultural states of affairs.
We can now say more about states of affairs. For Husserl, a state of affairs is a “syntactic,” “categorial”formation: individuals are joined “syntactically” with properties or relations to form states of affairs. For instance,
the state of affairs that Socrates is a human is a formal combination of
the individual Socrates with the species humankind; and the state of affairs that Socrates taught Plato is a formal combination of the individuals
Socrates and Plato with the relation of teaching. Obviously, this ontology
of states of affairs reflects the formal structures posited in Fregean-era
predicate logic, and the doctrine is shared by Wittgenstein and other
Austrian philosophers of the early twentieth century. Although formal
semantics in the twentieth century made do with set-theoretic structures
(like models) instead of states of affairs, a state-of-affairs ontology is not
outdated: David Armstrong (1996) has recently argued anew for“a world
of states of affairs.”
Husserl joined this ontology with an epistemological notion of “categorial intuition.” According to Husserl, we grasp intuitively the formal
categorial structures of states of affairs, including predication (Socrates is
a human) and connection between atomic states of affairs (Socrates is a
human and he taught Plato). Our concerns, however, are limited to the
ontology.
Entities under Fact, Essence, and Sense are linked in distinctive ways.
Senses represent entities under these categories, whereas material essences
qualify or “determine” factual entities, and formal essences or “forms”
define or “inform” and so apply to entities under Fact, Essence, and
Sense. We begin to see a complex of links among things under the
three basic categories. There are patterns of recursion in the scheme,
as forms apply to facts and essences, forms have essences, senses have
essences including forms, and senses represent facts, essences, and states
Basic Categories 263
of affairs. A full development of the ontology would map out these types of
linkage.
Remember that Husserl did not assume a dualism, or trialism, of “substance.” As I (1995) stressed, the same “fact” – this subject (“I”) or this
experience – may have aspects or moments (dependent parts) falling
under Nature, Culture, and Consciousness. Husserl’s notion of moment
is a variant on the Aristotelian notion of a particularized quality that
exists only “in” a primary substance. Thus, this white in this piece of
paper is a dependent part of the paper; it could not exist unless the paper existed. We shall shortly factor dependence out as a distinct formal
essence.
Under Sense, we now observe, are such types of sense as Individual
Concept, Predicative Concept, Proposition, and Connective (to adopt
more recent terminology). These types of sense reflect familiar logical
forms, which align at least partly with certain formal essences.
