Basic Categories 275
the categorial divisions themselves. Again, we are looking at fundamental
ontological divisions at least among predication, composition, dependence, and intentionality.
A Twenty-First-Century Category Scheme
Bearing in mind the ontological complexities considered here, let me
propose a simpler category scheme that factors the categorial divisions
explored. We distinguish formally distinct types as forms, or formal categories. And we distinguish (differently than Husserl) several materially
distinct types drawn initially from everyday life. Within some of these
categories, formal or material, we note specific subcategories (presented
separately in Figure 8.9, for simplicity). Notice that the categorial niche of
intentional content, or meaning (sense), falls under the formal structure
of intentionality.
I propose this scheme for future adjudication. There is much to be
done to flesh out various parts of the scheme, but I propose the outlines as presented earlier. Most important, for present purposes, are the
divisions of formal ontological types. Observing such divisions, we are
better prepared to face the most pressing ontological issue of our day:
the nature of the connection between mind and body, as we understand
Formal Categories [Ontological Forms]
individual
species/kind, quality, relation, state of affairs
number, set, structure, . . .
part/whole
location [form of space-time]
possibility, necessity, (actuality)
dependence
intentionality
– with subcategories:
Intentionality
subject, act/experience, content/meaning,
object [of intention], intention [intentional “relation”]
Material Categories (Everyday Kinds (of Terrestrial Entities))
object, event, place, time, plant, animal, human being,
mental activity, artifact, institution
–with subcategories:
Mental Activity
perception, thought, emotion, volition
figure 8.9. A contemporary category scheme.
276 Mind World
it in philosophy and science today. Descartes’s ontology notoriously left a
sharp division between mental and physical, a division that leaves philosophy confounded to this day. Husserl’s ontology allowed a crucial improvement, making room for the cultural as distinct from both the mental and
physical. Still, all these materially distinct things occur in one world. The
crucial distinctions among the mental, physical, and cultural, we should
begin to see, are formal rather than material. With the preceding formal
divisions we can, I think, better understand the ontology of these material
phenomena (“material” as opposed to formal, not as opposed to mental
or cultural).
In the long run we might cast the most basic categories not as types
of entity but as modes of being that define entities, drawing on the conception of depth ontology prefigured in Whitehead (as interpreted in
Chapter 7). In that spirit we would distinguish two principal formal
categories: Being and Basis. Under Being would fall the various categories
of entity, such as Individual, Species, and so on. And under Basis would
fall basic categories or “modes” of being that define or “originate” entities
of various categories. Thus, the category Individual would be grounded
in the mode of being distinct (Distinctness), the category Species would
be grounded in the mode of being together (Togetherness), the category
Number would be grounded in the mode of being quantified (Quantifi-
cation), and so on. However, the category Possibility would itself be a
mode, the mode of being possible. Dependence too would be a mode,
the mode of being dependent. And I am inclined also to cast Intentionality as a mode, the mode of being intentional or directed. (Whitehead’s
notion of prehension may be seen in this light.) To detail a category
scheme of this sort would be a very long story, far beyond the scope of
the present exploration. Here we can only gesture toward this approach
to configuring a categorial ontology. (See D. W. Smith 1997 and Simons
1994–95 for brief sketches along these lines.)
Three-Facet Ontology
There is an important ontological division among three basic aspects or
facets of an entity: what we may call its form, appearance, and substrate.
This distinction is elaborated in my “Three Facets of Consciousness”
(in Chapter 1). There I argue that the ontology of consciousness requires this distinction: we need to distinguish – on a categorial level –
the formal structure of intentionality, the way an experience appears in
Basic Categories 277
consciousness (including “what it is like”), and the neural substrate and
cultural background of mental states. However, the three-facet distinction is thoroughly general, or rather “categorial.” How then does this
distinction relate to the preceding category schemes?
Briefly, the distinction runs as follows. The form of an entity includes
its various types of attributes – using “form” in the wide Aristotelian sense
(form plus matter), as opposed here to the narrower Husserlian sense
of formal essence. The appearance of an entity includes the ways it can
be known or, most generally, “intended” in a mental state – as reflected
in various types of sense or intentional content that prescribe the entity.
Finally, the substrate of an entity includes the various types of entities it
depends on for its existence – background conditions including physical
composition, causal genesis, cultural history, psychological motivation, or
whatever, depending on its material type. (The appearance of an act of
consciousness begins with “inner awareness” as appraised in my “Return
to Consciousness,” in Chapter 3. The cultural background of an intentional experience, part of its substrate, is explored in my “Background
Ideas,” in Chapter 5.)
Now, this three-facet distinction can be grounded in any category
scheme that gives pride of place to predication, dependence, and intentionality. For an entity’s form includes the attributes or essences (of
whatever type) that are predicable of it, whereas an entity’s appearance includes the senses (of whatever type) that represent it in an intentional
state; and an entity’s substrate includes the conditions or entities on
which its existence depends. Any entity participates in these ways in predication, dependence, and intentionality. So the three-facet distinction applies categorially to any entity – in a world with predication, dependence,
and intentionality.
The Husserlian category scheme, notably the ordered Husserlian
scheme fashioned here, grounds the three-facet distinction. Indeed, that
scheme was constructed precisely with these, among other, issues in mind.
And the contemporary category scheme of the previous section similarly
grounds the distinction. Again, this simpler scheme was fashioned precisely to distinguish formal categories of:
Individual
Species/Kind, Quality, Relation, State of Affairs
