2. The mathematical forms are studied in branches of mathematics:
Number, Set, Manifold, and so on.
3. Part-Whole is treated separately as a formal essence. Then there
is the pivotal formal essence: Dependence. Dependence is formal
because it applies to entities in different material “regions.” But it
has a different role than either predicative or mathematical forms.
It is presupposed, for one thing, in the formal connection between
individuals and relations, forming a state of affairs. We need also to
consider other categories that belong in this third group, including
Modality.
4. Finally, we take intentionality as formally distinctive, as having a
separate type of form, intentional form. We assume the form of
intentionality does not reduce to the form of relation, or to any
other type of formal essence. Hence, intentionality has a unique
ontological role.
Distinguishing these various types of category, on the heels of the previous category schemes, leads to the larger question of higher-order structure in a category scheme, to which we now turn.
“Deep” Structure in Ontology (Whitehead Interpreted)
In Process and Reality (1978/1929) Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947)
developed an elaborate categorial ontology designed to supersede the
Aristotelian metaphysics of substance-and-attribute, which has reigned
(with variation) for 2,500 years. Whitehead’s categories, and their application to mind, are explored in my “Consciousness and Actuality in
Whiteheadian Ontology” (2001a), reprinted as “Consciousness and Actuality” in Chapter 7. Here I turn to the architecture of Whitehead’s
category scheme. What is new in that scheme, as I interpret it, is a “deep”
structure in the world at large.
Whitehead’s metaphysical vision was shaped by both physics and
biology: everything evolves or “becomes” in the flux of matter-energy in
space-time, and the universe as a whole is itself an evolving “organism.”
Thus Whitehead proposed to replace the Aristotelian category of “primary substance” (that which becomes) with the category of “becoming”:
the process of becoming an “actual entity.” Substance ontology reflects
Basic Categories 267
the subject-predicate structure of grammar – even as developed in the
mathematical logic of Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica
(1910–13). By contrast, Whiteheadian process ontology reflects the mathematical structure of the calculus and fits more complex mathematics like
dynamical systems theory developed after Whitehead’s day. From predicate calculus to field calculus, we might say, is the formal reformation
Whitehead sought for ontology. Importantly, Whitehead does not eliminate everyday objects and their properties, where Aristotle began, but
he proposes a different and “deeper” foundation for the category of substantial particulars.
Whitehead starts with Heraclitus’s view that all is flux. The primary entities in the world are accordingly something like point-events, dubbed
“actual entities” or“actual occasions,”in the process of actualizing. Things
like Socrates and his house or even his walking or talking or thinking are
formed from these more basic entities. For Whitehead, each actual entity “feels” or “prehends” a wide variety of other actual entities and also
“eternal objects” or Platonic “forms” (conceived as pure potentialities
for being determined in some way). In the process of becoming, or “concrescence,” one actual entity emerges out of the many actual entities and
forms that it prehends. Prehension subsumes three traditional ontological
relations: causation of one actual entity by another, consciousness of something by an actual entity (of the right sort), and exemplification of a form
by an actual entity. A nexus is a fact of “relatedness” wherein an actual entity prehends (in different ways) other actual entities and/or forms. The
world is thus a flux composed of very many nexuses in which actual entities prehend many other actual entities and many Platonic forms. More
precisely, for Whitehead, “the actual world” of a given actual entity consists of those other actual entities and forms it prehends, from its point
of view as it were. So there is not one overarching world, but rather a
different world relative to each actual entity. The influence of relativity
physics is apparent.
Whitehead is normally read as a “process” philosopher who would reduce everything, in Heraclitean fashion, to temporal flow. But Whitehead
distinguishes two types of flux called “transition” and “concrescence.”
(See my reconstruction in the essay cited.) As I would like to put it, transition is the process of temporal becoming, while concrescence is the process
of ontological becoming. Thus, transition is the temporal “process” by which
one entity emerges from others earlier in time. Time, or space-time, is
an “extensive continuum” of these transitions. By contrast, concrescence, or
ontological becoming, is the ontological “process” by which one actual
268 Mind World
entity becomes – becomes that entity – as it emerges out of the many actual
entities and forms it prehends.
In our terms here (drawn from Husserl), transition is a material “process” and becoming is a formal “process.” So becoming is the formal process in which all things become entities, become what they are in relation
to all else. Time or space-time itself “becomes” in this primordial sense.
As Whitehead remarks: becoming is not temporal; temporality becomes.
In this way, for Whitehead, becoming is the ultimate structure of being:
the “category of the ultimate.”
Adverting to the ancients, I like to see this element of Whitehead
as echoing not Heraclitus but Anaximander. Anaximander, essentially
the first philosopher in the West, around 600 b.c. proposed that all the
world – including the most basic elements (air, earth, fire, water: or
strings, quarks, electrons, etc.) – originates in a more primordial level
called the apeiron, or “nondeterminate”: that which is not “determined”
or defined with the familiar types of properties. In like manner, Whiteheadian ontology posits a “deep” level of structure – Becoming – that
ultimately defines the more familiar levels of structure, including substance and attribute. Everything is thus founded on becoming.
Whitehead organized his ontology around a complex system of categories. He posited four types and levels of categories:
1. The Category of the Ultimate: Becoming.
2. Categories of Existence: of what exists or becomes.
3. Categories of Explanation: of how things are (axiomatic conditions).
4. Categoreal Obligations: preconditions on how things can be (conditions of possibility).
Within this hierarchy, he organized quite a number of categories, as
shown in Figure 8.8. Most of the complexities (and oddities?) in Whitehead’s category scheme we cannot delve into here. (Where Whitehead’s
terminology deliberately sounds mentalistic, think instead of hard ontological form.) Yet it is instructive to study the motivation and architecture
of this scheme, in contrast with the other schemes we have been studying.
To be sure, we have come a long way from the simplicity of the category
scheme we drew from Quine, whose 1932 Harvard dissertation (in logic)
was directed by Whitehead.
What I should like to abstract from Whitehead is an intuitive sense of
how differently “becoming” works in his ontology. Becoming is neither an
object nor a property or relation of an object. The distinctions we drew
Basic Categories 269
CATEGORIES
1. The Category of the Ultimate: becoming
(creativity, concrescence, process)
– the “principle” by which many become or create one; presupposed by all
other categories.
2. Categories of Existence
* 2.1. actual entity (actual occasion)
2.2. prehension (fact of relatedness)
2.3. nexus [fact of togetherness]
2.4. subjective form [form of apprehension]
* 2.5. eternal object (form, potential for definiteness)
