produced a “paradox of subjectivity”: our intentional activities in science
have crafted our mathematical models of physical reality, but our subjective activities of consciousness, which produce our scientific theory, find
no place in those models. Indeed, the concepts of “subject” and “object,”
Husserl found, no longer fit together, and this is the culmination of
Kantian theory. Had Husserl lived another half century, he would have
seen a more precise statement of this “crisis.” Today we have “mathematized” the mind, declaring with cognitive science that intentional
activities of thinking, perceiving, and the like are processes of computation, described mathematically by algorithms written in formal computer
languages. But today some philosophers have come to realize that consciousness and, indeed, intentionality do not fit into this model. We face
a profound scientific-philosophical crisis. We simply do not understand
how to put consciousness and the physical world together in a unified
view. More broadly, we do not know how to fit phenomenology together
with the ontology of physical science.
To resolve this paradox in our understanding of consciousness and
world, we need to synthesize ontology and phenomenology. But this synthesis of the ontological and the phenomenological requires a paradigm
shift in our thinking about both consciousness and the world in general: a
shift away from choosing among dualism, physicalism, idealism, culturalrelativism, and so forth and toward seeing consciousness at home in a
world of nature, culture, and consciousness. The current paradigm of
naturalistic philosophy, grounded in philosophy of science, holds that
the world is composed of physical particles in physical fields; mental and
cultural activities must then fit this mold. But consciousness and its interesting properties – intentionality, inner awareness, sensory qualia – simply
do not appear in our best naturalistic description of causal-computational
processes of “brain mechanics.”
294 Appendix
Only gradually have I come to realize that the integration of the phenomenological and the ontological requires a genuine paradigm shift,
somewhat like the shifts Thomas Kuhn described in the history of science.
It has become increasingly clear that the debates in philosophy of mind
about materialism, functionalism, property-dualism, mind-as-brain, and
mind-as-computation were missing both the rich structure of intentionality and the deep structure of ontological categories (or modes of being).
To see these phenomenological and ontological structures in one view is
the shift in perspective I have in mind. One part of the view takes in the
details of phenomenology while another part of the view takes in the wide
field of ontology. The best metaphor is not seeing with two disciplinary
eyes but rather seeing as a hawk does: seeing simultaneously both its prey
and the wider terrain, through different mechanisms in the eyes.
Kant proclaimed a “Copernican revolution”in eighteenth-century philosophy. Copernicus had said the Earth moves around the sun, rather
than the sun around the Earth. Kant then said the objective world of
“phenomena” – things as they appear, even things as described by
physics – rests on our subjective activities (as the necessary conditions
of the possibility of such a world). For Kant, the world spins around us
insofar as our representations of the world are necessarily conditioned
by the structures of our own cognitive faculties of sensation and conceptualization (today we stress language). Kant’s revolution was thus a
philosophical counterrevolution. The problem of subjectivity and objectivity has been with us ever since, either displacing or superimposing itself
atop the problem of mind and body that Descartes had defined in the
seventeenth century. I believe the proper perspective has emerged only
with a correct account of intentionality, beginning with Husserl’s groundbreaking work around 1900. But rather than say that consciousness spins
around physical particles, or alternatively that the physical spins around
mind or language, or that only the physical or the mental or even the
cultural exists – rather, we need a new way of seeing things, a unified story
that puts these things in their place while giving each their due.
Whereas Kant chose the term “revolution” (in the time of the American
and French revolutions), Kuhn in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
(1962, a time of cultural revolution) coined the term “paradigm shift” in
reviewing the major shifts in science, as from Newtonian physics to relativistic and quantum physics. With such a shift, we do not simply revolt
against a prior view of things; rather we come to see things in a new way
that renders the old way ineffective. In philosophy, as opposed to science,
a major change of views is rarely a bona fide “revolution” because the
Appendix 295
problematic phenomena – say, consciousness, nature, culture, and their
interrelations – do not go away but come to be viewed differently. “Evolution” rather than “revolution” is the way of deep philosophical thinking and often scientific thinking, too (and even political thinking). Our
brain type did not displace the lizard brain type; it grew from it, evolving
radically new abilities but retaining many of the older, well adapted features. And so it is with philosophical theory or understanding. We move
from Anaximander to Plato and Aristotle and on through Avicenna and
Ockham to Suarez and Descartes to Kant to Husserl to Quine and on
to our own best views that grow from prior ideas. The shifting paradigm
of consciousness, bringing the phenomenological into the ontological
and vice versa, follows this pattern of evolution, moving from one species
of view to another about our awareness of the world in which we find
ourselves.
A recurring approach to the mind-body or subject-object problem is to
say that proper background assumptions prevent the problem from arising. It is said that Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Wittgenstein, and others –
perhaps Kant or Husserl before them – gave accounts of our activities in
the world, on which the old bugbears of dualism, realism, idealism, and
the like simply do not arise. But in fact, after we have given careful descriptions of our experiences, practices, and language games, after we have a
careful phenomenological analysis of our conscious intentional activities
(and related social-cultural activities), we must extend our story with the
compelling results of today’s physics, biology, neuroscience; these are
not just another “story” for our entertainment. And we find that phenomenological descriptions of our activities of consciousness do not fit
with advancing theory in physical science, with descriptions of activities
from quarks to neurons and DNA – much as Descartes had begun to see in
the seventeenth century. But the ontological maneuvers of dualism, materialism, idealism, antirealism, functionalism, computationalism, connectionism, externalism, evolutionism – so ably explored in recent decades
in philosophy of mind and cognitive science – do not solve, resolve, or
dissolve the problem of fit. The subjectivity and intentionality of consciousness remain just that, not something else like a pattern of particles
bobbing in the void.
We might tackle directly the details of physics, biology, and neuroscience, hoping to find consciousness amid the details. This tack is taken
by many, from physicists like Roger Penrose to biologists like Edward
O. Wilson to philosophers like David Albert, Paul Churchland, Patricia
Churchland, Daniel Dennett, Fred Dretske, Jerry Fodor, Ruth Millikan,
296 Appendix
and others, all seeking to “naturalize” consciousness in one way or
another. Alternatively, I urge, we might tackle directly the details of
phenomenology and ontology, which must be integrated as a basis
for bringing into the picture the results of recent physical-biologicalcomputational science. Here in philosophy lies the “formal” side of the
synthesis; there in empirical science lies the “material” side. And the
distinction between “formal” and “material” ontology is itself part of
ontology.
So we need a new way of looking at consciousness and its place in the
world. We need a systematic integration of the phenomenological and
the ontological (not to be confused with the mental and the physical).
The yearning for this new synthesis, we noted, is all around us. Evidently
the paradigm shift is in progress. However, the core of the synthesis lies in
