principles of philosophy, in the integration of two often misunderstood
philosophical disciplines.
Of Ontology and Phenomenology
Ontology is the science or theory of being, of what is and how it is. I make
no distinction here between ontology and metaphysics. Some philosophers have defined “metaphysics” as speculation about being, speculation
beyond the range of our abilities to know, especially beyond all empirical
knowledge. I do not use that definition (respect for Kant notwithstanding). As Quine has stressed with Peirce (and Husserl), all our knowledge
is in some measure speculative, beyond the measure of absolute certainty,
and limited to the range of our sensory and intellectual and intuitive capacities, limited even by our technologies that aid in developing knowledge. We practice ontology by saying, to the best of our current abilities,
what is.
Phenomenology, I assume, is the science or theory of consciousness
as we experience it – literally, the theory of “phenomena” in the ancient Greek sense of “appearances.” Where ontology studies reality, phenomenology studies appearance, namely, the ways things are given in
perception, thought, imagination, volition, and other processes. But
“phenomena” are not simply sense data (as in the British empiricist tradition). Rather, “phenomena” are nearly always intentional presentations
of things: things as given in perception, imagination, thought, desire, will,
and indeed embodied intentional action. (Remember that perception is
itself partly action, as we move our eyes, hands, nose in perceiving things
around us.)
Appendix 297
Phenomenology, as I understand it, is centered in the theory of intentionality via content or meaning, a theory pursued in prior works.2 The
present essays extend this basic conception of intentionality and place it
in a framework of basic ontology.
By phenomenological analysis we learn that consciousness is characteristically intentional: in (nearly) each case it is of or about something,
directed toward some object. And we learn that each act of consciousness “intends” its putative object through some conceptual content or
meaning. So phenomenology studies the meanings things have for us
in our intentional activities of perception, thought, imagination, emotion, volition, and bodily action. Moreover, our conscious intentional activities tie into attitudes, moods, skills, habits, traditions, languages, and
ways of life that are part of our experience even if we are not directly
aware of them. Thus, phenomenology comes down to the study of intentionality via meaning, first in consciousness and then in less-thanconscious activities that carry meaning. Historically, phenomenology
as we know it was launched in 1900 with Husserl’s analysis of intentionality via meaning. Husserl drew on Brentano, Bolzano, Descartes,
Hume, and Kant. In Husserl’s wake, Heidegger defined phenomenology as the study of “phenomena”; however, avoiding the terminology
of “consciousness” and “subject,” Heidegger spoke of our “being” and
“comportment” (verhalten, relating to) in acting, speaking, and thinking.
I adopt a simplified terminology of consciousness, context, subject, act,
content, and object – as appraised in the present essays and in prior
works.3
Phenomenology is a philosophical discipline alongside ontology, epistemology, logic, ethics, and the like. Yet phenomenology is still not so
well understood as these other disciplines. Some philosophers have de-
fined phenomenology as a movement, a historical tradition including the
work of Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty – and more recently
Gurwitsch, Mohanty, Føllesdal, and many others. I do not follow that defi-
nition (admiration for Husserl, Heidegger, et al. notwithstanding). Other
philosophers have defined phenomenology as the practice of a particular
philosophical methodology: transcendental reflection on the meaning of
our experience, as prescribed by Husserl; or hermeneutic interpretation
of our existence, as prescribed by Heidegger. It is wrong to restrict phenomenology to method. This is a process-product confusion: we practice
phenomenology by a process of analysis following some methodology,
and our results are products thereof. No, phenomenology is a discipline,
the study of consciousness cum meaning, and in its practice we will try to
298 Appendix
settle upon the best methodology. We experience a variety of types of consciousness, we reflect upon them, we describe and interpret and analyze
them as best we can, we expand on the conditions in which we believe
them to arise, physical as well as cultural and environmental conditions.
In short, we do the best we can. Perhaps results of neuroscience or evolutionary biology or quantum physics will one day help us to refine our
phenomenological descriptions of experience as we live it. Or perhaps
only disciplined practices of meditation, like those of Tibetan Buddhists
or Zen masters, can refine our awareness of our own experiences. But in
any event, we must describe, interpret, and analyze our experience as we
find it.
Our best philosophical theory of mind-and-world will unfold within a
system of phenomenology and ontology. This is nearly a tautology, given
the preceding. More significantly, the two disciplines are interdependent. Ontology must accommodate the results of phenomenology, because what exists includes our acts of consciousness and their intentional
structure; moreover, the practice of ontology is a collective intentional
activity that we philosophers engage in. And phenomenology must accommodate the results of ontology, because an act of consciousness has
an identity, properties (including intentionality), relations, and dependencies – all ontological structures of the act of consciousness.
These ties between ontology and phenomenology are apparent in the
classical literature of phenomenology. Husserl famously analyzed structures of consciousness while bracketing questions of the existence of the
objects of consciousness. Yet, within those phenomenological analyses,
he assumed basic principles of what he would call formal ontology –
for example, particular things have properties or “essences,” or they are
dependent beings. And Heidegger famously described our intentional
activities or “comportments” such as hammering or indeed speaking as
modes of “being in the world.” These ontological structures of “being”
are apparent in our own activities.
From a Phenomenological Point of View
When Quine titled his book of essays From a Logical Point of View (1953),4
it was timely to reassert the importance of logic in philosophy. I say reassert because logic has been very much with us ever since Plato and
Aristotle. Looking back on twentieth-century philosophy, we take modern logic for granted – because of the work of Frege, Whitehead and
Russell, Godel, Carnap, Tarski, Quine, and others. Yet, we know, Russell ¨
Appendix 299
and Moore were surrounded by the British absolute idealists, and Harvard
was the heart of pragmatism. (Never mind that Peirce in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, was also a logician and McTaggart in Cambridge, England,
reasoned elegantly.) Quine’s title is vindicated by developments throughout the second half of the century, in the traditions of philosophical logic,
philosophy of language, possible-worlds semantics, the logic and metaphysics of modality, externalism of direct reference and of intentional
content, and indirectly the developments in philosophy of mind under
the umbrella of cognitive science.
It is now timely to reassert the importance of phenomenology in philosophy, to look afresh at mind and its place in the world “from a phenomenological point of view.”I say reassert, because phenomenology has
been with us incipiently in the ancient Greek and Indian thinkers, formatively in the medieval Arabic-Islamic and European-Latin philosophers,
and modernly in Descartes, Hume, Kant, Fichte, Bolzano, and Brentano.
Of course, phenomenology has been with us explicitly, and prominent in
European thought, since 1900 when Husserl crystallized the theory of intentionality and the discipline of phenomenology as science of consciousness – our own conscious intentional experience in perceiving, thinking,
and acting. It is timely now to reassert, and reassess, phenomenology in
philosophy of mind and in metaphysics. For consciousness has drawn
intense interest as science has begun to understand the workings of the
brain in recent decades.
Why must we reassert, if you will, consciousness itself? Why must we
reassert the discipline of phenomenology in the study of consciousness?
Think of philosophy’s trends. Existentialism stressed consciousness;
but poststructuralism forgot it while privileging structures of language.
Philosophical logic in Quine, taking behaviorism as key to the study
