Professor Scheffler has proposed a theory suggesting that at certain times, events provide the greatest possibility for determining meaning. This statement is hypothetical and requires endorsement by proper criteria to be validated.

Consider the statement "Scotland is the author of Waverley." To answer affirmatively:

1. Did at least one man write Waverley?
2. Was it only one man who wrote Waverley?
3. Was this man Scott?

Based on Reichenbach's notion that "Experience and Prediction," Prof. Scheffer has not published his theory (as noted in the preface). 

The range of meaningful propositions is not limited by empirical reality alone. Proper criteria can be obtained for value theorems or theoretical judgments. The theory recognizes the variability of meta-physical assumptions as a condition of meaning. Meaning becomes a function of true and false Re, factors: the logical or expressed in the imprecise formulation of hypotheses, the psychological inherent in the act of judging, and the philosophical expressed in the universal dependence on the consensus which this attribution of meaning enjoys, rather than its empirical verifiability.

Thus, meaning represents an emergence from a meta-physical context. Just as every man creates his own picture of the world, just as scientists find in nature only what they insert through their hypotheses, and just as every question determines at least the range of answers, history does not exhibit the same portent to everyone but yields only the meanings inherent in the nature of our query.

Therefore, philosophy of history is inseparable from metaphysics and involves a deep awareness of its mysteries. The end result combines meta-physical (the criterion) and epistemological elements (the assertion), rather than judgments of truth or falsity. 

In reaction to the problems of moral necessity and human freedom, various thinkers experienced what was inaccessible to reason, thus giving their answer to the meaning of history. Therefore, it is not a repetition that history represents merely an echo chamber of crime and morality, nor does it capture the essence of humanity. It offers a comparative concept but does not represent a necessary starting point for answers.

The existence of other levels of meaning is shown by figures like Tolstoy, Schweitzer, Ionesco, Camus, and Shakespeare to whom history was a deeply felt experience of transcontinental importance. 

Who is right then? Is history the sole realization of the spirit of freedom as Hegel held, or does it represent something else entirely?



The growth and decline of organic cultures lie at their essence as criteria for their moving force, longing for manifestation of power, as I argued. Is there a deeper purpose in all the organization and decay of civilizations—a realization of self by faith, as Toynbee implies? Does his history amount to more than a temporal recurrence, the stage for that Man who supersedes himself, or does it reveal the drama of a divine plan, steadily unfolding and culminating in universal peace, as Kant asserts?

1. Consider this point: Alfred North Whitehead's "Science and the Modern World."

If we are seeking the metaphysical context that assigns significance, this precludes differentiation by which to judge validity. These criteria exist but are not as obvious as the logics of positivists assume.

Though these questions delineate their range, we can require answers to be relevant to the problem. Though each culture and perhaps each individual interprets it in an intensely personal way, we can insist that the data be adhered to. We can analyze internal consistency. On another level, we can judge the adequacy of the thinker's philosophical assumptions by their scope, by their grasp of the totality of life, instead of just its appearances.

3. Newton sitting under the apple tree might have correctly concluded that apples fall when ripe. It is not a question of right or wrong, therefore, but of depth and shallowness. It does not suffice to show logically deduced theorems as an absolute test of validity. There must also exist a relation to the pervasiveness of an inward experience which transcends phenomenal reality.

Though man is a thinking being, it does not follow that he understands himself in thinking. The ultimate mysteries of life are perhaps not approachable by dissection, but may require the poet's view, who grasps the unity of life, which is more than finite, however plainly taking analysis as one of its manifestations.

The Philosophy of History exhibits, therefore, in its metaphysical assumption an attitude towards the basic problems of existence. It reveals whether life is approached with reverence and humility or as a servant tool of civilization.

1. However, Kant described the self-realization of peace to a divine order unfolding in the cosmos. See post Appendix A: The Concepts of Meaning. This involves utilizing another set of assumptions. See post Appendix A - The Concept of Meaning.



The true nature of reality is revealed outside itself through the resolution of historical events, which condition a transcendental experience or existential exhaustion that discloses ethical predispositions—not properties of historical data.

1. **Post-Modern Theories and the Sense of Responsibility**
   - The philosophy of history reflects basic attitudes about life, where death marks its beginning and life is a process toward mortality. Everything existing is modified by time; history fixes the moldings of growth, fulfillment, and outward decay. As individuals strive for knowledge and gain it, they can no longer bear it. This awareness becomes paralyzed by knowledge, which one purchases at the price of their death. Thus emerges the appearance of life but not necessarily its meaning.

   - The magical attitude toward life seeks to escape the transient nature of existence by conjuring its data. It attempts to find a prophecy in history to fulfill its elusive concepts and classify them as attributes of events. However, purpose represents the embodiment of some metaphysical context, not a necessary deduction from phenomena. No ethical value can be ascribed to mere survival that theory attributes to this magical attitude; it develops into a philosophy of eternal recurrence as a condition for cognition.

   - Death becomes the result of fulfillment; life exhibits mortality, history represents a machine continually reproducing new manifestations of power. Values exist only as modes of causality. The mystery of life is limited by classifiable phenomena and exhausts itself in the riddle of the first cause. The fact of occurrence reveals the only criterion of inevitability.
