
The struggle for power heralds either a beginning or an end. Victorious Caesarism will then mark the final attempt by the powers of blood, doomed to petrification because the fire in the soul of Civilization has long died out. Its outward manifestations are mere appearances. People take the place of the scepter and crown in constitutional monarchy. They are carefully paraded for the masses to obscure their total lack of real meaning. With power without tradition as its last manifestation, and waking-consciousness defeated by itself, the Civilization turns into a fellah state where time is meaningless, and history has ended.

Thus, the drama of high culture—a wonderful world of deities, arts, thoughts, battles, or ideas—closes with the return of the primitive facts of blood eternal that are one and the same as the ever-circling cosmic flow. The bright imaginative Waking-Being submerges itself into the silent service of Being, as the Chinese and Roman empires tell us. Time triumphs over Space, and it is Time whose inexorable movement embeds the ephemeral incident of Culture on this planet in the incident of man—a form wherein life flows for a time while behind all, stretching horizons of geological and stellar history pile up in the light-world of our eyes.

For us, however, whom Destiny has placed in this Culture at this moment of its development—the moment when Rome is celebrating its last victories and the Caesarism that approaches with quiet, firm step—our direction, both compelled and obligatory, is set within narrow limits. Life is not worth living on any other terms. We do not have the freedom to reach here or there; we have the freedom to do what is necessary or to do nothing. And a task historic necessity has set will be accomplished with or against the individual.

Spengler’s metaphysical dilemma permeates his political theory, which contains many similarities with the Platonic conception of degeneration as a consequence of a loss of tradition and the dominance of self-love. The Estates represent the quintessence of creativity embodying breed and training and thereby become the foci of world history. Yet how has this creativity been accomplished? Nobility symbolizes pure becoming, while the Priesthood typifies waking-consciousness. Since the essence of the former is comprised in living a destiny and that of the latter in confining itself to the world of eternally possible expressed by withdrawal from history, it becomes difficult to attribute clear-cut roles within this dynamic.

---



To see the symbolic significance, we must understand Spengler's view that if nobility does nothing but live a destined existence, it cannot be creative. If the priesthood represents mere waking consciousness without offering any characteristic symbolism, then its role is limited.

According to Spengler (Vol. II, p. 507), one might expect early manifestations of religion, as a construction of waking-consciousness, to be hesitant and unsure of themselves, achieving ever greater mastery of form with the emancipation of waking consciousness in cultural development. However, in Spengler's scheme, the greatest religious creative force occurs at the beginning of culture and Caesarism, while by its end, religion, like all other problems, becomes devoid of symbolic significance.

The nobility, as a primary estate, appears unable by itself to achieve the inner purposiveness that Spengler considers the outstanding characteristic of the State. Indeed, the state comes into existence only over its opposition.



The essay explores an idea that is a function of waking consciousness, not an immanent destiny. Spengler points out that Magian cultures articulate themselves almost exclusively through the symbolism of a priesthood, with the nobility playing a subsidiary role.

The conclusion appears, despite many striking insights, that the strict separation of becoming and being into alternatives has no standing in reality. Both are merely tendencies, the relative predominance of which characterizes modes without an organic framework. This perspective aligns more closely with waking consciousness than any predetermined destiny.



Societies often underestimate the unconscious factors that motivate human action. It must be admitted that in many respects, Spengler acknowledges this. In his chapter on mathematics, he explicitly affirms the interrelationship between these aspects.

However, there is always a temptation to shock and view history as a machine perpetually reproducing new manifestations of power, which man appears impotent to influence. This leads to an opposition between Time and Space, Destiny and Causality, the World-as-History, and the World-as-Nature.

Luther was not merely the creation of intellectual necessity but of destiny. It would be better to say that destiny embodies itself in intellectual necessity. Political conduct reveals not just an inexorable imperative but a process of becoming consciously evaluated. Luther was consequently more than the creation of historical piece-mealness; he was the shaper of a tendency and the inspiration for a dimly felt longing.

Life does not reveal merely activity, but purposeful activity. Politics is not simply an aimless playing out of predetermined events.



Spengler's philosophy of history reveals all the implications of his metaphysical assumptions. The forms of great cultures emerge from the stream of historical humanity, with their entire existence as an effort to actualize their immanence and directedness. However, this experience soon comes into conflict with waking consciousness. Any rationalism that recognizes no mysteries loses its influence in the German style. In religion, politics, art, a sense of futility prevails among human beings who can find refuge from the tensions within their souls only in myths, panem et circenses, and resigned acceptance of political Caesarism. As communal greatness gradually decreases, culture turns into civilization amidst a series of catastrophic wars. Finally, with waking consciousness defeated by itself, the powers of blood reassert themselves, life reverts to the primitive state, creative impotence becomes entrenched.

The necessity can only serve as foil for the transcendental experience of freedom, not as a guide to action. This concept is discussed in G. H. Pos t's "History and Man's Experience of Morality" within the context of the "Sense of Right Impotency." For full development, refer to Spengler's work (Vol. I, p. 54; Vol. II, p. 295). However, these constitute the recognition or acknowledgment rather than a normative framework.



Pit, e, the civic organization image, an imagined peopled by its startlingly accurate predictions, our analysis has revealed serious difficulties. The opposition between waking consciousness and becoming, between time and space, history, and causality expresses but does not resolve the dilemma of experience or freedom in a determined environment.

Spengler believes that history is an inexorable destiny, triumphing through a kind of unconscious participation in the process of becoming. However, much of his data disproves these assumptions. Each author creates their own image of the world and bends it to sustain itself as an axiom, using the biological sequence of generations merely as symbolism through inward experience. Since experiences are unique, no causality can govern only the general; thus, we find that the specificity of each culture is a function of freedom, not an all-mighty working organism.

Destiny requires waking consciousness to actualize its possibilities. On the other hand, if the life of each culture represents an effort to actualize its primal symbol, one would expect historical development to vary significantly with their symbolism. However, Spengler has postulated identical political institutionalization at comparable stages of existence, leading to the conclusion that cultures are not self-contained organisms as he suggests. The very possibility of making an analysis of another culture's soul indicates a degree of inner relationship compounded by the fact that Spengler seriously examines only the Faustian, Apollinian, and Magian Cultures.

Spengler's denial of the interrelationship among cultures and their inability to ever understand each other's symbolisms overlooks his examination limited to three major cultural types.
