ffOV!r::r 'merely,,13.n. identity o:f!' , outward 1
'--0rm -not, of'-, inwa:rd:·0
:pr()blem-·,. 
The srune U.."1if'or:m1 ty is fou.,.-id during growth .mich , accord￾Toynbe e1 
always reveals a crea t ive minority, c.n uninspired 
cnj or i ty and bart-arians W1der the c iviliza ti on 's .spell. 
'.lha pr oces s of w! thdrawal and return by vmich the crea￾tive minori ty a ocomp llshe s 1 ts growth in s ta ture revea ls all 
me difficulties of 7oynb ee ' s pragma tism. I ts proor rests in 
the firs t 1 n.s t@ce • on the l i.fe of Chris t. Once p os tula ted , 
fue principle magical ly reveal s i tsel.f in a vast varie ty of man￾ta ti ona or creativi ty! Withdrawal and re turn aa an agency 
of growth :!mplles ., however , that the increment in crsa t:tve leader￾shlp bears s ome rela ti on to the temp or ar7 ceasa ti on :from activity 
and 13 giv en effect by a return to the world, Of' Toynbee' 5 il￾h.stra tions only Chri st, Saint Paul and other Chrlatlan figures 
the test. Hindenburg was, to be sure ., in re tiret:ttent when 
in charge or Germany 's Ea ster.i Front in 1g14 . Yet ab sol￾no evidence e:xiata ,... tha t hia period o:f 1 no.o t1vity increased 
his m1Utary ef.flc i ency at Tannenb erg, mil ch d erived from his 
te knowledt:;e of his ances tral :.!ansur ian lake-db tric t . · 
, unques tioningly was smuggled back to Russia by the Germans . 
only fair to 11ssu.me , howevoer , tha t Ruas ia' a mil i tacy col￾wae inf':tni toly more ins trumen tal in giving the BolshEr
vika 
-246-
±eir opp or tuni ty in 1917 , than the Swiss exile of' the ir leader . 
s withdrawa l to Mecca , liachia.velli 'a exil:e f'rom Florence , 
s seclusi on in Koenig3berg 1the 11.f'e of the Buddha , c ons ti­
:;,heno:mena without ai.1.y iime1• connecti on . Withdrawal-and￾a. pheno￾l 
nena, a mechanis tic descripti on of' defini ti onal c oncepts . 
'Iho empirical me thcxl breaks down comple tely when app li ed 
to such c oncep ts a:--J pr ogre s3 and purp os e , whi ch must ever :rerae.i;i 
netaphysical c ons tructi ons., Toynbee a ttempts , throug.ri a pyramid￾ing of 
the
meta
oloei
phor
cal 
s 
realm. 
to make the transl tion from the b iologicsl to 
Eut analogies can not s erve as substl￾demons tra tiun. Tuey assume the proof nnd merely illus￾essen tial s imilarity of divergen t manifes ta ti ons . An 
s t
ca
ra
n 
ta
not 
. A 
as
pragm
s ert 
atis
that 
t, 
