Historical Dynamics 
Why States Rise and Fall 

PRINCETON STUDIES IN COMPLEXITY 
SERIES EDITORS 
Philip W. Anderson (Princeton University); Joshua M. Epstein (The Brooking~ 
Institution); Duncan K. Foley (Barnard College); Simon A. Levin (Princeton 
University); Martin A. Nowak (Harvard University) 
Lars-Erik Cederman, Emergent Actors in World Politics: How States and 
Nations Develop and Dissolve 
Robert Axelrod, The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models of 
Competition and Collaboration 
Peter S. Albin, Barriers and Bounds to Rationality: Essays on Economic 
Complexity and Dynamics in Interactive Systems. Edited and with an introduction by Duncan K. Foley 
Duncan J. Watts, Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks between Order and 
Randomness 
Scott Camazine, Jean-Louis Deneubourg, Nigel R. Franks, James Sneyd, Guy 
Theraulaz, Eric Bonabeau, Self-Organization in Biological Systems 
Peter Turchin, Historical Dynamics: Why States Rise and Fall 
Historical Dynamics 
Why States Rise and Fall 
Peter T urchin 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
PRINCETON AND OXFORD 
Copyright © 2003 by Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, 
Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TR
press.princeton.edu
All Rights Reserved
First published in 2003
First paperback printing, 2018
Paper ISBN 978-0-691-18077-9
Cloth ISBN: 978-0-691-11669-3
Library of Congress Control Number 2003110656 
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
The publisher would like to acknowledge Peter Turchin for providing 
the camera-ready copy from which this book was printed
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
Contents 
List of Figures 
List of Tables 
Preface 
Chapter 1 . Statement of the Problem 
1.1 Why Do We Need a Mathematical Theory in History? 
1.2 Historical Dynamics as a Research Program 
1.2.1 Delimiting the Set of Questions 
1.2.2 A Focus on Agrarian Polities 
1.2.3 The Hierarchical Modeling Approach 
1.2.4 Mathematical Framework 
1.3 Summary 
Chapter 2. Geopolitics 
2.1 A Primer of Dynamics 
2.1.1 Boundless Growth 
2.1.2 Equilibrial Dynamics 
2.1.3 Boom/Bust Dynamics and Sustained Oscillations 
2.1.4 Implications for Historical Dynamics 
2.2 The Collins Theory of Geopolitics 
2.2.1 Modeling Size and Distance Effects 
2.2.2 Positional Effects 
2.2.3 Conflict-legitimacy Dynamics 
2.3 Conclusion: Geopolitics as a First-order Process 
2.4 Summary 
Chapter 3. Collective Solidarity 
3.1 Groups in Sociology 
3.1.1 Groups as Analytical Units 
3.1.2 Evolution of Solidaristic Behaviors 
3.1.3 Ethnic Groups and Ethnicity 
3.1.4 The Social Scale 
3.1.5 Ethnies 
3.2 Collective Solidarity and Historical Dynamics 
3.2.1 lbn Khaldun's Theory 
3.2.2 Gumilev's Theory 
3.2.3 The Modern Context 
3.3 Summary 
viii 
X 
xi 
1 
3 
4 
4 
5 
5 
7 
9 
9 
9 
11 
12 
14 
16 
16 
20 
23 
25 
27 
29 
29 
29 
31 
33 
34 
36 
36 
38 
40 
42 
47 
vi 
Chapter 4. The Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
4.1 Frontiers as Incubators of Group Solidarity 
4.1.1 Factors Causing Solidarity Increase 
4.1.2 Imperial Boundaries and Metaethnic Fault Lines 
4.1.3 Scaling-up Structures 
4.1.4 Placing the Metaethnic Frontier Theory in Context 
4.2 Mathematical Theory 
4.2.1 A Simple Analytical Model 
4.2.2 A Spatially Explicit Simulation 
4.3 Summary 
Chapter 5. An Empirical Test of the Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
5.1 Setting Up the Test 
5 .1.1 Quantifying Frontiers 
5 .1.2 Polity Size 
5.2 Results 
5.2.1 Europe: 0-1000 C.E.

5.2.2 Europe: 1000-1900 c.E.

5.3 Positional Advantage? 
5.4 Conclusion: The Making of Europe 
5.5 Summary 
Chapter 6. Ethnokinetics 
6.1 Allegiance Dynamics of Incorporated Populations 
6.2 Theory 
6.2.1 Nonspatial Models of Assimilation 
6.2.2 Spatially Explicit Models 
6.3 Empirical Tests 
6.3.1 Conversion to Islam 
6.3.2 The Rise of Christianity 
6.3.3 The Growth of the Mormon Church 
6.4 Conclusion: Data Support the Autocatalytic Model 
6.5 Summary 
Chapter 7. The Demographic-Structural Theory 
7 .I Population Dynamics and State Breakdown 
7.2 Mathematical Theory 
7.2.1 The Basic Demographic-Fiscal Model 
7.2.2 Adding Class Structure 
7.2.3 Models for Elite Cycles 
7 .2.4 Models for the Chinese Dynastic Cycle 
7.2.5 Summing up Theoretical Insights 
7.3 Empirical Applications 
7.4 
7.3.1 Periodic Breakdowns of Early Modem States 
7.3.2 The Great Wave 
7.3.3 After the Black Death 
Summary 
CONTENTS 
50 
50 
51 
53 
57 
59 
63 
64 
68 
75 
78 
78 
79 
81 
83 
83 
86 
89 
91 
92 
94 
94 
95 
95 
99 
104 
105 
111 
112 
113 
116 
118 
118 
121 
121 
127 
131 
137 
138 
140 
140 
143 
145 
148 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 8. Secular Cycles in Population Numbers 
8.1 Introduction 
8.2 "Scale" and "Order" in Human Population Dynamics 
8.3 Long-Term Empirical Patterns 
8.3.1 Reconstructions of Historical Populations 
8.3.2 Archaeological Data 
8.4 Population Dynamics and Political Instability 
8.5 Summary 
Chapter 9. Case Studies 
9.1 France 
9.1.1 The Frontier Origins 
9.1.2 Secular Waves 
9.1.3 Summary 
9.2 Russia 
9.2.1 The Frontier Origins 
9.2.2 Secular Waves 
9.2.3 Summary 
vii 
150 
150 
150 
155 
155 
161 
164 
167 
170 
170 
170 
176 
184 
184 
184 
191 
196 
Chapter 10. Conclusion 197 
10.1 Overview of Main Developments 197 
10.l.l Asabiya and Metaethnic Frontiers 197 
10.1.2 Ethnic Assimilation 1 98 
l 0.1.3 Demographic-Structural Theory 1 99 
10.1.4 Geopolitics 1 99 
10.2 Combining Different Mechanisms into an Integrated Whole 200 
10.3 Broadening the Focus of Investigation 203 
10.4 Toward Theoretical Cliodynamics? 204 
Appendix A Mathematical Appendix 205 
A.l Translating the Hanneman Model into Differential Equations 205 
A.2 The Spatial Simulation of the Frontier Hypothesis 206 
A.3 Demographic-Structural Models with Class Structure 208 
A.4 Models for Elite Cycles 21 2 
Appendix B. Data Summaries for the Test of the Metaethnic Frontier Theory 214 
B.l Brief Descriptions of "Cultural Regions" 214 
B.2 Quantification of Frontiers 215 
B.3 Quantification of Polity Sizes: The First Millennium c.E. 224 
B.4 Quantification of Polity Sizes: The Second Millennium c.E. 225 
Bibliography 226 
Index 243 
List of Figures 
2.1 Qualitative types of dynamics. 10 
2.2 Feedback structure of the Collins geopolitical model. 16 
2.3 Relationship between the rate of territorial change and territory 
in the two simple geopolitical models. 18 
2.4 Territorial dynamics of the European state system as simulated 
by the model of Artzrouni and Komlos ( 1996). 22 
4.1 The relative growth rate of asabiya in relation to the imperial 
boundary. 65 
4.2 Isoclines of the asabiya-territory model (the unstable case). 66 
4.3 Dynamics of Model (4.5) for the case of unstable equilibrium. 67 
4.4 Dynamics of the spatial asabiya-area model and 
expansion-contraction curves of areas for polities in East and 
Central Asia, 600-1200 c.E. 70 
4.5 The reflux effect in the spatial frontier model. 74 
5.1 Cultural regions used as geographical units in the statistical 
analysis of the relationship between metaethnic frontiers and 
polity size. 80 
6.1 Different shapes of the contact distribution. 101 
6.2 Schematic patterns of spread predicted by spatial contact 
models. 103 
6.3 Predicted relationships between the proportion of population in 
the core ethnie and its rate of change in various models. 106 
6.4 Conversion to Islam in Iran and Spain. 108 
6.5 Iran and Spain data plotted on a C - C phase plot. 109 
6.6 Iran and Spain data plotted on a C /C-C phase plot, compared 
to prediction of the immigration-autocatalytic model. 110 
6.7 Growth of early Christianity in the Roman Empire and Egypt. 112 
6.8 Proportion of the world population converted to the Mormon 
church, 1840-1980. 113 
7.1 Dynamics of the demographic-fiscal model. 124 
7.2 Dynamics of the stochastic version of the demographic-fiscal 
model. 125 
7.3 Dynamics of the selfish elite model. 130 
LIST OF FIGURES ix 
7.4 Dynamics of the lbn Khaldun model. 134 
7.5 Dynamics of the lbn Khaldun model with class structure. 135 
7.6 Consequences of population growth in England, 1500--1750. 142 
7.7 Price index of consumables in western Europe, 1200--2000. 144 
8.1 Population of England and Wales, 1080--2000. 155 
8.2 Population of several European countries, 1000--2000. 158 
8.3 Population dynamics of China from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E. 160 
8.4 Relative proportion of excavated settlements occupied during 
each period in seven western areas of Roman Empire. 162 
8.5 New houses built on Wetherill Mesa, fifth to fourteenth century. 163 
8.6 Population dynamics and political instability in China. 165 
8.7 Effects of population density and political instability on the 
population rate of change in China, 200 B.c.E.-430 c.E. 167 
8.8 Effects of population density and previous political instability on 
the current instability in China, 200 B.c.E.-430 c.E. 168 
9.1 Frontier intensity in NFR and the area of French polity. 175 
9.2 Population history of Roman Gaul. 176 
9.3 Movement of grain prices in France and England from 
1500--1750. 181 
List of Tables 
2.1 Durations of imperial phases for large polities. 26 
5.1 Results of the empirical test of the frontier model. 84 
5.2 Results of the empirical test of the positional effects model. 90 
6.1 Summary of empirical tests of the autocatalytic model. 113 
6.2 Predictions of logistic versus noninteractive models for religious 
conversion. 115 
8.1 Summary of nonlinear time-series modeling analysis of the 
English and Chinese population data. 157 
8.2 Coefficients of determination in models fitted to population rate 
of change and political instability index. 166 
Preface 
Many historical processes are dynamic: growth and decline of populations, territorial expansion and contraction of empires, trends in political centralization/ 
decentralization, and the spread of world religions, to name just a few examples.

A general approach to studying dynamical systems is to advance rival hypotheses 
based on specific mechanisms, translate the hypotheses into mathematical models, 
and contrast model predictions with empirical patterns. Mathematical modeling is 
a key ingredient in this research program because quantitative dynamical phenomena, often affected by complex feedbacks, cannot be fully understood at a purely 
verbal level. Another important ingredient is the full use of statistical techniques 
(such as time-series analysis) for quantitative and rigorous comparison between 
model-predicted and observed patterns. This general approach has proved to be 
extremely successful in natural sciences. Can it be instrumental in increasing our 
understanding of historical processes? 
Historical Dynamics is an attempt to answer this question. The specific problem 
chosen for analysis is the territorial dynamics of agrarian states. In other words, 
can we understand why some polities at certain times expand, while at other times 
they contract? The advantage of focusing on territorial expansion/contraction is 
that we have reasonably accurate empirical data on this aspect of historical dynamics (historical atlases). The focus on agrarian polities is motivated by the extent of empirical material (roughly, from the third millennium B.C.E. to 1800 c.E.) 
and the greater simplicity of these societies compared to modern ones, potentially 
making them easier to understand and model.

Although the main focus of the book is on territorial dynamics, it is clear 
that the ability (or inability) of states to expand depends very much on their internal characteristics. Thus, in order to understand how and why states expand 
and contract, we need to study military, economic, demographic, ethnological, 
and ideological aspects of social dynamics. I consider four sociological theories potentially explaining territorial dynamics. The first is the geopolitical model 
of Randall Collins. This theory has been very clearly formulated and requires 
minimal work to translate into a mathematical model. The second one, by contrast, is an original development. Starting from ideas of the fourteenth century 
Arabic thinker lbn Khaldun and recent developments in sociobiology, I advance 
a theory attempting to explain why the capacity for collective action may vary 
among different societies. The third theory addresses the issue of ethnic assimilation/religious conversion dynamics. Finally, the fourth theory focuses on the interaction between population dynamics and sociopolitical stability. The connection 
between population growth and state breakdown is based on the demographicstructural model of Jack Goldstone (another well-formulated theory that is easily 
xii PREFACE 
translated into a dynamical model). To this model, I add the feedback mechanism, 
postulating how state breakdown and resulting sociopolitical instability negatively 
affect population numbers. The four theories address somewhat different aspects 
of historical dynamics, and thus logically are not mutually exclusive. However, 
alternative hypotheses about particular empirical patterns can be derived from 
them and tested with data. I present several such empirical tests.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many people provided extensive comments on previous book drafts or draft chapters. I am particularly indebted to Tom Hall, Jack Goldstone, Sergey Nefedov, and 
the anonymous reviewer who read the whole draft and provided numerous and 
truly excellent comments and criticisms. I also wish to express my deep gratitude to Marc Artzrouni, Robert Boyd, Christopher Chase-Dunn, Randall Collins, 
Lev Ginzburg, Robert Hanneman, John Komlos, and Nikolai Rozov for their 
comments on various parts of previous drafts. Many thanks to Svetlana Borinskaya, Andrey Korotayev, and other. members of the Social Evolution group in 
Moscow for constructive critique and general encouragement. I am grateful to 
Marc Artzrouni for providing the graphical output of his simulation model for 
Figure 2.4. Finally, I wish to thank Jennifer Slater for excellent copyediting, Kathy 
Tebo for help with typing and proofreading, and Mirko Janc for his ''TeXpert" 
typesetting.

Historical Dynamics 
Why States Rise and Fall 
Chapter One 
Statement of the Problem 
1.1 WHY DO WE NEED A MATHEMATICAL THEORY IN HISTORY? 
Why do some polities--chiefdoms and states of various kinds-embark on a successful program of territorial expansion and become empires? Why do empires 
sooner or later collapse? Historians and sociologists offer a great variety of answers to these and related questions. These answers range from very specific 
explanations focusing on unique characteristics of one particular polity to quite 
general theories of social dynamics. There has always been much interest in understanding history, but recently the theoretical activity in this area has intensified 
(Rozov 1997). Historical sociology is attempting to become a theoretical, mature 
science.

But why do historical sociologists use such a limited set of theoretical tools? 
Theory in social sciences usually means careful thinking about concepts and definitions. It is verbal, conceptual, and discursive. The theoretical propositions that 
are derived are qualitative in nature. Nobody denies the immense value of such 
theoretical activity, but it is not enough. There are also formal, mathematical approaches to building theory that have been applied with such spectacular success 
in physics and biology. Yet formalized theory employing mathematical models 
is rarely encountered in historical sociology (we will be reviewing some of the 
exceptions in later chapters).

The history of science is emphatic: a discipline usually matures only after it 
has developed mathematical theory. The requirement for mathematical theory is 
particularly important if the discipline deals with dynamic quantities (see the next 
section). Everybody is familiar with the paradigmatic example of classical mechanics. But two more recent examples from biology are the synthetic theory of 
evolution that emerged during the second quarter of the twentieth century (Ruse 
1999), and the ongoing synthesis in population ecology (for example, Thrchin 
2003). In all these cases, the impetus for synthesis was provided by the development of mathematical theory.

Can something similar be done in historical sociology? Several attempts have 
been made in the past (e.g., Bagehot 1895; Rashevsky 1968), but they clearly 
failed to make an impact on how history is studied today. I think there are two 
major reasons explaining this failure. First, these attempts were inspired directly 
by successes in physical sciences. Yet physicists traditionally choose to deal with 
systems and phenomena that are very different from those in history. Physicists 
tend to choose very simple systems with few interacting components (such as 
the solar system, the hydrogen atom, etc.) or systems consisting of a huge number of identical components (as in thermodynamics). As a result, very precise 
quantitative predictions can be made and empirically tested. But even in physical 
applications such systems are rare, and in social sciences only very trivial questions can be reduced to such simplicity. Real societies always consist of many 
qualitatively and quantitatively different agents interacting in very complex ways.

Furthermore, societies are not closed systems: they are strongly affected by exogenous forces, such as other human societies, and by the physical world. Thus, 
it is not surprising that traditional physical approaches honed on simple systems 
should fail in historical applications.

The second reason is that the quantitative approaches typically employed by 
physicists require huge amounts of precisely measured data. For example, a physicist studying nonlinear laser dynamics would without further ado construct a 
highly controlled lab apparatus and proceed to collect hundreds of thousands of 
extremely accurate measurements. These data would then be analyzed using sophisticated methods on a high-powered computer. Nothing could be further from 
the reality encountered by a historical sociologist, who typically lacks data about 
many aspects of the historical system under study, while possessing fragmentary 
and approximate information about others. For example, one of the most important aspects of any society is just how many members it has. But even this kind 
of information usually must be reconstructed by historians on the basis of much 
guesswork.

If these two problems are the real reason why previous attempts failed, then 
some recent developments in natural sciences provide a basis for hope. First, 
during the last 20-30 years, physicists and biologists have mounted a concerted 
attack on complex systems. A number of approaches can be cited here: nonlinear dynamics, synergetics, complexity, and so on. The use of powerful computers has been a key element in making these approaches work. Second, biologists, and ecologists in particular, have learned how to deal with short and 
noisy data sets. Again, plentiful computing power was a key enabler, allowing 
such computer-intensive approaches as nonlinear model fitting, bootstrapping, and 
cross-validation.

There is another hopeful development, this time in social sciences. I am referring to the rise of quantitative approaches in history, or cliometrics {Williamson 
1991 ). Currently, there are many investigators who collect quantitative data on 
various aspects of historical processes, and large amounts of data are already 
available in electronic form.

These observations suggest that another attempt at building and testing quantitative theories in historical sociology may be timely. If we achieve even partial 
success, the potential payoff is so high that it warrants making the attempt. And 
there are several recent developments in which application of modeling and quantitative approaches to history have already yielded interesting insights.

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 3 
1.2 HISTORICAL DYNAMICS AS A RESEARCH PROGRAM 
Many historical processes are dynamic. Generally speaking, dynamics is the scientific study of any entities that change with time. One aspect of dynamics deals 
with a phenomenological description of temporal behaviors-trajectories (this is 
sometimes known as kinematics). But the heart of dynamics is the study of mechanisms that bring about temporal change and explain the observed trajectories.

A very common approach, which has proved its worth in innumerable applications, consists of taking a holistic phenomenon and mentally splitting it up into 
separate parts that are assumed to interact with each other. This is the dynamical systems approach, because the whole phenomenon is represented as a system 
consisting of several interacting elements (or subsystems, since each element can 
also be represented as a lower-level system).

As an example, consider the issue raised at the very beginning of the book.

An empire is a dynamic entity because various aspects of it (the most obvious 
ones being the extent of the controlled territory and the number of subjects) 
change with time: empires grow and decline. Various explanations for imperial 
dynamics address different aspects of empires. For example, we may be concerned 
with the interacting processes of surplus product extraction and warfare (e.g., 
Tilly 1990). Then we might represent an empire as a system consisting of such 
subsystems as the peasants, the ruling elite, the army, and perhaps the merchants.

Additionally, the empire controls a certain territory and has certain neighboring 
polities (that is, there is a higher-level system-or metasystem-that includes 
the empire we study as a subsystem). In the dynamical system's approach, we 
must describe mathematically how different subsystems interact with each other 
(and, perhaps, how other systems in the metasystem affect our system). This 
mathematical description is the model of the system, and we can use a variety of 
methods to study the dynamics predicted by the model, as well as attempt to test 
the model by comparing its predictions with the observed dynamics.

The conceptual representation of any holistic phenomenon as interacting subsystems is always to some degree artifical. This artificiality, by itself, cannot be 
an argument against any particular model of the system. All models simplify the 
reality. The value of any model should be judged only against alternatives, taking 
into account how well each model predicts data, how parsimonious the model is, 
and how much violence its assumptions do to reality. It is important to remember 
that there are many examples of very useful models in natural sciences whose 
assumptions are known to be wrong. In fact, all models are by definition wrong, 
and this should not be held against them.

Mathematical models are particularly important in the study of dynamics, because dynamic phenomena are typically characterized by nonlinear feedbacks, 
often acting with various time lags. Informal verbal models are adequate for 
generating predictions in cases where assumed mechanisms act in a linear and 
additive fashion (as in trend extrapolation), but they can be very misleading when 
we deal with a system characterized by nonlinearities and lags. In general, nonlinear dynamical systems have a much wider spectrum of behaviors than could be 
imagined by informal reasoning (for example, see Hanneman et al. 1995). Thus, 
a formal mathematical apparatus is indispensable when we wish to rigorously 
connect the set of assumptions about the system to predictions about its dynamic 
behavior.

1.2.1 Delimiting the Set of Questions 
History offers many puzzles and somehow we must select which of the questions 
we are going to address in this research program. I chose to focus on territorial 
dynamics of polities, for the following reasons. Much of recorded history is concerned with territorial expansion of one polity at the expense of others, typically 
accomplished by war. Why some polities expand and others fail to do so is a 
big, important question in history, judging, for example, by the number of books 
written about the rise and fall of empires. Furthermore, the spatiotemporal record 
of territorial state dynamics is perhaps one of the best quantitative data sets available to the researcher. For example, the computer-based atlas CENTENNIA (Reed 
1996) provides a continuous record of territorial changes during 1000-2000 c.E.

in Europe, Middle East, and Northern Africa. Having such data is invaluable to 
the research program described in this book, because it can provide a primary 
data set with which predictions of various models can be compared.

The dynamic aspect of state territories is also an important factor. As I argued in the previous section, dynamic phenomena are particularly difficult to 
study without a formal mathematical apparatus. Thus, if we wish to develop a 
mathematical theory for history, we should choose those phenomena where mathematical models have the greatest potential for nontrivial insights.

Territorial dynamics is not the whole of history, but it is one of the central 
aspects of it, in two senses. First, we need to invoke a variety of social mechanisms to explain territorial dynamics, including military, political, economic, 
and ideological processes. Thus, by focusing on territorial change we are by 
no means going to be exclusively concerned with military and political history.

Second, characteristics of the state, such as its internal stability and wealth of 
ruling elites, are themselves important variables explaining many other aspects of 
history, for example, the development of arts, philosophy, and science.

1.2.2 A Focus on Agrarian Polities 
There are many kinds of polities, ranging from bands of hunter-gatherers to the 
modem postindustrial states. A focus on particular socioeconomic formation is 
necessary if we are to make progress. The disadvantages of industrial and postindustrial polities are that the pace of change has become quite rapid and the 
societies have become very complex (measured, for example, by the number of 
different professions). Additionally, we are too close to these societies, making 
it harder for us to study them objectively. The main disadvantage of studying 
hunter-gatherer societies, on the other hand, is that we have to rely primarily 
on archaeological data. Agrarian societies appear to suffer the least from these 
two disadvantages: throughout most of their history they changed at a reasonably 
slow pace, and we have good historical records for many of them. In fact, more 
STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 5 
than 95% of recorded history is the history of agrarian societies. As an additional 
narrowing of the focus for this book, I will say little about nomadic pastoralist 
societies and leave out of consideration thalassocratic city-states (however, both 
kinds of polities are very important, and will be dealt with elsewhere).

This leaves us still with a huge portion of human history, roughly extending 
from -4000 to 1800 or 1900 c.E.,1 depending on the region. One region to which 
I will pay much attention is Europe during the period 500--1900 c.E., with occasional excursions to China. But the theory is meant to apply to all agrarian 
polities, and the aim is to test it eventually in other regions of the world.

1.2.3 The Hierarchical Modeling Approach 
There is a heuristic "rule of thumb" in modeling dynamical systems: do not attempt to encompass in your model more than two hierarchical levels. A model 
that violates this rule is the one that attempts to model the dynamics of both interacting subsystems within the system and interactions of subsubsystems within 
each subsystem. Using an individual-based simulation to model interstate dynamics also violates this rule (unless, perhaps, we model simple chiefdoms). From 
the practical point of view, even powerful computers take a long time to simulate 
systems with millions of agents. More importantly, from the conceptual point of 
view it is very difficult to interpret the results of such a multilevel simulation.

Practice shows that questions involving multilevel systems should be approached 
by separating the issues relevant to each level, or rather pair of levels (the lower 
level provides mechanisms, one level up is where we observe patterns).

Accordingly, in the research program described in this book I consider three 
classes of models. In the first class, individuals (or, perhaps, individual households) interact together to determine group dynamics. The goal of these models 
is to understand how patterns at the group level arise from individual based mechanisms. In the second class, we build on group-level mechanisms to understand 
the patterns arising at the polity level. Finally, the third class of models addresses 
how polities interact at the interstate level. The greatest emphasis will be on the 
second class of models (groups-polity). I realize that this sounds rather abstract 
at this point; in particular, what do I mean by "groups"? The discussion of this 
important issue is deferred until chapter 3. Also, I do not wish to be too dogmatic 
about following the rule of two levels. When we find it too restrictive, we should 
break it; the main point is not to do it unless really necessary.

1.2.4 Mathematical Framework 
The hard part of theory building is choosing the mechanisms that will be modeled, making assumptions about how different subsystems interact, choosing functional forms, and estimating parameters. Once all that work is done, obtaining 
model predictions is conceptually straightforward, although technical, laborious, 
'Negative sign refers to years B.C.E.

and ti~e consuming. For simpler models, we may have analytical solutions available (to solve a model analytically means to derive a formula that gives a precise solution for all parameter values). However, once the model reaches even a 
medium level of complexity we typically must use a second method: solving it 
numerically on the computer. A third approach is to use agent-based simulations 
(Kohler and Gumerman 2000). These ways of obtaining model predictions should 
not be considered as strict alternatives. On the contrary, a mature theory employs 
all three approaches synergistically.

Agent-based simulation (ABS), for example, is a very powerful tool for investigating emerging properties of a society consisting of individuals who are assumed 
to behave in a certain way (by redefining agents to mean groups of individuals 
or whole polities, we can also use this approach to address higher-level issues).

Agent-based models are easily expandable, we can add various stochastic factors, 
and in general model any conceivable mechanisms. In principle, it is possible 
to build a theory by using only agent-based simulations. In practice, however, a 
sole emphasis on these kinds of models is a poor approach. One practical limitation is that currently available computing power, while impressive, is not infinite, 
putting a limit on how much complexity we can handle in an agent-based simulation. More importantly, ABSs have conceptual drawbacks. Currently, there is 
no unified language for describing ABSs, making each particular model opaque 
to everybody except those who are steeped in the particular computer language 
the model is implemented in. Small details of implementation may result in big 
differences in the predicted dynamics, and only in very rare cases do practitioners 
working with different languages bother to cross-translate their ADS (for a rare 
exception, see Axelrod 1997). And, finally, the power of ABSs is at the same 
time their curse: it is too easy to keep adding components to these models, and 
very soon they become too complex to understand.

The more traditional language for modeling dynamical systems, based on 
differential (or difference) equations, has several advantages. First, it has been 
greatly standardized, so that a model written as a system of differential equations 
is much easier to grasp than the computer code describing the same assumptions. This, of course, assumes that the person viewing the model has had much 
experience with such equations, which unfortunately is not the case with most 
social scientists, or even biologists, for that matter. Still, one may hope that the 
level of numeracy in nonphysical sciences will increase with time, and perhaps 
this book will be of some help here. Second, analytical results are available for 
most simple or medium-complexity models. Even if we do not have an explicit 
analytical solution (which is the case for most nonlinear models), we can obtain analytical insights about qualitative aspects of long-term dynamics predicted 
by these models. Third, numerical methods for solving differential models have 
been highly standardized. Thus, other researchers can rather easily check on the 
numerical results of the authors. To sum up, differential (difference) equations 
provide an extremely useful common language for theory building in dynamical 
applications.

Note that I am not arguing against the use of ABSs. In fact, I find the recently proposed agenda for doing social science from the bottom up by growing 
STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 7 
artifical societies (Epstein and Axtell 1996) extremely exciting (for an excellent 
volume illustrating the strength of this approach when applied to real problems in 
the social sciences, see Kohler and Gumerman 2000). Rather, I suggest that the 
ABS should always be supplemented by other approaches, which may lack the 
power of ABSs, but are better at extracting, and communicating, the important 
insights from the chaos of reality. The best approach to building theory is the one 
that utilizes all the available tools: from pencil-and-paper analysis of models to 
numerical solutions to agent-based simulations.

1.3 SUMMARY 
To summarize the discussion in this introductory chapter, here is my proposal for 
a research program for theory building in historical dynamics.

• Define the problem to be addressed: the territorial dynamics of agrarian polities. The main questions are, why do some polities at certain times expand? 
And why do they, at other times, contract, or even completely disappear? 
More luridly, what are the causal mechanisms underlying the rise and demise 
of empires? 
• Identify the primary data set: the spatiotemporal record of territorial dynamics within a certain part of the world and a certain period of time. The data 
set serves as the testing bed for various mechanistic theories. The success 
of each theory is measured by how well its predictions match quantitative 
patterns in the primary data.

• Identify a set of hypotheses, each proposing a specific mechanism, or a 
combination of mechanisms, to explain territorial expansion/contraction of 
polities. Many of these hypotheses have already been proposed, others may 
need to be constructed de novo. The list of hypotheses does not have to 
be exhaustive, but it should include several that appear most likely, given 
the present state of knowledge. Hypotheses also do not need to be mutually 
exclusive.

• Translate all hypotheses in the list into mathematical models. Typically, a 
single hypothesis will be translated into a spectrum of models, using alternative assumptions about functional forms and parameter values.

• Identify secondary data. These are the data that we need for each specific hypothesis and its associated spectrum of models. For example, if a hypothesis 
postulates a connection between population growth and state collapse, then 
we need data on population dynamics. Secondary data provide the basis for 
auxiliary tests of hypotheses (in addition to tests based on the primary data).

Thus, predictions from a hypothesis based on population dynamics should 
match the observed patterns in the population data. On the other hand, a 
hypothesis based on legitimacy dynamics does not need to predict population data also; instead, its predictions should match temporal fluctuations of 
legitimacy.

• Solve the models using appropriate technology (that is, analytical, numerical, 
and simulation methods). Select those features of the models' output where 
there is a disagreement among hypotheses/models, and use the primary data 
set to determine which hypothesis predicts this aspect better than others.

Take into account the ability of each hypothesis to predict the appropriate 
secondary data, how parsimonious is the model into which the hypothesis 
is translated, and any degree of circularity involved (for example, when the 
same data are used for both parameter estimation and model testing). Make 
a tentative selection in favor of the model (or models) that predicts various 
features of the data best with the least number of free parameters.

• Repeat the process, by involving other hypotheses and by locating more data 
that can be used to test various models.

Clearly this is a highly idealized course of action, which sounds almost naive in 
its positivistic outlook. In practice, it is unlikely that it will work just as described 
above. Nevertheless, there is a value in setting the goal high. The rest of the book 
presents a deliberate attempt to follow this research program. As we shall see, 
reality will intrude in a number of sobering ways. Yet I also think that the results, 
while failing to achieve the lofty goals set out above, prove to be instructive. But 
this is for the readers to judge.

Chapter Two 
Geopolitics 
Geopolitics, in the narrow sense that I use in this book, concerns itself with the 
spatial aspects of historical dynamics. There are two major kinds of mechanisms 
invoked in geopolitical models: the ability to project power at distance, and the 
effect of spatial position. Thus, geopolitics is a natural place to start in my review 
of theories for territorial dynamics of states. Additionally, it is one of the besttheorized areas in historical sociology (for example, Collins 1978, 1986, 1995), 
and perhaps enjoys the greatest number of already existing formal models (see 
below). However, my argument in this chapter indicates that geopolitical models 
(in the narrow sense) are insufficient for the explanation of empirical patterns; in 
particular, they fail to account for a sustained decline of formerly powerful and 
territorially extensive polities.

2.1 A PRIMER OF DYNAMICS 
Rather than starting immediately with geopolitical models, I first review some 
basic facts about general kinds of behaviors that can be exhibited by dynamical 
systems. Although these facts are fairly elementary, they are worth discussing, 
because (I) they may not be well known to people lacking extensive experience 
with dynamic models, and (2) it gives me a chance to introduce a simple classification scheme, to which I can then refer throughout the book. An excellent 
introduction to dynamical social systems can be found in Fararo (1989).

2.1.1 Boundless Growth 
The simplest possible dynamics is linear growth, obeying the differential equation 
X=c (2.1) 
Here X is the variable that is changing, X is the rate of change of X (often written 
as dXfdt), and c is a constant. A familiar application of this model is Newton's 
first law, in which X is the position of a body and c a constant velocity. (The 
first law states that, in the absence of any forces acting on the body, it will move 
with constant velocity.) The solution of this equation is X(t) = X0 +et, where t 
is time and X0 is the initial position of the body, X(O) = X0 • The solution says 
that X will change linearly with time (Figure 2.la), and that the rate of change 
is c. Thus, I refer to this kind of dynamics as linear growth (or decline, if c is 
negative).

--
S< 
-
~ 
(f) 
-
~ 
t t 
Figure :u Qualitative types of dynamics: (a) linear, (b) exponential, (c) asymptotic, 
(d) logistic, (e) boom and bust, and (f) sustained oscillations.

Another simple model of growth obeys the following differential equation: 
(2.2) 
This is the exponential growth model. The parameter r is another constant, called 
the relative rate of change (because the total rate of change is the product of 
the relative rate r and X). Because the rate of change of X is assumed to be 
proportional to X itself, this type of growth is sometimes called autocatalytic: 
the more X there is, the faster it grows. The exponential equation provides the 
simplest model for the growth of biological populations and can be thought of as 
the first law of population dynamics (Turchin 2003). The autocatalytic part arises 
because the more animals there are in the population, the faster the population 
grows (since each animal can reproduce). The solution of the exponential model 
is a curve bending up (Figure 2.1 b).

GEOPOLITICS 11 
The linear and exponential models are examples of boundless growth. Such 
models often provide good starting points for modeling dynamical systems, because they make minimal assumptions about the system. In other words, they are 
null models, and that is why the first laws of mechanics and population dynamics 
belong to this class. But boundless growth models, by themselves, are not good 
models for the overwhelming majority of dynamic phenomena, because few reallife systems exhibit limitless growth. We need to add other mechanisms to the 
right-hand side of equations.

2.1.2 EquUibrial Dynamics 
Few real-life processes grow without bound. Usually, there are some 
mechanisms-generally called negative feedbacks-that act to impose upper and 
lower limits on growth. One of the most important characteristics of a negative 
feedback mechanism is the lag time with which it operates. Some feedback 
mechanisms operate on a time scale that is much faster than the time scale at 
which the modeled variable X changes. In such cases we usually neglect the 
lag and assume that the feedback is instantaneous. A simple model that adds an 
instantaneous negative feedback to the linear growth is 
X=c-dX (2.3) 
Here two processes affect the dynamics of X. One force increases X at a constant rate c, but there is also a counteracting force, whose strength increases 
proportionately to X. At some point (specifically, when X reaches X*= cjd), the 
strengths of the positive push and negative pull balance each other, and X stops 
growing. The point X* where the rate of change of X is zero is called an equilibrium. Equilibria can be stable or unstable. For this model, the equilibrium X* is 
stable, because when X is below the equilibrium, the positive push overwhelms 
the negative pull; and vice versa, if X somehow gets above X*, then the negative 
pull will overwhelm the positive push, and return X back to the equilibrium. A 
typical trajectory for X predicted by equation (2.3) is initially linear (at low X) 
and then slows asymptotically as X approaches equilibrium (Figure 2.lc). I will 
refer to such dynamics as linear-asymptotic or asymptotic growth, for short.

Adding a negative feedback to the model of exponential growth is also simple.

In this case, let us assume that the relative growth rate r is a linear function of 
X: r(X) = r0 - gX. This leads to the logistic equation 
X = r(X)X = (r0 - gX)X (2.4) 
Logistic growth is illustrated in Figure 2.ld.

Both asymptotic and logistic dynamics belong to the class of singledimensional or first-order differential models. The general form of first-order 
models is X= f(X), where f(X) is some arbitrary function of X. For example, 
in the logistic model, f(X) = (r0 - gX)X is a quadratic function of X. These 
models are called first order (or one dimensional) because there is only one 
structural variable, X. (In mathematical applications structural variables are 
called state variables, because they describe the state of the system. The use 
of this standard terminology in dynamical systems, however, would create 
unnecessary confusion because the main subject of this book is states in the 
meaning of polities.) 
In addition to the kinds of dynamics illustrated by the asymptotic and logistic models, in which the system is always attracted to a unique stable equilibrium, single-dimensional models can also have a more complex behavior, called 
metastable dynamics. For example, if f(X) is a cubic polynomial, so that the 
model is 
X =a(X -b)(c-X)X (2.5) 
(a, b, and c are positive constants), then there are three equilibria: two stable 
ones (a low and a high equilibrium), and one unstable in the middle. If X is 
initially below the unstable equilibrium, the trajectory will be attracted to the 
low equilibrium. Alternatively, if X starts above the unstable point, the trajectory 
is attracted to the high equilibrium. One social science application of such an 
equation is in modeling "tipping" behaviors (see Chapter 6).

One very important fact that we need to know for later is that first-order differential models are incapable of oscillatory dynamics. They cannot even exhibit 
a single (rise-and-fall) oscillation. Fast negative feedbacks, operating without an 
appreciable lag, cannot cause a dynamical system to oscillate. They can only 
cause it to return asymptotically to an equilibrium, if a stable equilibrium exists 
(if it does not, then the system will run away to ±oo ). In order for oscillations 
to arise, a negative feedback must operate with a delay. We model such slow 
feedbacks either explicitly, by adding other structural variables to the differential 
equation model, or implicitly by using discrete-time (difference) models.

2.1.3 Boom/Bust Dynamics and Sustained Oscillations 
In order to model rise/fall dynamics of X with differential equations, we need 
to identify another structural variable, call it Y, which is affected by X and, in 
turn, itself affects X. Thus, X is affected by a negative feedback loop that is 
mediated by Y. Consider the following simple biological model of a population 
of consumers living on a nonrenewable resource: 
X=caXY-dX 
Y=-aXY (2.6) 
where X is the number of consumers at time t and Y is the current amount of 
resources. Looking first at the Y equation, we see the term -aXY representing 
the rate of consumption (the minus sign indicates that consumption reduces the 
amount of resources present). Consumption is assumed to be proportional to the 
product of X and Y, for the following reasons. First, more consumers deplete 
resources faster. Second, when resources are plentiful, each individual consumer 
depletes resources faster than when resources are scarce. Turning to the X equation, I assumed that consumers increase in proportion to the amount of resource 
consumed, with c being the constant of proportionality (this is the term caXY).

GEOPOLITICS 13 
Additionally, consumers die off at a rate proportional to X (the proportionality 
constant d is known as the relative or per capita death rate).

The dynamics of this model are illustrated in Figure 2.le. Assuming plentiful 
initial resources, consumers will first increase because their "birth rate" (caXY) 
will exceed the "death rate" (dX). Meanwhile, resources are depleted, and at 
an increasingly faster rate, because consumers are becoming more and more numerous. Eventually, resources fall beyond the point where consumer birth rate 
exceeds death rate, and the consumers start declining. Since consumers are still 
depleting resources, even during the decline phase, there is no end to the collapse: 
X will keep decreasing to 0. The boom is inevitably followed by the bust.

It is very easy to modify Model (2.6) to cause it to go through repeated 
boom/bust cycles. For example, we can add the assumption that the resource 
is renewable, and grows exponentially in the absence of consumers. Adding the 
exponential growth term bY to the second equation, we have 
X=caXY-dX 
Y=-aXY+bY (2.7) 
This is the famous Lotka-Volterra model of predator-prey cycles (a typical trajectory of X is shown in Figure 2.lf).

Second- and higher-order differential models (models with two or more 
structural variables) are capable of very diverse kinds of dynamic behaviors.

They can have a stable equilibrium, approached either monotonically (as in 
one-dimensional models) or in an oscillatory fashion. They can exhibit stable 
cycles, characterized by a certain period and amplitude. Models with three or 
more structural variables can oscillate chaotically (predicting irregular-looking 
dynamics) or quasiperiodically (two or more cycle periods superimposed on 
each other). There are many kinds of fascinating mathematical phenomena, 
but we do not need to be concerned with them in the investigation of social 
dynamics, at least not for a long time yet. The important general class of 
dynamics for our purposes is second-order oscillations. Whether they are limit 
cycles, quasiperiodicity, or chaos is not critical at the current state of the art.

The important feature, which distinguishes them from first-order dynamics, is 
sustained periods of increase followed by sustained periods of decline.

One further important result from nonlinear dynamic theory is that there is 
a close relationship between the time scales at which negative feedback loops 
operate (how fast they are) and the time scale of the dynamics (for example, 
the average period of oscillations). In differential equation models such as (2.7), 
the speed with which negative feedback acts is explicitly related to parameter 
values of the model, typically those whose units are [time] or [time]-1• In the 
Lotka-Volterra model, there are two parameters whose units are [time]-1: d and 
b. The parameter d measures how fast the numbers of consumers would (exponentially) decline in the absence of resource; b, analogously, measures how fast 
resources would (exponentially) increase in the absence of consumers. These two 
parameters determine the periodicity with which the consumer-resource system 
oscillates. In fact, the period is inversely related to the geometric mean of b and 
d (for the mathematically inquisitive: the period of oscillations near the neutrally 
stable equilibrium is 21T I ../iid). Thus, the faster consumer and resource populations change in time, the shorter is the oscillation period. In models more complex 
than the Lotka-Volterra model the formula for the period is more complicated, 
but the qualitative insight carries over: faster feedbacks cause faster oscillations 
(and if feedbacks are too fast, then we cannot even obtain oscillations, because 
dynamics tend to be stabilized by very fast feedback mechanisms).

2.1.4 Implications for Historical Dynamics 
Our discussion of dynamics, so far, has focused exclusively on endogenous factors-variables that participate in dynamic feedbacks. In a purely endogenous 
system any fluctuations are solely a result of the interaction of endogenous variables; such systems are "closed" with respect to influences from outside. Historical social systems, by contrast, should always be affected by outside forces: 
climate fluctuations causing crop failure, sudden appearance of new epidemics, 
hostile invasions, spread of new religions, and so on. Factors that influence a 
dynamical system, but are not themselves influenced by its variables, are called 
exogenous. The distinction between endogenous and exogenous factors is not 
sharp, and usually depends on the questions we choose. For example, if we are 
focused on the internal dynamics of a single polity, then we will model invasion 
by other polities as an exogenous factor. But if we decide to expand the model 
to cover the dynamics of the whole system of interacting states, or the worldsystem (Wallerstein 1974; Chase-Dunn and Hall 1997), then invasion occurrence 
is endogenized.

The open property of historical social systems presents no problem to the 
dynamical systems approach. The most natural way to model such influences is 
to add an exogenous structural variable to the system of equations. For example, 
if we already have endogenous variables X and Y, and add an exogenous variable 
Z, then the equations look something like 
X=f(X, Y,Z) 
Y=g(X, Y,Z} 
i = h(t) 
where f, g, and h, are some functions. That is, the rate of change of X and Y 
depends on all three variables in the system, while the rate of change of Z is 
given by some time-dependent function. There are two general ways to model Z: 
(1) as a stochastic variable or (2) as a deterministic trend. Which approach we 
choose depends on the nature of the exogenous variable, and the questions we 
wish to ask.

In Sections 2.1.1-2.1.3 I identified three fundamental types of dynamics characterizing purely endogenous systems. The simplest type encompasses systems 
that are not affected by negative feedbacks. I will call such dynamics zero order.

Next, there are systems that are affected only by feedbacks acting very rapidly, 
which I will call first-order dynamics. Finally, there are systems that incorporate 
GEOPOLITICS 15 
multiple endogenous variables, leading to negative feedback loops acting with a 
time delay. These are second-order systems.

Allowing exogenous variables leads to a natural generalization of this order 
typology as follows. Zero-order systems are characterized by this general model: 
X =/(Z(t)) (2.8) 
In effect, X itself is the exogenous variable. Examples of such systems are various kinds of random walks (biased or otherwise), stochastic exponential increase 
or decline models, and so on. Such systems typically do not have an equilibrium 
density around which they fluctuate (unless we construct the function fin a very 
special way, to force such an "equilibrium" exogenously). Zero-order systems are 
not terribly interesting from the dynamical point of view, because any systematic 
dynamical patterns found in them are entirely due to the action of exogenous 
variables. The power of the dynamical systems approach would be largely misspent in applying it to such systems. However, zero-order dynamics provide a 
natural null model, against which other more complex alternatives can be tested.

First-order systems are governed by models of the form 
X=f(X,Z(t)) (2.9) 
where Z is an exogenous variable and does not depend on X. If Z is a stochastic 
variable, and f includes a negative feedback, then the dynamics are characterized 
by a stochastic equilibrium. X fluctuates in the vicinity of the stable equilibrium, 
and if X becomes too high or too low, endogenous dynamics push it back to the 
equilibrial level of fluctuations (in other words, the dynamic process is characterized by a return tendency). No cycles or any other kinds of complex dynamic 
behaviors occur in first-order systems, unless they are exogenously imposed (for 
example, Z oscillates periodically).

Second-order systems are governed by models like 
X =f(X, Y, Z(t)) 
Y =g(X, Y, Z(t)) 
where Z is again an exogenous variable. More than two endogenous variables 
can be involved. Second-order systems are capable of all kinds of complex dynamics: stable equilibria, limit cycles, quasiperiodicity, chaos, multiple coexisting 
attractors, etc. Adding stochasticity expands the spectrum of possible behaviors 
even further. However, for the purposes of this book, I will call all such behaviors 
second-order oscillations. Perhaps the time will come when we have methods and 
data good enough for distinguishing between limit cycles and chaos in historical 
systems, but this time is not here yet. The fundamental importance of distinguishing between the three kinds of dynamics is that in zero-order systems all dynamics 
are driven exogenously, while in the first- and second-order ones some proportion 
of the variance in fluctuations is explained by the action of endogenous variables.

Furthermore, different social mechanisms can often be classified as either fast or 
slow feedbacks, leading, correspondingly, to either first- or second-order dynamics. Detecting and characterizing such oscillation-inducing feedbacks is a major 
goal of the proposed research program in historical dynamics.

2.2 THE COLLINS THEORY OF GEOPOLITICS 
One of the most powerful formulations of the geopolitical theory is found in the 
work of Randall Collins (1978, 1986, 1995); see Rozov (1997). Because Collins 
states his geopolitical principles clearly and succinctly, this verbal theory can 
be relatively easily translated into mathematical models. Furthermore, Collins 
and eo-workers have also advanced formal geopolitical models, formulated as 
computer simulations (Hanneman et al. 1995). My plan in this section is to review 
the postulates advanced by Collins, and translate them into simple differential 
models. I will also do the same for the simulation model of Hanneman et al.

(1995), thus bringing these developments to a common denominator. Another 
interesting model that is relevant to the issues at hand is the spatial simulation by 
Artzrouni and Komlos (1996).

2.2.1 Modeling Size and Distance Effects 
As is natural, Collins' thinking has evolved over the last two decades, so the material below is based on his 1995 article, specifically on his Figure 1 there, which 
I redraw here as Figure 2.2. The main variable of interest is the state's territory 
size, or area. Temporal change in this variable occurs as a result of war success.

The positive arrow from "war success" to "territory size" indicates that when 
the state is successful in war, it gains territory, while war failure implies territory 
loss. Territory size also positively affects "geopolitical resources" (more taxes and 
Territory 
size 
A 
Marchland 
position 
p 
Logistical 
loads 
L 
Geopolitical 
resources 
R 
War 
success 
w 
Figure 2.1 Feedback structure of the Collins geopolitical model. (After Collins 1995: 
Figure 1) 
GEOPOLITICS 17 
recruits for the army), which in turn positively affects war success. Increased territory size also means increased "logisticalloads." The further that military power 
is projected from the home base, the higher the costs (Collins 1995:1558). Additionally, more state resources are tied up in policing the populace and extracting 
the resources. This connection between the state's size and logisticalloads is often referred to as the "imperial overstretch" principle (Kennedy 1987). Increased 
logistic loads, in turn, have a negative effect on war success. Finally, "marchland 
position" favors war success, because states with enemies on fewer fronts expand 
at the expense of states surrounded by enemies (Collins 1995:1555). However, 
state expansion reduces the marchland advantage, as the state expands away from 
its initially more protected position.

We now translate this theory into formal models, starting with the loop involving geopolitical resources, and then adding the effect of logistical loads.

Marchland position requires a spatially explicit approach and will be tackled in 
the next section. In developing the following models, I will make two general 
assumptions. First, and most importantly, I will assume that various feedbacks 
act rapidly with respect to territorial dynamics. Thus, I can use ordinary differential equations as the mathematical framework. Second, to make the model more 
concrete I will assume simple functional forms, usually linear ones. The effect of 
these assumptions on the results will be discussed below.

In the first model, there are three variables: territory size, or area A, geopolitical resources R, and war success W. I will assume that the rate of change of A 
is linearly related to war success: A= c1 W, where c1 is a proportionality constant, translating war victory into square kilometers of territory gained. Resources 
should be roughly proportional to the area (in the simplest case, if population density is approximately constant, increased area implies greater population base to 
pay taxes and provide recruits). Thus, R = c2A. Finally, the relationship between 
resources and war success is a bit more complex. Resources translate into state 
power, but in order to gain victory, state power has to be greater than the power 
of the adversary. Assuming that the state we study (the focal state) exists in a 
homogeneous environment, characterized by a constant military power of rivals, 
we have W = c3R- c4 • The constant c3 translates resources into power, while c4 
is the power of the adversary who must be defeated. The greater is the power 
of the focal state, in relation to the adversary power, the more successful it is 
in war, and, in consequence, the faster it increases its territory. Putting together 
these assumptions, and after some algebraic manipulations, we have the following 
model: 
A=cA-a (2.10) 
where I defined c = c1c2c3 and a= c1c4 , to gid rid of unneeded parameter combinations.

The dynamics of this linear model are very simple, and depend on the initial 
territory of the state (see Figure 2.3a). If the initial A is below the threshold 
A0 = afc, then the rate of change is negative, and A decreases to 0. However, if 
A starts above the threshold, then it grows exponentially (that is, at an accelerating 
rate) to infinity. In other words, we are dealing here with a zero-order type of 
(a) 
Territory 
Figure 2.3 Relationship between the rate of territorial change, A, and territory, A, in the 
two simple geopolitical models. (a) Model of territory size effects. (b) Model of territory 
size and distance.

dynamics. This is not at all surprising, because all arrows in the loop we modeled 
so far have pluses associated with them. In other words, we have just modeled a 
positive feedback loop, and obtained an entirely predictable result.

The loop involving logistic loads, on the other hand, involves one minus, and 
therefore it is a negative feedback loop. To model the effect of logistic load, let 
us follow Collins and assume that imperial overextension results from difficulties 
associated with projecting imperial power over distance. In other words, if state 
power at the center is P0 , then at distance r it is P0L(r), where L(r) is the logistic 
distance multiplier, ranging from I at r = 0 to 0 at r = oo. Boulding (1962:245-
247) presents the argument that logistic distance multipliers should decline with 
increasing r as a negative exponential function: L(r) =exp[-rfc5], with c5 governing how rapidly power declines with distance. Since the relationship between 
area and radius is A"' r2 , the logistic distance multiplier is L(r) = exp[ -.JA/c7].

Substituting this relationship in the model, we have 
A= cAexp(-JA/h]-a (2.11) 
where parameter combinations were again replaced with single parameters. Figure 2.3b shows that state power, as measured by its ability to expand, is negative 
at low A Gust as in the pure size model), and initially increases with A. However, eventually the effect of increased logistic load begins to be felt. At A = 4h2 
state power is maximized, and for A > 4h2 it begins to decline. There are two 
equilibrial points, A 1 and A2• A 1, similarly to A0 in the size-only model, is unstable: if the initial condition is below A 1, then the state is eaten by its neighhors. A2 is a stable equilibrium: below it, the state's ability to expand is positive 
and A increases; above it, the state expansion rate is negative and A declines 
(Figure 2.3b ).

GEOPOLITICS 19 
An alternative formulation is to assume that power declines with increasing 
distance as a Gaussian curve, c5 exp[-r2fc6]. The Gaussian curve appears convenient as a phenomenological description, because it is flat near the state center, 
where communications are best, and then declines at an increasing rate. Employing this assumption leads to a slightly different model: A = eA exp[-A/ b] -a.

The relationship between A and A in this model has the same qualitative shape as 
in Figure 2.3b, so the implications for territorial dynamics are exactly the same 
as in Model (2.11).

Note that in this model imperial overstretch does not lead to state collapse.

Comparing the size-only model to Model (2.11 ), we see that the novel feature is 
the existence of the upper equilibrium A2 , which turns out to be stable. Thus, we 
now have a model of first-order dynamics; there is no possibility of boom/bust 
behaviors. How general is this result? Remember that we made two kinds of 
assumptions: fast feedbacks and simple functional forms. Taking the second assumption first, here is where our knowledge of dynamics (Section 2.1) begins to 
pay for itself. No matter how nonlinear the various functional forms are, we will 
still end up with a one-dimensional ordinary differential equation model, which 
is not capable of generating boom/bust dynamics and second-order oscillations.

All we are likely to do is to create a few more equilibrial points, making the dynamics increasingly more metastable. If we add large enough amounts of noise, 
then we may be able to force the state trajectory to jump between a high and 
a low equilibrium. This would not be a terribly satisfactory model, because we 
then would have to understand just what were the exogenous forces that forced 
the trajectory from one basin of attraction to another. We would need to model 
these exogenous forces explicitly, and end up with a very different kind of theory 
from the one we are examining here.

The assumption of fast feedbacks is more crucial to the general theoretical 
results implied by Model (2.11). Clearly, adding delays, whether implicitly by 
using difference equations, or explicitly by making some variables, other than 
A, change on a slow time scale, will lead to models that are capable of oscillations. Let us consider whether adding such delays makes sense empirically. The 
historical record shows that the growth of empires occurs over time periods of 
many decades, and even centuries. Thus, A is a slow variable. The geopolitical 
resources may also come on line with some time lag (because it takes time to 
"digest" new conquests). However, R is involved in the positive feedback loop, 
and delays in R will only slow the state expansion, but will not cause an imperial collapse. The feedback loop involving logistic loads, L, on the other hand, 
should operate without an appreciable time lag. For example, the effect of distance, which is how we modeled logistics, is instantaneous: as soon as territory 
is conquered, the boundary moves away from the center, and the state immediately incurs the higher costs of projecting its power to the new boundary. Other 
factors, such as policing the newly conquered population, also should impose an 
immediate extra burden on the state.

The general argument of this section, then, can be summarized as follows.

Imperial overstretch, at least as conceptualized by such geopolitical theorists as 
Collins and Kennedy, should not lead to state collapse. It is a first-order factor 
that acts to set a limit to further territorial expansion. Should the state, by chance, 
overstep this boundary, its power to defend the extra territory is immediately impaired. That territory may be reconquered by neighbors, or the state may abandon 
it as not worth the bother (as the Roman Empire did with Agri Decumates and 
Dacia). Such a retreat restores the ability of the state to defend itself. Thus, we 
need to look to other variables in order to understand the empirically observed 
examples of imperial collapse.

2.2.2 Positional Effects 
In order to investigate positional effects properly, we really need a spatially explicit model, which in practice usually means computer simulations. Before jumping into simulations, however, it is often a good idea to generate some expectations with a drastically simplified version of the model that permits analytical 
insights. Even if these insights are shown to be completely wrong by the subsequent simulation model, we learn something (at the least, we learn that explicit 
space is the key element in obtaining correct results). For this reason, let us 
consider the following simple model. It is a modification of the size-distance 
geopolitical model [Equations (2.11)] which assumes that territorial dynamics 
occurs in one-dimensional space. I will again assume that the logistic distance 
multiplier is a negative exponential function of distance, but now that we have 
one-dimensional space, A "' r. The resulting modified model is 
A= -ycAexp[-A/h]- a (2.12) 
(note that there is no square root associated with A inside the exponential). The 
additional parameter 'Y takes values 1 or 2, depending on whether the state has 
enemies at both boundaries, or only at one. In the second case, the state delivers 
twice as much power at the single boundary ( 'Y = 2). What is the effect of position 
(as codified by -y) on the resulting size of the state? To do a rough calculation, 
we approximate exp[x] with 1 +x. and solve the resulting equation for the A2 
equilibrium (the upper stable one), obtaining A2 =0.5h(l +J1-4afch-y). From 
this expression, we see that doubling 'Y does not result in doubling the equilibrium 
state size. To illustrate this with a numerical example, suppose that the equilibrium 
size of the state with enemies at both sides is only double the critical size below 
which the state collapses, A2 = 2A1• Then, having an enemy only on one side 
will increase A2 by about 30%. If A2 = 3A1 then the increment resulting from 
the marchland effect is less than 20%. Thus, this simple model suggests that the 
marchland position should yield a rather modest increase in the equilibrium state 
size. Its primary effect is to give some protection to states that are rather marginal 
in size (in fact, the marchland effect reduces the critical state size, A1, by 50%).

The Artzrouni and Komlos Model 
I now turn to the spatial simulation of territorial dynamics constructed by 
Artzrouni and Komlos (1996) to investigate hypotheses explaining the formation 
of the European state system. These investigators represented Europe as a grid 
GEOPOLITICS 21 
of unit squares, with linear dimensions of about 40 km. At time = 0 (which 
was assumed to correspond to 500 c.E.), the simulated space was filled with 
equal-sized states, each occupying 5 x 5 squares, and thus with a starting area of 
roughly 40,000 km2 (see Figure 2.4).

The two variables that affect the power of states in the Artzrouni and Komlos 
simulation are the area A (measured as the number of unit squares that make 
up a country) and the perimeter C (the number of squares that have a foreign 
neighbor). The power is increased by greater A, but decreased by greater C, 
because longer boundaries require more resources to defend. Note that this is a 
different conceptualization of logistic loads from the one used in the previous 
section. The marchland effect was modeled by treating state boundaries along the 
sea and mountains differently from those where no natural borders are present.

Artzrouni and Komlos assumed that a sea boundary is easier to defend. Therefore, 
in calculating the boundary length, each unit along the sea counted only as a 
fraction f of a unit along the land border. In addition, two European mountain 
chains, the Pyrenees and the Alps, were assumed to present impregnable natural 
barriers, so that unit squares abutting these areas were not counted as part of C.

However, the Pyrenees and the Alps did not completely cut off their respective 
peninsulas from the continent (see Figure 2.4).

Artzrouni and Komlos assumed the following specific form for the power function of state i: 
A. P.= I 
1 a+ exp[ -yC; + /3] (2.13) 
where A; and C; are the area and the perimeter of state i, respectively, and a, 
{3, and 'Y are positive constants. This function, although conceptualized differently, results in the same general shape of the relationship between the state 
size and power as in Model (2.11 ). As we increase A from 0, P first increases 
with A, as a result of the positive feedback associated with increased geopolitical 
resources. Eventually, however, the negative feedback associated with increased 
logistic loads overpowers the positive one, and for very high A, P declines to 0.

The relative powers of states determine their success in war with neighbors.

Each iteration of the model is made of one bilateral interaction (war). The simulation model chooses a country at random (call it i) and compares its power to 
the powers of all its neighbors. The simulation then determines which neighbor j 
differs the most in power from i (the j for which the absolute difference lP;- Pi I 
is maximized), and the two countries go to war. The more powerful country 
wins with probability l-0.5exp[-K(P;/Pi -1)]; otherwise, the weaker country 
wins. After the conclusion of war, all boundary squares of the loser contiguous 
to the winner are absorbed by the winner. The simulation then performs another 
iteration, choosing a country at random, etc. Each iteration corresponds to 1/3 
year.

The Artzrouni and Komlos model has five parameters (f, a, {3, -y, and K). The 
investigators used the method of trial and error to find the specific values of these 
parameters that would replicate the historically observed dynamic map of Europe 
as closely as possible. One particular realization of the simulation is shown in 
Figure 2.4 Territorial dynamics of the European state system as simulated by the model 
of Artzrouni and Komlos (1996). Top: initial map at 500 c.E. Bottom: model-predicted 
map at 1800 C.E. Thick black lines indicate the location of the Pyrenees and the Alps.

(After Artzrouni and Komlos 1996: Figure 4) 
GEOPOLITICS 23 
Figure 2.4: the 234 initial countries at 500 c.E. are reduced to 25 by the end of 
the simulation. The outlines of coastal countries ("France," "Spain," and "Italy") 
take shape rapidly, while inland countries take longer to solidify. Additionally, 
there is much more variability in the final configuration achieved away from the 
coasts in different realizations. Thus, the marchland effect has two aspects. First, 
countries enjoying it achieve somewhat larger size compared to more centrally 
located ones (this can be seen by the large size achieved by "Spain," "France," 
and "Sweden/Norway" in Figure 2.4). Second, their boundaries reach stability 
much faster than the boundaries of inland states.

To summarize, the Artzrouni and Komlos simulation provides a confirmation 
of the postulated effect of the marchland advantage. Additionally, the simulation suggests that the boundaries of present states, especially those with long sea 
borders (Spain, France, Italy, and Greece), may be determined in a large degree 
by geopolitical mechanisms. However, Artzrouni and Komlos are very careful to 
stress that simulation parameters must be tuned just right for the simulation to 
reach the desired equilibrium. While the circularity involved in parameter calibration weakens the result, we should keep in mind that the simulation is very 
parsimonious, having only five free parameters. The sensitivity to one parameter, f, is of particular interest to the question of the marchland effect. If f is 
set too low, then the simulations usually yielded just one or two countries with 
maritime borders to the west of Europe that swept eastward across the continent.

Their small effective perimeters kept their power high, allowing them eventually 
to annex all their neighbors.

Finally, the geopolitical simulation of Artzrouni and Komlos, similarly to analytical models advanced before, generates an essentially first-order behavior.

Large countries conquer smaller and eventually expand until they reach the limits set by imperial overstretch, where their size is stabilized. In other words, the 
model does not predict that states reaching too high a size will collapse.

2.2.3 Conflict-legitimacy Dynamics 
The geopolitical theory of Collins has three major principles (Collins 1986:168, 
1995: Figure 1): (1) territorial resource advantage, (2) marchland advantage, and 
(3) overextension as a result of increased logistic loads. Our modeling in previous sections suggests that these postulates lead to first-order dynamics characterized by initially accelerating territorial growth that eventually reaches a stable 
equilibrium. Geopolitical models do not predict the collapse of large powerful 
empires (although small states may be destroyed before they manage to grow 
above a critical size). Yet, historical empires exhibit a different behavior, because they always eventually collapse. When a dynamical system exhibits opposite trends (growth versus decline) for the same values of variables in the 
explanatory set, this means that there is another hidden variable that determines 
the direction of change, which we have not yet included in the set. Thus, our 
modeling efforts have already paid for themselves: they showed that we need to 
look for explanatory mechanisms other than pure geopolitical principles, in order 
to understand the rise and collapse of territorial empires. It appears that Collins 
has also reached the same conclusion, judging by his extensive discussion of 
mechanisms of state breakdown in the 1995 paper. Specifically, Collins discusses two theories: (1) the demographic-structural model (Goldstone 1991b), 
and (2) ruler legitimacy as affected by geopolitical power-prestige (Hanneman 
et al. 1995). Dynamical systems theory suggests that the key property of the postulated mechanisms of collapse is the time scale on which they act (the concept 
of temporal scale is also discussed by Collins; e.g., Collins 1995: Figure 6). Thus, 
our task, which will be largely pursued beyond the confines of this chapter, is 
to translate various postulated nongeopolitical mechanisms into models, determine whether these models are in principle capable of generating second-order 
dynamics, and, if so, derive testable predictions from them.

Although the conflict-legitimacy model of Hanneman et al. is not based on a 
geopolitical mechanism (in the strict sense), I will review it in this chapter, because this model is already well developed (and can be quickly summarized) and 
is closely connected with the models considered earlier. Actually, Hanneman et 
al. develop not one model, but a series of models of increasing complexity. This 
is a methodologically sound approach; in fact, I am in complete agreement with 
the philosophy of modeling as set out by Hanneman et al. To their excellent recommendations (see also Hanneman 1988), I would add only that more attention 
should be paid to a parallel development and consideration of analytical models.

The core of the theory advanced by Hanneman et al. focuses on the interaction 
between power-prestige, state legitimacy, and international conflict. Hanneman 
et al. assume that the motivation of rulers to initiate external conflict is directly 
proportional to the difference between their current legitimacy and the goal of 
maximum legitimacy. For any given level of conflict initiated, the degree of success is determined by the proportional superiority of the power of the focal state, 
relative to that of its rivals. Change in the state prestige is proportional to war 
success, and legitimacy follows, with delay, from prestige (Hanneman et al. 1995: 
17). Hanneman et al. do not explain why legitimacy should follow war success 
with a lag time. Yet, in their model they impose a substantial lag: whereas war 
occurs at every time step (they use a discrete-time framework), legitimacy follows 
with a lag of three time units. This would suggest that (crudely) on average it 
takes victory in three successive wars for the legitimacy of the state to increase 
substantially. I would argue, by contrast, that legitimacy operates on a much faster 
time scale. War victory is immediately followed by a rush of patriotism that floats 
up the fortunes of politicians, and, vice versa, war failure is immediately followed 
by disillusionment with the powers that be. If legitimacy were a slow variable, 
then there would be much less temptation for politicians to use "a small victorious 
war" to bolster their shaky legitimacy.

Hanneman et al. develop three models: ( 1) the core model that focuses on 
war legitimacy dynamics, (2) a more complex version that adds the costs and 
benefits of empire, and (3) the full model that further adds imperial capitalism and 
the military-industrial complex. Of particular interest to us is the second model 
because, for certain parameter values, it appears to predict repeated instances of 
imperial growth followed by breakdown. However, it appears that occurrence of 
these instances of state collapse depends in a critical way on the assumption of a 
GEOPOLITICS 25 
lag time with which legitimacy follows war success. To check whether this is true, 
I translated the core of the Hanneman model into a differential equation model.

In the Appendix (see Section A.1) I show that the legitimacy-conflict model is 
described by a single-dimensional ordinary differential equation. In other words, 
we again end up with a first-order model. This model can have multiple equilibria, 
and depending on the initial values of territory size and previous record of war 
success, the trajectory will be attracted to one or another of the stable ones. But 
the model is incapable of exhibiting boom/bust dynamics or sustained oscillations.

The inescapable conclusion, therefore, is that the interaction between legitimacy, 
war success, and territorial expansion cannot generate sustained imperial decline.

Thus, the imperial collapses occurring in the Hanneman model appear to be 
entirely due to the assumed delay with which legitimacy follows war success.

2.3 CONCLUSION: GEOPOLITICS AS A FIRST-ORDER PROCESS 
I started this chapter by reviewing some elementary facts from nonlinear dynamics for the following reasons. Most social scientists are not closely familiar with 
dynamical systems theory, and I wanted to present a nontechnical summary of its 
insights most relevant to the issues dealt with in this book. One such particular 
insight is that there is a close relationship between the time scales at which negative feedbacks operate and the nature of the dynamics. If feedback mechanisms 
operate much faster than the dynamics of the focal variable, then the system 
cannot oscillate or even exhibit a single boom/bust behavior. If we do have an 
oscillatory system, then, more quantitatively, the speed with which a feedback 
acts determines the temporal pattern of the dynamics (for example, the average 
length of an oscillation, or a boom/bust cycle). This means that if a feedback loop 
operates on the scale of years, or even worse, weeks, then it is highly unlikely 
that it could cause oscillations, whose average period is measured in centuries.

Centuries-long cycles are typically caused by feedbacks operating on the scale of 
human generations (decades or longer).

This insight is very relevant to the issue of what mechanisms underlie imperial boom/bust cycles. Empires grow and decline on the time scale of centuries 
(Taagepera 1978a, 1978b, 1997; see also Figure 4.4 in Chapter 4). Let us make 
a simple analysis of the imperial growth/decline data tabulated in the Appendix 
of Taagepera (1997). Taagepera defined the rise phase as the time it takes for a 
polity to expand from 20% to 80% of its maximum area (1997: 480). We can 
define the decline phase analogously, as the time needed to decline from 80% to 
20% of the maximum, and the peak phase as the time from the end of the rise to 
the beginning of the decline. Table 2.1 gives the phase durations for the 31 polities from Taagepera (1997), that had four or more consecutive area observations 
(we need these data points to unambiguously define the phases). There is a large 
amount of variation in the durations of decline phases for these polities. In about 
half of the cases (14) the decline phase was on the order of one human generation (less than 0.3 centuries). The rest of empires exhibited longer decline phases, 
Table 2.1 Durations (in centuries) of imperial phases (rise, peak, and decline) for large 
polities listed by Taagepera (1997: Appendix).

Empire Rise Peak Decline 
Suiffang 0.7 1.0 1.4 
Sung 0.3 1.4 1.5 
Kanyakubia 0.1 0.2 0.0 
Tu fan 1.7 0.7 4.3 
Khmer 3.4 2.7 4.7 
Liao 0.3 1.8 0.0 
Jurchen 0.0 1.1 0.0 
Frankish 3.2 0.3 1.4 
Kievan Rus 1.2 0.5 1.0 
Fatimids 0.6 0.1 1.0 
Ayyubids/Mamluk 1.8 1.5 1.2 
Caliphate 0.7 1.0 0.8 
Samanid 0.8 0.6 0.4 
Bujid 0.0 0.9 0.2 
Ghaznavid 0.4 0.0 1.5 
Seljuk 0.5 0.5 0.2 
Khwarizm 0.8 0.1 0.2 
Inca 0.2 0.4 0.0 
Aztec 0.5 0.1 0.0 
Lithuania/Poland 1.8 2.5 0.2 
Golden Horde 0.0 0.7 1.7 
Ottoman 0.9 3.4 0.1 
Spain 1.4 0.5 0.0 
MongoVYuan 0.5 0.5 0.9 
Delhi l.l 0.4 0.5 
Ming 0.9 0.6 1.8 
Mogul 0.7 0.9 0.8 
Manchu 1.3 1.4 0.2 
French 0.3 0.5 0.0 
British 1.1 0.4 0.1 
Portuguese 0.0 0.4 1.5 
with 12 cases declining for one century or longer. Thus, Table 2.1 suggests that 
slow imperial declines are commonly found in the historical record.

My main argument in this chapter is that geopolitical variables (in the narrow sense) cannot explain the long-term (a century or longer) imperial decline 
phases. Such geopolitical variables as logistic loads and loss of marchland advantage begin operating essentially without a time lag. As soon as more territory 
GEOPOLITICS 27 
is conquered, the state must shoulder the burden of defending it from external 
and internal (rebellion) threats. Similarly, as soon as the victorious state intrudes 
on a central location, any previous marchland advantage is diminished. It is true 
that the benefits of increased size can come with a substantial lag, because it 
takes time to organize production in newly conquered territory and to persuade 
the populace there to accept state authority. But this mechanism is part of the 
positive feedback loop; it is not what causes empires to decline. In an interesting extension of the usual geopolitical variables, Collins and co-authors proposed 
that the relationship between state legitimacy and war success may cause territorial overshoot, followed by collapse. However, our investigation of this idea 
suggested that this mechanism still leads to first-order dynamics (metastability), 
unless we impose an unrealistically (as I would argue) long lag on the response 
of legitimacy to war success. Furthermore, even if we stipulate such a long lag, 
only one of the models investigated by Hanneman et al. exhibited boom-bust 
cycles, and the collapse in this model was accomplished in essentially one time 
step. By contrast, historical data suggest that imperial decline often occurs on the 
time scale of decades or even centuries (Table 2.1 ). This empirical pattern is not 
explained by purely geopolitical theories.

The importance of time scales has not, of course, escaped previous theorists.

Collins devotes several pages to discussing this issue (Collins 1995:1584-1586), 
Kennedy (1987) repeatedly stresses that the state's military strength and productive ability are correlated in the long term, and we certainly should not forget 
Braudel's (1972) la longue duree. However, the discussion of this issue typically 
does not get beyond verbal theories. It is precisely in these kinds of quantitative 
issues that nonlinear dynamics can be of great use, because formulating explicit 
models allows us to build in the empirically based characteristics of postulated 
mechanisms (including their rates of change) and predict the ensuing model dynamics (for example, the temporal durations of the rise and decline phases).

Pushing through such an exercise can help us reject some rival hypotheses. Development of geopolitical models in this chapter is an example of this general 
idea.

If the time-scale argument advanced in this chapter is accepted, it does not 
mean that geopolitical mechanisms (in the narrow sense) are unimportant in the 
explanation of the imperial rise and demise. They are just insufficient, and we 
must look to other variables in order to build the required theory. One potential 
avenue that seems worth exploring is to abandon the view of polities as "black 
boxes" and look into their inner workings. This will be our goal in the next 
chapter.

2.4 SUMMARY 
• There are three very general classes of dynamical behaviors. Zero-order dynamics, boundless growth or decline, arise in systems that are not affected by 
negative feedbacks. Examples include linear and exponential growth/decline 
processes. First-order dynamics characterize systems in which feedbacks 
act on a fast scale. First-order dynamics are equilibrial; examples include 
asymptotic and logistic growth processes. First-order dynamics may also be 
metastable (more than one stable equilibrium is present). Finally, secondorder dynamics arise in systems in which dynamical feedbacks act with a 
lag. Examples of second-order behaviors include a single boom/bust dynamic 
and sustained periodic or chaotic oscillations.

• The geopolitical theory of Randall Collins postulates three main mechanisms 
explaining territorial dynamics of states: geopolitical resources, logistical 
loads, and the marchland position.

• The mathematical model incorporating only the positive feedback between 
territory and geopolitical resources exhibits zero-order dynamics. If the initial 
state territory is above a certain threshold, then it grows in an accelerating 
fashion. However, if the initial territory is below the threshold, then the state 
shrinks and eventually disappears.

• Adding to the model the negative feedback of the logistical loads leads to 
first-order dynamical behavior, metastability. Again, if the initial territory is 
below the threshold, the state loses ground and disappears. However, starting 
above the threshold, the territory does not increase without bound, as in the 
simpler model, but approaches an upper equilibrium. This equilibrium is 
stable with respect to small perturbations.

• In order to examine the positional effects I turn to a spatial simulation model 
developed by Artzrouni and Komlos. This model suggests that states initially 
enjoying marchland advantage (a higher proportion of boundary along a 
coastline) grow to larger sizes than inland states. However, the model does 
not exhibit any second-order oscillations: the loser states disappear, while 
the winners grow to the limits set by logistical factors, where their size is 
stabilized.

• Finally, I review the simulation model of conflict legitimacy dynamics developed by Hanneman and eo-workers. I show that if we translate this model 
into differential equations, then we again obtain a first-order system that is 
incapable of second-order oscillations.

• An analysis of growth/decline data tabulated by Rein Taagepera suggests 
that long periods of imperial decline (more than a century) are frequently 
found in the historical record (12 cases out of 31). This finding strongly suggests that at least in some historical cases imperial dynamics were governed 
by second-order mechanisms. However, models based on purely geopolitical 
mechanisms do not predict such prolonged declines. Thus, we must investigate other mechanisms of imperial collapse.

Chapter Three 
Collective Solidarity 
3.1 GROUPS IN SOCIOLOGY 
3.1.1 Groups as Analytical Units 
In the previous chapter I suggested that we cannot understand the territorial dynamics of polities without studying their inner workings. This raises an important 
question: what are the elementary units in terms of which our theories should be 
constructed? The philosophical principle of methodological individualism maintains that ultimately sociological theories should be based on the properties of 
individuals. I agree with this approach in principle, especially if we stress the key 
word ultimately. However, methodological individualism, in my opinion, must be 
tempered with two important caveats. First, the idea that individuals are somehow 
more "real" than groups does not appear to be tenable. Human individuals cannot 
exist apart from a group and remain human (as real-life "Mowglis" attest). Furthermore, human groups are more than simple collections of individuals. Uc!ike 
animal groups, human groups are uniquely able to plan and purposefully carry 
out actions (Alexander and Borgia 1978; Melotti 1987).

Second, an attempt to follow the prescription of methodological individualism 
in one step does not appear to be a good modeling strategy (Section 1.2.3). Polities, especially such complex ones as empires, contain multitudes of individuals 
differing among themselves in a multitude of ways. Furthermore, an individual 
primarily interacts with a small subset of others, rather than directly with everybody else in the polity. In other words, large human societies consist of a 
number of groups, often hierarchically nested within each other. Thus, a much 
better modeling strategy would be to break the problem into two (or more) steps.

First, we would like to understand how group dynamics arise from individual 
action, and then we can use g~up properties to model polity dynamics. "There 
is a distinctly sociological way of looking at the world. It holds that the key to 
understanding social life lies with the analysis of groups, rather than individuals." 
(Hechter 1987:2) An excellent example of such a hierarchical approach that introduces groups as intermediate actors between individuals and social dynamics 
is Jack Goldstone's (1994) analysis of revolutionary action. We also should keep 
in mind that eventually it will be necessary to progress to the next level and 
consider how polities interact within world-systems.

There are two characteristics that are particularly responsible for making human groups not just collections of individuals, but agents in their own right: the 
tendency to draw social boundaries and the capacity for group-oriented action 
even if it is individually costly.

Social Boundaries 
Humans use many cues to demarcate group membership (Shaw and Wong 1989; 
Masters 1998). One of the most important recognition markers is language, especially dialect, accent, and speech patterns. For example, there is abundant experimental evidence from several societies that people are more disposed to cooperate 
with others who have the same dialect as themselves, even when dialectal differences are slight (Nettle 1999:57). Phenotypic similarity provides a number of 
potential markers: visible resemblance of facial and body form (and even odor); 
movement patterns, facial expression, and behavioral stereotypes; clothing and ornaments; and style and manners (the latter are especially important for signaling 
social class). Speech dialect and phenotype provide obvious, instantaneous information about group membership. Other categories of markers include kinship 
(presumed common descent; can be fictitious), religion (shared beliefs, norms, 
and rituals), and territory or proximity of residence (Masters 1998:456-457). The 
last category can also include shared membership in the same polity (nationalism 
or"regnalism"; see Reynolds 1997).

Capacity for Solidaristic Behaviors 
A very powerful approach for inferring patterns of collective action from individual behaviors is the rational choice theory (Coleman 1990). The basic premise 
of this theory is that individuals are utility maximizers. The rational choice theory, however, has been unable to solve one very important problem in sociology: 
how societies can function without falling apart. An important theory (as formulated, for example, by Thomas Hobbes) maintains that society is based on the 
concept of social contract. However, it turns out that if people acted on a purely 
rational basis, they would never be able to get together to form society at all 
(Collins 1992:9). In fact, this "nonobvious sociological insight" {Collins 1992) 
approaches, in my view, the logical status of a theorem. For example, Kraus 
(1993) shows how the best developed theories of Hobbesian contractarianism all 
founder on the collective action problem, the free-rider predicament {Olson 1965; 
for a nontechnical review, see Collins 1992:13-19).

There appears to be only one solution to the puzzle of how societies can hold 
together (Collins 1992). Although people pursue their selfish interests most of the 
time, they also have feelings of solidarity with at least some other people. Such 
precontractual solidarity, in Durkheim's words, is the basis of societies (Collins 
1992). States and armies break apart when people stop thinking of themselves as 
members of the group and think only of their own individual self-interest (Collins 
1992:23).

Thus, the functioning of society can only be understood as a mixture of selfcentered (rational) and group-centered ("extrarational") behaviors. In Collins' 
(1992:8) view, "the overall structure of society is best understood as a result 
of conflicting groups, some of which dominate the others. But conflict and domination themselves are possible only because groups are integrated at the micro 
level." This statement captures very nicely the essence of the approach that I 
develop here.

COLLECIIVE SOLIDARITY 31 
3.1.2 Evolution of Solidaristic Behaviors 
The preceeding argument suggests that, in order to understand the functioning of 
societies and states, the rational choice theory must be supplemented by norms 
that promote group-maintenance behaviors. This observation, coupled with overwhelming empirical evidence for norms, leads to the question: where do norms 
come from? More precisely, we need a theory for how group-promoting norms 
could arise in the process of social evolution. Several mechanisms have been 
proposed, including reciprocity, punishment, kin selection, and group selection 
(Richerson and Boyd 1998).

Reciprocity as a mechanism for building trust and cooperation in longcontinued interactions was proposed by Trivers (1971). Subsequently, Axelrod 
and Hamilton ( 1981) showed that a simple strategy, "tit for tat" (cooperate on 
the first round and then do as your partner did last time), provides a cooperative 
solution in the repeated prisoner's dilemma game. Thus, cooperation is possible 
between two rational individuals, provided that they interact over a long term.

The problem is that the tit-for-tat strategy does not generalize to large groups, 
because it is very difficult to get reciprocity to increase when rare in a large 
group dominated by unconditional defection (Boyd and Richerson 1988).

Punishment has also been proposed as a mechanism to support norms. Axelrod (1997:44-71) used a series of computer simulations to investigate conditions 
under which norms can evolve and be stable. One possibility that he investigated 
is the employment of metanorms, or willingness to punish someone who did 
not enforce a norm. Axelrod found that a norm could become stabilized by a 
metanorm. However, this result was dependent on the population starting with a 
sufficiently high number of norm enforcers. If there were too few "avengers" to 
start with, then both the norm and the metanorm collapsed. A similar model was 
developed by Boyd and Richerson (1992), who showed that a division of labor 
can arise, with few, or even one, punisher preventing a large number of reluctant 
cooperators from defecting. However, there are some problems (Richerson and 
Boyd 1998). First, the number of group members that can be coerced by leaders 
is limited. Second, what is lacking in the punishment system is a mechanism 
to regulate individual behaviors in the group interest (if a leader is capable of 
coercing the whole group, then (s)he might be motivated to use the group in 
his/her interests). Finally, comparative evidence is not supportive of the idea that 
coercion can generate ultrasociality (Richerson and Boyd 1998:79).

Reciprocity and coercion are rational behaviors. But, as was noted above, 
norms promoting group-beneficial behaviors cannot arise as a result of a contract 
between self-interested individuals. Similarly, it is difficult to imagine how altruistic behaviors might arise if evolution acts only at the individual level (all formal 
models developed so far indicate that this is impossible). The only known theoretical mechanism for the evolution of altruism is multilevel selection (Sober and 
Wilson 1991 ), The noncontroversial example of multilevel evolutionary mechanism is kin selection, based on W. D. Hamilton's concept of inclusive fitness. A 
more controversial mechanism is group selection. Evolutionary biologists have 
gone through phases of first uncritically accepting group selection, and then repudiating the concept (Sober and Wilson 1991). Currently, there is a cautious but 
definite acceptance of group selection as a legitimate evolutionary mechanism, 
given certain conditions (which human groups satisfy; Sober and Wilson 1991).

Unfortunately, many sociologists still think of group selection as a thoroughly 
discredited concept (e.g., Sanders 1999).

There seems no doubt that altruism can evolve in small groups by the mechanism of kin or group selection (Richerson and Boyd 1998). Furthermore, kin and 
group selection are not logically distinct categories (Sober and Wilson 1991) and 
can work synergistically (Jones 2000). Additionally, although altruistic norms 
cannot evolve purely by the mechanisms of reciprocity and punishment, these 
mechanisms can substantially enhance the likelihood of norms evolving in a 
group selection context, by reducing (although not completely eliminating) the 
free-rider problem. Another potential feature that could enhance evolution of altruism is leveling institutions, such as monogamy and food sharing among nonkin 
(Boehm 1997). Bowles (1999) lists yet other altruism-promoting characteristics 
of groups: segmentation, conformism, and parochialism.

While evolution of altruism in small groups is widely accepted by social biologists, and accounts satisfactorily for the small-scale cooperation in nonhuman 
primates, certain aspects of human ultrasociality remain puzzling (Richerson and 
Boyd 1998). There is some controversy about whether kin and genetic group 
selection, even when buttressed by reciprocity, punishment, and leveling institutions, could account for altruistic behaviors in large groups, where the recipient of 
altruism is not a relative, nor personally known to the altruistic donor. Sober and 
Wilson ( 1991) contend that, given the characteristics of human collectives, group 
selection is an entirely plausible mechanism. Boyd and Richerson think it is not 
enough, and propose their own theory, which invokes cultural group selection 
(original theory in Boyd and Richerson 1985; recent assessments in Richerson 
and Boyd 1998, 2001).

An important preadaptation for cultural group selection is what Boyd and Richerson call the conformist transmission of cultural traits, for example, "when in 
Rome, do as Romans do" (for a related concept of rational imitation, see Hedstrom 1998). Using this strategy can be advantageous, because the group is often 
"wiser" than an individual, having a longer collective memory and wider range 
of experience than any single individual could obtain alone. The side effect of 
conformity is that it reduces cultural variation within groups, while increasing 
variation between groups, a process that strengthens group-level selection compared to individual-level selection. Boyd and Richerson also developed a theory 
for the cultural evolution of symbolic and ideological markers of group membership (using models of "indirect bias"; see Boyd and Richerson 1985: Chapter 8) 
and for the evolution of moralistic punishment (Boyd and Richerson 1992).

Once symbolically marked adaptation for in-group cooperation stabilized by 
moralistic punishment evolved in small groups, such as bands of paleolithic huntergatherers, an important threshold in human evolution was crossed. Symbolic demarcation allows for large collectives to become designated as cooperating groups.

"Success in intergroup competition came to depend on within-group cooperation; an evolutionary arms race arose. The scale of cooperation-to-compete might 
COLLEGIVE SOLIDARITY 33 
escalate until ecological, rather than evolutionary constraints bring a halt. Once 
the barriers imposed by kinship and reciprocity are breached by cultural group 
selection, it is not clear what the next natural evolutionary limit to scale of cooperation is" (Richerson and Boyd 1998:91-92). Thus, evolution of symbolically 
demarcated boundaries is an example of the "stairway effect" (Turchin 1977:102), 
in which an accumulation of small quantitative changes at some point allows a 
qualitatively large step to be made, rapidly followed by another, and so on. The 
critical theoretical problem is to understand the mechanism for widening the definition of the cooperating collective from a smaller-scale group to a larger-scale 
group. Repeated iteration of the mechanism leads to an ever-larger cooperative 
in-group, until some other force stops the process.

To summarize, evolutionary biologists are beginning to agree that the evolution of human sociality had to involve some kind of group selection. There are 
two versions of the argument, one emphasizing the biological ("genetic") aspect 
(Sober and Wilson 1991), and the other emphasizing the cultural aspect (Boyd 
and Richerson 1985) of group selection. In actuality, the two versions are not 
very far apart, the difference being mostly in the emphasis. Both arguments are 
buttressed by a battery of mathematical models and empirical evidence. For example, group selection has been shown to be a remarkably effective mechanism 
in experiments (Goodnight and Stevens 1997). Another example is the recent experimental demonstration of altruistic punishment in humans (Fehr and Giichter 
2002). In their most recent review, Richerson and Boyd (2001) argue that the theory of cultural group selection passes a number of tests, such as those for logical 
coherence (checked with formal models), verification of the proximal (psychological) mechanisms assumed by the theory, tests for the existence of the necessary 
microevolutionary processes, and examinations of the large-scale comparative 
evidence, including patterns of adaptation and maladaptation.

3.1.3 Ethnic Groups and Ethnicity 
One very important type of human collective is the ethnic group. All of the 
characteristics of human groups that we discussed above are expressed most 
vividly when applied to ethnic groups. Thus, the markers listed in Section 3.1.1-
language, religion, phenotype, and territoriality-are all used in various combinations to draw ethnic boundaries. In fact, as was emphasized by Barth (1969), 
it is not the specific form of the· demarcation markers that is important. The key 
aspect of ethnicity is "the ethnic boundary that defines the group rather than the 
cultural stuff that it encloses" (Barth 1969:15). According to Barth, ethnicity is a 
form of social organization and its main characteristic is self-ascription, as well 
as ascription by others. Different ethnic groups may use different kinds of markers, but the function is the same, to draw boundaries between ''us" and "them." 
This insight has stood the test of time well (Vermeulen and Govers 1994).

Not only do ethnic groups tend to have the sharpest boundaries, they also tend 
to evoke the most intense feelings of solidarity. The ultimate form of collective 
solidarity, sacrifice for the common good, is relatively common in ethnic conflicts.

By contrast. it is hard to imagine individuals sacrificing their lives for the sake 
of a professional organization or a corporation.

Ethnic groups appear to be quintessential human groups. The reason, most 
likely, is that ethnicity was the basis of social organization in humans during most 
of their evolutionary history. Hunter-gatherers living in bands were characterized 
by a very flat social hierarchy and very limited division of labor, and ethnicity 
(in the wide sense, see below) provided the main basis for group formation.

Ethnicity has been defined by Brass ( 1991: 18) as a sense of ethnic identity that 
consists of the subjective, symbolic, emblematic use by a group of people of any 
aspect of culture, in order to create internal cohesion and differentiate themselves 
from other groups. Note that this definition of ethnicity (which I adopt in this 
book) does not specify the nature of the cultural markers that are used for ethnic 
boundary delineation. Thus, two religious sects that share all other cultural characteristics (dialect, phenotype, material culture, etc.) are considered as two separate 
ethnic groups if they use membership in a religious community as the way to distinguish "us" from "them." Thus, the Serbs, Croats, and Bosnians of the former 
Yugoslavia are clearly separate ethnic groups. Although they speak the same language, the religious markers (Orthodox, Catholic, and Muslim, respectively) play 
the dominant role in defining ethnic boundaries. The usage of "ethnic" and "religious" in this book thus differs from the lay meaning of the terms, which are often 
employed as alternative bases for classifying different groups. To avoid misunderstanding of what follows, this point is worth emphasizing: in my view the religious 
identity is just one of the many cultural markers used by groups to delineate ethnic 
boundaries, and it is a particularly important one for agrarian societies (especially 
for demarcating boundaries at the metaethnic level; see below).

3.1.4 The Social Scale 
Even the simplest human societies known to anthropologists are characterized by 
a hierarchical structure with nested levels (Johnson and Earle 2000). Thus, familylevel groups, such as Shoshone or !Kung, have two levels: the family or hearth 
group and the extended family camps or hamlets. The ethnicity of humans who 
lived (and still live) in agrarian societies can have many more layers. The simplest social organization reflecting this principle is the segmentary society, such 
as found in the Berbers of the central High Atlas of Morocco (Gellner 1969).

Complex agrarian societies retain segmentary organization {although they can 
have additional sources of identities). For example, Sahlins (1989) identified the 
following circles of identity characterizing the inhabitants of early modern Cerdanya: village-quarters-Cerdanya-"1\vo Counties" (Roussillon and Cerdanya}-
Catalonia-Spain. Thus, one important dimension along which ethnic groups can 
vary is the social scale. Most people think of themselves as having several ethnic identities, nested within each other. At the smallest scale, an individual is a 
member of a family and local community. Above that level identity may have 
regional, national, and finally "civilizational" (in the sense of Huntington 1996) 
components.

We need better terminology than "region," "nation," and "civilization," each of 
the terms carrying too much extraneous baggage with it. Unfortunately, the terminology has not yet settled down, at least in the English-language literature. Two 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 35 
imported terms are currently used: ethnos and ethnie (the latter will be discussed 
in a subsequent section). Ethnos is widely used in Russian ethnology (Gumilev 
1971; Bromley 1987; Bromley and Kozlov 1989). The most common definition 
runs as follows: ethnos is a stable assemblage of people that historically developed 
within a certain territory; the members of the ethnos possess common, relatively 
stable linguistic, cultural, and psychological characteristics; furthermore, they are 
conscious of their unity as differentiated from other similar human assemblages 
(self-awareness), which is reflected in their ethnonym (Bromley 1987:14).

Of particular importance to our purposes here is the system-like nature of the 
ethnos concept. Thus, just as systems consist of subsystems, and themselves are 
part of a metasystem, ethnic groups of different scale, or hierarchical level, can 
be referred to as subethnos, ethnos, and metaethnos. Where we need more levels, 
we can always add categories like subsubethnos. In principle, we can designate 
any arbitrary level as "ethnos" and define other levels in terms of sub- and metaprefixes. In practice, however, ethnos is typically used for that level of ethnic 
groups that roughly corresponds to modem nations. People belonging to different ethnoses tend to speak mutually unintelligible languages. Thus, Americans, 
French, Germans, Russians, and Egyptians are all different ethnoses. Examples 
of subethnoses are Mormons and Southerners ("Rebs") in the United States, and 
Bavarians, Saxons, and Schwabs in Germany. Different subethnoses within the 
same ethnos are often characterized by distinct speech dialects.

Metaethnic identity often arises as a result of past or present association within 
the same large state (or, rather, empire). Thus, Latin Christians of Medieval Europe were primarily inhabitants of successor states of the Carolingian empire 
(Bartlett 1993). Today, the inheritor of Latin Christendom is the European identity, based primarily on membership in the European Community (accordingly, 
Germans or French do not consider, for example, Belorussians as "fellow Europeans,'' even though Belarus is geographically a European country). Another 
important source of metaethnic identity is religion. Thus, an Egyptian is also an 
Arab, a Sunni Muslim, and, finally, a Muslim (so we need several metas to designate these identities). I hope that the advantage of viewing ethnicity as a systemic 
property is apparent from the preceding discussion: it prevents us from arguing 
about whether Arabs are an ethnos, a metaethnos, or something else.

Ethnos-based terminology also avoids arguments about whether there were nations before nationalism or not. Thus, an Athenian of the classic period was also 
an Ionian, and a Hellene. We know that ancient Greeks had a hierarchical sense 
of ethnicity, since they had two separate words to designate alloethnics: foreigners (xenoi) which was used for other Hellenes, and "barbarians" (barbaroi) which 
was used for non-Hellenes, even for members of other highly developed civilizations, such as the Persians. The Greeks also keenly felt such intermediate-level 
ethnic boundaries as the one between Dorians (to whom Spartans belonged) and 
Ionians (which included Athenians) (Smith 1986).

To . sum up, ethnicity, in the broad sense that I use here, may range from 
solidarity felt toward a small circle of relatives, friends, and neighbors, at one 
end of the spectrum, to solidarity felt toward millions belonging to the same 
nation or even a supranational entity, at the other end of the spectrum. However, 
it must be stressed that the strength of collective solidarity usually varies with the 
scale of ethnic group. Thus, it is quite possible that solidarity may be very high at 
the subethnic level, and quite low at the next level up. A somewhat extreme but 
not unusual example is the situation in the France of the late sixteenth century, 
when Huguenots and Catholics engaged in an extremely brutal conflict. By this 
point in French history, Huguenot strongholds were primarily found in the south 
and southwest of France, while the Catholic League was strong in the north 
and east (Briggs 1998), so in this example regional and religious identities were 
tightly intertwined. This example also illustrates the dynamic nature of solidarity.

Just a generation or two before, the French nobility was quite solidaristic in its 
struggle against the Habsburg hegemony, and many nobles fighting on opposite 
sides in the wars of religion were comrades in arms during the Spanish Wars (or 
their fathers were).

3.1.5 Ethnies 
The second term, ethnie, was imported by Anthony Smith (1986) from the French.

He defined ethnie as a named human population with myths of common ancestry, 
shared historical memories, one or more elements of shared culture, a link with a 
homeland, and a measure of solidarity, at least among the elites (Smith 2000:65).

In my view, this definition is quite similar to Bromley's definition of ethnos, 
although the emphases, to be sure, differ (Bromley seems to put more stress 
on objective cultural characteristics). In any case, it is not important to resolve 
these definitional matters for the purposes of this book. Because of its current 
prevalence in the English literature, I will adopt Smith's term ethnie, but I will 
also employ the suffixes sub and meta for smaller- or larger-scale ethnic groups.

One aspect of Smith's theory that I find particularly useful is his analysis of 
interrelations between ethnicity and class (Smith 1986: Chapter 4). Smith distinguished two types of ethnies. The first is lateral or aristocratic ethnie, in which 
the sense of common ethnicity is largely confined to elites (nobles, clerics, and 
wealthier merchants). The second type is vertical or demotic ethnie, characterized by a much greater degree of "social penetration" of shared ethnic feeling.

The important point is that lower strata of an ethnie can have a variable sense of 
solidarity with the elites. At one extreme are tightly vertically integrated ethnies 
like certain tribal confederations (e.g., Mongols under Chinggis Khan) and some 
city-states in ancient Sumer or classical Greece. At the other extreme are polities 
in which the elites are ethnically distinct from subjugated commoners ( e.g, the 
Old Hittite Kingdom). Thus, the strength of collective solidarity can vary not only 
with the scale of the ethnic group (Section 3.1.4), but also with the socioeconomic 
stratum.

3.2 COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY AND WSTORICAL DYNAMICS 
As I stated at the beginning of this chapter, before we can understand polity dynamics we first need to analyze how various groups of people interact within a 
polity. There are two aspects of human behavior that make groups particularly 
COLLEGIVE SOLIDARITY 37 
effective agents in their own right: boundary demarcation and group-directed (altruistic or solidaristic) behaviors. As agents, groups can interact with other groups, 
and the interactions are often conflictual: "the best-organized group usually wins, 
and that means the group with the most internal solidarity" (Collins 1992:26; see 
also Richerson and Boyd 1998). Can we use this insight to help us understand 
why some states are more successful than others? 
Respectable theories in historical sociology tend to avoid the subject of collective solidarity, and instead focus on coercion and economic relations, which of 
course are the bread and meat of the rational choice theory. One example of this 
bias is the (in other ways excellent) book by Tilly (1990), in which "coercion" 
and "capital" are actually the first words in the title. The impression that one gets 
from the professional literature is that war and economics are somehow "hard" 
subjects, while solidarity is "soft" and unscientific. The reason is probably due 
to the failure of earlier macrohistorians (Vico, Danilevsky, Spengler, Toynbee, 
Sorokin) to develop scientific theories, that is, theories that make nonobvious 
predictions that can be empirically tested. Quigley (1961:129) calls such historical explanations "softening of the fiber'' theories. Tainter (1988:89-90) similarly 
dismisses them as "mystical explanations" that are "crippled by reliance on a 
biological growth analogy, by value judgments, and by explanation by reference 
to intangibles." 
But what if "softening of the fiber'' refers not to the moral degradation of individuals in declining empires, but rather to the loss of collective solidarity by these 
societies? In order to build a scientific theory of collective solidarity, we need to 
somehow endogenize this variable, that is, to postulate mechanisms that cause it 
to wax or wane in response to other dynamic properties of societies and polities.

So far, no respectable sociological theory has managed to do this, in my judgment, although there are many hints scattered through the theoretical literature.

For example, Hechter (1987) starts essentially with the same concept of collective solidarity that is being developed here. He makes this "groupness" itself a 
dynamic variable (Hechter 1987:8). However, he then makes a valiant attempt to 
develop a rational choice theory of group solidarity (Hechter 1987: Chapter 3), 
which is, however, doomed for reasons given in the previous section. Collins 
(1992: Chapter 1), in already cited passages, constructs a powerful argument in 
favor of collective solidarity as an important historical variable. In Chapter 2 he 
discusses one mechanism that can generate solidarity: Durkheim's theory of religion. However, Collins never connects solidarity with other historically important 
variables in a dynamical theory. Smith (1986:38) discusses how interstate warfare may ignite and maintain ethnic sentiment: "One has only to read Aeschylus' 
description of the Persian Wars in which his brother was killed and he himself 
fought, to grasp the communal significance for the ethnic identification of each 
individual, of collective resistance on the battlefield through the activation of comradeship, teamwork and esprit de corps in moments of crisis." Yet, again, warfare 
was almost continuous throughout history, but some polities grew and others declined even while under pressure from external aggression. We need something 
more to build a theory on. Tantalizing hints are also scattered throughout the historical literature. Here is, for example, McNeill (1963:809) discussing the rise of 
Prussian industry in almost the same words as those of Smith: "a managerial elite 
with strong internal discipline and an esprit de corps quite different from the individualistic and nakedly pecuniary ethos common among British businessmen." 
I could go on. There are, however, two theories that have been developed to the 
point where they can actually yield testable predictions: Ibn Khaldun's theory of 
asabiya, and Gumilev's theory of passionarity.

3.2.1 Ibn Khaldun's Theory 
The fourteenth-century Arab thinker lbn Khaldun was probably the first sociologist in the modem sense (Gellner 1981). In his monumental work The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History he advances a remarkable theory of political 
cycles. lbn Khaldun developed his theory mainly to explain the history of the 
Maghreb (Northern Africa), but he also makes excursions to other areas known 
to him (e.g., Arabic Spain and the Middle East). lbn Khaldun was not an ivorytower academic. He was a practicing politician and almost lost his life in a failed 
coup. He also traveled extensively (even encountering and having a long conversation with Timur Lenk once). In short, Ibn Khaldun knew well the workings of 
the societies he studied from the inside.

Groups and Group Solidarity 
lbn Khaldun's main argument is remarkably modem (the following account partly 
relies on the introduction by the Muqaddimah translator Franz Rosenthal, indicated by lower-case Roman page numbers; upper-case Roman numbers indicate 
the volume). He begins by postulating that a human individual cannot live outside 
a group: it is absolutely necessary for man to have the cooperation of his fellow 
men (lbn Khaldun 1958:I:90). Defense and protection are successful only for a 
closely knit group (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:263). But a communal way of life is also 
necessary for acquiring different crafts and technical skills, and for intellectual 
intercourse. The next postulate is that different groups have different abilities for 
concerted action. Here Ibn Khaldun introduces the key concept of his theory: 
asabiya, which Rosenthal translates as "group feeling." Originally the word signified something like "making common cause with one's agnates" (lbn Khaldun 
l958:I:lxxviii). But in lbn Khaldun's usage, asabiya is a wider concept, because 
it can also be shared by people not related to each other. Asabiya produces ''the 
ability to defend oneself, to offer opposition, to protect oneself, and to press one's 
claims" (lbn Khaldun l958:I:289). Preponderance of asabiya renders one group 
superior to others (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxix).

Ibn Khaldun was clearly aware of the nested nature of ethnic groups, and that 
each level has its own asabiya associated with it. For example, he notes that, in 
order for the higher-level group not to fall apart, its asabiya must be stronger than 
the asabiyas of lower-level groups combined (lbn Khaldun 1958:1:284). Additionally, he continuously stresses that the leading or ruling element within a group 
must be vested in a family or lineage that has the strongest and most natural 
claim to the control of the available asabiyas (lbn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxx). Only 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 39 
the leader who controls an asabiya of sufficient strength may succeed in founding 
a dynasty.

Dynamics of Asabiya 
lbn Khaldun also develops a detailed theory explaining how asabiya is created, and also how it is lost. In general, asabiya arises from "the social intercourse, friendly association, long familiarity, and companionship" (Ibn Khaldun 
1958:I:374). This is remarkably similar to the explanation of how social capital is 
acquired (Putnam 2000; for a comparison of asabiya and social capital, see Section 3.2.3). However, not all social conditions are equally conducive to the growth 
of asabiya. As I mentioned above, lbn Khaldun's theory was developed for the 
specific situation of the Medieval Maghreb. Ibn Khaldun distinguishes two major ethnic groups inhabiting the Maghreb: the Berbers and the Arabs. These two 
groups differ not only ethnically, but also in the way their societies are organized: 
respectively, "desert" and "civilization." The distinction that lbn Khaldun makes, 
however, is not between nomadism and sedentary life; he rather groups together 
nomads and sedentary backwoods people, and contrasts them with sedentary urban people as inhabitants of large population centers (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxvii).

The sociological distinction is not qualitative, but quantitative, and refers to the 
size and density of human settlements, as well as the scale of polities. "Desert" 
is characterized by small-scale polities {chiefdoms, in the modem terminology).

"Civilization" is organized in states and empires (except during the periods of 
state breakdown).

In lbn Khaldun's view, the society type is the key to understanding why asabiya 
increases or declines. "Desert" life with its constant struggle for survival and, consequently, necessity of cooperation creates conditions for asabiya growth. "Civilized" society controls a large number of human beings. A large amount of human 
labor becomes available, and a certain proportion of it may be channeled into 
production of "conveniences" and luxuries (that is, not necessities). This development toward luxury carries a penalty in the form of causing degeneration. The 
ruling dynasty, and therefore the state (Ibn Khaldun does not make a distinction), 
is the principal victim of this tendency to luxury (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxxilxxxii). lbn Khaldun (1958:11:119-122) essentially argues that access to luxuries 
causes increased intraelite competition and eventually intraelite conflict. As a 
result, asabiya rapidly declines. lbn Khaldun even provides a quantitative assessment of the rate of decline: it takes four generations from the establishment to 
the disappearance of a dynasty, although it may continue into the fifth and sixth 
generations in a state of decline (I:281).

In addition to the decline of asabiya, there is another major factor that causes 
the disintegration of the state: economics. According to lbn Khaldun, general 
prosperity leads to population growth, which in turn leads to scarcity, increased 
oppression by the elites, and eventually state collapse. This aspect of Ibn Khatdun's theory is further pursued in Chapter 7, in the context of the demographicstructural theory.

In summary, here are the main points of lbn Khaldun's argument about the dynamic relation between asabiya and polity strength. Asabiya grows and is maintained at a high level in small-scale societies, where the capacity for collective 
action is the key to survival. Additionally, such societies produce only necessities, 
and therefore there is no corrosive effect of luxuries on asabiya. lbn Khaldun's 
primary example of such "desert" societies are the Berbers of Maghreb, although 
he also cites other instances, e.g., several Arab tribes who invaded northwestern 
Africa in the eleventh century (1:283). Desert tribes with high asabiya conquer 
civilized people with low asabiya, and establish a ruling dynasty (a state) over 
them. Under conditions of civilized life, however, asabiya inevitably declines. In 
approximately four generations, asabiya becomes so low that the state collapses 
as a result of factional conflict. This is the point at which the civilized area 
becomes vulnerable to another conquest by desert tribes.

Assessment 
There is much in lbn Khaldun's theory that appears to be very useful to our 
objectives. First, the theory is very clearly formulated. Thus, it makes clearcut 
empirical predictions that can be tested. Additionally, if quantitative predictions 
are needed, then the theory can, rather easily, be translated into a mathematical 
model. Second, Ibn Khaldun describes explicit sociological mechanisms on which 
his theory of state collapse is based. This provides another way in which the 
theory can be tested.

There are also some weak points. In general, while lbn Khaldun offered a brilliant account of one kind of society-an Islamic society of the arid zone--his 
account is not universally applicable even within Islam (Gellner 1981:88-89). It 
would be interesting to see if his theory can be extended to agrarian societies 
in general. More specifically, one could question lbn Khaldun's emphasis on the 
importance of "luxury" in asabiya decline. lbn Khaldun's is not the only theory 
that invokes this mechanism; many "softening-of-the-fiber" theories propose similar explanations. This is a question that should be resolved empirically, but to 
do that we need some explicit alternatives to test against. I try to construct an 
alternative explanation in Chapter 4.

3.2.2 Gumilev's Theory 
Although the ethnogenetic theory of Gumilev {1971) is largely unknown in the 
West, it has generated a considerable controversy in Russia, at least among the 
lay public interested in macrohistorical questions. The reception among professional historians and ethnologists was cooler, for reasons that will become apparent shortly. Despite its serious scientific flaws, however, Gumilev's theory contains several interesting concepts, which can be of use to the historical dynamics 
project, and thus I briefly review it here.

The main kernel of Gumilev's theory is the explicit connection that he makes 
between ethnie and polity dynamics. According to Gumilev, each polity has its 
core ethnie, and it is the properties of core ethnies that drive the success or failure 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARI1Y 41 
of their polities. The key concept of Gumilev's theory is passionarity. Individuals 
with high passionarity (passionaries) purse, with great energy, some goal that is 
usually extrarational. That is, passionaries are typically motivated not by personal 
gain, but by some higher goal (the goal may be selected either consciously or 
not). Although in his definition Gumilev does not directly address the collective 
solidarity aspect of passionarity, the language he uses in his examples is very 
evocative of asabiya. In particular, Gumilev repeatedly mentions the ability of 
passionaries to sacrifice themselves for the sake of the collective good. (This 
exposes one of the problems with Gumilev's theory: it is not developed very 
precisely. Instead, Gumilev relies on voluminous examples and evocative prose 
to get his point across.) 
Different ethnies have variable proportions of passionaries. Additionally, the 
degree of passionarity of an ethnie changes with time. An ethnie with great numbers of passionaries will expand at the expense of other ethnies, in the process 
building an empire. Thus, high passionarity directly translates into a polity's capacity for territorial expansion, and vice versa.

The second key concept for Gumilev is ethnogenesis. He defines it as the 
process by which some or many members of an ethnie become passionaries. Unfortunately, the specifics of the mechanism that he offers rely on phenomena that 
are either currently unknown to science or flatly contradicted by it. According 
to Gumilev, the Earth is periodically struck by bundles of cosmic energy, which 
cause the mutation of passionarity. Gumilev identified a number (about ten) of 
such events that occurred during the known history of Eurasia. Each event gives 
impulse to multiple occurrences of ethnogenesis in bandlike regions several hundreds of kilometers long.

After the initial impulse, the passionarity of the affected group increases over 
the period of several centuries, reaches a peak, and then declines. Meanwhile, the 
group expands, first becoming a subethnie, then a full ethnie (in the process perhaps absorbing other ethnically related groups), and finally creating a metaethnic 
empire (unless it prematurely loses to an even stronger neighbor). Eventually, as 
passionarity continues to fade, the polity built around the core ethnie loses its 
cohesiveness and falls prey to a combination of internal warfare and external aggression. Using multiple examples, ranging across the whole history of Eurasia, 
Gumilev provides a detailed phenomenology of the rise and fall of ethnies and 
empires.

Assessment 
Because I focused on what I perceive as major weaknesses in Gumilev's theory, 
my account did not really do justice to it. Gumilev has amassed an enormous 
amount of historical and ethnological material. Even when one disagrees with 
the mechanisms that he advances, it is difficult to escape the feeling that he has 
indeed identified some regularities in the historical process. I believe that there 
are several insights of Gumilev's that are of great interest. First, it is a fruitful 
hypothesis that there is a close connection between the fortunes of a polity and 
its core ethnie. This is a particularly important point, because Gumilev shows 
with much factual material that the modern relationship between nationalism and 
state has very close analogs in history. That is, ethnicity and polity are variables 
that may be dynamically connected.

Second, Gumilev's concept of ethnogenesis has a lot of merit. Most if not 
all currently existing ethnies started small and then expanded by a variety of 
mechanisms, including demographic growth and ethnic assimilation. Successful 
territorial expansion was very much a factor in this ethnic expansion. Something 
allowed these initially small ethnic groups to acquire a high capacity for collective 
action. Thus, another potentially fruitful hypothesis is that there is a close relation 
between the process of ethnogenesis and enhanced collective solidarity.

In contrast, Gumilev's concept of passionarity does not appear to be a fruitful concept to me; at least it does not add anything useful to Ibn Khaldun's 
asabiya. Furthermore, the temporal trajectory of passionarity increase followed 
by decrease, postulated by Gumilev, is too mechanical. Gumilev treats passionarity as an exogenous variable: it waxes and wanes according to its own internal 
nature, so to speak, and is not related in any obvious way to other variables in 
the system. Before this concept can be of use, it must be endogenized somehow.

Interestingly, the few mathematical attempts to model Gumilev's theory that I 
know of specify passionarity as an exogenously driven variable.

3.2.3 The Modern Context 
Durkheim 's Mechanical and Organic Solidarity 
The concept of asabiya (collective solidarity) that I discuss in this chapter does not 
"hang in the air." Instead, it appears to be related to several much more modem 
theories in sociology, social psychology, and political science. Within sociology 
the best-known theory of social cohesion has been developed by Durkheim (1915, 
1933). Gellner (1981:86-98) provides a highly useful comparison of Ibn Khatdun's and Durkheim's theories, which I briefly summarize here. As is well known, 
Durkheim contrasted two kinds of solidarities: mechanical which was based on 
similarity between individuals and organic which was based on complementarity 
or mutual interdependence. Simple segmentary societies, such as the Bedouins of 
Ibn Khaldun, can possess only mechanical solidarity, while more complex urban 
societies characterized by greater division of labor have the potential to exhibit 
organic solidarity. In Durkheim's view, mechanical solidarity was an inferior form 
of social cohesion, compared to organic solidarity.

In Ibn Khaldun's theory the only kind of social cohesion is the one arising 
from what Durkheim would call mechanical solidarity. "Organic solidarity" for 
Ibn Khaldun was not solidarity at all, but a form of social dissolution. Civilized 
life with its complex division of labor was inherently inimical to social cohesion 
and given time would degrade the initially high asabiya of tribesmen moving to 
town (Gellner 1981:87).

In general, it is not clear whether such economic variables as the degree of division of labor have any relevance to the waxing or waning of asabiya. By contrast, 
cultural uniformity appears to be an important precondition of social cohesion.

Ruling elites of such successful nation-states as France certainly thought so, and 
COLLECfiVE SOLIDARITY 43 
as a result employed rather draconian methods for imposing linguistic uniformity 
on their citizens (Weber 1976). In any case, the Durkheimian concept of organic 
solidarity appears to be primarily applicable to industrial societies. If so, then the 
distinction between organic and mechanical solidarity is largely irrelevant in our 
analysis of preindustrial agrarian polities. On the other hand, Durkheim's insight 
that religion is one of the most powerful forces that keep groups together appears 
to be highly relevant to the issues under investigation (see also Collins 1992).

Individualism and Collectivism 
At first glance, it would appear that the direction within social psychology most 
relevant to social cohesion would be research on the individualism/collectivism dichotomy (Triandis 1995). A closer look, however, reveals that the two approaches 
apparently address different social scales. Actually, social psychologists studying 
individualism and collectivism do not explicitly discuss the scale of the group at 
which collectivistic behaviors are aimed. From the context of their studies, however, it becomes apparent that they typically focus on small-scale groups: families 
and local communities. However, although there is no explicit consideration of 
scale in the analysis, results obtained for small-scale groups are sometimes generalized to larger-scale societies. Furthermore, the primary variable of interest to 
psychologists is not the properties of groups made up from individualistic versus collectivistic individuals, but the inverse relation: the effect of the group on 
individuals. This is, of course, understandable since psychologists are primarily 
interested in individual behaviors, rather than the capacity of groups for collective action. Nevertheless, it decreases the relevance of their findings for issues of 
interest to us. Still, there is much of value in this area of psychology, not least 
of which is the empirical research on variation in individualism/collectivism in 
different cultures.

Social Capital 
Of much greater relevance is the theory of social capital, which recently has garnered a lot of attention, thanks in part to several books and articles by Robert 
Putnam and associates (see, for example, Putnam 2000; for a closely related concept of social trust see Fukuyama 1995) Such aspects of social capital as mutual 
support, cooperation, social trust, institutional effectiveness, and, particularly, the 
implications of social capital for collective action suggest to me that social capital 
and collective solidarity are closely related concepts. "Social capital here refers 
to features of social organization, such as trust, norms, and networks, that can 
improve the efficiency of society by facilitating coordinated action" (Putnam et 
al. 1993:167). This is very close to my definition of asabiya as the capacity of a 
group for collective action. Thus, asabiya appears to be essentially the agrarian 
societies' equivalent of social capital (at least as the latter is defined by Putnam 
and eo-workers). Several other features of social capital deserve a comment.

• There are two forms of social capital: bridging (or inclusive) and bonding 
(or exclusive) (Putnam 2000:22). Examples of bonding social capital include 
ethnic fraternal organizations and exclusive country clubs, while the civil 
rights movement and ecumenical religious organizations are examples of 
bridging social capital. This distinction appears to address the issue of social 
scale: bonding social capital characterizes smaller-scale groups, while the 
bridging kind characterizes larger-scale societies.

• Putnam cautions that social capital may have its "dark side." While it is 
generally good for those inside the network, the external effects of social 
capital are by no means always pOSitive (Putnam 2000:21). One example is 
power elites exploiting social capital to achieve ends that are antisocial from 
a wider perspective. This is very similar to the already discussed idea of 
internally solidaristic groups coercing other, less cohesive groups.

• Societies belonging to different countries, and even regions within countries, 
vary in the amount of social capital. For example, Putnam et al. (1993) show 
that both the density of interpersonal ties and institutional effectiveness vary 
greatly between north and south Italy. Similarly, Fukuyama (1995) advances 
the argument that different industrial countries vary in the degree of social 
trust, and that this variation explains much about the economic effectiveness 
of their corporations.

Contrasting Social Capital and Collectivism 
To illustrate why I think of social capital as a much more useful concept for 
our purpose than collectivism, it is instructive to contrast how the two concepts 
are applied when comparing two specific countries, the United States and Italy 
(with an emphasis on the Italian south-the Mezzogiorno). Triandis (1995:92-93, 
97-98) classifies the Mezzogiorno society as collectivist and American as individualist. From the point of view of social capital, however, the picture is completely 
reversed: southern Italians have very little of it, while Americans have lots (Putnam et al. 1993; Putnam 2000). The sociological study of the Mezzogiorno goes 
back at least to Banfield (1967). Banfield described the extreme atomization of 
the southern Italian society, in which all cooperative efforts are limited to the 
smallest possible societal unit, the family. Relations to such kin as cousins, and 
sometimes even grown-up siblings, are rife with distrust and lack of cooperation.

Community-level cooperative efforts are virtually impossible. Banfield called this 
type of society "amoral familism," and drew an explicit contrast with the vibrant 
civic culture of a small Midwestern American town.

In a later study that contrasted the Italian north and south, Putnam and eoworkers (1993) described how lack of interpersonal association, trust, and cooperation in the Mezzogiorno leads to ineffective and corrupt local government.

In contrast, the north has a much greater level of civic engagement, and correspondingly more effective government on the local level. A recent study (A'Heam 
2000) provides yet another confirmation of the original Banfield insight. I should 
also mention the work of Gambetta (1988, 1993:77), who cogently argued that 
the Sicilian mafia can be understood as a response to the lack of trust specifically 
affecting southern Italy, and that the endemic distrust is the crucial difference that 
explains why the mafia did not emerge elsewhere in the Mediterranean world.

COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 45 
The richness of American civic life was extensively commented on by de 
Tocqueville (1984). Putnam (2000) provides great factual material documenting 
the waxings and wanings of social capital in the United States. He also shows 
that American "rugged individualism" is a myth.

It is interesting that Triandis, in his discussion of the individualism and collectivism of Italians and Americans, cites the same two authors, Banfield and 
de Tocqueville, but comes to the opposite conclusions. This puzzle is resolved 
when we pay attention to the social scale. Triandis focuses on very small groups, 
essentially, family. Indeed, southern Italians are characterized by "tight" families, 
while American families are "loose." Putnam's focus of interest (and ours) is on 
larger-scale societies: regional and national. Thus, I am not trying to say that the 
work of Triandis and other social psychologists is wrong in any way. It is simply 
that their focus on very small-scale groupings makes their results less relevant to 
our concerns.

A Terminological Note 
Collective solidarity, social cohesion, social capital, and asabiya are clearly 
closely related concepts. This raises the question of which term we should use in 
this research program. The problem with "social capital" is that it sounds jarring 
when applied to preindustrial or even prestate societies. Further, "capital" has the 
wrong associations. Capital should be something divisible, but social capital is a 
public good. In general, capital is too much an economic term, while collective 
solidarity is a very sociological concept. Finally, "social capital" is used in the 
sociological literature in at least two very different senses (Lin 2001: Table 1): 
one focused on the individual (Lin 1982; Burt 1992), the other focused on 
the group (Bourdieu 1980; Putnam et al. 1993). These are two very different 
notions. Contrast, for example, the "group-focused" definition of Putnam, given 
above, with the "individual-focused" one due to Lin (2001): social capital is 
"investment in social relations by individuals through which they gain access to 
embedded resources to enhance expected returns of instrumental or expressive 
actions." In light of the discussion in Section 3.1.2, these two kinds of social 
capital may actually act antagonistically: group-level capacity for action may 
occur at the expense of some individual interests, while individuals manipulating 
social networks for their advantage can harm group-level performance.

Collective solidarity and social cohesion also have some undesirable aspects.

There is too much emphasis on interpersonal connection, rather than group-level 
emergent property. Thus, I decided to settle on asabiya as the term for the central 
concept in the theory that is developed: the group's capacity for collective action.

Note the explicit reference to the group here: it does not make sense to speak 
of asabiya in general, or of the asabiya of a person (by contrast, one can speak 
of the solidarity that an individual may feel toward a group). The main kind of 
collective action we are interested in is coercive power: the ability of a group to 
defend itself and its resources (such as territory), as well as to extend its sway 
over other groups and their resources.

The usage of the term asabiya has several advantages. The most important 
reason is that it has very little theoretical baggage, because (unfortunately) few 
people are familiar with lbn Khaldun's writings. Second, I would like to explicitly 
acknowledge the contribution of lbn Khaldun's thinking to the theory of historical dynamics by using his terminology (and if we ever get to the point where we 
can actually quantify asabiya, I suggest that we do it in khalduns ). lbn Khaldun, 
of course, knew only a small subset of agrarian societies, and since we want to 
generalize asabiya to all agrarian polities, we had to stretch his concept considerably. As Gellner (1981), Lapidus (1990), and Barfie1d (1990) pointed out, lbn 
Khaldun theorized how asabiya increased or decreased in small- and mediumscale societies. The specific historical cases that he discussed were the origins 
of regional states, rather than large territorial empires. In the historical dynamics 
research program, we want to generalize the notion of asabiya to apply to all 
kinds of agrarian polities.

Incidentally, there is a very interesting empirical pattern of medieval and modem Middle Eastern history: the deserts of North Africa and Arabia, and the mountainous zones throughout the whole region, which were inhabited by Bedouin nomads and sedentary tribes of the Berbers, Kurds, and Pashtuns, were divided into 
small regional states. By contrast, the Iranian and Anatolian plateau zones were 
generally under the control of great empires, which were inhabited by tribes organized into large confederations of Turco-Mongolian descent (Barfield 1990:157).

This observation raises two questions: how did Turco-Mongolian polities manage 
to generate and maintain asabiya at such a large scale? And why do Arabian 
and Turco-Mongolian asabiyas exhibit this systematic difference throughout the 
period of many centuries? An attempt at answering these questions is made in 
Chapter 4.

Implications for the Research Program 
Since my main focus is on preindustrial societies, I will restrict the term asabiya 
(the capacity of a group for collective action) to agrarian and extractive societies.

If social capital is a closely related concept to asabiya, as I would argue, although 
one developed for industrial societies, then we can greatly benefit from theoretical 
and empirical research on this topic. The first important aspect of social capital 
is that political scientists have developed methods for measuring it. Measures 
can be made on both the individual and group levels. At the individual level, 
Putnam and eo-workers quantify the density of networks within which people 
are embedded, the quality of interactions (cooperation, reciprocity), and mutual 
trust. At the level of societies, Putnam and eo-workers have addressed institutional 
effectiveness, such as in the Italian example referred to above. Other theorists have 
connected the level of social trust to economic performance (Fukuyama 1995). If 
social capital is measurable, then by implication its equivalent for preindustrial 
societies, asabiya, may be measurable too.

As I argued throughout this chapter, one of the most important determinants 
of asabiya is the capacity of individuals to behave solidaristically, that is, to 
sacrifice individual advantage for the sake of the common good (however, this is 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 47 
not the only dimension of asabiya; for example, the capacity to self-organize, as 
in choosing and then obeying leaders, can also affect the capacity for collective 
action). The historical record provides several kinds of quantitative data that can 
be used to measure the degree of solidarism among individuals of a certain group, 
such as the willingness to provide recruits for the army and to pay taxes. The 
last variable, the tax rate to which the populace acquiesces, can be quantified for 
many different societies and historical periods. Several caveats should be kept 
in mind, mainly who is paying and for the benefit of what group. Thus, the tax 
rates imposed on the peasants may reflect more the degree of coercion that the 
elites can bring to bear on them, rather than any feelings of ethnic solidarity 
(although I would argue that we should not assume that lower strata will a priori 
lack any degree of ethnic solidarity with the elites ). Similarly, alloethnic elites 
may be reluctant to contribute to an empire that recently conquered them. Tax 
rate as a measure of asabiya is probably least problematic when applied to the 
core ethnie's elites.

Furthermore, even groups of very high asabiya should not be expected to consist of pure unconditional altruists. In fact, the more commonly found altruistic 
strategy is to perform individually costly group-beneficial behaviors only if others 
are doing the same. An example of such behavior is the quasivoluntary compliance of citizens in paying taxes (Levi 1988:52). It is voluntary because taxpayers 
choose to pay rather than free-ride (and, therefore, it is not a rational, or selfinterested behavior). It is quasivoluntary because taxpayers contribute only if they 
have reasonable assurances that free-riders will be punished. Nobody cares to be 
a dupe.

An interesting approach to measuring collective solidarity is suggested by Douglass North. Sociologists distinguish four general sources of power, based on the 
use and manipulation of norms and symbols (ideological), administrative structures (political), material incentives (economic), and coercion (military) (Mann 
1986; Turner 1995). Collective solidarity clearly belongs to the first class. In fact, 
North explicitly defines ideology in solidaristic terms: "Ideology consists of the 
set of individual beliefs and values that modify behavior." Then he adds: "It can 
be measured by the premium people are willing to incur not to free ride" (North 
1985:394).

3.3 SUMMARY 
• Human groups constitute an intermediate level of organization between individuals and polities. Instead of attempting to connect polity dynamics directly to individual action, I build the theory in two steps: first inferring 
group dynamics from interactions between individuals, and then inferring 
polity dynamics from interactions between groups.

• Not all collections of individuals are true groups. Groups arise because their 
members draw imaginary boundaries separating in-group from out-group individuals (''us" versus "them"). Humans use a variety of recognition markers 
to distinguish between group members and outsiders, such as language, religion, and phenotype.

• Group members are capable of solidaristic behaviors that impose costs on the 
individual performing the behavior, but yield group-level benefits. (I distinguish solidaristic from altruistic behaviors: whereas the latter benefit other 
individuals, the former benefit the group as a whole.) Solidaristic and altruistic behaviors are not rational (they are "extrarational"), and are based not 
on calculated self-interest, but on norms. Thus, human motivation is only 
partly self-interested (although this might be a very large part, and in some 
individuals the only part).

• Theory suggests that solidaristic behaviors can evolve by a variety of multilevel selection mechanisms: kin selection and group selection acting on 
genetic and/or cultural traits. Group selection, especially its cultural variant 
espoused by Boyd and Richerson, has strong theoretical and empirical support, and provides the main mechanism for evolution of solidarism in large 
human groups.

• Several characteristics of human behavior and sociality promote the evolution of solidaristic behaviors. Leveling institutions (monogamy, food sharing) 
reduce within-group phenotypic variability, and consequently the strength of 
individual-level selection. Certain psychological mechanisms guard against 
free-riding (cheater detection circuits and norms to punish free-riders). Conformism is the mechanism that ensures that group members share norms and 
react similarly to the same behavioral stimulus (and also reduces withingroup phenotypic variability).

• As a result of boundary demarcation, solidarism, and uniformity-causing 
behaviors, groups of individuals can act as independent agents in their own 
right.

• Different groups vary in their capacity for collective action. This capacity 
is a result of a complex mix of individual behaviors: the proportion of solidarists in the group and the strength of their solidarism, the denseness and 
nature of social networks within which individuals are embedded, the ability 
to detect and punish free-riders (including higher-level norms that detect and 
punish those who do not punish cheaters), and the self-organization capacity 
(for example, selecting and obeying a leader). The group capacity for concerted collective action is called collective solidarity or asabiya, using the 
terminology of lbn Khaldun.

• Groups characterized by higher asabiya tend to survive, expand, and replicate 
themselves at the expense of groups with lower asabiya.

• One of the most important kinds of human collective is the ethnic group.

The importance of ethnically based groups is, first, that they tend to invoke 
the highest level of group loyalty. Second, during most of human evolution 
groups were based on shared ethnicity.

• Individuals are embedded in a system of hierarchically nested ethnic 
groups-family, community, subethnie, ethnie, and metaethnie. Each group 
level has its own degree of asabiya. Thus, it is possible to have a high 
degree of collective solidarity at, for example, the subethnic level, but low 
solidarity at the ethnic level. The variation in collective solidarity with 
ethnic group level can potentially be quantified with "asabiya profiles." 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 49 
I should stress here that, while lbn Khaldun was concerned with asabiya of 
small- or medium-sized groups, I reformulate and broaden his concept to 
apply to groups of any scale, up to and including such huge metaethnies as 
Latin Christendom or Dar al-Islam.

• Groups in agrarian societies are formed on the basis of two main characteristics: ethnicity and socioeconomic stratum (most importantly, peasants 
and elites). I propose the hypothesis that the fortunes of a polity are primarily affected by the capacity of its elites for collective action. However, 
ethnic solidarity (or lack of it) between elites and peasants may also be very 
important in polity success or failure.

Chapter Four 
The Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
4.1 FRONTIERS AS INCUBATORS OF GROUP SOLIDARITY 
Chapter 3 argued that the capacity for collective action, or asabiya, to use lbn 
Khaldun inspired tenninology, is an important variable that affects the ability 
of polities to defend and expand territory. Large territorial polities-empirestypically have a complex internal structure, and therefore polity-level solidarity 
is composed in a complex way from the asabiyas of various groups comprising 
it. As stated above, I focus on two main dimensions along which polities are 
structured. The first is the socioeconomic stratification, where we can distinguish 
elites who hold power from commoners concerned with producing goods. The 
second is the ethnic dimension, where we can distinguish core ethnies from the 
rest (alloethnies). For example, the core ethnies of the European Great Powers 
of the eighteenth century are Castilians in Spain, English in the British Empire, 
northern French (speakers of langue d'oi1) in France, Austrian Germans in the 
Habsburg Empire, Prussians in the Kingdom of Prussia, and Russians ( velikorossy) in the Russian Empire. This scheme, of course, greatly oversimplifies the 
historical agrarian societies, but we must start somewhere.

Another simplifying assumption that I will make is that each empire has at 
its core a particular group, whose asabiya is of overriding importance to the empire's success or failure. One type of such an imperial core group is simply the 
elites of the core ethnie, who use their high asabiya to coerce compliance from 
both their own commoners and alloethnic elites (who, in turn, coerce alloethnic 
commoners). The second type is a more vertically integrated (or demotic, using 
Anthony Smith's classification) core ethnie, in which commoners of the core ethnie share a substantial degree of ethnic solidarity with their elites. The third type, 
alternatively, is characterized by lateral empire-wide integration of the elites (the 
aristocratic ethnie of Smith), who rule over ethnically heterogeneous commoners.

Thus, I do not mean to imply that a core group must have hard boundaries. Rather, 
cores have fuzzy boundaries and internal structure, e.g., segmentary organization.

Furthermore, although as the first step in theory building I tie polity success at 
territorial expansion to the asabiya of the core group, asabiyas of other groups, 
and their attitudes (cooperative, acquiescent, or antagonistic), will eventually also 
have to be included in the analysis.

Incidentally, it is possible for a polity to have two distinct cores, as in the 
sixteenth century Habsburg Empire of Charles V (Castilians and Austrian Germans), but such situations appear to be rather unstable. Thus, Charles V's empire, 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 51 
upon his resignation, was divided between the Austrian and Castilian branches of 
Habsburgs.

There is some amount of controversy about the relationship between nationality and the state, with some arguing that it is states that invent nationality, while 
others arguing that, on the contrary, it is nations that construct states around 
themselves. The approach I take in this book is that ethnie and polity exist in a 
state of dynamic interaction. The core ethnie provides the seed around which the 
polity crystallizes. But polity also affects ethnic dynamics. For example, being in 
the same polity sets up conditions for ethnic assimilation of alloethnic elites and 
commoners (this will be pursued in Chapter 6). Thus, the relationship between 
ethnie and polity is like that between a chicken and an egg; neither is primary, 
and both are components of an ethnopolitical system. Still, because both polities 
and ethnies have beginnings (and endings), we must confront the question of 
how ethnopolitical systems get started. The theory developed here provides an 
answer: an ethnic group characterized by high asabiya ( 1) expands the territory 
it controls, (2) increases the number of its members through population growth, 
colonization, and ethnic assimilation, and (3) advances up the social scale from 
subethnie to ethnie to, eventually, metaethnie. This proposition, however, raises 
another question: how do ethnic groups acquire high asabiya, and why do they 
eventually lose it? The development of a high level of asabiya that is capable of 
scaling up (from subethnie to ethnie, etc.) is a necessary condition for ethnogenesis, because otherwise small-level ethnic groups would never be able to evolve 
into a full-blown ethnie. Perhaps we should call this process "ethnopolitogenesis," because usually polity formation appears to be inextricably intertwined with 
ethnie formation.

4.1.1 Factors Causing Solidarity Increase 
So far I have treated asabiya as an exogenous variable: it is something that is 
hypothesized to affect the territorial dynamics, but it is not yet clear what factors 
cause collective solidarity to increase or decline. Thus, the main objective in this 
chapter is to endogenize asabiya.

One possible approach to solving this problem is to think about specific social 
mechanisms that are used by groups to maintain high levels of collective solidarity. One of the most important of such mechanisms is clearly religion. Thus, 
Collins (1992) devotes a whole chapter to discussing Durkheim's theory of social rituals. But all societies have rituals and some form of religion, yet some 
societies are more cohesive than others. That is, identifying any specific cultural 
mechanism of creating and maintaining asabiya does not help us with the main 
question. Is it possible to abstract away from the cultural forms asabiya takes and 
focus somehow on its essence? 
If we follow this tack, then we have only one general source of insights: the 
theory of multilevel selection. Let us see how far this approach could take us. The 
key prediction of the theory, as discussed in the previous chapter, is that grouplevel selection operates on intergroup variation, while individual-level selection 
operates on intragroup variation among individuals. The evolution of solidaristic 
(group-beneficial but individually costly) behaviors is enhanced by conditions that 
increase intergroup variation and decrease intragroup variation. What conditions 
are these? I can think of three.

Intergroup Conflict 
The first factor that may affect the evolution of collective solidarity is the frequency and intensity of intergroup conflict. Two extremes may be imagined: one 
is location near the center of a territorially extensive empire during the periods 
when the empire is strong enough to maintain internal peace. The opposite end 
of the spectrum is the stateless environment-"the tribal war zone" (Ferguson 
and Whitehead 1992), in which each tribe is simultaneously a potential aggressor 
and a potential victim. Current anthropological evidence suggests that stateless 
societies were typically characterized by incessant warfare (Keely 1997).

The Ratio of Population to Resources 
The second factor is the population density in relation to the carrying capacity of 
the local region. High population density pressing against the subsistence limit 
should cause persistent resource shortages, which promote intragroup competition 
and thus have a corrosive effect on group solidarity. Here we should distinguish 
the situations of mild and severe resource shortages. A mild resource shortage, 
or even an anticipated future shortage, may act to promote solidaristic action to 
solve the problem. Groups may employ some technology for food production 
intensification, or they may organize to deprive neighboring groups of their resources. However, as formal models of preindustrial population dynamics that 
combine Malthusian and Boserupian mechanisms indicate, economic change can 
win only a temporary respite from marginal immiseration (Wood 1998). When 
severe and persistent resource shortages develop, the ability of a group for collective action should be greatly diminished. It is particularly difficult to organize 
a successful military action: starving people do not make good fighters. As a 
result, intergroup competition should be reduced, while intragroup competition is 
enhanced, since it becomes much easier to think of another group member as a 
potential victim. Only highly solidaristic groups can resist the corrosive effect of 
severe and prolonged resource shortage without splintering.

By contrast, population density substantially below the carrying capacity means 
that there is a surplus of food in a typical year. Occasional subsistence crises 
are short in duration and can be buffered by communal action, such as surplus 
storing and food sharing. Thus, resource competition is reduced or entirely absent.

As a result, intragroup variation in fitness is low, which promotes the evolution 
of group-directed behaviors. Note that when I speak of "carrying capacity," I 
mean the population density ceiling imposed by the ability to produce resources, 
mainly food. The actual population density equilibrium may be set at a fraction 
of the carrying capacity by factors other than food production, most notably by 
increased mortality due to conflict. Small-scale polities, in which all members 
are potentially exposed to the dangers of external warfare (intergroup conflict), 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 53 
should be particularly likely to have an equilibrium density much below carrying 
capacity. This idea is supported by formal models (Thrchin and Korotayev 2003).

Thus, the two factors, conflict intensity and population density, are related.

Ethnic Boundaries 
The other feature that intergroup conflict and population density have in common 
is that they create conditions favoring asabiya increase in small-scale groups.

Larger-scale groups can be created temporarily as a result of successful conquest 
by one particularly solidaristic tribe. But what mechanisms would maintain the 
cohesiveness of the larger group as one generation is succeeded by another? 
Apparently none. In the environment of a multitude of small groups, a large 
group should not be able to keep its cohesiveness for many generations, because 
this group will not be threatened by external forces (being the largest around).

Internally divisive issues will eventually destroy the asabiya of the large group, 
unless it is "disciplined" by an external threat. Furthermore, in the tribal war zone 
it is common for the subgroups comprising the large group to be ethnically as 
similar to each other as they are to small groups outside the large group. The 
large group is likely to have a blurred symbolic boundary that separates it from 
other groups, with all the negative consequences for maintaining high levels of 
asabiya.

Thus, it is hard to imagine how large groups can arise and maintain themselves 
in a homogeneous environment populated by many small groups, with an ethnic 
distance separating each pair of groups of roughly the same order of magnitude.

But what if there is a major ethnic boundary? I will call it a metaethnic fault line, 
to emphasize the scale of ethnic distance separating groups on different sides of 
the boundary. A small group near such a boundary will be confronted with very 
different others, dwarfing in their "othemess" neighboring groups that are on the 
same side of the metaethnic line. Warfare across the metaethnic line is likely to 
be much more violent, with a higher level of atrocities and lethality (e.g., Dower 
1986). This should lead to enhanced alliance formation among groups on the 
same side of the boundary. Alternatively, if small groups on the same side of the 
metaethnic frontier are unified by force, they are more likely to continue sticking 
together. Furthermore, any group demarcation symbols developed in opposition to 
the others across the boundary are likely to prove integrating with respect to ethnically similar groups on the same side of the boundary. In short, location near a 
metaethnic fault line creates conditions for the "stairway effect" in which symbols 
developed for marking boundaries of a small group are applied to successively 
larger-scale groups. Thus, my third proposed factor that enhances evolution of 
asabiya (for large-scale groups) is location near a major ethnic boundary.

4.1.2 Imperial Boundaries and Metaethnic Fault Lines 
The three factors that I propose do not operate independently of each other. In 
fact, there is one set of conditions where they all work synergistically: frontier 
zones of large empires, and particularly empires with vigorous ideologies. During 
the agrarian period of human evolution, the most internally integrative and externally divisive ideologies were, of course, the major religions of the exclusionary 
kind (Stark 1996). Exclusionary religions are those that disallow simultaneous 
membership in other religions or cults. Exclusionary religions often provide the 
symbolic markers for metaethnic fault lines, and therefore imperial boundaries 
and metaethnic fault lines often coincide (but not always, since religion can spread 
beyond the imperial boundary).

I should emphasize that a combined imperial/metaethnic boundary typically 
creates a frontier zone, that is, a two-dimensional area characterized not only by 
its length along the boundary, but also by its width (and, in any case, boundaries 
of preindustrial polities were much less like one-dimensional lines than they are 
today). There are two kinds of frontier: between an empire and a stateless (but not 
"chiefdomless") tribal zone, and between two empires. According to the argument 
I advanced above, the tribal side of the frontier should provide ideal conditions 
for (1) increase of asabiya intensity, and (2) increase in the asabiya scale (that is, 
the social scale of the group that is integrated by asabiya). Because the tribal zone 
is stateless, there is constant warfare among the ethnic groups inhabiting it, and 
thus population density should be kept below the subsistence carrying capacity.

Frontiers on the imperial side are subject to much the same pressures. One potential difference is that vigorous empires prevent internecine fighting. However, 
there is usually plenty of pressure and/or opportunities coming from the other 
side of the boundary, so imperial frontiers should provide excellent conditions 
for asabiya increase. If a very different imperial ideology (religion) is present on 
the other side of the boundary (this is the case of the frontier between two empires), then such a situation provides a particularly strong incentive for asabiya 
increase. Finally, in mature empires, in which central regions have lost much of 
their collective solidarity (because of lack of conflict and high population density 
there), frontier regions may acquire their own identity, separate from both the 
parent empire and the enemy on the other side of the border. This process may 
cause a new highly solidaristic group to arise, which will eventually establish its 
own empire.

Additional Factors That May Affect Asabiya 
Although I stress intergroup conflict, low population density, and metaethnic 
boundaries as the main factors that generate increased asabiya, one can think 
of additional variables that may or may not be important. First, group selection 
theory suggests that it is much easier for collective solidarity to increase in small 
compared to large groups. However, the various mechanisms characterizing human sociality, which we discussed in Chapter 3, should reduce the effect of group 
size on asabiya dynamics. Furthermore, the size of the group with which individuals interact is correlated with the location along the imperial center-frontier 
zone dimension, because densely populated cities with large groups of interacting 
people are typically located away from the imperial periphery. Thus, on one hand, 
it is not clear whether group size is a factor that can be isolated from the bundle of factors distinguishing imperial centers from frontiers. On the other hand, 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 55 
there is some difficulty in defining just what the cooperating group might be in a 
city: Is it the whole city? A neighborhood? A guild? Since this issue raises more 
questions than it offers answers, I leave its resolution for the future.

The second factor, also suggested by the group selection theory, is the presence 
of leveling institutions, which has been proposed as promoting the evolution of 
collective solidarity. Central regions of mature empires usually acquire high levels 
of social inequality, implying high intragroup variance in fitness, which should be 
conducive to asabiya declines. Frontiers may or may not develop a high degree 
of egalitarianism, and perhaps one can capitalize on such variation for predictive 
purposes. Again, I leave this idea for future development.

The third factor is the differential in wealth and "civilization" across the frontier. An empire presents both a threat and an opportunity to the frontier tribes.

Vigorous expansionist empires exert an enormous amount of pressure on the 
tribal society, generating a strong incentive for small-level groups to integrate 
into larger ones. But weaker stationary empires also play an integrative role, because they present an irresistible target for raiding, and large groups usually have 
a better chance of acquiring substantial loot. Additionally, empires are a source 
of technologies, ideologies, and trading goods, especially prestige goods that are 
impossible to obtain elsewhere. All this taken together suggests that a metaethnic fault line becomes a much stronger asabiya generator if it coincides with an 
imperial border.

A related mechanism is that metaethnic frontiers are places where very different 
cultures come in contact. Peoples, products, ideas, religious and other concepts 
and practices, human genetic material, microbes, and so on mingle on frontiers 
(Hall 2001). These cultural (and biological) elements may mutate and recombine 
in the contact zone, greatly increasing the overall amount of cultural variation 
on which group selection operates, and, therefore, increasing the rate of cultural 
evolution.

Specific cultural mechanisms enhancing asabiya, as well as maintaining it at a 
high level, clearly play an important role in historical dynamics. One example is 
the spread of a new religion, such as Christianity or Islam. Another example is 
the spread of nationalistic ideology in Europe in the nineteenth century (which 
played an important role in German and Italian unification). However, at this point 
it is not clear to me how we might endogenize such factors in a fruitful manner.

Thus, reluctantly, I must model them as variables exogenous to the currently built 
theory (see also Section 4.1.3).

The Effect of Physical Geography 
The physical environment, in particular, mountains and rivers, should clearly have 
a strong (and quantifiable) effect on the dynamics of collective solidarity. Mountainous terrain makes travel difficult, isolates small groups from each other, and 
inhibits the establishment of the dense interaction networks that are necessary for 
the maintenance of large-scale asabiya. Furthermore, a small polity occupying a 
highly defensible mountain valley has a good chance of avoiding conquest. As a 
result, a mountainous area, even with an intense metaethnic frontier, provides a 
poor environment for asabiya growth and scaling up. There is little incentive for 
small ethnic groups to unite for mutual protection, because each thinks it can do 
as well or even better in its own mountain fastness. It is difficult for an incipient 
empire to unite the area by conquest. Finally, even when conquered, it is difficult 
to fuse the numerous small ethnic groups into a single ethnie.

In contrast to mountains, rivers enhance the flow of people, goods, and cultural 
elements. A riverine environment, therefore, is an excellent place for an ethnic 
group to grow up in scale. Additionally, rivers often serve as trade routes. Access to prestige goods, with which rulers reward their followers, may provide an 
additional stimulus for state building.

The effect of seas on asabiya dynamics is less straightforward. On the one 
hand, seas can connect separate localities. Many sea coasts act very much like 
rivers (with one bank). Certain straits, such as the Dardanelles-Sea of MarmaraBosporus system, can be thought of as simply saltwater rivers. On the other hand, 
seas can also divide. What is particularly nettlesome is that the same sea may 
play both roles during different historical periods. For example, the Mediterranean 
played an integrative role for the Roman Empire, but became a moat between 
Christendom and Islam during the Habsburg-Ottoman conflict era.

Conclusion: The Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
Stimulated by insights from multilevel selection theory, I argue that areas where 
imperial and metaethnic frontiers coincide act as asabiya incubators. Frontier conditions impose an intense selective pressure under which weaker groups with low 
asabiya fragment and are incorporated into stronger groups. Groups with high 
asabiya expand and eventually become full-blown ethnies, unless they encounter 
and succumb to an even stronger group. It is important to emphasize that the 
mechanism of cultural group selection (Boyd and Richerson 1985) does not assume physical extinction of the individuals comprising the losing groups. Furthermore, the mechanism does not even require group extinction, because successful 
strategies can spread rapidly by imitation (Boyd and Richerson 2002).

I should also stress that no claim is made here that the metaethnic frontier 
mechanism is the only way of explaining how new ethnies and empires arise. The 
theory advanced here, however, should be particularly relevant to the "imperial" 
period of agrarian polities (roughly, -3000 to 1800 c.E.). Thus, the theory takes 
the existence of empires for granted-the question of the origins of the state is 
well beyond the scope of the historical dynamics program. (However, metaethnic 
fault lines can arise even in a stateless environment as a result of, for example, 
an invasion of alien tribal peoples. Thus, there are interesting implications from 
the theory for the origin of pristine states, although I cannot pursue them here.) 
If the metaethnic frontier theory has validity, then it explains the cycle of 
empires as follows. We begin with a situation where at least one empire (the "old 
empire") is already present. Its frontier zones, especially where they coincide 
with metaethnic fault lines, create regions of intense cultural evolution leading 
to groups with increased asabiya. In the process of interpolity competition, one 
particular group with a combination of high asabiya, structures allowing it to 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 57 
scale asabiya up, and luck eventually emerges as the winner. This group can 
be either an offshoot of the old imperial ethnie, or a new ethnic group arising 
from the tribal side of the frontier. In either case, the group has a distinct identity, 
demarcated by a strong ethnic boundary, and a high degree of internal cohesionin other words, this is a new subethnie (or small ethnie ), and the preceding history 
can be thought of as its ethnogenesis. (Thus, ethnogenesis is not a single point in 
time, but a historical process that can take many generations and even centuries.) 
As the new subethnie grows (both numerically and in the territory it controls), 
it assimilates other ethnically similar groups nearby, by either voluntary or (initially) coercive mechanisms. The ethnic boundary is expanded to encompass these 
groups, melding them into a single ethnie (although subethnic divisions may persist, it is important that the asabiya is high at the level of the whole ethnie ). The 
positive feedback dynamic sets in, so that increased size enhances the ability of 
the ethnie to consolidate an area around it into a territorial polity. The new polity 
grows by conquest, first by consolidating ethnically similar groups, then at the 
expense of the rest of the old empire and the tribal zone. Eventually a new empire 
is created and expands to the limits set by geopolitical constraints. In the process, 
the ethnic group transforms itself into the imperial core group.

The new empire is initially governed by highly solidaristic elites and is successful in maintaining internal peace (all warfare is transferred to the frontiers).

As a result, population density in the center increases to the limit set by the 
subsistence technology. Asabiya in the empire's center begins to decline, as a 
result of its inhabitants not being exposed to external threats, and as a result of 
increased internal competition. This process probably takes a long time (many 
generations, and perhaps even centuries). Meanwhile, a similarly slow process 
causes another round of ethnogenesis to occur in the frontier zone. Eventually a 
new ethnie (or, more likely, several ethnies) is born, bringing an end to the old 
empire, and the cycle starts again.

4.1.3 Scaling-up Structures 
An important element of the theory is the ability of ethnic groups to scale up 
without splintering into subgroups. While the common general mechanism, as I 
postulated, is location near a metaethnic fault line, specific cultural structures that 
enable asabiya to scale up vary. Here I discuss three examples of such structures.

Religion 
One of the most powerful mechanisms for the scaling up of asabiya is a religion 
that is (1) proselytizing and (2) exclusionary. The first property allows an expanding ethnic group, professing the religion, to increase its size by adding converts.

The second property, exclusivity (Stark 1996), maintains a sharp boundary between the in-group and out-group: "who is not with us is against us." 
The archetypal examples of proselytizing exclusionary religions are Christianity and Islam. Both religions, especially during their early periods, placed a big 
emphasis on the community of the faithful as opposed to the unbelievers. For 
example, within the Islamic community, or umma, Muslims were expected to behave to each other altruistically (thus, one of the emphases was on charity). The 
Muslim world (Dar al-Islam) was in opposition to the non-Muslims (Dar al-Harb, 
literally "the House of War''), and Muslims were certainly not expected to behave 
altruistically toward the nonbelievers: whereas enslaving Muslims was forbidden, 
no such injunction existed against enslaving the infidels.

If we interpret the characteristics of such religions as Islam and Christianity in 
terms of group selection theory, we see that they correspond very well to features 
that promote selection at the group level: 
• Sharp boundary between in-group and out-group 
• Leveling institutions (charity; monogamy in Christianity) 
• Strong norms and metanorms (enforcement of norms) 
• Altruistic in-group behavior 
Stark ( 1996) provides a sociological analysis of early Christianity, with an emphasis on its features that explain its spectacular rise.

Primogeniture 
An example of a political structure that increases group cohesion is the institution of rulership, in which one group member becomes a symbolic focus for the 
whole group. An example of a small-scale group of this kind is a warband with 
its military leader. Many large empires started in this way; for example, the Ostrogoths (Bums 1984). However, the success of such groups is typically limited 
in time and space, and they must evolve certain structures that will allow them 
to overcome their scaling-up limitations. Extension of the temporal duration is 
achieved by the cultural mechanism of dynasty. Some dynasties exerted an extremely powerful influence over very long periods of time, such as Chinggisids 
and Sharifs (descendants of Muhammad). But the greatest danger to empires established by tribal conquest typically was the division of the acquired territory 
among the multiple heirs. One cultural mechanism that prevented the splintering 
of the realm was the rule of primogeniture.

It is interesting that history knows several cultural innovations that attempted 
to prevent empire splintering, although they did not work as well as primogeniture. For example, during the Kievan period, Russian princes evolved an elaborate 
mechanism by which the overall ruler (the Grand Prince) was succeeded by his 
younger brother, who would move up to the main capital of Kiev, thereby freeing 
a subordinate capital, which would be occupied by the next member of the hierarchy, and so on. This system, however, did not work very well, and quickly led to 
a collapse into a feudal situation of multiple principalities, each governed by its 
own dynasty. However, the process did not stop there. The practice of assigning 
each heir his allotment lead to the progressive splintering of Russian principalities. Only when one of them, Moscow, adopted the rule of primogeniture, could 
the trend toward disintegration be reversed.

THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 59 
Society-Wide Mechanisms of Male Socialization 
In a cross-cultural study of warfare, Otterbein (1985) demonstrated that societies 
engaged in internal warfare (conflict among small-level groups) were dominated 
by small-scale "fraternal interest" groups composed of related males. Societies 
that emphasized socialization of males into military institutions that crosscut 
units of male relatedness, by contrast, were able to suppress internal warfare.

Such societies were much more successful in external warfare (conflict among 
larger-scale groups). Examples of such cultural innovations include age sets and 
police societies among prestate people (Otterbein 1985), militia drilling in Greek 
city-states and seventeenth-century Europe (McNeill 1982:131), and obligatory 
nationwide military service in modem national states.

4.1.4 Placing the Metaethnic Frontier Theory in Context 
The argument of the previous section has several intersecting points with theories previously advanced in sociology and history. I will not attempt a complete 
literature review here; my plan rather is to provide the context for the metaethnic 
frontier theory, and to highlight some of the similarities to, as well as dissimilarities from, the thinking of previous authors.

Ibn Khaldun 's Theory 
The basic premises from which I advanced the frontier model of ethnogenesis are 
very different from those of Ibn Khaldun, and it is not surprising that the mechanism I propose differs substantially from his. However, there are also some points 
of similarity. In fact, I believe that Ibn Khaldun's theory is largely a subset of the 
frontier model. (Here I focus on Ibn Khaldun's theory for the origin of dynasties; 
his theory dealing with the state collapse will be dealt with in Chapter 7.) 
In Ibn Khaldun's theory for political cycles in the Maghreb, there are two 
ethnic groups, civilized Arabs living along the Mediterranean littoral, and desert 
Berbers living inland. Thus, there is an ethnic boundary dividing these two ethnies. The ethnic distance separating Arabs and Berbers, however, is not very 
large. Although Arabs lived in wealthy civilized states, these states were generally too weak to exert much pressure on Berber tribal communities. Additionally, 
both ethnic groups professed Islam, which is therefore a factor that unifies rather 
than divides them. Although several Berber dynasties were established by religiously motivated groups belonging to a different sect from the settled areas, such 
a sectarian difference is not as large as, say, the Muslim/Christian fault line. In 
short, the ethnic distance between Arabs and Berbers is moderate, and therefore 
we should expect that it would exert a moderate pressure for asabiya to scale 
up. And, indeed, the historical record shows that desert-originating dynasties in 
North Africa built only region-sized polities.

The contrast between the regional Maghrebin polities and large territorial empires build by Turco-Mongolian ethnies, to which I referred in Section 3.2.1, appears to be very interesting in light of the theory just advanced. Turco-Mongolian 
tribes, of course, originated from one of the most prominent and long-standing 
metaethnic fault lines in Eurasia, the Chinese-Inner Asian frontier. The ethnic 
gulf between the nomads of Central Asia and Chinese agriculturalists was very 
deep, since they did not share either religion or language (or economic way of 
life, obviously). Asian nomads faced (most of the time) a huge and powerful 
territorial empire, China. Thus, in order to successfully resist its pressure and 
have any chance of obtaining prestige goods from it by raiding or extortion, 
Turco-Mongolian nomads had no choice but to evolve structures for large-scale 
asabiya. In this fashion, steppe polities were a reflection of agrarian polities on 
the other side of the frontier, as was brilliantly argued by Barfield (1989). But 
then we might ask, why did agrarian polities on the North African frontier reach 
only regional size, while on the Inner Asian frontier they typically expanded to 
imperial size? The theory advanced in this chapter suggests that the evolutionary 
pressure for scaling up affected not just the nomads, but both sides of the frontier. On the Inner Asia frontier, the scaling-up dynamic operated until checked by 
geopolitical constraints, resulting in huge empires on both sides of the frontier.

In the Maghreb, by contrast, as soon as polities reached medium size, the ethnies 
across the frontier were no more alien than other ethnies on the same side. Thus, 
a more shallow ethnic divide should, and did, produce smaller-scale asabiyas and 
polities.

External Conflict-Internal Cohesion Theory 
Social theorists have long known that conflict between groups tends to increase 
internal cohesion (Simmel 1955; Coser 1956). Conflict sets boundaries between 
groups and strengthens group consciousness (Coser 1956:34). Simmel and Coser 
also make the important observation that severe conflict can either break a group 
or increase its internal cohesion. The most important factor affecting the outcome 
seems to be the initial degree of group consensus. If a group is lacking in basic consensus, an external threat may lead to apathy, and the group disintegrates 
(Coser 1956:93). A group that enjoys some degree of initial cohesiveness, on 
the other hand, is likely to emerge from the conflict greatly strengthened. This 
observation is consistent with how I envision ethnogenesis in the frontier zone.

Certainly not every ethnic group will immediately enjoy an increase in asabiya 
upon finding itself next to the frontier. Most groups will perish in the pressure 
cooker of a metaethnic frontier (note that, when a group disappears, it does not 
necessarily mean that all or even most of its members are physically destroyed).

Other groups will survive but will be unable to scale up without disintegrating.

Very few groups, by chance or conscious design, will be able to hit on the combination of norms and structures that will enable them to survive and expand.

Frontiers in History 
There is an enormous literature on frontiers. Some directions, such as the "frontier thesis" of Turner (1921) and related literature, are not particularly useful 
to our purposes. Highly relevant is the observation made by McNeill (1963:60) 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 61 
about "a long line of lords marcher who created empires by successfully exploiting a strategic position on the frontier between civilization and barbarism." One 
example that McNeil cited was the Akkadian Empire. McNeill (1963:249) also 
pointed out that almost all the states that unified China in a single empire originated on the margins of the Chinese world (one exception was the Ming). The 
importance of the frontier between the agrarian China and steppe-dwelling nomads was stressed by Lattimore (1967), and more recently in an excellent study 
by Barfield (1989). Service (1975) made a similar observation about the frontier 
origin of Egyptian unifiers. Other examples of well-studied frontiers in history 
are: the Roman (Dyson 1985; Whittaker 1994; Williams 1997), medieval Europe 
(TeBrake 1985; Bartlett and Mackay 1989; Bartlett 1993; Abulafia and Berend 
2002), and Europe's steppe frontier (McNeill1964), as well as the Russian part of 
it (Wieszynnski 1976). Several general frontier studies are by Savage and Thompson {1979), Donnan and Wilson (1999), and Power and Standen (1999). I have 
already mentioned the civilizational fault lines of Huntington (1996).

From this highly incomplete list it is clear that there is a consensus that frontiers played an extremely important role in history. However, the reasons that 
made frontiers important are not completely clear. There seem to be two general 
explanations offered in the historical and sociological literature. The first one, the 
advantages of marchland position, was already discussed in Chapter 2. Note that 
this theory is in a sense the diametrical opposite of the theory that I advance.

Whereas Collins argues that marchland position protects states from predation by 
neighbors, I postulate that frontier location, on the contrary, puts a lot of pressure on ethnic groups, so that only the most capable survive. Thus, in my theory, 
frontier location is destructive in the short run but constructive in the long run.

Since the two theories offer different predictions, we have here the possibility for 
an empirical test (which is pursued in Chapter 5).

The second common explanation is based on diffusion of technology. For example, "the Akkadians were in a favorable position to unite barbarian prowess 
with civilized technique to form a powerful military force" (McNeill 1963:60). I 
have already commented on a related aspect, that metaethnic frontiers are characterized by a great amount of cultural variation, which, according to the theory 
of multilevel selection, should speed up cultural evolution. As to the purely technological aspect, I am somewhat dubious about its explanatory power regarding 
success at territorial expansion, at least in the long run. However, the final arbiter 
of this issue is data, and it should be possible to design an empirical test for 
distinguishing between these two hypotheses.

Semiperipheries in the World-Systems Theory 
The world-systems theory was formulated by Wallerstein (1974, 1980, 1989), and 
later developed in various directions by other authors (for an overview, see the 
recent volume edited by Denemark et al. 2000), so that at this point in time it is 
more of a research program, rather than a single theory. One basic premise shared 
by researchers working within the world-systems paradigm is that the dynamics 
of any single polity or society are not endogenous, but are a consequence of 
complex interactions among local, regional, and global processes (Chase-Dunn 
and Hall 1997). An extremely important kind of spatial interaction is between 
core and periphery regions within the world-system (in fact, world-systems can 
be conceptualized as core-periphery structures; Hall 2001). Core/periphery differentiation exists when two societies systemically interact and one has higher 
population density and/or greater complexity than the other (Chase-Dunn and 
Hall 2000:91). Chase-Dunn and Hall further conceptualize the semiperiphery as 
those regions that are spatially located between core and peripheral regions, or 
between two competing core regions. Alternatively, semiperipheries may mix core 
and periphery forms of organization, or be intermediate in form between those 
forms found in the adjacent core and peripheral areas.

Chase-Dunn and Hall argue that "semiperiphery is fertile ground for social, 
organizational, and technical innovation and is advantageous location for the establishment of new centers of power. In particular, secondary state formation 
on the marches of empires has frequently been recognized as a semiperipheral 
phenomenon that is related to the rise and fall of empires" (2000:96).

There are some striking parallels between the Chase-Dunn and Hall theory and 
the one advanced in this chapter. However, I argue that the theory of semiperipheral marcher states has not yet been formalized to the point where it could be 
submitted to a rigorous empirical test. The first problem is that a region can be 
designated as semiperipheral either because of its spatial location, or because it 
has institutional forms intermediate between core and periphery. In other words, 
the definition is too broad, and too many polities could be classified as semiperipheral. The second and related problem is that the theory of Chase-Durin and 
Hall does not resolve the issue of why some semiperipheral challengers succeed 
and others do not (Chase-Dunn and Hall 1997:98). By contrast, the metaethnic 
frontier theory makes much sharper predictions, and thus has a higher falsifiability potential. It essentially says that only those semiperipheries where imperial 
frontiers coincide with metaethnic fault lines should be the sources of aggressive challenger states. Furthermore, the more intense the ethnic differential and 
the longer the frontier occupies a region, the more likely it is that a challenger 
would emerge and be successful at building a large territorial empire. The empirical issue thus becomes whether the metaethnic frontier theory captures all 
cases of empires starting as semiperipheral marcher states, or whether there are 
semiperipheral states that gain their ability for territorial expansion by some other 
mechanism.

Ethnogenesis 
While theoretical ethnology languished in the West after World War 11, in the 
Soviet Union, by contrast, ethnology was a respected and productive direction of 
research. I have already discussed the original (although, in my opinion, deeply 
flawed) theory of ethnogenesis advanced by Gumilev (1971). But there was a 
great variety of other ethnological research in Russia, both theoretical and empirical. For a review of one influential school of research on ethnosocial processes, 
see Bromley (1987; Bromley and Kozlov 1989). Several studies examined the 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 63 
processes involved specifically in ethnogenesis {Alekseeva 1973; Alekseev 1986).

Russian ethnology continues to evince a heightened interest in the problems of 
social and historical ethnology (Arutyunov 1989; Lurie 1998).

In recent years, researchers in western Europe and North America have also become interested in the problems of ethnogenesis. A particularly fruitful research 
program is taking shape in the study of the ethnogeneses of various Germanic 
peoples at the time of the later Roman Empire (Wolfram and Pohl 1990; Heather 
1996; Hummer 1998). However, origins of other ethnies are examined with an increasing frequency (Roosens 1989; Emberling 1995; Hudson 1999; Moore 2001).

Not all social scientists, however, are sanguine about the term "ethnogenesis," because of its connotation of "origin" (see the discussion by Ausenda in Hummer 
1998:21).

The connection between frontiers and ethnogenesis has not escaped the attention of various authors. A very interesting study of the relationship between 
frontiers and ethnic identity is that of Armstrong (1982). A series of papers in the 
Journal of World History presented several case studies of frontier ethnogenesis 
{Chapell 1993a,b; Miller 1993; Mulroy 1994).

A very interesting perspective that merges the ideas of frontier ethnogenesis 
and core-periphery interaction is offered by Hall (2000, 2001). Hall defines a 
frontier as a region or zone where two or more distinct cultures, societies, ethnic 
groups, or modes of production come into contact. Contact often leads to conflict, 
and attempts by some groups to incorporate others across the frontier. Attempted 
incorporation and resistance against it exert tremendous pressure on both the incorporated people and the incorporating system. "These interactions also reshape 
the ethnic landscape. Frontiers are zones where ethnogenesis, ethnocide, culturicide, and genocide are common" (Hall2000:241). Hall illustrates these processes 
with the example of Navajo (Dine) ethnogenesis. Navajo groups prior to the arrival of Europeans shared language, customs, and a vague sense of being the 
same people. However, Dine-wide institutions such as the Navajo Tribal Council 
developed as a result of frontier conditions. A consolidated Navajo ethnie began 
to form over the centuries of interaction between the Navajo and the Spaniards, 
and finally took shape under the American occupation (Hall 2001:260).

4.2 MATHEMATICAL THEORY 
The theory that I advanced in the previous section is formulated verbally. It 
seems plausible that the waxings and wanings of asabiya could underlie imperial 
cycles, but we are dealing with dynamical systems, and intuition based on verbal 
reasoning can mislead. For example, it is possible that when we translate the 
verbal assumptions into a mathematical model, we do not get the expected boombust cycles, but some other dynamics. Thus, we need to make sure that our verbal 
reasoning did not mislead us.

Frontiers are inherently spatial quantities, and the mathematical theory that we 
will build must eventually include space in an explicit way. However, explicitly 
spatial models are more difficult to analyze and typically require numerical solutions or computer simulations. It is often useful to attempt to capture the main 
interactions postulated by theory with a simplified pseudospatial model that is 
much more transparent to analysis. This is the strategy that I pursue. First, I 
develop a very simple pseudospatial model and determine what it tells us about 
the dynamic relationship between empires and frontiers (Section 4.2.1 ). Second, 
I construct a spatially explicit simulation to make sure that the insights from the 
simpler model hold in a more complex setting (Section 4.2.2).

4.2.1 A Simple Analytical Model 
In Section 2.2.2 I analyzed a simple geopolitical model (2.12) of territorial dynamics in one-dimensional space. Setting y = 1 (since we are not interested in the 
effects of position) and employing the approximation exp[x] = 1 +x, suggested 
in Section 2.2.2, we have the following equation for the territorial dynamics: 
A=cA(1-A/h)-a (4.1) 
The parameter c translates the state's resources into its geopolitical power, h is 
the spatial scale of power projection, and a is the geopolitical pressure from the 
hinterland (assumed to be a constant).

Model (2.12) assumes that a polity's power is proportional to the amount of its 
resources (eA). The "resources" primarily refer to the state's human resources, 
since it is the population that pays taxes and produces recruits who are necessary 
for territorial defense and expansion. As I argued in the previous chapter, however, 
the success of a state is a result of collective action. No matter how many subjects 
an empire has, if they cannot, or will not, work together, the imperial power is 
zero. Thus, the coefficient c is actually a function of collective solidarity.

Let S stand for the average polity-wide level of collective solidarity. I scale S 
to be between 0 and 1, with 0 corresponding to a completely atomized society 
that is incapable of collective action, and 1 corresponding to the maximum solidarity possible for humans. Next, I assume the simplest possible function relating 
the power multiplier to asabiya: c(S) = c0S. In other words, I have assumed 
that geopolitical power is proportional to the product of asabiya and the state's 
resources. Substituting this relationship in the equation, we have 
A= c0AS(1- A/h)- a (4.2) 
I now need to derive an equation for the temporal evolution of S. The first step 
is to choose a law of growth for it. We still lack a well-developed theory that 
would connect micro-level individual actions to macro-level dynamics of asabiya, 
so the next-best approach is to select among the simple models of growth such as 
the four discussed in Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. The two boundless growth models 
(linear and exponential) are not good for our purposes, because it is unlikely 
that asabiya can grow without bound, and I have limited it from above by 1, 
anyway. Thus, the real choices are either the asymptotic or the logistic growth.

The asymptotic growth implies that when S is at low level (near zero), it will 
grow linearly. This is also not a good assumption. As discussed in Section 3.2.3, 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 65 
most people are conditional altruists (if they are altruists at all). When they are 
in a minority, conditional altruists are likely to follow selfish strategies, because 
they do not wish to be taken advantage of by free-riders. It is only when there is a 
sufficient number of other (conditional or unconditional) altruists around that they 
will be likely to behave altruistically. This (admittedly crude) argument suggests 
that the initial growth of asabiya should be autocatalytic. In other words, if we 
wish to select one of the four simple models of growth, then it is the logistic that 
matches best the hypothesized dynamics of asabiya growth: 
S = T(A)S(1- S) (4.3) 
Note that I have already made the relative growth rate T a function of A. Figuring 
out the form of this function is our next task.

In the verbal theory advanced earlier in this chapter, I argued that asabiya 
is expected to grow in locations near the imperial boundary and decline in the 
empire's center. Let us assume, for simplicity, that the relative rate of growth 
of asabiya is a linear function of distance from the border (Figure 4.1 ). We see 
that the space is divided into three areas: the "hinterland" outside the empire, the 
"frontier" where asabiya tends to increase, and the "center" where asabiya tends 
to decrease. The parameter To is the maximum relative growth rate, which takes 
place right at the border (x =A), and b is the width of the frontier region (where 
T(x) > 0].

The average polity-wide asabiya is 
1 A ( A) T(A) =A fo T(x) dx =To 1- 2b (4.4) 
r(x) 
Center Hinterland r-----------~--------~--------------x A 
Figure 4.1 The relative growth rate of asabiya, r(x), in relation to the imperial boundary.

Symbols: A is the polity size, b is the width of the frontier zone (thus, the "Center" 
extends from x = 0 to x =A-b, while the frontier is between A-b and A), and r0 is the 
maximum relative growth rate of asabiya, taking place at the boundary x =A.

Substituting this formula into the equation for S, we have 
A= c0AS ( 1 - ~) -a 
S = r0 ( 1 - ~) S(l- S} (4.5) 
The state variables are constrained as follows: 0 < S < 1 and A > 0.

Analysis of this simple model is very straightforward, and can be accomplished 
graphically by looking at the isoclines in the phase space. The isocline for the 
first equation in ( 4.5) is the curve showing all combinations of A and S values for 
which the change in A is zero. The significance of the isocline is that it divides 
the phase space (which graphically represents all possible combinations of A and 
S values) into parts where A either grows or declines (and on the isocline itself, 
where A= 0, A does not change). The isocline for the second equation is defined 
analogously, by setting S = 0. Plotting the two isoclines (Figure 4.2}, we see 
that they intersect at only one point. In other words, the model admits a single 
nontrivial equilibrium point. The stability of the equilibrium is determined by the 
position of the S = 0 isocline in relation to the minimum of the A = 0 isocline.

Thus, the stability is determined by only two parameters: h and b. If 2b > h/2 
(the intersection point is to the right of the minimum}, then the equilibrium is 
stable to small perturbations. The mechanism works as follows. Increasing A also 
increases the area in the center, and causes the average asabiya to decline, which 
pushes the empire boundary back. On the other hand, decreasing A causes S 
to increase, which pushes the border forward. I should add that, in addition to 
the equilibrial dynamics, it is also possible for the polity to fail, if the initial 
combination of S and A is too low. Roughly speaking, if A(O)S(O) < afc, then 
the expansion never starts, and the fledgling polity is destroyed by the pressure 
s 
0 
11 
•Cl) 
..___--~--_J_--------l~A 
2b h/2 h 
Figure 4.2 Isoclines of the asabiya-territory model (the unstable case).

THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 67 
from the hinterland. This is not a novel feature of the asabiya-territory model, 
but a characteristic of the original geopolitical model (see Section 2.2.1 ). In fact, 
the case of 2b > h/2 is not qualitatively different from the geopolitical model 
without asabiya.

If 2b < h/2, then the equilibrium is unstable. The population dynamics are 
characterized by a single boom/bust cycle [assuming that initial power A(O)S(O) 
is over the threshold]. Initially, both A and S increase, but when A exceeds 2b, 
S starts declining. The territorial expansion stops because the empire runs into 
logistic limitations, and S continues to decrease, because the central areas of the 
empire dominate the periphery. Low S eventually means that the empire cannot 
counter the geopolitical pressure from the hinterland. As a result, A begins contracting, first slowly, and then at an accelerating rate. The collapse rate accelerates 
because the empire has progressively decreasing resources. At some point, S begins to increase again (when A falls below 2b), but by that point it is too late: 
the positive feedback dynamic (decreased A-decreased resources-even faster decrease in A) overwhelms any increase in S, and the empire collapses (A hits 0).

An example of these dynamics is shown in Figure 4.3.

This analysis illustrates the value of translating verbal theories into mathematical models. Even though we made a number of greatly simplified assumptions, so 
that our model is at best a caricature of reality, nevertheless, the model turned out 
to be capable of more complex behavior than we could have guessed beforehand.

Most importantly, although the model confirms that the postulated mechanism can 
lead to imperial boom/bust cycles, it also indicated that other kinds of dynamics are possible for different parameter values. Most importantly, if the empire's 
"reach" (as quantified by parameter h) is not much longer than the frontier width 
(b), then the expected boom/bust cycle will not materialize. Instead, the empire 
1.0 
Ci) 0.8 .... ' 0 ' $ 0.6 1/) 
Q) 
::c 
cu "I: 0.4 cu 
> 
~ - 0.2 Cl) 
0.0 
0 10 20 
' ' ' ' ' 
30 
Time 
~ 
~ 
.............

---
40 50 60 
Figure 4.3 Dynamics of Model (4.5) for the case of unstable equilibrium. Parameter 
values: r0 = 0.1, c0 = 1, h = 1, b = 0.2, and a= 0.1.

will reach a state of equilibrium Gust as in the original geopolitical model without asabiya dynamics). Furthermore, b must be substantially less than h. While 
the precise quantitative result, b < h/4, is likely to be affected by the structural 
assumptions of the model (for example, the linear relationships assumed for various functions), the qualitative insight is probably robust. Frontier areas must be 
small in relation to the empire size, determined by logistic constraints; if they are 
not, then no boom/bust dynamics ensue.

The other interesting insight is that the model does not appear to admit repeated boom/bust cycles or sustained oscillations. The key factor preventing a 
resurgence of a collapsing empire is that the outside pressure never relents (it 
is parameterized by a constant a). In reality, the pressure from outside is likely 
to come from other polities that will have their own logistic limitations. Thus, 
if we model the rival states explicitly, perhaps we will see another possible dynamic behavior that cannot be generated by the very simple model we developed 
here. This is a conjecture that I will pursue in the context of the spatially explicit 
simulation (next section).

Finally, yet another advantage of translating verbal theory into simple mathematical models is that we can quickly check the effects of various assumptions.

For example, in the derivation of the model I assumed that asabiya grows logistically. What is the effect of using another growth model, for example the 
asymptotic one? It turns out that this assumption does not substantially affect the 
qualitative results. Most importantly, the isocline structure is precisely the same 
as in the model with the logistic S.1 Similarly, making r(x) a nonlinear function of space in Figure 4.1 does not affect the isocline structure. Finally, Sergey 
Nefedov (personal communication) investigated the effect of not using the approximation exp[ x] = 1 + x in deriving the equation for A, and found that the 
qualitative result is unchanged, but the quantitative condition for the boom/bust 
cycle becomes 2b < h instead of 2b < h/2 in Model (4.5). Thus, the insights 
from the model appear to be quite robust with respect to various modifications.

4.2.2 A Spatially Explicit Simulation 
Our next step is to make the frontier model spatial and determine how this change 
affects the predicted dynamics. The details of the simulation model are banished 
to the Appendix (Section A.2). Here I give a brief overall description of the 
model, focusing. on ways in which it differs from the nonspatial model (4.5). The 
most important addition is the explicit spatial dimension. The elementary spatial 
unit in the model (a "cell") corresponds to a small regional polity (a chiefdom) 
or a province within a large territorial empire. Cells are arranged on a rectangular 
grid.

Asabiya is tracked at two spatial levels: each cell has a value of asabiya, and 
each empire is characterized by its own value of asabiya, which is the average 
of the asabiyas of all cells belonging to the empire. The asabiya of a cell grows 
logistically (to the upper limit S = I) if the cell is a "frontier" one: that is, 
1For the mathematically inclined readers: remember that I imposed the condition 0 < S <I, so we 
do not care about the S = 0 isocline 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 69 
situated next to a boundary between two empires, or between an empire and the 
"nonimperial hinterland." If a cell is not on a frontier, then its asabiya declines 
exponentially to 0. This is a slightly different implementation of the effect of 
the frontier on asabiya dynamics than that depicted in Figure 4.1. First, rather 
than declining linearly with distance from the border (as in the analytic model), 
the relative growth rate of asabiya is Z shaped: it is flat (and positive) within the 
frontier region, then abruptly declines to a flat (negative) value within the interior.

Second, the width of the frontier region, b, is fixed at the size of one cell.

The dynamics of territorial expansion is modeled in a way analogous to equation ( 4.5). Each empire attempts to expand by attacking cells bordering it. The 
success of expansion is determined by the relative powers of the attacker and 
defender. Power is directly proportional to imperial size, A, and average asabiya, 
S, but discounted by distance between the empire's center and the site of conflict, 
d: P =AS exp[ -dfh]. The parameter h measures how fast power attenuates with 
distance [see equation (2.11) in Section 2.2.1]. The attacker wins if the power it 
brings to bear on the conflict site exceeds the power of the defender by a certain threshold (Ap). Note that this is a more realistic description of the process 
of expansion, because the powers of polities bordering the empire are modeled 
explicitly, rather than implicitly (with a constant, a) as in Model (4.5).

Dynamics Predicted by the Model 
The dynamics of the model are illustrated by a typical realization (Figure 4.4a).

The simulation was initiated with Empire 1, located in the upper central region 
of the arena, while the rest of the cells were assigned to nonimperial hinterland.

Empire 1 grew rapidly for about ten time steps, until it occupied half of the 
available space, and then stabilized due to logistic constraints. During this first 
period of relative stasis, a stationary imperial frontier was established, which 
caused an increase of asabiya in the frontier zone just outside the empire. Soon 
after time step 20, a bunch of trajectories suddenly appeared, as a result of asabiya 
in the frontier zone increasing to the point where small polities began conquering 
each other. Only four polities (Empires 2, 9, 11, and 16) survived of this initial 
bunch, and grew first to consolidate the area around them, and then at the expense 
of Empire 1, causing its eventual extinction. During this process all area was 
divided between the four empires (no hinterland was left). A second period of 
relative stasis ensued, succeeded by an abrupt growth of Empires 9 and 16 at 
the expense of the other two. However, Empires 2 and 11 were not extinguished.

After the third period of relative stasis, when the asabiyas of the two large empires 
declined while the asabiyas of smaller empires grew, another period of rapid 
change caused Empires 9 and 16 to collapse, while Empires 2 and 11 grew to 
take over most of their territory. Interestingly, one portion of the arena turned 
stateless as a result of Empire 9 collapsing, and this area was not conquered by 
the remaining empires. The fourth period of stasis was ended by the appearance 
of a new empire (17) arising in the stateless area. This eventually led to the 
collapse of one of the older empires, and a period of back-and-forth dynamics 
between the two remaining polities.

70 
(/) 
"' ~ 
0.6 
<( 
~ 0.4 
;f 
0.2 
0 50 100 150 200 
Time 
6~---------------------------------------T,~--~ Mongol 
- 4 N 
E 
:E 
-
"' ! 
<( 2 
l-
' ' ' ' 0 ' ' 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Centuries C.E.

Figure 4.4 (a} Dynamics of the spatial asabiya-area model. Each curve depicts the territorial dynamics of simulated empires (polity area is expressed as a fraction of the total arena occupied). Model parameters are r0 = 0.2, 8 = 0.1, h = 2, Scri1 = 0.003, and 
ll.p = 0.1. Numbers associated with the trajectories are the imperial indices of the polities.

(b) Expansion-contraction curves of areas for polities in East and Central Asia, 600-1200 
c.E. (Data from Taagepera 1997: Appendix) 
The model-generated trajectories look quite similar to the trajectories of historical polities (compare to Figure 4.4b). One striking similarity is how periods 
of rapid change are succeeded by periods of relative stasis. Another similarity is 
how situation dependent are the dynamics of polities. In particular, the maximum 
quasistable area during each stasis period is quite variable, despite all empires be-
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 71 
ing subjected to the same logistical constraint function. This variability is, first, 
due to history resulting in a variable proportion of high-asabiya cells producing 
different average asabiya at the empire level. Second, since the location of boundaries reflects the balance of the opposing forces exerted by neighboring polities, 
the ultimate size of the empire depends very much on the relative powers of 
neighbors.

The qualitative similarity between historical polity trajectories and the simulated ones does not, of course, constitute any "proof' that the theoretical and 
empirical dynamics are driven by the same mechanism. In general, for any potential pattern there are an infinite number of mechanisms that can produce it: 
the mapping between mechanisms and patterns is many to one. Thus, in order 
to build empirical support for the frontier hypothesis, we will need to subject it 
to rigorous empirical testing (this will be our task in Chapter 5). Nevertheless, 
the observation that several features of the model's output match the observed 
dynamics is, at the very least, an encouragement to further theory developing 
and testing. Remember that the dynamic patterns in Figure 4.4a were not built 
in as model assumptions. On the contrary, they are an emergent macroscale feature of the assumptions about specific microscale mechanisms. Furthermore, the 
match between the observed and predicted dynamics goes beyond the superficial 
resemblance. Consider, for example, the political dynamics in Central-East Asia 
during the twelfth century. At that time there were two large empires (Sung and 
Tufan) with stationary borders throughout most of the century. Then a bundle of 
four "challenger" polities arrived on the scene: Western Liao, Jurchen, Khwarism, 
and Mongol. All challengers arose in the northern frontier zone. By the end of 
the thirteenth century, only one of the challenger polities survived (Mongol); the 
other three, as well as the two older empires were destroyed by it. This is very 
similar to what happens in the simulation during time steps 20-30, when a bundle 
of challenger polities arise in the frontier zone surrounding Empire 1, with most 
of them (as well as Empire 1 itself) eventually consumed by the four winning 
empires.

Trajectory Instability of Model Dynamics 
One interesting feature of the model is that its output is very erratic looking. In 
fact, if we repeatedly simulate the model starting with exactly the same initial 
condition (the initial location and asabiya of Empire 1), each run will produce 
wildly different outcomes. Because the rules of change are largely deterministic 
(the only way stochasticity enters in the model is in the order in which cells 
become potential attackers, as well as in the order in which neighboring cells are 
attacked), this observation suggests that the model behaves chaotically. To check 
on this, I removed all stochasticity from the simulation (by fixing the order of 
attackers and directions to attack). The purely deterministic model still produced 
very erratic-looking trajectories (although now, of course, each run was exactly 
the same as the previous one). However, a small change in the initial conditions 
(for example, adding or subtracting a single cell from the initial state of Empire l) 
again produced rapidly diverging trajectories. Thus, it appears that the simulation 
is indeed characterized by chaotic dynamics (that is, sensitive dependence on 
initial conditions; Ruelle 1989).

In retrospect, the finding of chaotic dynamics in the spatial version of the 
metaethnic frontier model is not surprising. Complex dynamics are promoted by 
nonlinearities and high dimensionality in dynamical systems. Several features of 
the frontier model introduce severe nonlinearities. One is the size-threshold effect 
(see Section 4.2.1): small polities are highly liable to extinction, but as soon as 
they grow over a certain size they become much more resistant to external pressure. The second threshold is Scrit• the critical value of average asabiya, below 
which an empire cannot sustain its cohesion. Yet another important factor is the 
logistic growth assumption underlying the asabiya equation. Logistic growth at 
low values of the state variable is essentially exponential, and thus is characterized by sensitive dependence. This means that two cells within a frontier zone 
that differ slightly in their initial asabiya (due to historical effects) will actually 
diverge in their asabiya values, even though they are subjected to exactly the 
same dynamic rule.

The high dimensionality of dynamics is imposed by space. Each cell is characterized by two state variables: its imperial index and its asabiya. Thus, the 
dimensionality of the dynamic process is twice the number of cells within the 
arena (for example, it is 800 for a 20 x 20 arena). This means that there are 
typically several empires contending for territory at any given time, and that each 
empire's internal composition is highly context and history specific. This situation 
dependence was already remarked on above.

To sum up, nonlinear functional forms and high dimensionality due to the 
spatial nature of the simulation conspire to make its dynamics highly chaotic. If 
the frontier model actually captures some important aspect of reality, then the 
prospects for long-term prediction of the trajectories of agrarian polities are not 
good. It is true that the spatial frontier model is extremely simple, even simplistic, 
but more complex models typically tend to have even more chaotic dynamics.

The Effect of the Logistic Load Parameter on Stability 
The analysis of the nonspatial frontier model suggested that the key factor determining stability in that model was the ratio hfb (increasing the spatial scale 
of power projection, quantified by h, in relation to the frontier width, b, resulted 
in a destabilization of the equilibrium polity size). In the spatial simulation, the 
width of the frontier is fixed at 1, but we can vary h and observe the effect 
on predicted dynamics. The nonspatial model suggests that decreasing h should 
eventually stabilize the dynamics, while increasing it should further destabilize 
the dynamics. Numerical exploration of the spatial simulation showed that this 
is indeed the case. When h is reduced to, for example, 1 (compared to the reference value of 2), the simulation output ceases to generate oscillations. Instead, 
after some transient dynamics, a number of medium-sized polities arises, each 
occupying between 7 and 16% of the total area (30-70 cells).

Increasing h serves to destabilize the dynamics, in accordance with predictions 
of the nonspatial model. For example, if we set h = 3, then, after some initial oscillations, one polity will eventually take over the whole simulation arena.

THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 73 
Lacking any frontiers, all cells will eventually decline in asabiya to 0. When the 
average empire asabiya declines below the threshold Scrit• the empire collapses, 
but since it collapses everywhere uniformly, no new boundaries arise, and the 
system persists in its stateless condition for ever.

The Reflux and Breakthrough Effects 
One further pattern predicted by the spatial simulation is worth discussing at this 
time. In examining the spatial dynamics of the simulation output, I noticed that 
challenger empires arising in the frontier zone initially tend to expand away from 
the older empire, into the hinterland, or even at the expense of other, smaller 
challengers near them (Figure 4.5).

In retrospect, it is very clear what is going on here. A challenger polity typically cannot successfully attack the old empire, because the empire is still very 
strong due to its large size and perhaps still not insubstantial average asabiya.

Meanwhile, the asabiya in the nonfrontier hinterland is low and expansion there 
is easy. Furthermore, as the challenger empire expands into the hinterland, its 
center of gravity moves away from the old empire, and thus the pressure it can 
exert on the old empire decreases with time. Further expansion within the hinterland is stopped only by logistic constraints (or by reaching the edge of the 
simulation arena). I term this expansion pattern away from the frontier zone the 
reflux effect.

Under certain conditions, the reflux does not occur. Specifically, this happens 
if a challenger arises late in the game, when the average asabiya of the old 
empire is so low that it cannot resist pressure from the challenger. In this case, 
we often observe a "breakthrough" effect: a long period of quasistasis, during 
which the asabiya of the old empire is slowly declining, while the asabiya of the 
challenger polity grows. Then suddenly the difference between the powers of the 
antagonists goes over the threshold lip, and the challenger takes over the border 
cells of the empire. This takeover catastrophically lowers the average asabiya of 
the old empire (since the only cells where asabiya is high are on the frontier), 
and leads to rapid expansion of the challenger into the interior regions of the old 
empire (and, frequently, to the collapse of the old empire, if its average asabiya, 
when deprived of border regions, goes below the threshold Scri1).

The reflux effect is a very typical feature of the dynamics predicted by the 
spatial simulation. It is also an emergent feature, because it was not built in at 
the micro level. This striking prediction of the model provides us with a way to 
test it, by looking through the historical record and determining whether reflux 
events are present in it.

Caveats 
Finally, I need to discuss the limitations of the frontier model, as well as how we 
could modify the model to address them. First, the simulation models distance 
effects using the simplest possible approach, by assuming that the power that an 
empire can bring to bear on a particular cell at its boundary declines exponentially 
Time = 26 Time = 29 
•• .. 0 0 0 0 
• • 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
. . . . . . . . . . .

. .

. . . .

. .

. . . .

. . .. .......

Time= 32 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • • • • • • • • • 
. .

. . . . . . . . .

. .

. .

.

.

.

. . .

.

. .

.

. .

• • 0 0 
• • • • • • • 0 0 0 0 0 
• • 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
. . . .. . . . . • • • • 6 • • ..

• • • • • 4 • ..

a a a a A 6 6 6 
........

. . . . . . . . • • • • 0 
• • • • • • • 0 0 0 0 
• • • • • • • 0 0 0 0 
• • • • • 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
• • • • 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
• • • 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Time= 35 
. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • • • • • • • • 0 0 
• • • • • • • 0 0 0 0 0 
• 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
• • • 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Figure 4.5 The reflux effect in the spatial frontier model. In each of the four snapshots, 
dots indicate the hinterland regions, circles are regions belonging to Empire 1, squares 
to Empire 2, and triangles to Empire 3. In the first snapshot (time= 26), Empires 2 and 
3 have just appeared in the frontier zone of Empire I. At time = 29, both new empires 
expand into the hinterland. Subsequently, Empire 2 conquers Empire 3, and expands to 
the limits imposed by logistical constraints (time= 35).

with increasing distance from the imperial center. It would be very interesting to 
explore some more mechanistic assumptions. For example, one could explicitly 
model the movements, locations, and supply of anny units. Such an approach 
would impose a more realistic constraint on the ability of the empire to expand 
(in the current simulation, the empire can in principle expand in all directions 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 75 
simultaneously). Another important geopolitical aspect is barriers to movement 
like mountains and water bodies. Investigating such aspects would be a very 
important project but would lead us well beyond the confines of the present 
book, and thus must be left to the future.

The second aspect of the simulation that greatly oversimplifies the reality is 
its lack of attention to ethnic dynamics of populations inhabiting various polities. Rather, the simulation equates ethnicity to membership in the polity. Thus, 
all imperial borders are assumed to represent metaethnic divides. Conversely, the 
simulation assumes that as soon as a cell is taken over, its inhabitants immediately 
transfer their loyalty to the conquering empire (or, alternatively, are immediately 
replaced with colonists). This is a very serious flaw, because ethnokinetic processes such as ethnic assimilation clearly take time. This aspect of the problem 
is pursued in Chapter 6.

The third large area in which the theory needs more development is the dynamics of different social strata (most importantly for our purposes, commoners and 
elites ), including their population dynamics, as well as upward/downward mobility. This is also a serious omission, because the degree of collective solidarity 
that ties different strata together in a polity is an important variable in itself. Furthermore, population dynamics is an important determinant of economic power 
of the state. Some initial steps in developing theory addressing these issues are 
made in Chapter 7.

4.3 SUMMARY 
• The main objective of this chapter was to endogenize the concept of asabiya 
(capacity for collective action). This means that we need to advance a theory 
specifying variables that cause asabiya to increase or decline.

• We turn to the theory of multilevel selection for theoretical insights as to 
what conditions favor evolution of collective solidarity. Multilevel selection 
theory states that selection for group-beneficial but individual-costly behaviors is promoted when intragroup variation in fitness is minimized, while 
intergroup variation in fitness is maximized. This argument suggests at least 
three variables that should affect evolution of asabiya.

• The first variable is the degree to which the environment of a group is pacified. Because the primary source of intergroup variation is conflict between 
groups, location in a stateless environment should promote asabiya increase, 
while location near the center of a large polity (far from boundaries where 
warfare mainly occurs) should promote asabiya decrease.

• The second variable is population density in relation to the carrying capacity.

Density pushing at the subsistence limits promotes intragroup competition, 
and causes asabiya to decline. Low population density implies low intragroup competition, and conditions favoring the increase of asabiya. Note 
that this variable is correlated with the first, since mortality rates in stateless 
environments tend to be higher than in the centers of large polities, resulting 
in population densities substantially below the carrying capacity.

• The first two variables primarily affect the conditions favoring increase in 
the asabiya of small-scale ethnic groups. The third variable, location near 
a major metaethnic fault line, creates condition for the widening of asabiya 
profiles. The general mechanism is the expansion of the symbolically demarcated ethnic boundary to encompass a larger-scale group, in opposition to 
the very alien group (or groups) situated on the other side of the metaethnic 
fault line.

• Metaethnic fault lines may coincide with imperial boundaries, creating regions that I call metaethnic frontiers. Metaethnic frontiers are regions where 
all three factors (intergroup conflict, population density, and deep ethnic divides) work synergistically. Thus, the theory developed in this chapter makes 
the prediction that metaethnic frontiers are asabiya "crucibles." 
• Conditions most favorable to asabiya increase should be the frontiers of a 
major empire, particularly if it is also a carrier of a universal religion, abutting stateless hinterlands. Imperial frontiers can exert a "push" or "pull" (or 
both) on the tribal zone. When empires are vigorous they exert expansionary 
pressure on the ethnic groups inhabiting the hinterland. When empires are 
weak, they tempt border tribes with rich booty. In either case, "barbarians" 
living on the imperial frontier have an added stimulus to generate a better 
capacity for collective action.

• Another kind of situation that should also be conducive to asabiya increase 
is the frontier between two large empires that espouse different exclusionary religions (for example, Christianity and Islam). In this case, it is the 
groups inhabiting the frontier regions of the empires that are under pressure 
to increase and scale up their asabiyas.

• Metaethnic frontiers are zones where groups come under enormous pressure, and where ethnocide, culturicide, and genocide, but also ethnogenesis, 
commonly occur. Intense intergroup competition eventually results in one 
group with high asabiya, scaling-up structures, and simple luck emerging as 
a victor. In the process, the group acquires a distinct identity, demarcated 
by a strong ethnic boundary, and a high degree of internal cohesion-in 
other words, it becomes a new ethnic group (an incipient ethnie). Thus, the 
process leading to the formation of this new ethnopolitical system can be 
thought of as ethnogenesis. Note that the theory views polity formation and 
ethnogenesis as two aspects of the same dynamic process.

• Formalization of this verbal theory into a simple analytical model suggests 
that the dynamics of polity size and asabiya should go through a single 
boom-bust cycle. However, this dynamic occurs only if the extent of the 
frontier zone is small compared to the upper limit on the polity extent imposed by logistic constraints. If this condition is violated, then polity dynamics are not qualitatively different from the simple geopolitical model of 
Section 2.2.1.

• To check on the analytical results, I constructed a spatially explicit simulation of a world-system of polities whose territorial dynamics are driven by 
geopolitical forces and asabiya. Asabiya increases in the frontier regions, and 
declines in central regions. The simulation indicates that for a wide variety 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 77 
of parameters, polities go though repeated boom-bust oscillations. However, 
these oscillations are not cyclic, but highly chaotic.

• One of the key periods in the life of a polity is its beginnings. The asabiya of 
its core ethnie must somehow increase above that of the surrounding ethnic 
groups in order for the focal group to expand. The process that increases 
a group's asabiya and launches it on the polity-building and expansionary 
course is ethnogenesis.

Chapter Five 
An Empirical Test of the Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
5.1 SETI'ING UP THE TEST 
The theory developed in Chapter 4 predicts that large territorial empires should 
originate at metaethnic frontiers. My goal in this chapter is to test this prediction 
empirically. The theory is universal, in the sense that its prediction applies to any 
agrarian polity, anywhere in the world. A test encompassing all known history, 
however, is not feasible given resources currently at my disposal, so it is necessary 
to select a discrete area and period as a first step. I chose to focus on Europe 
during the first two millennia c.E., because the history within these spatiotemporal 
boundaries is reasonably well known (and is easily accessible in Western language 
literature).

One disadvantage of using Europe as a testbed of general theory is the argument 
that Europe may have a number of unique features distinguishing it from the rest 
of the world; special characteristics that explain its spectacular rise during the 
modem era (e.g., Jones 1981; Landes 1998). However, explanations of the rise of 
Europe based on such "European exceptionalism" have been severely criticized 
(Blaut 1993, 2000). Furthermore, current scholarship (summarized by Frank 1998; 
Pomeranz 2000) suggests that Europe began diverging from other world regions 
only after 1800. In any case, it is not necessary for me to choose a side in this 
debate. My working assumption at this time is that the metaethnic frontier theory 
is equally applicable to Europe and other world regions. Here I report on the 
results of testing the theory on European material, while future publications will 
report on tests of the theory in Central/East Asian, South Asian, and Southwest 
Asian regions (research in progress). In other words, I treat this as an empirical 
issue. In Charles Tilly's words, "the European historical experience, for all its 
special features, is long enough, well-enough documented, and a large influence 
on the rest of the world that any systematic conclusions which hold up well in the 
light of that experience would almost automatically become plausible hypotheses 
to be tried elsewhere" (Tilly 1975:13).

Geographically, Europe is a western peninsula of Eurasia, and thus the boundary separating it from the rest of the Old World is somewhat arbitrary. I use 
the standard geographic boundary between Europe and Asia (Urals Mountains, 
Ural River, Caspian Sea, the Great Caucasian mountain chain, Black Sea), but 
with two exceptions. I will omit the area of Northern Caucasus, because its history is poorly known for most of the period of interest. However, I include the 
Anatolian peninsula (Asia Minor), because excluding it would force me to treat 
several important European Great Powers (the Byzantine and Ottoman Empires) 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 79 
as exogenous intrusions. Another area where drawing a sharp boundary is problematic is the Iberian-Moroccan junction. I chose to treat Moroccan polities (most 
notably, Almoravids and Almohads) as exogenous intrusions.

Because my focus is on agrarian polities, the temporal end point I use is 1900 
C.E. Although several states in northwest Europe had made the agrarian-industrial 
transition by this time, this development affects only a small part of the spatiotemporal domain. I chose 500 c.E., which roughly coincides with the fall of 
the western Roman Empire, as the starting point for the consideration of polity 
dynamics. Because frontiers affect ethnopolitical dynamics with a long time Jag, I 
started my frontier database at 0 c.E. I readily admit that the spatial and temporal 
bounds that I chose are somewhat arbitrary and other choices could be made.

However, I would argue that the important principle here is that all regions and 
all polities falling within the specific spatiotemporal bounds should be used in the 
empirical test. In this way, the outcome of the test cannot be criticized as resulting from conscious or unconscious selection bias. As to specific spatiotemporal 
bounds, they simply need to encompass sufficient number of regions and polities 
so that we can do statistics.

5.1.1 Quantifying Frontiers 
Frontiers are hard entities to pin down (Hall 2000), both in time and space. They 
move around and have fuzzy spatial extent. Yet, in order to devise a statistical 
test, we have to discretize them. The first step is to divide space into discrete geographical units. I divided the total area into some 50 "cultural regions," mostly 
characterized by areas of between 0.1 and 0.2 Mm2 (Figure 5.1 ). When drawing 
the borders between the geographical units I attempted to take into account major 
fixed terrain features (mountains, coastline) and ethnic divisions (language, religion). In addition to spatial divisions, I also need temporal ones. Because we are 
dealing with very slow processes, I divided time into intervals of one century.

Let me reiterate that any scheme that would translate temporally dynamic and 
spatially fuzzy things like frontiers into discrete spatiotemporal units must be 
procrustean, to a greater or lesser degree. I have no doubt that better schemes 
than the one proposed here can be devised. Yet one needs to start somewhere.

This is what I do here, while hoping that in the future the approach will be 
improved or a better alternative will be proposed.

With over 50 cultural regions and 19 centuries I have close to a thousand areacenturies, which are my main data units for analysis of shifting frontiers in Europe 
0--1900 c.E. The next step is to assign each unit a quantitative score reflecting the 
intensity of cross-ethnic interaction in it. I assume that the interaction intensity 
has four components, based on differences in religion, language, way of life, and 
the pressure of warfare. I give religious difference a score with four levels: 
• The highest score, 3, is given to areas where Islam and Christianity interact 
with each other, or with paganism.

• The next score, 2, is given to major religious divisions within Christianity or 
Islam (e.g., Catholics versus Orthodox after 1000 c.E.; Shiites versus Sunnis).

Figure 5.1 Cultural regions used as geographical units in the statistical analysis of the 
relationship between metaethnic frontiers and polity size.

• Sects within the same religion are scored as 1. Examples include Catholics 
versus Protestants, or Latin and Greek Christians prior to 1000 c.E. I also 
scored differences between various pagan religions at this level, because 
these religions, unlike Christianity and Islam, tend not to be exclusive and 
proselytizing.

• Finally, no religious difference is scored as 0.

Linguistic distinctions are scored 0 (none), 1 (different languages within the 
same linguistic group: Romance, Germanic, and Slavic), and 2 (different linguistic groups). I do not give an extra point for different linguistic families (IndoEuropean, Ugro-Finnic, etc.) because I assume that once languages diverged to 
the point of complete mutual incomprehensibility (which certainly happened by 
the time the two languages belong to different groups), the speakers will have 
no way of knowing that they belong to the same linguistic family. My reasons 
for giving an intermediate score of l to speakers of clearly related languages 
(such as Catalan and Castilian, or Occitan and French) are as follows. First, a 
speaker of the northern French (langue d 'oi1) will recognize Occitan as a related 
language, and may feel a greater degree of kinship to an Occitan speaker than 
to a German. Second, historically the gradations between languages belonging 
to the same group were typically not abrupt. Thus, it would be difficult to draw 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 81 
clearcut boundaries during the Middle Ages separating Romance speakers from 
each other. The same was true with respect to the area inhabited by Germanic 
languages and dialects, or the area including speakers of east and west Slavic 
languages.

The greatest difference in the economic way of life (score 2) is between settled agriculturalists and nomadic pastoralists. This distinction codes for a whole 
bundle of cultural differences, including very different behavioral norms, as well 
as attitudes to each other. Score 1 distinguishes agriculturalists with urbanized 
culture and literacy (at least, among some social stratum) from "backwoods" 
cultivators.

Finally, the intensity of warfare index codes for the demographic impact of 
war across the metaethnic divide. The highest score of 2 reflects intense warfare 
(up to and including genocide) that results in detectable depopulation of the area.

Score 1 is given to persistent raiding for loot and captives that does not cause a 
significant drop in the population numbers. Finally, the score of 0 corresponds to 
either relatively peaceful interaction, or "mild" warfare, practiced by the elites, 
and not affecting the demographics of the productive class.

The total score for frontier intensity is obtained by summing the religion, language, way of life, and warfare intensity indices. It varies from 0 to 9. Note 
that, ~cause religion has an extra intensity level, compared to other indices, this 
approach gives it a somewhat bigger weight in the final score. I believe that this 
is appropriate, given the important role of religion in erecting and maintaining 
metaethnic divisions.

Details of translating historical information into frontier scores are given in 
Appendix B. Briefly, I examined the history of each cultural region, and determined whether at any given point in time it had a state boundary running through 
it, or next to it. If the region was in the interior of a large empire, it was assigned 
the frontier index of 0. Similarly, a region would be assigned an index of 0 if 
it was situated in a stateless environment (that is, chiefdoms and smaller-scale 
polities). If a region was on a state boundary, then I scored the four components 
of ethnic interaction intensity, as described above, and summed them for a total 
frontier score. If there were two or more frontiers running through the same region, I used the highest score (the assumption being that frontier intensities do 
not add up).

5.1.2 Polity Size 
In the test I am setting up, the frontier intensity is the independent (predictor) 
variable. For the dependent (response) variable, we need some measure of imperial success. One appropriate measure, as discussed in Section 1.2.1, is simply 
the territorial extent of polities. Accordingly, I quantified the imperial success as 
the maximum extent of territory controlled at the peak. One disadvantage of this 
measure is that it does not distinguish between empires that reached the peak 
quickly, and as quickly collapsed, from more durable polities. It is clear that a 
longer-lived polity was probably based on a greater degree of asabiya, since surviving for many centuries means that the polity has encountered and overcome 
a number of challenges. By contrast, an evanescent empire may have just been 
lucky, by capitalizing on temporary weaknesses of its rivals. One way to distinguish between these two cases is to build duration into the index. For example, 
we can integrate the area under the territorial curve of a polity. I plan to pursue 
this idea in future (work in progress), but for now I will be content with a simpler 
measure based on the maximum territory.

The metaethnic frontier model predicts where large territorial polities should 
arise. The distinction between large polities and the rest is, of course, arbitrary, 
but I need some cutoff point, simply in order not to have to deal with a myriad 
of small polities, such as lesser Imperial states in the early modem Europe. I set 
the threshold at 0.1 Mm2 (1 Mm= 1,000 km; thus 1 Mm2 = 106 km2), which 
is comparable to the area of smaller-sized geographic units in Figure 5.1. In 
other words, I do not care to consider polities that occupy only a fraction of a 
geographic unit.

In addition to the cut-off point for polity size, I also need a cut-off for cumulative frontier intensity. After all, the theory does not predict that just any state 
boundary would serve as an asabiya generator. A frontier must be intense and its 
influence on the area long in duration. The second attribute is important because 
asabiya increases on a long time scale. Thus, a frontier that rapidly moved through 
an area is unlikely to cause any ethnogenetic events. More likely, the area will 
be incorporated into the advancing empire, and as the frontier moves away, the 
forces acting on the population of the area will cause asabiya to decline, rather 
than increase. To incorporate both of these attributes, I required that a frontier, 
in order to be classified as "asabiya generator," should have an intensity of 5 or 
higher (note that 5 is the midpoint of the frontier intensity scale), and should 
persist in the given cultural area for three centuries or longer.

We are now ready to specify the prediction of the theory in terms that can be 
immediately testable. Cultural regions where the frontier intensity is 5 or higher 
for three or more centuries are expected to be the sources of territorial polities 
with maximum areas larger than 0.1 Mm2• By "sources," I mean regions where 
large polities originated, which are inhabited by the polity's core elites, and where 
they typically have capitals. We can test this prediction by classifying all units 
in a two-way table as (1) with or without metaethnic frontiers, and (2) with or 
without a polity over 0.1 Mm2 at some later time (this will be specified below).

The theory predicts that the cells "no frontier and no empire," and "frontier 
and empire" should have more entries than randomly expected. Some entries in 
the "frontier, but no empire" cell are also expected. The most common reason 
for this happening, as predicted by the model of Section 4.2.2, is that some 
other region nearby, and also on the frontier, may get its empire going first, and 
conquer the region we are observing before it has the chance to develop its own 
empire. Another potential reason is that in the real world the increase of asabiya 
leading to the foundation of an aggressive empire must be a stochastic process, so 
variable periods of time may pass before it is complete. Nevertheless, if a region 
is situated on a frontier for a long period of time without being taken over by 
another empire, and does not develop its own empire, then this is an anomaly, as 
far as the theory is concerned.

AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 83 
The entries in the "no frontier, but empire" category, however, present the 
greatest empirical challenge to the theory, because according to it, there should 
be no such observations. Adopting the Lakatosian perspective, we will treat such 
observations as anomalies. If there are too many anomalous observations, then 
the theory collapses, especially if there is an alternative that can explain the 
observations better. The value of anomalies is that they often suggest how an 
alternative theory can be constructed.

5.2 RESULTS 
I now proceed to presenting the results, starting with Europe during the first 
millennium c.E., and then Europe during the period up to 1900 c.E. The description of intermediate steps in the analysis and data tables has been banished to 
Appendix B.

5.2.1 Europe: 0-1000 C.E.

During the first half of the millennium the political geography of Europe was 
dominated by the Roman Empire. The frontier of the Roman Empire was largely 
stationary, although with some oscillations. There were advances into Germania, 
northern Brittania, and Dacia that were not sustained for long periods of time.

During the calamitous third century, the frontier was overwhelmed by barbarian 
invasions. But, generally speaking, the frontier affected broadly the same swath of 
regions running southeast from present-day Netherlands to Romania. The regions 
classified as "frontier" during 0-500 c.E. are SBR, NED, NFR, EFR, WGE, SGE, 
BOH, AUS, HUN, TRA, VLH, BUL, BYZ, MOL, and ZAP (see Figure 5.1).

The presence of a single empire during this period makes construction of the 
statistical test straightforward. I simply use the frontier regions during the first 
half millennium, and observe whether there is a correlation with large polities 
originating from these regions and reaching their maximum size during the second 
half millennium (500-1000 C.E.). The temporal separation is determined by the 
direction of causation (frontiers must temporally precede empires). The separating 
date, 500 c.E., is convenient because it is very close to the date of collapse of the 
western Roman Empire. The results are summarized in Table 5.1.

The overall pattern documented in Table 5.1 confirms the predictions of the 
metaethnic frontier theory: the overwhelming majority of cases are concentrated 
in the categories "no frontier, no empire" and "frontier and empire." The statistical 
test indicates that the probability of this outcome occurring by chance alone is 
vanishingly small. Now that we have an overview of the pattern, let us delve into 
some specifics.

A Quick Overview of the Ethnopolitical History of Europe during the 
First Millennium 
The Roman frontier in Europe had three fairly distinct segments: two in the flat 
terrain separated by one in a rugged area. The first flat segment stretched along 
Table 5.1 Results of the empirical test of the frontier model: (a) Europe 0-1000 c.E.

Test of independence (Sokal and Rohlf 1981:737): Gadi = 27.1, P « 0.001. (b) Europe 
1000-1900 c.E. Test of independence: Gadi = 22.0, P « 0.001.

No empire 
Empire 
No empire 
Empire 
(a) 0-1000 C.E.

No frontier Frontier 
34 
1 
4 
ll 
(b) 1000--1900 C.E.

No Frontier Frontier 
19 
3 
6 
22 
the Rhine north of the Jura and Vosges mountains, where it runs through the north 
European plain (I will return to this area in Section 9.1.1). The rugged segment 
of the frontier was situated north of the Alps. It was crosscut by the foothills of 
the Alps, as well as by smaller chains of mountains and hills: the Jura, Bavarian/Bohemian forest, the Sudetes, and the Tatras. The last flat segment, along the 
Danube river, itself consisted of two pieces: the Hungarian and, beyond the Transylvanian Alps, the Wallachian plain. The Wallachian plain merges smoothly into 
the coastal lowlands of the Black Sea, running from Constantinople/Stambul to 
the Dnieper and beyond (the latter area will be discussed in Section 9.2.1). This 
whole segment of the frontier, including the Hungarian plain, can be thought of 
as a western extention of the great Eurasian steppe.

In Section 4.1.2 I advanced the hypothesis that rugged terrain has an inhibiting 
effect on asabiya increase. Thus, we should expect large polities forming along 
the flat segments of the Roman frontier. This is precisely what happened. The 
largest European polity of the first millennium (for a complete list of polities, 
see the Appendix) was the Frankish Empire, whose territory reached a peak of 
roughly 1.8 Mm2 during the reign of Charlemagne. Smaller Germanic states and 
chiefdoms, forming in the same general area, include the Burgundian Kingdom 
and the Duchies of the Alamanni, Thuringians, and Saxons. Across the English 
Channel, a similar development took place, albeit on a smaller scale, with Wessex, 
Mercia, and Northumbria eventually merging into England.

The second largest empire in Europe (or, more precisely, in western Eurasia) 
during the first millennium was Byzantium (I Mm2 in 970 c.E.). The Byzantine 
empire presents a fascinating historical puzzle, usually posed as follows: why 
did the eastern Roman Empire survive the collapse of the western Empire, and 
then thrive for another thousand years? The metaethnic frontier theory proposes a 
solution to this puzzle. Beginning in the third and until the tenth century, the area 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 85 
around Byzantium-Constantinople became the imperial frontier. Once the invader 
from the north crosses the Danube, there are no significant geographic barriers 
between it and Constantinople. Furthermore, the area around Constantinople is 
vulnerable to sea-based raiding. As a result, it was repeatedly raided and invaded, 
and Constantinople was besieged by a succession of barbarian hordes, such as 
the Goths, Huns, Slavs, Avars, Bulgars, and Arabs. Furthermore, from the fourth 
century and until the conversion of the Bulgars in 863-900 c.E., the frontier 
coincided with a metaethnic fault line between Christianity and Paganism.

As I discussed in Chapter 4, a new empire can be born on either the imperial or 
the tribal side of the old empire's frontier. In the case of the lower Danube frontier, 
both sides gave rise to empires. Turkic-speaking nomads and Slavic-speaking 
agriculturalists merged into a new Bulgarian ethnie north of the frontier, while 
another new ethnie, the Byzantines, formed south of the frontier. The case for the 
Byzantines as a new ethnie, I believe, is quite strong. Certainly, the Byzantines 
were distinct both linguistically and religiously from the Romans of the classical 
age, but the cultural changes went ever deeper, including a striking transformation 
from the naturalism and rationalism of Hellenism to the transcendentalism and 
mysticism of the fifth and sixth centuries (McNeill 1963:451). Of course, the 
Byzantines continued to call themselves "the Romans," but so did many other 
people-from "the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation" to the modem 
Romanians and the (gypsy)Roma and even the Rum Seljuks. Note that I am 
not suggesting that this ethnic transformation occurred overnight, or even within 
the course of a single century. The eastern Roman Empire was subjected to an 
extreme pressure from barbarians in the north and the Muslims in the east for at 
least half a millennium. But the Byzantines survived and when the pressure abated 
in the middle of the ninth century embarked on sustained territorial expansion of 
their own (Whittow 1996, Treadgold 1997).

So far I discussed polities that formed in situ on the former Roman frontier.

One feature fairly unique to the particular period, however, is the number of 
polities for whom the location of ethnogenesis was quite distant from the location of the polity that was eventually established. Thus, Visigoths and Ostrogoths 
originated north of the Black Sea, yet established states in the Iberian and Appenine peninsulas, respectively. Langobards initially coalesced in Pannonia (HUN), 
but eventually established a state in northern Italy. The Hungarian plain, in fact, 
saw a truly bewildering succession of state-building ethnies: the Dacians before 
the Roman conquest, then the Huns, Gepids and Langobards, Avars, and finally 
Magyars. The reason for such a rapid ethnic turnover, most likely, is the location 
at the western end of Eurasian steppe, making this plain the last stop of invading 
nomadic hordes.

Cases Not Fitting the Predictions of the Metaethnic Theory 
Four regions fell into the category of "frontier, but no empire." In each case, 
the reason is incorporation into an empire based in a neighboring region. NFR 
and AUS were incorporated into the Frankish Empire, TRA was part of the 
Avar Khanate, and BUL was an integral part of the Bulgarian Khanate (whose 
center was initially in VLH and later shifted south ~o BUL). In addition, AUS is 
disadvantaged with respect to its neighbors, since it sits on the rugged segment 
of the Roman frontier (it has a mountain chain, the Alps, running right through 
its middle).

The single case in the "no frontier, but empire" category is the Duchy of 
Aquitaine. As discussed in the previous section, any instances falling into this 
category are considered as anomalies from the point of view of the frontier 
model. However, Aquitaine does not present a strong challenge to the theory.

This polity was formed after the collapse of Merovingian Frankish Empire, and 
can be considered as a relict (along with Neustria and Austrasia). It was reincorporated into the Carolingian Empire during the eighth century. Thus, this polity 
may not even merit inclusion into the analysis, but I decided on the conservative 
course of action.

In summary, the results of the analysis of Europe during the first millennium 
c. E. provide strong support for the frontier model. The statistical test indicates that 
there is a high degree of correlation between the frontier and the genesis of large 
states (Table 5.1 ). Actually, the pattern is so clearcut that almost no statistical test 
is needed. Essentially all large polities that are found on the map of Europe during 
the 500-1000 c.E. were organized by peoples who went through ethnogenesis on 
the frontier of the Roman Empire. The only exceptions are two exogenous polities 
(the Avars and Omayyads) and a possible anomaly (Aquitaine). By contrast, the 
heartlands of the Empire (notably Italy and Spain), as well as tribal hinterlands far 
from the frontier (northern and eastern Europe) were conspicuous in the absence 
of in situ-originating polities. This general pattern is precisely what the frontier 
model predicts.

5.2.2 Europe: 1000-1900 c.E.

After the Roman Empire collapsed, the geography of frontiers in Europe became 
much more complex. First, there were more frontiers. During the period 500-1500 
c.E. slightly more than half (28 out of 50) of cultural regions were classified as 
frontier ones (a frontier of intensity five or higher located in the region for three 
or more centuries). Second, frontiers were much more dynamic than during the 
Roman era. We can distinguish three general classes of frontiers.

The first set of frontiers, which dominated western Europe throughout much of 
the period, are the Carolingian marches (Bartlett 1993). Into this class, I include 
frontiers of the predecessor polity (Merovingian Empire), as well as successor 
polities, collectively referred to as the Latin Christianity (Bartlett 1993 ). The 
frontier in northwestern France faced Bretons and later Norse; the Spanish march 
guarded against the Muslims of Cordoba Emirate, a later site of the Reconquista.

The Austrian march initially was the site of Carolingian operations against the 
Avar Khanate. Later, it faced the brunt of the Magyar incursions. After the Hungarians converted to Latin Christianity, this frontier lost its intensity (but was 
reactivated in the sixteenth century as a result of the Ottoman advance).

Finally, the Saxon march during the pre-Carolingian times was directed toward 
pagan Germans. After Charlemagne's conquest of Saxons, this frontier bifur-
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 87 
cated, with one prong moving east, and eventually transforming itself into German Drang nach Osten. The second prong moved north through Scandinavia, first 
affecting Denmark (whose very name reflects its position on the Danish march), 
and then Sweden and Norway. The northern prong fluctuated between "push" 
and "pull" influences. At the height of its power, the Carolingian empire exerted 
military (this mostly affected the Danish) and ideological pressure. Persistent 
proselytization attempts, however, triggered a backlash from native paganism, 
especially in Sweden, which was finally Christianized only during the twelfth 
century. After the Carolingian decline, the frontier recoiled, with Scandinavians 
even colonizing parts of northwestern France. However, in the end Christianity won, and the eastern expansion resumed. In the northern Baltic, the Danish 
and Swedish advance sometimes competed and sometimes cooperated with the 
German expansion along the southern shore.

The second set of frontiers can be collectively called "the Great Steppe frontier" (McNeilll964). One end of this frontier is located in present-day Hungary 
(Great Alfold plain), which is the westernmost extension of the Great Eurasian 
Steppe. From HUN it runs first east (TRA, VLH, MOL) and then northeast (ZAP, 
UKR, SRU, KAZ), following the transition between forests and grasslands. The 
steppe frontier had a greater degree of stationarity, compared to the Carolingian 
marches and their offshoots, because it was (and still is) anchored by the physical 
geography of eastern Europe. Nevertheless, this frontier swayed back and forth 
as time progressed. During the Kievan Russia period, the frontier was pushed 
south and east. After the Mongolian invasion, the frontier was pushed far back 
north. Finally, the frontier again advanced south during the Muscovite period, 
and finally was closed down by the Russian Empire in the late eighteenth century 
(with the conquest of the Crimean Khanate).

The third class of frontiers includes several "leftovers" from the Roman frontiers. The frontier between Germanic invaders and the indigenous people of Roman Britain is one example. This frontier lost its intensity by the end of the 
seventh century, with Anglo-Saxon conversion to Christianity. It then regained 
intensity after the invasion by another set of Germanic pagans, these ones from 
Scandinavia.

At the other end of Europe, the frontiers of the Byzantine Empire are another example of a "Roman leftover." The Balkan frontier lost its intensity by 
the tenth century, when invading Slavs and Bulgars had been largely converted to 
Christianity. The eastern frontier, however, remained a major fault line throughout the period. In the seventh century, Byzantium lost its Middle Eastern and 
African possessions to the Caliphate. As a result, Anatolia became one of the 
most intense interfaces between Christianity and Islam. The Arab expansion put 
an enormous amount of pressure on Byzantium. The Byzantines survived and 
two centuries later began their own advance. Unfortunately, the Byzantine Empire experienced a disastrous reverse at the battle of Manzikert in the late eleventh 
century, and the advance turned into retreat. In the fourteenth century, the advancing Ottomans reached the Balkans, and eventually as far west as the Hungarian 
plains. Thus, the Ottoman frontier connected and coincided with the Great Steppe 
frontier, especially if we take into account that the Crimean Khanate was an Ottoman dependency throughout most of its existence. Incidentally, the Anatolian 
Plateau can be considered as another extension of the Great Eurasian Steppe 
frontier.

This is a very schematic sketch of the frontier history of Europe, which focuses only on intense and long-lived metaethnic fault lines. There were many 
other population movements (Gaelic Scotti into Scotland, Basques into Aquitaine, 
Muslims into Southern Italy and especially Sicily, Vlachs into Moldavia, Greeks 
from Egypt and Syria into Byzantium after the Muslim conquest, and later to 
Greece, etc.) but according to my calculations these occurrences were either too 
local or did not result in an intense and prolonged frontier (see the Appendix for 
details).

To construct a test of the frontier model, I classified all fifty regions as "frontier" if during 500-1500 c.E. they had a frontier satisfying my intensity and length 
requirements (five or higher intensity and three or more centuries). Otherwise, the 
region was classified as "no frontier." I then identified all large polities (achieving 
an area of at least 0.1 Mm2 at some point in time) that occurred in Europe (including Asia Minor) during the period of 1000-1900 c.E. I then eliminated some 
polities so that I would have at most one per cultural region, retaining the one 
that achieved the greater peak area. For example, the region KAZ was the locus 
of two polities (Volga Bulgars and the Kazan Khanate ). I eliminated the Kazan 
Khanate and retained the Volga Bulgars, since the latter controlled a greater area 
at its peak. I also eliminated two polities that were of clear exogenous origin, 
the Cumans and the Teutonic order. The latter originated within Europe, but if 
any region can be assigned as its origin, it is EGE, which also generated a larger 
polity, Brandenburg-Prussia-Germany. There was also one polity that I classified 
as a relict, the Astrakhan Khanate, which was the largest piece left when the 
Golden Horde collapsed in the fifteenth century. Finally, each region was classified into the same four classes as in the previous section. The results are shown 
in Table 5.lb.

As we can see, the general pattern is consistent with the predictions of the 
frontier model. It is gratifying that all the Great Powers (England-U.K., CastileSpain, France, Brandenburg-Prussia-Germany, Austria, Lithuania-Poland, Byzantium, the Ottoman Empire, and Muscovy-Russia) originated from regions heavily 
influenced by frontiers. Equally revealing are areas that never experienced intense frontiers, for example, AQU-SFR and EPL-BEL-WRU. These regions were 
always objects of geopolitics, never its subjects.

There are also six anomalous cases, in which the frontier presence did not result 
in a large polity. Four regions (AND, NED, VLH, and SRU) were incorporated 
into empires originating from neighboring regions. One interesting case is SGE, 
which had a polity originating in it, Switzerland, that did not make the size 
threshold. The Swiss case is interesting because initially, during the fourteenthfifteenth centuries, the Swiss expanded their polity quite aggressively. But after 
the middle of the sixteenth century expansion ceased, even though there were 
apparently plenty of opportunities to expand north into the lesser imperial states.

A possible explanation of this failure is the negative influence of the rugged 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 89 
topography on the scaling up of asabiya (Section 4.1.2). Another rugged region, 
ALB, may have failed to develop a strong polity for the same reason.

The greatest challenge to the model, however, is presented by the three cases of 
no frontiers, but empires. The first, medieval Poland (0.3 Mm2 in 1020 c.E.), is not 
a strong anomaly, because it apparently formed very much under pressure from 
the Frankish march, similarly to the nearby Bohemia. However, its conversion 
to Christianity was quite rapid, so that it experienced a high-intensity frontier 
only for two centuries (and thus failed to be classified as a prolonged frontier).

The second case is the Duchy of Burgundy. Burgundy arose as a scavenger state 
following the fourteenth-century French collapse. Its dukes then embarked on a 
program of territorial expansion, mainly relying on dynastic marriages. At its 
peak in 1480 c.E. it was about 0.13 Mm2, which is just over the threshold size.

The Burgundian state, however, turned out to be quite fragile, and collapsed in the 
late fifteenth century. Nevertheless, I believe that it presents a genuine anomaly 
for the frontier model, since instability was a general feature of most agrarian 
polities.

The last case, Savoy-Sardinia-Italy, appears to be the strongest anomaly. Incidentally, it is also one of the best examples of the reflux effect, since the state 
originated in Savoy, which is now part of France, and was successively pushed 
by its stronger neighbor over the centuries toward the east. Nevertheless, there is 
nothing even remotely resembling a metaethnic frontier in the Savoy case. And 
even though Italy has never managed to achieve Great Power status (some authors, 
however, do give it this status for the period 1870--1914), it has not collapsed, 
and even managed to acquire colonies in Africa. Thus, all hallmarks of empire 
are present (albeit not a very strong one), but the frontier model clearly does not 
apply. This anomalous case, therefore, is a clear indication that the frontier model 
cannot pretend to be a universal explanation of how all states arise.

5.3 POSITIONAL ADVANTAGE? 
So far I have been comparing the predictions of the frontier model to an implicit 
null hypothesis that polity size and frontiers are statistically independent of each 
other. A stronger test is to contrast the performance of the frontier model with an 
explicit alternative (Section 1.2). One possible alternative theory has already been 
discussed in Section 2.2.2. Recollect that the Collins geopolitical theory postulates 
a positional advantage (a "marchland effect") to polities expanding from an area 
that is easy to defend. We can use the empirical machinery developed in this 
chapter to test the effect of marchland position.

As a first step in addressing the effect of protected position, I will focus on the 
proportion of the boundary of the polity that is coastline (Artzrouni and Komlos 
1996). A more sophisticated analysis would also include the effect of mountainous terrain. However, estimating the effect of topography on the defensibility of 
a border is not straightforward. For example, we cannot just use the average elevation in the area, since low-elevation but very rugged hills can present a more 
significant barrier to invading armies than a high-elevation plateau. Thus, I will 
leave such refinements to future work, and for now use a cruder index that incorporates only the effect of large bodies of water (seas, straights, etc.) on the 
defensibility of a border.

To come up with a rough index of positional vulnerability, I approximated 
each cultural region by a rectangle and scored how many sides of the rectangle 
were inland versus coastlines. The index, therefore, ranged from 0 to 4, with 0 
corresponding to an island region, and 4 to a landlocked region. There was only 
one region with the vulnerability index of 0 (IRL), nine regions with index 1, 
six with index 2, sixteen with index 3, and eighteen with index 4. I combined 
regions with indices 0-2 into one class, to obtain three vulnerability classes with 
roughly the same number of cases in each (16, 16, and 18).

Because the vulnerability index is a static measure, I combined my two data 
sets on polity sizes (before and after 1000 c.E.) into one. If a region had two polities, I retained the largest. I then classified each region according to the maximum 
polity area it achieved. In order not to depend too much on the specific threshold 
size, I used two: 0.1 and 0.3 Mm2• This approach yielded three size classes of 
polities: small (0-0.1 Mm2), medium (0.1-0.3 Mm2), and large(> 0.3 Mm2 ).

Examining the results, sorted by vulnerability and polity size classes, we see 
that there is no apparent connection between the two (Table 5.2). Thus, the inescapable conclusion is that geographical position does not affect the eventual 
polity size either positively or negatively. This conclusion must be tempered by 
the crudity of the procedure I used to generate data in Table 5.2. However, some 
further qualitative consideration suggests that, if a more sophisticated test finds 
a relationship between marchland advantage and geopolitical success, it will be 
weak. A major geographical feature of Europe is the plain running from southwestern France through northern France, Germany, Poland, Belarus and Ukraine, 
and Russia. There are no significant mountain chains interrupting this plain. Existence was always precarious here (as the example of Poland shows most graphically). Yet, most of the European great powers originated precisely in this swath 
of territory (France, Frankish Empire, Holy Roman Empire, Prussia-Germany, 
Lithuania-Poland, Kievan Russia, and Muscovy-Russia, to name just the largest 
ones). With so many counterexamples, it is unlikely that positional advantage 
would help explain historical dynamics in Europe. At best, it is a factor of secondary importance.

Table S.l Results of the empirical test of the positional effects model.

Vulnerability Polities 
Index Small Medium Large n 
0-2 5 5 6 16 
3 7 3 6 16 
4 6 7 5 18 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 91 
5.4 CONCLUSION: THE MAKING OF EUROPE 
In a paper on the history of European state-making written a quarter of a century 
ago, Charles Tilly asked, "At each point in time from 1500 forward, what features of a political unit would have permitted us to anticipate whether it would ( 1) 
survive into the following period as a distinct unit; (2) undergo territorial consolidation, centralization, (3) become the nucleus of a national state?" (1975:40). This 
is precisely the kind of question that motivates the theory developed in this book.

I cannot claim that the metaethnic frontier theory gives a precise and accurate answer for the territorial dynamics of every European state. However, I believe that 
the theory explains the general pattern of European political development-"the 
making -of Europe" (Bartlett 1993).

A particularly lucid exposition of this general pattern is found in the work of 
Stein Rokkan (1975; Rokkan and Urwin 1982). Rokkan pointed out that geopolitically the early modern Europe can be divided into a series of bands, in which aggressive state-building regions alternated with politically weak, fragmented areas.

In the middle there is a belt of territorial1y fragmented but economically vibrant 
city-states that runs from the North Sea and the Baltic south along the Rhine 
and into Italy. To the west of this "trade-route belt" there is an area of strong 
conquest centers ("the seaward empire nations"): Denmark, England, France, and 
Spain. Further to the west lies a band of politically weak territories ("seaward 
peripheries"): Iceland, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and Brittany. On the other side 
of the central trading belt, the situation is a mirror image of the west. First, there 
is a band of "the landward empire nations": Sweden, Prussia, Bavaria, and Austria. Next comes a band of "landward peripheries": Finland, Bohemia, Poland, 
and Hungary. Thus, "paradoxically the history of Europe is one of center formation at the periphery of a network of strong and independent cities" (Rokkan 
1975:576).

The theory advanced and tested in Chapters 3-5 suggests that there is nothing paradoxical about this striking pattern. The explanation has two aspects: the 
spread of state by "contagion" via the metaethnic frontier mechanism, and a 
slow (centuries-long) decay of asabiya in imperial cores. However, in order to 
understand which regions develop strong states and which fragment and are conquered after 1500, we must go back to the Carolingian Europe, which itself is 
explained by the Roman Europe (and, incidentally, the rise of Rome can also 
be traced to the dynamics of the Mediterranean region of the early first millennium B.C.E. ). The Rhenish frontier of the Roman Empire, for reasons amply 
discussed in Section 5.2.1, became the core region of a series of Germanic empires: the Merovingians, the Carolingians, and the Ottonians. Thus, the central 
belt of highly urbanized and politically fragmented polities is comprised of two 
former imperial cores (the classic Roman and medieval German).

The key period for the making of modern Europe was the post-Carolingian 
ninth and tenth centuries (Bartlett 1993), when Latin Christendom was assaulted 
on all sides by the Vikings, Saracens, Magyars, and Polabian Slavs. A set of defensive frontiers-the Carolingian marches-formed to respond to these threats.

The attention of new polities forming on the marches was directed outward.' 
West and southwest of the Carolingian core, strong conquest polities arose on 
the Breton and Spanish marches, and in England, once it was brought into the 
Latin Christian world by the Norman conquest. In the north, the Scandinavian 
world was incorporated by conversion, rather than conquest, and its main direction of expansion was east, simply because there were few opportunities in the 
western (Iceland) and northern (Lapland) directions. Finally, east of the core two 
conquest centers developed: one on the Saxon-Slavic frontier (Drang nach Osten, 
eventually leading to the formation of Brandenburg-Prussia), and the other on the 
Bavarian-Magyar frontier (eventually leading to the Habsburg Austria).

In summary, I argue that the metaethnic frontier theory provides a coherent 
explanation for the spatiotemporal pattern of political development in the postRoman Europe. It also gives a more accurate representation of the pattern. For 
example, Rokkan rather arbitrarily assigned Denmark to the seaward, but Sweden 
to the landward empire-nation belts. By contrast, I interpret the political evolution 
of Europe as centrifugal from the Carolingian-Ottonian core, in all directions 
but the southern one (where another old imperial core was located). Finally, the 
explanation advanced above has the virtue of generality. In his account Rokkan 
(1975:596) emphasizes the uniqueness of the European configurations. I suggest 
that what was unique about Europe was the particular combination of initial and 
boundary conditions (using the mathematical language), rather than the general 
mechanism. In other words, the specific course of events in Europe was contingent 
on the Roman Empire starting where it did, on the timing and locations of extraEuropean invasions, and on physical features such as the rivers and mountains, 
which affected where frontiers formed. But the general explanation, based on the 
link between frontiers and collective solidarity, should work outside of Europe.

At least, it seems to be a plausible working hypothesis (Tilly 1975), worthy of 
investigation in other world regions.

5.5 SUMMARY 
• The metaethnic frontier model predicts that large territorial polities originate 
in areas subjected to a prolonged influence by intense metaethnic frontiers.

In this chapter I empirically tested this prediction for Europe (plus Asia 
Minor) during the first two millennia c.E.

• I divided the total testing area into fifty "cultural regions" of between 0.1 
and 0.2 Mm2 in area. In each region and for each century from 0 to 1900 
c.E., I calculated a "frontier index," consisting of four components, based on 
differences in religion, language, and economic way of life across the ethnic 
divide, and on the intensity of warfare. An index of 0 is assigned to regions 
through which no frontier passes during the given century, while a score of 9 
is assigned to very intense, major metaethnic fault lines. I classified regions 
as "frontier" ones if they had a relatively intense (intensity score 5 or more) 
1Thanks to Jack Goldstone for suggesting this formulation.

AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 93 
and stationary (three or more centuries) frontier. The rest of the regions were 
classified as "no frontier" ones.

• I first examined the relationship between frontiers and large polities in the 
period ending 1000 c. E. There was a strong correlation between an intense 
and prolonged frontier in a region during the period of 0-500 c.E. and the 
maximum territory the polity originating from the region achieved during 
500-1000 c.E. A statistical test rejected the null hypothesis of no association 
with P « 0.001.

• A similar result was obtained for a comparison of frontiers during 500-
1500 c.E. and maximum polity sizes achieved during 1000-1900 c.E. Again, 
the null hypothesis was rejected at the P « 0.001 level. In particular, I 
found that all the European Great Powers (England, Castile-Spain, France, 
Brandenburg-Prussia-Germany, Austria, Lithuania-Poland, Byzantium, Ottoman Empire, and Muscovy-Russia) originated from areas subjected to 
intense and prolonged frontier influence. The only exception was SavoySardinia-Italy.

• I also examined an alternative hypothesis, based on the geopolitical notion 
of "marchland" positional advantage. I constructed an index of vulnerability 
for each region, based on the proportion of its boundary in coastline versus 
land. I found no association between the vulnerability index of a region and 
the size of polity that originated from it.

• These results provide a great degree of empirical support to the metaethnic 
frontier model, which outperformed both the null hypothesis of complete randomness, and an explicit rival hypothesis connecting positional advantage to 
geopolitical success. However, the test also revealed several anomalous cases, 
of which the most significant is the Italian one. In other words, although the 
frontier model predicted correctly the majority of large territorial polities (at 
least for Europe 500-1900 c.E.), it did not predict a few others. This observation suggests that there may be other mechanisms, in addition to the 
frontier one, that explain the genesis of large territorial polities.

Chapter Six 
Ethnokinetics 
6.1 ALLEGIANCE DYNAMICS OF INCORPORATED POPULATIONS 
The previous two chapters analyzed the initial stage of a polity's expansion, during which newly incorporated groups are rapidly integrated into the core ethnie.

One assumption of that theory was that the population inhabiting newly added 
areas immediately transfers its loyalty to the conquering empire. This is not necessarily an unrealistic assumption. Under certain circumstances, notably when 
newly incorporated elites are ethnically similar to the polity core, lack of strong 
ethnic differences may allow them to merge with the core elites without any 
substantial time lag.

Such a state of affairs, however, cannot last long. Sooner or later, a successfully 
expansionist empire will annex a territory inhabited by ethnically very different 
people (alloethnics). In fact, one definition of an empire is a polity encompassing 
more than one ethnie. Once a polity becomes multiethnic, its ability to function 
and expand will be strongly affected by the loyalties of incorporated ethnies.

The asabiya profiles of annexed ethnies will probably show a substantial decline 
between the regional level (inhabited by each ethnie) and that of the empire.

This has two consequences. First, because members of annexed ethnies feel little 
loyalty to the empire, they will be reluctant to contribute resources to it. Thus, 
annexation of an alien ethnie will increase the geopolitical power of the empire 
much less than adding an equivalent number of ethnically similar people. (If the 
state coerces alloethnics to contribute the same amount as members of the core 
ethnie, the overall contribution to the state power is still going to be diminished, 
since coercion is expensive.) It is especially difficult to obtain willing and loyal 
recruits for the army from alloethnies, so many empires choose to recruit only 
from the core ethnie (examples, the Roman Republic, but not Empire; the Russian 
Empire).

Second, ethnically different people are much more likely to rebel against the 
empire. If their ethnie-level asabiya is high, it will be relatively easy for their 
elites to overcome the collective-action problems associated with starting a successful uprising (for a general review of this issue, see Goldstone 1994). Thus, the 
empire will have to devote a considerable amount of resources to either buying 
the alloethnic elites off, or suppressing their rebellions.

In short, ethnic divisions have the potential to severely reduce the geopolitical 
power of the state. However, ethnicity is not a static variable, and ethnic composition of a polity continuously changes. Ethnic composition changes, first, as a 
result of demographic mechanisms (differential rates of population increase) and, 
ETHNOKINETICS 95 
second, as a result of ethnosocial mechanisms (Bromley 1987), such as ethnic 
assimilation and mobilization. Thus, whether alloethnic elites will assimilate to 
the core ethnie or not, and how fast this process proceeds, should have a great 
effect on the fortunes of the empire.

The overwhelming majority of medium- to large-sized polities in history were 
polyethnic (McNeill 1986; Hall 1998). Because geopolitical power depends so 
much on the ethnic composition of a polity, we need to develop some quantitative 
understanding of how and why the ethnic composition of polities evolves with 
time. Thus, the main purpose of this chapter is to develop dynamic models of 
ethnosocial change. I call such models ethnokinetic, because mathematically they 
are very similar to models of chemical kinetics. My primary emphasis is on ethnic 
assimilation, because of its postulated importance to the empire's power base. I 
should also remind the reader that, because I use the broad definition of ethnicity, 
I do not reduce assimilation to just linguistic assimilation. Granted, language 
or dialect is a very important cultural marker of ethnicity. However, during the 
period of interest, religion often provided an even more relevant (meta)ethnic 
marker. Thus, the two social processes of particular interest for purposes of this 
chapter are linguistic assimilation and religious conversion as examples of how 
ethnic identity may be changed. My empirical examples below will be drawn 
from instances of religious assimilation.

6.2 THEORY 
6.2.1 Nonspatial Models of Assimilation 
The Noninteractive Model 
I begin with the simplest possible formulation of an ethnokinetic process. First, I 
assume that there are only two groups: the core and the periphery ethnies. Second, the population growth rates of the two ethnies are the same. This means 
that the relative proportions of core and peripheral ethnics change with time only 
as a result of individuals switching ethnic allegiance (identity). Third, peripheral ethnics switch their ethnicity and become members of the core ethnie with 
a constant probability per unit of time. These assumptions lead to what I call 
the noninteractive assimilation model (noninteractive because the probability of 
switching ethnic identity does not depend on what others are doing). Very similar 
models were proposed by Hopkins (1973) and Cederman (1997), although these 
authors modeled not two, but several classes of individuals (classified according 
to whether they were assimilated or not, and mobilized or not).

Obviously, the assumption of two distinct ethnies, with individuals making 
an instantaneous switch between them, is a great oversimplification of the reality. However, there were some instances in history for which this simple model 
may provide not a bad approximation. I refer to those historical ethnies who defined their ethnic boundary primarily (or even exclusively) in terms of religion.

"Switching of ethnic identity;• then, refers to the religious conversion. 1\vo historical examples in which the entry into the core elite was relatively open to 
individuals willing to convert to the state religion were the Ottoman Empire and 
Muscovite Russia. More complicated situations, involving language barriers as 
well as multidimensional ethnic boundaries, are discussed in Section 6.5.

Let C be the proportion of population in the core ethnie, and P = 1 - C be 
the proportion of population in the peripheral ethnie. The probability of ethnic 
switch from periphery to core is p. Then, the differential equation describing the 
dynamics of ethnic composition at the macro level is 
C=pP=p(1-C). (6.1) 
We have already encountered this simple model of asymptotic growth in Section 2.1 [see equation (2.3)]. At low values of C, this variable grows approximately linearly, and eventually it approaches the equilibrium point c• = 1 in an 
exponential manner (refer to Figure 2.1c).

When deriving equation ( 6.1) I assumed that only members of the periphery 
could switch ethnic identity. We can allow for an inverse process, in which members of the core ethnie switch identity ("going native," so to speak; for example, 
Old English in medieval Ireland; Kidd 1999:146). Suppose the probability of 
switching from the peripheral to the core identity is p0 , while the probability 
of the reverse switch is p1• This modification leads to a very similar model of 
asymptotic growth: C = p0P- p 1 C = p0 - (p0 + p1 )C. However, at equilibrium, 
the proportion in the core ethnie is not 1 but c• = p0/(p0 + p 1). This equilibrium, 
however, is approached in the same fashion as in the simpler model: initially linearly, then asymptotically.

The Autocatalytic Model 
Although the noninteractive model has been used to investigate ethnic assimilation (e.g., the multiclass modifications of Hopkins 1973 and Cederman 1997), I 
believe it is deeply flawed. It is not a matter of it being overly simple, because 
the alternative I am about to discuss is equally simple (actually simpler, as it has 
one fewer parameter). The problem is that the noninteractive model assumes a 
sociologically implausible scenario. Societies are not composed of atomized individuals; instead, each individual is embedded within a social network (or multiple 
networks) of other individuals. What we know about the spread of rumors, innovations, and perhaps ethnicity suggests that these cultural elements spread by 
contact, from one individual to another along the social networks (Rogers 1995).

Taking religious conversion, individuals simply do not convert to a new sect spontaneously, upon reading about it in the newspaper, for example. On the contrary, 
as sociologists of religion have demonstrated (Stark 1996; Stark and Bainbridge 
1996), conversion, like contagion, travels along interpersonal links. "The basis for 
successful conversionist movements is growth through social networks, through a 
structure of direct and intimate interpersonal attachments" (Stark 1996, emphasis 
in the original).

How can we translate these assumptions at the micro level into a model describing dynamics of conversion at the macro level? The rigorous approach would 
ETHNOKINETICS 97 
require an explicitly spatial approach (where "space" may refer to social rather 
than physical space). We discuss such an approach in the next section. Here, 
however, I seek to capture the difference between a noninteractive and a network 
based assimilation (or conversion) processes with a simple model, so space has 
to be implicit in it. Let us, then, simply assume that the probability of conversion 
is proportional to the numbers already converted, and explore the consequences 
of this assumption.

To make things slightly more complicated, I will allow ethnic switching in 
both directions. Let the probability of an individual switching from the peripheral 
to the core identity (per unit of time) be p0 = r0C, and the reverse probability 
p1 = r1P (the probability of switching into an ethnie is proportional to the fraction 
of population belonging to the ethnie; the proportionality constants r0 and r1 
are relative rates of switching). The rate at which peripherals are switching to 
the core, then, is the product of the probability of switching multiplied by the 
proportion in the periphery. The rate of switching from the core is determined 
analogously. Thus, the rate of change of C is 
Defining r = r0 - r1 and substituting it in the equation above, we have 
C= rC(l-C) (6.2) 
We see that this derivation led us to the logistic equation-another elementary 
model of growth discussed in Section 2.1. This model is even simpler than the 
full noninteractive model that had two rate parameters, p0 and p1• In this model, 
we need to know only one parameter, the difference between the two relative 
rates, r.

The dynamics of equation (6.2) differ from the noninteractive model in one 
important respect: when C is at low levels, it will grow at an accelerating rate.

The reason for the accelerating pattern of growth is that the more people have 
converted or assimilated, the more probable it is that any particular individual will 
switch identity. Such a dynamic pattern is analogous to autocatalytic reaction in 
chemical kinetics, in which the presence of a compound increases the rate at 
which it is created. Accordingly, I will refer to equation (6.2) as the autocatalytic 
model.

Another way in which the noninteractive and autocatalytic models differ is 
that the equilibrium that C approaches in the autocatalytic model is 1 (assuming 
that r > 0), whereas in the noninteractive model the equilibrium can be substantially less than 1. This difference alone should make us suspect the noninteractive 
model. Why should core individuals continue switching to the peripheral identity 
when the core identity has reached overwhelming proportions? Yet that is precisely what the noninteractive model suggests. Clearly, core individuals switching 
to the peripheral identity should occur only in locations where P » C, as happened in the Anglo-Irish example mentioned above.

The Threshold Model 
Making the probability of switching a function of proportion in the core ethnie 
was a step in the right direction. However, we assumed that the relationship 
between p and C was linear (p = rC), and it is a good idea to investigate what 
will happen if we relax this assumption. A particular class of nonlinear behaviors, 
threshold models of collective behavior (Granovetter 1978; Schelling 1978), has 
been extensively discussed in the sociological literature. Particularly important to 
the issue at hand is that it has also been applied to the problem of switching 
ethnic identity (Laitin 1998).

We can model threshold behavior by modifying the previously assumed linear 
relationship between p and C to a nonlinear one of the form p = rC(C- C0).

The new parameter, C0 , is the threshold proportion. When C > C0, the rate of 
switching to the core identity is positive, because the core ethnie has achieved 
the "critical mass." When C < C0 , the rate of switching is negative. That is, more 
individuals are switching from core to peripheral identity than vice versa (in other 
words, I interpret p as the difference between the probabilities of switching in 
either direction). The notions of critical mass and threshold behaviors are amply 
discussed by Schelling (1978) and Granovetter (1978), among others, so I do not 
discuss them further here, referring the reader to these authors instead.

Substituting the assumed form of p in the model, we have the following 
equation 
C = rC(C- C0)(1- C) (6.3) 
The threshold model belongs to the class of metastable dynamics (Section 2.1.2).

It has three equilibria: two stable C = 0 and C = 1, and one unstable C = C0 • 
The outcome of the ethnic assimilation process is entirely dependent on the initial 
conditions. If C starts above C0 , then the trajectory eventually approaches 1. In 
other words, all the population of the empire acquires the core identity. Alternatively, if C starts below C0 , then the peripheral identity will win in the end, and 
all core ethnics lose their original identity. This is an interesting prediction of the 
threshold model, and it seems to fit the many historical cases when a small group 
of invaders conquered a much larger ethnically different population. Often the invaders would proceed to convert to the dominant religion of the conquered people 
and switch to speaking their language (examples are the Visigoths, Langobards, 
Bulgars, and Normans).

There is one feature of the threshold model that is problematic: its dynamics are 
determined by whether the global frequency is above or below the threshold, yet 
it is more plausible to assume that an individual probability of switching identity 
should be affected by the local composition of society. The autocatalytic model 
as an approximation of the social network process also suffers from this criticism, 
although, as we shall see below, it still appears to be not a bad approximation, 
even in an explicitly spatial setting (under certain conditions). Adding explicit 
space to the threshold model, on the other hand, may substantially change its 
predicted dynamics. This is the next issue that we need to investigate.

ETHNOKINETICS 99 
6.2.2 Spatially Explicit Models 
As I have repeatedly stressed in this book, there are many advantages of developing mathematical models. One such advantage is that when we derive a specific 
model for some issue, we may find that it is mathematically exactly the same as 
some equations developed to model a completely different problem. This means 
that we do not have to develop an analytic apparatus from scratch, but can profit 
from what others did before. This is the case with ethnokinetics. The kind of 
models that we formulated in the previous section have been extensively used 
in modeling chemical kinetics, spread of rumors and innovations, dynamics of 
epidemics, and so on. As I argued in the previous section, one key element that 
we need to investigate theoretically is the addition of explicit space. Fortunately, 
there is a very rich theory for the dynamics of both chemical and population 
processes in space (reaction-diffusion theory and epidemiological models), and 
we can use the insights from these mathematical theories for our purposes (for 
a good review of the mathematical theory, see Murray 1993). In the following 
I will mainly rely on results from the theory of epidemics in space, because 
its mathematical formalism fits most closely the kinds of processes we need to 
understand.

Social Space 
When I say that we need to add "space" I do not necessarily mean physical 
space. Rather, what we need is some notion of social space, in which distance 
between individuals is measured by the frequency and intensity of their social 
interactions. The social space has many dimensions, but sociologists often reduce 
them to two principal classes: the vertical and horizontal (Sorokin 1927). The 
vertical dimension refers to the position in the social hierarchy (stratification).

Thus, a peasant may have a lot of interactions with the village head, who in turn 
interacts with the local noble, and so on to the polity ruler. Two people inhabiting 
the same location may be very socially distant from each other (for example, a 
prince and a pauper). The horizontal dimension arises as a result of patteming 
in day-to-day activities such as working, raising children, or simply conversing 
to neighbors (Black 1998). There is a strong spatial component present in the 
horizontal dimension. Thus, a typical peasant will interact mostly with people in 
the same village, to a certain extent with inhabitants of nearby villages, and very 
little (if at all) with anybody in a different province.

Social space has some peculiar topological characteristics (Black 1998). First, it 
is often anisotropic, because downward interaction may be stronger than upward 
interaction. For example, the decision of a king to convert to Christianity has a 
much stronger effect on the probability that a peasant will convert than vice versa.

Second, higher ranked persons tend to belong to wider-scale social networks. For 
example, a noble of middle rank will likely have a closer connection to another 
noble in a nearby province than two peasants separated by a similar geographic 
distance. Finally, certain geographic features, such as mountains, tend to attenuate 
social distance. Perhaps a better measure would be not the physical distance, 
but distance measured in travel time. Horizontal anisotropy may also arise, for 
example, along rivers (it is much easier to move down river than against the 
current).

There is an important concept from epidemiology that can be useful in conceptualizing spatial models of linguistic assimilation and religious conversion. I 
refer to the contact distribution, which in epidemiology is defined as the probability of disease passing from one individual to another as a function of distance 
separating them. We can reinterpret the contact distribution as the intensity of 
social interaction between two people located at different points in the social 
space. In the context of religious conversion, the analogy is complete because 
we can interpret the contact distribution as the probability of religious conversion 
spreading from one individual to another. This formulation allows one, in principle, to model a variety of complicating effects, including heterogeneous space 
(e.g., mountains and other barriers), and anisotropy (such as larger-scale contact 
distributions characterizing higher-ranked persons). I will not pursue these complications here, because a model including all these realistic features would have 
to be solved by simulation on the computer. Instead, I will focus on how space 
can modify the frequency-dependent aspects of ethnokinetic processes. This topic 
is where we can profit from the analytical results made available by the epidemiological theory. I consider, first, the spatial extension of the autocatalytic model 
and, second, the threshold model (the noninteractive model is not affected by 
space, because each individual changes identity spontaneously and independently 
of what others do). In the following account I provide no mathematical equations, 
because the interested reader can find them in the appropriate special literature.

An introduction to the ecological aspects of spatial contact processes and models of spread can be found in my book on quantitative analysis of movement 
(Turchin 1998:70-72, 329-348). More technical accounts are in Murray (1993) 
and Mollison (1995). I do not need to delve into the mathematical results because 
all I do is take the already developed theory and reinterpret it in terms of social 
contacts and social influence on identity switching.

The Autocatalytic Model in Space 
To make the autocatalytic model spatially explicit, first we redefine the frequency 
of individuals with the core identity, C(t), into a spatially varying variable, 
C(x, y, z. t). Here x and y may stand for physical space coordinates and z for 
position in the social hierarchy; t is time as usual. As an illustration, C(x, y, z, t) 
might be the proportion of Christians among small merchants in a particular town 
at a particular point of time. Second, we define the contact distribution: V(s) is 
the intensity of social contacts between two individuals separated by social distance s. Note that in this model I assume that the contact distribution does not 
vary with space, rank, or time. As stated above, however, such modifications can 
be made, and the resulting model investigated numerically. Third, I assume that 
the probability of an individual switching identity is a function of the identities 
of other individuals in the social vicinity, weighted by their social distance to the 
focal individual. To illustrate how the model works, suppose the contact distribution is rectangular in shape, as in Figure 6.1a. This means that there is a certain 
ETHNOKINETICS 101 
(a) rectangular 
------. I 
I 
I (b) thin-tailed 
·-·--- (c) thick-tailed ....... _ 
·---·-·-·--· 
Social Distance 
Figure 6.1 Different shapes of the contact distribution: (a) rectangular, (b) "thin-tailed," 
and (c) "thick-tailed." 
circle of relatives and friends with which the focal individual interacts socially, 
and the intensity of interaction is the same with each individual in the circle. Outside the circle, however, the intensity of interaction is zero. Then, the probability 
of converting will simply be proportional to the fraction of individuals within the 
circle who are already converts.

The rectangular contact distribution is not a realistic shape for human social 
interactions, because some humans are likely to have very distant acquaintances, 
even though their interactions with them may not be very intense. Thus, the contact distribution should not end abruptly, but there must be some "tail" extending 
quite far for a few individuals (for example, long-distance merchants). The mathematical theory of spatial contact processes distinguishes two important cases: the 
"thin-tailed" case when the tail of the contact distribution declines exponentially 
(or faster) with social distance, and the "thick-tailed" case when the tail declines 
more slowly than exponentially (Figure 6.1 ). As we shall see below, these two 
classes of tails imply very different spatial dynamics.

When the contact distribution has a tail, it means that the focal individual makes 
a decision about conversion not only based on what others in the immediate social 
vicinity do, but also taking into account what the society at large does. However, 
the influence of socially distant individuals is much less than the influence of the 
close circle of friends and relatives. The diminution of influence with increasing 
social distance is measured with how fast the contact distribution drops off to 
zero.

The case of thin-tailed contact distributions is mathematically well understood.

If the probability of switching identity is directly proportional to the weighted 
average of identities held by others (the weights are given by the contact distribution), then this spatial contact process is well approximated by a reaction-diffusion 
model in which the local source/sink term is logistic, and spatial redistribution 
is simple diffusion. This model has been thoroughly investigated, starting with 
the seminal work of Fisher (1937) and Kolmogoroff et al. (1937) on the spatial 
spread of advantageous genes. A well-known application in social sciences is the 
model of spread of neolithic farmers in Europe (Ammennan and Cavalli-Sforza 
1973). The dynamics of the model are as follows. Suppose we start with initially 
a small number of converts to the new religion (such as a group of disciples fonning around a prophet or messiah). Locally, the conversion process will follow the 
S-shaped logistic curve, initially growing exponentially and then saturating when 
all local people are converted to the new religion. The spatial spread will also initially accelerate, but rather rapidly a well-defined front of advance is established, 
and this front expands with time at a constant velocity. As a result, the total area 
where the majority of people are converted expands linearly in time. Thus, after 
an initial acceleration the number of converts will grow linearly with time until 
the whole available space is taken over.

This orderly front advance observed for thin-tailed contact distributions is in 
great contrast with what happens if the contact distribution has a thick tail. An 
initially small group of converts will grow locally according to the logistic curve, 
as in the previous case. However, as the number of converts builds up, it becomes 
increasingly more likely that one of them will have a long-distance acquaintance 
who will be converted. The most likely mechanism for a proselytizing religion 
is that the initial religious commune would send missionaries out. Such longdistance jumps of the conversion process will prevent formation of an orderly 
front. Instead, we will observe a number of secondary foci of spread forming 
around the original focus, then tertiary foci will appear as a result of missionaries 
sent from the secondary foci, and so on. The whole spatial process will spread 
in an accelerating fashion, and the global number of converts will exhibit an Sshaped growth pattern. The more thick tailed the contact distribution, the more 
closely the global spread process will approximate the logistic.

Threshold Model in Space 
The spatial threshold model behaves in a very different manner from the autocatalytic model (for mathematical details, see Lewis and Kareiva 1993). First, and 
rather obviously, the initial local proportion of converts must exceed the threshold 
C0, otherwise the new cult will die out. Second, and less obviously, the size of 
the area initially occupied by the cult (the "beachhead") must exceed a certain 
threshold. Otherwise, the "diffusive losses" across the boundary will overwhelm 
the conversion rate within the area occupied by the religion, and it will fail. The 
third and most important difference is that the threshold model can exhibit only 
linearly advancing fronts, no matter what the shape of the contact distribution.

This feature arises because any converts that get out too far in advance of the main 
front suffer from the threshold effect: they are locally swamped by nonbelievers.

The other interesting prediction made by the theory is that in well-connected 
space coexistence of two identities is impossible. Suppose a spatial front between 
two identities was somehow established. Then it will always advance in one 
direction or another. In the specific fonn of the threshold model proposed above 
ETHNOKINETICS 
~ ~ c: 
8 
c: 
0 
:e 
g_ 
e 
a.

1 .... -------- , / I .

(a) I / I (b}·/ 
I / I 
I 
Time 
103 
Figure 6.2 Schematic patterns of spread predicted by spatial contact models: (a) autocatalytic process and thick-tailed contact distribution, {b) autocatalytic process and thin-tailed 
contact distribution, and (c) threshold process.

[equation (6.3)], the direction of advance depends on whether C0 > 0.5 or not. If 
yes, then the core identity will lose; otherwise, it wins (Lewis and Kareiva 1993).

However, if social intercourse across the boundary is substantially less than on 
each side, then stable coexistence is possible (e.g., Levin 1976).

Summary: The Three Types of Growth in Spatial Contact Models 
To summarize, the spatial models reviewed in this section predict three distinct 
patterns of conversion or assimilation process. These patterns are schematically 
illustrated in Figure 6.2a. The fastest spread occurs in the autocatalytic model with 
thick-tailed contact distributions. In this case, the process of conversion begins 
to grow at an accelerating rate in the locality of the initial group of converts.

Before this process can reach the phase where it is locally saturated (as a result 
of locally converting most of the population), the conversion process jumps to 
several other locations, which fuel further growth, and also generate further foci 
of spread. As a result, the conversion dynamics are explosive. The thicker is the 
tail of the contact distribution, the faster all points in the total area we model are 
reached. If the tails are essentially flat on the scale of the whole area, then the 
spatial process will be indistinguishable from the nonspatial logistic dynamics.

By contrast, if the tail of the contact distribution attenuates rapidly (the thintail case), then we should first observe a "latent period" during which no spread 
occurs (this is the time when local numbers of converts are building up), followed by an accelerating growth period. Eventually, a spatial front between the 
converted and unconverted areas is established. This front advances at a constant velocity, which results in a linear spread until the whole area is eventually 
converted [curve (b) in Figure 6.2].

Finally, if the conversion process is characterized by a threshold, then the shape 
of the contact distribution does not matter. If the conversion process is viable 
(which requires a sufficient initial mass of converts, not too high a conversion 
threshold C0 , and not too great losses of converts by diffusion), then a spatial front 
between the converted and unconverted areas becomes rapidly established. The 
front then advances linearly, but more slowly than in the autocatalytic case. The 
reason for the slower rate of spread is because, in order for the front to advance, 
the numbers of converts at the boundary must build up past the threshold C0 • In 
the autocatalytic case, by contrast, the conversion process can spread even when 
locally at low density. Thus, in the threshold case, the front is "pushed" by high 
numbers of converts behind it. In the autocatalytic case, the front is "pulled" 
by the interactions of low numbers of converts with the unconverted population& 
ahead of it.

6.3 EMPIRICAL TESTS 
The three models of Section 6.2.1 provide a reasonable starting point for empirical 
tests of the ethnokinetics theory. I will focus on testing the nonspatial models 
because currently I do not have access to any spatial data sets on conversion or 
assimilation that could allow testing of spatial models. It is true that spatial models 
predict somewhat different global patterns of the temporal course of assimilation 
(as depicted in Figure 6.2), and theoretically one could capitalize on that to devise 
an empirical test. Several practical problems, however, prevent a straightforward 
implementation of this idea. First, the patterns depicted in Figure 6.2 are highly 
stylized. To obtain more precise quantitative predictions it would be necessary to 
numerically solve spatially explicit models based on various assumptions about 
the process of identity switching and the shape of the contact distribution. Second, 
all three trajectories in Figure 6.2 predict roughly S-shaped dynamics. Given 
realistic data, affected by various degrees of process and observation noise, it will 
be difficult to distinguish between the theoretical alternatives in practice. In other 
words, I argue that approaches attempting to distinguish between spatial models 
on the basis of data on global patterns of ethnic change will be characterized 
by low statistical power. We need explicitly spatial data to test explicitly spatial 
models.

In contrast to spatial models, global curves of ethnic change should provide us 
with an excellent opportunity to design an empirical test for nonspatial models 
(the noninteractive, the autocatalytic, and the threshold processes). Nevertheless, 
one must choose the response variable carefully in order to maximize the statistical power of the test. A response or dependent variable in statistics is something 
that is predicted on the basis of predictor or independent variables (Box and 
Draper 1987). We distinguish between alternative models by determining how 
well they predict the response variable. The model that predicts the response 
variable the best is the one that is best supported by the data. The obvious, but 
not necessarily optimal, choice of a response variable for contrasting the predictive abilities of the three models would be the trajectory C(t), the proportion 
ETHNOKINETICS 105 
in the core at time t. Consider, for example, the trajectories predicted by the 
noninteractive and the autocatalytic models (see Figures 2.1c and d). Given nonplentiful data and large amounts of noise (which is the realistic assumption in 
historical applications), it will often be difficult to determine whether the curve 
has an initially accelerating phase or not. By contrast, if we look at the predictions 
that different models make about the rate of change of C, the contrast between 
the models is very stark (Figure 6.3). The noninteractive model predicts the linear relationship between C and C (Figure 6.3a), while the autocatalytic model 
predicts a humped curve (Figure 6.3c ). A simple contrast between the slopes of 
the relationships for C < 0.5 (negative versus positive) is sufficient to detennine 
which model is closer to reality. The prediction of the threshold model is also 
very striking: a negative rate of change for C < C0 (Figure 6.3e). Another useful 
contrast between the autocatalytic and threshold models is in their predictions for 
relative rates of change, C/C (Figure 6.3d versus f; examining the relative rate 
of change for the noninteractive model, panel b, is not very instructive, but is 
included for completeness).

The take-home message here is that, while we should certainly examine empirical time trajectories and compare them to trajectories predicted by models, in 
order to more fully utilize the data we should also plot them (and fit models to 
them) in the way depicted in Figure 6.3. Doing so allows us a closer approach to 
the mechanisms that may underlie the observed trajectories, because we examine 
the structure of the dynamical process at the level of the differential equation (by 
plotting the observed rate of change versus the state variable), rather than at the 
more phenomenological level of the time solution of the equation.

I now apply these ideas to three data sets, dealing with conversion to Islam, 
Christianity, and Monnonism. Our goal is to determine which of the three alternative models provides the closest match to the empirical patterns.

6.3.1 Conversion to Islam 
The Data 
The first case study is based on the remarkable database developed by Richard 
Bulliet. One of the characteristic cultural products of Islamic society has been 
the literary genre of the biographical dictionary (Bulliet 1979:9). The numerous 
biographical compilations, which contain many hundreds of individual entries, 
provide unique sources of quantifiable data for medieval Islamic societies. Bulliet 
analyzed the almost six thousand biographies contained in Iranian biographical 
dictionaries and discovered a very interesting pattern. There is an almost complete 
absence of Persian names among the subjects of biographies, who belonged to 
the religiously eminent upper class, and were characterized by a universal custom 
of giving their sons Arabic names. Yet Persian names appear in the genealogies 
of the biographical subjects. Over two-thirds of genealogical sequences are initiated by a Persian name, followed by a shift to exclusively Arabic ones (Bulliet 
1979:18). Bulliet hypothesized that the Persian name that initiates the sequence 
is that of the first family member to become a Muslim (this proposal can be 
confinned in certain cases by independent infonnation). Thus, it is likely that the 
Rate of change (C) Relative rate of change (ClC) 
(b) 
0 1 0 
c c 
Figure 6.3 Predicted relationships between C and the rates of change C (panels a, c, and 
e) and the relative rates of change C/C (panels b, d, and t) for the noninteractive model 
(panels a and b), the autocatalytic model (panels c and d), and the threshold model (panels 
e and t).

subgroup of genealogies that begin with a Persian name can provide reliable data 
on the approximate date of conversion of specific Iranian families. There were 
469 genealogies that fell into this subgroup. Bulliet divided the Muslim calendar into 25 year periods, and calculated the expected proportion of conversions 
falling within each period (see Bulliet 1979: Chapter 3 for further details).

Large numbers of genealogies are also available for Iraq, Syria. Egypt, and 
Spain. It would be very useful to perform the same analysis for these areas, as 
ETHNOKINETICS 107 
a way to check on the results from Iran. Unfortunately, the occurrence of nonArabic names in Iraq, Syria, and Egypt is very rare. All these areas became Arabic 
speaking in time, and Iraq and Syria were inhabited by speakers of languages related to Arabic even prior to Islamic conquest. In Spain, fortunately, the situation 
is different (Bulliet 1979: Chapter 10). Bulliet identified 154 Spanish genealogies 
beginning with non-Arabic names from five biographical dictionaries. Performing 
the analysis along the lines of the Iranian genealogical database, he calculated the 
proportion of families converting during each 50-year period (a longer period has 
to be used since there are fewer data points than in the Iranian case). We can use 
these data as an independent check on the Iranian data, because Muslim Spain 
was a region isolated both geographically and in time (it was conquered some 
seventy years after Iran}.

The Analysis 
Plotting the proportion of Iranian families converting to Islam during each 
25-year period against the midpoint of the period, we obtain the estimated 
curve of conversion to Islam in Iran (Figure 6.4a). Visual inspection of the data 
strongly suggests a logistic-like process. This impression is confirmed by fitting 
the temporal solution of the logistic: 
1 
C(t) = 1 + [(1- 'Y)/'Y]exp[ -rt] 
where the fitting parameters 'Y = C(O} is the initial proportion of converts at time 
t = 0 and r is the relative rate of conversion [the same parameter as in equation 
(6.2)]. This two-parameter curve explains a remarkable 99.98% of the variation 
in the response variable, C(t). This is an excellent fit, even by the standards of 
the physical sciences. By contrast, the noninteractive model explains only 79.2% 
of the variance (note that taken by itself this would be a very respectable result, 
but in comparisons of alternative models with data as the arbiter, it is the relative 
fit that matters; that is, which model performs better and by how much).

Almost identical results are obtained in the analysis of the Spanish data (Figure 6.4b). The logistic curve explains 99.7% of the variance. Interestingly, the 
fitted value of the parameter r is substantially lower than that for Iran (r is 2.8 
century-1 for Iran, but only 1.5 century-! for Spain). Again, the noninteractive 
model fits the data substantially worse (76.6% of the variance explained).

Further evidence in favor of the autocatalytic model (as compared to the two 
alternatives) comes from examining C-C phase plots (Figure 6.5a). The positive 
slope of the curves in the region of C < 0.5 is obvious and needs no statistical 
test. Furthermore, there is no evidence for negative rates of change, which would 
be predicted by the threshold model. Thus, of the three simple alternatives considered in Section 6.2.1, the autocatalytic model provides by far the best description 
of empirical patterns. On the other hand, plotting the data in the phase space has 
revealed some interesting features of the conversion process that were not apparent in the trajectory plot. In particular, the curves appear asymmetric (skewed to 
the right), while the logistic model, of course, predicts a completely symmetric 
Iran 
1 
• data 
"0 -model 
~ 
~ c:: 
8 
c:: 
0 
:e 
0 
Q.

e 
D..

0 
7 8 9 10 
Spain 
• data 
"0 -model 
~ Cl) 
> c:: 
8 
c:: 
~ 0 
Q.

e 
a..

0 
7 8 9 10 11 
Century C.E.

Figure 6.4 Trajectories of conversion to Islam in Iran and Spain. (Data from Bulliet 1979: 
Table 2 and Graph 20) 
parabola. To delve further into this issue, let us look at the relationship between 
relative rates of change and proportion converted indicated by the data (Figure 
6.6a). We see that, while quantitatively there is quite a large difference between 
relative conversion rates (the Iranian process went almost twice as fast), both 
curves have qualitatively same nonlinearities. The observation that the nonlinearity is almost identical in both cases suggests that this is not simply a sampling 
ETHNOKINETICS 
Q) 
C) 
c: 
tU 
.&:.

(.) 
0 
s 
tU 
0::: 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 0.5 
Proportion converted 
1.0 
109 
Figure 6.5 Iran and Spain data plotted on a C-C phase plot. Units of the rate of change 
C are in proportion converted per century.

issue (of course, these are only two replicates). On the other hand, it is still eminently possible that the observed nonlinearities are some artifact of the procedure 
used by Bulliet to extract conversion dates from the genealogies. Let us speculate 
what possible mechanisms may underlie the nonlinearity if it is real (this is a way 
of generating hypotheses for future research). First, the nonlinearity is certainly 
not suggestive of any threshold effect, because that would introduce a nonlinearity 
of opposite curvature (see Figure 6.3t). Furthermore, spatial models also all predict some acceleration during the initial stages of the conversion process, which 
again does not help to explain the observed patters. In fact, the concave shape 
of the function at low C has some resemblance to the noninteractive process 
(see Figure 6.3b). This observation raises the following possibility: the process 
is noninteractive during the very early stages, and then becomes autocatalytic.

For example, initially the proportion of converts in the population increases as 
a result of immigration. As the number of converts builds up, the autocatalytic 
part of the process rapidly swamps the increase due to immigration. I investigated this scenario with an explicit model, C = (p + rC)(l- C), and found that 
as long as p « r, that is the immigration rate is small, the model predicts precisely the shape observed in the data. An example of the pattern predicted by the 
immigration-autocatalytic growth model is given in Figure 6.6b.

To summarize, the analysis of the Bulliet data indicates that the autocatalytic 
model fits the empirical patterns overwhelmingly better than the two alternatives, the noninteractive and threshold models. In fact, the autocatalytic model 
achieves an unheard-of precision (at least in nonphysical sciences) of 99.98%.

However, this excellent fit is partly due to the specific viewpoint chosen, that 
is, fitting temporal trajectories. A more detailed investigation of the relationship 
between the state variable (C) and its rate of change as well as its relative rate 
110 
3 
Q) 
C) 
r:::: 
tU 2 .s:: 
(J 
0 
.!! 
e 
Q) 
~ ~ 
0 
3 
Q) 
C) 
r:::: 
tU 2 .s:: 
(J 
0 
.!! 
tU 
...

Q) 
1 .0!: 
16 
"! 
0 
\ 
\ 
0.0 
0.0 
~ ........ .......__......._ 
-4-- Iran 
--A- Spain 
........ ...._ __ ._ 
-- 0.5 
-+-model 
0.5 
Proportion converted 
1.0 
1.0 
Figure 6.6 (a) Iran and Spain data plotted on a tIC- C phase plot. Units of the rate of 
change C are century-•. (b) Relationship between the relative rate of change and proportion converted predicted by the immigration-autocatalytic model.

of change reveals some discrepancies between the predictions of the autocatalytic 
model and the data. We also found that a somewhat more complex alternative to 
the simple autocatalytic model, the immigration-autocatalytic process, provides a 
better empirical fit. It is encouraging that the best-fitting model, even though it 
was suggested by a post hoc pattern in the data, appears to correspond well with 
our understanding of what historically happened in Spain after Islamic conquest, 
when there was indeed a substantial immigration by Muslim Arabs and Berbers.

However, we should note that only two replicates are currently available (which is 
the minimum amount to guard against sampling error). Furthermore, there is the 
ETHNOKINETICS 111 
possibility that the observed nonlinearity is a result of some (unknown) bias in the 
procedure used by Bulliet to estimate conversion dates. Finally, the discrepancy 
is rather minor, and at best suggests a second-order improvement of the basic 
autocatalytic model. The simple fact of the matter is that the basic autocatalytic 
model fits the data awfully well.

6.3.2 The Rise of Christianity 
The second case study is more qualitative, simply because we do not have as good 
data sets documenting the dynamics of conversion to Christianity, compared to 
the on~s developed by Bulliet for conversion to Islam. The material in this section 
is based on Rodney Stark's The Rise of Christianity (1996).

When discussing the rise of Christianity, historians are impressed by how few 
Christians there were during the first two centuries c.E., and how suddenly their 
numbers grew-exploded-during the second half of the third century. Most historians of early Christianity concluded that some extraordinary process of mass 
conversions must have taken place to explain this astonishing expansion (see Stark 
1996:14 for quotes). Stark argues forcefully that this argument is based on a misappreciation of the nature of the autocatalytic process. The striking fact about 
such autocatalytic processes as the exponential or the logistic is that they appear 
to go through discontinuous stages of growth, while the basic driving mechanism 
does not change. The driving mechanism is the relative conversion rate (the number of new members per current member that convert in a unit of time). While the 
relative rate stays constant, the absolute rate (the product of the relative rate and 
the proportion already converted) increases with time, thus generating an illusion 
of the process going through qualitatively different stages. , 
Stark illustrates this phenomenon with an estimated growth curve or' Christians 
up to the middle of the fourth century. He assumes that in 40 c.E. there were 
about a thousand Christians and that they grew exponentially at the relative rate 
of 40% per decade. (Stark's use of the exponential model is not really at variance 
with our model of logistic growth, because the two processes generate essentially 
the same quantitative predictions for the early stages of growth, and begin to diverge only after the proportion converted exceeds 10-20%.) One thousand people 
corresponded to 0.0017% of the population of the Roman Empire. By 200 c.E., 
Stark's projection predicts that there was still less than 1% of the Roman population who converted to Christianity (0.36%, to be precise). Then, the projected 
growth "suddenly" takes off: 1.9% in 250 c.E., 10.5% in 300 c.E., and 56.5% in 
350 c.E. (Stark 1996: Table 1.1). In other words, the startling expansion of Christianity during the period of 250-350 c.E., as compared to an apparent lack of 
growth during 50-250 c.E. (the "latent period" in epidemiological terms), could 
have happened without any change in the underlying mechanism of conversion.

As long as the early Christians managed to keep their social networks open, they 
would continue to connect to and convert new members at the same relative rate 
of change, and the end result would be an eventual explosion of the size of the 
Christian community.

Stark derived the parameters for the projected conversion curve (the initial 
number at 40 c.E. and the relative rate of growth) by integrating over rather 
50 
• Bagnall's data 
40 - Stark's projection 
"0 
~ CD 
c: > 30 
0 
(J 
-
c: 20 
~ CD 
(L 
10 
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 
Year C.E.

Figure 6.7 Comparison between Stark's projection on the growth of early Christianity in 
the Roman Empire and Bagnall's data on the proportion of Christians in Egypt.

heterogeneous quantitative and qualitative information from various sources (see 
Stark 1996:4-12). Several years after he made these estimates, a colleague of 
Stark attracted his attention to the reconstruction by Roger Bagnal1 of the growth 
of Christianity in Egypt. Bagnall examined Egyptian papyri to identify the proportion of persons with identifiably Christian names in various years (Stark 1996: 
12-13). Comparing Stark's projected curve to these independent data constitutes 
a strong test of the theory (in fact, this is a true experimental test, since Stark 
was unaware of Bagnall's data when he constructed his prediction). Figure 6.7 
illustrates the results of this test. The match is quite good, and the coefficient 
of prediction is a very respectable R~ = 0.74. Thus, this test provides a strong 
quantitative confirmation of the theory.

6.3.3 The Growth of the Mormon Church 
The last case study concerns the growth of a modem religion, the Mormons.

The data are the total number of members in the Church of the Latter Day 
Saints from 1840 to 1980, and are tabulated by Stark (1984). Iri order to fit the 
logistic model to these data I need to convert them to proportions. Because the 
Mormon church is a world religion, with branches on all inhabited continents, 
I expressed the data as the proportion of the world population converted. This 
procedure probably overestimates the population of potential converts, because 
the targets of Mormon conversion are those who are not strongly committed to 
some other religion. However, this caveat does not affect the analysis results, 
because Mormons are very far from the conversion midpoint, no matter how we 
define the population at "risk of conversion," and thus the autocatalytic model 
predicts that they should be growing in an essentially exponential fashion.

ETHNOKINETICS 
- 1o-2 rr======:::::;-----------, 
Q) 
~ g> 
:::::.. 10-3 
~ ~ c: 
8 
c: 10-4 
0 
i 
e 
a.

+ data 
- regression 
10-s +---r-----r---r---r-----r---.----1 
1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 
YearC.E.

113 
Figure 6.8 Proportion of the world population converted to the Monnon church, 1840-
1980. The data are plotted on a logarithmic scale to emphasize the essentially exponential 
nature of the growth, which characterizes the autocatalytic dynamics at low C.

Fitting the logistic curve to these data indicated that the model explains 98.9% 
of the variance. Thus, again we obtain a remarkable fit between the theoretical 
prediction and the observed trajectory (Figure 6.8).

6.4 CONCLUSION: DATA SUPPORT THE AUTOCATALYTIC MODEL 
The results of empirical tests are summarized in Table 6.1. The most striking 
feature of these results is just how well the autocatalytic model fits the data (or 
predicts, as in the case of Christianity), especially given how simple the model 
is. It only has two fitted parameters (the initial condition, C(O), and the relative 
conversion rate, r). The important implication is that not everything in history is 
Table 6.1 Summary of empirical tests: the estimated relative conversion rate, r, and the 
proportion of variance in the data explained by the autocatalytic model, R2 (except in the 
case of Christianity, where R2 is the proportion predicted). The units of r are yr- 1• 
Case study f R2 
Islam (Iran) 0.028 0.9998 
Islam (Spain) 0.015 0.997 
Christianity 0.034 0.74 
Mormon 0.023 0.989 
messy or impossible to predict. Furthermore, a clean test of alternative models is 
possible. Recollect that we started with three models that were based on different 
assumptions of how people are converted to a new religion: the noninteractive, the 
autocatalytic, and the threshold processes. The quantitative tests of all four data 
sets yield a unanimous result: the autocatalytic model fits the data far better than 
the two alternatives. This is a heartening conclusion, because according to the 
current sociological thinking, conversion travels through interpersonal networks 
(Stark 1996}, the mechanism on which the autocatalytic model is based. In other 
words, a purely data-driven analysis agrees with the theoretical postulates.

If we start dissecting some of the better measured data (e.g., the two cases of 
conversion to Islam}, then we find some systematic deviations between model predictions and data. But this caveat in no way diminishes the accomplishment of the 
autocatalytic model: it does much better relative to alternatives, and progress in 
science is achieved by successive improvement of theories, by discarding poorly 
performing alternatives in favor of those that do better. (Actually, in this case, the 
autocatalytic model does extremely well even in absolute terms, but that is beside 
the point.) Furthermore, the observed systematic deviations suggest an improved 
model-initial immigration followed by autocatalytic conversion process-which 
makes a lot of sense in light of what we know about the history of early Islamic 
Iran and Spain.

The empirical finding that the autocatalytic process describes the observed 
conversion dynamics best has important implications for the historical dynamics 
research program. Logistic growth (unlike, for example, asymptotic growth} has 
a certain sensitivity to initial conditions built in it. Consider, for example, the 
growth of Christianity. Let us quantify the temporal scale of conversion by time 
needed to reach the inflection point on the logistic curve (when 50% of population is converted). Starting with 1000 Christians in 40 c.E. and using Stark's 
estimate f = 0.034, the midpoint is reached in 368 C.E. (this is a bit later than 
Stark's calculation, because Stark used the pure exponential method, while I am 
employing the logistic model). To contrast the logistic growth with the asymptotic 
growth, let us assume that the parameter p = 0.0021, because with this parameter an asymptotic process starting with 1000 converts in 40 c.E. also hits the 
midpoint by 368 c.E. The trajectory predicted by the asymptotic model is very 
insensitive to the initial conditions, how many Christians there were in 40 c.E.

(Table 6.2). Whether there are 10 or 100,000 Christians in 40 c.E., the midpoint 
is still achieved in 368 or 367 c.E. By contrast, every tenfold change in the initial 
condition changes the logistically predicted midpoint by 69 years (Table 6.2).

Sensitivity to initial conditions makes prediction problematic, especially when 
initial conditions are hard to measure precisely. In the Christianity case, Stark's 
estimate of 1000 converts at 40 c.E. could easily be revised by an order of magnitude up or down. Furthermore, the tendency of a nonlinear dynamical system 
to amplify small variations in initial conditions may cause it to behave chaotically. It is known that, for example, resource-consumer models in which resource 
grows asymptotically are much more stable than the analogous models in which 
the resource grows logistically (Turchin 2003). I have already commented on 
ETHNOKINETICS 115 
Table 6.2 Predictions of logistic versus noninteractive models on when 50% of population 
is converted, depending on the initial condition.

C(O) Noninteractive Logistic 
10 368 C.E. 506 C.E.

lOO 368 C.E. 437 C.E.

1000 368 C.E. 368 C.E.

10,000 368 C.E. 299 C.E.

100,000 367 C.E. 230 C.E.

the role of logistic growth in the chaotic dynamics of the spatial frontier model 
(Section 4.2.1).

Finally, in empirical tests I focused on religious conversion, because that is 
where I could find data. However, religion is just one source of markers for 
symbolic boundaries between ethnies. The nature of the demarcation markers 
affects the ease with which they can be crossed. Crossing some boundaries is 
easy (for example, acquiring appropriate dress), while others are much more 
difficult or even impossible to cross. For example, if race is one of the defining 
ethnic characteristics, as in modem Japan, then a European has no chance of 
being accepted. Language-based boundaries are also difficult for individuals to 
cross, since the great majority of people, once past puberty, are unable to learn a 
different language well enough to pass as a native speaker. Furthermore, linguistic 
assimilation usually does not happen directly from one language to another, but 
indirectly through a distinct class of bilingual speakers. Thus, ethnic assimilation 
that involves crossing a linguistic boundary could be even slower than religious 
conversion. Note that even religious conversion is a surprisingly slow process: in 
the empirical case studies, reaching the half point of conversion typically required 
2-3 centuries.

In the models I considered there were only two classes of individuals: assimilated and not assimilated. Creating extra classes is one way to make models more 
realistic. For example, linguistic assimilation should probably be modeled by explicitly adding a third variable, the proportion of individuals in the polity who 
are bilingual speakers. Furthermore, creating multiple classes may be a reasonable 
approach to modeling the situation when an ethnic boundary involves multiple 
symbolic dimensions. For example, if assimilation requires both converting to 
the official religion and learning the language of the core ethnie, we might set 
up four classes, reflecting all possible combinations of the two religions and two 
languages. More classes, in principle, could be added to reflect finer divisions, but 
eventually the model will become so complex as to be unmanageable. An alternative approach is to postulate that there are many continuous dimensions along 
which two ethnies may differ. Thus, each ethnie is a point in this multidimensional space, or even a cloud of points, if we wish to explicitly model intraethnic 
variability in individual characteristics. The critical variable, then, becomes the 
distance separating two ethnies in this multidimensional space. A somewhat similar approach has been used by the creators of the Sugarscape model (Epstein and 
Axtell 1996), although they modeled cultural traits discretely, as sequences of ls 
("trait present") and Os ("trait absent").

I discuss these alternative modeling strategies to show that we are not limited to the simple approaches discussed in this chapter. If we find the approach 
too restrictive, we can use one of the alternatives, although at the expense of 
complicating the ensuing model.

6.5 SUMMARY 
• When a growing empire adds territory inhabited by people who are ethnically different from its core ethnie, it is expected that the initial loyalty of 
the incorporated ethnie toward the empire will not be high. The subsequent 
development of the geopolitical power of the empire will depend very much 
on whether, and if yes how fast, the newly incorporated population (and/or 
its elites) assimilates to the core ethnie.

• In this chapter I considered three basic sets of assumptions about how people 
switch their ethnic identity (a process that may involve linguistic assimilation, religious conversion, etc.).

• The noninteractive model posits that each nonassimilated individual has a 
constant probability of switching ethnic identity (per unit of time). Such an 
assimilation process results in asymptotic dynamics.

• The autocatalytic model assumes that assimilation occurs as a result of direct interpersonal attachments. The dynamics predicted by the autocatalytic 
model are the S-shaped logistic curve.

• The threshold model postulates an even more nonlinear mode of conversion: 
The rate of assimilation is positive if the proportion already assimilated is 
over a certain threshold. Otherwise, the assimilation rate is negative, leading 
to the inverse process in which core individuals assimilate to the peripheral 
identity. The dynamics of the threshold model are metastable.

• Next, I consider spatial extensions of all three models. The noninteractive 
model is not affected by adding space.

• The spatial autocatalytic model behaves globally in a logistic fashion if the 
social contact distribution is characterized by a thick tail. What this means in 
practice is that the assimilation process will not run out of potential subjects, 
if the already assimilated individuals manage to keep their social networks 
open, and thus continue reaching out and entering into new and distant social networks. If the contact distribution has a thin tail, then after an initial 
period of accelerated growth, expansion settles to a linear increase with time.

Finally, if there are segments of population poorly connected to the rest, they 
may remain as unassimilated islands in perpetuity.

• The spatial threshold model suggests that an assimilation process is difficult 
to get started. A critical mass of assimilated population has to be established 
ETHNOKINETICS 117 
in some locality, before the assimilation can start spreading. The spread, if 
successful, is linear. Gaps in social contacts can lead to a stable coexistence 
of two or more ethnic identities (this outcome is even easier to achieve than 
in the autocatalytic model).

• To determine which of the three simple alternative models describes the 
historical dynamics of identity switching, I investigated several data sets on 
religious conversion. I contrasted predictions only from nonspatial models, 
since I lack spatial data. The data concerned conversion to Islam in Iran and 
Spain, the rise of Christianity in the Roman Empire, and the growth of the 
Mormon church.

• In all case studies, by far the best model turned out to be the autocatalytic 
process. The initial acceleration period, predicted by the autocatalytic model, 
was obvious in all case studies. The autocatalytic model generated predictions of remarkable accuracy (greater than 99% of the variance explained in 
three out of four cases). The time scale of the conversion process was quite 
long: 2-3 centuries from the beginning to the midpoint (when half of the 
population is converted) in the Islam and Christianity cases (the Mormon 
church is currently quite far from the midpoint).

• More detailed analysis of the two Islamic cases revealed some systematic 
discrepancies between the predictions of the autocatalytic model and the 
data patterns. A modification of the autocatalytic model that allowed for 
immigration of the Muslim populations at a low rate matched this empirical 
pattern, suggesting this model as a viable contender in future empirical tests.

• An important general implication from this chapter is the demonstration 
that the formal approach advocated in the book (translating alternative hypotheses into mathematical models, and using data to distinguish between 
alternative models) can work in realistic historical applications. Furthermore, 
simple models can yield strikingly accurate results when applied to realistic 
historical data sets.

Chapter Seven 
The Demographic-Structural Theory 
7.1 POPULATION DYNAMICS AND STATE BREAKDOWN 
Unless prematurely extinguished by an overwhelming external force, empires 
typically progress through three stages: (1) polity formation and ethnogenesis of 
the core ethnie, accompanied by initial expansion within an ethnically similar 
substrate, (2) expansion to peak size, in the process acquiring a multiethnic character, and (3) stagnation, decline, and collapse (perhaps followed by a revival, 
and another imperial cycle). Mathematical models for the first two phases were 
advanced in Chapters 4 and 6. In this chapter I aim to investigate the causes of 
collapse.

A useful starting point is again provided by Ibn Khaldun, who postulated two 
major causes of state decline: (1) ideological (loss of asabiya) and (2) economic 
(including demographic and fiscal mechanisms) (Ibn Khaldun 1958:11:118-119).

We have already discussed the first mechanism in Chapter 4, so let us concentrate 
on the second one.

lbn Khaldun (1958:11:122-123, 135-137) notes that recently established states 
are moderate in their expenditures and just in their administration. As a result, 
taxation is light, and little coercion of subjects is needed. Such benevolent rule 
creates conditions under which people will flourish, and "procreation will be vigorous." General prosperity causes both rulers and people to become accustomed 
to increased spending ("luxury" in lbn Khaldun's words}. The army and the bureaucracy demand and receive higher pay. Although population numbers build up 
gradually, eventually (after several generations) the society reaches the limits of 
its growth. However, habits of luxury continue to increase, and must be paid for, 
so the state attempts to increase its revenues through heavy taxation, or outright 
seizure of its subjects' property. Such fiscal policy inevitably leads to the ruin of 
the economy, and then to famines, pestilence, political unrest, and rebellion.

Such is the argument of Ibn Khaldun in a nutshell. Ibn Khaldun discusses 
many specific sociological and ecological mechanisms underlying each of the 
postulated links in his argument (for example, he explicitly connects the spread 
of epidemics to population density, although the microbial origin of diseases was 
not known in his days). I refer the reader to Ibn Khaldun's book for further 
details (as well as innumerable historical accounts of various specific instances 
of civilization collapse that invoke some variant of this argument).

The hypothesis that excessive population growth has negative effects on social 
dynamics has been vigorously debated for the last two centuries, ever since the 
work of Malthus (1798). I cannot review this enormous literature here, but note 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 119 
that theories postulating population growth as a direct cause of societal collapse 
do not appear to be empirically supported. Of much more current interest is the 
idea that population growth causes social crisis indirectly, by affecting social 
institutions, which in turn affect social stability (Goldstone 199lb). Goldstone 
refers to his theory of state breakdown as demographic-structural: demographic 
because the underlying driving force is population growth; structural because it 
is not the demographic trend itself that directly causes the state crisis, but its 
impact on economic, political, and social institutions (Goldstone 199lb:xxvi). I 
briefly summarize Goldstone's theory below (Goldstone 1991b:24-25).

Population growth in excess of the productivity gains of the land has multifarious effects on social institutions 
• First, it leads to persistent price inflation which outstrips the ability of agrarian states to increase tax revenues. Furthermore, increased population leads 
to expansion of armies and rising real costs. Thus, states have no choice but 
to seek to expand taxation, despite resistance from the elites and the general populace. Yet attempts to increase revenues cannot offset the spiraling 
state expenses. Thus, even though the state is rapidly raising taxes, it is still 
headed for fiscal crisis.

• Second, rapid expansion of population results in an increased number of 
aspirants for elite positions, which put further fiscal strains on the state.

Moreover, increased intraelite competition leads to the formation of rival 
patronage networks vying for state rewards. As a result, elites become riven 
by increasing rivalry and factionalism.

• Third, population growth leads to rural misery, urban migration, falling real 
wages, and increased frequency of food riots and wage protests.

• Another consequence of rapid population growth is the expansion of youth 
cohorts. This segment of the population is particularly impacted by lack of 
employment opportunities. Additionally, the youthfulness of the population 
contributes to its mobilization potential.

• Finally, elite competition and popular discontent fuel ideological conflicts.

For example, in early modem Europe, dissident elites and dissatisfied artisans 
were widely recruited into heterodox religious movements.

As all these trends intensify, the end result is state bankruptcy and consequent 
loss of military control; elite movements of regional and national rebellion; and a 
combination of elite-mobilized and popular uprisings that manifest the breakdown 
of central authority (Goldstone 1991b:25) 
One of the strengths of Goldstone's (1991b) analysis is his employment of 
quantitative data and models in tracing out the mechanistic connections between 
various economic, social, and political institutions (this is discussed further in 
Section 7.3.1). However, Goldstone does not develop his theory to the point of an 
explicit dynamic model. In particular, he treats the underlying engine of change, 
population growth, as an exogenous variable. He suggests that a combination 
of favorable climate and receding disease may explain the observed doubling of 
population in most world regions between 1500 and the early 1600s (Goldstone 
1991b:25). This choice was, clearly, not made lightly. Goldstone's (1986, l99la) 
analysis of population dynamics, prices, and real wages in early modem England led him to conclude that existing endogenous theories are not supported by 
the data. For example, the Malthusian-Ricardian model assumes that population 
movements respond to changing prices. However, as Goldstone shows with data, 
long-term mortality patterns were seemingly independent of real wages.

Perhaps this is the correct approach, and we need to look for specific exogenous factors that explain population dynamics in different periods and regions.

However, I do not think that the complete spectrum of endogenous models has 
been contrasted yet with data. In particular, I would like to explore the possibility 
that there is a feedback effect of political instability on population dynamics.

How can political stability or instability affect population dynamics? Let us 
start by assuming a Malthusian-Ricardian model of the interaction between population dynamics and food production. I have in mind something like the logistic 
model, which has two parameters. The intrinsic rate of population growth is a 
balance of birth and death rates in the absence of density feedback (that is, for 
low population densities). The carrying capacity is set by the climate and soil 
conditions, as well as the current level of agricultural technology (this is made 
more specific in the next section). Political instability can affect both parameters.

Most obviously, when the state is weak or absent, the populace will suffer from 
elevated mortality due to increased crime, banditry, and internal and external warfare. Furthermore, the times of troubles cause increased migration rate: refugees 
from war-affected areas, or areas whose productive potential has been destroyed 
(see below on this). Migration has several effects. First, it can lead to emigration 
(and we can simply add that to mortality). Second, people on the move cannot 
afford to have children. Thus, birth rates decline. Third, increased migration leads 
to epidemics. Increased vagrancy spreads disease by connecting areas that would 
stay isolated during better times. Additionally, vagabonds and beggars aggregate 
in towns and cities, increasing their population size. This may tip the density 
over the epidemiological threshold (the critical density above which a disease 
spreads). Finally, political instability causes lower reproduction rates, because 
during uncertain times people choose to marry later and to have fewer children.

Incidentally, people's choices about their family sizes may be reflected not only 
in birth rates, but also in rates of infanticide. Thus, family limitation practices 
may be disguised as increased child mortality.

Political instability can also affect the carrying capacity. There are many mechanisms by which the state can increase carrying capacity, so I will mention just 
two of the most common ones. First, the state offers protection. In a stateless society people can live only in natural strongholds, or places that can be made defensible. Examples include hillfort chiefdoms in preconquest Peru (Earle 1997), and 
the movement of settlements to hilltops in Italy after the collapse of the Roman 
Empire (Wickham 1981 ). Fearful of attack, people can cultivate only the small 
proportion of the productive area that is near fortified settlements. The strong 
state protects the productive population from external and internal (banditry, civil 
war) threats, and thus allows the whole cultivable area to be put into production.

The second general mechanism is that states often invest in increasing agricultural productivity by constructing irrigation canals and roads, by implementing 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 121 
flood control measures, by clearing land from forests, etc. Again, the end result 
of these measures is an increase in the number of people that can be gainfully 
employed growing food, e.g., the carrying capacity.

In summary, political instability can negatively affect both demographic rates 
and the productive capacity of the society. I will explore both mechanisms in the 
models developed below. To reiterate, my goal is a theory in which population 
dynamics is an endogenous process: not only is there a link between population 
growth and state breakdown, but there may be a feedback connection between 
state breakdown and population growth.

7.2 MATHEMATICAL THEORY 
7.2.1 The Basic Demographic-Fiscal Model 
Model Development 
I begin with the simplest possible model of agrarian state collapse. My purpose 
is first to expose the most basic logical blocks of the argument, and only then 
to start adding real-life complexities to it. In this section I will ask the reader 
to work through the model derivation and analysis with me, because the math is 
very simple, but at the same time crucial for understanding the main result. In 
the following sections, math will be banished to the Appendix.

There are two variables in the model, one for the population and the other 
for the state. N ( t) is the population density of subjects at time t. I assume that 
the state area does not change, so the density is simply the population number 
divided by the area. Thus, the units of N could be individuals per km2 • S(t) is 
the current accumulated state resources, which I measure in kilograms (or tons) 
of grain. The choice of this particular variable is based on the economic nature 
of the agrarian state, in which food is the main commodity produced.

To start deriving the equations connecting the two structural variables (N 
and S), I first assume that the per capita rate of surplus production is a declining function of population numbers (this is David Ricardo's law of diminishing 
returns). There are several socioecological mechanisms that underly this relationship. First, as population grows, the stock of the most fertile land is exhausted, and 
increasingly more marginal plots are brought into cultivation. Second, increased 
population growth also means that land is subdivided into smaller parcels. Although each parcel receives more labor, its production rate (kg grain per ha per 
year) is also subject to the law of diminishing returns.

For the purpose of simplicity, I will approximate the relationship between per 
capita rate of surplus production, p, and population numbers, N, with a linear 
function 
p(N) = c1 (1- N /k) 
Here c1 is some proportionality constant, and k is the population size at which 
the surplus equals zero. Thus, for N > k, the surplus is negative (the population 
produces less food than is needed to sustain it).

Next I assume that population dynamics are Malthusian: 
N=rN 
and that the per capita rate of population increase is a linear function of the 
per capita rate of surplus production, r = c2p(N). Putting together these two 
assumptions, we arrive at a logistic model for population growth: 
N = r0N(l- N /k) (7.1) 
where r0 = c1 c2 is the intrinsic rate of population growth, obtained when N is 
near 0. The parameter k is now seen as the "carrying capacity," or equilibrial 
population size. When N < k, the society generates surplus, and the population 
grows. If N > k, then the society produces less food than is needed for households 
to sustain and replace themselves, resulting in population decline.

Turning now to the differential equation for state resources, S, we note that S 
changes as a result of two opposite processes: revenues and expenditures. I will 
assume that the state collects a fixed proportion of surplus production as taxes.

The total rate of surplus production is the product of per capita rate and population numbers. Thus, the taxation rate is c3p(N)N, where c3 is the proportion of 
surplus collected as taxes. State expenditures are assumed to be proportional to 
the population size. The reason for this assumption is that, as population grows, 
the state must spend more resources on the army to protect and police it, on 
bureaucracy to collect and administer taxes, and on various public works (public 
buildings, roads, irrigation canals, etc ). Putting together these processes we have 
the following equation forS: 
(7.2) 
where p0 = c1 c3 is the per capita taxation rate at low population density and p 
the per capita state expenditure rate.

We are not done yet. Although we have established the dynamic link from N 
to S, there is no feedback effect (from S to N) in the model. I assume that the 
strong state has a positive effect on population dynamics; specifically, it increases 
k, the sustainable population size given the ecological conditions and the current 
development of agricultural technology, as discussed in the previous section.

Thus, the carrying capacity k is a monotonically increasing function of S.

However, k cannot increase without bound. No matter how high S is, at some 
point all potential land is brought into cultivation, and all potential improvements 
have been put in place. Thus, there must be some maximum kmax, given the historically current level of agricultural technology. Another way of thinking about 
this mechanism is that the return on capital investment is also subject to a law of 
diminishing returns. I assume the following specific functional form for k(S): 
k(S) = k0 (t +c-S-) (7.3) s0+S 
:ne parameter k0 is the carrying capacity of the stateless society, c = kmax - k0 
1s the maximum possible gain in increasing k given unlimited funds, and s0 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 123 
indicates how improvement in k depends on S (when S = s0 , k(S) has been 
improved by cl2).

Putting together equations (7.1)-(7.3) we have the complete demographic-fiscal 
model (because it focuses on the fiscal health of the state as the main structural 
variable). The model has six parameters: p0, ~. r, k0 , c, and s0 , but we can 
reduce this set to four, by scaling N' = NI k0 and S' = SI p0• This procedure 
leaves us with the following parameters: ~' = ~lp , r, c, and s' = s0lp0 • The 
scaled equations are 
N=rN(l- k~)) 
S=N (1- _!!__) -~N k(S) 
s k(S)=l+c-- s0+S 
(7.4) 
(where I dropped the primes for better readability). I also impose the condition 
S ~ 0 (that ·is, the state is not allowed to go into debt).

Model Dynamics 
The typical dynamics of the demographic-fiscal model are shown in Figure 7.1a.

Starting with the initial value of S = 0 and population numbers N = k012, the 
model predicts that initially both N and S will grow. As S increases, so does the 
carrying capacity k(S}, which quickly approaches the upper limit kmax. For this 
reason, the growth of N does not stop at k0 , but continues beyond that critical 
value. However, at a certain population size Ncrit• well before N approaches kmax• 
the growth of state resources ceases, and S begins to collapse at an increasing rate, 
rapidly reaching 0. This means that k(S) also decreases to k0 , and the population 
size rapidly follows suit.

The mechanics underlying the collapse of S are illustrated in Figure 7.1 b. The 
rate of change of S is determined by the balance of two opposing forces: revenues 
and expenditures. When N is low, increasing it results in greater revenues (more 
workers means more taxes). The growth in state expenditures lags behind the revenues, and the state's surplus accumulates. As N increases, however, the growth 
in revenues ceases, and actually begins to decline. This is a result of diminishing 
returns on agricultural labor. However, the expenditures continue to mount. At 
population density N = Ncrit• the revenues and expenditures become (briefly) balanced. Unfortunately, population growth continues toward the carrying capacity, 
k, and the gap between the state's expenditures and revenues rapidly becomes 
catastrophic. As a result, the state quickly spends any resources that have been 
accumulated during better times. When S becomes zero, the state is unable to 
pay the army, the bureaucrats, and maintain infrastructure: the state collapses.

The equilibrium N = k0 and S = 0 is locally stable. This means that, once 
the state has collapsed, small perturbations in either population size or state resources do not lead away from this equilibrium. In order for another cycle of 
124 
(a) 
kmaxr-------------------, 
0 
s 
/ 
/ 
100 200 300 400 
Time 
/ 
/ 
(b) 
~/ / 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Ncrtt k 
500 
Figure 7.1 (a) Temporal dynamics of the demographic-fiscal model (7.4). (b) The change 
in state resources (S) as a balance of revenues versus expenditures. Model parameters: 
{3 = 0.25, r = 0.02, c = 3, and s0 = 10.

state building-collapse to get going, either N must be decreased below (1-{3), 
or S must be increased above s0/( c({J- 1 - 1) - 1 ]. Thus, in a deterministic world, 
once the state collapses, it cannot arise again. In a stochastic world, where a 
variety of exogenous factors affect both N and S, it is a matter of time before a 
strong enough perturbation will start the model trajectory going on another state 
building-collapse cycle. For example, I incorporated stochasticity in the model 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 125 
4,---------------------------------------------, 
en 3 
Q) 
::c 
m "i: 
~ Q) 2 
en 
c: 
0 
a.

en 
~ 1 
Time (yr) 
Figure 7.2 (a) Temporal dynamics of the stochastic version of the demographic-fiscal 
model. Parameters: f3 = 0.25, r = 0.02, c = 3, s0 = 10, and u = O.Is0 • 
by adding once a year to S a random Gaussian number with mean 0 and a 
small standard deviation u = 0.1s0 • The dynamics of the stochastic demographicfiscal model were characterized by recurrent cycles of state building and collapse 
(Figure 7 .2). Note that once the state cycle gets going, its duration is well determined by initial conditions. By contrast, the stateless periods between cyclesintercycles-are quite variable in length (because the system must wait until a 
strong enough perturbation comes about).

A numerical investigation of the influence of parameters on model dynamics 
indicated that the average length of a political cycle was mainly determined by the 
value of r, and to a lesser extent by {3. The parameter c affects the amplitude of 
oscillations, since it determines by how much kmax is greater than k0 • Parameter s0 
determines whether oscillations occur or not: if it is set too high, then k(S) never 
increases far enough to get the political cycle going. The parameter {3 sets the 
population size at which state revenues fall behind expenses, since Ncrit = I-{3.

Finally, the intrinsic per capita rate of population growth, r, affects the temporal 
extent of the oscillation, since the main determining factor is how long it takes 
for the population to grow to Ncrit· A reasonable estimate of r is 0.02 yr- 1 (or 
2% relative increase per year). Note that r is the intrinsic rate of growth that 
obtains when N is near 0. For more typical densities in the vicinity of N = k/2.

the model predicts per capita growth rates of about 1% per year, which is a 
typical observation for short-term growth periods in historical populations. For 
this estimate of r, the model predicts oscillations of 2-3 centuries in duration 
(Figure 7 .2). This is a quantitative prediction of the model that can be tested 
empirically.

Assessment 
Let us now discuss some of the simplifying assumptions about functional forms 
made during model development. Looking again at Figure 7.1 b, it is apparent 
that the basic argument is quite unaffected by the details of the functional forms 
governing the relationship between population size and per capita surplus production or per capita state expenditures. For example, if we substitute any nonlinear 
(but monotonic) function instead of the assumption of linear decline in per capita 
surplus with population size, then all we will accomplish will be to distort the 
parabola in some way. The basic shape-increase in the revenues followed by 
decrease-will be unaffected, because revenues must be 0 both at the end N = 0 
and the end N = k, and there must be a maximum in between. Similarly, the relationship between expenditures and population size can be nonlinear (in fact, it 
is likely that expenditures will be an accelerating function of N, simply because 
large populations require more bureaucratic layers to control and tax). Again, 
however, the expenditures must increase monotonically with N, and thus it is 
inevitable that at some population size, Ncrit• the revenue and expenditure curves 
will cross, with all the consequences for the state's fiscal well-being that were 
discussed above. The general conclusion seems inescapable: unless the population size can somehow be prevented from crossing the Ncn1 threshold, the state's 
expenses will inexorably grow beyond its means, and the state will inevitably 
become insolvent. Once this point is reached, increasing the tax rate or cutting 
expenses on nonessentials like court luxuries, can at most be a short-term solution. Allowing the state to borrow money (that is, allowing S to become negative 
until the debt hits some maximum value) similarly only postpones the inevitable.

I believe that this conclusion is of extremely high importance to the dynamics 
of agrarian polities. The argument based on the model, however, does not imply 
that all states everywhere inevitably collapse within two to three centuries. But 
having an explicit model allows us to consider how various features of reality 
that are left out from the model may affect its basic message.

First, I should stress that the model is applicable only to preindustrial societies.

It is conceivable that an industrial or even information-based economy may be 
able to expand its productive base by innovation and technology implementation, and thus keep ahead of population growth. However, this option is not open 
to agrarian societies. Traditional societies have a certain stock of technologies 
that they can utilize to intensify production under increasing population pressure 
(Boserup 1966, 1981 ). Eventually, though, the possibilities of further intensification are exhausted (Wood 1998). This is reflected in my assumption that the 
function k(S) must eventually saturate.

Second, the model ignores factors external to the population-state system. In 
particular, a population under severe military pressure from outside may be pre-
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 127 
vented from growing to the equilibrium determined by food production. For example, we can model this situation by adding a density-independent death term, 
-8N, to the logistic equation for N [equation (7.1)]. If 8 is large enough, then 
the population equilibrium will be shifted to the left beyond Ncrit• and the polity 
will remain indefinitely in the region where revenues exceed expenses. However, 
such a situation is likely to affect only smallish polities. In large territorial empires, only borderlands should be affected by external military pressure, while the 
population in the central regions should grow unchecked to the subsistence limits.

Conversely, a state may be successful in conquering adjacent areas. If the society 
pursues an active colonization policy, then population pressure within the empire 
will be relieved. This mechanism, however, should only postpone the inevitable, 
since no agrarian empire can expand its territory without limit.

Third, a society may choose to limit its population growth. Voluntary family 
limitation seems a priori unlikely, because the costs of fewer children are borne 
by individual families, while the problems associated with overpopulation are 
spread societywide. In other words, voluntary limit on reproduction has all the 
earmarks of a collective action problem. However, this may not be an insoluble problem. Furthermore, under certain conditions, family limitation may be a 
rational strategy for individuals to pursue. This is, therefore, an empirical question, to be determined for any particular society: do its members practice family 
limitation? Does family limitation result in a population equilibrium below Ncrit? 
Finally, the state may coercively limit population growth. This can be accomplished indirectly, simply by appropriating more than the surplus production. By 
leaving peasant households with fewer resources than they need to maintain and 
reproduce themselves, such severe taxation may cause a population decline and, 
paradoxically, increase the amount of surplus produced (observe how moving N 
to the left of Ncri1 in Figure 7.1 causes the fiscal surplus to increase). This possibility appears to be the most realistic for historical societies, especially because one 
does not need to assume that states consciously adopt the strategy of population 
reduction. All they need to do is to extort a larger proportion of total production 
from the population, which they have all the incentive to do, if they are anywhere 
near the Ncrit point. Furthermore, empirically most agrarian states at most times 
have been accused of oppressing their productive populations. Therefore, we need 
to explore this possibility further with a model that is more complex than the one 
developed here. The main question is what is the mechanism of state coercion? 
That is, who is doing the coercing in agrarian states? The general answer is the 
elites. They either directly collect taxes from peasants and then transmit them to 
the state, or provide the bureaucrats and military officers for the state apparatus 
that extracts the taxes. In either case, we need to add more structure to the basic 
model and explicitly consider the dynamics of the state, elites, and commoners.

7 .2.2 Adding Class Structure 
My next goal is to expand the theory advanced in the previous section by considering how adding class structure affects the theoretical predictions concerning 
state collapse. To do this, I divide the total population into two socio-economic 
strata: commoners and elites. The development of this theory relies very much 
on insights from Jack Goldstone's demographic-structural theory (199lb).

The basic structure of the model is as follows (see Appendix Section A.3 for the 
derivation and other mathematical details). There are three structural variables: 
population numbers of commoners (peasants, P), population numbers of elites 
(E), and the accumulated state resources (S). As in the basic demographic-fiscal 
model, growth of commoner population results in decreased per capita productivity. Specifically, I assume that production per peasant is a linearly decreasing 
function of peasant population size. To connect production to population dynamics, I assume that the per capita rate of the commoner population growth is a 
linear function of the resources available to each producer. If the resources per 
peasant capita are over a certain threshold, then the peasant population will increase. On the other hand, if too high a proportion is extracted, then the peasant 
population will decline. In the Appendix I show that if peasants dispose of all 
resources that they produce, then their population dynamics is described by the 
logistic equation.

Peasants, however, are not allowed to keep all the food they produce. In the 
Appendix I derive a model for resource extraction by the elites. The key element 
of the model is the amount of coercion that the elites are able to bring to bear 
on the peasants. At low elite numbers, E, the amount of coercion they will be 
able to generate (and, thus, the proportion of resources that they will be able to 
extract from the producers) is directly proportional to E. However, as E increases, 
the nobles cannot extract more resources than what are produced. Thus, although 
increased elite numbers allow a greater proportion of production to be extracted 
from the peasants, ability of the elite to extract resources suffers from diminishing 
returns, so that resources extracted per elite capita decline with increased elite 
numbers.

The population dynamics of elites is modeled in the same way as that of 
peasants. If resources per elite capita are high, the elite population grows by reproduction and recruitment from the general populace. If per capita resources are 
low, then elite population shrinks as a result of reduced reproduction, increased 
mortality, and downward mobility. It is clear, however, that the threshold amount 
of resources necessary for an elite household to sustain and reproduce itself is 
set at a much higher value than the equivalent parameter for commoners.

As in the basic model, the state resources change as a result of revenues and 
expenditures. On the revenue side, I assume that the extracted resources are divided between the elites (rents) and the state (taxes). However, the portion of 
the extracted resources that actually ends up in the state's coffers is a dynamic 
quantity. When the resources extracted from peasants are sufficient to maintain 
the consumption levels expected by the elites, they will pass along the taxes due 
to the state. However, as elite numbers increase, and each elite household obtains 
a diminishing amount of resources for maintenance and reproduction, the elites 
will divert an increasing proportion of taxes to their needs. Historically, nobles 
used a variety of practices to appropriate the state's revenues. They petitioned 
the authorities for tax forgiveness, pleading poverty. Second, they often simply 
failed to transmit taxes to the state, keeping them for themselves (this option is 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 129 
available when landowners collect taxes). Third, elite members serving as officials used a variety of corrupt practices to divert state-owed taxes into their own, 
and their clan's pockets. The end result in all cases was that, as elites became 
impoverished, the state received a decreasing fraction of the product extracted 
from the commoners. I model this dynamic by assuming that each elite household keeps the resources they need to maintain themselves and then transmits a 
fixed proportion of the surplus to the state.

Next, arguing by analogy with the derivation of the basic model, I assume 
that state expenditures grow linearly with elite numbers, because the state has to 
provide employment to them as officers, bureaucrats, and priests. This argument 
assumes that state expenses associated with increased commoner numbers are 
negligible compared to the demands made on the state by elites. (It is certainly 
possible to add commoner-related expenditures, but this complicates the model 
and does not change the main result.) 
Finally, we need to model the effect of S on the population dynamics of P 
and E. As discussed in Section 7.1, S can either affect the productive capacity 
of the society (as in the basic demographic-fiscal model) or act on demographic 
rates. In the Appendix I derive two versions of the model, one for each of these 
two cases. The first model is completely analogous to the basic demographicfiscal model: high S increases the carrying capacity of the peasant population. In 
the second model, I assume that the presence of a strong state imposes peace on 
the elites: intraelite competition does not take lethal forms, and elite extinction 
rate is low. When the state is absent or weak, however, intense intraelite conflict 
leads to increased elite extinction rate.

Both models generate basically the same kinds of dynamics, so I will focus 
on the second one, in which S affects elite demography. I will refer to it as the 
selfish elite model, because it assumes that elites oppress commoners without 
any regard for their well-being, and transmit taxes to the state only if they have 
satisfied their own basic requirements.

A numerical investigation of the selfish elite model indicates that it is capable of 
three kinds of dynamic behaviors. First, for certain parameters the elites cannot 
get themselves established and go extinct. Second, after an initial episode of 
state building and collapse, the elites and producers approach an equilibrium and 
remain there in perpetuity (Figure 7 .3a). (For some parameters, the state never 
gets going, and the stateless equilibrium is approached directly.) What happens is 
that the growth of the commoner population creates a large resource base, which 
allows the elites to rapidly expand their numbers. The state grows in parallel 
with this initial elite expansion. However, as elite numbers grow, an increasingly 
greater proportion of the extracted product goes just to maintain them at the 
minimum level, and the proportion going to the state begins to decrease. At 
the same time, the demands of the elites on the state increase, so at some point 
expenditures overwhelm revenues. Just as in the basic model, this eventually leads 
to state collapse. Meanwhile, the elite demand on peasant-produced resources 
becomes so intense that peasants are left with less food than they need to sustain 
themselves. As a result of this intense oppression, peasant numbers begin to 
decline. After the state collapses, the ensuing period of anarchy is characterized 
(a) 
p 
E 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 
(b) 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 
Time 
Figure 7.3 Dynamics of the selfish elite model. (a) A stable equilibrium in a stateless 
society. Parameters are 1 = 81 = 0.02, p0 = 2, 2 = 0.5, 82 = 0.025, ")' = 10, a= 0.2. (b) 
Stable limit cycles. Same parameters as in (a) except 82 =0.1.

by intense exploitation of peasants and highly lethal intraelite conflict. As a result, 
numbers of both commoners and nobility decline, and after some mild oscillations 
approach an equilibrium.

This kind of dynamics, predicted by the selfish elite model, is analogous to 
the typical dynamics exhibited by the basic model, except the role of N is now 
played by E. As in the basic model, although the equilibrium is locally stable, it 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 131 
can be perturbed to go for another state building/state collapse excursion (again, 
this is analogous to the dynamics of the basic model).

A single state building/collapse episode followed by a stateless equilibrium 
(in the absence of perturbations) is the dynamics typical for most parameter 
combinations of the selfish elite model. It is also the typical dynamics of the 
class-structured model with S affecting the productive capacity of the society.

For some parameter values, however, the selfish elite model exhibits a third kind 
of behavior, in which the system undergoes stable limit cycles of recurrent state 
building, collapse, a period of anarchy, and then another episode of state building 
(Figure 7 .3b ). One way to move the system from the stable stateless equilibrium 
to recurrent cycles is to increase the elite death rate in the absence of the state.

This modification allows elites to die off rapidly and to a low enough point, which 
creates the conditions for state resources to increase.

One behavior that the selfish elite model does not exhibit is a stable equilibrium 
between peasants and elites with the state present, S > 0. The reason is clear and 
completely analogous to the mechanism operating in the basic demographic-fiscal 
model. If E is at an equilibrium, then E is necessarily zero (the elites have no 
surplus to share with the state). Thus, the state gets no revenues, but still must 
spend on defense, administration, and so on.

One obvious modification of the model that leads to an equilibrium with the 
state present consists of allowing the state to collect a fixed proportion of the 
total product extracted from commoners by elites (rather than a fraction of the 
elite's surplus). With this modification, and for realistic parameter values, P and 
E approach equilibrium, while S stays positive (actually, S grows with time, but 
surely the state will find things to spend this surplus on).

This result, however, poses an interesting question. How realistic is it to assume that, during the periods when the elites experience a substantial degree of 
hardship, they will allow a large proportion of revenue to go to the state? Note 
that this model assumes that, even when the economic position of the elites is so 
desperate that their numbers are declining, they will still not attempt to dip into 
the flow of taxes from peasants to the state treasury. In most agrarian societies 
the elites were the ones who administered tax collection. It is likely that most 
elites will feel a greater degree of solidarity with their family and clan, rather 
than with the whole polity. Thus, I think that this kind of "selfless elite" model 
is not a particularly realistic description of most historical agrarian states.

7 .2.3 Models for Elite Cycles 
The models discussed in Section 7 .2.2 indicate that the predicted dynamics are 
primarily determined by the assumptions we make about the elites. This theoretical result supports the argument that the elites play the key role in state 
breakdown (Goldstone 199lb; see Section 7.1).

In this section I continue the investigation of how elite characteristics affect 
polity dynamics. I am interested, in particular, in how nomadic elites, or elites 
originating as nomads, interact with agrarian states. To simplify the matters, I 
initially assume that the population of commoners does not change with time.

However, after investigating the simple model, I check on how its predictions 
are affected by the simplifying assumptions (this is the general procedure that I 
follow in this book).

The lbn Khaldun Model 
The first model that I construct is tailored to the situation in the medieval 
Maghreb, as conceptualized by Ibn Khaldun (what follows is largely a verbal 
description of the model, while the equations are banished to the Appendix).

The dynamics of the Ibn Khaldunian "world-system" are determined by the 
interaction between the civilized society and the desert tribes (Section 3.2.1 ).

The civilized region is the site of recurrent state building/collapse episodes. It is 
inhabited by an indigenous commoner population, who provide the productive 
basis of the society. The desert is inhabited by stateless tribes, who periodically 
conquer the civilized region and establish a ruling dynasty there. Desert tribes, 
thus, supply the elites (nobility) for the civilized state.

In the model I assume that the dynamics of the commoner population are 
largely disconnected from the elite dynamics. Dynasties come and go, but peasants and merchants continue to grow food, trade, and pay taxes to whichever 
government is currently in power. Thus, the amount of resources extracted from 
commoners is a constant, R. During the early years of the dynasty, the extracted 
resources are divided in two parts: taxes to support the government, y R, and rents 
to support the elites, (1- y)R. The parameter y, the proportion of resources going to the state, is assumed to be a constant. The income per noble is therefore 
JL = (1- -y)R/E, where E is the current number of nobles.

I now introduce two other parameters. Let p.0 be the per capita income that is 
necessary to maintain and replace exactly one noble. In other words, when per 
capita income falls below p.0, the elite numbers will decline, while if p. > p.0 , 
then the elite numbers will increase. The second parameter is P.min• the per capita 
income that nobles consider to be the minimum that accords with their station.

This "minimal acceptable income" is determined socially and can vary between 
societies. In general, however, J.l.mjn 2: p.0 , since it is unlikely that nobles would 
consider acceptable an income on which they cannot afford to perpetuate their 
family line to the next generation. lbn Khaldun argued that with time former 
tribesmen forget the rude ways of the desert, and subsequent generations grow 
accustomed to ever-increasing luxury. Thus, P.min is a variable that starts at some 
low level (e.g., p.0) at the beginning of the dynasty and then increases at a certain 
rate (e.g., 8JL per year).

As I stated above, elite numbers increase when per capita income p. is greater 
than p.0• The rate of elite population growth is proportional to the difference 
p. - p.0 , subject to not exceeding the maximum rate of increase, r max. Because the 
model is tailored to a specific society, in which the elites practiced polygamy, I 
set rmax = 0.08 yr- 1 at four times the intrinsic rate of population increase typical 
for preindustrial populations. My justification for this assumption is that the legal 
maximum of wives that a Muslim man could have is four. Of course, in Islamic 
societies many high-rank individuals would have large numbers of concubines and 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 133 
would usually acknowledge their sons as legitimate heirs. This practice would 
lead to a much higher rate of population growth. On the other hand, poorer 
members of the elite might be unable to afford the full complement of legal 
wives. On balance, I believe that a multiplier of four is a reasonable one to 
choose as the reference value for Islamic societies (as is usual in theory building, 
we will need to determine how variation in this and other parameters affect the 
model predictions).

The next key assumption of the model is that as long as per capita income 
generated from rents exceeds the minimum acceptable income, (I - y)R/ E > 
/Lmin• the state and elites live in harmony. However, if elite numbers grow to 
the point where their per capita incomes fall below /Lmin• then nobles become 
dissatisfied, and will use a variety of usual techniques to divert some of the taxes 
into their pockets (as discussed in the previous section). The model makes the 
assumption that at this point /L = /Lmin• that is, the elites steal just enough from the 
state to be able to maintain what they perceive as the minimal standard of living 
appropriate to their station. If elite numbers grow to the point where R/ E < /Lmin• 
that is, there is not enough extracted resource to satisfy all the nobles, even if 
the state gets no taxes, then the model assumes that /L = R/E. In other words, 
at this point the nobles divide all extracted resource among themselves, and the 
state gets nothing.

The state fiscal dynamics are modeled as usual, with revenues as described 
above, and the expenditures proportional to the elite numbers. Thus, the dynamics of S, the accumulated state resources, follows the typical trajectory, in which 
S grows during the early period of the dynasty, because elite numbers are few and 
their appetites are modest. At some point, however, the revenues drop to the point 
where they cannot match expenditures, and S declines and eventually become 0.

At this point, the model assumes that the dynasty failed. The state becomes vulnerable to conquest, which (at least in the model) happens immediately, because 
the desert tribes provide a ready and spatially adjacent source of the next dynasty.

A typical trajectory predicted by the model is illustrated in Figure 7 .4a.

Note that I chose to frame this model in economic (or fiscal) terms. However, 
we can easily cast the model in terms of collective solidarity (asabiya). For example, we can reinterpret S as the asabiya of the elites supporting the current 
dynasty (the conquering tribesmen and their descendants). Then, at the beginning 
of the dynasty, asabiya is high, and it stays high until elite numbers reach the 
threshold where per capita income falls below the minimal acceptable level. At 
that point, intraelite competition intensifies, and the asabiya begins to decline.

When asabiya reaches a certain threshold, the dynasty (and the state) collapses, 
and is replaced by a new tribal group from the desert. The dynamics of such a 
model are essentially identical to those shown in Figure 7 .4a.

A numerical investigation of the effect of parameter values on the dynamics of 
the lbn Khaldun model indicates that the main parameters that affect the period 
of the cycle are the maximum rate of elite population increase (r max) and the rate 
at which the minimal acceptable income grows with time. Rather rapid cycles 
of about one century in period, shown in Figure 7 .4a, obtain for high values 
0 100 200 300 
(b) 
0 100 200 300 
Time 
Figure 7.4 (a) Dynamics of the lbn Khaldun model: elite numbers, E (solid line) and 
accumuljlted state surplus S (broken line). (b) Dynamics of the parasitic nomad model: 
elite numbers (solid line) and elite asabiya S (broken line).

of r max that should be typical for societies where elite polygamy is widespread.

By contrast, reducing rmax to 0.02 leads to longer cycles, of around 1.5 centuries.

Now that we have some understanding of the dynamics predicted by the lbn 
Khaldun model, it would be a good idea to investigate the effects of some of the 
simplifying assumptions we employed to derive the model. Probably the most 
drastic simplification was the assumption that we can neglect the commoner dynamics. To check on the validity of this approximation, I developed a more complex Ibn Khaldun model with class structure (see the Appendix for equations).

This model predicts essentially the same dynamics for E and S as the simple lbn 
Khaldun model (Figure 7 .Sa). Additionally, it reveals the commoner dynamics 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 
1/) 
(I) 
:0 
ea 
·;:: 
ea 
> 
0 
0 
100 
100 
200 
200 
135 
(a) 
300 400 500 
(b) 
300 400 500 
Time 
Figure 7.5 Dynamics of the lbn Khaldun model with class structure. E: elite numbers, 
S: accumulated state surplus, and P: commoner numbers. (a) Dynamics with high elite 
reproduction rate and limited extraction ability. (b) Dynamics with low elite reproduction 
rate and high extraction ability.

during the elite cycle. We see that the growth of the commoner population is 
slowed by periodic state breakdown, but this effect is slight. Numerical investigation of the model parameters indicates that commoner population declines are 
more pronounced when we increase the elite extraction ability (by increasing the 
parameter E, the maximum proportion of commoner production that can be extracted by elites). Additionally, the cycle period is lengthened and the amplitude 
of commoner oscillation is increased when we decrease the per capita rate of 
elite reproduction. This happens because longer cycles mean longer periods of 
very intense exploitation of commoners by elites, resulting in a greater decline 
of commoner populations by the end of the cycle. A sample trajectory for E = 1 
and r max = 0.02 is shown in Figure 7 .Sb.

The Parasitic Nomad Model 
The last model that I develop in this section is tailored to the situation on the 
Inner Asian frontier of China, as conceptualized by Barfield (1989) and further 
developed by Kradin (2000, 2002). This model is in many ways similar to the 
lbn Khaldun model. Again, I focus on the dynamics of nomadic elites (chiefs of 
various ranks and their kin). Contrary to the Maghrebin situation, however, the 
nomads of the Inner Asian frontier preferred not to conquer the civilized state, 
the Chinese Empire, but to extort tribute from it.

Here is the verbal description of the model (the equations are in the Appendix).

Let R be the amount of tribute extracted from the Chinese in a particular year (R 
is a variable whose dependence on other variables in the model will be explained 
below). Let E be the elite numbers. Thus, the elite per capita income is JL = R/E.

The elite population dynamics are modeled exactly as in the lbn Khaldun model 
(that is, the elite per capita rate of population change is proportional to JL- JLo, 
where JLo is the income level necessary to maintain and replace a member of the 
elite).

The second structural variable of the model, in addition to E, is S, the asabiya 
of nomadic elites at the highest organizational level, that of the "imperial confederation." I assume that the asabiya of lower-scale groups is fixed at a high level, 
typical of nomadic life, so that we do not have to model it explicitly. The process 
leading to the rise of imperial confederation is conceptualized as follows. Initially, the steppe is divided among numerous "tribes" (nomadic chiefdoms). One 
particular tribe, through advantageous location, a rise of a charismatic leader, or 
simply luck, acquires an enhanced ability to extract booty or tribute from the 
agrarian polity on the other side of the steppe frontier. Using the goods extracted 
from settled agriculturalists, the tribal chief increases his warrior retinue. This 
sets in motion a positive feedback dynamic: greater retinue allows the chief to 
conquer nearby nomadic tribes, incorporate them into the growing steppe army, 
extract a greater booty/tribute from the agrarian state, attract more warriors, and 
so on. An imperial steppe confederation is the result. This autocatalytic process 
runs on until it hits the upper limit of what can be extracted from the agrarian 
state (remember that the canny nomads do not wish to conquer the agrarian state 
but just milk it for what the traffic can bear).

Specifically, I assume that the amount of tribute, R, is a nonlinear function 
of E: first, it rises with E in an accelerating manner, but then approaches an 
upper asymptote. R is also proportional to the confederation-level asabiya, S. S 
initially starts at a high level, and as long as the amount of tribute per elite head 
is abundant, it stays constant (S = 0). However, if the per capita income, ,.,, falls 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUGURAL THEORY 137 
below some minimum level deemed appropriate, J.Lmin• intraelite competition is 
intensified. This has a corrosive effect on the asabiya, and S declines.

Typical dynamics of the parasitic nomad model are shown in Figure 7 .4b. The 
causes underlying the rise of imperial confederations have been explained above.

The reason that confederations fail is, in a way, the same dynamic, but running 
in reverse. When the imperial confederation achieves the maximum extraction 
rate, its territorial growth stops, but elite numbers continue to grow as a result 
of the natural population increase of elites. When elite numbers reach the point 
where JL > J.Lmin• S begins to decline (Figure 7.4b). Declining S lowers the ability to extract tribute from the agrarian state, which further exacerbates intraelite 
competition. Eventually, S hits some lower threshold, below which the imperial 
confederation cannot be held together. The confederation dissolves into a number 
of warring tribes, and the cycle can begin again. Because the tribe-level asabiya 
remains high, the preconditions for the rise of another confederation are created 
immediately upon the collapse of the previous one (thus, the model assumes that 
the next cycle begins right away).

7 .2.4 Models for the Chinese Dynastic Cycle 
Historians have long noticed the importance of the dynastic cycle in Chinese 
history (Meskill 1965). During the early phase of the dynastic cycle, peace and 
prosperity reign, and population tends to increase. Eventually, however, the dynasty becomes "old and feeble," corruption and public disorder increase, and the 
dynasty falls. During the ensuing period of anarchy, the population usually declines. Two similar models of the dynastic cycle have been proposed, one by the 
economist Dan Usher (1989), and the other by the economist Cyrus Chu and the 
demographer Ronald Lee (Chu and Lee 1994). Because Usher's model is rather 
complex (having twenty equations), I do not discuss it here, but turn instead to 
the simpler model of Chu and Lee.

There are three classes in the Chu and Lee model: peasants grow food and pay 
taxes, bandits steal food and fight peasants and rulers, and self-interested rulers 
tax farmers and hunt bandits. Food production is increased by extra labor inputs, 
but this increase is subject to diminishing returns. Peasants have a choice: they can 
stay peasants and farm, or they can turn into bandits and steal. This occupational 
decision is based on comparison of the expected utility of bandits and peasants.

The utility function is the product of food received and probability of survival.

Chu and Lee show that one effect of a larger population is to increase the rate 
with which peasants turn into bandits. When the number of bandits increases, it 
has two consequences. First, there are fewer peasants, and thus food production 
is decreased. This leads to population decrease due to higher child mortality.

Additionally, a greater number of bandits means increased risk of death to adults.

Second, the growing ranks of bandits improve their survival probability, which 
causes their population to increase. At some point, the bandit power overwhelms 
that of the government, and the dynasty collapses.

Assessment 
Usher's and Chu and Lee's models are based on a rational choice argument: peasants weigh the utilities of staying peasant or turning into a bandit and then make 
the appropriate occupational decision. In principle, this is an interesting and potentially powerful approach for building theory and making empirical predictions.

Yet, I am troubled by the nature of the utility function that these authors chose: 
commoner utility is essentially the expected income (in food units) multiplied 
by their survival probability. My feeling is that this is too much the economist's 
approach, and that a more sociologically sophisticated approach is needed that 
would build upon collectively held norms and collectively made decisions.

An even more serious criticism of these two models is that they focus on 
the popular rebellion as the main mechanism causing the state collapse. Yet, 
Goldstone ( 1991 b) presents a very convincing argument, buttressed by numerous 
empirical cases of early modem state breakdown, that popular uprising by itself 
usually could not bring down the state. Peasants are poorly armed, trained, and 
organized, and stand almost no chance against the coercive apparatus of the state 
when backed up by cohesive elites. Goldstone argues that the state collapse is 
brought about by factional fighting among the elites, which then opens the way for 
popular rebellion (furthermore, even peasant uprisings are often led by members 
of the elite). Thus, current theory states that popular discontent is, in a sense, a 
secondary factor. We should look to elite dynamics for the main mechanism of 
state breakdown.

Despite the above criticisms, I believe that the models by Usher and by Chu 
and Lee make an important contribution to building the theory of state breakdown.

Note that the underlying force for state breakdown in both models is population 
growth, which leads to a gradual fall in income per head, until eventually the 
surplus over bare subsistence is insufficient to provide for the ruling class (Usher 
1989). Usher and Chu and Lee did not specify their models to the point where 
we could determine what type of long-term dynamics they predict. But the basic 
model that I proposed in Section 7 .2.1 does that, and suggests that the dynamics 
should be characterized by recurrent (if somewhat irregular) state building-state 
collapse cycles of around 2-3 centuries in length for the likely parameter values.

Furthermore, it would be interesting to see if the rational choice perspective 
could provide insights about elite dynamics. Thus, it would be instructive to apply 
the "occupation choice" module not to peasants, but to elites during the period 
of worsening economical conjuncture, (that is, striving for an official position or 
turning rebel). This approach, however, would get us well beyond the current 
goals of the book, so I leave it to future investigations.

7.2.5 Summing up Theoretical Insights 
Demographic-structural models discussed in this section suggest two general insights. First, as a result of diminishing returns on labor, population growth in 
agrarian societies inevitably leads to a gradual fall of per capita income. Eventually, the surplus produced by peasants becomes insufficient for the maintenance 
of the state. State bankruptcy and collapse can be prevented only if population 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 139 
numbers are kept below the critical threshold at which state expenditures match 
state revenues.

The second insight is the key role of elites in state dynamics. Elites can limit 
commoner population growth by leaving commoners with less income than is 
necessary for bare subsistence. However, there does not seem to be a general 
mechanism for limiting elite population growth. In some exceptional cases, the 
state apparatus may be able to function independently of elites, and provide the 
necessary coercive force to limit elite numbers. In other cases, elites themselves 
may choose to limit their population growth. In most agrarian societies, however, 
I expect that elite numbers will increase beyond the sustainable level, leading to 
state breakdown.

The elite attributes have a strong influence on the period and amplitude of state 
buildup/breakdown cycles. Two parameters appear to be of main importance: elite 
reproduction rate and extraction ability. High reproduction rate and low extraction ability lead to fast cycles of the lbn Khaldun type, with a period of around a 
century, and mild amplitude of oscillations in commoner numbers. A low reproduction rate, approaching that of commoners, increases the period of the cycles.

A higher extraction ability leads to more drastic falloffs of commoner population. Longer cycles also lead to a greater amplitude of commoner population 
oscillations, because a longer decentralization phase causes commoner numbers 
to decrease to a lower level. As a result, the dynamics of commoner population 
in the selfish elite model with low elite reproduction and high extractive ability 
are similar in their period and amplitude to the population dynamics in the basic 
demographic-fiscal model.

Note that in all models I assumed that elite recruitment is a result of reproduction. In real societies, of course, elite numbers grow both by reproduction of 
existing elite families and by upward social mobility from the commoner strata.

I investigated the effect of adding this mechanism for elite recruitment to models, and found that it does not affect the qualitative insights from the theory.

Essentially, the dynamics depend on how fast elite numbers grow, and it does not 
matter by what mechanism this growth occurs.

There is a number of ways in which the simple models discussed here can be 
extended. For example, it would be very interesting to redefine the variables in 
the Chu and Lee model in terms of the Jack Goldstone theory, with the three 
structural variables being the numbers of commoners, elites, and dissident elites 
(or "antielites"). Another interesting direction is to expand the list of variables 
not only to include the numbers of individuals in any particular stratum, but also 
to keep track of the average accumulated resources per individual in the stratum. Such a variable would be analogous to the accumulated state resources that 
enters as an explicit variable in most demographic-structural models. Recently, 
Malkov and co-authors developed models addressing this issue (Malkov et al.

2000; Malkov and Sergeev 2002).

The final issue that I need to address here is the terminological one. What 
should we call the dynamics predicted by the suite of demographic-structural 
models developed here? Models predict very long-term oscillations with periods 
ranging from one to three centuries, depending on the model structure and parameter values. The dynamics are characterized by two phases: centralization, when 
political stability is high, and decentralization, when political instability is high.

The decentralization phase, when the state is weak or absent, can extend for various periods of time and does not necessarily lead to a centralization phase. Thus 
the oscillations predicted by the models are not necessarily strongly periodic.

Long-term swings or waves on the scale of centuries have been commented 
on by a number of authors. Cameron (1989) referred to them as the "logistics," 
Braudel (1988) as the "secular trends," and Fischer (1996) as the "great wave," 
to give just a few examples. The logistic is a term that I prefer to reserve for 
the logistic equation, an essential building block of many models considered in 
this book. The logistic is a first-order model and is not capable of second-order 
oscillations such as those predicted by demographic-structural models. Thus, calling these cycles "logistics" would cause no end of confusion. "Secular trends" 
is a much better term, because one meaning of "secular" refers to very long 
changes occurring on the scale of centuries. However, a "trend" usually refers to 
a monotonic increase or decrease, while the dynamics predicted by demographicstructural models predict up-and-down swings. For this reason, I propose that we 
call these dynamics secular cycles or secular waves. The first term may be used 
if we want to emphasize the quasiperiodic nature of dynamics, the second if we 
want to emphasize the irregular up and down pattern (both dynamics are predicted by the models, depending on the structural assumptions). I would further 
distinguish another category: "elite cycles," in which the general population does 
not change very much, but most of the action is due to elite interactions.

7.3 EMPIRICAL APPLICATIONS 
7 .3.1 Periodic Breakdowns of Early Modem States 
The demographic-structural theory of Jack Goldstone (199lb) makes detailed and 
quantitative predictions about interrelations between such variables as population 
growth, inflation rate, state fiscal distress, intraelite competition, and popular discontent. The theory, thus, can be empirically tested by examining the historical 
record and determining whether the hypothesized relationships held in different 
instances of state breakdown. This was the approach followed by Goldstone, 
who chose four cases studies for a detailed examination: the English and French 
Revolutions, the Ottoman crisis of the seventeenth century, and the Ming-Qing 
transition in China (as well as less detailed comparisons to a few other early 
modem polities). I will focus on the English Revolution of the seventeenth century, because the data base documenting various dynamic variables is the most 
complete in this case.

The population history of England is known better than for any other region in the world (see Chapter 8). After the fourteenth-century decline and 
fifteenth-century stability, the population began to grow rapidly. Between 1500 
and 1640 c.E. the population more than doubled. The first consequence of this 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 141 
growth was a drastic decline in the land/peasant ratio. For example, whereas prior 
to 1560, 57% of landholdings were 1 acre or greater in size, after 1620 only 36% 
were in that category. What was worse, there was a drastic increase of landless 
peasants (those that had only a cottage with garden): their proportion increased 
from 11% before 1560 to 40% after 1620 (data from Everitt 1967; Goldstone 
1991b: Table 1). These data indicate that by 1650 land was in short supply. Even 
though land must have been more intensively cultivated (because the labor supply grew), the food production per capita should have declined between 1500 
and 1640 due to the law of diminishing returns. A clear indication that this happened was a drastic increase in the price of grain: a rise of 600% from 1500 to 
1640. According to Goldstone's (1991b: Table 3) analysis, a simple regression 
model with a log-transformed population, an index of harvest quality, and time 
(the dummy variable for technical change) as independent variables explains 99% 
of the variance in the log-transformed prices.

The second major consequence of population growth was the increasing fiscal 
strain on the English state. The state finances, strong under Henry VII, deteriorated by the mid-sixteenth century, when ordinary revenues started to lag behind 
expenses, and finally collapsed in the early seventeenth century (Figure 7.6a).

The basic problem was that, while the Crown income kept pace with inflation, 
the real expenses increased with population. First, increased population meant 
larger armies and fleets. Second, the expanded elite numbers imposed greater patronage costs on the state. Increasingly, from the mid-sixteenth century on, the 
Crown was forced to sell assets, levy forced loans, and seek parliamentary grants 
even in peacetime (Goldstone 1991b:93). By the 1630s, Crown lands were largely 
gone, and the unpaid Crown debt reached the point where the interest on it was 
greater than the ordinary revenues. Furthermore, prior efforts to secure extraordinary revenues had alienated the elites to the point where they were unlikely to 
acquiesce to further fiscal demands or entreaties by the Crown.

While the general population doubled between 1500 and 1640, the numbers 
of the elite expanded even faster. Whereas in 1540 there were 6300 gentry families, in 1600 (only 60 years later) there were 16,500. This number further increased to 18,500 in 1640, then declined to 16,400 in 1688, after the Civil War.

In 1760 there were still only 18,000 gentry families-less than at the 1640 peak 
(Goldstone 199lb:l13). The drastic increase of elite numbers affected all strata: 
between 1540 and 1640 the number of peers increased from 60 to 160, baronets 
and knights from 500 to 1400, esquires from 800 to 3000, and armigerous gentry 
from 5000 to 15,000 (Stone 1972:72). The consequence of this rapid expansion 
(especially during the second half of the sixteenth century) was increased competition for jobs and patronage. Goldstone argues that one way of measuring 
.this competition is by examining the data on university enrollments. University 
enrollments increased drastically during the second half of the sixteenth century 
and reached a peak in 1640. By the 1750s, when intraelite competition greatly 
subsided, the enrollments declined to pre-1600 levels (Figure 7.6b). Another indicator of intraelite competition is the amount of litigation among gentry. Between 
1640 and 1750, the number of gentry who appeared in the Courts of Common 
142 
c 
0 
4 
~ 3 
~ i5 2 
"B (/J 
u:: 1 
500 
:;:::; 400 ~ c.

E 
0 300 u 
~ 
jjj 200 
(ij 4 
~ 
a. ~ 3 
c 
0 
~ 2 
:0 
0 
~ 1 (/J 
(/J 
ro 
::!: 
1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 
(b) 
1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 
(c) 
1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 
Year 
Figure 7.6 (a) State fiscal distress, measured on a scale from 0 (adequate income and 
credit) to 4 (total bankruptcy) (from Goldstone l99lb: Figure 4). (b) Elite competition 
measured by enrollments at Oxford University (Stone 1974: Table lA). (c) Mass mobilization potential (arbitrary scale) (from Goldstone 199lb: Figure 4).

THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 143 
Pleas as plaintiffs or defendants dropped by over 65% (Goldstone 199lb:l21; 
data from Brooks 1989, cited in Goldstone).

The final ingredient in Goldstone's theory of state breakdown is the mass mobilization potential (MMP) of the general populace. Of particular relevance are the 
urbanized workers and artisans, especially in the capital, because they are located 
near the centers of power. Goldstone proposed that there are three measurable 
components in the MMP. First, we can measure the degree of misery affecting 
the urban masses by the dynamics of real wages (for example, the average laborer 
wages expressed in the amount of food they can buy). Second, a youthful age 
structure increases the mobilization potential of the crowd. Third, urban growth 
concentrates the poor young sons, and thus could play an important multiplier 
role in further amplifying the popular discontent brought about by increasing 
poverty. Goldstone proposed the following formula for combining the effects of 
these three mechanisms in one measure of mass mobilization potential: 
MMP = W +(W -1) UA I w, w, I I 
where W, is the real wage in decade t and W is the average real wage for the 
period 1500-1750. The lower the current real wage in relation to the long-term 
average, the greater is the ratio W jW,. The second term reflects the interactive 
effects of urbanization and age structure. U, was defined by Goldstone as the 
weighted average of London's growth over the decade and the preceding two 
decades, and A, is the proportion of the population 10-29 years old to the population aged over 30 years. Thus, the second term says that U, and A, will amplify 
the effects of W, if W, < W, and otherwise will not have much of an effect 
on the MMP. The estimated MMP for England during 1530-1750 is plotted in 
Figure 7.6c.

To summarize, the case of the English Revolution provides a great degree of 
empirical support for the demographic-structural theory of Goldstone. The three 
ingredients of the revolution were the state's financial crisis, acute competition 
and factionalism among the elites, and the existence of a large body of disaffected 
commoners who could be mobilized by parliamentary leaders against the royalists 
in London. Measures of all these processes increased during the second half 
of the sixteenth and the early seventeenth centuries, and peaked around 1640 
(Figure 7 .6).

7 .3.2 The Great Wave 
As I noted above, the value of the demographic-structural theory (Goldstone 
1991b) lies in its detailed analysis of the interrelations between important social 
variables mediating the effect of population growth on state stability (or, rather, 
instability). The enormous amount of quantitative material collected by Goldstone 
on state breakdown in early modem Europe and Asia provides a solid empirical foundation for his theory. Yet the theory is incomplete: while the effect of 
population dynamics on state stability is extremely well documented, the feed-
back effect on population is not. In Goldstone's theory population dynamics is 
an exogenous variable.

A more complete description of the interactions between population numbers 
and sociopolitical stability was given in the (verbal) model advanced by the historian David Hackett Fischer (1996). Fischer proposed that during the period 
of 1200-2000 c.E., western Europe went through four "great waves" of socioeconomic change (Fisher was not the first to notice these waves; I return to 
this issue in the beginning of Chapter 8). These long-term dynamics were reflected in the history of prices (Figure 7 .7), in which periods of price equilibrium 
(roughly, the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, and the Victorian Era) were interspersed with periods of rapid inflation (the "price revolutions" of the thirteenth, 
sixteenth, eighteenth, and twentieth centuries). Fischer argues that price movements are correlated with a comprehensive set of societal variables. Periods of 
price equilibrium were characterized by prolonged prosperity, flowering of the 
arts, and the spread of optimistic ideologies. Periods following price revolutions 
were characterized by widespread misery, political disorder, social disruption, and 
a growing mood of cultural anxiety (Fischer 1996:237).

Fischer's explanation of this wavelike pattern can be summarized as follows 
( 1996:246-251 ). During the late stage of a price equilibrium, material conditions 
are improving, social stability is increasing, and cultural expectations are growing 
brighter. People respond by marrying earlier and having more children; population begins to grow. The aggregate demand grows faster than supply, and prices, 
especially of food and fuel, begin to rise. Eventually, these developments create 
conditions for increased poverty; they put a strain on social relationships and 
intensify class conflicts. Public revenues fall behind expenditures, and the states 
are reduced to near insolvency. The cultural mood changes; there is a sense of 
-G> 
5 
1/) 
g 
)( 
G> 
"0 
.5 
G> 
(J 
·;:: 
a..

3000 
1000 
300 
100 
1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 
Year 
Figure 7.7 Price index of wnsumables (food, drink, fuel, and clothing) (Phelps-Brown 
and Hopkins 1956:Appendix B). A decadal average is plotted here.

THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 145 
social pessimism. The changed social environment impacts particularly hard on 
young people, who find it difficult to get good jobs or start a family. Finally, a 
triggering event (or, usually, a combination of events) precipitates a major crisis, leading to a protracted period of political disorder, social conflict, economic 
disruption, demographic contraction, and cultural despair. This general crisis relieves the pressures, so the economic trends run in reverse. Demand falls, prices 
deflate, and real wages begin to rise (because labor has become scarce). After 
some lag time, a period of new equilibrium develops, and the cultural mood 
becomes positive. Population starts to increase, and the cycle begins again.

Fischer collected together an enormous amount of cliometric material: changes 
in population; prices of food, oxen, and manufactures; import rates of precious 
metals; real wages, rents, and interest rates; and even crime, bastardy, and alcohol 
consumption rates. Using this array of quantitative data he then traced out the 
main stages (price revolution, crisis, and equilibrium) of each of the four great 
waves that, according to his analysis, occurred in western Europe during the last 
millennium.

The responses to Fischer's book were largely negative (e.g., Krugman 1997; 
de Vries 1998; Morgan 1999; Munro 1999). Reviewers criticized Fischer's caricaturization of the conventional theories of inflation, a lack of mathematically 
convincing models, and his failure to make a distinction between pre- and postindustrial revolution societies. These criticisms are fair. Yet, I think the majority of 
reviewers would also agree that Fischer managed to identify a very important and 
broad pattern of European history during the last millennium. (In the Appendix, 
Fischer briefly points out some similar-looking patterns in the ancient world and 
East Asia.) 
Furthermore, Fischer's account and explanatory model are broadly consistent 
with the demographic-structural theory. Thus, the Goldstonian waves of early 
modern state breakdowns (during the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries) correspond to the crisis periods of the Fischerian second and third waves. Also, 
note that the duration of the three complete waves (3, 3, and 2 centuries, respectively) matches the theoretical predictions of the demographic-fiscal model 
of Section 7 .2.1. Thus, I would argue that the models developed in this chapter may address at least one shortcoming of Fischer's book, its lack of explicit 
mathematical theory.

7 .3.3 After the Black Death 
The sudden arrival of the plague pandemic (the Black Death) in the midfourteenth century resulted in a massive perturbation of social, economic, and 
political structures of western Afroeurasian societies. The primary impact of 
the plague was the removal of one-third to one-half of the population in many 
communities. Therefore, we can view this perturbation as a "natural experiment" 
with which to test various theories using population numbers as an important 
explanatory variable. What is interesting is that different societies followed 
divergent social trajectories after the impact of the Black Death. The explanation 
of how the subsequent trajectory depended on the structural characteristics of 
the society becomes an important goal for comparative historical research. Many 
of the issues discussed during the Brenner debate {Aston and Philpin 1985) were 
closely related to this question.

A recent Ph.D. thesis by Stuart Borsch (2001) develops a particularly 
interesting comparison between post-plague Egypt and England. Both regions 
lost roughly half of their population, with the initial Black Death and subsequent 
plague outbreaks combined. In England wages rose, rents and grain prices 
dropped, unemployment decreased, per capita incomes rose, and the economy 
fully revived by the year 1500. In contrast, the consequences of depopulation 
in Egypt were profoundly different. Wages dropped, land rents and grain prices 
rose, aitd unemployment levels increased. No economic recovery was anywhere 
in sight by 1500: agricultural output had declined between 1350 and 1500 
by 68%. Thus, one society, England, responded to depopulation in a typical 
Malthusian-Ricardian manner {however, this response still took more than a 
century; more on this below), while the other, Egypt, responded in a completely 
opposite way.

Borsch considers several alternative explanations of these divergent outcomes 
and focuses on the differences in the landholding systems as the main explanatory 
factor. From 1250 to 1517 Egypt was ruled by a group of specialized warriors 
known as Mamluks. Mamluks were "slave-soldiers," Christian or pagan children 
purchased via Italian intermediaries from the Caucasus. The Mamluk landholding 
system was very different from the forms it took in western Europe. Rather 
than forming a loose group of individual landholders closely associated with 
their estates and the local village communities, Mamluk landholders formed a 
unified body that would often act together to support their interests in the rural 
scene. In the postplague period Mamluks used their tremendous collective power 
in an attempt to maintain the same level of resource extraction from a greatly 
diminished rural population, resulting in a much higher level of exploitation of 
individual peasants (this is very similar to the dynamics predicted by the selfish 
elite model).

In England the elites also attempted to follow this route. The intense exploitation of peasants was one of the main reasons for the repeated peasant uprisings of 
the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. Yet, as Borsch argues, the struggle between lord and peasant was won not on the battlefield (peasant mobs never 
had a chance against the heavily armed knights as long as the latter were acting 
in a cohesive manner), but by peasants voting en masse with their feet. Peasants 
were willing to abandon the estates if rent or wage conditions were not to their 
advantage. Eventually, the landlord attempt at collective action broke down and 
the peasants' demands were slowly but surely met. As rents dropped, rural wages 
rose, and customary fees and fines were abolished, peasant incomes rose, and the 
conditions were set for another period of sustained economic and demographic 
growth.

Potential critics of the Borsch argument may object by pointing to many other 
divergent aspects of the Egyptian and English societies. To this criticism, Borsch 
has an excellent response: another comparison, but this time to the situation in 
Egypt after the Antonine plagues of the late second century. Depopulation was 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 147 
severe, eliminating one-third of the tax-paying population. However, the landholding system of Roman Egypt was more similar to that of medieval England than 
to that of Mamluk Egypt. As a result Roman Egypt recovered relatively quickly 
from the devastation caused by the plagues, and in general its social trajectory 
was similar to that of post-Black Death England.

Assessment 
I think that the argument constructed and defended by Borsch is very persuasive.

This research is also an excellent example of the strength of the comparative 
approach in historical sociology. To the case studies of the divergent post-Black 
Death trajectories in western Europe (England and France) versus central Europe 
(Prussia, Poland, and Bohemia), discussed during the Brenner debate, Borsch 
adds two more "data points": Egypt after the Black Death and after the Antonine 
plagues. It is to be hoped that eventually we will have dozens of such data points 
with which to do statistics. A formal statistical meta-analysis will go a long way 
in laying the objections of critics to rest.

However, I would like to add one more element to the Borsch argument, suggested by the demographic-structural models. In particular, recollect that the selfish elite model predicts that the period of population decline is characterized by 
high elite/peasant ratios and correspondingly high exploitation rates. Eventually, 
however, the elite numbers decline, as a result of a combination of processes (sliding into the peasant class because of economic difficulties, lower reproduction, 
and high mortality resulting from civil wars). This is what happened in England 
by the end of the Wars of the Roses. As elite numbers decline to a low enough 
level, exploitation of peasants eases off, their per capita consumption rates rise, 
and the conditions are set for the next secular cycle to begin.

In Egypt, however, Mamluks continued to be recruited from exogenous sources 
(note that children of Mamluks could not themselves become Mamluks). Thus, 
while the rural population declined, Mamluk numbers did not, leading to a high 
elite/peasant ratio that did not decline with time. As a result, the Egypt of Mamluks was caught at the equilibrium of low population numbers, high elite/peasant 
ratio, and intense exploitation of peasants. This vicious equilibrium was apparently stable to internal perturbations and could only be broken by an outside 
force, in this case, the Ottoman conquest of 1517.

It is interesting that the comparison between the English and French postplague trajectories provides further evidence for this scenario. Note that economic 
and demographic growth in England was delayed, perhaps by half a century, in 
comparison to France (this is discussed later in Section 9.1.2). The recovery of 
England was probably delayed because "the English nobility was (at least temporarily) able to resolve some of its difficulties at the expense of the French 
counterpart by means of the convulsions attendant upon the Hundred Years War" 
(Bois 1985:113). Once the English were expelled from France, they immediately 
experienced their own period of internal warfare (the Wars of the Roses, 1455-
1485). Only after this extensive pruning of the English nobility could the English 
economy start growing again.

7.4 SUMMARY 
• Population growth in agrarian societies leads to a gradual decrease in per 
capita production, due to diminishing returns on labor inputs into agriculture.

The surplus available for the state shrinks and eventually becomes insufficient to provide for the state's needs. Thus, unchecked population growth 
leads to the fiscal insolvency of the polity.

• State breakdown and ensuing sociopolitical instability have a negative impact on both demographic rates (birth, death, and migration rates) and the 
productive capacity of the society. As a result, state breakdown is typically 
followed by periods of population decline.

• A simple mathematical model of the interaction between population dynamics and the fiscal health of the state predicts recurrent episodes of state 
building and population growth followed by state breakdown and population 
decline. For the range of plausible parameter values this demographic-fiscal 
model predicts that state breakdown should occur at somewhat irregular intervals 2-3 centuries apart.

• A more sophisticated model that keeps separate track of the commoner and 
elite segments of the population predicts similar dynamics (periodic state 
breakdown). Growth of the commoner population leads to the expansion 
of elite numbers and, initially, strengthening of the state. However, as elite 
numbers grow, an increasing proportion of the extracted product is appropriated by the elites for their needs. State revenues decline, while expenditures 
increase, and eventually the state becomes bankrupt.

• I develop two models focusing on the political dynamics of nomadic elites 
interacting with agrarian states. The Ibn Khaldun model investigates the situation in which nomads periodically conquer the agrarian state and establish 
a ruling dynasty there. The parasitic nomad model addresses the situation in 
which nomads do not conquer the agrarian state, instead imposing a tribute 
on it. In both cases the models predict faster cycles of polity building and 
collapse (periods of about a century), compared to cycles generated by the 
demographic-fiscal model and its class-structured variants.

• I briefly review two economic models advanced to explain the dynastic cycle in Chinese history. The basic logic underlying the explanation offered 
by these models of the collapse of Chinese Empires is also MalthusianRicardian, although they are somewhat more complex than the models I 
develop.

• The structural-demographic explanation of early modern state breakdown developed by Goldstone (1991b) postulates population growth as the primary 
cause of state collapse. It is important to emphasize, however, that in this 
theory (and in the models I develop) population dynamics do not directly 
cause the state breakdown. Rather, population growth promotes political instability indirectly, by causing the state's fiscal distress, increased elite competition and factionalism, and increased mobilization potential of the general 
populace. I review one of Goldstone's case studies, the English Revolution, 
for which a particularly complete cliometric database exists. These data are 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUGURAL THEORY 149 
found to be in very good agreement with the quantitative predictions of the 
structural-demographic model.

• Finally, I briefly review Fischer's (1996) theory and data dealing with 
four "great waves" of socioeconomic dynamics in western Europe from 
the twelfth to the twentieth century. Again, my conclusion is that these 
ideas and analyses are broadly consistent with the theory developed in this 
chapter.

• Depending on the structural assumptions and parameter values, the models 
developed in this chapter can generate a variety of dynamics. Oscillations 
can be either regular or quite irregular. Average periods are generally long 
but may range from one to three centuries. Changes in the commoner population may be very drastic or mild (in the case of "elite cycles"). But one 
general conclusion is that agrarian states are characterized by instability and 
oscillations on the time scale of centuries. I propose that we call such dynamics secular cycles or waves.

Chapter Eight 
Secular Cycles in Population Numbers 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
A major prediction emerging from the demographic-structural theory (Chapter 7) 
is that population numbers in agrarian societies are expected to go through slow 
oscillations with a periodicity of approximately two to three centuries. 1 We do not 
necessarily expect these secular cycles to be very regular. What the theory does 
say, however, is that these dynamics should be of second order. The concept of 
process order was introduced in Section 2.1.4 and will be further formalized for 
human population dynamics below. Put in nontechnical language, however, what 
I mean is that both the increase and decrease phases of population oscillations 
should occur over periods of multiple human generations.

Secular waves in the socioeconomic and demographic history of western Europe have been described by Fran~ois Simiand(l932), Wilhelm Abet (1966), 
Michael Postan (1973), and Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie (1974) (see also Braudel 
1988; Fischer 1996). Recently, Sergey Nefedov (1999, 2002a) presented data suggesting that secular cycles also occur in several macroregions of Asia (China, the 
Middle East, and India).

Much of the data on population fluctuations with which these authors worked 
is of a fragmentary nature. Nevertheless, several data series of reasonable length 
have been compiled and published in recent years. This development presents us 
with an opportunity to test the predictions of the demographic-structural theory 
by using the formal methods of time-series analysis in order to estimate empirically the periodicity and process order characterizing long-term fluctuations in 
population numbers. Performing such an analysis is the main goal of this chapter.

I begin by discussing how the process order can be estimated from time-series 
data on population dynamics. Next, I apply the statistical approach to the available 
time-series data on historical population dynamics. Finally, I extend the analysis 
to one case study in which we have data on both population numbers and the 
dynamics of sociopolitical instability.

8.2 "SCALE" AND "ORDER" IN HUMAN POPULATION DYNAMICS 
Population ecologists have recently made great strides in modeling, analyzing, 
and explaining the population dynamics of nonhuman organisms. I review these 
1 Note that in this chapter I will not deal with nomadic societies, or societies dominated by nomadic 
elites, whose oscillations are predicted to occur on a faster time scale (Section 7 .2.3).

SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 151 
developments in my book on Complex Population Dynamics (Turchin 2003). Is 
it possible that we can transfer some of the techniques and insights developed 
by population ecologists to the study of human population dynamics? Certainly, 
the set of specific mechanisms that affect human reproduction, mortality, and migration should be very different from those proposed for animals. Many of these 
mechanisms must be economic and sociological in nature, and it seems highly 
unlikely that certain ecological models, e.g. a predator-prey model with humans 
playing the role of prey, would be of use in studying human populations. On the 
other hand, ecological models such as those dealing with resource-consumer or 
disease-host interactions may be quite relevant to understanding the dynamics of 
historic and prehistoric human populations, as long as we do not fall into the trap 
of biologism, by attempting to explain everything solely in biological terms. What 
is important to note here is that population dynamicists have developed a set of 
general approaches to the nonlinear modeling of time-series data coming from 
population systems. These methods do not assume specific ecological models, 
that may or may not apply to human populations. Rather, they provide us with 
tools for quantifying empirical patterns in temporal fluctuations of population 
numbers.

In Section 2.1.4 I introduced the concept of process order. It turns out that 
this concept is very useful in investigations of population dynamics of nonhuman 
organisms (Turchin 2003). However, while order is a readily definable property 
of differential equations (in which context I introduced it in Section 2.1.4), the 
application of this concept to the analysis of time-series data is not completely 
straightforward. The important point is that the order that we estimate from data 
depends on the temporal scale at which population fluctuations are quantified.

Thus, a few remarks are warranted on the temporal scale at which various mechanisms affecting population change operate.

Temporal Scale: Years 
Let us consider four potential time scales: years, decades, centuries, and millennia. The first of these scales, years, is an important pacesetter for the dynamics 
of the resource base of human populations, because usually food gathering and 
production are strongly influenced by seasonal cycles. Additionally, many sources 
of mortality operate on a yearly (or faster) scale. For example, research on the 
dynamics of childhood diseases shows that these historically important sources 
of mortality have their own rhythms: the annual cycle driven by seasonal variation in contact rate (Yorke and London 1973), and a characteristic 2-3 year 
oscillation associated with the nonlinear nature of population interaction between 
infants and the pathogen {Schaffer and Kot 1985). Other sources of mortality that 
should be strongly affected by a seasonal cycle are death as a result of exposure 
to inclement weather and starvation due to seasonal dearth.

Temporal Scale: Decades and Centuries 
The next scale, decades, is the appropriate one for measuring replacement of 
human populations due to reproduction. The important benchmark here is some 
measure of generation time. The reproductive age for human females extends 
from 15 to 45 years of age (Wood 1990). However, the curve of fecundability 
as a function of age is skewed, so that its mode (maximum fertility rate) is at 
roughly 20, while its mean (average age of female at birth) is around 25, and 
in some populations closer to (or even over) 30 years. Certainly, there is a large 
amount of variation in these measures of generation length for humans, depending 
on biological (nutrition, mortality schedules) and social (age at marriage) characteristics of the population. It is clear, though, that for most historical human 
populations generation time should lie in the interval between 20 and 30 years.

General population dynamics theory suggests that population dynamics may 
have oscillatory components falling within three broad classes: generation, firstorder, and second-order cycles (Turchin 2003). Generation cycles are characterized by a period of between 20 and 30 years. These cycles are often found in 
human populations (Keyfitz 1972). They become apparent when population age 
structure is represented as an age pyramid. For example, the age pyramid for the 
current U.S.A. population has clear bulges separated by around 30 years, representing baby boomers and children of baby boomers. Generation cycles are even 
more apparent in the population of present-day Russia, a fact probably explained 
by two huge perturbation& of age structure-World War 1/Civil War and World 
War 11-were separated by roughly one generation time, setting a series of ensuing oscillations. Unlike generation cycles in certain insect populations (Godfray 
and Hassell 1989), however, human generation cycles do not appear to be stable phenomena, and dissipate rather rapidly after a perturbation (Wachter and Lee 
1989). Furthermore, generation cycles are usually expressed as oscillations in age 
structure and have only a weak effect on total numbers.

Unlike generation cycles, which arise as a result of interactions between age 
classes, first-order cycles result from relatively fast density-dependent feedback 
mechanisms. First-order cycles arise most naturally in discrete population models, and have a typical period of two generations (one generation at high density, 
the next at low, and so on). The existence of first-order cycles in human populations was hypothesized by Easterlin (1980). Easterlin suggested that, during the 
twentieth century, U.S. demography was characterized by an alternation of largeand small-cohort generations. A sparse generation enjoys better wages (due to 
labor shortages) and produces many children. The next generation, however, experiences increased competition and produces few children. This mechanism can 
theoretically lead to a typical first-order oscillation with an average period of two 
generations (40-50 years). Although formal models confirm that two-generation 
cycles can in principle occur, in practice the estimates of parameters are such that 
they do not place the model in the cyclic regime (Lee 1974; see also Frauental 
and Swick 1983; Wachter and Lee 1989).

Second-order cycles arise as a result of population size interacting with some 
other slow dynamical variable (see Section 2.1.4). An example of second-order 
oscillations is the dynamics of the demographic-fiscal model of state breakdown 
(Figure 7.1). Unlike typical first-order cycles, in which the increase and decrease 
phases are each one generation long, second-order oscillations are characterized 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 153 
by increase and decrease phases of multiple generations in duration. Thus, the 
basic trichotomy of generation, first-order, and second-order cycles results in 
typical periods of one, two, or many generations.

Let us consider what would be an appropriate temporal scale for studying 
second-order oscillations, were they to exist for human populations. Population 
theory based on discrete models suggests that second-order cycles are characterized by a minimum period of six generations (Murdoch et al. 2002). Typical 
periods in such models range from 6 to 12-15 and more generations (Turchin 
2003). Bracketing the human generation time by 20 and 30 years suggests that 
second-order cycles in humans should have periods ranging from 120 to 450 
years, with the most likely region of 200-300 years. Of course, this calculation 
assumes that factor X -the slow dynamical variable, whose interaction with population density drives the oscillations-operates at a temporal scale similar to that 
characterizing movements of human populations. However, this is probably not a 
bad assumption, to a first approximation, because if the two interacting variables 
operate on too different temporal scales then we cannot easily get second-order 
dynamics (if one variable operates on a time scale much faster than the other, 
the feedback for the slow variable essentially becomes "fast," and the dynamics become first order). Similar periods are suggested by simple continuous-time 
models. For example, in the Lotka-Volterra predation model (Section 2.1.3), the 
period of oscillations is approximately 2'11fJ(,r~). where r is the per capita rate 
of prey population growth, and ~ is the analogous parameter for the predators 
(it is actually the per capita decline rate of predator population in the absence of 
prey). Assuming that r and ~ are of the same order of magnitude as the intrinsic 
per capita rate of human population growth, r0 , leads to a (very rough) period 
estimate of 27Tfr0 . Because r0 of human populations should be around 0.02 yr-• 
(although in modem times some populations have been known to grow at 4% 
annual rate, this is probably an overestimate for historical times), the estimate of 
the oscillation period is 300 years. This estimate is similar to that suggested by 
the discrete-time theory above. In summary, my expectation is that second-order 
cycles in human populations, if they exist, should be characterized by periods of 
2-3 centuries.

The rough calculations in the above paragraph should be taken only as an indicator of the order of magnitude of period length that might characterize secondorder oscillations in human population dynamics. Clearly, periodicity will change 
depending on the nature of variables, model structure, and parameter values. On 
the other hand, we do have a theory for population dynamics in agrarian societies 
(Chapter 7). Models based on the demographic-structural theory predict oscillations with period ranging from one to three centuries, depending on the model 
structure and parameter values. This theoretical result provides a somewhat firmer 
basis for the prediction of oscillation periods.

Temporal Scale: Millennia 
Finally, I briefly turn to processes operating on much longer-millennial-scales.

This is the time scale of evolution of human societies, including their technological and cultural components. The big roadposts are the agricultural and industrial 
revolutions, respectively around 10,000 and 200 years ago. Currently, the pace 
of change has become almost frenetic, but prior to the industrial revolution, we 
can still probably assume some degree of quasistationarity at the scale of each 
millennium. Thus, according to the estimates of McEvedy and Jones (1978), the 
typical doubling time of the global human population, prior to the industrial age, 
was around 1000 years.

Evolutionary change of human societies is certainly something that we have 
to take into account when analyzing long-term data on human population 
dynamics (see, for example, Komlos and Nefedov 2002). If our main interest is 
not in millennial-scale processes, however, we will have to apply detrending to 
the data. Detrending is particularly appropriate in those cases where we have a 
clear mechanistic basis for understanding why the carrying capacity has changed 
historically. Ideally, we would use historical information to estimate how many 
people a unit of land could maintain, given the contemporary level of technology.

Here I will not follow this tack, because it would take me much beyond the 
scope of this book, and simply employ phenomenological detrending methods.

Implications 
The preceding discussion makes it clear that the appropriate temporal scale for 
studying human dynamics depends greatly on the questions of interest. If we 
are concerned with the dynamics of measles epidemics, then we should use the 
scale of months and years. At the other extreme, if we are interested in modeling 
how the capacity of the Earth to sustain human population evolved as a result 
of technological and societal change, then our time scale is centuries and millennia. However, if we are interested in first-order processes that regulate human 
population density, and in mechanisms that may cause second-order cycles, then 
our temporal scale should be intermediate: decades (the basic time step at which 
we measure population density) and centuries (the length of time series). More 
specifically, we need to follow a population for at least 500-600 years, in order to 
have the minimum sample size, two oscillations (assuming that each oscillation 
is around 2-3 centuries in length). This is a rough guide, but it suggests that if 
we have data sampled at yearly intervals, we might just as well subsample the 
series at 10-year intervals-we are not really throwing out any useful information 
by doing that. Data series sampled at 20- or 30-year intervals (approximately one 
human generation) are also acceptable. But any data series that was collected at 
intervals greater than two generations (50 years) is seriously undersampled. After 
all, one needs at the minimum four points per cycle to characterize it as such, 
and one-fourth of a cycle of 200-300 years is 50-75 years.

I searched the literature on historical demography for time-series data of sufficient length (at least 500 years) and sampled at sufficiently frequent intervals (not 
more than 50 years) for a defined locality (typically corresponding to a modem 
country or to a province in a country). One problem in obtaining data relevant to 
our purposes is that historical demographers ask very different kinds of questions.

A population dynamicist is primarily interested in relative changes of density with 
time, and knowing the absolute scale is not as important. By contrast, historical 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 155 
demographers typically attempt to estimate the absolute density at a particular 
point in time. Another problem is that a large amount of guesswork is often 
involved in reconstructing the historical dynamics of human populations. Historical demography is a very controversial subject, and hugely different estimates of 
population numbers can be profferred by different authorities. One possible way 
of getting around the subjective element is the methods of archaeology, and I will 
discuss some archaeological data sets below.

8.3 LONG-TERM EMPIRICAL PATTERNS 
8.3.1 Reconstructions of Historical Populations 
I begin with what I consider the best data set, the population history of England 
and Wales between 1080 and 2000 c.B. (Figure 8.1 ). This data set involves the 
least amount of guesswork, compared to the rest (with the exception of the archaeological data). For the period of 1800-2000, we can use the results of regular 
censuses. The period of 1540-1800 is almost as solid, because it is based on the 
excellent work by Wrigley, Schofield, and eo-workers, who used the technique of 
population reconstruction based on parish records documenting births and deaths 
during this period (Wrigley and Schofield 1981; Wrigley et al. 1997). The earliest 
period, from 1080 to 1540 c.B. (taken from Wrigley 1969), is the one where the 
subjective element is the strongest. Still, the population dynamics of medieval 
England are known as well as those for any other country. At the beginning of 
c: 
~ :; 
a.

0 
a.. 0 2 3 4 5 
E 
----- data 
--trend 
0 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Century C.E.

Figure 8.1 Population of England and Wales, 1080-2000 c.E. Population numbers, in 
millions, sampled every 10 years, are plotted on a log scale. Trend: fitted curve Y =a+ 
bX8, where Y =logN(t) and X is time scaled to the interval 0-l. ACF: the autocorrelation 
function of the detrended data. All time units (including ACF lags) are in centuries.

the period, the population record is anchored in the Domesday Book census. The 
timing of the population collapse associated with the Black Death is also solidly 
dated. The uncertainty primarily concerns the height of the pre-Black Death peak 
and the depth of the postplague collapse (Hatcher 1996).

Two features are readily apparent on Figure 8.1. The first is the increasing 
trend. The trend is nonlinear and greatly accelerates around 1800. The mechanism underlying this trend is probably uncontroversial (the Industrial Revolution), 
and does not concern us here. To quantitatively characterize the trend, I fitted a 
power relationship to the data in Figure 8.1. The second feature of the data is the 
oscillation around the general trend. In order to be able to characterize the oscillatory component, I detrended the series by subtracting the fitted power curve 
from the data.

The detrended data were subjected to time-series analysis. First, we calculate 
the autocorrelation function (shown as the inset in Figure 8.1), which has a clear 
oscillatory tendency, reaching the first peak at 3.1 centuries. The next step is 
to apply some standard tools from the population dynamicist's kit (time-series 
techniques for the analysis of population data are described in Thrchin 2003: 
Chapter 7). The basic idea of the analysis, developed by Box and Jenkins (for 
a readable introduction, see Chatfield 1989), is to regress the current population 
density, N,, on lagged population densities N,_T, N,_2T, etc. where T is the time 
lag. I used the approach known as nonlinear time-series modeling (NLTSM), 
which approximates the relationship between current and lagged densities using 
a modified polynomial scheme (for details of the implementation, see Turchin 
2003). There are two structural parameters that also need to be estimated from 
the data: the number of lagged densities, d, and the polynomial degree, q. We are 
primarily interested in d, because it provides us with an estimate of the process 
order.

One question that has to be resolved in order for the analysis to proceed is, 
what value of the time lag, T, is appropriate? The series is sampled at 10-year 
intervals, but this was done simply for convenience. Above, I argued that the 
generation time for human populations should lie somewhere in the interval of 
20-30 years. To be safe, therefore, I used both lag values, T = 2 and 3 decades, 
and checked how this choice affects the results (and I repeat this procedure below, in the analysis of the long-term data on population dynamics in China). As 
Table 8.1 indicates, the results of the analysis with either choice of T are congruent. Both choices suggest a high signaVnoise ratio (R2 = 0.7-0.8) and rather 
unstable dynamics (A near 0). The evidence that the dynamical process is of 
second order (or higher) is very strong. It is noteworthy that, although different 
choices ofT result in different estimates of d, when we express the maximum 
process order in physical units ( Td), we obtain the same value, 60 years. To 
summarize, the analysis of this data series suggests a second-order, oscillatory 
population process, with a strong deterministic component, but rather low amplitude (at least, by the standards of nonhuman population dynamics; see Thrchin 
2003). These results appear to be robust with respect to various choices that we 
need to make in the process of the analysis. For example, I reanalyzed the data 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 157 
Table 8.1 Summary of nonlinear time-series modeling analysis of the English and Chinese 
population data. Quantities: number of data points n, time lag T (in decades), measure 
of amplitude (standard deviation of log-transformed data) S, dominant period T (also 
in decades), autocorrelation at the dominant period ACF[T] (** = ACF is significantly 
different from 0 at lag = T; *=same at lag = T /2), estimated process order d, polynomial 
degree q, the coefficient of determination of the best model R2 , and the estimated dominant 
Lyapunov exponent A.

Location n T s T ACF(T] d q Rz A 
England 93 2 0.11 31 0.60** 3 2 0.72 -0.04 
England 93 3 0.11 31 0.60** 2 2 0.77 0.02 
China 1 64 2 0.15 23 0.21* 2 2 0.63 0.08 
China 1 64 3 0.15 23 0.21* 2 2 0.32 0.08 
China 2 64 2 0.10 31 0.40** 2 1 0.54 -0.40 
China 2 64 3 0.10 31 0.40** 3 2 0.15 -0.20 
China 3 64 2 0.05 13 0.04* 2 1 0.64 -0.26 
China 3 64 3 0.05 13 0.04* 2 1 0.16 -0.42 
Data: England (including Wales): 1080-2000 c.E., China 1: 200 B.C.E.-430 c.E., China 2: 
440-1070 c.E., China 3: 1080-1710 c.E. (all series detrended). Note that all series are 
sampled at 10-year intervals; therefore, all periods (T) and time lags (T) are indicated in 
the same time units, decades.

using a quadratic detrend instead of the power function; I also analyzed separately the 1500-2000 c.E. segment, where the amount of guesswork in obtaining 
the numbers was minimal. In all cases, the general results were unchanged.

The implications of this analysis are startling, but before making any far reaching conclusions, we need to check on these results by looking at other data sets.

The first obvious place to look to is other western European countries during the 
last millennium. I am unaware of any data sets similar in quality and length to 
the one constructed by Wrigley and eo-workers, but a useful overview, albeit of 
lesser quality, is provided by the population atlas of McEvedy and Jones. This in 
many ways excellent compilation of long-term population dynamics, organized by 
country, suffers, in my opinion, from one failing: the tendency of the authors to 
underemphasize the degree of fluctuation. To give an example where we can obtain an independent check, McEvedy and Jones suggest that population numbers 
in England increased throughout the seventeenth century (although at a declining 
rate): 4.25, 5, and 5.75 million in 1600, 1650, and 1700 c.E., respectively. Yet the 
population reconstruction by Wrigley and eo-workers, which became available 
after the publication of the McEvedy and Jones atlas, suggests that all population 
increase occurred during the first half (from 5.05 to 5.83 million), and in fact 
population slightly decreased by the early eighteenth century (to 5.73 million in 
1710). Nevertheless, there is a virtue in the conservatism of McEvedy and Jones: 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Century C.E.

Figure 8.2 Population of several European countries, 1000-2000 c.E. The countries are 
(in order of population magnitude at 1000 c.E., from larger to smaller) France, Italy, Spain, 
Germany, Czechoslovakia, Portugal. Data from McEvedy and Jones, supplemented by U.S.

Census Bureau for year 2000.

where they indicate sharp changes in population numbers, it is likely that the 
historical evidence for such events is quite strong.

In Figure 8.2 I reproduce the population trajectories suggested by McEvedy 
and Jones for the four largest western European countries, as well as for two 
smaller ones, located to the southwest, and east, respectively, of the big four.

Although the data are not detailed enough for formal analysis, we see that the 
general pattern exhibited by England is also present in other European countries: an increasing millennia! trend, and three secular cycles around the trend, 
with population growth slowing down or reversing in the fourteenth, seventeenth, 
and late twentieth centuries. Only France does not exhibit a seventeenth-century 
decline, which is a result of the McEvedy and Jones conservatism referred to 
above (as we shall see in the next chapter, where I look at more detailed French 
population data). Additionally, the averaging of the dynamics of southern and 
northern France serves to further mask the degree of change. It is well documented, for example, that the population of southern France declined during the 
period of 1680-1750 (Le Roy Ladurie 1974), while northern France lost population earlier (for example, see Reinhard et al. 1968: Figure 13). Currently (2000 
c.E.), all European countries exhibit a deficit of births over deaths, and in half of 
them, where immigration does not compensate this deficit, population is actually 
declining (U.S. Census Bureau data).

I now turn to the opposite end of Eurasia, and consider the population dynamics in China. The picture for China is complex. On one hand, the central authority 
in China (when it existed) conducted detailed censuses for tax purposes. On the 
other hand, corrupt or lazy officials often falsified or fabricated population data 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 159 
(Ho 1959). Conversion coefficients between the number of taxable households 
and the actual population are often unknown, and, what is worse, these coefficients probably changed from dynasty to dynasty. The area controlled by the 
state also continually changed. Finally, it is often difficult to determine whether 
the number of taxable households declined during the times of trouble as a result 
of demographic change {death and emigration), or as a result of the state's failure 
to control and enumerate the subject population. Thus, there is a certain degree 
of controversy among the experts (Ho 1959; Durand 1960; Song et al. 1985).

However, the controversy primarily concerns the absolute population levels, and 
there is a substantial degree of agreement on the relative changes in population 
density (which are, of course, of primary interest for our purposes). The Chinese 
population, essentially, expanded during periods of political stability and declined 
(sometimes precipitously) during periods of unrest. As a result, population movements closely mirror the "dynastic cycle" in China (Ho 1959; Reinhard et al.

1968).

The most detailed trajectory of population dynamics in China was published 
by Chao and Hsieh (1988). These authors give estimates of Chinese population 
numbers at irregular time intervals. In order to make the data suitable for time 
series analysis, I interpolated Chao and Hsieh data using an exponential kernel 
with bandwidth of 10 years and then subsampled the resulting smoothed trajectory 
at 10-year intervals. The trajectory is clearly nonstationary and has at least two 
abrupt steplike changes: (1) until the eleventh century, the population peaked in 
the vicinity of 50 million; (2) from the twelfth to the beginning of the eighteenth 
century, population peaks doubled to around 100 million, (3) beginning in the 
eighteenth century the population started growing at a very rapid pace, reaching 
400 million during the nineteenth and more than 1 billion during the twentieth 
century. The mechanism underlying the shift from period 1 to period 2 is known.

Prior to the eleventh century, the center of gravity of the Chinese state was 
situated in the north, with the south lightly settled. Under the Sung dynasty the 
south matched and then overtook the north (for example, see Reinhard et al. 1968: 
Figures 14 and 115).

Dropping the third period as least amenable to detrending, I focused on the 
period from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E., which gives us 192 points (sampled at decadal 
intervals). If we divide this series into three equal-sized pieces, then the second 
division neatly separates the 50 million peak period from that characterized by 
100 million peaks (see Figure 8.3). The splitting of the series into 6.4-centurylong pieces seems appropriate, because each piece should be long enough for 
several oscillations ( = "data points").

The results of analyzing these three series, using both delay choices (two and 
three decades), are presented in Table 8.1. The analysis detects a somewhat lower 
signal/noise ratio and more negative Lyapunov exponents in the Chinese series 
compared to the England data (the difference is especially clear when T = 3 is 
used). This is probably due, at least in part, to the greater measurement error, 
but there also seems to be a. genuine difference between western European and 
Chinese dynamics, in that Chinese oscillations are much more variable in period.

120 
80 
-CD 
~ 60 Cl) 
0) 
g 
Cl) 40 c: 
~ .E 
r:: 
0 
:= 
tU 
'3 20 Q.

0 
a..

-2 -1 0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
Century 
Figure 8.3 Population dynamics of China from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E. (data from Chao 
and Hsieh 1988). Vertical lines indicate where data were split.

Additionally, the nature of the periodicity is complex, with several oscillations 
appearing to be superimposed on each other. Thus, in the second and third pieces, 
there appear to be two coexisting oscillations: a short one with the period of 
1.3-1.5 centuries, and a longer one with a period of 3-4 centuries. Given such 
variability in periodicity estimates among the three series, we should take these 
results with a grain of salt: the evidence for periodicity in the Chinese data 
is not strong. By contrast, the evidence for second-order dynamics is completely 
consistent across replicate series and time-delay choices (Table 8.1 ). To conclude, 
although the results of this analysis should be interpreted cautiously, given the 
uncertainty associated with estimates of Chinese population numbers, it provides 
important confirmatory evidence to the detection of second-order oscillations in 
western European data.

Population reconstructions for other areas are not as good as those for western 
Europe and China and thus not suitable for formal time-series analysis. One example is the very interesting data presented by Whitmore and eo-workers (Whitmore et al. 1993) on population dynamics in Mesopotamia, Egypt, Yucatan, and 
the central Mexican plateau. These data show that the typical state of human 
populations is not stasis or slow growth, but oscillations-periods of growth interspersed with periods of decline (sometimes very sharp). Unfortunately, the data 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 161 
are not sampled frequently enough to be useful for time-series analysis. Interestingly, Whitmore and eo-workers suggest that the "pace" of human dynamics has 
greatly increased with history, so that oscillations (or "waves," as they call them) 
in the distant past were slow, taking many millennia to complete their course, 
while oscillations in the more recent past are only a few centuries in period. My 
problem with this generalization is that it could easily arise as an artifact of our 
incomplete knowledge of history. Since early history is much less known than 
more recent history, it is quite possible that we "missed" many more instances of 
population decline in the distant compared to the proximate past. Such a systematic bias could produce the same pattern of apparently accelerating oscillations.

A possible example is the case of Maya population history. The first archaeologists who studied the ruins of the Maya civilization did not even suspect that 
at some point in their history Maya societies sustained highly dense populations.

The original picture was that of ceremonial centers embedded in a matrix of rainforest cultivated by swidden agriculturalists. Later archaeological work showed 
beyond any degree of reasonable doubt that at their peak (or, more likely, peaks) 
Mayan societies cultivated large areas very intensively. Accordingly, early reconstructions proposed a long period-more than 1000 years-of very slow increase, 
followed by a rapid (1 century) collapse. Even more recent evidence shows that 
there were repeated cycles of centralization followed by state collapse in the uplands of Guatemala and Peten (Culbert and Rice 1990). Thus, it is becoming 
clear that Mayan population history was quite complex, although we will have 
to wait for more archaeological data and better methods before we have a data 
series suitable for analysis by the methods discussed in this book.

8.3.2 Archaeological Data 
The methods of archaeology offer great promise for resolving many current controversies about the dynamics of historic (and prehistoric) populations. A general 
problem with archaeological sources of population estimates is that they are indirect. They rely on a physical record left by humans: most often, on the number 
of houses or settlements that were occupied at a certain period in time. Human 
density can also be estimated by the amount of food they grew, using, for example, pollen cores. The problem in all these cases is to translate the quantitative 
measures of human activities in the archaeological record into the number of people. For example, if we have an estimate of how many structures were present 
at some point in time, we need to also know how many people, on average, inhabited each structure. I note that this is not an insurmountable problem. In fact, 
in population ecology researchers often rely on indices of population density that 
may even be nonlinearly related to density itself (an example is the data on the 
famous 10-year cycle in lynx fur returns). Furthermore, our primary interest is 
in relative population fluctuations, which are easier to document than absolute 
population densities.

The great advantage of archaeological methods is that they offer a potentially 
more objective way of reconstructing population history. These approaches clearly 
can have biases and require a lot of thought in real-life applications (Dewar 
1991; Curet 1998), but generally the amount of subjectivity and guesswork is 
reduced.

As I stated in Section 8.2, to be useful for our purposes, a population history 
must be sampled at no longer than 50-year intervals. Thus, most population estimates published in the archaeological literature are not yet suitable for analysis.

An example of a data set that comes close is a very interesting reconstruction 
of the population history of the Deh Loran Plain in the Middle East (Dewar in 
Neeley and Wright 1994:211), which shows at least three huge oscillations in 
density (ten-fold peak/trough ratios). However, the sampling interval is around 
200-300 years, which is much too sparse for formal analysis.

There are, however, several examples in which the sampling rate is starting to 
approach the one we need. The first example relates to the question of the population history of the Roman Empire, which has been hotly debated for decades 
(Scheidel 2001). The issue is what role depopulation may have played in the 
collapse of the Roman Empire. The problem is that the first evidence of depopulation shows up as early as the later decades of the Republic (Brunt 1971 ). A 
remarkable data set, recently published by Lewit ( 1991) throws a new light on 
this problem (Figure 8.4 ). It turns out that there were two episodes of settlement 
abandonment in the Roman Empire: during the third and fifth centuries. The 
third-century decline (and the fourth-century revival) must have involved quite 
substantial changes in population numbers, since change in the proportion of settlements occupied underestimates the amplitude of population change. These data 
are discussed further in Section 9.1.

100 
80 )( 
Q) 
"'C 
.E 60 r:::: 
0 
:;:I 
a.

cu 
40 ::I 
8 
0 
20 
0 
-1 0 2 3 4 5 
Century C.E.

Figure 8.4 Relative proportion of excavated settlements occupied during each period in 
seven western areas of Roman Empire (Britain, Belgica, Northern and Southern Gaul, 
Italy, and Northern and Southern Spain). (Data from Lewit 1991) 
SECUlAR CYCLES IN POPUlATION NUMBERS 
60~~r============~~----------~ 
~ 40 en 
::1 
0 
J: 
~ z 20 
6 7 8 
ACF 
9 10 11 12 13 
Century C.E.

163 
Figure 8.5 New houses built on Wetherill Mesa. ACF: the autocorrelation function of the 
square-root transformed data (lag units in centuries).

Another example of site occupancy data, this time from the New World, 
was published by Hally ( 1996) for platform mounds in Georgia during 1000-
1600 c.E., suggesting three oscillations in the northwestern part of the area, but 
only two oscillations in the southeast. Lack of space prevents me from providing 
more examples of this kind. However, one last data set (Varien 1999), also from 
the New World, needs to be mentioned because of its uniquely fine temporal 
resolution. The data come from Mesa Verde (Colorado) where, as a result of the 
dry climate, logs used in house construction can be preserved for centuries (and, 
incidentally, used over and over in building houses). Using dendrochronological methods, archaeologists can precisely date the time when the logs were cut.

The distribution of times when logs found at one site, Wetherill Mesa, were cut 
is shown in Figure 8.5. These data show that there were four spurts of housebuilding activity on Wetherill Mesa, occurring during the seventh, ninth, eleventh, 
and thirteenth centuries, suggesting that these centuries were periods of rapid population growth. Following periods of building activity were typically periods of 
no building at all (around the years 700, 900, and after 1300; only during the 
twelfth-century did low levels of building activity persist between the eleventhand thirteenth-century peaks). Unfortunately, we cannot analyze these data using 
the standard NLTSM approach, because the structure of the process generating 
them is very different from regular population processes (in effect, we have some 
information on what happens during the population increase periods, but data on 
population declines are completely censored from the data set). However, we can 
calculate the ACF, after transforming the data, to ameliorate the skewness (see 
the inset in Figure 8.5). The ACF clearly reveals a two-century cycle in the data.

8.4 POPULATION DYNAMICS AND POLmCAL INSTABILITY 
While the finding of secular oscillations in human population data is in basic 
agreement with the demographic-structural model, it is possible that other sociodemographic processes could produce the same empirical pattern. It would be 
much more satisfying to test the predictions of the demographic-structural theory 
directly, by examining whether the relationship between population fluctuations 
and political instability in the historical record conforms to the pattern predicted 
by theory. One very interesting paper that addresses this issue is that of Cyrus 
Chu and Ronald Lee (1994), which I already discussed in the context of models 
of the dynastic cycle in China. These authors analyzed the population time series 
for China developed by Chao and Hsieh (1988) and two dummy variables for 
peasant rebellion and incidence of war. The dummy variables take the value 1 if 
rebellion (or war) is present, otherwise they are set to 0. An additional predictor 
variable used by Chu and Lee was the temperature time series.

Chu and Lee fitted a series of models to the data, starting with simpler ones and 
then increasing the number of explanatory variables. They found that the model 
that included the effect of temperature and warfare, but not peasant rebellions, 
explained a small proportion of the variance in the population data (R2 = 0.021).

By contrast, the R2 of the model that also included rebellions was about five times 
as high, 0.116. The coefficient characterizing the effect of rebellion on population 
change was highly significant. There was also a statistically significant effect of 
population density on the incidence of rebellion .• 
One of the reasons for a small R2 characterizing the effect of rebellion on 
population change is the nature of the data used by Chu and Lee. Because they 
only had a dummy characterization of revolt, they did not know the scale of the 
uprising, and consequently their analysis did not distinguish between small and 
large uprisings (Chu and Lee 1994:367). Apparently, Chu and Lee were not aware 
of the data set on the incidence of internal war in China constructed by J. S. Lee 
(1931). This index gives us a graduated scale for measuring political instability 
in China. Plotting the population and internal war data on the same graph, we 
observe that there appears to be some sort of dynamic relationship (Figure 8.6; 
focusing on the relatively stationary period from 200 B.C.E. to 1070 C.E.).

To formally investigate the interactive effects of population dynamics and political instability on each other, I used an extension of the nonlinear time-series 
analysis of the Chinese data in Section 8.3.1. We found there that the process 
order of Chinese population dynamics, when measured on the generational time 
scale, was definitely 2 (or higher). I now would like to test the hypothesis that 
political instability is the endogenous variable that drives the second-order oscillations. If this hypothesis is correct, then we should detect a strong influence of 
political instability on the per capita rate of population change.

I fitted a series of models to the per capita rate of population change, defined 
as r, = ln(N,/ N,_T), characterized by the same general form 
r, =f(NI-T' W,_T)+E,, (8.1) 
where W, is the index of political instability. J. S. Lee's incidence of internal 
warfare was reported at five-year intervals, while the population data come on 
i60 
50 
:::.

c 
E 40 
c 
0 
:;; 
"330 
c.

0 
a..

20 
-2 
W. Han E.Han Political disunity E. Tang 
-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Century, C.E.

Figure 8.6 Population dynamics (curve) and political instability (bars) in China, 200 B.C.E.-
1070 C.E. The top bar indicates dynasties (S = Sui).

:; 
-
(1) 
3 
!!.

:E 
ID 
.., 
:; 
c.

(1) 
X 
r I 
10 11 
Thble 8.2 Coefficients of determination in models fitted to population rate of change and 
political instability index.

Period 
Response variable 200 B.C.E.-430 C.E. 440-1070 C.E. 1080-1710 C.E.

T=20 
Population 0.59 0.57 0.59 
Instability 0.82 0.62 0.37 
T=30 
Population 0.67 0.67 0.61 
Instability 0.66 0.36 0.11 
a decadal scale. To bring both sets of data to a common temporal resolution, 
I smoothed Lee's index using an exponential kernel regression with bandwidth 
h = 10 years, and resampled the resulting curve at 10-year intervals, giving me 
the variable W, (t = -200,-190, ... , 1700, 1710 c.E.). In other words, I treated 
the internal warfare data in the same way as population data (see Section 8.3.1).

Because the functional form of/(·) in equation (8.1) is not known, I approximated it using the response surface methodology (RSM) of Box and Draper 
( 1987). RSM is a modified polynomial approximation scheme, in which the predictor variables (in this case, N,_, and W,_,) are subjected to the Box-Cox transformation. There was strong evidence for curvilinear effects (see below), and thus 
I used second-degree polynomials to approximate/(·). For the analysis I broke 
the whole time series from -200 to 1710 c.E. into three equal-length pieces of 64 
data points each (this is the identical procedure to that used in Section 8.3.1). It 
reduces the influence of nonstationarity, and also allows us to check on whether 
the relationship between population dynamics and political instability changes 
with period. Finally, to make sure that a specific choice of the base lag T does 
not unduly affect the results, I performed all analyses for two choices, T = 20 
and 30 years.

There was a highly significant effect of political instability on population dynamics in all three periods and for both choices of T (Table 8.2). The density 
dependence and political instability jointly explained around 60% of the variance 
in r,. The direction of the effect was as expected from theory (Figure 8. 7).

Population density had a negative effect on the population rate of change, 
reflecting the basic density-dependent pattern of population dynamics. Political 
instability also had a negative effect on population increase. Interestingly, the 
effects of density and instability were synergistic, as indicated by a statistically 
significant interaction term. We can see this effect in Figure 8.7: the population decline was particularly pronounced if both population density and political 
instability were high.

SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 167 
o.s 
o.4 
~ o.o ~ 
~ ell .o.A ...

pJ.

to 
9- .o.s 
g.

~ .1.:z ~ 
Figure 8.7 Effects of population density and political instability on the population rate of 
change in China during the first period (200 B.C.E.-430 c.E.).

A similar analysis was performed on political instability as response variable 
(I log-transformed W, in order to make the data more normally distributed). The 
proportion of variance explained by the model declined from the earliest to the 
latest period (Table 8.2). The population density at time t-r had a positive effect 
on instability at time t (Figure 8.8). The past value of instability (WI-T) also had 
a positive effect on the present instability (W,) (Figure 8.8).

In summary, the analysis of Chinese data provides strong empirical confirmation of the endogenous version of the demographic-structural model. Both links, 
from population to instability and back, are substantiated in the data. The coefficients of determination are high, generally over 50% (except in the case of the 
N on W effect during the third period).

8.5 SUMMARY 
• I searched the literature to locate any data set on relative population fluctuations that was at least 5 centuries long, and sampled at intervals of 50 
years or better. I identified a number of such data sets from Europe, China, 
6 
4 
2 
g .2 
0 
~ 
~ .4 
~ ..6 
Figure 8.8 The effect of population density and previous political instability on the current 
instability in China during the first period (200 B.C.B.-430 c.B.).

and North America. Some data were historical reconstructions of population 
dynamics, others relied on archaeological data.

• Standard approaches to nonlinear time-series analysis suggest that in the 
best historical data sets the evidence for second-order regulation (England, 
China) and periodicity (England, Mesa Verde) is quite strong. A general 
pattern, common to all the data sets, is oscillations-periods of population 
growth, followed by decline-characterized by a variable degree of periodicity. Population declines tend to occur at intervals of 2-3 centuries.

• The observed patterns are consistent with predictions of the demographicstructural theory {Section 7 .2), which also predicts somewhat irregular oscillations with an average period of 2-3 centuries. This result, therefore, 
constitutes an empirical confirmation of the demographic-structural theory.

However, informal calculations suggest that most second-order processes involving population size as one of the main variables should lead to oscillations of roughly the same period. Thus, the possibility that some other theory 
may explain these patterns as well remains open.

• A direct test of the demographic-structural model, addressing the caveat 
above, was performed by jointly analyzing the data on population numbers 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 169 
and the incidence of internal warfare (an index of political instability). The 
regression results suggest that both the influence of density on instability, 
and the reverse connection, are statistically highly significant. Time-series 
models fitted to the data generally resolve a high proportion of the variance.

Thus, at least in one case, China from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E., we have direct 
and quantitative evidence for the demographic-structural theory.

Chapter Nine 
Case Studies 
One of the main themes of this book is the need for an objective, rigorous approach to testing various theories explaining historical dynamics. Following this 
approach, I discussed several such theories, including geopolitical, ethnodynamic, 
and demographic-structural ones. All theories were subjected to one or more empirical tests, which they passed with various degrees of success. So it seems that 
each theory, when examined separately, has some empirical justification. However, it is not yet clear how we should combine the various models together 
to explain the holistic phenomenon of historical dynamics. We need to generate ideas, and this requires a less rigorous attitude than that involved in testing 
the hypotheses based on the ideas. Accordingly, in this penultimate chapter, I 
shift gears and use a very different approach from the one used before. My goal 
is to look at some specific case studies and discuss how specific mechanisms 
may be operating in each particular case, how different mechanisms may interact 
with each other, and what sorts of more rigorous hypotheses we may attempt to 
develop for future research.

I chose to focus on two polities: France and Russia in the longue duree (from 
the origins to 1900 C.E.). These two cases are a sample from the universe of 
successful European territorial empires (in particular, both were members of the 
Great Powers club during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries). Both polities 
are situated on the northern European plain, although France is at its extreme 
western end, while Russia occupies the opposite northeastern quadrant. The two 
countries, however, followed very different social, political, and economic trajectories. Thus, any similarities that may emerge from the comparison have a good 
potential as generalizations.

My discussion of historical dynamics in the two case studies is organized as 
follows. First, I focus on the dynamics of asabiya and the associated issues of 
frontiers and ethnogenesis. Second, I trace out the secular cycles involving linked 
demographic, social, and political processes.

9.1 FRANCE 
9.1.1 The Frontier Origins 
On the Roman Frontier 
The western end of the northern European plain during the first two millennia c.E.

was successively incorporated into three polities: the Roman Empire, the Frankish 
CASE STUDIES 171 
Empire, and the Kingdom (later Republic) of France. After the Roman conquest 
and until the beginning of the third century, the Roman frontier ran through 
what is now Benelux and Western Germany (the cultural regions of NED, WGE, 
and SGE; see Figure 5.1 and Appendix B). Northern and eastern France (NFR 
and EFR) were lightly affected by the frontier. The situation changed during the 
calamitous third century, when the Roman Empire experienced a prolonged period of state collapse and internal warfare. During this time of trouble, the Roman 
frontier became completely porous to Germanic invaders, who repeatedly devastated the Roman Gaul. Three groups, Franci, Burgundi, and Alamanni, coalesced 
on or moved near the Roman border and penetrated into formerly Roman territory 
to a greater or lesser degree (Geary 1988; Wolfram 1997). As a result, the NFR 
and EFR regions themselves became part of the Roman frontier.

After the respite of the relatively stable fourth century (which, however, was 
characterized by continued southward penetration by the Franks), the "barbarian" 
advance resumed. The Franks expanded to incorporate most of NFR into their 
empire, the Burgundi invaded deep into Roman Gaul and established their kingdom in EFR, while the Alamanni pushed south into Rhaetia (which is outside our 
area of interest). During the fourth and fifth centuries the intensity of the frontier 
passing though NFR and EFR was greatly enhanced by the religious fault line: 
whereas Roman Gauls were Christians, Franks and Alamanni were pagans (the 
Franks converted around 500 c.E., and the Alamanni during the seventh century).

On the March of Frankish Empire 
After the Franks established their empire, NFR remained on the frontier, albeit 
of a different polity. During the fifth century the peninsula of Brittany was colonized by Celtic people from the British Isles who established their own polity, 
independent of the Merovingian Franks. As a result, the area between the lower 
Seine and Loire became the march of Brittany. The intensity of the frontier, however, decreased because both Bretons and Franks (after 496 c.E.) were Christian, 
although there were significant religious differences between their two brands of 
Christianity. The Carolingians subjugated the Bretons for a brief period of time, 
but were unable to convert their military superiority into lasting political control 
(Galliou and Jones 1991). Although the civilizational difference between Bretons 
and Franks was not very great, nevertheless, during the ninth century the intensity 
of warfare between the two ethnies was very high (Dunbabin 1985:66). As a result of continuous raiding and counter-raiding, a whole swath of territory running 
between the lower Seine and the lower Loire became depopulated to a significant 
degree. This was precisely the area into which the Norman invaders managed to 
wedge themselves (Searle 1988).

VJ.ki.ngs first settled in the areas around the mouths of the Loire and the Seine.

The Loire settlement was ultimately unsuccessful, but the Seine one expanded 
by degrees. During the ninth and tenth centuries, the area between Rouen and 
Paris and north of the Loire again became a very intense metaethnic fault line, 
combining religious, linguistic, and military pressure components. Only after the 
Normans assimilated (both religiously and linguistically) to the Latin Christian 
metaethnie did the intensity of the frontier decline.

To summarize, from the third to the tenth century, NFR. was the site of a 
major frontier, first part of the Roman limes and then as a Frankish march. The 
intensity of this frontier waxed and waned between high and medium levels, as 
various Germanic invaders assimilated to the Romance language and Christian 
religion, but the frontier conditions were essentially continuous. According to 
the metaethnic frontier theory, it was precisely this ethnic cauldron where the 
French experienced their ethnogenesis and France was born. Before discussing 
this process, however, I briefly review the events in the neighboring region of 
NED.

Ethnogenesis of Franks 
NED (modem Benelux plus a piece of Germany west of the Rhine) became a 
frontier earlier, during the first century, and also ceased to be a frontier before 
NFR, in the late eighth century (after the Carolingians conquered and converted 
the Frisians and Saxons ). Thus, ethnogenesis in NED preceded that in NFR.. Prior 
to the Roman conquest of Gaul the region was inhabited by a variety of small 
tribes lacking any cultural means for scaling up collective solidarity. After the 
Roman frontier was established in the first century B.C.E., the selective pressure 
for such cultural mechanisms became very intense (Miller 1993). The Roman 
Empire during the Principate exerted an enormous amount of military pressure 
on the region (the limes ran right through the middle of NED). Conversely, during 
the troubled third century and the Dominate, the "push" exerted by the Empire became an equally irresistible "pull." As I discussed before, the pull factor provides 
a strong selection pressure for scaling-up structures, since in order to acquire really significant loot, large raiding parties need to be organized, capable of taking 
whole cities (which during the Dominate began acquiring fortifications). Additionally, the religious gradient across the frontier became very steep after 300 c.E.: 
the Empire became Christian, while the Franks practiced a rather aggressive form 
of paganism, which acted as an important unifying force in the Frankish ethnogenesis (Miller 1993). Another factor was the political mechanism evolved by the 
Franks: the "long-haired kings" (Scherman 1987). Prior to 300 C.E., western Germans did not have the institution of kingship (unlike eastern Germanic tribes like 
the Goths). The amalgamation of various tribes (Chamavi, Chattuari, Bructeri, 
Amsivarii, Salii, and others) into a single Frankish ethnie (Geary 1988:78) is precisely what the metaethnic frontier theory predicts. In sum, Frankish ethnogenesis 
fits the frontier model very well.

The French Ethnogenesis 
When most of NFR became incorporated into the Merovingian Empire, its ethnic 
composition was very diverse. On the Gallic substrate (which itself was ethnically very heterogeneous, but that is another story), two other groups were superimposed. First, there were the colonists from the rest of the Roman Empirelegionnaires, who served and then settled on the frontier, plus their dependents 
CASE STUDIES 173 
and descendants (Geary 1988:15). Second, there were Franks moving from the 
north. Frankish farmers were probably the dominant ethnic element north of the 
Seine and a substantial influence down to the Loire. The reason that this region 
experienced such heavy colonization during the third to fifth centuries is probably 
because of the drastic population decline which occurred during the second half 
of the third century, when the proportion of archaeological sites occupied was 
only 45% of the second-century peak (Lewit 1991). After a brief rise during the 
fourth century, the population of north Gaul collapsed even lower, so that only 
9% of dwellings were occupied after 400 c.E. (Lewit 1991). Such drastic depopulation of a countryside is one of the typical characteristics of a high-intensity 
metaethnic frontier.

During the fifth century the western part of NFR was colonized by Bretons 
(Musset 1975: 112). The final substantial ethnic infusion occurred during the ninth 
and tenth centuries, when various Germanic peoples from Scandinavia established the Duchy of Normandy (Searle 1988). These diverse ethnic groups were 
relatively rapidly assimilated to a common religion (Christianity) and language 
(vulgar Latin evolving into northern French-langue d'oi1). The process was particularly rapid for Normans, who accomplished it within two centuries. Linguistic 
assimilation of the Franks was probably a more drawn-out process, with islands 
of Frankish language, the precursor of modem Dutch, persisting into the eleventh 
century. Assimilation of the Bretons took the longest time (the majority of Bretons switched to French only in the nineteenth century).

The relative rapidity with which Germanic intruders (Franks and Normans) 
assimilated to the region's common culture raises a set of interesting questions.

Why did Normans assimilate so rapidly (in the course of two centuries), while 
Bretons required more than a millennium? As was discussed in Chapter 6, current sociological thinking suggests that the rapidity of assimilation depends on 
the nature of social networks. Were there significant gaps between the Breton 
network and the rest of the population in NFR? Did the Normans rapidly establish dense connections with the Frankish network? A related observation is that 
the linguistic assimilation of southern France was quite slow. Although the region was conquered by the French in the thirteenth century, three centuries later 
only large cities were French speaking, while the majority of inhabitants spoke 
Occitan (langue d'oc). The midpoint was crossed only after three more centuries 
elapsed, during the late 1800s. Incidentally, the multiethnic nature of France during most of its existence is the reason I refer to it as an empire. Even by 1868, 
essentially at the end of the period of interest, French was the native language 
of only one-third of the inhabitants of France. Another third spoke it as a second 
language, and the rest could not speak it at all (Weber 1976).

By the eleventh century, NFR (with the exception of Brittany) appears to have 
been ruled by what was, despite its disparate origins as Roman-era landowners, 
Frankish counts, or descendants of Vikings, a fairly homogeneous elite, at least 
if we focus on linguistic and religious characteristics. However, the region was 
not politically unified. Instead, multiple foci of territorial power simultaneously 
formed and consolidated, starting in the middle of the ninth century, when the 
Neustrian march was created by Charles the Bald, and intensifying in the late 
tenth century (Dunbabin 1985; Bates 1995). The most dynamic polities were 
organized around the Dukes of Normandy and the Counts of Anjou and Paris 
(the latter secured for himself the French Crown in 987, although at the time 
it was largely of symbolic value). Other, less aggressive incipient polities were 
organized by the Counts of Blois (who acquired Champaign) and the Dukes 
of Bretagne. This intense episode of polity building is very reminiscent of the 
dynamics of the spatial frontier model. If this analogy is valid, then the conquest of England by the Normans in late eleventh century can be interpreted as 
an example of the reflux effect. In fact, the dynamics of England for the next 
three centuries should probably be interpreted as an offshoot of NFR. As is well 
known, after the Norman conquest, the native English elites were "destroyed as 
a class," and replaced with members of Duke William's host, who mostly originated from northern France and the Low Countries. There was another infusion 
of north French when England passed to the Angevin dynasty of Plantagenets in 
the mid-twelfth century. The process of mutual assimilation of French-speaking 
elites and English-speaking lower strata took no less than the following two centuries, and can probably be thought complete only after the Plantagenet-Tudor 
transition.

A Digression on the Role of Nonelite Asabiya 
A contrast between the ultimate fate of Norman England and a polity having similar origins, Norman Sicily, is instructive. Both were created at approximately the 
same time and had a similar initial sociopolitical trajectory. Thus, both polities 
were cited as examples of precocious state building in twelfth-century Europe.

Both were unusually centralized for their times and had solid fiscal bases. The 
trajectories of these two states, however, radically diverged after the twelfth century. The Kingdom of Sicily (which occupied the whole SIT region) rapidly 
declined, and went through a sequence of owners: German Emperors, Angevins, 
Aragonese, Castilians, and finally Piedmontese. In short it was an object rather 
than a subject of international politics. By contrast, England, following a period 
of relative insignificance after its expulsion from the continent in the mid-fifteenth 
century, eventually achieved the status of a Great Power, and even a hegemonic 
one during parts of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. This comparison, limited as it is to a single pair of data points, suggests the importance of the asabiya 
of the lower stratum of the society. SIT was an imperial core for at least half 
a millennium after the Roman frontiers moved away in the first century B.C.E.

The theory suggests that this region should have a thoroughly depressed asabiya.

By contrast, SBR was the locus of an intense frontier from the fifth through the 
eleventh centuries. It is clear that on the eve of the Norman conquest the English 
were already well on the way to building a coherent and aggressively expanding 
state. This observation leads to the hypothesis that while a polity's dynamics in 
the short run may depend more on the asabiya of its elites, the long-term success 
or failure must depend very much on the asabiya of the general populace. At this 
point, this proposition is just a hypothesis, but it is clear that we can construct 
~ 0 
c: 
~ 
.= 
...

Q) 
:;::l 
c: 
e 
1.1.

CASE STUDIES 175 
a test by considering the universe of polities, where there was a significant ethnic difference between the elites and general population, and examining how the 
estimated asabiya of the population affected the durability of the polity.

Dynamics of Frontier Intensity in NFR and Size of the French Polity 
In Figure 9.1 I plot the frontier intensity in NFR and the territorial extent of the 
French polity. The curve starts in 987 c.E., when Hugo Capet was elected King 
of France. Around 1000 c.E., the Capetians controlled a small area of northern 
France around Paris and Orleans. Initial expansion was slow, and by 1200 c.E. the 
royal domain was still less than 0.1 Mm2 in size. For comparison, the Angevin 
domain at that time encompassed 0.4 Mm2• Then, during the first half of the 
thirteenth century the territory expanded rapidly to over 0.3 Mm2, and stabilized 
at that level. Most of this growth spurt occurred at the expense of the Angevins, 
and as a result of Albigensian Crusades. Thereafter, growth continued to 1900 
c.E., but with some oscillations that will be discussed in the next section.

What is striking about this trajectory is how slow-long term-the processes 
are. NFR was affected by frontier conditions for around eight centuries. After 
the tenth century, the frontier rapidly declined and then disappeared. Yet the 
first substantial spurt of growth occurred only during the thirteenth century. The 
French polity continued to expand for another six centuries and began showing signs of declining asabiya only recently (the string of military defeats from 
Germany in 1870, 1914, and 1940; loss of the overseas empire). These observations suggest that the temporal scale on which asabiya waxes and wanes is very 
long. In fact, the dynamics of asabiya appear to be substantially slower than the 
0.6 
9 
0.4 
6 
0.2 
3 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 
Century C.E.

Figure 9.1 Frontier intensity in NFR and the area of French polity (excluding overseas 
possessions).

"' E 
:::!: 
cU 
e 
< 
kinetics of linguistic or religious assimilation or the secular cycles resulting from 
demographic-structural processes.

9.1.2 Secular Waves 
The Principate Wave 
If the archaeological data presented by Lewit (1991) and discussed in Chapter 8 
really reflect population oscillations, then Roman Gaul must have gone through 
two oscillations, separated by a period of population decline during the troubled 
third century. The character of the cycle ending with the third-century decline (let 
us call it "the Principate wave," since that is what the Roman Empire during this 
period is often called) is quite clear. Most of Gaul (apart from the Roman Province 
in the south) was added to the Empire in the first century B.c.E. During the first 
century c.E., the frontier moved north and east, and Gaul began an extended 
period of peace and prosperity. As a result, the population grew (Figure 9.2).

From the first century B.C.E. to the second century c.E., the site occupation 
index increased by a factor of 3, so the actual population increase was probably 
even greater, because it is reasonable to suppose that settlement size also increased. This pattern of population growth was mirrored in the rest of the Empire 
(at least, in all the western provinces). According to the demographic-structural 
theory, such unchecked population growth should have inevitably led to state 
insolvency and eventual breakdown. This is precisely what happened. During 
the second century c.E., the Roman Empire experienced a great wave of inflation (Fischer, 1996: Figure 5.03). The state collapse followed, and during most 
of the third century, the empire lacked central authority. The proximate reasons 
for population decline were multifarious: famine, disease (the Antonine plagues), 
South Gaul 
100 )( 
Q) 
"C 
..5 80 
c: 
0 
:0::0 
m 
a.

60 
:::::J 
8 40 0 
~ en 20 
0 
-1 0 2 3 4 5 
Century C.E.

Figure 9.2 Population history of Roman Gaul. (data from Lewit 1991) 
CASE STUDIES 177 
internecine fighting that affected most of the territory, and barbarian invasions.

Additionally, during this period Romans practiced various reproduction control 
practices (mainly infanticide; see quotes in Stark 1996). Ultimately, however, it 
can be argued that all these causes of increased mortality and decreased fertility 
are connected to a high level of sociopolitical instability. Thus, Lewit shows that 
the depth of population decline in a province was correlated with the level of 
warfare it experienced during the calamitous third century.

The Dominate-Merovingian Wave 
It is interesting to observe that the population trajectories of the north and south 
Gaul, which moved in parallel up to the third century, diverged thereafter (Figure 
9.2). The site occupation index in the north declined to a lower level and enjoyed 
only a moderate increase after order was restored at the end of the third century. It 
then declined to a much lower level during the fifth century. The probable reason 
is that during the Dominate period northern Gaul became part of the Roman 
frontier and, as was discussed above, frontier conditions are not conducive to high 
population densities. The more intense the frontier, the sparser the population in 
the region, and apparently the frontier in northern Gaul was very intense.

As was discussed in the previous section, northern Gaul was a frontier between 
the old empire and challenger ethnies: mainly the Franks, but also the Alamanni 
and Burgundi. The Frankish chiefdom established a foothold just north of the 
Roman border during the third century, slowly penetrated south into northern 
Gaul during the fourth century, and came into its own-Regnum Francorumduring the fifth century. After its peak during the first half of the sixth century, it 
fragmented. By 600 c.E. there were four independent polities (Neustria, Austrasia, 
Burgundy, and Aquitaine), which continued to fragment to even smaller pieces 
during the seventh century. According to Slicher van Bath (1964:78), the low 
point of the post-Roman population probably came between 543 and 600 c.E. (see 
also Russell 1985). In other words, the population decline of the sixth century 
was accompanied by increased political instability, precisely as predicted by the 
demographic-structural theory. Again, there is no single factor that can be pointed 
to as the cause of population decline. Certainly both diseases (the plagues of 
Justinian) and warfare played a very important role. One interesting feature of this 
secular wave was the correlation in population declines between widely separated 
regions, belonging to separate polities, e.g., Gaul and Anatolia.

The Carolingian Wave 
After about a century of political turmoil, the secular trend again reversed itself, 
from decentralization to centralization. By 700 c.E. a rejuvenated Frankish polity 
was expanding again, reaching its peak in 800 under Charlemagne. There was 
a population upswing during the Carolingian era (starting during the seventh 
century), followed by a downturn after 900 (Reinhard et al. 1968, Duby 1974).

Several contemporaries describe the heartland of Charlemagne's empire (in NED) 
during the ninth century as full of people, or bursting at the seams with too many 
people. However, large areas of the empire were still available for assarting. Thus, 
the population peak of the ninth century, in absolute numbers, was nowhere near 
as great as the peak of 1300. But locally, in those areas that were cleared of 
forests, population density appears to have been high.

During the ninth century the Carolingian Empire fragmented. The east Frankish Kingdom was taken over by Saxons and eventually reorganized into the Holy 
Roman Empire, but that is outside the geographic region of current interest. The 
west Frankish Kingdom of Charles the Bald fragmented into duchies and counties. In the south, counts lost control over viscounts and castellans, resulting in 
an extreme dispersal of power in such areas as the Massif Central (Zimmerman 1995). Clearly, this was another secular trend inversion, and it was again 
correlated with population change. The population decline and political fragmentation were accompanied by increased incidence of internal warfare and external invasions, of which the most significant for northern France was the Viking 
incursion.

The Capetian Wave 
The period of political fragmentation following the collapse of the Carolingians 
was particularly long. As I discussed in the previous section, three particularly 
aggressive challenger politieslprotoethnies arose on the Frankish march in NFR: 
Normans, Angevins, and Capetians. Although their origins were highly mixed, 
by the eleventh century the ethnic boundaries separating the Norman, Angevin, 
and Capetian elites were quite blurred (Bates 1995), and there was a considerable 
degree of intermariage and movement across them. Thus, it was very likely that 
one polity would incorporate the others, and forge first the elites and then the 
general populace into a single ethnie. This is what happened, although things 
were complicated by the Norman conquest of England. During the twelfth century 
it looked as if the successful polity would be the Angevins, but eventually the 
Capetians triumphed.

However, the reason for the anomalously long stretch of time between the 
population peaks of 800 and 1300 c.E. is now apparent-the tenth through twelfth 
centuries were an intercycle period. The centralization phase of the secular cycle 
could not get going until there was a unified polity of substantial size. As matters 
stood, France acquired a strong monarchy only by about 1200 c.E. Population 
growth began prior to this event and continued strongly throughout the thirteenth 
century. By 1300 c.E., France (as well as most of western Europe) was crammed 
with people. During the first half of the fourteenth century, population growth 
completely ceased, and signs of decline became visible, even before the 1348 
epidemic of bubonic plague. This was the time of frequent subsistence crises and 
an onset of internal warfare. The Hundred Years War is portrayed in textbooks as 
a dynastic conflict between French and English kings. In reality, this war was a 
period of great political instability within France (Salmon 1976; Braudel 1988).

The main conflict was that between the great seigneurs of France, the dukes, and 
the counts, of whom the King of England was just one.

CASE STUDIES 179 
The Valois Wave 
The qualitative population dynamics during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries are well understood, even if we may lack precise quantitative estimates 
(Dupaquier et al. 1988a). The French population (similarly to that in other westem European polities) began declining after 1300 c.E., then experienced a precipitous drop in the Black Death epidemic of 1348, followed by further losses 
as epidemics recurred and fighting in the Hundred Years War intensified. Overall population numbers declined by about one-half (Dupiiquier et al. 1988b:149).

After that, for about a century population numbers fluctuated at a low level, and 
started to increase only during the second half of the fifteenth century. The nature 
of population dynamics can be seen in one particular example, Normandy (Bois 
1984:76). Rural population numbers fluctuated back and forth, with three declines 
(in the mid-fourteenth and the early and mid-fifteenth centuries), interspersed by 
periods of partial recovery. The absolute minimum was achieved around 1460, 
after which the population finally entered an era of sustained increase.

The prolonged "stagnation" of population (actually, fluctuations at a low level) 
during the 1350-1450 period presents a serious challenge to most standard demographic theories. Certainly, the crude version of the Malthusian-Ricardian theory 
predicts that populations should have started growing by the end of the fourteenth 
century, not a century later (Brenner 1985). After all, land was plentiful, and large 
amounts of surplus could again be generated (and they apparently were produced, 
judging by the practically universal decline of grain prices, roughly by a factor 
of two from 1300 to 1400 c.E.). The effect of the plague similarly declined and 
reached a minimum (at least, as judged by the number of localities affected; see 
Biraben 1975:120). In fact, the incidence of plague started a slow increase after 
1400 to another peak during the seventeenth century. Thus, some other factor, 
acting with a long delay (a second-order mechanism, in the terminology adopted 
here), was responsible for preventing population increase.

As I argued in Chapter 7, the underlying cause of secular waves in human 
population numbers is the interaction between population and political stability.

According to the demographic-structural theory, then, it was ultimately political 
instability that prevented immediate population increase once the demographic 
pressure was relieved. The situation in France during 1350-1450 appears to support this prediction. The Hundred Years War was a period of almost continuous 
political unrest, although there were two particularly bad periods, c. 1360 and 
the 1420s. Certain regional studies provide further evidence for the connection 
between political instability and population dynamics. For example, the population of Normandy began increasing after the worst crises of the 1360s and 1370s 
were over. However, this increase was not long lived and was succeeded by another period of depopulation during the 1420s and 1430s. This is perhaps not 
surprising, given that Normandy was a primary battlefield between the English 
and French during these periods.

The two particularly acute periods of French state collapse are reflected in the 
territorial trajectory (Figure 9.1), which reached local minima in 1370 and 1430.

The latter nadir was a time of particularly desperate straits for the kingdom, 
when even the capital was lost to the Anglo-Burgundian forces. However, the 
secular trend was about to reverse itself, and while the current situation looked 
grim, France was actually on the brink of another period of territorial expansion 
(Figure 9.1).

The reason for this turnaround is suggested by the selfish elite model. Recollect 
that this model predicts that, in order for the state to be viable, it needs to keep a 
relatively low ratio of elites to commoners. The model, thus, makes a prediction 
that a centralization trend could not get going until the number of French nobles 
declined below a certain threshold. This is a prediction that may be tested with 
data. Qualitatively this proposal seems likely, given the enormous numbers of 
French nobles dispossessed during this period (Wright 1998). Additionally, the 
massive slaughter of "the flower of French nobility" at Crecy and Agincourt 
must have made a noticeable impact on their numbers. Thus, Dupaquier et al.

( 1988a:342) estimate that about 40% of the French nobility was lost at each 
battle.

The years 1430-1510 c.E. were a period of rapid and continuous expansion 
for the French state (Figure 9.1). First, by 1453 the English were expelled almost 
completely from the continent (retaining only a tiny area around Calais). By 
1480, France took over half of the Burgundian inheritance. Finally, in 1494 the 
French embarked on their most ambitious venture, the attempt to dominate Italy.

This adventure lead to the Valois-Habsburg wars of the sixteenth century and 
ultimately ended with the expulsion of the French from the Appenine Peninsula.

One possible explanation is that France overextended itself geopolitically; this 
seems very likely, but needs to be tested in a thorough and quantitative fashion.

For example, it would be very interesting to see how much it cost France to deliver 
armies to Rome or Naples, compared to the same task for Spain. The French had 
to travel overland, through mountain passes in the Alps. The Spanish, by contrast, 
shipped troops by sea, and it looks as if they had a geopolitical advantage. But 
this is just a qualitative argument, and a more quantitative approach is needed.

Note that the model of logistical loads is one theory that I have not been able to 
test directly (so far).

Whether because of logistical constraints, or for some other reason, the territorial expansion of France ceased by the mid-sixteenth century. The sixteenth 
century was also a period of sustained population growth in France, which was, 
as usual, reflected in the movement of food prices (Figure 9.3). Between 1460 
and 1560 the population of France doubled (Dupaquier et al. 1988b), reaching 
20 million, and then stagnated at that level to the end of the century (in fact, this 
level was not exceeded until the middle years of Louis XIV; Salmon 1976:32).

The elite numbers increased even faster. Thus, the total number of noble families 
in the election of Bayeux increased from 211 in 1463 to 559 in 1598 (Wood 
1980). At the other end of France, in Montpellier, the number of officeholders almost quadrupled from 112 in 1500 to 442 in 1600 (Greengrass 1985:122).

Thus, the demographic-structural machinery became engaged again, leading to increased fiscal distress, elite competition, political instability, and eventually state 
collapse.

CASE STUDIES 181 
200 - England 
4 France I\ 
150 I \ 
~ I \ 
I ' "I: I ' Q.

1: 100 I ·e I 
(.!) I 
I 50 ,..--
0 
1500 1600 1700 
YearC.E.

Figure 9.3 Movement of grain prices in France and England from 1500 to 1750 c.E. (Data 
from Abel 1966) 
The Bourbon Wave 
The period of political instability in France was about a century long, roughly 
1560-1660 c.E. There were two episodes of state collapse: the peak of the religious wars (around 1590) and the Fronde (around 1650). The first one resulted 
in a dynastic change from Valois to Bourbon. The authorities lost control of the 
capital both times, and internal warfare was extremely bloody, particularly in 
northern France.

'fhe period between the religious wars and the Fronde was relatively stable, with the exception of Louis XIII's minority. According to DupAquier et al.

(1988b:152), there were three periods of population decline: 1580-1597, 1626-
1631, and 1660-1663. These population crises were quite serious, especially the 
first and the last. The first crisis may have resulted in a population loss as high 
as 20% or more (Benedict 1985:96). During the last, certain provinces in the 
north and east probably lost close to a half of their inhabitants (Dupfu}uier et al.

1988b:152).

The end of the time of troubles, by mid-1660s, led to another bout of territorial 
expansion (Figure 9.1). Thus, we see that the French state experienced three 
major episodes of expansion: thirteenth century, fifteenth century, and the period 
of 1660-1710. In other words, the secular cycle had a direct effect on the ability 
of the state to expand. Note also that each successive wave of expansion was 
shorter and gained less territory. This trend can reflect either a declining asabiya 
or logistical constraints (or both).

The Bourbon cycle concluded with the French Revolution. The events leading 
to it are well known, and have been discussed by Goldstone from the point of 
view of the demographic-structural theory, so I will not review them here. I only 
note that the period of political instability extended from 1789 to 1848, and that 
during this time France experienced the Great Revolution, Bourbon restoration, 
a revolution in 1830, another one in 1848, and, finally, the establishment of the 
Second Empire. After that France embarked on another imperialistic expansionary 
period (although this time it did not do very well), but this quickly takes us 
beyond our self-imposed boundary of 1900 c.E.

A Digression on Synchrony 
One interesting aspect of the Bourbon wave was that France's period of instability 
was shifted in time with respect to the rest of western Europe. Thus, central 
Europe's period of instability was during the Thirty Years War (1618-1648).

England's was 1640 to 1690 (English Revolution, Stuart Restoration, and the 
Glorious Revolution). Spain's crisis years were during the 1640s: rebellions in 
Portugal, Catalonia, and southern Italy (although we should not forget about the 
Dutch revolt of the second half of the sixteenth century). Only Russia seems to 
be on the same trajectory as France (as will be seen in the next section).

This quick comparison raises a number of interesting issues. First, why did 
early modem state breakdown tend to occur in waves (Goldstone 1991b)? The 
crisis of the seventeenth century and the age of revolutions during the nineteenth century affected Europe, the Middle East (Ottoman Thrkey), and East Asia 
(China). Second, although there was a rough synchrony between different polities, 
it was not by any means perfect, as the fine structure of the "seventeenth-century 
crisis" shows. Additionally, although Russia was in synchrony with France during the seventeenth-century crisis, it subsequently shifted out of phase, since it 
experienced revolutions and state collapse in the early twentieth century, not in 
the mid-nineteenth as was the case for central and western Europe.

We can look for explanations in purely exogenous factors, such as climate fluctuations (Galloway 1986; Goldstone 199lb). Thus, it is possible that the pllgue 
pandemic of the fourteenth century (itself a consequence of the Mongolian superempire) "reset" a number of polities to the same starting conditions. Another 
possibility is some "contagion" leading to positive spatial autocorrelations. For 
example, almost synchronous uprisings in Portugal, Catalonia, and Sicily could 
happen because the revolt in one region could encourage others to do the same.

Similarly, it is known that the wave of European revolutions in 1848 fed on 
news from other parts of the continent. The third possibility is suggested by the 
dynamical systems theory.

If two oscillatory systems are driven by the same mechanism, causing them 
to cycle with the same period, then they may oscillate in synchrony by chance 
alone, simply because they happened to get started at approximately the same 
time (Turchin and Hall 2003). If that is the case, then differences in phase will 
tend to be perpetuated in time. For example, it happened that France came out 
of the fourteenth-century crisis before England. Whereas France was already on 
the ascendant by 1450, England had yet to experience the last bout of its own 
state collapse, the Wars of the Roses ( 1455-1485). This may have delayed the English demographic-structural cycle by roughly half a century, compared to France.

CASE STUDIES 183 
Thus, we would expect that the next period of England's state breakdown should 
begin after that of France. This is what apparently happened: France was in a fullblown crisis by 1590, while England's turn came only in 1640. Of course, there 
is another possible explanation for this shift in phase. The demographic-structural 
theory predicts only how pressures for crisis evolve. The actual beginning of the 
crisis needs a triggering event, which may come sooner or later. For example, 
in agrarian monarchies, the triggering event is often a disputed succession. Thus, 
two polities under identical amounts of pressure may go into crisis 10 years apart, 
depending on when their respective monarchs die. In the early modem French and 
English cases, however, it seems that there was a genuine difference in pressure 
for crisis. Food prices are a particularly good indicator of fiscal pressure, and note 
how food prices in France started increasing prior to those for England (Figure 
9.3). French prices reached a peak in 1590 (and a second one during 1620-1640).

In contrast, in England food prices reached a peak only in 1640. These data, thus, 
suggest that France and England were genuinely shifted in phase. Note that during the next episode of political instability, it was France again that led the way 
with the French Revolution. By contrast, England's period of political crisis was 
acute (but did not cause state breakdown; Goldstone 1991 b) during the 1830s.

The considerations discussed above are suggestive, but no more than that. However, it is clear that meaningful empirical tests can be devised to distinguish between the three different explanations of apparent synchrony (as well as persistent 
phase shifts). Furthermore, in reality all three kinds of mechanisms (exogenous, 
endogenous, and spatial autocorrelations) may contribute to the observed pattern 
of synchrony (Turchin and Hall 2003). For example, an exogenous force may 
interact with the inherent tendency of the dynamical system to oscillate with a 
certain period to produce synchronous oscillations in different polities. One possibility, a strong exogenous shock delivered to all systems at the same time (the 
Black Death pandemic), was already mentioned above. Another, more subtle, 
mechanism is when slight changes in climate affect the carrying capacity of populations. Numerical exercises show that correlated changes in carrying capacity, 
even when quite small (e.g., 10-20%), may synchronize the dynamics of two 
polities driven by the selfish elite model.

Fine Structure of Decentralization Phases 
Another interesting pattern apparent in the French case is that decentralization 
phases are not uniformly awful, but have their own rhythms. Thus, the Hundred 
Years War had two periods of particularly acute crisis (c.l360 and the 1420s), 
separated roughly by half a century. During the next decentralization phase, there 
were again two peaks of political instability, in the 1590s and c.1650. The most 
acute crisis of the French Revolution was around 1790, after which the internal situation was reasonably stable under Napoleon and the Bourbons. After this 
respite, another period of instability followed with the revolutions of 1830 and 
1848. It is hard to say whether this is just a coincidence, or whether some regular pattern is involved. If real, one possible explanation of such oscillations 
may be that after a prolonged period of instability, e.g., a decade, people begin 
to yearn for stability. Even if the basic conditions that brought about the crisis 
in the first place have not been resolved, people may acquiesce in any political arrangement that restores order. Thus, the generation that grew up during 
the time of trouble is likely to support order at any cost, even if the regime is 
perceived as lacking in legitimacy. The next generation, however, does not have 
direct experience with turmoil and therefore is easier to persuade to support an 
overturning of the existing order. Such a dynamic should result in two-generation 
cycles of 40-60 years in duration. Furthermore, it is possible that some mechanism similar to that described by Richard Easterlin (1980) may be operating.

Heightened sociopolitical instability depresses birth rates, resulting in a smaller 
cohort and, consequently, less competition among the next generation. The next 
generation, therefore, does well economically, has a lower mobilization potential, 
but also produces a large number of babies. Such a mechanism should lead to an 
alternation of smalVdocile versus large/belligerent generations. The two possible 
explanations, discussed above, are not alternatives, but can work together. Additionally, there could be some interesting implications here for the connection 
between Kondratieff waves and warfare (Goldstein 1988), and some recent literature from the world-systems research program (Modelski and Thompson 1996).

9.1.3 Summary 
Counting the centuries of sociopolitical instability and population decline (which 
are more easily detected in the historical record), we observe the following sequence for Gaul-France: ID-VI-IX-XIV-XVII-XIX, or six oscillations during 
the 2000-year period. All oscillations but one are of 2-3 centuries in duration.

The only exception is the X-XIV period, which as I argued above is an intercycle.

Thus, the periods of the secular waves conform well with those predicted by the 
demographic-structural theory. Additionally, although we lack quantitative data, 
such as J. S. Lee developed for China, we have traced the qualitative dynamics 
in this region, and they appear to be in line with the theoretical predictions.

9.2 RUSSIA 
9.2.1 The Frontier Origins 
On the Great Steppe Frontier of Europe 
The importance of the steppe frontier in Russian history has been pointed 
out by numerous historians (Presniak.ov 1918; McNeill 1964; Kargalov 1974; 
Wieszynnski 1976; Armstrong 1982; LeDonne 1997; Khodarkovsky 2002). In 
1992, a whole issue of Russian History was devoted to this topic (see Hellie 
1992 and following articles).

The great grasslands dominate the interior of the Eurasian continent. The 
Eurasian steppe runs practically uninterrupted from Khingan Mountains in the 
east (on the northern border of China) to the Carpathians in the west, and beyond 
CASE STUDIES 185 
the Carpathians to the Hungarian plain. Within eastern Europe the grasslandwoodland transition runs in the northeast-southwest direction, roughly through 
the following cultural regions (see Figure 5.1): KAZ, SRU, UKR, and ZAP. In 
addition, the Eurasian steppe curls around the Black Sea into MOL and VLH, and 
there is an extension into central Europe (HUN, the Hungarian plains). Finally, 
the Anatolian Plateau (ANT) can also be considered as an extension, although 
this area belongs to the dry steppe variety.

From at least the times of Cimmerians (the beginning of the first millennium 
B.C.E., Riazanovsky 2000) and until the eighteenth century the grasslands were 
dominated by nomadic pastoralists. The woodlands were inhabited by settled 
agriculturalists since the fourth millennium B.C.E. (Riazanovsky 2000: 13). Thus, 
the forest-steppe transition zone was the locus of a metaethnic frontier throughout 
almost all of its history (and a large chunk of prehistory). Note, however, that the 
steppe frontier was not stationary but tended to sway back and forth (more on this 
below). Furthermore, its intensity tended to wax and wane. Although very little 
is known about the period when the steppe was dominated by the Indo-European 
nomads (Cimmerians, Scythians, and Sarmatians), the cultural difference between 
the agriculturalists and pastoralists may not have been too great. Thus, many 
religious terms in the modem Russian are of Iranian origin, suggesting that there 
were some common elements in the religion of east Slavs and Iranian-speaking 
nomads (Scythians and Sarmatians). Beginning from the late third century c.E., 
the Iranian nomads were replaced on the steppe by repeated waves of Turkic 
and Mongolian peoples. It is likely that the cultural distance across the frontier 
increased as a result of this development. But the greatest intensity was achieved 
by the frontier when two world religions, Christianity and Islam, extended their 
sway over eastern Europe. Settled agriculturalists tended to embrace Christianity, 
while nomads converted to Islam.

The socioethnic complexity of the southern part of the steppe frontier was further enhanced after the seventh century B.C.E. as a result of Greek colonization of 
the northern shore of the Black Sea (Olbia, Chersonesus, Tanais, Pantikapaeum, 
and Phanagoria; see Riazanovsky, 2000:14). This colonization led to the establishment of the Bosporan kingdom, which eventually passed to the Romans and 
then to the Byzantines. As a result of these developments, the Pontic Steppe was 
squeezed between two very different frontiers: the southern frontier between civilized (in the sense of being urban) empires and the steppe (MOL, ZAP, AZV), 
and the northern frontier between the steppe and the settled agriculturalists of the 
woodlands (MOL, ZAP, UKR). The metaethnic frontier theory predicts that this 
area should have been the locus of intense ethnopolitogenesis.

This is precisely what happened (a quick overview is given in Riazanovsky 
2000:13-16). The first strong polity was established by the Scythians, who ruled 
the Pontic Steppe from the seventh to the third century B.C.E. The Scythians were 
defeated and replaced by the Sarmatians (also known as Alans). The Sarmatians 
ruled the area until roughly 200 c.E., when they were defeated by the Goths. The 
Gothic period is dated from 200 to 370 c.E., when Runs-probably a Prototurkic 
people with large Mongol and U grian contingents-arrived on the scene. The Hun 
invasion represented a watershed of sorts, since it and all later nomadic waves 
were non-Indo-European speaking peoples (Ugrians, Turks, and Mongols).

After the defeat of the Ostrogoths and Visigoths by the Huns, the Pontic Steppe 
ceased to be the locus of strong polities. Successive waves of invaders originating 
in central Asia passed through the Pontic Steppe and established their polities 
west or south of it. The center of the short-lived Hun polity was in Pannonia 
(HUN region). Avars (whose invasion is dated to 558 c.E.) and Magyars of the 
ninth century followed in the Huns' steps. Bulgars, by contrast, pressed south 
to the northeastern Balkans, where they established the empire of the Danubian 
Bulgars in the seventh century. At about the same time, another nomadic empire, 
Khazaria, was established to the east, with its center in the Volga Delta. Thus, 
until about 900 c.E., the Pontic Steppe was a contested ground between strong 
polities to the west (Avars, then Magyars), south (Bulgars), east (.Khazars), and 
eventually north (Principality of Kiev, from the ninth century).

The Kievan Prelude 
The origins of the Principality of Kiev are not completely understood and are still 
the subject of some debate among historians. What is clear is that by the ninth 
century, the UKR region was inhabited by Slavs, whenever and however they 
got there (authorities still disagree on this issue). The Slavs of the forest-steppe 
transition zone had partly assimilated Iranian, Baltic, and Finno-Ugric people 
(Novoseltsev 2001). The grasslands were inhabited by nomadic pastoralists, of 
very complex ethnic origins, as indicated in the quick historical summary above.

From the seventh century, the eastern Pontic Steppe was dominated by Khazaria. Khazaria was the first large state in the history of eastern Europe, and 
it exerted a defining influence on the ethno- and politogenesis in this region 
(Novoseltsev 2001). The Khazarian ethnie formed during the sixth and seventh 
centuries probably as a result of an amalgamation of Prototurkic, Ugrian, and 
Iranian elements (Novoseltsev 2001). The core region of the Khazar state was 
located in Daghestan (northeastern Caucasus), which at the time was situated on 
the northern frontier of the Sassanian Empire. The final triggering event leading 
to the crystallization of the Khazarian polity was the invasion of Khazaria by 
the Arabs, after the latter conquered the Sassanian Empire in the middle of the 
seventh century. The Arabs, from their bases in Derbent and on the main passes 
of the Caucasus Mountains, exerted a significant amount of geopolitical pressure 
on Khazaria, eventually even taking the Khazar capital city of Samandar in 737 
(Novoseltsev 2001). In what appears as a classical reflux effect (Section 4.2.2), 
the main thrust of the Khazarian expansion was directed northward (see the map 
in Farrington 2002:83). By the middle of the eighth century, the Khazars ruled 
the Crimea, the lower Don, and the lower and middle Volga areas. According to 
the Russian chronicles, at some point in time, the Polanian Slavs were also subjugated, while other east Slavic groups payed tribute to the Khazars (Novoseltsev 
2001). Thus, by the ninth century, the Slavs inhabiting the UKR region found 
themselves on an imperial frontier of an aggressive and ethnically alien empire.

CASE STUDIES 187 
The last element of the ethnic melting pot in the UKR region was the Scandinavian traders and raiders, referred to as the Varangians in Russian chronicles.

Working from the Baltic Sea, the Scandinavians established a network of settlements along such important trade routes as the Volkhov, Volga, and Dnieper 
Rivers. With time, some of these settlements, most notably Novgorod and Kiev, 
changed in nature from trading posts to the nuclei of territorial chiefdoms, and 
eventually states.

The most powerful of these incipient polities was the Principality of Kiev, or · 
the Rus Kaganate (as it was referred to in the Arabian sources). The Rus Kaganate 
was a federation of elite warriors living on trade and booty and drawing tribute 
from the Slavic, Baltic, and Finnish agricultural peoples of the forest and foreststeppe land {Hosking 2001:33). At this stage in its development, the Kievan 
polity was a rather typical complex chiefdom, with the Great Prince in Kiev 
as the paramount chief, and princes of various East Slavic tribes as subordinate 
chiefs. The cohesive forces holding this polity together were rather standard for 
a frontier "barbarian" tribal confederation: defense and predation.

Settled agriculturalists living on Europe's steppe frontier had always had to 
deal with raiding by the nomads. During the eighth and ninth centuries, as stated 
above, many east Slavic tribes had to pay tribute to Khazaria. After 900, however, 
the intensity of raiding pressure on east Slavs intensified, because a new steppe 
polity, the Pechenegs (or Patzinaks ), broke through the area controlled by the 
Khazars (Novoseltsev 2001) and established itself in the Pontic Steppe (Hosking 2001:34). As I pointed out above, there were no large-scale nomadic polities 
based in this area {ZAP and AZV) during the previous five centuries. It is probably not by chance alone that the Principality of Kiev coalesced practically at the 
same time as the Pecheneg Confederation. The mechanism underlying the rise of 
the Pechenegs was probably similar to that described by Barfield {1989) for the 
interaction between agrarian societies of China and nomadic empires of central 
Asia, and modeled in Section 7.2.3. This hypothetical dynamic can be quickly 
sketched as follows. Varangians based in Kiev using their military superiority 
impose tribute on the surrounding Slavic tribes, perhaps offering them increased 
protection from the competing predators of the steppe. Steppe dwellers now have 
to increase the size of their war parties in order to overcome the stronger defenses 
of the agriculturalists. Additionally, a concentration of both staple and prestige 
goods in Kiev and eventually other towns presents a greater incentive for scaling up the political organization on the steppe. As a result, pressure from the 
steppe significantly increases. This provides extra centralizing incentives for agriculturalists, and the positive feedback loop causes both polities, the agrarian and 
the nomadic, to centralize until the process is stopped by ecological and logistic 
constraints.

Mutual defense was not the only force generating scaled-up asabiya in the 
Kievan Rus. Varangians, the warrior elite of this polity, were notable predators 
themselves. The richest target was Constantinople, and a number of raids were 
directed against the Byzantine Empire, including the campaigns of Oleg and lgor 
in the tenth century. Furthermore, under Prince Sviatoslav (the second half of the 
tenth century) the Rus sacked the capital of the Volga Bulgars, delivered a death 
blow to Khazaria, and captured the capital of the Danube Bulgarians. Both the 
necessity of gathering the large forces needed to overcome these powerful polities 
and the enhanced reputation resulting from the success must have been powerful 
sources of collective solidarity for the Rus warrior elites.

It would be interesting to speculate why the Kievan state coalesced in the 
UKR (and not in the SRU or ZAP) region. History books stress the importance of 
trade (see, for example, Kliuchevskii 1911 on the importance of waterways). This 
hypothesis is supported by the current anthropological theory that emphasizes the 
importance of prestige goods in the evolution of chiefdoms (Earle 1997). Eastern 
Europe of the second half of the first millennium had two main trading routes, one 
associated with the Dnieper and the other with the Volga. It is interesting to note 
that the loci where the Dnieper and Volga trading routes intersect the woodlandssteppe transitional region were both centers of intense political development at 
about the same time (Kiev in UKR and Great Bulgar in KAZ). Similarly, the next 
great trade artery is the Danube, which is precisely where the Danubian Bulgars 
established their state.

An important event for the metaethnic landscape of eastern Europe was the 
arrival of world religions toward the end of the first millennium. The first was 
Judaism, which was adopted as the state religion in Khazaria. However, Judaism 
had very little impact on the area after the fall of Khazaria in the tenth century.

The Volga Bulgars were Muslim, and were instrumental in converting Mongols 
to Islam during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Eventually, all nomads 
in eastern Europe became Muslim (apart from a later intrusion of the Buddhist 
Kalmyks). By contrast, the Slavs and other agricultural people converted to Orthodox Christianity. Thus, the religious frontier that emerged during the early 
second millennium coincided with the economic frontier dividing agriculturalists 
from pastoralists. This development resulted in a significant deepening of the 
metaethnic fault line running through eastern Europe.

Russian Ethnogenesis 
The locus of Russian ethnogenesis was northeastern Rus, also known as VladimirSuzdal Rus. Right away I should state that by "locus" I do not mean a precisely 
delineated area. Thus, Moscow itself, the Volga-Oka mesopotamia, the northeastem Rus, and the rest of the formerly Kievan lands, as well as the Golden Horde 
to the east, all contributed to the process of Russian ethnogenesis, but the importance of these contributions varied, generally decreasing with greater distance 
from Moscow.

Vladimir-Suzdal Rus was a northeastern frontier of the Principality of Kiev 
(note that I use "Rus" to refer to the pre-Mongolian period, and "Russia" to the 
period after Mongolian conquest; because the core regions of Rus and Russia 
were distinct, "northeastern Rus" became "central Russia"). On the eve of the 
Mongolian conquest, it was inhabited by people who were some kind of mixture 
of Baltic, Finnish, and Slavic tribes. Some Russian historians (e.g., Kliuchevskii 
1911) argued that northeastern Rus was populated as a result of massive colonization by the Slavs. Others (Paszkievicz 1983) thought that the Great Russians 
CASE STUDIES 189 
were simply a slavicized Merya (a Finnish tribe that inhabited the Volga-Oka 
mesopotamia). Whatever the details, it is clear that the population of northeastem Rus during the first few centuries of the second millennium was increasingly 
assimilated to the Slavic language and Orthodox Christian religion. At the same 
time it was subjected to one of the most intense and prolonged metaethnic frontiers in European history.

In the eleventh century, the northeastern frontier of the Kievan Rus had a 
rather mild quality. It was a frontier between Slavic-speaking Christians and 
largely Finnish-speaking pagans. Additionally, Kievan Rus had an increasingly 
urban culture and, as population densities grew, more intense agriculture than 
indigenous peoples. On the other hand, it is likely that the process of Christianization of Slavs was gradual (see Chapter 6). Meanwhile, non-Slavic people were 
increasingly converted to Christianity.

During the twelfth and especially the thirteenth century, the steppe frontier advanced north. This occurred partly as a result of decentralization processes within 
the Kievan polity (see below), and partly because of the arrival of new nomadic 
hordes from central Asia: first the Cumans (Polovtsy) in the mid-eleventh century, then Mongols two hundred years later. In the twelfth century the core of the 
Kievan state was both the site of internecine warfare between various Ryurikid 
factions, and the subject of increasing raiding pressure from the Cumans. As population density declined and many settlements were abandoned, nomad raiders 
had to press further north in quest of booty and slaves. In the thirteenth century, 
both the Cumans and East Slavic principalities were decisively defeated by the 
Mongols. Although northeastern Rus became part of the Golden Horde, it did not 
lead to a cessation of pressure from the steppe. First, the Mongols did not rule 
Russia directly, instead relying on local rulers to deliver tribute. This relationship 
required periodic punitive expeditions to remind both the elites and the population of the alternative to paying taxes. There were a number of urban risings in 
Russia against the Mongols during the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

People objected particularly to the enslaving of householders who could not pay 
their dues (Hosking 2001 :55). Second, no steppe ruler could completely control 
all his followers, and there was a certain amount of raiding, which intensified 
when the central authority in the Golden Horde weakened in the middle of the 
fourteenth century.

By the middle of the fifteenth century, the Golden Horde had undergone a final 
dissolution. Three strong polities arose on its former periphery: the Principality 
of Moscow and the .Khanates of Kazan and Crimea. Russian lands came under 
an extremely intense raiding pressure from the Kazan and Crimean Tatars. The 
prime motivation of nomadic raiders was obtaining slaves. By some estimates, 
150,000 to 200,000 Russians were captured in the first half of the seventeenth 
century (.Khodarkovsky 2002:22) 
I rate the intensity of the metaethnic frontier in CRU during the thirteenth to 
the sixteenth centuries as 9, the maximum possible value. The religious divide 
between Christianity and Islam gets a rating of 3, the linguistic difference is 2, 
the economic way of life is 2, and the intensity of warfare is 2. The last index reflects the essentially genocidal quality of the steppe frontier during this 
period. The large swath of the forest-steppe transitional zone was depopulated 
due to the combined effects of mortality and slave taking resulting from raids, 
and emigration of the remaining population to more protected regions. Thus, the 
former core of the Kievan state was completely abandoned by agriculturalists.

Most of the Principality of Ryazan was also abandoned, including the old capital (the new capital had to be moved northwest to Pereyaslavl-Ryazansky). The 
remaining population was hanging on precariously in the northwestern corner of 
the principality.

The steppe frontier was not the only metaethnic fault line running through 
Russia in the first half of the second millennium. Another source of geopolitical pressure on the lands of east Slavs was the Lithuanian state, which arose 
in the thirteenth century and rapidly grew during the fourteenth century, conquering most of the former Kievan Rus, except the northwestern (Novgorod and 
Pskov) and northeastern (Vladimir-Suzdal) lands. Interestingly, the expansion of 
this empire, the largest in Europe of the fifteenth century, did not result in establishing an intense metaethnic fault line. The initially pagan Lithuanian elites 
were very rapidly assimilated to the culture of Kievan Rus. The Lithuanian army, 
administration, legal system, and finance were organized on the Russian pattern, and Russian became the official language of the new state (Riazanovsky 
2000:134). Even when the Lithuanian/west Russian nobles began converting to 
Catholicism, as a part of Polonization resulting from the Poland-Lithuania dynastic union of 1385, no sharp ethnic boundaries arose. Up to the twentieth century, 
Slavic dialects between Moscow and Warsaw formed a seamless linguistic matrix. There was no sharp religious fault line, because Polonization affected primarily the upper strata (and even them incompletely, since many nobles stayed 
Orthodox). Thus, the "civilizational fault line" (sensu Huntington 1996) between 
the Catholic and Orthodox worlds was rather blurred in this part of Eastern 
Europe.

A rather different situation developed to the north. During the thirteenth century, 
the east Baltic region became one of the crusading frontiers of Latin Christendom 
(Shaskolsky 1978; Bartlett 1993; Murray 2001). The Danes invaded Estonia, the 
German crusading knights intruded in Livonia, and the Swedes conquered southern 
Finland. These Germanic-speaking Catholic peoples began exerting a significant 
amount of pressure on the northwestern Russian city-republics of Pskov and Novgorod. In my view, the Baltic frontier qualifies as a major metaethnic fault line for 
at least two reasons.

First, there is the ideological dimension-a crusade was declared against the 
enemies of Latin Christians, pagans as well as "schismatics." This development 
suggests that by the 1240s the western and eastern brands of Christianity had 
diverged far enough to be considered separate metaethnies. It is interesting that it 
was during the thirteenth century that the metaethnonym Nemtsy arose in Russian 
(Lind 2001). Nemtsy designated all non-Slavic peoples of western Europe. During 
the thirteenth century old ethnic terms for Danes and Swedes (Don' and Svei) 
completely disappeared from the Russian language. When the need to distinguish 
between various ethnic groups of Nemtsy arose around 1500 c.E., new terms 
CASE STUDIES 191 
had to be created (Datchane, Shvedy), while Nemtsy became reserved for the 
Germans.

The second reason is the intensity of conflict, which at times acquired ethnocidal and even genocidal character. The impact of Baltic Crusades on native 
peoples such as the Prussians is well known. But even as late as the sixteenth 
century, during the Livonian War, the fighting on the frontier was so intense that 
the entire Novgorodian region was largely depopulated.

To summarize, after the Kievan Rus imploded, its northern borderlands became "contested grounds," squeezed between two metaethnic frontiers. The most 
intense metaethnic fault line resulted from a northward shift of the steppe frontier. The pressure from the steppe resulted in a depopulation of the UKR and 
SRU regions, while the CRU and KAZ regions saw the formation of multiple 
centers of power during the fifteenth century (Tver, Moscow, and Kazan). The 
second metaethnic frontier, of somewhat lower intensity (I rate it as 6), arose in 
the northwest. When the Muscovite state conquered Novgorod (and Tver) by the 
end of the fifteenth century, it came under the influence of both frontiers. The 
subsequent history of Russia is very much the story of how these frontiers were 
moved away from the Volga-Oka heartland. Russia was a frontier state until at 
least the eighteenth century. The steppe frontier was closed down only with the 
conquest of the Crimean Khanate in the late eighteenth century. The acquisition 
of Poland and Finland around the same time, as well as the entry of Russia into 
the system of European Great Powers also changed the quality of the Baltic frontier, but these developments occurred toward the end of the period of interest, so 
I will not pursue it here.

9.2.2 Secular Waves 
The Kievan Wave 
Although the population of Kievan Rus grew rapidly during the eleventh century, 
from around 3.5 million in 1000 c.E. (McEvedy and Jones 1978) to 7-8 million in 
the twelfth century (Riazanovsky 2000:48), it is unlikely that the peasant/land ratio was anywhere near the Malthusian subsistence limits. A much greater threat to 
the political stability of the Kievan state came from the growth of the elites, particularly from "the ever-increasing princely family with its numerous branches" 
as Riazanovsky (2000:49) characterized them.

The Kievan state reached its zenith during the reign of Iaroslav the Wise ( 1019-
1054). The reigns of Iaroslav's successors introduced a long period of decline, 
characterized by increasing intraelite conflict and eventually state collapse. Of 
the 170 years following Iaroslav's death, 80 witnessed civil war (Pogodin, cited 
in Riazanovsky 2000}. However, the decentralization phase of the secular cycle 
had two periods of particularly intense internal conflict with a period of relative 
stability in between (we have already noticed this pattern in the French case). The 
period of stability was the reigns of Vladimir Monomakh and two of his sons 
(1113-1139}. The second period of civil war in the mid-twelfth century led to the 
final collapse of the Kievan state. In 1169 Andrei Bogoliubskii sacked Kiev and 
transferred the capital to Vladimir in northeastern Rus. Kiev was sacked again 
in 1203 and suffered complete destruction in 1240 at the hands of the Mongols 
(Riazanovsky 2000).

The Golden Horde Intercycle 
By the year 1200 the core of the Kievan state had undergone a complete disintegration. The southern half of Kievan Rus was the arena for a three-way struggle 
between branches of Ryurik's clan: the Rostislavichi of Smolensk, the Olgovichi 
of Chernigov, and Roman Mstislavich of Volynia (Fennell 1983). Two relatively 
stable polities, Novgorod and Vladimir, were preeminent in the north. The spatial pattern of an imploded core, surrounded by rising marcher states, is a typical feature of the postimperiallandscape (Chapter 4). The endogenous evolution 
of Kievan Rus, however, was forcibly interrupted by an intrusion from central 
Asia. For about two hundred years, from the mid-thirteenth to the mid-fifteenth 
century, Rus (and especially its northeastern part) became the periphery of the 
Mongolian Empire (or the Golden Horde, after the empire was divided among 
the descendants of Chinggis Khan). As a result of this change of status, the political dynamics of northeastern Rus, or central Russia (CRU), as I will refer to 
it from now on, were determined by exogenous forces, originating from an imperial steppe confederation. For this reason, I refer to these two hundred years 
as an "intercycle" period. I should note, however, that recently Sergey Nefedov 
(2002b) persuasively argued that the Mongolian period can be considered as a 
complete secular cycle in its own right, especially in the Novgorodian land, where 
the Mongolian influence was weak.

The demographic-structural models of Chapter 7 suggest that agrarian states 
with monogamous elites tend to have longer secular cycles compared to nomadic 
confederations with polygamous elites. Because central Russia became a periphery of a steppe polity, it was affected by a distinctly different "rhythm of history," 
than what was typical either before or after the period of Mongol domination.

The following summary of events on the Eurasian steppe and environs is from 
Grousset (1970).

The huge territory conquered by the Mongols during the first half of the thirteenth century contained four large "cultural areas" inhabited by settled people: 
China, Transoxania, Persia (including Mesopotamia), and eastern Europe. From 
the middle of the thirteenth century, these four areas were ruled by four separate Chinggisid dynasties: (1) Kublai and his successors (the Yuan dynasty) in 
China; (2) Jagataids in Turkestan (which included Transoxania); (3) Hulagu and 
his successors (Il-Khans) in Persia; and (4) Juchids (Batu and his successors) 
in the Kipchak Steppe (the Golden Horde). According to the theory advanced 
in Chapter 7, these four polities should be subject to the lbn Khaldun cycles of 
around a century in period. This is indeed what happened.

In China, the civil war between the successors of Kublai broke out in 1328.

The 1350s saw numerous revolts led by native leaders, and in 1368 one of these 
leaders expelled the Mongols and established the Ming dynasty.

Turkestan was unified until 1333-1334, when a nomad-led insurrection broke 
out against the Jagataid regime in eastern Turkestan. By 1350 the power in Transoxania passed into the hands of local Turkic nobles. After a period of turmoil, 
CASE STUDIES 193 
a new dynasty was established by Timur. Timur unified Transoxania in 1379 
and conquered Iran during the 1390s. The Timurid dynasty also lasted about a 
century. In 1469 Persia was lost to the White Sheep Horde, while Transoxania 
splintered between warring branches of Timur's descendants.

The Persia of 11-Khans underwent dissolution in 1335. After a period of civil 
war it was conquered by Timur (see above). When the Timurids lost Persia in 
1469, another turbulent period followed, and eventually, by 1500, Persia was 
unified by a native dynasty (Safavids).

A similar course of events occurred in the Kipchak Steppe. The Juchids' rule 
ended in 1359, when the Kipchak Steppe fell into anarchy. After a period of civil 
war, the Golden Horde underwent a revival under Timur Qutlugh, who expelled 
Tokhtamysh in 1391 (with Timur's help). In 1399 Timur Qutlugh won a signal 
victory over the Lithuanians and consolidated his dominion over Russia, although 
a series of punitive expeditions were required during the early fifteenth century 
to keep the tribute flowing. In the middle of the fifteenth century, however, the 
revived Golden Horde began disintegrating again. The first piece to secede was 
the Crimean Khanate in 1430. The Khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan followed 
(in 1445 and 1466, respectively).

The Moscow polity went through its own period of civil war during the second 
quarter of the fifteenth century, which, curiously, coincided with the civil war 
on the steppe that lead to the final splintering of the Golden Horde. As soon 
as the civil war ended, Muscovy became de facto an independent state (de jure 
independence had to wait until 1480).

To summarize, all Chinggisid dynasties went through typical lbn Khaldun cycles of about a century in period. In China, a native dynasty expelled the Mongols 
after one cycle, while in Russia and Iran the steppe dynasties went through two 
cycles before giving way to native rulers. Incidentally, the central Eurasian steppes 
continued to undergo lbn Khaldun cycles, until their conquest and division between the Russian and the Chinese empires.

The Muscovy Wave 
After the end of the succession wars in 1450, Muscovy embarked on a centurylong period of practically uninterrupted expansion. By the early sixteenth century 
the "gathering of Russian lands" resulted in the Muscovite state's absorption of 
virtually all the lands of Kievan Rus that were not part of Lithuania. During 
the 1550s Russia conquered Kazan. Once the barrier of this moderately strong 
state was removed, the Khanates of Astrakhan and Siberia quickly fell, and rapid 
eastward expansion into the stateless territory of north Asia became possible (this 
is an example of the "breakthrough effect," discussed in Section 4.2.2).

By the 1570s, however, the Muscovite expansion ran out of steam. The prolonged Livonian war (1558-1583) actually resulted in a loss of territory. Historians have proposed many explanations of Russia's defeat by Poland-Lithuania and 
Swt:den, but I suggest that the root cause was the inversion of the secular trend.

Indeed, evidence supports a demographic-structural interpretation of the 
sixteenth-century crisis of the Muscovite state that culminated in the Time of 
Troubles (1598-1613) (Dunning 1998). The population of Russia grew rapidly, 
possibly doubling, during the sixteenth century, with most increase occurring 
during the first half of the century. The numbers of the aristocracy (members of 
the Boyar Duma) and the lower class of service nobility increased even faster 
than the general population. The price of grain increased by a factor of 4-5, 
while for many Russians taxes rose sevenfold (adjusted for inflation). During 
the 1570s, the decline of the Russian economy reached catastrophic proportions, 
leading to a massive flight of peasants and urban taxpayers. Population declined 
both in the central region of the Muscovite state and on its northwestern frontier 
(the Novgorodian lands, which were also badly affected by fighting during the 
Livonian war). The result was a huge loss of revenue, both for the state and for 
the service nobility (Dunning 1998).

Political instability affected Russia in two waves. The first period of heightened 
instability was the Oprichnina years of 1565-1572 (Riazanovsky 2000:149-151).

The peculiarity of this period was that it was a coup d'etat lead by the monarch 
himself, using one part of the elite (oprichniki) against the rest. The reign of 
Fedor (1584-1598) was an interlude relatively free of internal conflict, during 
which Russia prosecuted a successful war against Sweden, recovering the lands 
previously ceded to Sweden by the peace treaty of 1583 (Riazanovsky 2000).

However, Fedor's death without a natural successor introduced the second period of instability, the Time of Troubles. During this period, four Tsars ruled 
Russia in rapid succession: Boris and Fedor Godunovs, False Dmitry, and Vasily 
Shuisky, followed by the interregnum of 1610-1613. There were several popular 
uprisings led by dissident elites, foreign interventions of Poland, Sweden, and the 
Crimean Tatars. In short, this was a typical state collapse, proceeding according 
to the demographic-structural scenario. Note that the peaks of the two periods of 
instability, 1570 and 1610, are forty years, or roughly two generations, apart.

The Romanov Wave 
In 1613 Michael Romanov was crowned as Tzar, beginning the 300-year reign 
of the Romanov dynasty. However, the period of instability was not yet completely over. Although Russia did not experience a full-blown state collapse, the 
fiscal health of the state remained shaky throughout Michael's and his successor's 
reigns. It also took a while to recover social stability. In fact, various riots and 
uprisings occurred until the early years of Peter the Great's reign.

Nevertheless, gradually, from the middle of the seventeenth century on, the 
centralizing tendency and associated territorial expansion began to reassert itself, 
beginning with Poland ceding the left-bank Ukraine to Russia in 1667. What 
followed was one of the longest and most successful periods of territorial expansion known in history. During the eighteenth century Russia either toppled 
its seventeenth-century adversaries from Great Power status (Sweden, Turkey), or 
outright conquered them (Crimean Khanate, Poland). The status of a Great Power 
was followed by a brief period of European or perhaps even Eurasian hegemony 
during 1815-1850. Of course, this hegemony was not due only to the internal 
strength of the Russian Empire (forged on the anvil of the steppe frontier with 
CASE STUDIES 195 
a hammer of Baltic crusades, if I may be forgiven a poetic metaphor). Much of 
the explanation is also due to Russia getting out of phase with the secular cycles 
of other Eurasian empires, as a result of the anomalously long period of expansion. Note that the "crisis of the seventeenth century" was Eurasia-wide, affecting 
western Europe, Russia, the Ottoman Empire, and China (although not Persia or 
India). During the first half of the nineteenth century, both China and Turkey were 
well into their respective decentralization phases (which turned out to be the last 
one for the Ottoman Empire). More importantly, western Europe was experiencing its Age of Revolutions (1789-1848), which allowed Russia to play the role 
of the "gendarme of Europe" (e.g., the suppressing of the Hungarian revolution 
of 1849). Even England, while avoiding a full-blown state collapse, experienced 
significant sociopolitical instability during the 1830s (Goldstone 1991b). Thus, 
it was the relative strength of the Russian empire that explains its geopolitical 
preponderance during the first half of the nineteenth century.

The explanations underlying the Russian expansion of 1650-1850, I suggest, 
are twofold. First, Russia originated from a maximally intense metaethnic frontier, 
which, according to the theory, should produce a very high level of asabiya.

Second, at the beginning of the expansionary period Russia acquired huge areas 
of "black-earth lands" that were lightly populated but quite suitable to agriculture.

Colonization of these lands allowed peasant numbers to grow from around 10 
million in 1600 to more than 100 million in 1900. This enormous expansion of 
the productive stratum allowed the Russian society to find employment for all 
the elites. Because Russia was a strictly monogamous society, the elites grew no 
faster than commoners. Nobility constituted only 1-2% of the population in the 
Russian Empire (Mironov 2000), significantly reducing the potential for intraelite 
competition.

However, no growth can go on forever. During the nineteenth century the population of European Russia tripled from 36 to 100 million (McEvedy and Jones 
1978). Peasant/land ratios declined, food prices increased, and food shortages 
became common. Although the numbers of nobility stayed at around 2% of the 
population, new kinds of aspiring elites (raznochintsy, intelligentsia) were on the 
rise. Thus, by the second half of the nineteenth century the demographic-structural 
machinery has caught up with the previously "runaway" growth of the Russian 
empire.

The inversion of the secular trend, combined with logistical strains, started to 
exert a negative influence on the geopolitical prospects of the Russian empire 
around the middle of the nineteenth century. The defeat in the Crimean war was 
a temporary setback, but the abandonment of the Treaty of San Stefano (1878) 
under the pressure of the other Great Powers was a significant check on the expansion at the expense of the Ottoman Empire. The dynamic underlying this shift 
in relative geopolitical power was, first, the onset of the decentralization phase 
in Russia. Second, the other powers had just concluded their own decentralization phases and had entered on the expansionary imperialistic ones. Thus, Russia 
could continue to expand only in regions that were out of reach of European 
powers, such as central Asia. The clearest illustration of the effect of weakening internal structure on geopolitical expansion is the Russo-Japanese war. Even 
though Russia had a very disadvantageous logistics situation, and lost its expeditionary naval force in the battle of Tsushima, it managed to mass enough troops 
for a decisive push into Manchuria. However, the revolution of 1905-1907 caused 
the government to abandon the plan of land-based attack against the Japanese, 
because it needed the troops to quell the uprising.

The dynamics of political instability in Romanov Russia followed the by now 
familiar two-generation pattern, or, in the Russian case, the "fathers-and-sons" 
pattern (with apologies to Thrgenev). The first period of unrest occurred during 
the reign of Alexander ll. The 1860s and 1870s saw peasant riots and a terror 
campaign by revolutionaries, ending with the assassination of the tsar in 1881.

The following reign of Alexander m was, by contrast, a time of stability. The next 
instability period culminated in the revolutions of 1905-1907 and 1917, although 
there was a large contributing effect of geopolitical stress brought about by war, 
especially in the case of World War I and the 1917 revolution.

9.2.3 Summary 
Despite Russia and France being very different countries, each with its own geography and culture, a number of common themes emerge when we look at their 
history through the lenses of the metaethnic frontier and demographic-structural 
theories. First, both regions experienced two ethnogenetic events: the Franks and 
the French, the Rus and the Russians. All four ethnies arose on metaethnic frontiers. All states went through secular cycles, and there was an intercycle period 
between the Frankish Empire and France and between the Kievan Rus and Russia. Finally, the decentralization phases of secular cycles are almost invariably 
characterized by the fathers-and-sons fine structure, in which instability occurs in 
waves about two generations apart.

Chapter Ten 
Conclusion 
10.1 OVERVIEW OF MAIN DEVELOPMENTS 
In Chapter 1 I outlined a research program for investigating historical dynamics.

The main features of the proposed approach are (I) translation of verbal theories 
into mathematical models, (2) derivation of quantitative predictions from two or 
more alternative theories/models, and (3) empirical tests to determine which of 
the rival theories predicts data best. This general approach worked very well in the 
natural sciences, but can it be applied to social and historical questions? I believe 
it can, and I attempted to show how a consistent application of the approach can 
yield nontrivial advances in the understanding of territorial dynamics of agrarian 
polities.

10.1.1 Asabiya and Metaethnic Frontiers 
Perhaps the most novel development that I discuss in the book is the theory of 
asabiya, the capacity of a group for collective action (Chapter 3). I advanced the 
hypothesis that asabiya increases on metaethnic frontiers and declines in the core 
regions of large polities. I explored this hypothesis with a simple analytical model 
and a more complex spatial simulation, and determined under what conditions we 
should observe repeated cycles of imperial rise and demise (Chapter 4). I then 
developed an empirical apparatus for testing the theory. This turns out to be a 
nontrivial task (and very much work in progress), but such difficulties are probably to be expected when new concepts are advanced and raw empirical facts need 
to be translated into normalized data (Rozov 2000:25). Applying this apparatus 
to the history of Europe during the first and second millennia (Chapter 5), I found 
that the predictions of the theory are borne out by the data. The match between 
theory and data is not perfect, but that is as expected, since all scientific theories 
are at best approximations of reality. Furthermore, an alternative theory, based on 
the geopolitical marchland advantage, does a much worse job of predicting where 
large polities ("empires") originate; in fact, it "guesses" right no more frequently 
than would be expected by chance alone.

I submit that the results of this worked example, which starts with a verbal 
formulation of theory and pushes it all the way through to an empirical test, are 
an indication that the general approach can work in historical applications and 
yield nontrivial insights. Note that the value of this exercise does not depend 
on whether the metaethnic frontier theory continues to be corroborated or is 
ultimately rejected in favor of some better alternative. The important point is 
that, by passing the test successfully, the theory now establishes a standard that 
needs to be bettered, so rejection of it in favor of a better alternative would 
necessarily lead to further advances. Whatever the ultimate explanation, there is 
a striking association between metaethnic frontiers ("civilizational fault lines") 
and the subsequent development of aggressive empires from such regions.

As I argued throughout the book, exclusionary religions such as Christianity 
and Islam play a key role in many metaethnic frontiers. Yet my theory treats 
the appearance of world religions in a particular place as an exogenous event.

As the anonymous reviewer of a previous book draft pointed out, ''the theoretical question is left open: under what conditions do world religions appear, and 
where do they spread, relative to existing geopolitical configurations?" This is an 
excellent question, and I wish I could answer it. However, at this point in time I 
do not have any credible hypotheses about how we could endogenize the spread 
of world religions, so I must leave this issue for future research.

10.1.2 Ethnic Assimilation 
I continued to apply the same approach to two other theories. The first one, the 
kinetics of religious and linguistic assimilation (which I dubbed "ethnokinetics"), 
had been largely developed in a verbal fashion and is still relatively unmathematized. Thus, I was forced to start at the ground level, by considering which of the 
basic modes of growth provides a reasonable starting point for modeling ethnic 
assimilation. Empirical tests with three case studies (conversion to Islam, the rise 
of Christianity, and growth of the Mormon church) uniformly indicate that the 
autocatalytic model does much better than the noninteractive and threshold alternatives. Incidentally, fitting the autocatalytic model to the temporal trajectory of 
proportion converted yields, in one case, a remarkable R2 of 0.9998. This is not a 
result of overfitting, because the model is very simple, with just two free parameters, and the data set is quite large, being based on many hundreds of biographies.

In other words, high degrees of precision are not limited to physical applications.

However, I need to reemphasize the point made in the previous section: it is not 
the absolute value of R2 that matters, but the process by which we arrive at successively better theories. The Islamic conversion example, in fact, illustrates this 
idea very nicely, because a more detailed investigation of the observed patterns 
yielded evidence of a systematic deviation between model predictions and data, 
which allowed us to advance an alternative model that explained this pattern (and 
without adding more parameters).

Despite this encouraging beginning, the study of ethnokinetics is just beginning. Of key importance are two issues. First, how to characterize the social space 
within a polity: where are connections between people dense and where are there 
gaps (fortunately, social networks appear to be a topic of much current interest 
in sociology, so hopefully we can profit from this literature). This is important, 
because assimilation spread can be inhibited by gaps in networks. It is even possible that two alternative stable states become established on each side of the gap, 
as perhaps happened in Iran, where a certain minority never converted to Islam, 
staying Zoroastrian. The second issue is quantitative estimates of coefficients, 
CONCLUSION 199 
such as r, the relative assimilation rate. Thus, the estimated r for Iran was almost 
twice as large as that for Spain (Table 6.1 ). Why did the Iranians convert at twice 
the rate of the Spanish? Furthermore, cases exist where the assimilation process 
reversed its direction (for example, Germanization of the Czechs in the Habsburg 
Empire in the eighteenth versus the late nineteenth century). In short, we need a 
theory that can make predictions about the numerical values of coefficients.

10.1.3 Demographic-Structural Theory 
The last theory for which I attempted to travel all the way from verbal beginnings to empirical tests is the demographic-structural theory (Chapter 7). This 
theory has already been well developed and tested by Goldstone and others, 
which greatly simplified my treatment of it. However, the Goldstonian version of 
the theory treats population dynamics as an exogenous variable, while I wished 
to examine the hypothesis that it is actually dynamically linked to state breakdown. I hypothesized that political instability has a negative effect on population 
growth. Translating this hypothesis into models, I found that somewhat irregular 
cycles of 2-3 centuries in duration are predicted for agrarian polities. Irregularity 
arises (in the simple model) as a result of variable periods of time passing from 
state collapse to the beginning of the next demographic-structural cycle.

The empirical survey of available long-term data on population dynamics suggests that oscillations of 2-3 centuries in period are the rule rather than an exception (Chapter 8). Furthermore, building on previous work by Chu and Lee, I 
analyzed a data set containing estimates of both population dynamics and political 
instability in China from -200 to 1710. The results of this analysis suggest very 
strongly that population and instability are endogenously linked to each other.

Qualitative surveys, one by Fischer for the whole of western Europe, and my 
more focused one on France and Russia, also support this view (further support 
for the theory comes from recent work by Sergey Nefedov).

The theory also predicts faster cycles for nomadic imperial confederations, with 
periods of about a century. Although the nomadic polities are not a primary focus 
in this book, a brief excursion into the post-Chinggis Khan history of Central Asia 
(Section 9.2.2) provided some supporting evidence for such dynamics.

10.1.4 Geopolitics 
One theory that I was unable to subject to a thorough empirical test is the theory of geopolitics (Chapter 2). However, it was still possible to make a lot of 
progress just on the strength of translating the verbal theory into mathematical models. Thus, we found that the mechanisms postulated, for example, by the 
Collins version of the theory-geopolitical resources, logistical loads, and marchland advantage-led to first-order dynamics. In other words, the theory cannot 
explain prolonged declines that characterize many historical empires. This purely 
theoretical development illustrates one of the strengths of mathematical, as opposed to verbal, models. What may look reasonable when the problem is stated 
verbally does not necessarily have the proposed dynamical consequences when 
we formalize the description in the language of dynamical systems. Nonlinearities and lags affecting historical (and physical, and biological) systems require a 
specialized mathematical apparatus for connecting assumptions to predictions.

One empirical application of the geopolitical theory, although limited, was my 
test of the effect of positional advantage of a region on the maximum polity size 
originating from it. I found no statistical association between the two variables, 
suggesting that marchland position confers no fixed geopolitical advantage. This 
is not to say, however, that marchland position may not confer a temporary advantage. In fact, there are many convincing examples of states losing wars that 
they fought on two fronts, such as Germany in the two world wars. However, this 
idea remains to be rigorously tested. We need to go beyond anecdotal approaches: 
after all, Prussia during the Seven Years War was also fighting on multiple fronts, 
yet it triumphed. The empirical development of geopolitics is another area where 
further research is needed. An objective test that would address all military interactions within a defined area and period of time would be most satisfying, 
because it would avoid any conscious or unconscious selection of cases. However, developing a set of worked examples would be a very useful first step in 
this direction, like the example I suggested in Chapter 9 on the sixteenth-century 
struggle for Italy between France and Spain.

10.2 COMBINING DIFFERENT MECHANISMS INTO AN 
INTEGRATED WHOLE 
Although it can be argued that useful advances have been made in all theories 
(apart from, perhaps, geopolitics) separately, it is not completely clear how to 
develop an approach that would integrate them. Tracing how different mechanisms may have interacted in specific polities (Chapter 9), however, suggests 
some hypotheses that can be developed in future work. Here I describe my current thinking about this problem (with the caveat that this is hypothesis building, 
so all of the following is subject to change in the light of new models and data).

One of the most useful aspects of the dynamical-systems approach is that it 
forces us to worry explicitly about the temporal scale on which a certain mechanism is operating. The initial discussion of temporal scales can be found in 
Section 8.2, and here I can refine it in the light of empirical developments that 
occurred after that section. One "natural" time scale of high relevance to historical dynamics is the human generation time (20-30 years). This is the scale at 
which population increases and declines, political elites are renewed, and culture 
is transmitted and modified. A much smaller scale of years is where "ecological" mechanisms operate: the agricultural cycle, outbreaks of disease, etc. The 
scale at which asabiya, ethnokinetic, and demographic-structural mechanisms operate is much longer than years, or even generations. The secular wave has the 
best defined period: it is around 2-3 centuries (in agrarian empires), or an order 
of magnitude longer than the human generation. Such a large·, tenfold, difference 
means that generation cycles will be nested within demographic-structural cycles, 
and the two will not interact strongly (at least, this is the working hypothesis, 
CONCLUSION 201 
which should be tested). Thus, any disequilibria in the age structure, such as 
baby booms, should proceed largely independently of the longer secular cycles.

Another type of shorter-period dynamics is the two-generation cycles with period 
of about 40-60 years. Possible examples include Kondratieff's waves, Easterlin's 
cycles, the long waves of Goldstein (1988), and the fathers-and-sons oscillations 
during decentralization phases, noticed in Chapter 9. It is interesting to note, in 
this respect, that long price time series, such as the one shown in Figure 7. 7, 
apparently have two dominant periods: around 300 years, corresponding to the 
secular oscillation, and around 50 years, perhaps reflecting some bigenerational 
cycle. The two cycles appear to be simply superimposed on each other (although 
the 50-year cycle may have a greater amplitude during the period of political 
instability). Even shorter cycles, such as the 11-year sunspot oscillation may be 
superimposed on top of the longer ones. So it may be appropriate to think about 
historical dynamics as a set of cycles of different periods nested within each 
other.

Now let us consider longer-term dynamics, and in particular the relationship 
between secular waves and the pace of an assimilation process or asabiya change.

Using the estimated rate parameters for religious conversion (Table 6.1), I estimate that the time needed for passing from 10% to 90% of the population converted is between 150 and 300 years. In other words, assimilation appears to 
occur on roughly the same temporal scale as the secular cycle.

By contrast, the dynamics of asabiya occur on a much longer scale (in fact, 
discovering just how slow this process is was one of the most interesting empirical 
findings of Chapter 5). Looking at large territorial empires of greater than 0.5 
Mm2 at the peak (the "Great Powers"), we observe that the duration of metaethnic 
frontiers in their regions of origin was from three to ten centuries. Thus, one 
secular wave is the minimum period of asabiya incubation, and usually two or 
three such periods have to pass before a new aggressive polity/ethnie is born. The 
temporal extents of successful empires are similarly long. In fact, we can measure 
the longevity of an empire in how many secular cycles it has survived. This is 
a particularly appropriate scale, because the final collapse of empires typically 
occurs during one of the demographic-structural crises.

Measured in this way, a "typical" empire is good for two or three secular cycles.

The Roman polity, for example, survived three: the Republic, the Principate, and 
the Dominate. France, as we saw in Section 9.1, went through three cycles prior 
to 1900 c.E. (Capetian, Valois, and Bourbon), and is now in the fourth one.

The Frankish Empire went through two cycles (Merovingian and Carolingian), 
although an argument can be made that there was a third cycle-the Ottonian 
and Salian emperors of the medieval German Empire who were direct successors 
of the Carolingians (thus, the Rhine valley was the geographical core of both the 
Carolingian and Holy Roman Empires; see Barraclough 1998:118). Russia went 
through two cycles prior to 1900: the Muscovite and the Imperial (or Romanov) 
waves. China had a succession of empires, with a typical duration of two secular 
cycles: East and West Han, then a long period of fragmentation (an intercycle); 
Early and Late Tang, another intercycle; Sung and Southern Sung, followed by a 
period of alien rule (Mongols, or the Yuan dynasty); and finally Ming and Qing 
(although the latter can be considered as another alien dynasty). I can go on, but 
it looks as if examples of imperial duration of one or four secular cycles are rare.

One example of a short-lived empire is the Principality of Kiev, which managed 
to survive for only one cycle (from the tenth to the twelfth century, with the coup 
de grace delivered by the Mongols in 1240).

Thus, the interaction between the demographic-structural and asabiya mechanisms is likely to be limited to periods of instability, at least to the first order 
of approximation. Therefore, I advance the hypothesis that large successful empires are destroyed by a combination of asabiya decline and the decentralization 
phase of the secular cycle. When asabiya is still high, an empire will reconstitute 
itself after a time of troubles. If asabiya has declined too far, then the period of 
instability will spell the end of the empire.

Because ethnokinetic and demographic processes occur on roughly the same 
time scale, these mechanisms may interact in more intricate and unpredictable 
ways. The basic problem is that the phase of the secular cycle may affect the 
magnitude and even the sign of the assimilation rate. During the centralization 
phase, when the elite/general population ratio is favorable, the imperial core elites 
are likely to be open to the entry of peripheral aspirants. Such a situation is highly 
conducive to strong pressures for assimilation. By contrast, during the decentralization phase, imperial elites close their ranks against newcomers aspiring to 
better their position, who then have no choice but to build alternative power networks, and challenge the established order. These "counternetworks" are likely to 
be based on peripheral identities. The specific symbolic markers used to differentiate the core elites from the dissidents may be based on religious, linguistic, 
or regional differences. Thus, social conditions during the decentralization phase 
may actually favor "reverse assimilation," in which members of a core ethnie 
living in a peripheral region are under pressure to assimilate to the peripheral 
identity. At this point, this is just a hypothesis, but certainly capable of being 
tested empirically.

Furthermore, there is a feedback effect from assimilation dynamics to 
demographic-structural mechanisms (Chapter 6). If the process of assimilation 
has largely run its course, then those particular markers (religious or linguistic) 
will probably not serve as a basis for elite fractures. Otherwise, under the 
pressures of the decentralization phase, the elites will fracture right down the 
ethnic lines, potentially with disastrous consequences to the empire.

Another conjecture is that during the time of troubles we should expect a 
"narrowing down" of the asabiya profile. That is, whereas during good times 
the members of the elite may identify themselves primarily with the empirewide 
ethnie, when times are bad, they may fall back on their regional (subethnic) 
identity.

Finally, there is the possibility that bigenerational cycles interact with the secular ones. In Section 9.1.2 I briefly touched on the pattern of two-generation cycles 
in political instability that seem to succeed each other during the decentralization 
phases. There may be a connection here to the Kondratieff waves, which are of 
the same duratio_n (40-60 years). For example, Joshua Goldstein (1988) argued 
that the Kondratieff waves have an effect on war dynamics in Europe. This is 
another avenue clearly worth pursuing.

CONCLUSION 203 
10.3 BROADENING THE FOCUS OF INVESTIGATION 
At the beginning of this book, I deliberately narrowed down the focus of the 
research program to the dynamics of agrarian polities. I believe such a focus is 
appropriate, especially during the beginning of an investigation. Here is the time, 
however, to discuss what was left out.

One important class of societies that I discuss in a very inadequate manner is 
the nomadic pastoralists. Addressing these societies should be the first order of 
business, particularly because nomadic polities were so important in the history 
of Eurasian empires.

Another class, which I completely left out, is the thalassocratic polities such 
as classical Athens, medieval Venice, or early modem Holland. Thus, my focus 
has been entirely on land-based rather than sea-based power, tellurocracies rather 
than thalassocracies. Again, this choice was deliberate. The basic resources of 
tellurocracies are land and people (thus my emphasis on territorial and population 
dynamics). I believe this makes tellurocracies particularly amenable to analysis 
with rather simple models. Note that I tried to avoid any monetary issues (at least 
in models). Also, the economic submodel in the demographic-structural theory 
is quite simple, focusing entirely on food production. Such an oversimplified 
approach will clearly not do for thalassocracies.

My focus on land power has led me to largely ignore the voluminous literature 
on hegemonic cycles (Modelski and Thompson 1996), even though I find this 
literature extremely fascinating. Another excellent field of research that I touched 
upon lightly is world-systems theory (Wallerstein 1974; Chase-Dunn and Hall 
1997). The reason is my focus on the polity as the main subject of analysis. This 
focus leads to a certain bias, which I readily acknowledge: a tendency to look for 
endogenous causes of the rise and fall of empires. At this point, I can only state 
that I wholeheartedly agree with the idea that we need to understand how systems 
of interacting polities work. This is also clearly the next order of business.

Finally, there is the issue of what the theories and results discussed in the 
book mean for modernity. Generally, I tried very hard not to cross the selfimposed temporal limit of 1900, for reasons explained in Section 1.2.2. It was not, 
however, my intention to imply that the insights from models and data for agrarian 
societies are completely irrelevant to modem societies. Clearly, we cannot directly 
apply some models, for example, those in Chapter 7, to western industrialized 
states because population growth in these societies does not lead to starvation. On 
the other hand, some of the ideas developed for the dynamics of elites in agrarian 
states may yield fruitful hypotheses about modem polities (see, for example, the 
discussion in Goldstone 2002). For example, modem societies may be susceptible 
to elite overproduction. A recent article in the Economist (November 14, 2002) 
reported that the proportion of Britons between 18 and 21 years old going to 
college has more than doubled during the 1990s (from 15 to 33%). Is British 
society approaching a crisis? This is the kind of hypothesis that can be addressed 
in future research.

Other theories may also be of relevance to current affairs. Judging by the burgeoning literature on social capital, the ability of groups and whole societies for 
concerted and effective action is of great interest to sociologists and political 
scientists. Geopolitical arguments were used to successfully predict the demise 
of the Soviet Union (Collins 1995). And the dynamics of assimilation or, conversely, ethnic fissioning and mobilization are the key elements of current international politics (Moynihan 1993). All these directions are extremely interesting 
and should eventually be followed. Still, I continue to argue for a conservative 
approach of first honing the theories and analytical approaches on the historical 
material, and applying them to contemporary issues only once we are reasonably 
sure of how well our approaches work.

10.4 TOWARD THEORETICAL CLIODYNAMICS? 
If the combined modelinglempirical approach to investigating history, advocated 
in this book, has the potential to become a fruitful research program, then it 
would be a good idea to come up with a better name for it than "historical dynamics." I propose to call it cliodynamics, by analogy with cliometrics. The term 
cliometrics was originally used for the new economic history in a rather derogatory sense (Williamson 1991 ), but now cliometrics is an accepted and mature 
direction within history. If we understand cliometrics in the general sense (that 
is, a focus on any quantitative data in history, not just economic ones), then it 
is an extremely valuable complementary discipline to the historical dynamics research program. Cliodynamics needs cliometrics for the raw empirical inputs. But 
I would argue that cliometrics needs something like cliodynamics as a source of 
theories and hypotheses to guide the empirical research.

