A theory for formation of large empires

Peter Turchin

Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06235,
USA

Abstract
Between 3000 BCE and 1800 CE there were more than sixty ‘mega-empires’ that, at the peak,
controlled an area of at least one million square kilometres. What were the forces that kept
together such huge pre-industrial states? I propose a model for one route to mega-empire,
motivated by imperial dynamics in eastern Asia, the world region with the highest concentration of mega-empires. This ‘mirror-empires’ model proposes that antagonistic interactions
between nomadic pastoralists and settled agriculturalists result in an autocatalytic process,
which pressures both nomadic and farming polities to scale up polity size, and thus military
power. The model suggests that location near a steppe frontier should correlate with the frequency of imperiogenesis. A worldwide survey supports this prediction: over 90% of megaempires arose within or next to the Old World’s arid belt, running from the Sahara desert
to the Gobi desert. Specific case studies are also plausibly explained by this model. There
are, however, other possible mechanisms for generating empires, of which a few are discussed
at the end of the article.

Introduction
Understanding the rise and fall of empires (large territorial states) is one of the most important research directions in world history. Beginning with Gibbon,1 most theoretical efforts
have been directed to the second part – the causes of imperial disintegration and fragmentation.2 The first part of the question, however, is theoretically more challenging, because
large territorial empires are a comparative rarity in the historical record before the Industrial Revolution. Thus, the really difficult question is why large agrarian states arose in

I am grateful to Eugene Anderson for help with compiling the information on Chinese unifications, to
Alexander Nemirovsky for his help with the Egyptian unifications, and to Nikolay Kradin for
information on Central Asian nomads and for comments on the manuscript. Many thanks to Sergey
Gavrilets, Andrey Korotayev, Christopher Chase-Dunn, and Thomas Barfield for their comments on the
manuscript. Incisive critique and editorial suggestions from Kenneth Pomeranz, William Clarence-Smith,
and two anonymous reviewers were invaluable in helping me to streamline the argument and buttress it
with historical data. This research was supported by the research grant from NSF 05–520 Human and
Social Dynamics. A first draft of the manuscript was written while I was on sabbatical at the Santa Fe
Institute; I am grateful for the support and the intellectually stimulating atmosphere of the Institute.

1 Edward Gibbon, The decline and fall of the Roman Empire, New York: Modern Library, 1932.

2 Joseph A. Tainter, The collapse of complex societies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

doi:10.1017/S174002280900312X
the first place, controlling millions of people across millions of square kilometres. Despite
some promising approaches – reviewed, for example, by Michael Mann3 – we have as yet
no good account of the preconditions for the rise of such ‘mega-empires’, defined here as
territorial states that controlled, at their peak, an area equal to or greater than one million
square kilometres.

In this article I propose a model for one route to mega-empire. The model is based on
dynamics in East Asia (more specifically, the interface between the settled farmers of East
Asia and the nomads of Central Asia). It draws on recent developments from theories of cultural evolution and on previous work by anthropologists on interactions between nomads
and farmers. The focus of the paper is on how and why small states scale up to megaempires. The paper has two parts: the first develops the model, while the second surveys
empirical patterns.

Imperiogenesis in East Asia
The spatial distribution of mega-empire occurrence is highly clumped. None arose in many
world regions, whereas in other regions empires rose sporadically and, in a few locations,
repeatedly. China is unique, in that it has seen a continuous sequence of rise and fall of
empires since the Bronze Age (Table 1). Beginning with the Qin unification in the third century BCE, the periods of fragmentation between successive unifications rarely exceeded a
century, although some unifications were partial.

Table 1 also quantifies another striking and repeatedly noted pattern.4 All but one of the
fifteen unifications – the establishment of the Ming dynasty c.1368 – originated in the north.

Three began from the north-east (the Liao peninsula, Manchuria), three from the north
central region (Huang He), and eight from the north-west (most often from the Wei River
Valley). The importance of the north for Chinese empires is also suggested by the location
of capitals (Table 1), almost all of which were in the north, even though the economic centre
of China shifted south to the Yangtze valley by c.1000 CE.

Thus, the political centres of Chinese empires were located not in geopolitically safe
locations but near China’s ‘perilous frontier’, to borrow the title of Thomas Barfield’s
insightful book. Before the Western intrusion of the nineteenth century, serious threats to
China always came from the north.5 On those borders, there was almost continuous
military pressure from Turco-Mongolian steppe dwellers in the north-west, and from the
Tungusic people of Manchuria in the north-east, periodically punctuated by successful
invasions that occupied northern China and, on two occasions, the whole of China. This
geopolitical pressure helps to explain why northern China was such a ‘hotspot’ of imperiogenesis.

3 Michael Mann, The sources of social power, volume I: a history of power from the beginning to A.D.

1760, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

4 William H. McNeill, The rise of the West, New York: New American Library, 1963.

5 Thomas J. Barfield, ‘The shadow empires: imperial state formation along the Chinese–nomad frontier’, in
Susan E. Alcock, Terence N. D’Altroy, Kathleen D. Morrison, and Carla M. Sinopoli, eds., Empires,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 11–41.

192 j
j
PETER TURCHIN
A THEORY FOR FORMATION OF LARGE EMPIRES j
j
Table 1. Imperial unifications in China from the Shang era to the present.

Unification Period Ethnicity From Capital
Shang 1766–1122 BCE ?? North central (Huang He) Anyang (Huang He)
W. Zhou 1122–771 BCE Frontier Han
(‘Western barbarians’)
North-west (Wei River Valley) Loyang (Huang He)
Qin 221–206 BCE Frontier Han North-west (Wei River Valley) Xianyang (Wei)
Han 202 BCE–220 CE Han North-west (confluence of Wei and
Huang)
Chang’an (Wei)
W. Jin 280–316 Han North central (Huang He) Loyang (Huang He)
N. Wei
(partial)
386–534 To-ba
(Mongolian)
North-west Loyang
(Huang He)
Sui 581–618 Han North-west (Wei River Valley) Chang’an (Wei)
Tang 618–907 Han (ruling family of
Turkic descent)
North-west (Wei River Valley) Chang’an (Wei)
Liao (partial) 907–1125 Kitan (Altaic?) North-east (S. Manchuria) Beijing
N. Song
(partial)
960–1127 Han North central (lower
Huang He around Kaifeng)
Kaifeng (Huang He)
Jin (partial) 1115–1234 Jurchen (Tungus) North-east (Manchuria) Beijing
Yuan 1206–1368 Mongol North-west (Mongolia) Beijing
Ming 1368–1644 Han East (Nanjing area) Beijing
Qing 1644–1911 Manchu (Tungus) North-east (Manchuria) Beijing
Communist 1949– Han North-west (Long March
to Wei River Valley;
unification from there)
Beijing
Source: Compiled from various sources: Eugene Anderson, University of California (personal communication); Victor H. Mair, ‘The north(west)ern peoples and the
recurrent origins of the ‘‘Chinese’’ state’, in J. A. Fogel, ed., The teleology of the modern nation-state: Japan and China, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press,
Philadelphia, 2005, pp. 46–84, table 1087; and Peter N. Stearns, The encyclopedia of world history, 6th edition, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2001, table 490. Not all of
these states controlled territory exceeding a million square kilometres, and thus only some of them are reflected in Table 2.

The importance of the steppe frontier in Chinese history has been examined by, among
others, Owen Lattimore, Thomas Barfield, and Nikolai Kradin.6 Barfield, in particular,
argues that the scale of political organization among the nomads was directly proportional
to the size of the neighbouring agrarian empires. The greatest imperial confederations of
nomads in world history (the Xiongnu, the Turks, and the Mongols) arose on the steppe
side of the frontier. In other words, the exceptionalism of the East Asian imperiogenesis hotspot was mirrored in the exceptionalism of repeated gigantic imperial confederations in the
steppes. Furthermore, there was a striking degree of synchrony between the rise of the
steppe imperial confederations and Chinese empires – Xiongnu and Qin/Han, Turks and
Sui/Tang, Mongols and Song. This correlation, however, was not perfect. For example,
the Mongols eventually conquered all China, extinguishing the Song dynasty.

Barfield and Kradin both argue convincingly that the political organization of pastoral
nomads on a large scale requires a nearby settled society, because the nomadic society does
not produce surplus in a form useable to support the state. Nomads are hard to tax, because
they are skilled at fighting and can move themselves and their wealth much more easily than
farmers can. Moreover, their chief product – livestock – cannot be stored easily, unlike the
grain produced by agrarian economies. Thus, political organizations among nomads had to
draw resources from the agrarian societies, by robbing the farmers, by extorting tribute from
agrarian states, or by controlling trade routes. Kradin refers to this as xenocratic political
organization (from xenos ‘stranger and kratos ‘power’).7 This argument suggests a reason
why the sizes of agrarian states and nomadic confederations are correlated. As agrarian states
in East Asia grew, nomads needed to cooperate on an increased scale to continue successful
raiding, to present a credible threat to extort the tribute, or to impose favourable terms of
trade. Additionally, larger and richer sedentary states possessed greater wealth that nomads
could extract, thus enabling larger nomadic polities. Consequently, Barfield calls the nomadic
confederations the ‘shadow empires’, their size mirroring that of agrarian states.8
Thus, Barfield and Kradin suggest that the appearance of agrarian mega-empires
explains the rise of nomadic imperial confederations. This is probably correct. However,
if the presence of a large agrarian state produced larger nomadic confederations, should
not the presence of a large nomadic confederation have similar effects on farmer societies?
Here I propose a verbal model, exploring possible consequences of such a feedback loop.

6 Owen Lattimore, Studies in frontier history: collected papers 1928–1958, Paris: Mouton, 1967; Thomas
J. Barfield, The perilous frontier: nomadic empires and China, Oxford: Blackwell, 1989; idem, ‘Tribe and
state relations: the inner Asian perspective’, in P. S. Khoury and J. Kostiner, eds., Tribes and state
formation in the Middle East, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1990, pp. 153–82; idem,
‘Turk, Persian, and Arab: changing relationships between tribes and state in Iran and along its frontiers’,
in Nikki R. Keddie and Rudi Matthee, eds., Iran and the surrounding world: interactions in culture and
cultural politics, Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2002, pp. 61–88; idem, ‘The devil’s
horsemen’, in Stephen P. Reyna and R. E. Downs, eds., Studying war: anthropological perspectives,
Langhorn, PA: Gordon and Breach, 1994, pp. 157–82; Nikolai N. Kradin, The Hunnu Empire (in
Russian), Moscow: Logos, 2002; idem, ‘Nomads, world-empires, and social evolution’, in idem, ed.,
Alternative routes to civilization (in Russian), Moscow: Logos, 2000, pp. 314–36; idem, ‘From tribal
confederation to empire: the evolution of the Rouran society’, Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum
Hungaricae, 58, 2005, pp. 149–61.

7 Kradin, ‘Nomads’, p. 329.

8 Barfield, ‘Shadow empires’.

194 j
j
PETER TURCHIN
Cooperation as the basis of society
I have explored elsewhere the forces that held together agrarian states.9 The first important
point is that attempts to build a theory of society by assuming that all people behave in
entirely self-interested manner, from Machiavelli and Hobbes to modern rational choice
theory, have been unsuccessful.10 The fundamental problem is that, for a society to exist
and function, its members must produce public goods, the costs of which are borne by
each contributor, whereas the benefits are shared evenly across all members. The rational
behaviour in such situations is to ‘free ride’, benefiting from the public-good production
by others while not contributing oneself.

One of the most important collective goods for small-scale societies is mutual defence.

Defence is a public good, because its costs are born privately (the probability of being killed
or seriously injured), while its benefits (group survival, or successful defence of the group’s
territory, crops, and herds) are shared automatically among all members. Groups consisting
entirely, or largely, of free riders are unable to cooperate in collective defence, and thus will
not persist. However, recent research in experimental economics has shown that, although
some people indeed behave as free riders, in most societies the majority is motivated not
only by the prospect of gain and avoidance of punishment but also by social norms that
promote cooperation.11 Thus, groups with many ‘prosocial’ individuals will have a better
chance of repelling invaders, although other factors play a role in explaining the capacity
of groups for collective action.12 Generally speaking, different groups are characterized by
different degrees of solidarity and, therefore, different capacities for concerted action – in
warfare as well as in other endeavours. Perhaps the greatest theorist of group cohesion
was the fourteenth-century Arab sociologist ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Khaldun.13 The key concept of Ibn Khaldun was ‘asabiyya, which can be loosely translated as ‘group feeling’.

According to Ibn Khaldun, ‘asabiyya produces ‘the ability to defend oneself, to offer opposition, to protect oneself, and to press one’s claims’.14 Ibn Khaldun, a native of the Maghrib
(north-western Africa), understood well the social interactions on frontiers between nomads
and agriculturalists. However, the outcomes of this interaction in the Maghrib were different from those on the East Asian steppe frontier. There were no mighty agrarian empires
similar to the Chinese ones in north-western Africa, and the scale of Maghribi states was
generally smaller than those created by the Turco-Mongolian peoples.

9 Peter Turchin, War and peace and war: the life cycles of imperial nations, New York: Pi Press, 2006, ch. 5.

10 J. S. Kraus, The limits of Hobbesian contractarianism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993;
James S. Coleman, Foundations of social theory, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1990. See also Randall
Collins, Sociological insight, New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

11 Joseph Henrich, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, and Herbert Gintis,
Foundations of human sociality: economic experiments and ethnographic evidence from fifteen smallscale societies, New York: Oxford University Press, 2004; Urs Fischbacher, Simon Ga¨chter, and Ernst
Fehr, ‘Are people conditionally cooperative? Evidence from a public goods experiment’, Economics
Letters, 71, 2001, pp. 397–404.

12 Peter Turchin, Historical dynamics: why states rise and fall, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2003, ch. 3. Turchin, War and peace and war, ch. 5.

13 Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah: an introduction to history, translated from the Arabic by Franz
Rosenthal, New York: Pantheon Books, 1958.

14 Ibid., pp. lxxxix, 289.

A THEORY FOR FORMATION OF LARGE EMPIRES j
j
The model
Although the starting point of the model is local communities, this is not a critical assumption. The main argument concerns the social scaling-up process from polities to ‘metapolities’, defining a polity as any kind of independent political organization, whether
community, simple chiefdom, complex chiefdom, state, or empire.

The model has two fundamental postulates. First, there is a steep gradient in average
rainfall. The well-watered side of the ecological frontier is inhabited by settled agriculturalists, while pastoral nomads occupy the arid zone. Second, pastoralist nomads have both the
incentive and ability to take agricultural products away from farmers by force. On the one
hand, ‘pure nomads’, without even limited forms of agriculture, cannot produce necessities
such as grain, which they must somehow obtain from agriculturalists.15 On the other hand,
they enjoy a preponderance of military power over farmers.

Assuming that the area is occupied by small-scale communities, nomads thus routinely
rob their farmer neighbours. A nomadic community might raid around the time of the
harvest, when agricultural products are most abundant, but the main booty can also be
slaves and livestock, later sold or exchanged for agricultural and prestige goods. Nomads
can also obtain products by trading but the possibility of violence is always present. Even
if older and wealthier nomads might prefer less risky trade, pressure for raiding is generated
by younger and poorer men, who wish to build up their reputation and wealth.

A successful raid can be devastating to a farming community. Not only does it lose a
large part of the resources needed to survive until the next harvest but the nomads may
also kill men of fighting age, and abduct women and children as slaves. Thus, raiding pressure from the steppes imposes a severe selective regime on farming communities. The less
cohesive and military able communities are likely to disintegrate in the aftermath of a
raid, with surviving members being accepted into surrounding, more effective groups.

Although raiding pressure should select for more cohesive and warlike communities over
time, the military superiority of steppe warriors places limits on how effectively a single
farming community can defend itself. The only successful way of resisting nomad pressure
is for several local communities to unite into a ‘meta-community’, with a larger defensive
force to offset the nomads’ military advantage.

There are at least three ways in which scaling-up can be achieved. The simplest is for the
leaders of several neighbouring communities to form an alliance to coordinate defence. The
concept of joint defence was broadly known within Eurasia, as attested by the common
motif of the quarrelling sons and the bundle of twigs, which is found in Greek, TalmudicMidrashic, and Indic literature, as well as in many folkloric traditions.16 However, voluntary defensive alliances are vulnerable to free-riding. Therefore, the second route to joint
defence is for one community to annex several neighbours by force, resulting in a simple
chiefdom, which is better at coordinating defence because the chief can punish any subordinate community that does not contribute to the common defence. The third route is a
15 Anatoly M. Khazanov, Nomads and the outside world, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.

16 Larry Moses, ‘The quarrelling sons in the ‘‘Secret history of the Mongols’’’, Journal of American
Folklore, 100, 1987, pp. 63–8.

196 j
j
PETER TURCHIN
variant of the ‘roving bandits–stationary bandits’ scenario.17 An enterprising group of
nomads moves permanently to the agricultural side of the frontier, subjugating several farming communities. With time, these nomads assimilate to the farmers’ language and culture,
but the chiefly elites remain of non-native origin.

Whatever the particular mechanism adopted, the scaled-up agrarian polity shifts the balance of military power in its favour, thereby creating selective pressure for scaling up on the
steppe side of the frontier. The nomad communities need to band together in order to nullify
the numerical advantage of the agrarian polities. Successful raids require a mixture of
cooperation and coercion, but probably with a lesser degree of coercion than on the farming
side. First, there is less of an opportunity to free ride (those who do not join the raiding
party do not share in the booty). Second, it is more difficult to coerce a nomadic group. It
is interesting that the quarrelling sons motif appears in the Secret history of the Mongols
no fewer than four times, with arrows rather than twigs bundled together to illustrate the
value of cooperation.18 Such a frequent occurrence possibly reflects the difficulty of uniting
the nomads by force, and a greater emphasis on ideological means to achieve the same end.

Once scaled-up steppe polities regain their military advantage, the pressure is on the
agrarian polity to scale up again, by evolving from a simple to a complex chiefdom. The initial ‘anisotropy’ in military power on the farming–steppe frontier thus sets up an autocatalytic process, resulting in a runaway evolution of polity sizes on both sides of the frontier.

The process is stopped either by running out of space, or as the result of problems of logistics and costs in projecting power over distance.19 Furthermore, once centralized agrarian
states arise, the steppe nomadic confederations learn that they can extort tribute simply
by threatening raids.20 However, pressure to maintain the size of the confederation persists,
owing to the need to pose a credible threat to the agrarian empire.

Application of the model to north China
The first postulate of the model, that there was a steep environmental gradient, clearly holds
for north China. One needs to travel only 300 kilometres from Chang’an (modern Xi’an) to
reach the Ordos desert (the homeland, or one of the homelands, of the Xiongnu), and even
less from Beijing to arrive at the outskirts of the Gobi. Thus, the farming communities of northern China were within easy raiding distance for the steppe nomads. Experiments with well-fed
Mongolian horses indicate that nomads could traverse 300 kilometres in less than a week,
while a trans-Gobi raid, covering 1,800 kilometres, would require 25 days of travelling time.21
The second postulate, military superiority of the nomads, also describes accurately the
history of Chinese relations with the steppes, especially after the invention of mounted archery at the beginning of the first millennium BCE. Only a centralized Chinese state was able
17 Mancur Olson, Power and prosperity: outgrowing communist and capitalist dictatorships, New York:
Basic Books, 2000.

18 Moses, ‘The quarrelling sons’.

19 Randall Collins, Weberian sociological theory, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

20 Barfield, Perilous frontier.

21 Michel Hoang, Genghis Khan, London: Saqi Books, 2001.

A THEORY FOR FORMATION OF LARGE EMPIRES j
j
to mount successful defence against nomad raids: the periods of internal disunity in China
were typically associated with increased raiding pressure from the steppes. Even with China
unified, many Chinese rulers found it necessary to buy nomads off with tribute, thinly
disguised as ‘gifts’.22
One feature of the model that may strike historians of China as unrealistic is that at the
starting point the area is populated by the smallest of polities, local communities. Indeed,
my focus is on the advantage that the invention of mounted archery gave to pastoral
nomads, and by the time this military technology spread to East Asia, the social evolution
in this region had already led to the rise of complex chiefdoms and archaic states. For
BCE).23
However, the starting point is not a critical feature of the model. The main question of
interest is the process leading to the end point – very large-scale polities. Moreover, the
model does not imply a unilinear progression from the simplest polities all the way to
mega-empires. On the contrary, the expectation is that the process will occur in fits and
starts, interrupted by devolution to simpler polities. This is the pattern generated by formal
mathematical models of evolution of social complexity.24 Furthermore, nomads enjoyed
some military superiority over farmers even before the rise of mounted archery. The invention of the chariot and its spread from the Great Steppe during the second millennium BCE
provides one example. Even before the advent of the horse, nomadic herders had a significantly greater incentive and opportunity to practise archery than farmers, for defence of
their flocks and for hunting.

Major advances in the social complexity of agrarian polities in China roughly correlated
with three waves of domestic animals emanating from western Eurasia.25 First, the arrival
of cattle, sheep, and goats in the third millennium BCE coincided with the rise of Longshan
culture and the first (perhaps mythical) dynasty, the Xia. Second, the beginning of the Shang
period (middle of the second millennium) coincided with the appearance of the domesticated horse (as well as chariots, bronze, and writing). ‘Analysis of the dynamics of Shang
civilization reveal ... profound steppic connections’.26 Finally, the arrival of horse-riding
archers in the first millennium BCE was followed by the Qin–Han unification. ‘From the
beginning and for three thousand years, Chinese history was intimately linked with the
history of the nomads of Inner and Central Asia’.27
An archaeologically recognizable frontier between China and its northern neighbours
dates to the second millennium BCE, while a pattern of military confrontation between
22 Barfield, Perilous frontier.

23 Li Liu, Xingcan Chen, Yun Kuen Lee, Henry Wright, and Arlene Rosen, ‘Settlement patterns and
development of social complexity in the Yiluo region, north China’, Journal of Field Archaeology,
29, 2002, pp. 75–100.

24 Sergey Gavrilets and Peter Turchin, forthcoming manuscript.

25 Victor H. Mair, ‘The horse in late prehistoric China: wrestling culture and control from the
‘‘barbarians’’’, in Marsha Levine, Colin Renfrew, and Katie Boyle, eds., Prehistoric steppe adaptation
and the horse, Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2003, p. 181.

26 Mair, ‘The horse’, p. 182.

27 Anatoly M. Khazanov, ‘Nomads in the history of the sedentary world’, in Anatoly M. Khazanov and
Andre´ Wink, eds., Nomads in the sedentary world, Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001, pp. 1–23.

198 j
j
PETER TURCHIN
the Chinese and semi-nomadic herders on this frontier is evident during the Shang and
Western Zhou periods (c.1500–770 BCE). In the mid seventh century BCE, the pressure
on the northern frontier suddenly accelerated.28 The Jung and Ti ‘barbarians’ on the
northern Zhou frontier had been organized into relatively small sociopolitical units, but
BCE the Jung of four different villages joined together in an attack on the Zhou capital.

The Ti were able to create even larger unions: apparently, they were united in two
confederations (the Red Ti and the White Ti).30
While the Jung and the Ti were semi-nomadic shepherds and farmers, and it was relatively easy for the Zhou states to match their military power, the appearance of true
nomads, the Hu, later called the Xiongnu (the first direct contact was in 457 BCE), ratcheted up the military pressure on Chinese states. During the Warring States period (475–
221 BCE), the size of Xiongnu polities increased to the point where their shan-yu
(‘emperor’) could field very substantial armies. In one battle, the Chinese army of General
Li Mu of Chao – consisting of 1,300 war chariots, 13,000 cavalry, 50,000 infantry, and
100,000 archers – inflicted a defeat on the Xiongnu, killing ‘hundreds of thousands of
men and horses’.31 Even though the Chinese source clearly exaggerated the Xiongnu casualties, the size of Li Mu’s army indicates that, by this date, state formation in the steppes
was already well advanced, and Xiongnu armies probably consisted of tens of thousands
of warriors.

Although our knowledge of Ancient China is still very fragmentary, the developments on
the steppe frontier during the Warring States period, as described by Di Cosmo, appear to
present a good match to the dynamics predicted by the model. There are clear signs of
intensifying pressure from the steppes, as well as increasingly aggressive Chinese war efforts
against the north-western ‘barbarians’. The social scale of steppe polities was increasing. On
the Chinese side, larger polities gobbled up smaller ones, then one of the larger polities
gobbled up the rest. Furthermore, social scaling-up during the Warring States period followed on from previous, less far-reaching upward sweeps in social complexity during the
Shang and the Western Zhou eras. It stands to reason that each successive attempt at state
building utilized the templates established by predecessors.32
In conclusion, the imperial confederations of Xiongnu, Turks, and Mongols were not
mere ‘shadow empires’, reflections cast on the steppes by Chinese empires. The interaction
between steppe confederations and agrarian empires in East Asia was characterized by feedback loops, with the causality flowing in both directions. If causality had been unidirectional, as postulated by Thomas Barfield, then the rise of steppe confederations would
have followed the unifications of China with a time lag. This prediction is contradicted
28 Nicola Di Cosmo, Ancient China and its enemies: the rise of nomadic power in East Asian history,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 80, 107, 314.

29 Ibid., p. 109.

30 Ibid.

31 Ibid., p. 153.

32 Henry T. Wright, ‘Early state dynamics as political experiment’, Journal of Anthropological Research,
62, 2006, pp. 305–19; Joyce Marcus, ‘The archaeological evidence for social evolution’, Annual Review
of Anthropology, 37, 2008, pp. 251–66.

A THEORY FOR FORMATION OF LARGE EMPIRES j
j
by the rise of the Gok-Turk Kaghanate (552 CE), which preceded Sui unification (581) by a
generation. Similarly, Ming unification (1368 CE), which followed the Mongol conquest
(finalized in 1279), was clearly a nativist reaction against the alien Yuan dynasty.

Furthermore, the beginning of the Xiongnu empire is traditionally dated to the rise of
Mao Tun (209 BCE), a date that conveniently follows Qin unification (221 BCE). However,
Mao Tun was not the first shan-yu of the Xiongnu, and Xiongnu armies of tens of thousands of steppe warriors appeared in the steppes well before Qin unification. The mirrorempires model assumes a system involving dynamic feedback in both directions, and therefore we expect a rough synchrony between agrarian and steppe empires, rather than one
always following the other. Furthermore, the mechanism is an evolutionary one. This means
that steppe frontiers are environments with selective pressures for increased polity size.

Whether actual empires arise or not at any given point in time is not guaranteed, for it is
a process with a large element of chance. As a result, model predictions are not deterministic, but stochastic.

Global patterns of mega-empire occurrence
Although the model emerged from historical dynamics in East Asia, the interactions
assumed by it are generic to Afroeurasia, and it would thus be interesting to determine
how well its predictions hold beyond East Asia. The empirical basis for the test is provided
by a compilation of territorial dynamics of historical states.33 My focus is on large landbased empires, both agrarian and nomadic, and not on sea-based powers, such as Athens,
Venice, or the modern western European great powers. Furthermore, because the focus is
on pre-industrial states, the list of empires only extends to 1800.

The statistical sample for testing model predictions is based on territorial size for two
reasons.34 First, although all quantitative data in history are measured with a substantial
error, the areas of historical states typically have the least amount of error compared to
other possible ways of selecting mega-empires, such as population. Thus, populations of
most ancient and medieval empires are known so imperfectly that the true value could easily
be double, or half, of the estimated one. Second, territorial extent is an interesting theoretical variable in its own right, as it is easier to control proximate subordinates than distant
ones. Thus, a compact city state of a million inhabitants presents a much lesser theoretical
puzzle than a far-flung territorial state with the same population.

33 Rein Taagepera, ‘Expansion and contraction patterns of large polities: context for Russia’, International
Studies Quarterly, 41, 1997, pp. 475–504; idem, ‘Size and duration of empires: growth-decline curves,
600 B.C. to 600 A.D.’, Social Science History, 3, 1979, pp. 115–38; idem, ‘Size and duration of empires:
systematics of size’, Social Science Research, 7, 1978, pp. 108–27; idem, ‘Size and duration of empires:
growth–decline curves, 3000 to 600 BC’, Social Science Research, 7, 1978, pp. 180–96; Christopher
Chase-Dunn, Thomas D. Hall, and Peter Turchin, ‘World-systems in the biogeosphere: urbanization,
state formation and climate change since the Iron Age’, in Alf Hornborg and Carole Crumley, eds., The
world system and the earth system: global socioenvironmental change and sustainability since the
Neolithic, New York: Columbia University Press, 2007, pp. 132–48; Peter Turchin, Jonathan M. Adams,
and Thomas D. Hall, ‘East–West orientation of historical empires and modern states’, Journal of WorldSystems Research, 12, 2006, pp. 219–29.

34 Turchin, Historical dynamics.

PETER TURCHIN
There were over sixty historical mega-empires (Table 2), and the great majority of these
empires were situated in or next to the arid belt that runs through Afroeurasia, from the Sahara in the west to the Gobi in the east (Figure 1). The exceptions include one empire in
Southeast Asia (Khmer), and the only empire in the Americas (Inca). There are also three
European exceptions: the Roman and Carolingian empires, and perhaps Lithuania-Poland,
although the latter expanded during the fourteenth century into steppe lands. In summary,
the relationship between proximity to steppe and the rise of mega-empires is not deterministic but there is strong statistical regularity.

The incidence of mega-empires drops off dramatically with distance from the Afroeurasian steppe belt, but this is not merely because of ecology. Arid zones are abundant on other
continents and yet large states are either absent or exceedingly rare in those regions. What
appears to be the important factor is proximity to pastoral societies.

Figure 2 presents the temporal evolution of the largest empire size in the database.35
During the third and second millennia BCE the maximum empire size fluctuated between
0.3 and 1 million square kilometres, albeit with a gradual upward trend (these were several
Egyptian empires, the Akkad, and the Shang). Between 800 and 200 BCE, however, there
BCE to 1.4 in 670 BCE (the neo-Assyrian empire), then to 5.5 in 500 BCE (Achaemenid
Persia), and finally to 9.0 in 180 BCE (the Xiongnu). It is remarkable that this dramatic
upsweep in the maximum area coincided almost precisely with the Axial Age, usually dated
to 800–200 BCE.36 After the upsweep of the Axial Age, the maximum imperial size continued to increase, but at a much slower rate (Figure 2). Karl Jaspers speculated that the great
religious and philosophical breakthroughs of the Axial Age were a response to political and
social instability brought on by increased pressure from the nomadic steppe dwellers, which,
in turn, was due to the military breakthrough of mounted archery. We know that the
Scythians were instrumental in bringing the end to the neo-Assyrian empire, and that the
Achaemenid struggle against them was in many ways similar to the struggle of the Han
empire against the Xiongnu.

There was a simultaneous development during the Axial Age of empire size, nomad military superiority, the rise of great world religions, and a radical increase in the world urbanization rate.37 The model developed in this article offers one possible explanation for this
remarkable pattern. As nomad military superiority forced agrarian states to scale up to resist
pressure from the steppes, one cultural mechanism for holding together ethnically diverse
people in new mega-empires was the presence of unifying, ‘meta-ethnic’ (supranational)
ideologies, such as Zoroastrianism in the Achaemenid empire, Buddhism in the Maurya
empire, and Confucianism in the Han empire.38 Turco-Mongolian nomads (perhaps going
35 Chase-Dunn et al., ‘World-systems in the biogeosphere’.

36 Karl Jaspers, The origin and goal of history, New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1953.

37 For cities, see Andrey Korotayev, ‘Urbanization and political development of the world system: a
comparative quantitative analysis’, in Peter Turchin, Leonid Grinin, Victor C. de Munck, and Andrey
Korotayev, eds., History and mathematics: historical dynamics and development of complex societies,
Moscow: URSS, 2006, pp. 115–53.

38 Shmuel N. Eisenstadt, ‘The Axial Age breakthroughs: their characteristics and origins’, in idem, ed., The
origins and diversity of Axial Age civilizations, Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1986, pp. 1–25.

