NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using 
the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical 
Analysis of Fela’s Music Library 
 
Adaora Unoma Echezona1, Francisca Tochukwu Udu2*, Ifeoma Agatha Uzoma3, Daniel Danalaml Baba4, 
Chizoba Chienyem Ike5, Ogunleye Bisola Aduke6 
Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Words: Communication, Effective Communication, Nigerian Pidgin English Language, Music Library. 
DOI Number: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.44111 
NeuroQuantology 2022; 20(8): 1023-1030 
1023 
 
 
Introduction 
The Nigerian Pidgin English has survived several 
years in Nigeria. It is spreading quite fast both in 
urban and rural areas than any other language. This 
places it as a very good tool for effective 
communication with the Nigerian public. Hence it is 
less reasonable to neglect the language. It is true 
that the language has its own problems; it will be of 
high benefit if it is developed and standardized. 
While pop music gains a lot of patronage and 
recognition through the use of Nigerian Pidgin 
English, Art music composers are yet to embrace 
the language fully. Pidgin English according to 
Encarta (2009) refers to a simplified language 
made up of parts of two or more languages, used as 
a communication tool between speakers whose 
native 
languages 
are 
different. 
With 
the 
heterogeneous mixture of people of various ethnic 
origins in urban areas of Nigeria, Pidgin English has 
come to be a common ground linguistically. 
 
Communication according to Encarta (2009) refers 
to the ‘exchange of information between people, 
e.g., by means of speaking, writing, or using a 
common 
system 
of 
signs 
or 
behavior.’ 
Encyclopaedia Britannica defines it 
as 
‘the 
exchange of meanings between individuals through 
a common system of symbols. Communication can 
be viewed as ways through which ideas are 
transferred from one person to another. Effective 
communication is communication between two or 
more persons in which the intended message is 
properly encoded, delivered through appropriate 
channels. It is also the communication between two 
or more persons wherein the intended message is 
successfully delivered, received and understood. 
This paper focuses on the textual/musical analysis 
of Fela’s songs namely ‘lady’ and ‘Gentleman’ as to 
examine the effective use of Pidgin English in 
communicating to a larger Nigerian audience. 
 
 
Corresponding author: Francisca Tochukwu Udu 
Address: 1,2*,3,4,5Department of Music, University of Nigeria Nsukka; 6Department of Music, Nnamdi Azikiwe University Awka. 
Works of art are intended to communicate ideas. A work of art that does not communicate or does so ineffectively
loses potency. Pidgin English, an unofficial Nigerian language has rises to a status where it cannot be viewed as
merely informal in urban areas. The language has proven to be a binder of various peoples who come from across
different ethnic and educational backgrounds. Hence, intercommunication with all these people via the media is
easier when done through Pidgin English. This paper focuses on the textual/musical analysis of Fela’s songs namely
‘lady’ and ‘Gentleman’ as to examine the effective use of Pidgin English in communicating to a larger Nigerian
audience. Through descriptive and analytical methods, this research article will serve as a stimulant for composers of 
Art music in engaging and exploiting the advantages of the use of Pidgin English. 

NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
Through descriptive and analytical methods, this 
research article will serve as a stimulant for 
composers of Art music in engaging and exploiting 
the advantages of the use of Pidgin English. 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English 
Nigerian Pidgin English (NPE) according to 
Wikipedia is ‘is a English-based pidgin and creole 
language spoken as a lingua franca across Nigeria.’ 
It serves as first language for many southern 
Nigerians especially those in the Niger-Delta region. 
There are however variations to the language 
according to areas. It is mostly spoken in the urban 
areas. Places such as Warri, Sapele, Benin City, Port 
Harcourt and Lagos speak pidgin a lot. Nigerian 
Pidgin English is also called ‘Naija’. ‘The term 
“Naija” as used by the speakers of NPE to refers to 
“Nigeria” as a country. The change to the reformed 
name is an attempt to erase the negative perception 
and attitude people have towards NPE as “broken 
English”, argued to be either inaccurate or 
derogatory.’(Ibrahim, J. 2016. Pg.1). Nigerian Pidgin 
English (NPE) combines terms from our local 
languages and foreign languages.’Thus, even the 
base of the Nigerian pidgin we have today is not 
totally English and is not totally European fused, 
but there are borrowings from some West African 
Languages for example, ‘wayo,’ ‘banza,’ ‘suya,’ 
‘yamutu,’ ‘pafuka’ are words from Hausa; ‘Awuf’, 
‘potopoto’ 
are 
from 
Krio; 
‘sabi’ 
(know) 
‘pickin’(child) ‘dash’, (to give to a person) ‘palava’ – 
(problem) are of Portuguese origin. Also, the word 
‘beaudcoup’ translated as ‘boku’ (Plenty) is of 
French origin while from Yoruba language we have 
words like ‘ole,’ (thief) ‘kobokobo,’ (a stranger) ‘aje’ 
(witch) which different tribes in Nigeria have 
borrowed into their own pidgin. (Balogun, T. 2013, 
pg. 97). All these borrowings have historical 
implications. 
 
Origin of Pidgin English 
Ibrahim J. (2016) accounted for the origin of Pidgin 
by saying that ‘the origin of pidgin in Nigeria can be 
traced back to the contact established between 
Nigerians and Europeans. According to Elugbe and 
Omamor (1991), NPE arose from the contact 
between multilingual coastal communities of 
Nigerian and their earliest trading partners the 
Portuguese starting from 1469, which brought 
about a Portuguese-based Pidgin language known 
as Negro  Portuguese. The Portuguese pidgin was 
short lived with the ousting of the Portuguese 
traders 
by 
other 
European 
traders 
and 
missionaries: the French, then briefly the Dutch and 
finally the English. Among these European interest 
groups, the British trade contact which started 
from the beginning of the 17th century endured, 
from which an English-based pidgin was developed 
along the coast.’ (Pg 3). Ifechelobi J & Ifechelobi C. 
(2015) stated that ‘The multiplicity of languages in 
the Niger Delta Region of Nigeria made the 
Portuguese to introduce the English language to 
them. The co-habitation of the English language and 
the indigenous languages produced an emergent 
language called Nigerian Pidgin. (pg. 210) Faraclas 
N. (1996) argued that with a large and vigorous 
population and a long tradition of ethnic and 
linguistic diversity and tolerance, Nigeria was able 
to develop a highly mercantile society with major 
urban centres centuries before the landing of 
European merchant ships in the fifteenth century 
or the arrival of the Jihad in the thirteenth century. 
City life, intermarriage, trading and travel have 
brought Nigerians who speak different languages 
into close contact with one another for thousands 
of years. Bilingualism and multilingualism have 1024 
always been the norm rather than the exception in 
most parts of Nigeria. For these reasons, it is very 
likely 
that pidginized 
versions 
of 
Nigerian 
languages were widely used in many areas. In fact, 
pidginized Hausa is still spoken by non-native 
speakers of Hausa in the markets around Lake Chad 
while a pidginized form of Igbo is used at present in 
some Niger Delta markets. 
Nigerian Pidgin may very well have developed from 
one or several such pidginized Nigerian languages 
that were spoken along the coast before the 
Europeans arrived. Because of the importance of 
the European trade and the reluctance 
of 
Europeans to learn other languages, European 
words would have been substituted for Nigerian 
words to facilitate communication. Since the 
Portuguese arrived first, a few Portuguese-derived 
items such as sàbi ‘know’ and pìkîn ‘child’ would 
have been initially adopted, but as the British 
consolidated power over Nigeria, more and more 
English words would have been integrated into the 
language. Along with British colonialism came 
European education via missionaries, many of 
whom were Krio speakers from Sierra Leone 
(mostly ex-slaves or descendants of ‘repatriated’ 
slaves from the Caribbean). Whether Nigerian 
Pidgin developed from marketplace contacts 
between European traders and the various ethnic 

NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
groups along the coast or from the influence of 
missionaries from Sierra Leone is impossible to 
determine, given the present state of our 
knowledge. It is reasonable to assume that both of 
these factors played some part, but scholars must 
be careful not to over-emphasize the role of either 
the traders or the missionaries in the evolution of 
Nigerian Pidgin (Faraclas N. 1996). 
 
Structure and Variations of Nigerian Pidgin 
English 
The Nigerian Pidgin English is predominantly 
English but there are influences of local languages 
in it. This has necessitated that each region have its 
own variation of the Nigerian Pidgin English since 
they have different local languages. Rickford (1998) 
supported this by saying that, ‘ A pidgin usually 
combines elements of the native language of its 
users and is typically simpler than those native 
languages in so far as it has fewer words, less 
morphology, and a more restricted range of 
phonological and syntactic options. As Ibrahim, 
J.(2016) puts it, ‘Like other pidgin languages 
around the world, NPE is made up of substrate and 
superstrate languages. The structure of 
NPE 
derives its vocabulary from English, and its sound 
system from the syntax of the local languages 
(Edith, 2014). For the dominant role in the fusion of 
what evolved as NPE, English is the superstrate 
while the indigenous Nigerian languages which are 
less dominant form the substrate language. Because 
of the linguistic diversity of the substrate situation, 
different dialects of the NP emerged.’(pg 4) As a 
result, Obiechina D. (1984) stated that, ‘classified 
the NPE into five (5) variants: Bendel, Calabar, 
Kano/Maiduguri, Lagos & Port Harcourt. The 
speakers of these variants can be summarized 
below: 
Attitudes towards Pidgin English 
It has been said that the disdain for Nigerian Pidgin 
English originates from the attitudes of the 
Europeans Balogun T. (2013) wrote that, ‘Nigerian 
Pidgin was denied, disallowed and rejected by the 
Europeans as official and proper English language, 
especially 
within 
the 
realms 
of 
education, 
administration and politics.’ (pg.3) Despite the fact 
that Nigerian Pidgin is in most respects the most 
logical choice for a national language, it has 
received little recognition from those responsible 
for language policy in Nigeria. Official attitudes 
towards 
Nigerian 
Pidgin 
remain 
negative, 
perpetuating erroneous notions inherited from the 
colonial period that Nigerian Pidgin is some form of 
‘broken English’. (Faraclas N. 1996). Ibrahim J. 
(2016) added that ‘The reality is that Nigerian 
Pidgin English(NPE), which was considered to be a 
debased, bastardized, jargonized and intellectually 
inferior language in Nigeria, is gradually growing 
to the status of language of wider communication 
(pg 1). 
Several radio stations make use of Nigerian Pidgin 
English exclusively. They include Radio stations like 
Naija FM Radio station, WAZOBIA FM Radio station. 1025 
Several other radio stations employ Nigerian Pidgin 
English in several of their programmes. Such radio 
stations are: Purity FM, Lagos State Television 
Station, Delta Broadcasting Service, Cool FM, 
Independent Television and many others. The use 
of Nigerian Pidgin English is featured more during 
advertisement, news, sports, social issues, public 
interactive programs, sports, news and social 
commentaries. Balogun T. (2013) supports this 
view by saying that, ‘Pidgin is commonly used in 
Nigeria soap operas. Notable among such operas 
are ‘Hotel de Jordan,’ ‘Village Headmaster,’ ‘Koko- 
Close,’ ‘Why Worry,’ ‘Inside Out,’ ‘Masquerade,’ 
‘Papa Ajasco,’ and a host of others. 
Today, broadcasting in WAZOBIA F.M., a popular 
Nigerian F.M. radio station, is strictly done using 
the Pidgin language. In the realm of poetry, the use 
of pidgin is also noticeable. For instance, there exist 
two anthologies of Nigerian Pidgin poetry today. 
These are the Vatsa (1981) and Aig-Imoukheuder 
(1982).’ (pg 96). 
Also, most Nigerian Popular Artiste 
employ 
Nigerian Pidgin English in their music including 
highlife, hiphop, Afro-beat, hip life musicians 
amongst others. Fela Kuti, 2 face, Davido, P- Square, 
Flavour, Tiwa Savage, Don Jazzy and many other 
musicians fall under this category. Their frequent 
VARIANTS
SPEAKERS
 
1.
 
Bendel 
Abraka, Warri, Isoko, Sapele, 
Agbor, Itsekiri, Effurun, 
Agbaraha-Oto, Urhobo & Ewu 
2. Calabar 
Calabar, Cross-River, Akwa- 
Ibom & Kalabari Regions.
3. Kano/Maiduguri North-East, North-West &
North-South 
4. Lagos 
South-West, South-Central, 
Eastern Part 
5. Port Harcourt 
Port Harcourt, River, Regional
Suburbs. 

NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
use of the language has helped a lot in promoting it 
even beyond the shores of the country. They as well 
aid in creating and promoting new terms in the 
language. The fact that these musicians are 
financially successful and some of them are literate 
and popular has challenged the prior notion that 
Nigerian Pidgin English is for the illiterate, 
unschooled or never- do-wells of the society, 
thereby making it more acceptable by the public. 
Today, many informal communications on social 
media occur in Nigerian Pidgin English including 
Facebook 
messenger 
chats 
and 
comments, 
Whatsapp chats, Instagram posts, Twitter posts and 
so on. Association of Nigerian Authors (ANA) now 
recognizes Nigerian Pidgin English (NPE) in its 
members’ literary works as many books and poetry 
volumes have been published in NPE. Some of the 
notable works include: Eriata Oribhabor’s If Yu Hie 
Se A De Prizin, Ezenwa-Ohaeto’s I wan Bi President, 
Tunde Fatunde’s No Food No Country and Ola 
Rotimi’s Grip Am.(Ibrahim J. 2016 (pg. 2). Nigerian 
Pidgin English is the language for many choruses in 
Protestant churches especially those in the urban 
areas. Obviously, this is necessary to accommodate 
the various tribes and tongues that assemble in 
large numbers in such churches. Even the orthodox 
churches are not left out, they also sing such 
choruses. 
Today, several articles and researched materials 
discussing the various aspects and issues of 
Nigerian Pidgin English have been written. 
Textbooks 
discussing 
its 
grammatical 
arrangements have been also scribbled. An example 
of such is ‘Nigerian Pidgin: Descriptive Grammar’ 
by Nicholas Faraclas. Thus, Nigerian Pidgin English 
has begun to receive attention from those in the 
academia. However more needs to be done to 
exploit the advantages of the language cum its 
position in the Nigerian society as widely spreading 
language. Nigerian Pidgin English has however be 
wrongly termed broken English, giving it a negative 
attachment. 
 
Problems and Challenges Associated with 
Nigerian Pidgin English 
Pidgin English faces several issues ranging from 
policies to usage. There are still many who have 
negative attitudes towards the language, regarding 
it as inferior. Many private and public schools 
discourage its use in schools. Also, the fact that 
Nigerian Pidgin English has influences from various 
indigenous languages has added some difficulty to 
its standardization. Although, a major lingua franca, 
it has no official recognition; even without any 
policy statements, it performs a growing range of 
functions, including, for example, that of a medium 
of public broadcasting, but no efforts have been 
made to develop it in order for it to be able to cope 
with these functions, as has been done for the 
major and to some extent also for minor indigenous 
languages. The nature of the language is not based 
on a standardized grammatical structure. For 
example, Balogun T. (2013) observes that, ‘Nigeria 
pidgin is alleged for not having a generally 
acceptable 
model. 
For 
example, 
the 
tense- 
agreement as we have it in English is absent as 
shown below: 
I am coming – I dey come 
He is coming – He dey come 
We are coming – we dey come’ (pg. 96) 
Also, the problems of orthography still bedevil the 
progress and standardization of Nigerian Pidgin 
English. However, linguists can work on some of 
these challenges and come up with a solution to it. 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English, broken English and 
Special English 
Broken English, on the one hand, is the type spoken 
as a result of inadequate mastering of standard 
English Language by non-native speakers of the 
language. It is different from Nigerian Pidgin. 
Special English, on the other hand is the type that is 
spoken with a deliberate attempt to manipulate the 
rules of English. It is used in most cases to create 
humour. Such is associated with characters like 
Zebrudaya 
of 
the 
television 
Soap 
Operas 
‘Masquerade’ (Balogun T. 2013pg. 92). Special 
English is same as what Elugbe and Omamor 
(1991) refers to this form as a ‘Pseudo Pidgin.’ 
 
Merits of Nigerian Pidgin English 
Nigerian Pidgin English for now, is the only 
language 
in 
Nigeria 
that 
can 
sufficiently 
accommodate the various people of diverse ethnic 
backgrounds. People of various academic and 
intellectual backgrounds can be communicated to 
using the language. Its simple nature makes 
communication easier. Montanya C. (2017) affirms 
that without the role of Nigerian Pidgin English as 
the medium, for most music and jokes in Nigeria, 
most youth in the industry would not have been 
there. Also, the kind of acceptance and patronage 
that Nigerian music and jokes have over other 
music imported into the country, would not have 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1026 

NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
been possible. (pg. 181) She added that ‘of the over 
four hundred indigenous languages spoken by 
Nigerians, only Nigerian Pidgin enjoys the privilege 
of being spoken by people from all walks of life and 
social strata. This offers it the wide coverage it has 
in essence leading to more patronage of music and 
jokes rendered in it (pg.187). In the entertainment 
industry, pidgin pervades the deeper feelings and 
emotions of fans, and serves as a very good 
entertainment when used for comedy, drama and 
films, music and concert. Also, sensitive issues of 
national and international interest are carefully and 
jocularly passed across to people using this 
medium. This has been observed in the music of 
such people as Yellow Man, Peter Torsh, Bob 
Marley, Raskimono, Fela Anikulapo Kuti and Femi. 
 
FELA and his Music 
Olufela, 
Olusegun 
Oludotun 
Ransome-Kuti 
popularly known as Fela Kuti or simply Fela was 
born on 15th October 1938 in Abeokuta Ogun state. 
He attended Abeokuta Grammar School and moved 
to London to study Medicine. Against his father’s 
wish, he changed to Music. They performed music 
that was a fusion of jazz and highlife. He returned 
to Nigeria in 1963 and trained as a radio producer. 
In 1967, He later moved to Ghana where he 
conceived the idea of Afrobeat. Fela is credited with 
the invention of the Afrobeat genre. Afrobeat is a 
genre combining highlife, Jazz and black American 
Soul. In 1969, He went with his band to Los 
Angeles, United states and performed there, staying 
up to ten months. There, he met Black Power 
Movement through Sandra Smith. He renamed his 
band Nigeria ’70. Due to some problems, he 
returned to Nigeria in 1970. He also renamed his 
group Africa ’70. In 1978, he married 27 women on 
the same day. These women were his singers and 
dancers. His music fought corruption and political 
ills in the country. He also fought against 
imperialism and cultural inferiority in Africa with 
his music. His songs such as Gentleman, Lady, and 
Yellow fever were meant to attack the fact that 
Africans try to copy the West at the expense of their 
culture and its relevance. He was frequently 
persecuted by the Nigerian government for his 
songs which attacked corruption among Nigerian 
politicians and leaders. 
 
His Language and Meaning in his Music 
Fela used Nigerian Pidgin English and sometimes 
Yoruba language or a mixture of both in his songs. 
The use of Nigerian Pidgin English in his music 
made him communicate effectively to his audience. 
This is simply because the majority in urban areas 
like Lagos where Fela’s music thrived spoke 
Nigerian Pidgin English. These urban areas were 
filled with people of various ethnic origin and 
academic background. Ipso facto, Nigerian Pidgin 
English became their unifying factor. Below is 
Olaniyan’s (2004) analysis of the song, lady by Fela 
is given below: ‘The more specifically cultural 
nationalist songs are, on the other hand, much 
more successful. “Gentleman” is a satire against 
overly westernized African men, but the more 
wildly popular is the earlier “Lady,” a satire against 
overly westernized African women and a most 
eloquent manifesto that gave many boys of my 
generation our first popular and pleasurable 
language of male chauvinism. The structure follows 
a classic Fela tripartite pattern of instrumentals, 
song, and instrumentals. An extended instrumental 
introduction opens the mid-tempo track—more 
than six minutes of the track’s nearly fourteen. The 
ensemble horns, guitars, keyboards, drums, and 
percussion begin at once to define the theme. A 
bass guitar solo leads the pack with short riffs that 1027 
are answered by the underlining horns, while the 
drums keep their warm consistency below. Then 
the horns abruptly withdraw, and the sonic range 
and 
pitch 
plummet. 
For 
a 
provoking 
and 
provocative twenty-four seconds, all we hear are 
the stout guitar, sizzling maracas, lushly ricocheting 
congas, and ever-so slight cymbals. If you are not 
already on the dance floor after these three minutes 
of the track, this is a call you cannot resist. The 
horns rejoin just as abruptly. A horn 
solo 
improvises on the earlier guitar pattern in a call 
and response with the rest. This arrangement is 
repeated several times in a consummate version 
with supple, lilting, underlying percussion. There is 
an overall intoxicating sumptuousness in the 
track’s soundscape. A longer horn solo purposefully 
explores several directions for over a minute before 
being called back by the others into the main call- 
and-response pattern for a while’. (pg. 45) 
 
The lyrics of the song is 
If you call am woman African woman no go 'gree 
She go say, she go say, "I be lady, oh" She go say, "I 
be lady, oh" 
She go say, "I be lady" 
She go say, "I no be woman" 
She go say, "Market woman na woman" She go say, 
"I be lady" 

NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
I want tell you about lady I want tell you about lady 
I want tell you about lady 
She go say him equal to man 
She go say him get power like man 
She go say anything man do himself fit do 
I never tell you finish I never tell you finish I never 
tell you finish I never tell you finish I never tell you 
She go want take cigar before anybody 
She go want make you open door for am She go 
want make man wash plate 
For am, for kitchen She want salute man 
She go, sit down for chair She want salute man 
She go, sit down for chair 
She want sit down 
For table… 
She want sit down 
For table before anybody She want sit down 
For table before anybody She want a piece of meat 
Before anybody 
She want a piece of meat Before anybody 
Call am for dance 
She go dance lady dance Call am for dance 
She go dance lady dance 
 
Interpretation 
Fela in this song campaigns against discourages the 
idea of gender equality among Nigerians which was 
as a result of European influence. He advocated that 
man should be given prime position in the society. 
According to Olaniyan (2004). 
‘The song’s narrated case against our prudish 
Nigerian Victorian “lady” is a stereotype of 
westernized middle class values that remains a 
target of barbs by a whole spectrum: the lower 
classes, those who are not western educated, and 
conservative sections of the educated middle class. 
But we know how often it is that a “defense” of 
“traditional African culture” is a vulgar cover for 
the promotion of all sorts of inequity such as, in this 
case, sexual domination and gender discrimination.’ 
(pg. 45) 
They were to be attended to after the men and not 
before. Lady used in this song refers to the African 
female who claims to be equal with man. Most of 
his audience in the urban areas understood what he 
was saying because he used a language that they 
could relate with. Fela employs the call and 
response style usually African songs. He also uses a 
kind of natural voice. He includes African musical 
instruments also in his instrumentation. 
An 
internet source translated the song as follows: 
If you call her a woman an African woman will not 
listen / She will tell you she is a lady / 
CHORUS: She will tell you she is a lady / Let me tell 
you about this “lady” / She believes she is equal to 
men / She believes she is as powerful as men / She 
will tell you that she can do anything men can do / 
Let me tell you / She is not ashamed of smoking in 
front of anyone / She demands that you open doors 
for her 
She expects her man to do the dishes in her kitchen 
/ She will sit down on a chair before saluting a 
man.(https://www.msafropolitan.com/2013/08/af 
rican-feminist- analysis-fela-lady.html) 
 
Gentleman 
I no be gentleman at all I no be gentleman at all 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I no be gentleman at all, at all 
 
[Refrain] 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original [Verse 1] 
Them call you, make you come chop You chop 
small, you say you belle full 
You say you be gentleman, you go hungry You go 
suffer, you go quench 
Me I no be gentleman like that 
[Refrain] 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o I be 
Africa man original [Verse 1] 
Them call you, make you come chop You chop 
small, you say you belle full 
You say you be gentleman, you go hungry You go 
suffer, you go quench 
Me I no be gentleman like that 
[Verse 2] 
You dey go your way, the jeje way Somebody come 
bring, original trouble You no talk, you no act, you 
say you be gentleman 
You go suffer, you go tire, you go quench Me I no be 
gentleman like that 
[Refrain] 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1028 

NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
[Verse 3] 
Africa hot, I like am so 
I know what to wear, but my friends don't know 
Him put him socks, him put him shoe Him put him 
pant, him put him singlet Him put him trouser, him 
put him shirt Him put him tie, him put him coat Him 
come cover all with him hat 
Him be gentleman, him go sweat, all over Him go 
faint right down, him go smell like shit 
Him go piss for body, him no go know Me I no be 
gentleman like that [Refrain] 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all, at all 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
I no be gentleman at all o 
I be Africa man original 
 
Translation 
Refrain: I’m not a gentleman at all/ I’m an original 
African man 
Verse 1: You were called to eat. You ate just a little 
and said you are satisfied because claim to be a 
gentleman. You’ll go hungry and famished. I’m not 
that kind of gentleman 
Refrain: I’m not a gentleman at all/ I’m an original 
African man 
Verse 2: Someone intentionally wants to pick up 
trouble with you, you ignored him because you’re a 
gentleman. You ended up suffering for it. 
Refrain: I’m not a gentleman at all/ I’m an original 
African man 
Verse 3: Africa has hot weather. I know what to 
wear but my friends (fellow Africans) don’t. They’ll 
wear socks, tie, singlet, pants, shoe, trousers, coat 
and hat on the head in the hot weather. This makes 
them sweat all over and smell. 
Refrain: I’m not a gentleman at all/ I’m an original 
African man 
Interpretation 
Fela in this music despised African who imitate 
European culture blindly. Gentleman here refers to 
a man who tries to avoid trouble at his expense or a 
man who would not want to be seen eating publicly 
so refrain from food though hungry or a man who 
dresses in suit in the hot African weather just to 
imitate colonial dressing. Succintly, he advocated 
against colonial mentality that was gaining more 
ground in his time. ‘The repeated, I no be gentleman 
at all o is a defiance against the European civilized 
lifestyle. It literally means: I’m not a gentleman at 
all. I be Africa man original means I’m an original 
African man. He used this to imply that he believes 
in retaining tge African beliefs and culture instead 
of the European culture that was gradually taking 
over the lifestyle of Nigerians. The song, through 
the use of pidgin communicated effectively to the 
public. 
 
Conclusion 
The main aim for creating and performing music is 
to communicate to one’s self or others some sort of 
feelings and ideas. Songs not only communicate 
with tunes   but   also   in text.   For   any   song   to 1029 
communicate meaning through its words, the 
language must be understood. In urban Nigeria 
where Nigerian pidgin is the prevalent language, 
composing songs in pidgin will help to ensure 
wider patronage because people tend to patronize 
what they understand and relate can with. Art 
music can embrace the use of Nigerian Pidgin 
English more in compositions than they have done 
in the past. This will help them in gaining a wider 
patronage and also creating more impact. There are 
however few art compositions in Nigerian Pidgin 
English as evident in the compositions of Dr, Alvan- 
Ikoku Nwamara. But generally, art composers are 
yet to embrace the use of the language fully. 
 
References 
Balogun, T.A. (2013). In defense of Nigerian pidgin. Journal of 
Languages and Culture, 4(5), 90-98. 
Edith, O.E. (2014). Language attitude and Nigerian pidgin. 
International Journal of Arts and Humanities, 3(4), 32-46. 
Elugbe, B. & Omamor, A.(1991). Nigerian Pidgin: Background 
and Prospects. Ibadan: Heinemann. 
Faraclas, N.C. (1996). Nigerian Pidgin: Descriptive  Grammar. 
Routledge: USA. 
http://www.britannica.com/topic/communication 
https://www.msafropolitan.com/2013/08/african-feminist- 
analysis-fela-lady.html 

NeuroQuantology | July 2022 | Volume 20 | Issue 8 | Page 1023-1030 | doi: 10.14704/nq.2022.20.8.NQ44111
Adaora Unoma Echezona et al / Effective Communication in Urban Nigeria Using the Pidgin English Language: A Textual/Musical Analysis of Fela’s Music 
Library 
ISSN 1303 5150
t l
 
 
Ibrahim, J. (2016). Nigerian Pidgin English: Multi-Prepositional 
Functionality of “Fo” Among Nigerian Staff of Ces in 
Manchaster. American Research Journal of English and 
Literature, 2, 1-10. 
Ifechelobi, J. & Ifechelobi, C. (2015) Beyond Barriers: The 
Changing Status of Nigerian Pidgin International Journal of 
Language and Literature, 3(1), 208-216. 
Microsoft® 
Encarta® 
2009. 
© 
1993-2008 
Microsoft 
Corporation. 
Motanya, C.C. (2017). Nigerian pidgin: A means of human 
development. UJAH: Unizik Journal of Arts and Humanities, 
18(2), 179-191. 
Obiechina, D. (1984). Towards the classification of Nigerian 
Pidgin English. London: Longman. 
Olaniyan, T. (2004). Arrest the Music! Fela and His Rebel Art 
and Politics. Bloomington:Indiana University Press. 
Rickford, J.R. (1998). The Creoles Origins of American 
Vernacular English: Evidence from Copular Absence. In 
Salikoko et-al (ed.), African American English. London: 
Routledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1030 

