African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
216 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
ROLES OF NIGERIAN ENGLISH VARIETIES IN NATIONAL INTEGRATION 
 
Oguji, Emmanuel Akpu 
Department of English, Ebonyi State College of Education, Ikwo 
08065966928; emmanueloguji4christ@gmail.com 
& 
Onuoha, Juliana N. 
Department of English, Ebonyi State College of Education, Ikwo 
08060944389, osinachiadinmajesus@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper examined the Nigerian English varieties and their roles in integrating the country. 
The English language has come to stay in Nigeria and looking at its long history, it has grown 
beyond a target language to a unity language – lingua Franca. The domestication of English 
in Nigeria has given birth to Nigerian varieties of English. The varieties are spoken by all 
Strata of the Nigerian society in daily transactions. This paper relies on Dell Hymes’ 
Ethnography of Communication theory as an analytical tool. The findings of the study reveals 
that the varieties of English spoken in Nigeria have united the social strata, closed all border 
lines between tribes or speech communities thus serve as password for all official transactions 
from local to national levels. Also, it is the passport for inter and intra city movements and 
trades. This paper proposes that more publications be made in the Nigerian English varieties 
to create wider awareness of its acceptability and that the Pidgin English and Creole which 
are part of the Nigerian varieties of English should not be waved aside as unacceptable English 
varieties in Nigeria. It also recommends creation of research centres with equipped language 
laboratories to develop, harmonize and strengthen Nigerian English varieties and that more 
deliberate study be carried out to standardize the Pidgin variety. 
 
Keywords: Roles; English; Variety; Nation; Integration 
 
Introduction 
Language anywhere and everywhere is a 
vital means of communication. It is an 
exclusive characteristic of human beings 
considering its unique properties of 
displacement, arbitrariness and duality 
(Yule 2003, p.20-25). By sources and 
acquisition, 
languages 
have 
common 
origin. "And the whole earth was of one 
language, and of one speech… Behold, the 
people are one, they have all one language; 
and this they begin to do: and now nothing 
will be restrained from them, which they 
have imagined to do" (Genesis 11:1, 6 the 
old King James version). From the Babel 
experience, where God scattered men and 
gave 
them 
diverse 
languages, 
each 
language has its family tree from which 
proto-European was established as the 
great-grand mother of English language 
(Yule 2003, p.214) and (Hudson 2001, 
p.37). Language from the beginning has 
binding force that unifies people for 
existence and functionality. 
 
Every language user in a bi-lingual or 
multi-lingual environment has his\her own 
mother tongue, yet for obvious needs 
acquire a second language. It goes to show 

African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
217 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
that everybody living there understands and 
speaks the same language. This marks those 
people as a family and many times such 
people are from the same decent. Whereas 
there are some nations that have national 
language, lots more are multilingual, 
multiethnic and multicultural. Nigeria as a 
nation falls within the latter group. As 
multilingual, 
multiethnic, 
multicultural 
nation, Nigerian is held together by the 
English language. Language indeed is the 
only sustainable binding force that wields 
multilingual nation together. 
 
English language, since its introduction 
decades ago in Nigeria, has functioned as 
primary medium of communication. It has 
grown over years to become a lingua franca 
by usage. Yusuf (2012, p.898) affirms this 
when he noted that English has emerged as 
that privileged language without which the 
unity of Nigeria as a nation is most 
improbable if not out-rightly impossible. 
Yusuf (2012, p.898) quoting Isayev posits 
that "language is a nation's most important 
asset. There is no such thing as a nation 
without a common linguistic basis". This 
affirms that for national integration, 
cohesion and development to thrive, there 
must be language capable and acceptable 
by all in the administration of a nation's 
affairs. 
 
This paper attempts to highlight how the 
English language and its varieties spoken in 
Nigeria functions in uniting every strata in 
the country. The unifying function of 
English in Nigeria is discussed in this paper 
as composite since all other varieties of 
English spoken in the country are all 
inclusive. Nigeria is a multilingual nation 
with 
about 
500 
estimated 
different 
languages spoken having Igbo, Hausa and 
Yoruba are the major languages. Other 
ethnic groups have their languages which 
are spoken by thousands of people. The 
arrival of the British introduced English in 
Nigeria through trade contact resulting in 
the formation of pidgin which probably led 
to the present day Nigeria Pidgin English. 
This Nigerian Pidgin English is mainly 
used for inter-ethnic communication. This 
inter-ethnic language has over the years 
grown in leaps and bounds galvanizing all 
facets of the country ranging from the 
highly educated elites, the non-educated, 
the security agents, the artisans to the 
traders even the market women. In addition, 
the Pidgin English complements the 
standard 
Nigeria 
English 
variety 
in 
unifying the nation and bringing the people 
together. 
 
The Concept of Varieties of English 
Variety according to Hudson (2001) is a 
different manifestation of a language or a 
set of linguistic items with similar social 
distribution, Oxford Concise Dictionary of 
Linguistics (2007) sees variety as any form 
of a language seen as systematically distinct 
from others. 
 
Varieties of English as posit here is 
different forms the English. It is the 
different forms of English spoken at 
different regions by different groups of 
people in different lands and clime.It results 
from the contacts English has made as it 
travelled through different lands and clime 
where the British had influence. Thus, we 
have 
American 
variety 
of 
English, 
Australian variety of English, Ghanaian 
variety of English, Nigerian variety of 
English, among others. 
Nigerian English Varieties  

African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
218 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
Admittedly, the English language is the 
major Lingua Franca in Nigeria and the 
world today. It is spoken in all the 
continents of the world. The status of 
English as a world language makes it 
perform a number of first, second and 
foreign language functions. Being a world 
language, it has developed a number of 
varieties in different parts of the world. 
Among the notable varieties are British, 
American, Canadian, and New Zealand on 
one hand as native speakers and Indian, 
Ghanaian, Nigerian, Singapore, etc on the 
other hand as non-native speakers (NOUN). 
 
The English language was introduced in 
Nigeria by the British about nineteenth 
century AD through trade contact and 
colonization. By 1914, it gained acceptance 
by the amalgamation of the Northern and 
Southern Nigeria. As English Language 
found a new abode in Nigeria, its structure 
has to undergo some changes in line with its 
new environment. By this, the English 
language which was once foreign has to be 
home-grown, nativized, domesticated and 
adopted to suit our environment (NOUN). 
Since its introduction, the English language 
grew side by side with several indigenous 
languages. This gave birth to Nigeria 
variety of English which has various -
pronunciation pattern with no consensus 
pattern for pronunciation (Okafor and 
Ugwu 2007, p.54). Citing Jibril, Jowitt, 
Bamgbose and Banjo, Okafor and Ugwu 
affirm that Nigerian English varieties 
actually exist and that there are many 
varieties of Nigeria English which range 
from something near Standard English to 
the Patois of the market place. It is a 
conglomeration of many varieties which 
relate to one another in sufficient respect to 
quality for a common cover term – Nigeria 
English. 
 
Nigerian English is that variety of English 
used by Nigerians to communicate across 
socio-cultural boundaries. It is different 
from the native speaker's variety in terms of 
its 
use 
of 
some 
culture-specific 
transformation 
as 
well as 
its 
non-
observance of certain global and surface 
structure constraints. Adetugbo in (NOUN) 
unequivocally states that Nigerian English 
like British and American English should 
be regarded as a dialect or a group of 
distinct form of a language devoid of any 
perforate connotation of inferiority. 
 
The Nigerian English (NE) as a product of 
its social context play significant role as a 
medium of social interaction considering 
the vast population of Nigeria with 
estimated population of about 200 million 
and estimated over 400 local languages and 
three 
of 
these 
languages 
(Hausa, 
15,000,000 speakers, Yoruba 10,000,000 
speakers, Igbo 6,000,000 speakers) are 
regarded as the major languages but only a 
few person can speak more than one of 
these three languages (NOUN). This in 
essence makes it clear that the only 
effective 
medium 
of 
communication 
between Nigerian from different linguistic 
backgrounds is English. 
 
In Nigeria, there are varieties of English 
that are learnt in a formal setting 
(classroom) and others that are learnt 
outside the classroom,(broken or pidgin 
English) in an attempt to communicate.  In 
Nigeria, there are many varieties of English 
as there are local languages. Without 
mincing words, Nigerian English may be 
defined as the speech form that embraces all 

African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
219 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
the speakers of English in Nigeria. This 
makes it difficult to decide on the types of 
English that exist in Nigeria. This obvious 
challenge made scholars to attempt to 
classify English types as used in Nigeria. 
 
Classifications of Varieties of Nigerian 
English 
Brosnaham (1958) as quoted (NOUN, p.50) 
classified English varieties used in Nigeria 
by using education criterion. He classified 
it based on four levels: 
 
Level I: the variety called Pidgin English 
used mainly by illiterates. This variety is 
spoken by a large number of speakers, 
mostly market women, artisans, labourers 
and at times the educated Nigerians lapse 
into it when they are in informal 
environments 
and 
they 
need 
to 
communicate 
across 
socio-cultural 
boundaries. 
 
Level II: The variety of English as used by 
high school graduates. It is characterized by 
some degree of communicative fluently and 
with a wide range of lexical items. 
 
Level III: This is the primary school 
English. It is the English as used by people 
with primary school education, and it has 
the greatest number of users. 
 
Level IV: This is the university English. 
This is the English used by the university 
graduates and it is characterized by 
linguistic features close to Standard 
English. 
 
Banjo's classification of Nigerian English 
quoted in NOUN and Okafor and Ugwu 
(2007) 
used 
the 
criteria 
of 
local 
acceptability to classify it into four 
varieties: 
I. Variety used by people with an 
imperfect knowledge of the language. 
Here transliteration is obtained.  
II. It is the variety that is highly accepted 
socially and used by 75% of Nigerian 
speakers. Linguistically, the variety is 
syntactically close to Standard British 
English 
(SBE) 
but 
differ 
at 
phonological and lexical levels.  
For example:  
1. My change is not complete 
2. Driver balance me 
3. I want to drop here.  
4. Take the other road, there is no 
go slow on the road.  
III. It is another variety marketed by low 
social 
acceptability 
and 
high 
international intelligibility. It is used by 
only 10% of Nigerians. He described 
such variety as having RP deep structure 
and Nigerian surface structure. 
IV. Another variety is the variety that is 
characterized by low social and high 
international intelligibility. This variety 
is used by a handful of Nigerians who 
are privileged to have English as their L1 
through birth by native speaker parent 
or were brought up in native speaker 
environment. This he equates with 
Standard British English (SBE). 
 
There is yet another classification by 
Bamgbose (quoted in NOUN). Bamgbose 
classifies Nigerian English into three 
varieties. The first variety he calls the 
contact English (CE) which is the type 
found in Antera Duke's diary of events in 
Calabar between 1785 and 1788. 
Example: 

African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
220 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
"... I see my men was liv with him to Canow 
com up and tell me ... I Run and Go Down 
for landing I find no Canow ..." 
 
Same kind of English was found in King 
Jaja of Opobo’s (1824) diary and it reads, 
"suppose my fader, or my fader fader come 
up from ground and peak me why English 
man do dat, I no sabby tell why". 
 
These are examples of broken English and 
Nigeria Pidgin English. Similar examples 
of this variety can be found in "New 
masquerade" by Chief Zebrudaya and Ken 
Saro-Wiwa's "Sozaboy." 
 
Bamgbose's second variety is the Victorian 
English associated with the so called 
cosmopolitan 19th century Lagos Negro 
English which is spoken to "impress rather 
than express." 
 
Bamgbose's third variety is the School 
English (SE): A summary of Bamgbose's 
description of Nigerian English (NE) is 
based on evolution of varieties of English 
in Nigeria - Contact English (CE) with its 
varieties as Nigerian pidgin (NP) and 
Broken English (BE); Victorian English 
(VE) and School English (SE). The above 
combine together to form what is called 
standard Nigerian English. 
 
From the classifications above, it is crystal 
clear that we have Nigerian English 
varieties. These varieties include among 
others Pidgin English. The origin of 
Nigerian Pidgin English lie historically in 
trade contact between the British and local 
people in the seventeenth century. A 
Manchester working group on language 
contact noted that Nigerian pidgin is part of 
a continuum of English pidgin and Creoles 
spoken in other West African countries 
such as Ghana, Sierra Leone, Cameroun. 
They noted that Nigerian Pidgin English 
development has been evident in big cities 
and ports in the south of Nigeria where it is 
used among people belonging to different 
ethnic groups. Thus, Pidgin in Nigeria is 
linked to the urbanization process. The 
Manchester group observed that in the past, 
the use of Nigerian Pidgin English was 
linked 
to 
non-educated 
people 
and 
perceived by educated ones with negative 
attitude. Nowadays the use of Nigerian 
Pidgin English is more widespread even 
among educated people and perceived as 
more 
Nigerian 
than 
English. 
Truly, 
Nigerian Pidgin is gaining popularity 
among young people, many writers, 
politicians and musicians. This stems from 
the fact that it is not attached to any ethnic 
group. The use of Nigeria Pidgin English 
can also function in some contexts as an act 
of identity when speakers need to stress 
their 'Nigerianness', as opposed to their 
ethnic group identity. This "belongingness" 
to Nigeria could not be achieved by ex-
colonial power in English Language. By 
this role, Pidgin English could have been a 
good candidate for national language in 
Nigeria since it retained the characteristics 
of 
solidarity 
and 
neutrality. 
But 
unfortunately, 
it 
has 
not 
yet 
been 
sufficiently well developed to fulfill all the 
duties of a national language. At present 
there is no standard orthography for Pidgin 
English. It has little or no written use and 
above all no active movement favouring its 
development and propagation. One of the 
major 
challenges 
affecting 
its 
standardization is argument that it is a 
variety of English and not a separate 
language. 
 

African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
221 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
Theoretical Underpinning 
This study is hinged on Dell Hymes’ (1967) 
Ethnography of Communication. The 
theory was a stimulus for the development 
of “interactional sociolinguistics” and as 
Malmkjar (2002) observes, it contributes 
strongly in the argument that for a person to 
attain communicative competence, such a 
person must transcend linguistic knowledge 
to knowing the social and cultural rules for 
using a language. In addition, Stubbs 
(1989) sees ethnography of communication 
as the art of using a specific speech type in 
a specific social setting. In Stubbs’ view, 
the speech in question should not be a 
general one but particular and specific 
speech events relevant to the social setting. 
According 
to 
him, 
ethnography 
of 
communication has to do with the use of 
observed 
or 
recorded 
pattern 
of 
communicative behaviour with a view to 
understanding spoken interaction. Thus, it 
is of importance to understand the act of 
communication in order to have perfect and 
clear understanding of any discourse. 
Further, Goddard (1998, p.342) submits 
that “Ethnography of communication is 
concerned with how speech is organized 
socially and has been adjudged the most 
influential approach to discourse and 
cultural 
studies.” 
This 
view 
places 
emphasis on the social background of the 
speech event and this makes it most 
appropriate for the present study which is 
based on the fact that the societies that the 
English language is used in Nigeria 
determine the form that it takes in order to 
accommodate the linguistic needs of each 
society using it. 
 
 
Impacts of Varieties of Nigeria English in 
National Integration 
English and its varieties in Nigeria 
are unifying tools for National Integration 
in Nigeria. In Nigeria, English is the 
language of government, business and 
commerce, education, the mass media, 
literature and much more of internal as well 
as external communication (Okafor and 
Ugwu, 2007). Unarguably, it is the most 
important language of the world being the 
first language of the United Nations. It is 
spoken in all nations of the world. Yusuf 
(2012) posits that English helps in 
promoting, nurturing and uniting the 
Nigerian nations. He further said that the 
English language is the language of 
integration in Nigeria because it is the only 
language that indexes the spirit of 
togetherness. This can be seen as it 
transverses regional barriers as political 
parties are named in English right from the 
first Republic till date. Names of some of 
the political parties include the Northern 
People's Congress (NPC), the Action 
Group (AG), National Council of Nigeria 
Citizens 
(NCNC), 
All 
Progressive 
Congress (APC), and Peoples Democratic 
Party (PDP). All the national political 
parties form slogans and campaign slangs 
using English and its Nigerian varieties. 
English and its varieties in Nigeria 
are void of suspicions in any formal, literate 
or social context as everyone understands 
them. In this, no one speaking them is 
suspected of having a skeleton in his 
cupboard or "hidden agenda" in inter-ethnic 
transactions or relationships. Yusuf (2012) 
further said that the English language bring 
all the supposed ‘nations’ of Nigeria to 
function as one. Each ethnic group is often 
mentioned as a nation thus Hausa nation, 
Igbo nation, Yoruba nation, Edo nation, Tiv 

African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
222 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
land, Ijaw nation, Ebira land, etc are 
cohabiting under the Nigerian nation 
through English. In other words, without 
English and the Nigerian Pidgin English, 
the violent ethnic groups like Oodua People 
Congress (OPC), Arewa Peoples’ Congress 
(APC), Ijaw Youth Solidarity (IYS), and 
the Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB) 
would have found more justification to 
secede from the Nigerian federation. Each 
of these social (linguistic) groups uses 
English 
in 
both 
intra 
and 
inter 
communication to solve linguistic issues 
that 
are 
peculiar 
to 
them. 
Hence, 
Ethnography of Communication theory 
submits that to attain communicative 
competence, a person must transcend 
linguistic knowledge to knowing the social 
and cultural rules for using a language. In 
other words, speaking Nigerian varieties of 
English requires knowledge of the social 
and cultural rules of the different social 
groups and communities that they serve. 
More so, the English language and 
its varieties in Nigeria are used as language 
of nationalism. The intelligibility of the 
different varieties of English in Nigeria 
manifest through their usage in the specific 
social setting. Nationalists like Nnamdi 
Azikiwe, Herbert Macaulay and current 
national figures express their views in 
English and for wider coverage often use 
Pidgin English in their addresses. By 
implication, English is a Language of 
Wider for Communication (LWC) as such 
is used for Phatic Communion, ceremonial 
purpose and instrument for keeping 
records, information dissemination, self 
experiment and embodiment of thoughts 
among the various linguistic groups of 
Nigeria. Therefore, with English as a 
common tongue to all the ethnic groups, the 
unification of individuals and ethnic 
differences is guaranteed. 
Consequently, the collective identity of 
Nigeria 
and 
co-operate 
existence 
in 
safeguarding the territorial integrity and 
peaceful co-existence in Nigeria is done 
through the English and the Pidgin English as 
can be attested by its use by all security 
agencies - Army, police, and all paramilitary in 
their interactions. Trading and travelling to all 
corners of the country are made free and swift 
if one is fluent either in standard Nigeria 
English or the Pidgin English variety. It is 
important to know that for anyone to rise or live 
in any place in Nigeria, the knowledge of 
English (irrespective of the variety) is 
paramount. The knowledge so acquired helps 
one to have communication with people from 
other ethnic groups and create the sense of 
unity, oneness, and loyalty. 
In Nigeria, the most common medium 
of communication is Pidgin English especially 
in an inter-tribal gathering. The use of it is a 
vital instrument that can be used in grass root 
mobilization for political and socio-economic 
activities. As a result of its wide acceptance, 
Pidgin English is referred to as our "Naija" 
language. Pidgin helps in achieving freedom of 
speech and freedom of movement which are 
two basic fundamental human rights. 
Language is dynamic, so it lives and 
grows. The tones and pronunciation of native 
speakers differ resulting in dialects. Nigeria – 
Nigerian English varieties are domesticated and 
nativized varieties with peculiarities according 
to the socio-cultural and political environment. 
However, 
they 
serve 
the 
functions 
of 
communication and social identity. 
 
Nigeria Varieties of English and the Way 
Forward 
In order for the English language to bring the 
supposed 'nations' of Nigeria to function better 
as one, the utilities of Nigeria English varieties 
should not be undermined. The highly 
educated, the undergraduates, the youths, the 
business class, the market women, the artisans 

African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022     https://ajemates.org 
 
223 
AJEMATES 
African Journal of Educational Management, Teaching and Entrepreneurship Studies 
VOL.7 (2), September-December, 2022; https://ajemates.org 
Impact Factor: SJIF 2020=5.536; SJIF 2021 = 5.57 
Impact Factor URL:  http://sjifactor.com/passport.php?id=21362 
                                              Ranking URL:http://sjifactor.com/masterlist.php?area=all&country=ng&ord=sjif 
 
should 
use 
it 
so 
as 
to 
enhance 
its 
communicative roles of uniting Nigerians. The 
same feat publishing the Standard English 
variety achieved in the world of science and 
technology can be replicated by giving Nigeria 
variety of English the required publicity in 
order to enhance its general acceptance. 
Pidgin English being the "country man" 
language can be developed and standard 
orthographies developed for its writing. Its 
pattern of spelling, and lexicon should be 
harmonized in other to have uniform and 
acceptable registers for it. A standard dictionary 
should be developed to make for harmonization 
to resolve different colorations of pidgin from 
different language groups where the Pidgin 
origin. 
Furthermore, 
language 
laboratories 
should be built across the geo-political zones of 
the country with Tetfund assistance as that will 
help the development of the Nigeria English 
variety to meet the challenges of integrating the 
country more. 
 
Conclusion 
In summary, this paper examined the Nigeria 
English varieties and their roles in integrating 
the country. It examined the varieties of English 
in Nigeria and how they help in unifying all 
strata of the society. It noted that English is 
accepted by all and that the Pidgin English has 
gained more ground as it is growing in leaps 
and bounds to galvanize all language groups. 
For the unity and integrity in Nigeria to 
be sustained this paper suggested that more 
deliberate study be carried out to standardize 
the pidgin variety and that more publicity be 
made with it in prints and media for its 
acceptance. That more deliberate action should 
be geared towards making Nigeria English 
varieties a uniting force.  
 
References 
Francesco Goglia Manchester Working Group 
on 
Language 
Contact, 
Migration 
Diaspora and Hybridity in Nigeria 
Language in Pidgin English online. 
Genesis 11: 1,6: King James Version. 
Goddard, C. (1998). Semantic analysis: a 
practical introduction. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Hudson, R. A. (2009). Sociolinguistics. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University 
Press. 
Hymes, D. (1967). “Models of the interaction 
of language and social setting.” 
Journal of social issues, 23(2), 8 - 38. 
Mamkjer, K. (Ed.) (2002). The linguistic 
encyclopedia. (2nd Ed.). London: Routledge. 
Matthew, P. H. (2007). Oxford concise 
dictionary of linguistics. Oxford University 
Press. 
National 
Open 
University 
of 
Nigeria 
nou.ed.ng>sites>filesmodules4: 
Varieties of English in Nigeria. 
Okafor, M. N. Ugwu, N. G. (2007). 
Contemporary issues in the study of 
varieties of English Abakaliki: Salt 
Coast Treasures Organization. 
Otagburuagu, E. J. (2006). "Politics and the 
Language Equation: The Case of the 
English Language in Nigeria." African 
journal of language research (AJLR) 
2(1&2) 
Blues 
Land 
and 
Communication Ltd. 
Stubbs, M. (1989). Discourse analysis: the 
sociolinguistic analysis of natural 
language. Oxford: Basil Blackwell 
Ltd. 
Yule, G. (2003). The study of language. 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University 
Press. 
Yusuf, H. O. (2012). "Language as a Tool for 
National Integration: The Case of 
English 
Language 
in 
Nigeria." 
International 
journal 
for 
cross-
disciplinary subjects in education 
(IJCDSE), Special Issue. 2 (1), online. 
 

