www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         90                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
A Contrastive Inquiry into Wh-Interrogatives in English and Nigerian 
Pidgin 
Macaulay Mowarin1 & Akpofure Oduaran1 
1 Department of English and Literary Studies, Delta State University, Abraka – Delta State, Nigeria 
Correspondence: Macaulay Mowarin, Department of English and Literary Studies, Delta State University, Abraka – 
Delta State, Nigeria. E-mail: mamowarin@yahoo.co.uk 
 
Received: August 6, 2014         Accepted: November 10, 2014          Online Published: December 2, 2014 
doi:10.5430/elr.v3n2p90          URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5430/elr.v3n2p90 
 
Abstract  
This paper undertakes a contrastive inquiry into wh-interrogatives in English and Nigerian pidgin based mainly on 
Chomsky’s minimalist program of transformational grammar as the theoretical framework. It is a pedagogical 
approach to the study of Nigerian pidgin in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria where the language has creolised.  
The main objectives of the paper are as follows: first, it undertakes an overview of English and Nigerian pidgin and 
the cross linguistic typological variations of wh-questions.  Second, evaluates linguistically, the wh-interrogatives in 
English and Nigerian pidgin with focus on wh-words and phrases, movement, pied piping and constraints on 
wh-movement in the two languages. The paper also discusses the use of ná and nkợ as wh-forms in NP. Finally, the 
paper examines the learning problems that a competent speaker of Nigerian pidgin will encounter while learning 
English wh-interrogatives as a second language. The importance of contrastive analysis as a panacea to the problem 
of semi-literary in English in Nigeria’s Niger Delta is underscored in this paper. 
Keywords: Contrastive inquiry, Wh-Interrogatives, Nigerian pidgin 
1. Introduction 
The derivation of interrogatives from kernel sentences is a linguistic universal; what is more, it is a core aspect of 
syntactic analysis.  This paper is a contrastive analysis of wh-interrogatives in English and Nigerian pidgin 
(henceforth referred to as NP) based on the minimalist program, as well as elements of principle and parameters 
model of Chomsky’s transformational grammar which is adopted as the theoretical model for this study. The paper is 
a pedagogical approach to the study of NP in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria where the language is creolised.  In 
this study, a linguistic description of wh-interrogatives in English and NP focuses on wh-words/phrases that function 
as wh markers in the two languagesIt also deliberates on the derivation of wh-interrogatives in direct and embedded 
clauses with focus on the constraints in the respective languages. The paper also discusses the unique features of ná 
and nkợ as wh-forms in NP. Finally, the paper identifies the learning difficulties that a competent speaker of NP will 
encounter while learning English wh-interrogatives as a second language learner.  This pedagogical approach is 
more pragmatic than the present repressive one where pupils and students are discouraged from communicating in 
NP. 
2. Theoretical Framework and Methodology  
The theoretical model adopted for the study is the minimalist program, as well as model of Chomsky’s 
transformational grammar (Chomsky, 1995b). The main reason for the adoption of the theoretical framework is the 
fact that the data collected for the study is germane to the model’s analysis. 
Data for the two languages are collected from different sources. First, data were sourced from postgraduate/ 
undergraduate students of English and from competent speakers of NP in Warri, Effurun and Sapele who speak the 
language as a creolised form.  Second, the researcher generated data largely through introspection since he is 
multilingual in English, NP, Urhobo, an indigenous language spoken in Delta Central Senatorial district and Yoruba 
which is spoken in Western Nigeria. Finally, data for the two languages were also sourced from completed research 
works and published materials. The methodology adopted for data collection is the qualitative method and the 
orthography adopted for NP is the phonetically based linguistics type (Note 1). 
 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         91                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
3. Background: English Language, Nigerian Pidgin and Typological variation of wh-interrogatives  
The sub-topic that discussed under the background includes the followings: an overview of contrastive analysis, 
English language in Nigeria, Nigerian pidgin and pidgin and typological variation of wh -interrogatives. The 
background will illuminate the study. 
The research focus in this paper comes from the field of contrastive analysis in second language analysis is second 
Dras (2009:1) sucking describe contrastive analysis hypothesis thus: 
According to the contrastive analysis hypothesis formulated by Lado (1957), 
difficulties in acquiring a new (second) language are derived from the 
differences between the new language and the native (first) language of a 
language user. Amongst the frequently observed syntactic error types in 
non-native English which it has been acquired that are attributable to 
language transfer are subject-verb agreement, noun-number disagreement 
and misuse of determiners. 
Since English language is now the property of the world, number numerous studies of different language pairs which 
focus on learning of English have been carried out while many of such studies have investigated the lexical and 
syntactical errors of speakers of European languages like French Russia Czech and Spanish learning English as a 
second languages learning English as a second languages.  
The study of contrastive analysis has been bifurcated into the pre and post 1980 eras. Gast (2008:3) examines how 
the scope of this field of study differ in the two eras. 
While contrastive analysis in the earlier stages focused on the linguistic 
system on the linguistic system i.e grammar and the lexicon 
(“Microlingistics in James  1980 term), in the 1980s and matter of 
language use discourse structure (‘macro linguistics’) came to the fore and 
new fields such as contrastive sociolinguistics (Hellinger and Ammon, 1996) 
cross-cultural pragmatics (Wierzbicka 1985, 1992) and contrastive rhetoric, 
(Connor 1996) emerged. 
A basic weakness of contrastive analysis is that it focuses only on errors caused by the interference, (Abbas, 1995). 
In recent years, the popularity of contrastive analysis declined due to the lack of interest in the relevance of this field 
of study’s input as a viable pedagogical tool. Although contrastive analysis is no more at the centre of applied 
linguistics stage “neither has it made it final exist”, (Johnson 2000:7). 
Nigeria is a complexly multilingual speech community and English is the country’s official language and that of 
formal education.  Schneider (2011:142) opines that “more than 500 languages are spoken in the country”.  
English has a higher market value in Nigeria because of its economic importance as the language of upward 
socio-economic mobility. The advent and growth of English has been investigated by many scholars; for discussion, 
see (Banjo, 1996) and Akere (1995). Bamgbose (2002:33) evaluates the peculiar feature of Nigerian English thus: 
Although Nigerian English is a variety of the English Language 
among world Englishes, standard Nigerian English has now 
undergone nativisation and indigenization since it is now a blend of 
British and Nigerian culture.  
English is now the default language of ICT and Technology. Oyeleye (2005:4) aptly describes English as “both a 
consequence of and a contribution of globalization”. 
NP is the only pidgin spoken in Nigeria.  NP is a member of West African Pidgin English (W.A.P.E.).  W.A.P.E. 
has three varieties which are Nigerian Pidgin (NP), Ghanaian Pidgin (G.P) and Cameroonian Pidgin (CP).  Elugbe 
(1995) notes that the three varieties are mutually intelligible.  W.A.P.E. is a member of West African Pidgins and 
its three varieties are W.A.P.E. Sierra Leonian Krio and Liberian Kru (Finney, 2003).  West African pidgins are 
members of the Atlantic group of English-based pidgins and creoles. 
NP and English are the ethnically neutral languages in Nigeria.  NP has a national spread especially in military and 
paramilitary formations in the country.  Schneider (2011:142) underscores the importance of the two languages in 
Nigeria’s linguistic ecology thus: 
Certainly, English and pidgin are mostly second (or third etc) 
languages, acquired in addition to tribal and regional languages. 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         92                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
Both have been found to increasingly become mother tongues of 
African children as well, however, English is becoming a first 
language primarily in educated families and in urban contexts, and 
pidgin in certain regions and amongst the less affluent.  Strictly, 
pidgin is thus a creolising language.  
NP is inferior to English because it is used mainly for informal communication and it lacks a standard orthography.  
Unlike English, it is not the language of upward socio-economic mobility.  This is why derogatory names like 
broken English and bad English are ascribed to the language (Holm, 1988).  In fact, the use of the language is 
discouraged in primary and secondary schools in the Niger Delta, where the language has creolized, and in Nigeria in 
general. Due to the close affinity between NP and the indigenous languages in terms of structure and function, NP 
can be aptly described as a neo-Nigerian language.  
3.1 Wh-Interrogatives in English 
Wh-constituents in English are mainly simple lexical wh-words and they are exclusively used singly.  However, 
there are also bi-lexical and multi-lexical wh-phrases in the language.  Examples of single and bi-lexical operator 
expressions are shown in figure 1 below: 
Figure 1. Operator Expressions  
 
A 
 
B 
 
Simple Lexical wh-words 
 
Bi-Lexical wh-phrases 
i) 
Who 
vii) 
Which place 
ii) 
Where 
viii) 
What time 
iii) 
Where 
ix) 
Which person 
iv) 
When 
 
 
v) 
What 
 
 
vi) 
Whose  
 
 
Below are sentences with simple wh-word and bi-lexical wh-phrase respectively. 
1a. The rain will fall when? 
b. 
When will the rain fall? 
2a. The train arrived what time? 
b. 
What time did the train arrive? 
3.2 Derivation of wh-Questions in English  
Two types of movement are involved in the derivation of wh-questions in English. They are head-to-head or Head 
movement and operator movement or O movement. Head-to-head movement involves what Radford (1996:106) 
calls “movement from head position to another”. 
The derivation of (1b) and (2b) above will be used as illustrative examples to describe the derivation of wh-questions 
in English.  In (1b), for example, the auxiliary will moves from Agr0 to C0 of CP. Chomsky (1995b) gives 
justification, for head movement of will to COMP by stating that COMP in an interrogative clause is a strong head.  
He further adds that a strong head has to be filled. Radford (1997:108) buttresses Chomsky’s (1995b) assertion when 
he adds that: 
A strong COMP node has the power to lure an auxiliary from INFL (Agrs) to COMP thereby 
satisfying the requirement for a strong COMP to be filled. 
When will is moved, it leaves a trace and the moved auxiliary is the antecedent of the trace. The moved constituent is 
the head and the trace is the foot, and both of them form a chain. So, will moves up to C-command its trace. 
If on the other hand, there is no auxiliary to fill COMP, a dummy do is generated in Agr0 and raised to COMP to 
satisfy what Radford (1996:111) states is the requirement for a strong COMP to be filled. Radford concludes that: 
Chomsky (1995) suggests that dummy do is only used as a last 
resort i.e. only where needed in order to satisfy some grammatical 
requirement which would not otherwise be satisfied. 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         93                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
So, dummy do is used in 2b above to enable strong COMP to be filled. 
The extraposition of the wh-word from its position as the complement of the verb to spec-CP position is known as 
operator movement. Radford (2002:268) describes how and what time in (1a) and (2b) are preposed thus: 
The preposed operator expressions are moved into some pre-head 
positions in CP, given that specifiers are generally positioned 
before heads, so they occupy the specifier position with CP (= 
spec-CP). 
The moved wh-question operator in 1b for example, always leaves a co-indexed trace known and abbreviated as 
wh-trace.  Camie (2007:321) formalized wh-movement thus: 
Wh-movement; 
Move a wh-phrase to the specifier of a CP to check a [+WH] feature in CO 
3.3 Pied piping of bi-lexical and multi-lexical wh-phrases 
Although, single wh-phrases are commonly used in wh-phrases in English, there are also cases of bi-lexical and 
multilexical wh-phrases in the language. Below are some examples. 
3a) which house was refurbished yesterday? 
b)  which place did the incident happen? 
4a)  what type of film will you watch tomorrow? 
b) 
what means of transportation do you prefer? 
What one notices from the examples above is that the entire hi-lexical wh-phrases in (3a & b) and the multi-lexical 
wh-phrases in (4a & b) are preposed from their positions as the complement of the verb to its spec-CP position. The 
movement of the entire wh-phrase in each of the examples above, has been described as a case of pied piping (see 
Radford, 2002 and Carnie, 2007). 
If the complements of the wh-determiner of (5a & b) below and (4a & b) above are not pied-piped along with the 
moved wh-operator, an ungrammatical wh-question will be derived as shown in (5a & b) and (6a & b) below.  
5a) *which was refurbished yesterday house? 
b)  *which did the incident happen place? 
6a)  *what will you watch tomorrow type of film? 
b)  *what do you prefer means of transport? 
The reason why (5a & b) and (6a & b) are ungrammatical is due to what Radford (2002) calls violation of Chain 
Uniformity Principle. Chomsky (1995b) formalized 
Chain Uniformity Principle thus: 
3.4 Chain Uniformity Principle 
A chain must be uniform with regard to phrase structure. 
So, the only way a uniform chain can be formed in the examples above is for the entire phrase to be pied piped to 
evolve a uniformity of the head and the foot.  
In English, there is however an exception to the pied piping of bi-lexical and multi-lexical wh-phrases and Chomsky 
(1995b) termed preposition stranding as an instance. In preposition stranding, it is possible to prepose only the 
wh-word while the preposition is left in-situ; yet, such derived wh-question is grammatical. Below are some 
examples. 
7a)  For whom did you buy the jewellery? 
b)  Who did you buy the jewellery for?  
8a)  To where did my brother travel? 
b)  Where did my brother travel to? 
So, in (7a) and (8a), the preposition associated with the wh-phrase is pied piped along the wh-phrase to spec-CP in 
conformity with the Chain Uniformity Principle. On the other hand, the preposition is left in-situ while the wh-phrase 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         94                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
is preposed to spec-CP in violation of Chain Uniformity Condition in (7b) and (8b).  Despite the fact that (7b) and 
(8b) violated Chain Uniformity Condition, both examples are still grammatical. 
3.5 wh-Movement in Embedded Questions 
Mathews (1997:111) defines embedding as “the inclusion of one clause or sentence in another.” This syntactic 
process occurs mainly in complex sentences. The illustrative examples of wh-questions that have been used in this 
paper are those of wh-questions in simple sentences. However, wh-movement also occurs in embedded clauses. In 
English, the two types of wh-movement imbedded questions are: one, the case of a wh-phrase which is proposed 
from the embedded clause to the matrix clause of the complex or insert sentence. It is also known as a direct question 
in an embedded clause. Two, the case where a wh-phrase is preposed from the complement of the verb of the 
embedded clause to spec-CP of the same clause. The derived wh-question from wh-movement of the latter is known 
as indirect wh-question. 
In the case of the former, the wh-phrase moves from the complement of the verb of the insert clause in phases until it 
gets to the spec-CP of the matrix clause. The reason why the movement of the wh-phrase is not a single leap from the 
complement of the verb of the insert clause to the spec-CP of the matrix clause is because the wh-phrase passes two 
clausal boundaries. Below are some examples. 
9a)  Where is the house that was burnt yesterday? 
b)  Who is the man that stole the money? 
The extraposition of the wh-phrase from the insert clause to spec-CP of the matrix clause is illustrated with the (9b) 
below. 
1)  Who is the man that stole the money? 
[CP2 Who C1 - C is [+WH] [AgrSP---DP the man TP---AgroP-VP-V; [CP1 that C1- C0 [-WH] [AgrsP 
 
 
Agrs1---TP – AgrOP ---VP-V stole DP the money DP j[+WH] ]]]]]  
 
As shown in the illustration above, who passes through three landing sites before it reaches its final landing site 
which is the spec-CP of the matrix clause. Between the clauses that the wh-phrase passes through, it leaves traces 
which Radford (2002) calls “intermediate traces.” 
In the case of wh-movement in indirect questions in embedded clauses, the landing site of the preposed wh-phrase is 
not the spec-CP of the matrix clause but the spec-CP of the embedded clause. The wh-phrase cannot be preposed to 
the spec-CP of the matrix clause because its COMP is [-WH] and if the wh-phrase is extraposed there, it cannot be 
checked by a [-WH] feature. So, the wh-phrase is preposed from the complement of the verb of the embedded clause 
to spec-CP of the embedded clause. The COMP of the embedded clause is [-WH]. The preposed wh-phrase will 
check the [+WH] feature of the embedded clause’s COMP. Below are two examples of indirect wh-questions in 
embedded clauses. 
10a)  
I wonder what killed the goat 
b)   
I wonder when the train will arrive.  
(10b) 
 is illustrated below. 
[CP2 --- C [-WH] [AgrSP---DP 1 TP---AgroP---VP--V wonder [CP-when  
 
C[+WH] [AgrsP DP the train TP T AgrOP--- Agro will - VP--V arrive Advpj ]]]]] 
 
3.6 Wh-Interrogations in NP 
NP bestrides the two cross linguistic variations of the Wh-movement since it involves both the overt Wh-movement 
and it also occurs in-situ. When the Wh-interrogative occurs in-situ in NP, it is like the case of Chinese/Japanese 
Wh-question type. So, Wh-in-situ questions in NP are quite different from those of English which occur only in 
4 
3 
2
1 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         95                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
echoic questions. Wh-in-situ questions in NP are, therefore, information seeking. Below are some examples of 
Wh-questions formed through overt Wh-movement and their Wh-in-situ counterpart. 
11a. Wetin yu bai? 
What-thing you buy (past)? 
What did you buy? 
b.  Yu bai wetin? 
You buy + past what-thing? 
You bought what? 
In (l1a), the Wh-phrase in the question involves overt movement of the Wh-phrase to clause initial position as in the 
English/Spanish type. In (11b) on the other hand, the Wh-phrase remains in-situ as in the Japanese/Chinese 
Wh-question type. 
3.7 Derivation of Wh-Movement in NP 
Wh-interrogation in NP is derived through operator movement. This type of movement is also known as A-bar in the 
literature. The movement of the Wh-phrase is always into a spec-CP position; what is more, the moved constituent 
always leaves a trace. 
The constituents of Wh-elements in NP are briefly discussed below. In the mesolectal sociolect of Warri/Sapele 
variety of NP adopted for this study, Wh-constituents that always function as operator expressions are mostly 
bi-lexical; however, one simple lexical Wh-constituent also exists in this sociolect as shown in figure 2. 
Figure 2. Operator Expressions in NP 
1 
Operator expressions in the mesolectal 
sociolect of NP 
English Gloss  
(i) 
Which pẹsin 
Which person – Who 
(ii) 
Wich taim 
What time – When 
(iii) 
Wetin mek 
What make - Why 
(iv) 
Wich ples 
Which place – Where 
(v) 
Wusai 
Which side/Where – locational positional  
(vi) 
Wetin 
What-thing? What? 
(vii) 
Hu/h/im 
Who/Him/Whose – positional  
(viii) 
Wie/wich ples 
Where – locational  
(ix) 
Hau 
How  
Examples (i-vii) are bi-lexical while (ix) is a simple lexical Wh-word.  A recent trend among some speakers of the 
mesolectal sociolect is to use simple Wh-constituent interchangeably with bi-lexical Wh-phrase as shown in 12(a&b) 
below. 
12a. Wetin mek   yu dẹ krai? 
 
   Wai 
 
What make   you PROG cry? 
 
   Why 
Why are you crying? 
Elugbe and Omamor (1991) observe that hau (how) is a unique type of Wh-constituent in NP because it can function 
in both non-verbal and verbal clauses. They (1991:108) give the examples of the use of hau for greetings in 
non-verbal clauses thus: 
13a.  
Hau nau - How are things? 
b.   
Hau bọdi - How are you? 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         96                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
(13a and b) above are actually covert verbal clauses that overtly appear as verbless ones because a copula (BE) is 
internally bound to nau and bọdi respectively. 
The impression created by Elugbe and Omamor (1991) above that the function of hau (how) is unique in NP is 
inaccurate. Pragmatically, hau (how) functions as an unritualised adjacency pair for greetings in both NP’s substrate 
and superstrate languages. Below is an example each from Yoruba and Urhobo. 
Yoruba  
 
 
rhobo 
 
 
 
 
English 
14a) Báwò ni  
b. 
 
Mávọ 
 
 
c. 
 
How are you? 
b. 
How it?  
 
 
How  
 
 
 
 
How is your mum? 
 
How are things? 
 
How is everything?  
Hau (how) is also used to introduce overt verbal clauses in NP as shown in the examples below. 
15a) Hau yu no im nem? 
 
How you know his name? 
 
How come you know his name? 
b. 
Hau im tel yu di tori? 
 
How he/she tell you the story? 
 
How did he/she narrate the story to you? 
Hau (how) is also used in serial verb constructions in NP as shown in 15c below: 
c. 
Hau yu tek kil the snek? 
 
How you kill + past the snake? 
 
How did you manage to kill the snake? 
Below are a set of examples of clauses with interrogative operators occurring in-situ and their positions after 
derivation. 
16a) Yu de krai 
 
wetin mek? 
You PROG cry  
what-thing make? 
You are crying,  
why? 
b. 
Wetin mek yu de krai? 
What make you Prog cry? 
Why are you crying? 
In (16a), the interrogative operator appears in-situ while in (16b), it is extrapolated from its position as the 
complement of the verb and preposed to spec-CP position of the clause which is always unoccupied. Radford 
(2002:268) describes how Wetin mek (why) in (16a) is preposed thus: 
The preposed operator expressions are moved into some pre-head 
positions in CP, given that specifiers are generally positioned 
before heads, so they occupy the specifier position with CP (= spec 
– CP). 
The moved Wh-interrogative operator always leaves a co-indexed trace which is known and abbreviated as 
wh-traces. 
Haegeman (1991:139) observes that what triggers Wh-movement is the feature (+WH) which always resides in the C° 
of a Wh-sentence. She adds that “Wh-phrases move into the specifier of CP to check the Wh- feature.” Based on 
Wh- movement discussed above, Carnie (2007:32) formalizes the operation thus: 
Wh-Movement 
Move a wh- phrase to the specifier of a CP to rheck a 
[+WH] feature in C°. 
 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         97                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
3.8 Types of Wh-Interrogatives in NP 
Two types of Wh-interrogatives in NP are the direct and embedded ones. The internal constituents of each of the two 
sub-divisions identified above will be discussed in detail below. 
3.8.1 Single, Double and Multiple Wh-Phrases in Direct Questions 
In the mesolectal sociolect from which data was collected for this study, there is only one wh-lexical phrase that is 
exclusively used singly in NP. It is non decomposable Hau (how). Below is an example of Hau (how) in an NP 
clause. 
17a. Hau yọ mama bọdi?  
How BE mother body? 
How is your mother’s health? 
In some contexts, single and double Wh-phrases can be used interchangeably as shown in the example below: 
b. 
Wich pesin  kari [+ PAST] mai baisikul?  
      Hu 
Who took my bicycle? 
c. 
Wetin yu bai? 
What thing you buy? 
What did you buy? 
Semantically, wetin collocates with (-HUMAN) features while wich pesin (which person) collocates with [+ 
HUMAN] objects. 
Three bilexical wh-phrases still used exclusively bilexically in this socioletct are: 
18a.  
Wich ples  
 
b  
Wich taim  
 
c  
Wetin 
Which place   
 
What time  
 
 
What-thing 
Where   
 
 
When  
 
 
 
What 
Below are some examples: 
19a.  
Wich taim dis rein go stọp? 
Which time DET rain FUT stop? 
When will this rain stop falling? 
b. 
 
Wich ples yọ mama go? 
Which place DET mother PAST + go? 
Where did your mother go? 
c.   
Wetin yu kari? 
What-thing you carry? 
What are you carrying? 
There are also cases of multi-lexical wh-phrases functioning as operators of direct questions in wh-interrogatives. 
Below are some examples: 
20a.  
Wich kaind mit yọ mama bai? 
What kind meatDET mother PAST+buy? 
What type of meat did your mother buy? 
b.  Hau meni shu  dem  yọ sista get? 
 
 
           s 
How many shoe  them  do your sister get? 
                s 
How many pairs of shoes do your sister have? 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         98                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
3.8.2 Pied Piping of Bi-Lexical and Multi-Lexical Wh-Phrases (as in English - minimize) 
The preposing of the entire bi-lexical and multi-lexical Wh-phrases from their position as the complement of the verb 
of the clause to its (Spec-CP) position has been described as cases of pied-piping in the literature (see Radford, 2002; 
Haegeman, 1991 and Carnie, 2007). If only the Wh- determiner is preposed and its complement is left in-situ, an 
ungrammatical structure will emanate as shown in (21b) below. 
21a. Wich taim dis rein go stọp? 
Which time DET rain FUT stop? 
When will this rain stop falling? 
* 
Wich dis rain go stop taim? 
Which DET rain FUT stop time? 
Which this rain will stop time? 
22b. Which kaind mit yọ mama bai fọ maket? 
 
What kind meat do PAST mother buy for market? 
What type of meat did your mother buy in the market? 
*b. Wich kaind yọ mama biai fọ maket mit? 
 
What type your mother bought in the meat? 
 
What type did your mother buy in the market of meat? 
While (21a) is correct, (21b) is wrong because the complement of the Wh-determiner is not pied piped along with the 
preposed Wh-determiner. The reason why (21b) is ungrammatical is due to what Radford (2002) calls violation of 
the chain uniformity principle because the complement of the Wh-operator is not pied piped along with the 
Wh-determiner. 
Pied piping of bi-lexical and multi-lexical Wh-phrases in NP, however, has its exceptions. It is possible to generate 
grammatical sentences where only the Wh-phrase is fronted while one or more grammatical constituents associated 
to the Wh-phrase is left in-situ. Preposition stranding is a good example of the exception to the rule of pied piping in 
NP. In this case, a Wh-phrase is moved while the preposition is left in-situ and the derived sentence is grammatical as 
shown in (22b) and (23b) below. However, if the Wh-phrase is moved, while pied piping the preposition associated 
to it, the sentence is still correct as shown (22a) and (23a) below. This is due to the fact that there is no one to one 
correspondence between the preposed Wh-operator and the trace it leaves behind as far as phrase structure rule is 
concerned. 
23a. To wich pẹsin yu giv di moni? 
To which person/whom you PAST give the money? 
To whom did you give the money? 
b.  Wich pẹsin yu giv di mọni to? 
Which person you PAST give the money to? 
Which person/who did you give the money to? 
24a. Fọ wich wuman yu bai di moto? 
For which woman you PAST buy the motor? 
For which woman did you buy the car? 
b.  Which wuman yu bai di moto fọ? 
Which woman you PAST buy the motor for? 
Which woman did you buy the car for? 
So in (23a) and (24a), the preposition associated with the Wh-phrase is pied piped along with the Wh-phrase to 
Spec-CP in conformity with the chain uniformity principle. In (23b) and (24b), on the other hand, the preposition is 
left in-situ while the Wh-phrase is moved to Spec-CP in violation of chain uniformity principle, however; the 
resulting sentences are grammatical. 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         99                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
3.9 Wh-In-Situ in Direct Questions and Ńkộ as a Wh-in-Situ Marker in NP 
Wh-in-situ questions are also a part of direct Wh-questions in NP. Unlike in its superstrate language where 
Wh-in-situ questions are echoic, since they are meant to reaffirm an opinion the speaker already has about an issue, 
Wh-in-situ questions are information seeking in NP. So, Wh-in-situ questions and preposed Wh-questions are similar 
semantically. Pragmatically however, there is a dichotomy between these two set of Wh-questions since preposed 
Wh-questions are more emphatic than Wh-in-situ ones. Below are a few examples of Wh-in-situ questions in NP. 
25a. Di rein go stop wich taim? 
DET rain FUT stop which time? 
The rain will stop when?/When will the rain stop? 
b. 
Yọ mama go wich pies? 
DET mother past + go which place? 
Your mother went/travelled to where?/Where did your mother travel to? 
c.  Yu kil wetin? 
You kill + past what thing 
You killed what / what did you kill? 
So, (25a-c) are not echoic; rather, they are information seeking. Wh-in-situ questions in NP bear a close affinity to 
those of its substrate languages. Ogbonna (2007-2008:73) corroborates this fact in his analysis of wh-questions in 
Igbo, a kwa language spoken in South Eastern Nigeria. He then gives these examples. 
26a. Ìgàrà èbe? 
 
You go-rv (past) where? 
 
You did go where? 
b. 
Èbe kà Igàrà tì? 
What that you go rv (past) 
Where did you go? 
Based on (26a & b) above, Ogbonna (2007-2008:72) concludes thus “therefore, in Igbo direct questions, the rule of 
Wh-movement is optional because failure to move the Wh-phrase does not affect meaning”. 
Ńkộ is a Wh-in-situ marker in NP and it always occurs in clause final position. So, an ńkộ introduced Wh-question, 
like Wh-in-situ and its preposed Wh-phrase counterparts function as content or information seeking questions. 
Etymologically, ńkộ is derived from Yoruba, which is the main language spoken in Western Nigeria. Delta and Edo 
states were part of western region before 1963 when Midwest region was created. Below are two examples of ńkộ 
introduced Wh-questions. 
27a. Mai mọni ńkộ 
 
My money, what about/where? 
 
What about/where is my money? 
b. 
Yọ mama ńkộ? 
Your mother, what about/how? 
What about/How is your mother? 
Pragmatically, there is a difference between a Wh-in-situ and an ńkộ introduced Wh-in-situ question in NP. An ńkộ 
introduced Wh-in-situ question is discourse linked because it cannot be the initial utterance in a piece of discourse. 
Other utterances must have preceded an ńkộ introduced Wh-in-situ question in NP. On the other hand, Wh-in-situ 
questions are not discourse linked because they can initiate a piece of discourse. 
3.10 Wh- Movement in Embedded Questions 
Embedding occurs mainly in complex sentences and Matthews (1997:111) defines this syntactic process as “the 
inclusion of one clause or sentence in another.” Two types of Wh- movement are identified in embedded clauses in 
NP. They are; first, the case of a Wh- phrase which is preposed to the Spec-CP of the matrix clause in embedded 
clauses. This is known as direct questions in embedded clauses. In the case of Wh-movement of direct questions in 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         100                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
embedded clauses, the Wh-phrases is preposed from the complement of the verb of the insert clause to the Spec-CP 
position of the matrix clause. Movement of the Wh-phrase is not a single leap because it passes two clausal 
boundaries before it gets to its final landing site. The moved Wh- phrase does not terminate at Spec-CP of the 
embedded clause because the Wh- feature in the C° of the embedded clause is –[WHj]. Due to this fact, the preposed 
Wh- phrase cannot be checked if it lands at the insert clause. However, the Spec-CP of the matrix clause is empty 
and its C° is occupied by a +WH feature. So, the Spec-CP of the embedded clause is an escape hatch for it to pass 
through. Between the clauses that the Wh- phrase passes through, it leaves traces which Radford (2002) calls 
intermediate traces. Below is an example of the movement described above. 
28. Wich peson you tink se tif the moni? 
 
Wich person you think steal [Past] the money? 
 
Who do you think stole the money? 
An analysis of the movement described above is illustrated in (28b) 
28b. CP1 ...C [+WH] wich pesin [AgrsP yu tink [CP ...C [-WH] se [AgrsP tif di moni i]]? 
 
[CP1 ... C [+WH] Which person [Agrsp you PAST think [CP ... C [-WI] COMP [Agrsp steal the money j]]]] ? 
Who do you think stole the money? 
In the case of Wh-movement in indirect questions in embedded clauses, the landing site of the preposed Wh-phrase 
is always the Spec-CP of the embedded clause. This is due to the fact that the C° of the embedded clause has [+WH] 
which the preposed wh-phrase checks; on the other hand, the C° of the matrix clause is [-WH], so a Wh-phrase 
cannot be preposed to the spec-CP of the matrix clause because it cannot be checked by C° [-WH] feature. Below are 
two examples of indirect question in an embedded clause. 
29a. A no sabi wich pesin Ese give di moni 
 
I no know which pesin Ese give +past the money 
 
I do not know/wonder who Ese gave the money 
29b. [CP2-C] C[-WH] [AgrsP A no sabi [CP1 wich pesin C[+WH] - [AgrsP Ese giv di moni j ]]]] 
 
[CP2…C] C[-WH] [Agrsp I not know [CP1 which person C[+WH] [Agrsp Ese past give the money j]]]] 
I do not know /wonder whom Ese gave the money. 
30a. A no sabi wetin mek pipul de rom 
 
I no know what make people runtprog 
I do not know why people are running  
30b. [CP2 - C] C[-WH] [AgrsP A no sabi [CP1 C[+WH] [wetin mek [AgrsP ipul de rọn j ]]]]  
 
[CP2 - C] C[-WH] [AgrsP I wonder [CP C[+WHJ what make [AgrsP people Prog run j ]]]] 
I wonder why people are running. 
Unlike in its superstrate language where the feature (+WH) is strong, it is weak in NP due to the syntactic flexibility 
of the language. So, the relative clause in (20) can occur in either the matrix or embedded clause especially if we is 
deleted. This syntactic flexibility of NP is derived from its substrate languages and it further buttresses our opinion 
that Wh-interrogatives are derivatives of substrate languages. 
4. Discussion 
Our discussion focuses on the differences in the deviation of wh-interrogative in English and NP with a view into 
identifying the learning problems that a competent NP speaker will encounter while learning wh-interrogative as 
second language. The first difference is that while NP bestrides the two cross linguistic variations which are only 
overt movement wh-in-situ questions in English involves only echoic questions and not information seeking ones. So, 
the NP learner will be informed that the sentence below is echoic and not information seeking as the NP speaker 
erroneously believes as shown in the example below. 
3 
2
1
1
1

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         101                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
31) you killed what? 
Secondly while the derivation of wh-interrogatives in English involves both head to head and operation movements, 
that of NP deals with only operator movement. In the case English, if there is no auxiliary to fill a dummy do  is 
generated in Agroo which is meant to satisfy the requirement for a strong comp to be filled, such requirement is not 
necessary for the deviation of wh-interrogatives in NP. So, the sentences below illustrate the differences.  
32)  (a) What you buy? 
 
(b) What do you buy? 
The NP speaker will liter the ungrammatical sentence in (32a) until he is taught the imperative of the insertion of 
dummy do to drive the grammatical sentence in (32b). 
32b) Finally, NP is a syntactically flexible language, so; [ +WH) is week in NP. On other hand (+ WH) is strong in 
English. The syntactic flexibility of NP is attributable to its substrate languages. 
5. Conclusion  
The paper has attempted to gap in knowledge by drawing attention to the learning problems that is competent 
speaker of NP encounters while learning wh- interrogative in English as a second language. The recent change in the 
status of NP from a low prestige language to a high status one has increased the domain of use of the language. Since 
the speaking of NP cannot be extirpated from schools, a contrastive study of English and NP has become imperative. 
The paper undertook a linguistic description of the two languages with a view into identifying the structural 
differences observed in wh-interrogative in the two languages. It was the structural differences that constituted the 
input of the paper’s discussion with the learning problems that a competent NP speaker encounters while learning 
wh-interrogative in English. 
Finally, the opines that the problem of language deficit in the English language by students in Niger Delta region will 
be minimized if English is taught through contrastive analysis. It is hoped that this paper will be of great benefit to 
pedagogists in the Niger Delta region where the language has creolised.  
References 
Apple, R. & Mysken, P. (1987). Language contact and Bilingualism. London. Edward Arnold Publishers. 
Agheyisi, R. N. (1971). West African Pidgin English: Simplification and simplicity. Ph.D Thesis, University of 
Stanford. University Microfilms, Ann. Arbor. 
__________ (1984). “The Standardization of Nigerian Pidgin English” English World Wide 5, No. 2(211-33). 
Aikhionbare, M. O. (1981). Aspects of the syntax of Nigerian Pidgin English Relativization Focusing and Negation. 
M.A. Dissertation, University of Ilorin, Illorin Nigeria. 
Barbay-Stoll, A. (1976). “Nigeria Pidgin English as a medium of literary Expression” African Bulletin. 27, 55-63. 
__________ (1975). “Some Aspects of Semantic Shifts in English Words in West African Pidgin English” Africana 
Bulletin, 29 (131-138). 
Bamgbose, A. (1971). “The English Language in Nigeria” Spencer J. (ed) The English Language in West Africa. 
London: Longman. 
Banjo, A. (1996). An Overview of the English Language in Nigeria. Ibadan. Ibadan University Press. 
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. Foris Dordretch. 
Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric; Cross CulrueL Aspects of Second Language Writing.  Cambridge. 
Cambridge University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139524599  
_________ (1995b). The Minimalist Program. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge Mass. 
Esizimetor, D.O. (2004). “On the question of Standard Orthography for Nigerian Pidgin” in the Domestication of 
English In Nigeria. A festscript. In Honour of Professor Abiodun Adetugbo (eds) Dawonusi, S. and Babololu, E. 
A. Lagos. University of Lagos Press. (248-64). 
Elugbe, B. (1995). “Nigerian Pidgin (Problems And Prospects,)” (eds) Bamgbose, A. et al.  New Englishes: A West 
African Perspective. Ibadan, Nigeria, Monsuro Press. 
Elugbe, B. & Omamor. (1991). Nigerian Pidgin (Background and Prospects), Ibadan, Heinemann Educational 
Books. 

www.sciedu.ca/elr 
English Linguistics Research 
Vol. 3, No. 2; 2014 
Published by Sciedu Press                         102                        ISSN 1927-6028   E-ISSN 1927-6036 
Faraclas, N.G. (1996). Nigeria Pidgin. New York. Routledge. http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9780203192801   
Finney, A. M. (2004). Substratal influence on the Morphosyntactic Properties of Krio. <http:/membersaol. 
com/afripalavaz/pidgin.html 
Gast, Volker. (2008).“Contrastive Analysis” www.uni-Jenade/-mu65qev/papdf/ca.pfd. Retrieved, 5th June, 2013. 
Haegeman, L. (1991). Introduction to Government and Binding Theory, Oxford, Blackwell Publishers. 
Haung, C.T.J. (1986). Logical Relations in Chinese and The Theory of Grammar, (Unpublished) PhD Dissertation, 
M.I.T 
Hellinger, 
M. 
& 
Ammon, 
U. 
(1996). 
Contrastive 
Sociolinguistics. 
Berlin; 
Mouton 
de 
Gruyter. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/9783110811551  
Holm, J. (1985). Pidgins and Creoles, (Vol. I), Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Jubril, M. (1995). “The Elaboration of the Functions of Nigerian Pidgin” (eds) Bamgbose, A. et al. New Englishes: A 
West African Perspective. Ibadan, Nigeria, Monsuro Press. 
Li Y. N. A. (1992). “Indefinite wh in Mandarin Chinese. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 1, 125-56. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00130234  
Matthew, P. H. (1997). Oxford Concise Dictionary of Linguistics. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 
Mafeni, B.O.W. (1971). “Nigeria Pidgin” In The English Language in West Africa (ed) Spencer J. London. Longman. 
95-112. 
Marchese, L. & Schnukal, A. (1982). “Nigerian Pidgin English” Journal of the Linguistics Association of Nigeria 
(213 - 219). 
Mopoho, R. (1997). “Origins εl Definitions DU West African Pidgin English” Papers from the annual meetings of 
the Atlantic Provinces Linguistic Association 11-19. 
Mafuwene, S.S. (1992). “West African pidgin English” In The Oxford Companion to the English language (ed) 
McArthur, iii. Oxford University Press. 
Ogbonna, J. E. (2007-2008). “More on Wh- Movement in Igbo” ed. Taiwo, O. Research in African Languages and 
Linguistics. Ibadan, Hope Publications (63-82). 
Oyeleye, L. (2005). “The New Linguistic order: A Critical Examination of the impact of Globalization on the 
English Language” M. Olateju and L. Oyeleye (eds) Perspectives on language and Nigerian Literature Ile-Ife 
Nigerian Obafemi Awolowo University Press. 
Radford, A. (2002). Syntactic Theory and the Structure of English. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press. 
Tonkin, E. (1971). “Some Costal Pidgins in West African”. Social Anthropology and Linguistics (ed) by E.W. 
Ardener. London. Tacistock publications. 
Walker. (1978a). Towards an Analysis of Nigerian Pidgin English” University of Leeds. 
Wierzbicka, A. (1985). “Different Cultures, difference languages, different speech acts” Journal of Pragmatics. 9.2/3: 
145 – 178.  
Wona, Sze-Meng, Jojo & Dras, Mark. (2009). “Contrastive Analysis and Native language identification” 
www.alta.asn.au/evens/alta2009/pdALTA2009.07pdf. Retrieved 5th June, 2013. 
 
Notes 
Note 1. Ezisimetor identifies three types of orthography that have been adopted for NP. They are early orthographies 
(EO) press orthographies (PO) and linguistic orthographies (LO). For a detailed discussion of linguistic 
orthographies, Ezisimetor DO, ‘What Orthography for Nigerian Pidgin?” online at: http://www.ifra-niqeriaorg Naija 
(Retrieved in December 2010) 2010. 
Note 2. Substrate influence on lexico-semantic processes is still common in pidgins and creoles that have close 
contacts with their substrate languages so, this feature is common in West African Pidgins (see Holm, 1998). 

