Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
101 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device 
For Vocabulary Development 
By  
 
Amadi, Laura Chinwenwo 
Department of English and Communication Arts 
Ignatius Ajuru University of Education 
& 
Collins-Wegwu, Victoria Fatima 
Department of English and Communication Arts 
Ignatius Ajuru University of Education 
 
Abstract 
The study is aimed identifying Nigerian Pidgin English (NPE) as an effective 
device for vocabulary development. It focused on varying array of NPE as used 
by undergraduates, cultists, market traders, street boys/ girls, motorpark touts, 
football fans etc. Precisely, it examines areasof vocabulary developments in NPE 
and the use of synonyms, polysemy and creative coinages. These creative coinages 
are mostly found amongst comedians, street boys/ girls, cultist thugs and motor 
park touts. The data for this study was selected randomly, with respondents of 
thirty persons. It was analyzed based on the use theory of meaning and 
sociolinguistics principles. The main thesis (findings) of this study shows that NPE 
has come to stay and its vocabulary developsvia continuous usage of synonyms, 
polysemy and creative coinages from the various groups of respondents listed 
above and most of these words are gradually creeping into Nigerian English usage 
generally, thereby expand the lexicon of Nigerian English. The study was 
summarized by advocating for an acceptable standard orthography of NPE, which 
should be taught and learnt in Primary/secondary schools as a subject and in the 
University as a compulsory General Studies Course (GS). 
 
Keyword words: Pidgin English, communication, vocabulary development, synonyms 
creative coinages. 
 
Introduction 
Language is a tool for social interaction. It is the totality of man’s cultural activities. Due to 
the multiplicity of indigenous languages in Nigeria, difficulty in learning the rule 
governed English Language and the inability of the English Language to bear the weight 
of our various cultural experiences, gave rise to what we know today as Nigerian Pidgin 
English (NPE). NPE is a variety of pidgin spoken in Nigeria just like the Ghanaian Pidgin, 
Senegalese Pidgin etc. It is a unifying language in Nigeria. Werna (2020) says that if you 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
102 
are visiting Nigeria, don’t be daunted by the 520 languages in our repertoire. Just 
remember to add a little bit pidgin to yours and you will be fine. It is the one language that 
binds together 
 
A lot has been said about its origin as a contact language between natives, coastal traders 
and missionaries from Portuguese and British traders. It developed out of the need to 
communicate among these traders, it is a simplified language between missionaries and 
natives that has reduced grammatical structures and less or no rules. Nigeria as a country 
has more than one language (multilingual) with different cultural practices (multicultural). 
The amalgamation (forced marriage) between the Northern and Southern protectorate in 
1914 brought about the structure we call Nigeria today. Due to the multiplicity of 
indigenous languages, difficulty in learning the rule governed English Language and the 
inability of the English Language to bear the weight of the cultural experiences led to what 
we know today as Nigeria Pidgin English (NPE). 
 
Today, NPE has metamorphosed from a contact language into a ‘lingua franca’ just like a 
larva metamorphoses into a beautiful butterfly. It is used in almost all facet of society,even 
religion is not left out. It is used as a medium of communication, interaction in commerce, 
media (both social and print media), and education excluding instruction, is now been 
offered as a course, for example; ECA 902 (Pidgin and Creoles) a Ph.D course for students 
in the Department of English and Communication Arts in Ignatius Ajuru University of 
Education. 
 
It was seen as a debased form or rotten English. Today, the reverse is the case as it is now 
been appreciated by most language scholars all over the world. This has earned it a place 
in Advanced Oxford Learners Dictionary 2020. Other areas where Nigeria Pidgin has 
gained popularity includes BBC Pidgin Naija, Wazobia FM/TV, Wycliffe Seed Company 
“Nigeria Pidgin Bible” (A version of pidgin bible comprising the books of Matthew to 
Revelation. (Matu-Revelashon). 
 
Nigeria Pidgin English is seen as a communicative device for vocabulary development. 
Ithas a rich source of lexicon which has developedthrough the use of creative coinages and 
borrowings from indigenous languages. NPE expresses the cultural experiences of the 
Nigerian users, unlike the English language with its consequent inability to bear the weight 
of our cultural ability.  NPE is a mixture ofPidgin and  indigenous languages that is why 
there are various forms of Nigerian Pidgin English like Warri Pidgin, Port Harcourt Pidgin, 
Lagos Pidgin etc. It is said that communication has not taken place if the receiver does not 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
103 
understand the message from the sender. There must be mutual intelligibility. This is why 
pidgin has gained the status of a Lingua Franca. 
 
Statement of the Problem 
Nigerian Pidgin English (NPE) is used in various areas of the society and its role as an 
effective tool for communication and vocabulary development cannot be denied; you do 
not run out of words when you relate or communicate in pidgin as it is found in English. 
In English, sometimes you lack words to express a point;that does not exist in pidgin 
because there are varieties of words to choose from. It is in this light that the study 
investigates the extent to which respondents use NPE synonyms,polysemy (words with 
more than one meaning), and creative coinages and howthis has developed their lexicon. 
Also to determine the contextual usage of NPE among, undergraduates, market traders, 
motor park touts, street boys/girls, cultist etc. 
 
Statement of Objectives 
The aim of this research is  
1. to examine the use of synonyms, polysemy and various creative coinages 
among speakers of NPE with emphasis on University undergraduates, street 
boys/girls motor park touts, cultist codes and slangs, and Christian religion, 
2. to identify the attitude of users towards NPE, 
3. to examine the role of pidgin in effective and communicative competence.  
 
Review of Related Literature 
Pidgin is known as a contact language, which developed out of the need communicate 
among traders. Ofoegbu (2014) sees pidgin as “a language operating between the members 
of different language communities who do not have a mother tongue in common and it is 
also not native to any of its speakers. It is a language believed to have arisen from contact 
situation, particularly where in such contact situation, the groups involved have no 
common linguistics means of communication”.  
 
Salami (2014) and Fawehinmi (1987) all share the same view that pidgin has a reduced   
grammatical structure, compared to other languages. Pidgin was primarily a language of 
trade which built its lexicon from different languages. Language must be mutually 
intelligible therefore, pidgin was used as that language that bridges the gap between 
indigenes and the Portuguese, European traders and missionaries. Language is a vehicular 
means of communication, it’s relevance to human society cannot be over emphasized. Isaac 
(2019,p.162) states that” language is believed to be part of man’s birth right…This is 
because humans communicate, interact with fellow human beings and carry out social and 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
104 
business transaction through the use of language.” This shows clearly that humans cannot 
do without language. For this reason, Yul-Ifode (2001) acknowledged that language is 
trans generational, meaning that language can be transmittedfrom one generation to the 
other. 
 
NPE has variants, both in written and spoken forms, depending on the part of the country 
where the speaker comes from. Each variety tends to add words from their indigenous 
languages into Pidgin giving it a beautiful colouration and uniqueness. An example is the 
Warri Pidgin, Port Harcourt Pidgin, Lagos Pidgin etc. These are various types of Nigerian 
Pidgin English. Vocabulary on the other hand, is the totality of all the words that make up 
a language. Vocabulary can be said to be the total number of words in a language, it 
includes; Phrases, Lexical chunks (i.e. collocations or group of words that are commonly 
found together). According to Schmitt (2000) a vocabulary consists of words, phrasal verbs, 
idioms etc. He emphasized that lexical knowledge is central to communicative 
competence, this is the reason why every language learner must develop their vocabulary. 
 
Development is a process of enlarging or advancing a language. It is learning more and 
more words. Stahl (2005) opined that vocabulary knowledge is knowledge and knowledge 
of a word does not only imply definition, but also implies how words fit into the world. 
This means that knowledge of a word helps you understand its meaning and context of 
usage. Therefore, it is very imperative to the study of NPE. Wilkins (1972) wrote that … 
while without grammar very little can be conveyed, without vocabulary nothing can be 
conveyed (pp.112-112). This basically means that, with just few words communication can 
take place, once there is sender and receivers mutual intelligibility. 
 
Theoretical framework 
The research is based on the use theory of meaning and sociolinguistics Principles. 
 
The use theory of meaning: 
The use theory of meaning is also referred to as the contextual or operational theory of 
meaning. Eze in Mbah (2016) posits the Use theory maintainsthat the meaning of a word 
or an expression is determined by the context of its use. That is to say that, it is the effect 
created by linguistic units within a given context that expresses its full meaning… Their 
defensive arguments are clearly shown in the claims of the use theory of meaning to 
language analysis. 
 
Proponents of the use theory of meanings are Ludwig Wittgenstein and Paul Horwich. 
Ludwig Josef Jobann, Wittgenstein is an Australian British Philosopher who was born in 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
105 
1889 at Vienna, Austria. He is one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth 
century. His works are in logic metaphysics, philosophy of language etc. Paul Horwich on 
the other hand is a British analytic philosopher at New York University born in 1947. His 
works includes; writings on the philosophy of language (especially truth and meaning). 
They belief meaning is function-dependent, (i.e. the meaning of any object at all is the use 
to which it is put in the society. 
 
The use theory of meanings believes that words are not defined by references to objects 
they designate, or by the mental representations one might associate with them, but by 
how they are used and the acceptance properties.  
 
Sociolinguistics principles 
Sociolinguistics is the study of language and its relationship with the society. It refers  
to the way language is used in the society. Holms (1992) said that the aim of a sociolinguist 
is to go closer to a theory that provides a motivation which accounts for the various ways 
of language use in a community and choices speakers make during usage of such 
languages.  
 
Sociolinguistics is concerned with the following: 
a. A sociolinguistic study must ask questions and discover the type of data 
relative to the question. 
b. It should be concerned with conversation strategies and speakers’ 
communicative competence. 
c. 
It should consider the speaker or writer, the language variety, and the 
recipients of the speech. 
d. It should concern itself with the results of such investigation and be able to 
interpret them. 
e. A sociolinguistic study looks at the language of speakers based on their 
different ages, social class and social groups Maduako and Alerechi (2018:3).  
 
The researcher uses a combination of the use theory of meaning and sociolinguistics 
principles in this study. The study investigates varieties of Nigerian Pidgin used by 
secondary school students, undergraduates, motor park touts, traders and street 
boys/girls, cultists etc. Concepts are basically different via individual acceptance and 
properties of the words that express them. The study is centered on the use of words and 
their meaning according to contextual usage, therefore, the use theory of meaning and 
sociolinguist principles are the right tools needed in the analysis of the responses gathered 
from the respondents. 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
106 
Methodology 
The seminar paper is designed with a well planned interview and questionnaires to 
analyze the opinions and feeling of the users of NPE. The subjects are selected by random 
sampling technique. Questionnaires are distributed and interviews are also carried out to 
assert users vocabulary development in the variety of NPE in use. Data will be collected 
from secondary school students, undergraduates, graduates, traders, market traders and 
street boys/girls, cultist, motor park touts and thugs-agbero. 
 
A total number of Thirty (30) person’s will be selected randomly. In order to achieve the 
aim of this research, a list of words are written out and respondents are asked to write 
words that means the same thing or similar in meaning to another word and give example 
of their usage in NPE. Also, they are asked to list words that have more than one meaning 
and use it to form sentences in NPE. Finally, they are asked to list five new words that have 
Nigerian colouration (i.e. words that a creatively coined to suit Nigeria Culture, that do 
not mean the same thing in English. 
 
Data Presentation 
Data will be presented according to the NPE used in each variety and their context of usage 
among respondents, specific reference to;motor park pidgin, street boys/girls, cultists 
pidgin and thugs, market traders pidgin and general pidgin usage. Also data will be cited 
from Wycliffe Nigerian Pidgin Bible. Other areas of data analysis in vocabulary of NPE 
includes; use of Abbreviations, Glyph/Symbolism, Blending, Initialism/Alphabetism, 
Acronyms, Coinage, Reduplication, Compounding, Synonyms and Polysemy. 
 
Secret Cult Pidgin Words 
 
Codes 
Meaning And Examples 
 
SK-Skunk  
Anything hard drug. E.g. Were yu kip di SK na? 
 
AZ-Arizona  
Hard drug. E.g. Mai gai, yu get AZ?  
 
BST 
Stands for the word bastard, meaning someone who 
does not know his father. E.g. No mind am, im be BST. 
 
OVB-Over Board  
To kill someone. E.g.  Hin don fuk up! We go give am 
OBV! 
 
COC-Code of Conduct  
This term or code used by different cult groups to 
identify their members. 
 
Egede or System Man   
Someone who is a member of a cult group. E.g. This 
gai na egede.  
 
Oka  
A locally made pistol. E.g. Aboi, mek yu no foget to 
com wit di oka. 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
107 
 
Granut 
Means bullet. E.g. I go giv yu won granut. Note that 
‘give’ here means to kill, not to give the bullet but to 
shoot the person. 
 
Aro 
It is a word used by a cult group to show membership. 
E.g. Boys Aro! Aro!  
 
BakPoket (BP) 
Gun. E.g. Ike cari bakpoket com skul 
 
Cluster  
Let’s meet. E.g. Mai guy, mek we cluster  
 
Loot  
Girlfriend. E.g. O boy! see mai loot 
 
Ship don cut 
The plan has been exposed. E.g. Abobi! the ship don 
cut!  
 
No juice  
No problem.  
 
Evritin stew  
Everything is fine e.g. No wori, evritin go stew very 
soon. 
 
Eez prezur- ease pressure  
To calm down. E.g. Abeg, giv mi di baz mek I eez 
prezur. 
 
Scores 
To know the outcome of the matter. Like an agenda. 
E.g. Gai, wetin be the scores of the meeting. 
 
 
Street Boys 
 
No be beans or no be moi-moi 
It is not easy e.g. A. 50 years no be beans.  
B. To go America no be moi-moi 
 
Runs  
Means a plan or an arrangement. E.g. Nna, I get won 
runz wey tight. Note that ‘tight’ is used to emphasize 
the importance of the matter.   
 
 
Para/provoke 
To be angry. E.g. As yu dey si mi so, no leme provoke 
o. 
 
ZBS Conscious  
It means there is nothing else on my mind, except how 
to be money. Money consciousness. E.g. A: Chima! yu 
no go go slip? 
       B: Slip wetin, na ZBS dey mai maindoo. 
 
Jelof 
Means to enjoy. E.g. O boy yu don dey jelof 
 
Fire down  
Means well done, continue. E.g. 
 A: Come folo me chop gari! 
 B: Tank yu, fire down! 
 
S.M.G  
It means there is food. E.g. Aboy! S.M.G com board. 
 
Dat manchie don kpai 
It means the young man is dead.  
 
Babikue 
Means girlfriend. E.g. How far yor babikue? 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
108 
 
Yorbodi go telyu 
You will experience the pain by yourself e.g. When I 
finish wit yu, yor bodi go tel yu. 
 
Yor own dey yor bodi 
You are also culpable (i.e. you also have character 
issues)  
 
Lap  
To come over. E.g. Abeg! lap  
 
Abobi 
 
 
Change am for yu 
 
Boy, guy or my friend. E.g. Abobi! Wida yu na? Note 
that ‘wida you’ means what are you up to or what do 
you intend to do. 
It means to make trouble or react negatively. I will 
show you the other side of me. 
 
Cut am come  
It means give it to me. E.g. Madam, abeg cut am come.  
 
Die am  
It means to forget the matter. E.g. O boy, die am dia! 
 
3 points  
The person has had carnal knowledge of the girl. E.g. 
I don sko 3 points for Jennifer   
 
 
Motor Park Pidgin 
 
Giv am belle  
To increase the volume of the radio or television. E.g. 
driva, giv ya volume belle! 
 
One nyarsh 
It is corrupted form of one chance. it means one  
passenger seat is left for the bus or taxi to be filled, but 
most times, it is a lie. E.g. Anti, na one nyarsh remain! 
 
Senior man 
A male passenger or elder. Senior is used to show 
respect. E.g. Senior man! mek I hol am.  
 
Hol am  
It is used during collecton of transport fare. It means 
pay your money. E.g. Anti, mek I hol am. 
 
Won H 
It means One hundred Naira. E.g. 
 A:  How much to Mile 3? 
 B:   Na wan H! 
 
Wazobia or Wan White  
It means fifty naira (N50). It is called wazobia because, 
the denomination represents the three major 
languages in Nigeria; wa – Yoruba, zo – Hausa, bia – 
Igbo. E.g. Yor moni na wan white. 
 
I go join una/mariuna 
Joining the balance of more than one passenger due 
to insufficient balance. E.g. Una no wan bring change 
abi? No problem, wen wi rich, I go mariuna! 
 
Pilot  
In English pilot means someone who flies an 
aeroplane, while in this variety it means driver E.g. 
Pilot! giv mi tu white. 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
109 
 
Market Traders Pidgin 
 
Put jara 
It means to add something to what has already been 
bought. E.g. Madam put jara. 
 
Komfolo me bai 
It means come and patronize me. E.g. Anti! Kom folo 
me bai.   
 
Kombai 
Come and buy from me. E.g. Kom bai from mi na? 
This statement is usually persuading in nature. 
 
Eleme 
Eleme is the name of a suburban area in Rivers State, 
but in market pidgin, it means onlookers. When 
customers look at the wares without buying them 
they are called Eleme. E.g. Abeg! dey go, Eleme!  
 
Bayelsa 
Bayelsa is a state in Nigeria, but in this context it 
means one who wants to buy. This is mostly used by 
Ok/Okrika sellers (those who sell fairly used/second-
hand clothes) E.g. Eleme go, Bayelsa come!  
 
I go do am wel for yu 
I will make sure I impress you. This ‘do am well for 
you’ is in relation to jara, that is the little extra that is 
always added to the things/items bought. 
 
Na market  
This is usually used by meat sellers when negotiating 
the price of meat. E.g.  
A:   Oga! di meat na how much? 
B: Giv mi one thouzon faiv hundred! 
 
 
Football Pidgin 
This is the type of pidgin used among people watching football, when watching 
football. 
 
Waste pipe 
It means an amateur player, some who is not skilled. 
E.g. Chimana waste pipe!  
 
Trowe face  
When you pass a ball without looking directly at your 
team mate. E.g. David Beckham just trowe face.  
 
Sel 
To pass the ball to another player. E.g. Im don sel di 
bol giv am. 
 
Naping 
In English napping is act of raising a nap as in a cloth, 
but in football pidgin, it means to convince someone 
to agree to your terms. E.g. I just giv am napping! 
 
 
 
 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
110 
University Students: Variety Of Pidgin 
 
Expo, Dub 
It means exposition in English, while in pidgin among 
undergraduates it refers to a piece of paper smuggled 
into an exam hall or venue to aid cheating. E.g.  
(a) I si am dey use expo! 
(b) She sabi dub! 
 
Jambite/Jambito 
Newly admitted students into the University setting. 
E.g. Chai, si jambito! 
 
Jairation 
It is used among a group of students called kegites 
(palm wine club) to mean partying or celebration. 
 
Jack  
It means to read or study seriously for an exam or test 
e.g. I don jack so te mai hed dey hot!  
 
Witout 
It means to eat food without meat – Madam, abeg, giv 
mi witout!  
 
 
Nigerian Pidgin Bible  
Matu 15:1-2. 
Some Farisi pipol and law tishas kom mit Jisos for Jerusalem ask am, “why yor disaipols 
nor  dey obey awa eldas tradishon? Dem no dey wash dia hand bifor dem chop”. 
 
Mathew 15:1-2 
Then came to Jesus the Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, why do 
thy disciples transgress the tradition of elders? For they wash not their hands when they 
eat bread. (English Holy Bible King James version). From examples above the NPE 
version is simpler. The simplicity is seen in the use of Farisi pipol and law tishas to refer 
to Scribes and Pharisees. An uneducated person may not understand the meaning of 
scribes; the use of law tishas is simpler to understand. This is because the word teacher 
is used always by parents who have children in school and in church (Sunday school 
teacher).  
 
Findings and Analysis 
 
Abbreviations: It is a process of shortening or reducing a word or phrase, used to 
represent the whole word  
 
Trans – transport fare 
Give me trans  
 
Gen – generator  
On di gen  
 
Info – information  
Pass di info  
 
 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
111 
Initialism/Alphabetism: Is also known as initialism. It is a process whereby abbreviation 
is read letter-by-letter, as “UN” United Nations  
 
H – Hungry/Hundred    
e.g. (a) I dey H (b) I need won H 
 
COC 
Code of conduct  
 
JJC  
Jonny just come – A new comer  
 
TDB - Till Day Break 
To sleep over night without returning home  
 
 
Symbolism/Glyph 
 
404 
Dog meat, either cooked or roasted 
 
411 
Latest information 
 
247 
24 hours, 7 days a week   
 
White/Sky  
Fifty naira (N50) 
 
6 to 6  
Cooked fermented cassava flour. Loi–loi, akpu, fufu 
 
 
Blending 
It is a word forming process. Whereby more than one word are connected to form a 
new word. It can be said to be a grammatical contamination. 
 
Akanchi/Akagum 
A tight fist (stingy) 
Aka + nchi means (grasscutter animal) in Igbo   
 
Block head  
Someone who does not know anything  
 
 
Reduplication 
It simply means to double, it is a morphological process, by which words are repeated in 
order to form new word or phrase. 
 
Wella – wella 
Very Good 
 
Bia – bia 
Beard  
 
Like play like play  
Would be or not be, finally happened 
 
Shapaly – shapaly 
This term is used mostly by Wazobia FM users and 
callers presenters ; to do it quickly 
 
Sofri – sofri 
Softly – softly. To be gently another word for this is 
jejely jejely. 
 
 
Onomatopoeia 
When words that are used to represent the way they sound or the. It is the use of language 
whose sound initiates that which it means or the use of words to represent the way it 
sounds. 
Lion  
A liar  
Linus  
A liar 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
112 
Keziah 
To share without recourse for consequences. 
Derogatory name for a prostitute  
 
 
Synonym 
Synonym is a word or phrase that has the same or similar meaning to another word or 
phrase. 
 
Kill am, die am, fashy 
End the matter  
 
Kasala, wahala, katakata, palava 
Trouble  
 
Loi – loi, Santana, 6 to 6, fufu, 
packet shirt, white man 
Cooked fermented cassava flour  
 
Shakara, gai, nyanga 
To be confident  
 
Sofri – sofri, jejely, wayoli 
To do something or handle  something gently 
Wayoyli is a translation from Igbo word “nwayo” 
which means gently. 
 
Runz girl, ashawo, ogbongidi, 
ojolojolo, raw-cochur, akwuna-
akwuna 
Prostitute  
 
 
Polysemy 
It is the ability of words, signs and symbols to have multiple meanings (more than one 
meaning) 
Belle: Stomach – Si im belle. 
Means pregnancy – Ada don get belle. 
Baff:  To take a bath – I wan baff; To dress up gorgeously – Nna! Si baff up. 
Die: To resistance – we die here! 
To end something – Die am!  
Till the end – I lov am die. 
Match: To step on someone – why you match my leg? 
To leave – Aboy! mek we match!  
 
Acronym 
Acronym is an abbreviation formed by the use of initial letters taken from a word 
or series of words, is pronounced as a word. 
OYO – It means you are On Your Own. Oyo is a name of a state but in pidgin it 
means you are on your own. 
 
 
 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
113 
Word Derivation Processes 
In NPE words are derived from verbs to nouns e.g.  
Baz – verb  
Baz – noun  
I wan baz. (verb) 
Give mi baz. (noun)  
Bulala – verb 
Bulala – noun  
I go bulala yu.  
Go bring mi bulala. 
 
Discussion 
Nigerian Pidgin English has a very rich vocabulary structure, from the study we have 
looked at varieties of pidgin, pidgin used by cultists, market traders, street boys/girls etc., 
we observed that creative coinage and vocabulary developments are found mostly among 
the younger generation which are involved in cultism, street boys/girls, motor park touts. 
Adegbija (2004:20) and Bamgbose (1995:26) believe that English in Nigeria has been 
“domesticated”. According to Bamgbose it has been pidginized, nativised, acculrated and 
twisted to express unaccustomed concepts and modes of interaction. 
 
From the study, we can see that vocabulary items have special creative coinage and 
meanings.  Pidgin from these varieties studied, has infiltrated the Nigeria system and is 
been used to communicate effectively among Nigerians with exception to cultist pidgin 
and coded words which are used exclusively by them, though some of their slangs are 
being used generally e.g. I dey bam the word “dey bam” came to full use when the cult 
group “Dey Bam” was instituted. They use the term to mean, I am in charge!. Today, its 
use goes beyond being in charge; it can also mean being ok, well, fine, unshakeable etc. It 
can be used as an answer to the question; How you dey? I dey bam! 
 
This seminar paper sets out to look at the various varieties of NPE and how their 
vocabulary is developed for effective communication among Nigerians. Each variety is 
unique in its right and adds to the lexicon of NPE. The method of analysis was descriptive 
analysis and it was exemplified (i.e. examples of its usage were given in the study). From 
the study, we have seen that it is not all pidgin that should be used by everybody to avoid 
misrepresentation, e.g. ‘over board’ which means to kill, its usage by a non-member within 
its speech community, can be dangerous. Also it can lose its meaning when outside its 
speech community. 
 
Conclusion 
This seminar paper sets to look at the various varieties of NPE and how their vocabulary 
is developed for effective communication among Nigerians. Each variety is unique in its 
right and adds to the lexicon of NPE. Methods of analysis were descriptive analysis and 

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
114 
exemplified (i.e. examples of its usage were given in the study). From the study we have 
seen that it is not all pidgin that should be used by everybody to avoid misrepresentation. 
E.g. over board which means to kill. If used in context or within its community as a non-
member can be dangerous. 
 
Recommendation 
Nigeria Pidgin English (NPE) has gained acceptance and popularity. Soonest it may 
become the national language in Nigeria. It should be noted that a standard orthography 
of pidgin is still a major challenge in the developmental strides of NPE. Therefore the 
following is recommended. 
 
a. A standard orthography by the Naija langwej Akedemi (NLA) which will be accepted 
by linguistic scholars. 
b. A detailed dictionary should be written and printed by linguist, which will facilitate 
the process of learning this beautiful language. 
c. 
Nigeria Pidgin English should be taught as a subject in primary/secondary schools. 
Also in the university, not only as a departmental course, but as a general course for 
all students. This will foster its development and acceptability. 
If these measures are taken Nigeria will be a tourist site, where people all over the 
world will come to learn its variety of pidgin. 
 
References 
Adegbite, E. (2004). The Domestication of English in Nigeria in Awunosi and Babalola 
(Eds).The domestication of English in Nigeria: A Festschrift in honuor of Abiodun 
Adetugbo. University of Lagos Press. P. 20-39 
Crystal, D. (2008). A dictionary of linguistics and phonetics (Ed). Oxford Blackwell Publishing. 
Emenanjo, E.(2006) language and communication: Myths, facts and features. E. Frontier 
Publishers. 
Faradas, N.G. (1996) Nigeria Pidgin. Routledge. 
Fawehmi, P.O 9 (1987) Communication in pidgin in Nigeria: origin, problems and 
prospect.  
In Udoh S. (ed.) Topical issues in communication arts. Longman. 
Hirst, T. (2016) The importance of maintaining a child’s first language (10:40am) bisnet or 
id. Archived from the origin on 12th March. 
Holms, J.A. (2000). An Introduction to pidgins and creoles, Cambridge University Press. 
Izenose, Joshua (2018). The role of Nigerian Pidgin English as communicative 
device. https://www.grin.com>document  

Icheke Journal of the Faculty of Humanities                                  Vol.19. No.1 March, 2021 www.ichekejournal.com 
 
Nigerian Pidgin English: An Effective Communicative Device For Vocabulary Development  
 
115 
Ken-Maduako, I and Alererchi, R.I (2018) Slangs as Special Speech Behaviour in Nigerian 
campuses. A case study of The University of Port Harcourt and The Ignatius Ajuru 
University of Education. In: Journal of languages, Literature and Communication 
(LALICO). Vol. 1, No.1. 
Ofoegbu, C.O. (2014) Issues in language and national development in Nigeria. Mustard Printing 
Pub. Company. 
Schmitt, N. (2000) Vocabulary in Language Teaching. Cambridge University Press.Stahl, S. 
(2005) 
Vocabulary 
Learning 
Strategies 
and 
Concepts. 
https://www.readnaturally.com>research. 
Wardaugh, R. (1998) An introduction to sociolinguistics. Blackwell. 
Werna, M. Nigerian Pidgin 20 useful words and phrases. https://www.britishcouncil.org. 
Yul-Ifode, S. (2001). An introduction to language in history and society. University of Port 
Harcourt Press. 
 
 
 

