PIDGIN ENGLISH IN GHANAIAN CHURCHES
1
George Kodie Frimpong
ABSTRACT
This paper revisits the sociolinguistic discussions on the 
domain of use of Pidgin English in Ghana (cf. Huber 1999; 1995; 
Dako 2002; Ofulue 2011). It advances the claim that pidgin is 
currently undergoing a process of expanding its domain of use 
into some respected formal spaces (such as the church) in Ghana, 
particularly through gospel music. What this means is that the 
account in the   literature that pidgin is absent in formal domains 
in Ghana can no longer be held to be accurate, for pidgin has now 
entered Christian religious worship. This has been possible 
partly through contacts within the West African sub-region. 
Unsurprisingly, the most popular pidgin songs in Ghanaian       
Christian communities, as reflected through responses to 
questionnaires administered, bear features of Nigerian Pidgin 
English; some of the songs have obviously been imported from 
Nigeria. Could this development be the watershed for the 
redemption of the image of Pidgin English in Ghana? For the     
purpose of this paper, Christians who fellowship in Accra only 
were surveyed; Accra serves as a haven for church activities due, 
perhaps, to its highly cosmopolitan background, and numerous 
churches are headquartered in this city.
Introduction
Ghanaian church music and language
The church has always been noted for its respect for ‘high 
culture’. In all of its senses – as a  building, as a worship and as a 
community of believers – the church is regarded as a sanctified
1 George Kodie Frimpong is an Assistant Lecturer in the Department of 
English, University of Ghana, Legon.
space and Ghanaians accord it sanctity. When the Bible in the 
Psalms admonishes Christians to make a joyful noise unto the 
Lord (cf. Ps 98; Ps 100), it isn’t explicit about which language 
should constitute the text for this joyful noise. And yet traditions 
over the years have deemed some languages more worthy for 
performing the special offices of the church. Church music (the 
joyful noise) is only one aspect of church service which employs 
language. 
In line with the numerous instances in the Bible suggesting the 
tremendous role of music in the Judeo-Christian belief system 
and worship, Alexander Agordoh, a Ghanaian       
ethnomusicologist, describes the importance of church music as 
follows: 
 Today, few people learn any faith dogmas by heart, like in 
the olden times when people were forced to rattle parts of the 
church catechism by memory. The only confessional 
documents  people (believers) might know by heart today are 
the words from hymns and songs they sing. It is these hymns 
and songs, repeated over and over, which form the container 
of much of our faith (Agordoh 2011: 1 – 2). 
What this implies is that the language of church music is as 
important as the language of the sermon, the holy Eucharist/the 
mass, intercessory prayers, etc. But in the Ghanaian church, this 
has not been so. The Ghanaian Christian gives the impression, 
from the survey I conducted, that the language of church music 
does not matter as much as does the language used in other 
aspects of the church service.
Frimpong  | 178
Special Edition , 2012  | 177
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

The European Christian missionaries who first brought 
Christianity to Ghana, however, had a  different view, and their 
contribution to the development of local languages and to 
vernacular literacy needs mention here. Some Wesleyan 
missionaries, including Rev. T. Laing, Rev. A. W. Parker and W. 
M. Cannell, made a modest attempt which could not endure the 
opposition of their own colleagues. The opposition emanated 
from colleague missionaries who ‘called for a greater use of 
English and the  abandonment of Fanti in school and church’ 
(McWilliam 1975).  But this early effort of these missionary-
scholars led to the production of the first Fante primer for schools 
in 1870 by Rev. Laing, followed in 1877 by the Fante version of 
two gospels produced by the Rev. Parker. In 1886, Rev. Parker 
jointly produced the first Fanti-English Dictionary (McWilliams 
1975).
The Swiss of the Basel Mission and the Germans of the 
Bremen Mission, however, were more successful in their efforts 
at developing local languages for church activities and for 
education. Their   legacy in vernacular literacy is captured by 
McWilliams in the following quotation:
…because their main aim was the establishment of a native 
African Church, ‘they   discouraged the use of English in 
the schools and mostly used the vernacular’. The 
foundations of the Ga and Twi studies were therefore laid by 
them (McWilliams 1975: 33).
The work of  J. G. Christaller, a Basel missionary, for instance, is 
arguably the most comprehensive in the literature. His 
publications include a translation of the entire Bible into Twi, a 
Twi grammar and a Twi Dictionary. Christaller’s effort was not 
an isolated one, for, elsewhere in Ewe-land and   Ga-land, other 
German-speaking missionaries laid an equally solid vernacular 
literacy  foundation. For example, Schlegel and Westermann 
produced the first Ewe grammar and Ewe dictionary
respectively. Similarly, Zimmermann made an impressive 
contribution to Ga literacy. His notable works include a 
translation of the four gospels into Ga in 1855, a Ga grammar in 
1857, a Ga Dictionary in 1857 and a Ga version of the whole 
Bible in 1866. This explains the variegated attitudes of mission 
churches and African Independent Churches (AICs) to local 
languages over the years. 
The AICs claim to be motivated in their activities by the 
zeal to promote the worship of God in  Africa the African way, so 
they place emphasis on African cultural practices. The irony is 
that though these new churches claim to promote local customs 
such as drumming, dancing, clapping of hands, etc. in their 
worship, they have done very little in promoting local languages. 
The AICs have over the years always marginalised local 
languages in the content of their church service due, perhaps, to 
the prestige associated with English as well as to their target 
population (the AICs target working middle class       
Ghanaians). An interesting phenomenon in this regard is the 
names of these AICs; the names of almost all of these neo-
1
Christian churches  are composed of English words (cf. 
Frimpong, forthcoming). There is an impression that these 
English names are more ‘modern’ and attractive in drawing more 
converts. In Ghana today, English is the most neutral language 
among over 45 indigenous languages (cf. Anyidoho and Dakubu 
2008). 
In recent times, however, a novel linguistic trend is 
emerging in the Ghanaian Christian church space. Pidgin, a 
highly stigmatised language in Ghana, has stealthily crept into 
the protected space of the  Ghanaian church and has managed to 
gain considerable popularity, not only among the youth but also 
among the entire membership of the church. Pidgin English has 
entered the church space through music. Its pervading influence 
is so massive that it is found in the praise and worship and even 
Frimpong  | 180
Special Edition , 2012  | 179
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

choral songs of both mission churches and AICs, and when 
accompanied by the clapping of hands, the beating of drums and  
dancing, most believers forget or do not care what language the 
songs are composed in.  It must be noted that of the two types of 
church music (liturgical music and non-liturgical music) 
identified by Agordoh (2011: 2), it is in the non-liturgical music 
that Pidgin has found an immediate welcome. 
The non-liturgical music comprises what is popularly 
called in Ghanaian parlance, ‘praise and worship songs’, and 
they are songs usually composed by any Christian who has the 
gift of song  composition or who may have been ‘inspired’ by the 
Holy Spirit. This is one lucrative area of activity in the church 
today, for through it many Christians make a living, and many 
gospel artistes are produced in this aspect of the church’s 
activities whose songs are sung at funerals, outdooring 
2
ceremonies,   weddings, birthday parties, etc. And these are the 
3
songs that are used for the ‘collection’  and for prayer           
sessions in a typical Ghanaian church service. This type of praise 
and worship in which pidgin has found a place has psycho-social 
implications. That is, pidgin used in this context can be construed 
to entertain and perform a cathartic as well as a levelling 
function.
In the first place, these songs engage mnemonic devices 
such as simplification, repetition  and idiophones, among others.  
Thus, the pidgin songs selected for this study have a few (two or 
three) lines which are repeated over and over. Not only that, but 
also pidgin songs have as part of their feature simple high 
sounding words whose melodic tones tend to make a natural 
appeal to the Ghanaian; these high tones (na double double oo, 
Igweee, Winner eeei) remind one of Ghanaian music. Since these 
songs are not stylistically highly contrived compared to 
traditional Christian hymns and do not need reference to any 
book in the form of a hymn book or music notation, it is easy to 
sing them. This music offers the  opportunity for a relaxed 
ambiance suitable for dancing. 
But there is, perhaps, a form of psychological healing 
associated with this phenomenon. In what may be described as 
cathartic, the kind of praise and worship which is described here 
has a feature of a mystic blend of songs, drumming, ecstatic 
shouts/screams and dancing. This has a tendency of building up 
to a crescendo of a trance state where participants can ease 
themselves of emotional burdens. Therefore some Ghanaians, 
especially the youth, will go to a church where the praise and 
worship is characteristic of the type described above, where 
everybody is involved in the event and age and other social 
differentials such as status and gender do not matter. 
This paper claims, among other things, that contrary to 
the established notion of the use of Pidgin English only in 
informal situations among students and as the lingua franca in 
barracks, it has made a successful incursion into religion (church 
service) in the area of church music in Ghana, and that the most 
popular of these Pidgin songs are of the Nigerian variety of 
Pidgin English. One would want to know the future of this 
phenomenon. Will it move into other church domains?
Already this phenomenon has found a positive appeal in 
Ghanaian political circles, for two popular Pidgin songs have 
been endorsed by the two most influential political parties in 
Ghana which have adopted these songs as their banner songs. In 
2008, the New Patriotic Party which was the party in       
government at the time adopted Go Go High, a pidgin gospel 
song by Philipa Barfi, a Ghanaian gospel musician. Recently in 
2011, the National Democratic Congress, now in government,
Frimpong  | 182
Special Edition , 2012  | 181
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

adopted Na Double Double, a Nigerian gospel song which was 
already popular in Ghana. 
While there may be nothing unusual in using pidgin in the 
church in Nigeria, for pidgin plays an extensive neutral role in 
Nigeria (cf. Akande 2010), the situation is different in Ghana. 
Pidgin is still heavily stigmatised in Ghana (Huber 1999; Dako 
2002), and the Ghanaian church space is a protected one reserved 
for English and local languages. It is interesting to note that for 
reasons of prestige, it is not common (if it happens at all) for a 
preacher to preach in a local language and have the message                 
interpreted into English and other local languages, though the 
reverse is a common trend even in local churches whose members 
speak the common indigenous language of the community.
1. Contacts Within the Sub-Region
It has been touted that the Ghanaian can be found in almost 
every corner of the world. The fact is that Ghanaians, probably like 
other nationals, are eager to explore other worlds in search of  
greener pastures. The same can be said about Nigerians who also 
have been noted to travel extensively. Over the years, migration 
within the sub-region has not been limited to one single country. 
Ghanaians have  travelled to Nigeria, Liberia, Sierra Leone, 
Libya, La Cote d’Ivoire, etc. In the same way, Nigerians and other 
nationals from the sub-region have moved into Ghana. However, 
bilateral movements between   Nigeria and Ghana go back to well 
before independence (Papademetriou et al 1991; Skinner 1963).
Nationals from these two countries have also experienced 
expulsions from each other’s country. A heavy presence of 
‘illegal’ Nigerians was recorded in Ghana leading to their 
expulsion by the Ghanaian government in 1969. A similar 
situation led to the expulsion of Ghanaians from Nigeria in 1983 
(Papademetriou et al 1991). In recent times, another similar 
phenomenon is building up gradually in Ghana. Nigerians are 
noted to have migrated into Ghana in their numbers. 
They are found in the church business, in tertiary institutions, in 
banking, in general trading and in the entertainment industry. Of 
course some Ghanaians may also be found in Nigeria  currently, 
though not in similar proportions.
The point of interest is that these contacts have linguistic 
implications. They serve as a recipe for linguistic diffusion, for 
instance. Already, some Ghanaians believe that pidgin in Ghana is 
the result of the 1983 exodus of Ghanaian immigrants from 
Nigeria; of course this position cannot be taken seriously because 
it suggests that Ghana had not known pidgin before this period. It 
can only be considered as one of a number of factors, and perhaps 
only a contributory one responsible for the development of pidgin 
in Ghana. Yet the returnees brought back home their acquired new 
code—Nigerian Pidgin—along with their tape recorder machines. 
But the literature available on this subject (cf. Huber 1999; Dako 
2002) traces the history of pidgin in Ghana to other West African 
Pidgins (Liberian, Sierra Leonean and Nigerian pidgins). 
According to these accounts, pidgin must have developed in 
Ghana after 1900 with the  migration into Ghana of male labourers 
from Liberia and Sierra Leone and soldiers, policemen, domestic 
servants and traders from Nigeria (Dako 2002). Police and 
military barracks are among the first spaces to have absorbed and 
developed pidgin, due not only to the low level of education of 
both the police and the army but also to the multilingual ecology of 
the barracks.  
Technology is a very powerful tool in today’s society and it 
also facilitates language contacts. The strength of the internet that 
fosters globalization, coupled with the influence from the movie 
industry, for instance, facilitates cultural fermentation. One 
language/code that is capable of influencing the Ghanaian culture 
in this regard is Nigerian Pidgin. As Ghanaians consume Nigerian 
movies, and as they share religious communion together with 
Nigerians, pidgin has a chance of expanding its domains and of   
redeeming its negative image in Ghana. At the moment a pidgin
Frimpong  | 184
Special Edition , 2012  | 183
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

 version of the Bible has found its way onto the World Wide Web, 
accessible to all. Additionally, a movie of the life of Jesus Christ in 
pidgin has enjoyed an overwhelming viewership in Ghana, a 
situation that not only suggests the versatility of Pidgin English in 
Ghana but also connotes the expansion of its domain of use. 
2. Pidgin English within the West African Sub-region
English-based pidgins within the West African sub-region 
have been described and continue to receive attention at the 
various linguistic levels (Holm 1989; Elugbe and Omamor 1991; 
Singler 1997; Huber 1999; Faraclas 2004; Peter and Wolf 2007; 
Ofulue 2011; etc.). Of these varieties – which include Ghanaian 
Pidgin, Nigerian Pidgin, Cameroonian Pidgin, Liberian Pidgin, 
(also commonly referred to as Kru Pidgin in Ghana), and Sierra 
Leonean Krio – the first three (the Ghanaian, the Nigerian and the     
Cameroonian varieties) are noted to be the most comparable since 
they are similar in most features. The Nigerian variety is noted to 
share more similarities with the Cameroonian variety whereas the 
Ghanaian variety which has its roots in Kru English and Abongo 
4
Brofo  (Dako 2002) shows more similarities with the Nigerian 
Pidgin. These similarities do not by any means suggest that the 
varieties are mutually  intelligible, for these varieties have varying 
features at all levels which make them to a very large extent 
unintelligible (Huber 1999). 
For instance, at the phonological level, the three varieties 
are observed to be more similar to their national standard varieties 
of English (Peter and Wolf 2007). Lexically, though there are 
borrowings across  varieties and it makes sense to assume that the 
Nigerian and Cameroonian varieties share a   number of lexical 
items due to geographical proximity, there are enormous 
differences since these  varieties do not merely draw vocabulary 
from English but also directly from local languages. Generally, 
varieties of West African Pidgin English (WAPE) have West 
African indigenous languages as the  substrate and English as the
 lexifier/superstrate. This point is relevant to the subject of this 
paper in that words which have obviously entered NigPE from 
Nigerian local languages have not only been used in some of the 
church music under discussion but have also had an influence on 
Ghanaian secular music and local movies. Words such as ‘Igwe’, 
5 
‘Chineke’, ‘Oga’ ‘tofiakwa’, ‘nyafunyafu’ are some of the words 
of Nigerian provenance which are now common in Ghana. Igwe 
has been used as the title of a popular Nigerian song on the 
Ghanaian market. In the song, Igwe is the chorus and a line runs 
‘come bless me nyafunyafu’.
Additionally, these varieties differ considerably at the 
grammatical level. For example, it is  observed that the Ghanaian 
variety differs from the Nigerian and Cameroonian Pidgins in 
some  grammatical features. As table 1 below from Peter and Wolf 
(2007: 17) shows, ‘na’ in all of its functions (as focus marker, as 
copular, as intensifier and as locative preposition) is absent from 
GhPE . In the same way, ‘don’, ‘bin’, ‘una’ and ‘dem’ are more 
Nigerian and Cameroonian than they are Ghanaian.
Frimpong  | 186
Special Edition , 2012  | 185
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

Table 1: Distinctive features and their occurrences in the varieties 
of WAPE (Peter and Wolf 2007: 17)  
NB: In the table ‘No’ indicates feature is not attested in a particular variety and 
‘Yes’ indicates the presence of a feature. As it turns out, there are variables for 
some of the features in the case of some varieties as attested in a couple of 
instances.
The relevance of this table is that the presence of features 
of Nigerian Pidgin in GhPE and pidgin gospel songs points to an 
influence which may have come from the Nigerian variety. Thus in 
the songs selected for this study, the grammatical features typical 
of NigPE but which are not notable in GhPE are targeted together 
with lexical items unique to NigPE
It must be mentioned here that these national varieties of 
pidgin are not monolithic entities, for some of them are noted to 
have local sub-varieties. Therefore NigPE, though mutually
intelligiblenationwide, has internal variations across geographical 
locations. Conversely, pidgin in Ghana is conceptualised in a 
continuum. Huber (1999), for instance, identifies the ‘educated’ 
and ‘uneducated’ sociolectal varieties as the two manifestations of 
Pidgin English in Ghana. 
The difference between these local varieties exists both at 
the structural and lexical levels (cf.  Huber 1999; Dako 2002). 
Moreover, the educated variety which is found mostly among 
students (and so is also referred to elsewhere as Student Pidgin – 
SP) is typically more characteristic of word creation potential 
(Huber 1999). The interesting point about the two varieties is that 
they perform different functions. Whereas the uneducated variety 
serves as a contact language for groups of people whose first 
languages differ, the Ghanaian SP serves as an in-group solidarity 
marker. In the context of the pidgin in Ghanaian churches, it 
becomes apparent that neither of these functions is the reason for 
its use. As it has been claimed above, the pidgin in Ghanaian 
church music serves more of a stylistic or entertaining       
function than as an in-group identification or communicative 
requirement. 
Another interesting area in the discussion of pidgin is the 
attitude of the community towards its use, and here much has 
already been written in the body of literature (Elugbe and Omamor 
1991; Huber 1999; Peter and Wolf 2007 and Akande 2010). In all 
of these accounts, NigPE is reported to enjoy the most favourable 
ecology while the Ghanaian variety is the most stigmatised and 
limited in domain of use. In this regard Huber (1999:156) 
describes the situation as follows:
   … Pidgin in Ghana is more stigmatised and less widespread 
in terms of area and number of speakers than it is in other 
Anglophone West African countries. Especially among 
the  educated section of Ghanaian society (but this is also 
true for less educated Ghanaians) Pidgin is still frowned 
upon as a mark of illiteracy and unpolished manners. 
Frimpong  | 188
Special Edition , 2012  | 187
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

In sharp contrast to this situation is the Nigerian context 
where the educated members of the society also use Pidgin 
English and pidgin is used in wider domains than in Ghana. In fact, 
in Nigeria, Pidgin English has a speaker population of about thirty 
million as claimed in a paper presented by Christine Ofulue at the 
6 
SPCL Conference at the University of Ghana in August 2011. 
This same paper points to the tremendous widespread use of 
Pidgin in both formal and informal domains in Nigeria. That is, 
unlike in Ghana and Cameroon, Pidgin has already found a home 
in Nigeria as it is found in Bible translations and in the media/news 
broadcasts, and grammars and dictionaries have even been created 
in it. This is the reason why the point of this paper that pidgin has 
found its way into the church would not stir anybody if it was said 
about the church in Nigeria. Ofulue’s (2011) study is among the 
body of  literature on this subject that claims that pidgin is absent 
in religion as well as in all other formal domains in  Ghana. 
3. Methodology
Research of this nature in which lyrics of music constitute 
the corpus exists, though there is not much of it (cf. Trudgill 1983; 
Miethaner 2005).  For the purpose of this paper, I collected and  
transcribed 10 ‘popular’ pidgin gospel songs. These consist of 
songs composed by Nigerian musicians which have received 
patronage in Ghana, and others composed by Ghanaians. The aims 
are twofold: to test the   assumption that Pidgin English is gaining 
popularity in the Ghanaian church and to analyse these songs to 
detect a Nigerian influence or otherwise. To do this, I prepared 
anonymous questionnaires and administered them to respondents 
of varied Christian backgrounds. All my respondents are resident 
in Accra. The purpose was to test the familiarity of respondents 
with the songs and their attitude to Pidgin English in church 
service, and to confirm the popularity rate of these songs. 
4. Results of questionnaires and analysis of songs
In all, 30 questionnaires were administered, of which 25 
were returned. They were filled out by 13 females and 12 males. 
The respondents were between 20 and 50 years. As the data 
involved songs, I committed to singing the selected songs, 
especially those of which the words were not familiar to  
respondents. A summary of the demographic information on 
respondents is contained in table 2 below:
Table 2: Demographic background of respondents
As the church is a very revered space in Ghana where Pidgin 
English is still highly stigmatised, I expected some respondents to 
prevaricate on whether pidgin is used in their churches. To make 
sure I got the facts, I intentionally recast the question on the 
presence of pidgin in respondents’ church for       
confirmation. My suspicion was confirmed when 16 out of the 25 
respondents said pidgin is not used in any aspect of the service of 
their church. But when provided with the 10 songs and asked 
which of them were sung in their church, 13 out of the 16 who 
claimed that pidgin was absent in all aspects of their church listed 
at least 3 songs, with some listing as many as 9 songs. In some 
instances, respondents from the same church did not agree about 
the use of pidgin or otherwise in their church, as captured in           
table 3 below. 
Frimpong  | 190
Special Edition , 2012  | 189
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

Table 3: Distribution of churches and responses on presence of 
pidgin in churches
These responses reflect three possibilities: either the phenomenon 
is not as widespread as the  impression suggests and so members 
from different branches of the same church may not be equally  
exposed to it, or even if it is used in their churches respondents 
have not paid attention to the words of the songs. However, in view 
of the status of pidgin in Ghana, the most likely possibility is that 
respondents were ashamed to associate their church with pidgin
On respondents’ attitude to pidgin in the church, though 
some were ‘indifferent’ about it, others  expressed misgivings 
ranging from utter surprise, to ‘it depends on the context’. Some 
even thought it was justified only as long as it was meant to reach 
out to a Nigerian audience, though 2 respondents thought it was 
normal only for a youth service. To some of the respondents, 
however, Pidgin English was permissible only in church music.
 On the popularity ranking of the songs, the following five songs 
appear to be in the lead: .
Na Double Double 
Igwe,
So So Wonders, 
Go Go High 
Jesus na you be Oga,
Na Double Double, Igwe and Jesus na you be Oga are of 
Nigerian origin. The remaining 2 – Go Go High and So So 
Wonders – are the most popular Ghana made Pidgin songs, though 
So So Wonders also, arguably, has a Nigerian influence. Songs that 
are not common among the respondents are God Dey be, a 
Ghanaian rap gospel song and Jesus na you be oo Oga 
Kpatakpata, obviously a Nigerian pidgin gospel song. I analysed 
these first five popular songs since to analyse all ten songs would 
be beyond the scope of this paper.
Na Double Double has been heard in Ghana for about 4 
years now. Probably due to its simplicity, it has received the 
highest patronage; even children of 2 years enjoy it (my two year 
old son’s teacher tells me this song is my son’s favourite). This 
song is of Nigerian origin, though only two grammatical 
constructions identify it as Nigerian. 
It has the equative copular ‘na’ which Huber (1999) and 
Peter and Wolf (2007) agree is a grammatical feature of Nigerian 
Pidgin English. There is also the reduplicative ‘double double’ 
which is more of a Nigerian than a Ghanaian feature. Similarly, 
Igwe was composed by a Nigerian and is performed by choirs in 
Ghanaian churches. Though many Ghanaian Christians do not 
know most of the words of the song, they love such expressions as:
Come bless me nyafunyafu
You love me sote
Igwe  
‘Igwe’ is already a household word in Ghana, and so is 
‘nyafunyafu’. And these are not the only words in the song that are
Frimpong  | 192
Special Edition , 2012  | 191
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

 from Nigerian substrate languages; others include ‘Oga’, ‘Baba’, 
etc.
So so Wonders was recorded by a Ghanaian gospel 
musician formerly known by the name Diana Akiwumi. Diana 
Akiwumi won an award in Ghana for this song and another one, 
Mai Body eei na God ai go Givam. So So Wonders can be claimed 
to have a Nigerian origin in the sense that at the time she sung it a 
Nigerian version which has virtually the same wording existed. 
Besides, Diana lived most of her youthful years in Nigeria with her 
Nigerian husband who is said to have played a very influential role 
in the songs she performed. One feature that marks So So Wonders 
as Nigerian is the reduplicative ‘so so’ which means ‘many’ which 
does not exist in Ghanaian Pidgin. 
Go Go High is another popular pidgin gospel song in 
Ghana. It was performed by one Philipa Barfi who calls herself 
‘the pidgin gospel artiste’; interestingly most of the Ghanaian 
pidgin gospel songs were performed by women, including Helena 
Rabbles, another Ghanaian female pidgin gospel artiste. Though 
Go Go High has some features of Nigerian Pidgin, it seems more 
to approximate Ghanaian Student Pidgin. Features of Nigerian 
pidgin adopted in this song include ‘una’ and ‘Oga’. However, the 
song does not look like one composed in a natural pidgin since it 
contains many structural features of Standard English which 
pidgins usually lack. It can perfectly be described as code mixing 
of pidgin with Standard English. For instance, the two stanzas 
below have Standard English with the exception of the Nigerian 
7
8
vocatives ‘abi’  and ‘Oga’.
Where you are is not your limit oh abi
Where you are is not your limit oh, Oga
The sky is your limit (2x)
 Don't be content with where you are oh abi
Jesus is your power
Jesus is your strength oh
Winners no for quit o, abi abi
Quitters no for win o
An admittedly Nigerian pidgin gospel song that is going 
through a tremendous evolution in Ghana is ‘Jesus Na You Be 
Oga’. It has been stylistically reworked into a danceable choral 
song by a Ghanaian composer and has had more appeal in 
churches where it is sung. In terms of its lexis and grammar, this is 
one simple song that has so many Nigerian features. The equative 
copular ‘na’ is present in the song together with Nigerian lexical 
9
elements such as ‘Oga’, and ‘ye ye’ . Of course the reduplicative 
‘so so’ is present. From observation, this song entered the 
Ghanaian gospel scene some years ago as a pop praise song. The 
new choral version prefaces the song with a Standard English 
introductory prefix whose words many fans of the music hardly 
know. 
Discussion
It appears most respondents do not recognize the 
importance of music in church service and so though they blacklist 
pidgin in general, they endorse it in church music. Some do not 
have any problem with pidgin in their church service as long as it is 
made to appeal to a Nigerian audience (and not to Ghanaians) or it 
is employed at a children’s service. These attitudes reflect the 
observation by Huber (1999) that in most situations, pidgin is used 
in Ghana for humour and entertainment. But this is a subtle way of 
courting pidgin in the church and the effect is that, coupled with 
the presence of pidgin in Ghana through Nigerian movies and 
other entertainment contacts between Nigerians and Ghanaians, 
Ghanaians will continue to pick phrases and expressions of 
Nigerian Pidgin. This situation, perhaps, explains Huber’s 
observation of Ghanaian children using pidgin expressions at play
Frimpong  | 194
Special Edition , 2012  | 193
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

(Huber 1999). The point is that the density of pidgin in Ghana 
seems to be growing gradually. Thus some stock pidgin 
expressions are present in the Ghanaian linguistic ecology to 
which many Ghanaian learners of English, including children, 
resort when short of standard expressions. The following pidgin 
expressions, for instance, are common in Ghana and may be heard 
in the speech of some people even when they are using Standard 
English.
How be? – how is it?
(I)be like – it is like- 
To chuk someone – to stab someone 
You dey? – are you there?
I dey – I am around
I dey like I no dey – I am around
The initial assumption of this paper was that Nigerian 
Pidgin music, or the type of pidgin music that has a predominance 
of features of NigPE is the most common pidgin music in 
Ghanaian churches. Again it was hoped that AICs would not have 
any problems with pidgin in their church service since they claim 
to promote Ghanaian/African cultural values. The truth is that 
mission churches have had a history of conservatism towards 
Ghanaian innovations, especially with regard to the use of 
drumming and clapping of hands. Therefore it was assumed 
initially that they, of all the churches, would reject pidgin outright.
In the first place, the assumption that pidgin gospel music 
of Nigerian origin, or those songs which have Nigerian features, 
would be more popular in Ghanaian churches seems to have been               
confirmed by respondents in the sense that the first five most 
popular songs are either of Nigerian origin or have a Nigerian 
influence reflected in the presence of Nigerian features – either 
structural or lexical. Secondly, the assumption that pidgin would 
be more readily accepted by AICs is not confirmed by the 
responses to the questionnaires. Respondents who belong to
 mission churches tend to easily accept that there is a pidgin factor 
in their church service. Surprisingly, respondents from AICs like 
Winners Chapel Ghana, the Church of Pentecost and the 
International Central Gospel Church are among those who had 
difficulty accepting pidgin in their churches. Indeed, they are 
mostly the respondents who deny the presence of pidgin in their 
churches and yet are able to make a list of pidgin songs performed 
in their church activities.
Conclusion  
Though the emphasis of this paper is purely linguistic and 
therefore issues such as a definition of music may appear 
irrelevant, Doggett’s (2009: 401) definition of music as ‘a vehicle, 
used by all groups of people to bear human prayer and praise to 
God, and to bear God’s word to his people’ is useful even in this 
discussion and may serve as an anchor for the conclusion. At least, 
it helps to establish the place of music in Christian worship. The 
explicit position of most of the people I surveyed is that whereas it 
is very normal for Pidgin English to be used in music at church, it 
is an anathema for it to be used in any other way in the church. 
Pidgin English is in many ways a youth phenomenon, and 
in Ghana it does not receive the open  endorsement it has in 
Nigeria partly because the neutralising role it plays in Nigeria is 
being fulfilled by Standard English. Besides, in Ghana – 
especially in cities in the south – Twi seems to perform the 
informal function pidgin performs in Nigeria. Twi is said to be 
spoken by almost 80 percent of the  Ghanaian population, making 
it a second lingua franca (cf. Dako 2002). But the point here is that 
Pidgin English, especially the Nigerian brand, has found its way 
into the Ghanaian church through music and the church seems to 
be flirting with it at the moment. This trend, though clandestinely 
making bold  incursions into a highly formal space at present, is 
perhaps a test to see if the church has a place for the youth and the 
uneducated.
Frimpong  | 196
Special Edition , 2012  | 195
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

Notes
1 Beginning from the 1960’s a new wave of Christian evangelism with the zeal 
of planting churches blew across Ghana. This was the inception of the Pentecost 
movement in Ghana spearheaded by Ghanaians and which has continued into 
the current dispensation of the Charismatic movement. Apart from their belief 
in and practice of glossolaria (speaking and praying in tongues), these churches 
have the mission of worshiping God the African way through dancing and 
clapping of hands. 
2 Outdooring is the traditional naming of a child in Ghana, especially popular 
among the Gas.
3 ‘Collection’ in Ghana is the money contributed by church members during 
offertory
4  Kru Brofo and Abongo Brofo are both alternative terms used to describe 
Pidgin English in Ghana. Kru is a Sierra Leonean tribe and Brofo is a Twi 
translation for English. Kru Brofo thus refers to Pidgin English which in Ghana 
is believed to have originated in Sierra Leon. Abongo Brofo, on the other hand, 
is used in Ghana to refer to Nigerian Pidgin. Abongo is a Twi word for a soldier 
connoting that this type of pidgin is typically found in the barracks among 
soldiers and policemen. 
5 These are Yoruba and Igbo lexical items which are most frequent in Nigerian 
movies that are found on the Ghanaian  market. Their meanings are as follows:
Igwe – an Igbo word which means king/traditional ruler
Chineke – an Igbo word which means God the creator
Tofiakwa – a Yoruba exclamation which means forbidden
Nyafu-nyafu  – a Yoruba expression which means more than enough
6   SPCL Conference 2011 is an international conference of the Society of Pidgin 
and Creole Languages held in 2011 in Ghana at University of Ghana
7   Abi is a Yoruba tag meaning ‘is it?’ or ‘ok?’
8      Oga is a pidgin word of Nigerian origin which means ‘my boss’
9 The reduplicative ‘ye ye’ is a Yoruba expression which means useless, 
nonsense or naughty
Frimpong  | 198
Special Edition , 2012  | 197
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

REFERENCES
Agodor, Alexander Akorlie. 2011. The Department of Church 
Music in Ghana. Accra: Sundel Services. 
Akande, T. Akinmade. 2010. ‘Is Nigerian Pidgin English 
English?’ Dialectologia et Geolinguistica  18: 3-22.
Aluko, Olajide. 1985. ‘The Expulsion of Illegal Aliens from 
Nigeria: A Case Study in Nigeria’s Decision-making’.
African Affairs 84 (337): 539-560. 
Anyidoho, Akosua and M.E. Kropp-Dakubu. 2008. “Ghana: 
Indigenous languages, English, and an emerging national 
identity”. In: Simpson, Andrew (ed.). Language and 
national identity in Africa, 141-157. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Brydon, Lynne. 1985. ‘Ghanaian Responses to the Nigerian 
Expulsion of 1983’. African  Affairs  84 (337): 561-585. 
Dako, Kari. 2002. Student Pidgin (SP): The language of 
the educated male elite. Research Review NS 
18.(2): 53 – 62. 
Doggett, Anne. 2009. ‘’The Old Vexed Question’: Divergent
attitude and practices in the sacred music of  early
Ballarat.’’ Journal of Religious History 33 (4) 401 – 417.
Elugbe, B. O. and Omamor A. P. 1991. Nigerian Pidgin: 
Background and Prospects. Ibadan: Heinemann 
Educational Books.
Faraclas, Nicholas G. 2004. ‘Nigerian Pidgin English: 
Morphology and syntax’. In Kortmann, Bernd  (ed.). A 
Handbook of Varieties of English Vol. 2, 828 – 853. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Ferguson, Charles A. and Charles B Debose. 1977. ‘Simplified 
Registers, Broken Language, and Pidginization’. In 
Valdman, Albert (ed). Pidgin and Creole Linguistics, 99 - 
125. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Fishman, A. Joshua.1967. Bilingualism With and Without 
Diglossia; Diglossia With and Without Bilingualism. 
Journal of Social Issues, 23 (2): 29 – 38.
Graham, C. K. 1971. The History of Education in Ghana from the 
Earliest Times to the Declaration of Independence. 
London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd.
Holm, John. 1989. Pidgins and Creoles. Vol. 2: Reference Survey. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Huber, Magnus. 1995. ‘‘Ghanaian Pidgin English: An 
Overview’’. English Worldwide 16:215-49.
Huber, Magnus. 1999. Ghanaian Pidgin English in its West 
African context. Amsterdam: John Benjamin.
McWilliam, H. O. A. and M. A. Kwamena-Poh. 1975. The 
Development of Education in Ghana: An Outline. 
London: Longman Group Limited.
Frimpong  | 200
Special Edition , 2012  | 199
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

Miethaner, Ulrich. 2005. I can look through muddy water: 
Analysing Earlier African American English in Blues 
Lyrics (BLUR). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Ofulue, I. Christine. Nigerian Pidgin and West African Pidgins: 
A sociolinguistic perspective. Paper  presented at the 
SPCL Conference, University of Ghana, 2-6 August, 
2011.
Skinner, P. Elliot. 1963. ‘’Strangers in West African Societies’’. 
Journal of the International African   Institute. 33 (4): 
307-320. 
Trudgill, Peter. 1983. ‘’Acts of conflicting identity:    
The sociolinguistics of British pop-song   pronunciation’’. 
In Trudgill, Peter (ed.). On dialect: Social and 
Geographical Perspectives, 141-160. Oxford: Blackwell.
Special Edition , 2012  | 201
Legon Journal of the HUMANITIES

