23 
 
 
 
 
Effects Of Nigerian Pidgin On The Acquisition, Learning 
And Mastery Of Igbo/Other Nigerian And English 
Languages In Nigeria 
 
 
Eze, Juliana Chizobam 
 
Department Of Igbo Language 
Federal College Of Education, Okene, Kogi State, Nigeria 
 
ABSTRACT 
This research investigated the effects of Nigerian Pidgin English (NP) on the acquisition, learning and 
mastery of Igbo (other Nigerian) and English languages in Nigeria. Specifically, this research sought to 
find out how Nigerians regard the Nigerian Pidgin and if they are favourably disposed to employing it in 
their daily conversational exchanges as any other indigenous tongues. It employed a survey research 
design. The population for the study was drawn from native speakers of the Igbo language as well as 
other ethnic nationalities residing within the South-East and North-Central Geo-political zones of Nigeria. 
The instruments employed for data collection were questionnaires, interviews, observation which 
involved participant and non-participant. It was observed that a lot of Nigerians within the areas of our 
linguistic investigation are favourably disposed towards the Nigerian Pidgin English. It was equally 
observed that the prescriptions of the NPE were not altogether being implemented. Fundamentally, all 
these favours which the Nigerian Pidgin enjoys in both formal (school system) and informal settings have 
been impacting negatively on the continued acquisition, learning and mastery of Igbo, other Nigerian 
languages as well as the English language. 
Keywords: Nigerian Pidgin, Igbo, Nigerian languages, English Language 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 In Nigeria, many indigenous languages abound, including Igbo which is predominantly spoken in the 
South-East geo-political zone of Nigeria. Its study, which first started in the first far away West Indies 
and later in Pennsylvania in the United States of America by Rev. G. C. A. Oldendorp, a German Pastor 
of the Moravian Brethren in 1766/67was later carried into Igbo land by the Christian missionaries who 
came to spread the gospel of Jesus Christ (Nwadike 2002, 2008). From such a humble beginning, the 
study of the language grew and developed, and today, it is among the national languages in Nigeria being 
studied at all the levels of our educational system; the two others being Hausa and Yoruba. Igbo as it is  
In Nigeria, other indigenous languages abound which according to the National Policy on Education 
(NPE) (2004) should be either studied, or at least be employed as a medium of instruction in our 
educational system.   
The English language being owned and spoken by the indigenes of the United Kingdom, and later in the 
United State of America, New Zealand, Canada, India, etc. came into Nigeria due to the activities of the 
Christian Missionaries, colonization and foreign trade (Jowitt, 2015) between Nigeria and the British 
people. However, being that Nigeria is a plural society with diverse ethnic nationalities, there was need 
for a common language that would enhance easy communication among the different ethnic groups.  
Hence, the English language comes handy, and was one of the official legacies that the British 
government bequeathed to the Nigerian nation even as it became nation’s lingua franca as well as the 
official language, the language of government, law, education, international trade. In fact, it also became 
the language of communication between people from diverse ethnicities etc. The intention of the 
International Journal of Innovative Language, Literature & Art Studies 11(2):23-38, April-June, 2023   
 © SEAHI PUBLICATIONS, 2023    www.seahipaj.org                 ISSN: 2467-8511 

24 
 
promoters of English in Nigeria is to ensure that the Standard English does not deteriorate, and, that the 
English being spoken in Nigeria always meets international intelligibility. To this end, emphasis is being 
laid on the fact that Standard English should be highly preserved within the four walls of every school, so 
that the speech patterns of an educated elite in English, in spite of whichever course the fellow studied, 
would truly depict the fact that such a fellow is really educated.  
The Emergence of the Nigeria Pidgin English   
According to Tamunobelema (2015) a pidgin is a contact language with no native speakers; that is, it is 
no one’s first language. Tamunobelema expatiates on this fact by asserting that a pidgin emerges out of a 
multilingual situation where those who wish to communicate must find or improvise a simple language 
system to do so. In line with this argument, Chima (1998) explains that “Nigerian Pidgin” which is a form 
of pidgin being spoken in Nigeria evolved as a medium of communication between the early European 
traders (the Portuguese, English, French and others) on the onehand, and the Africans on the other hand. 
At the emergence of ̀the Pidgin English in Nigeria, it was mainly employed as a language of “buying and 
selling” between the English people and the Nigerian natives. However, as years passed by, the pidgin 
language began to have tremendous advancement, to the extent that contemporarily, it has significantly 
developed, and its usage has spread to other areas of human endeavours, other than in buying and selling.    
Since any language develops along the cultural lines of its speakers, the Pidgin English, which obviously 
developed on the Nigerian soil has naturalized itself in such a way that it has developed significant 
syntactic, lexical and collocation patterns in line with the diverse Nigerian indigenous languages with 
which it is co-existing together. Authentically, the pidgin form of the English language being spoken in 
the country has so much taken the form and nature of Nigerianness on it to reflect their natural 
backgrounds which are Nigerian cultures and Nigerian languages. To this end, the Pidgin English has 
been referred to as the Nigerian Pidgin (Elugbe and Omamor, 1991, Chima 1998, Elugbe, 2015). 
Chima (1998) observes that when we talk of Nigerian Pidgin, we refer to a technical term for an 
identifiable version of pidgin associated with a given community of pidgin users, and whose lexis and 
syntax have their support in the Nigerian socio-cultural milieu; its acquisition, development and pattern of 
usage is Nigerian in outlook. Precisely, it is a systematic approach which bears the stamp of Nigerian 
culture. In fact, apart from having so much developed in Nigeria to the level of having acquired native 
speakership in places like Warri and Sapele (Elugbe and Omamor 1991, Chima 1998, Elugbe 2015), there 
has been increase in the number of functions that the Nigerian Pidgin is presently performing. 
Consequently, it is now competing with not only the Nigerian languages, but also the Standard English, or 
a version of English popularly known in Nigeria as the Nigerian English, which of course, is 
internationally intelligible. In fact, this competitive strength of the Nigerian Pidgin affords it the 
capability of posing a threat to both the Nigerian languages, including Igbo, and equally to the English 
language. In essence, its preference sometimes by Igbo native speakers as well as other Nigerian natives 
in place of their respective languages endangers the indigenous languages, while it has a deteriorating 
effect on the English language. 
Fundamentally, the employment of Nigerian languages from the pre-primary up to the end of the lower 
primary school system as specified in the NPE easily enhances pupils’ proper comprehension of concepts 
as the language barrier is eliminated. It also ensures a steady progression in the mastery of the use of these 
languages by the pupils, while the teaching of English alone in the English language at that stage in our 
school system enhances their early comprehension of the rudiments of the language. This would 
absolutely, aid the pupils in starting early enough in their academic careers to master the use of English, 
which would in turn enable them to communicate correctly in the language devoid of mistakes in their 
constructions as they progress in life and in their academic endeavours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

25 
 
Factors Responsible for the Growth and Development of the Nigerian Pidgin in Nigeria 
Several factors promote the growth and development of Nigerian Pidgin in Nigeria. Firstly, the pidgin 
language does not possess rigorous syntactic and morphological intricacies when compared to other 
languages including Igbo or English. For instance, there are no rigorous rules of grammar and word 
formation processes to be observed as in English or Nigerian languages by a speaker before one could 
employ it in communication. As a result, one can easily learn and master such constructions as the ones 
below:   
Nigeria Pidgin                                 
 English 
(a) Na you do am                           
 It is you that did it 
(b) He de do am every day      
 
He is doing it every day 
(c) Na she sabi                              
 It is she that knows                         
(d) I de go                                                  I am going 
(e) Na who de eat that tin?                       Who is eating that thing? 
(f) Na sweet sweet tin im be         
It is very sweet indeed 
(g) domoti                                          
Door mouth/door post              
(h) Wettin I de yarn?                          
What are you saying?  
 
As can be observed from the examples above, the Nigerian Pidgin does not demand rigorous knowledge 
of morphological and syntactic intricacies to be observed by a speaker before one could employ it in 
communication.  
 Secondly, the Nigerian pidgin has the capacity to borrow easily from other Nigerian Languages more 
than either the English language or other Nigerian languages can borrow from one another. Hence its 
enrichment comes very easily. Consider these instances below: 
 
Nigerian Pidgin                                        
English 
(a)  Na you biko!                                        
Up you! 
(b) Kudi go de                                            
There must/should be money 
(c) Na eba I chop                                       
It is eba that I ate 
(d) Ogbonge television                                
Very big television 
(e) Na powerful iyawo she be                    
She is a very strong wife 
(f) Se owo de?                                     
 
I hope there is money? 
(g) Yori yori gẹgẹ 
 
 
 
Fine/beautiful girl 
(h) Yori yori bọbọ                                
            Fine/handsome boy/guy 
(i) Kasala don’t burst                           
            there is trouble   
(j)  Wahala                                          
 
Problem 
(k) Ọmọ run oo!                                 
 
(You) run away! 
(l) Na jagwụda woman she be              
           She is a dirty woman 
 
A glance at these factors and the examples given underneath each factor is enough evidence to show how 
the Nigerian Pidgin manipulates its way among the various Nigerian indigenous languages for its growth 
and development. This in accordance with Todd (1984) as cited in Atechi and Fonka (2007:40) who 
stresses that Pidgin English commands a number of words drawn almost entirely from the language of the 
dominant group. In accordance with this view, it can be asserted that the Nigerian Pidgin took its roots 
from the English language and has profoundly enriched itself by borrowing a whole lot of words from 
Nigerian indigenous tongues. It should be noticed however, that these factors discussed above are all 
linguistic in nature. Other factors dictating the choice of languages and by implication, the growth and 
development of the Nigerian Pidgin according to Nlem and Anurudu (2013) are extra linguistic factors 
such as socio-psychological, economical and political factors. 
Statement of the Problem  
Igbo is one of the three major indigenous languages in Nigeria, whose teaching and learning in the school 
system is fully approved by the NPE, and the Nigerian Constitution. However, like many other 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

26 
 
indigenous languages it is facing threats by the common use of Pidgin English even among the 
indigenous tribes in Nigeria. Similarly, in spite of all the importance attached to the teaching and speaking 
of these languages to the younger generation, a huge number of the educated elites in our contemporary 
society attach more significance to the study of the sciences and technology than that of the local 
languages.  
While not down-playing the study of scientific and technological subjects or courses in our schools for 
therein lays in the propensity to uncover mysteries that could enhance human existence in the form of 
scientific and technological discoveries and innovations, we should not also take with levity the study of 
our indigenous language for therein lays our pride and cultural heritages.  Therefore, there is need to 
study our indigenous codes and develop them to such enviable heights like that of Hindi of India, Swahili 
of Tanzania etc. for our scientific and technological development among other things. 
Aims/Objectives of the Study  
The general purpose of this study is to determine the effects of Nigerian Pidgin on the acquisition, 
learning and mastery of Igbo (other Nigerian) and English languages in Nigeria. Specifically, this study 
aims to: 
1. investigate the factors which are responsible for the growth and development of the Nigerian 
Pidgin in Nigeria 
2. determine whether the NP is favourably accepted by Nigerians as any other Nigerian language    
3. find out if the prescriptions in the National Policy on Education (NPE) as regards the language of 
instruction in the junior primary is being implemented   
4. determine the challenges being posed by the Nigerian Pidgin English on the acquisition, learning 
and mastery of Nigerian languages and English language in Nigeria  
 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY/PROCEDURE 
The research design that was used in this study is Descriptive Survey. According to Akudolu and Olibie 
(2009:108) are of the view that the thrust of a descriptive survey research is to determine opinions, events, 
beliefs and incidences. Ogunleye (2000) as cited in Suleiman and Adaji (2016) opine that descriptive 
survey possesses the intense accuracy of the phenomenon of the moment and describes precisely what the 
researcher observes so as to analyze the meaning of the information.  
The population for this study consists of all the native speakers of the Igbo language residing in all the 5 
states that make up the South-East geopolitical zone of Nigeria. And all the non-Igbo speakers in the 8 
states which make up the North-Central Geo-political zones of Nigeria, including the Federal Capital 
Territory (FCT). Therefore, in all, 13 states of the federation were earmarked from which data was 
collected through random sampling. The 13 states from where data was collected include Abia, Anambra, 
Ebonyi, Enugu, Imo, Kogi, Kwara, Benue, Niger, Nasarawa, Kaduna, Niger and the Federal Capital 
Territory (FCT) Abuja.   
A total of 552 respondents consisting of 240 pupils, 160 students and 152 teachers from Abia, Enugu, 
Kogi states and the FCT were used for the study out of a targeted population of 600.  The target area for 
data collection which was made up of the 13 states of the South-East and North-Central Geopolitical 
zones of Nigeria, including the FCT, was split into two groups; meaning that the thirteen states, including 
the FCT were divided into 2 different groups while 2 states were selected from each group. This implies 
that data which were collected from 4 out of the 13 states including the FCT which were used for this 
study. Thus, in the South-East, the two states involved were Abia and Enugu states, while in the North-
Central, Kogi and FCT were involved.  
Whereas 4 local governments areas each were selected for data collection in both Enugu and Kogi states, 
3 local governments areas were selected from Abia state. Then, the FCT involved 3 area councils. Data 
were elicited from informants using questionnaires. However, in a bid to have a comprehensive 
knowledge of language use particularly, as it concerns the use of Nigerian languages, including Igbo, 
English and the Nigerian Pidgin among the citizenry in these states selected for research and the FCT, the 
researcher still made some rigorous efforts to employ observation, which included participant and non-
participant as well as interview methods of data collection to further collect data in the local governments 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

27 
 
areas involved and in the three area councils involved in the FCT, as well as in other local governments 
areas and area councils of the FCT where questionnaire instruments were not shared. The questionnaire 
instruments were shared in primary and secondary schools.    
For the questionnaire instruments, a total of 600 respondents were earmarked for the exercise from the 4 
states, including the FCT as have been notified. In Enugu and Kogi states respectively, a total number of 
170 questionnaires each were distributed while 162 were recovered in Enugu, and 160 were recovered in 
Kogi. Of these questionnaires collected in Enugu state, 70 were primary school pupils, 45 were secondary 
school students, while 47 were teachers. In Kogi state, the 160 questionnaires collected consist of 70 
primary school pupils, 45 secondary school students and 45 teachers. In Abia and the FCT, a total of 130 
questionnaires each were distributed respectively. Of these numbers of questionnaires, a total of 120 were 
recovered in Abia while a total number of 110 were recovered in the FCT. Of these 120 respondents from 
Abia, 50 were pupils, 40 were students and 30 were teachers. In the FCT, the 110 questionnaires collected 
consist of 50 pupils, 30 secondary school students and 30 teachers.  The data was basically analyzed and 
calculated in percentages.  
The respondents were indicate their opinions in the questionnaire by appropriately ticking in the box of 
their preferred choices on a 4-point likert scale: Strongly agree [ ], Agree [], Disagree [], or Strongly 
Disagree [ ] for each of the questions posed to them.   
 
RESULTS        
Group (A): Students Responses 
Table I: 
S/N 
Statements 
Abia 
Enugu 
Kogi 
FCT 
A 
D 
A 
D 
A 
D 
A 
D 
1 
Nigerian Pidgin is a 
Nigerian language and 
should be recognized 
and spoken with pride 
as any other Nigerian 
language 
[63] 
75.5% 
[57] 
68.4% 
[85] 
137.7% 
[77] 
124.74% 
 [89] 
142.4% 
[71]   
113.6% 
[57] 
62.7% 
 
 [53] 
58.3% 
2 
Our teachers use only 
our native language 
(mother tongue) in 
passing 
information/teachingu
s in the classroom 
[14] 
7% 
[36]  
18%      
[19] 
13.3%     
[51] 
35.7%       
 [13]  
9.1%  
[57] 
39.9% 
[07] 
3.5%     
[43] 
21.5% 
3 
Our teachers use the 
English 
language 
alongside our native 
language 
(mother 
tongue) in  passing 
information/teaching 
us in the classroom  
[40] 
20%      
[10] 
5%        
[56]  
39.2%     
[14] 
9.8% 
[52]   
36.4%     
[18] 
16.6% 
[44]  
22%      
[06] 
3% 
4 
Our teacehrs employ 
both 
the 
Nigerian 
Pidgin 
and 
our 
(mother tongue), but 
not English in passing 
information/ teaching 
us in theclassroom 
[08]    
4%       
[41]  
21%      
 [12] 
8.4%       
[58] 
40.6%       
[13]   
9.1%       
[57] 
39.9%    
[15] 
7.5%     
[35]  
17.5% 
 
 
 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

28 
 
The responses to question 1 reveal that in Abia state, the percentage of those who are favourably inclined 
to the recognition and acceptance of the use of the Nigerian Pidgin was 75.5% as against 68.4% who 
declined its recognition and acceptance. In Enugu state, the percentage was 137.7% for those who were 
favourably inclined for its recognition and acceptance as against 124.74% who declined. In Kogi state, the 
percentage of those in favour of the pidgin language is 142.4%, while 113.6% were not favourably 
disposed to it. In the FCT, the percentage of respondents who were favourably disposed towards the 
recognition and use of the Nigerian Pidgin was 62.7%, while the percentage of those who were not 
favourably disposed to it is 58.3%. From this observation, it implies that the Nigerian Pidgin is 
remarkably gaining ground in the South Eastern Nigeria as well as in Kogi state and the FCT.  
Evidence from the responses to question 2 reveals that in Abia state 7% of the pupils indicated that the 
teachers were employing the use of their MT as a medium of instruction during the impartaion of 
knowledge to the pupilsin a teaching/learning situation as against 18% of the pupils who indicated that 
the teachers were not employing the MT in the impartation of knowledge during the teaching/learning 
process. In Enugu state, according to the pupils, the percentage of the teachers employing the use of MT 
in knowledge impartation in the classroom was 13%, whereas the percentage of those not employing the 
MT when teaching and learning was on-goingwas 35.7%. In Kogi state, it was 9.1%  in affirmativewhile 
39.9% who responded otherwise. In the FCT, the percentage of teachers applying the MT as a medium of 
instruction according to the pupils was 3.5%  while 21.5% indicated otherwise.   
The responses to question 3 shows that 20% of the respodents (pupils) in Abia state observed  that their 
teachers use the combination of English and their MT as  media of communication while teaching them in 
class; whereas 5% did not subscibe to such observation. In Enugu state, 39.2% of the pupils affirmed that 
their teachers apply English and their MT in communicating with them while teaching in class while 
9.8% declined. In Kogi state, 36.4% of the pupils pointed to the fact that their teachers employ the use of 
English and MT while delivering their lessons in class while16.6% was of a contrary opinion. In the FCT, 
it was 22% of the pupils that affirmed that reachers employ the use of English and MT, while 3% declined   
The responses in to question 4 reveals that in Abia state, 4% of the pupils observed that their teachers 
make use of the NP and MT not English in disseminatinginformation to them in class while teaching is 
on-going while 21% of the pupils did not subscribe to this view. In Enugu, 8.4% of the pupils were of the 
opinion that their teachers employ both the NP and the MT and not English in passing information across 
to them during the teaching/learning process while 40.6% did not sunscribe to such observation. In Kogi 
state, it is conspicuous that 9.1% of the pupils were in agreement with the statement, whereas 39.9%  have 
a contrary opinion. In the FCT, it is perceptible that while 7.5% of the pupils were in affirmative, 17.5% 
of the pupils were not in accord with the assertion.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

29 
 
Table 2: Language use in the impartation of knowledge in a classroom situation (by Teachers in 
Primary School) 
S/N 
Statements 
Abia 
Enugu 
Kogi 
FCT 
A 
D 
A 
D 
A 
D 
A 
D 
1 
I feel at ease in 
imparting 
knowledge/teaching 
in the classroom in 
my native  
language (mother 
tongue) 
 
 [12] 
3.6%    
 
 [18]  
5.4% 
 
  [25]  
11.75
% 
 
[22]  
10.34%  
 
[19]8.5
5% 
 
[26]     
11.7 %  
 
[08]  
2.4% 
 
[22]  
6.6% 
 
2 
I feel at ease in 
imparting 
knowledge/teaching 
in the classrom in my 
native  
language (mother 
tongue) and in the 
English language 
[23] 
6.9% 
[07]  
2.1% 
[37]  
17.39
% 
[10]  
4.7 % 
 
[34]     
15.3% 
[11]    
4.95%    
[16]   
4.8% 
[14]  
4.2%   
3 
I feel at ease in 
imparting 
knowledge/teaching 
in the classroom in 
my native  
language 
(mother 
tongue) and in the 
Nigerian Pidgin 
[09]     
2.7%  
 
[21]     
4.41
%  
 
 [17]    
7.99% 
 
 [30]   
14.1% 
 
[13]     
5.85%  
 
[32]      
14.4% 
 
[08]      
2.4%  
 
 [22]     
6.6%   
4 
I prefer to impart 
knowledge/teach in 
the classroom in my 
native language 
(mother tongue) and 
in the Nigerian 
Pidgin than in the 
English language 
 [10] 
3% 
 [20] 
6% 
[15] 
7.05% 
 [32] 
15.04% 
[12] 
5.4%  
[33] 
14.85
% 
[07] 
2.1% 
[23] 
6.9% 
5 
I prefer to impart 
knowledge/teach in 
the classroom in my 
native language 
(mother tongue) and 
in the English 
language than in the 
Nigerian Pidgin 
[22] 
6.6%  
[08] 
2.4%   
[32]  
15.04
% 
[15] 
7.05% 
 [31]  
13.95
% 
 [14]  
6.3% 
[22] 
6.6% 
[08] 
2.4% 
 
Questions in 1 – 5 in table 2 presents the teachers’ responses with respect to language use in the 
impartation of knowledge in a classroom situation. While 30 teachers were used as respondents in Abia 
state, 47 were used in Enugu state.  In Kogi state and the FCT, 45 and 30 were used respectively. 
From the table, in Abia state, the percentage of the teachers  who specified that they feel at ease in 
imparting knowledge to the pupils in their MT was 3.6% while 5.4% indicated otherwise. In Enugu state, 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

30 
 
the percentage of the teachers who specified that they so much feel at ease in the application of their MT 
in knowledge impartation in class was 11.75% as against 10.34% who were of a  contrary opinion. In 
Kogi, the percentage was 8.55% in affirmative as against 11.7% who possessed a disgreeing opinion 
regarding the assertion. In the FCT, the percentage was 2.4% in affirmative as regards the viewpoint in 
question, as against 6.6% who were not positively disposed with the statement. 
In Abia, Kogi and the FCT, the percentages of the teachers who were of the opinion that they feel at ease 
in imparting knowledge to the pupils in junior primary in their MTs were less than those of their 
counterparts whosespecification implied  thatthey do not feel much at ease in the use of their MTs in 
passing instruction to the pupils in a classroom situation. However, in Enugu state, a greater percentage of 
the teachers implied that they feel at ease in disseminating information to the pupils in a classroom 
situation while the teaching/learning was on-going. 
Pertaining to the whether the teachers feel at ease in imparting knowledge/teaching in the classrom in 
their MT and in English in junior primary the table shows that across board, the percentages of teachers 
who were of the opinion that they feel at ease in the application of their MTs and English are higher than 
those who are opposed to the statement. For instance, in Abia state, it was 6.9% in favour of the 
statement, and 2.1% against the statement. In Enugu state, it was 17.39% in favour of the assertion and 
4.7% against the asserion. In Kogi state, it was 15.3% in favour of this viewpoint and4.95% against the 
point of view. In the FCT, it was 4.8% in favour of the opinion and 4.2% against it. 
Statement 3 sought to establish if the teachers who were used as sample population feel at ease in 
imparting knowledge in the classroom to the pupils in their MTs and in the Nigerian Pidgin.With regards 
to statement, in Abia state, the percentage of the teachers who feel so much at ease in teaching in their 
MT and NP was 2.7% as against 4.41% whose feeling implied a negative viewpoint to the issue at stake. 
In Enugu, it was 7.99% of the teachers who were in favour of the proposition while 14.1% were against 
the proposition. In Kogi state, it was 5.85% of the teachers who were in favour of the assertion while 
14.4% did not consent to the assertion. In the FCT, while 2.4% of the teachers were in favour of the 
statement 6.6% had a contrary view  
Evidence of some preference on the part of the teachers indicating that they are favourably disposed to 
teaching their pupils in their MTs and in the NP can be seen from the   fact that in Abia state for instance, 
it was 3% of the teachers who were in favour of the statement while 6% was opposed to it. In Enugu state, 
it was 7.05% of the teachers who were in favour of this preference whereas 15.04% was in diagreement. 
In Kogi state, it was 5.4% of the teachers who were in affirmative while 14.85% was against the assertion. 
In the FCT, it was 2.1% of the teachers who were in agreement with the proposition while 6.9% 
possessed a different view about the proposition  
The table also shows at a glance that quite a lot of teachers subscribe to the preference in the use of their 
MTs and English than the NP while they were engaged in a teaching/learning situation in class, imparting 
knowledge to the pupils therein. Evidently, in Abia state, it was 6.6% of the teachers who revealed their 
preference in the application of their MTs and English while 2.4% were not in favour of the assertion. In 
Enugu state, 15.04% of the teachersaffirmed that actually, they prefer to use their MTs and English than 
the NP in knowledge dissemination in class while7.05% did not subscribe to this viewpint. Meanwhile, in 
Kogi state, it was 13.95% of the teachers who were in agreement with the assertion whie 6.3% were in 
disagreement. In the FCT, it was 6.6% of the teachers who were positively disposed to the statement, 
while 2.4% were of a contrary opinion.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

31 
 
Table 3: Language use in classroom situation in the absence of a Teacher (Secondary School) 
 S/N 
Statements 
Abia 
Enugu 
Kogi 
FCT 
A 
D 
A 
D 
A 
D 
A 
D 
1 
Speaking in mother 
tongue (vernacular) is 
allowed 
in 
the 
classroom 
in 
the 
absence of a  
teacher 
[33] 
13.2
%    
[07] 
2.8%    
[36] 
16.2%   
[09]  
4.05% 
[38]  
17.1%    
[07] 
3.15%    
[24] 
7.2%    
[06] 
1.8% 
2 
Speaking 
in 
the 
Nigerian Pidgin is 
allowed 
in 
the 
classroom 
in 
the 
absence of a teacher 
[35]   
14%     
[05]  
2%      
[38]  
17.1%    
[07] 
3.15% 
[40]    
18%       
[05]  
2.25%    
[26] 
7.8%   
[04]    
1.2%    
3 
Speaking 
in 
the  
mother 
tongue 
(vernacular) is not 
allowed 
in 
the 
classroom 
in 
the 
absence of a teacher 
[09]     
3.6%    
[31]     
12.4
%         
[11]      
4.95%    
[34]     
15.3%   
[12]     
5.4%      
 [33]  
14.85
%           
[08]    
2.4%    
[22]   
6.6%    
4 
Speaking 
in 
the 
Nigerian Pidgin is not 
allowed 
in 
the 
classroom 
in 
the 
absence of a teacher 
[06]     
2.4%    
[34]     
13.6
%         
[08]      
3.6%      
[37]     
16.65%   
[05]     
2.25%    
 [40]  
18%       
[07]    
2.1%    
[23]   
6.9%    
  
  In this section, the items in the questionnaire were targeted at secondary school students and these 
question items pertain to language use in classroom situation in the absence of a teacher as perceived by 
the students. In Abia and Enugu states respectively, 40 and 45 students were used as respondents, while in 
Kogi and the FCT, 45 and 30 students were used. 
The responses reveal that in Abia, 13.2% of the students are of the submission that  communicating in 
MT is allowed in class in the absence of a teacher, as against to 2.8% who are of a contrary opinion. In 
Enugu, 16.2% of the students are of the stance that communicating in MT is allowed in class in the 
absence of a teacher, while 4.05% are not of such view. In Kogi, while 17.1% of the students were in the 
affirmative, 3.15% were of a contrary opinion. In the FCT, whereas 7.2% of the students were in the 
affirmative, 1.8% have a contary observation about speaking in MT in class in the absence of a teacher.  
The responses to item 2 shows that while 14% of the students in Abia state were of the observation that 
communicating in the NP is allowed in class in the absence of a teacher, 2% were of contrary point of 
view. In Enugu state, it is perceptible that 17.1% of the students indicate that speaking in the NP is 
allowed in class in the absence of a teacher, while 3.15% were in disagreement with this fact. In Kogi 
state, while 18% of the students were in agreement with the statement, 2.25% were in diagreement. In the 
FCT, it is displayed that while 7.8% of the students were in affirmative with the assertion, 1.2% possess a 
contrary opinion. 
 For item 3, posed to make it doubly sure that speaking MT by students is allowed in class in the absence 
of a teacher or if it is prohibited. It was observed that in Abia state,  3.6% of the students responded that 
speaking MT is not allowed in class in the absence of a teacher, while 12.4% observed that this is not the 
true state of affairs. In Enugu state, 4.95% of the students disclosed that MT is not allowed in class in the 
absence of a teacher, whereas 15.3% possesses a contrary viewpoint. In Kogi state, 5.4% of the students 
were in the affairmative, whereas 14.85% did not positively subscribe to the assertion. In the FCT, 2.4% 
of the students agreed to the statement, while 6.6% declined.    
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

32 
 
From the results of the respondents to item 4 was observed that in Abia state, 2.4% of the students agree 
to the fact that speaking in NP is not allowed in class in the absence of a teacher; whereas 13.6% of the 
students possess a contrary observation. In Enugu state, while 3.6% of the students were in 
affairmativewith regards to the statement,, 16.65% have a contrary opinion. In Kogi state, as 2.25% of the 
students were positively disposed to the assertion, 18% were not positively disposed to the assertion. In 
the FCT, while 2.1% of the students expressed that the statement is a fact, 6.9% are in disagreement with 
the statement.  
 
DISCUSSIONS OF FINDINGS  
The percentages of the responses from the sample population in question (1) group (A) table 1, is a 
pointer to the fact that most of them see the Nigerian Pidgin is a Nigerian language, and so, it should be 
recognized and spoken like any other Nigerian language. This further reveals that either consciously or 
unconsciously, the NP is gradually gaining a lot of recognition as any other Nigerian language. People are 
frequently using it interchangeably with their mother tongues. In fact, observation and oral interviews 
with the respondents reveal that some people deliberately use it when they are communicating with 
people from their linguistic backgrounds as well as when they are speaking with people from other 
diverse ethnic nationalities. The researcher also observed that among the educated and the uneducated 
alike, some people use it more often to crack jokes more than they do so in their native languages or in 
English. It was also discovered that some speak it leisurely with pride when communicating with senior 
or junior colleagues in place of work and in offices. This confirms earlier observations made by Nlem and 
Anurudu (2013) who observed that in all situations in the domain (of their research), NP is used by their 
respondents. To further throw more light on the vibrancy, favourability and acceptability of the NP, 
Osoba (2014) remarked that Nigerian Pidgin may be described as the most vibrant of the over 500 
languages spoken in Nigeria today. Osoba stressed that in terms of currency it may be described as the 
most widely spoken language followed by English, Hausa, Yoruba and Igbo respectively in Nigeria. This 
is corroborated by Njoku and Njoku (2014) who clarify that Pidgin (referring to NP) indeed has become a 
communicate live wire of every Nigerian. They further disclose that we (referring to Nigerians, 
themselves inclusive) use pidgin in almost all our daily communications; stressing that even foreigners in 
Nigeria speak it.  
All these revelations undoubtedly establish the fact that the NP is indeed, enjoying more popularity in 
Nigeria than any other Nigerian language, a situation that is seriously affecting the continued acquisition 
of our indigenous tongues, especially, by the younger generation. This is because, it was this recognition, 
acceptance and cheap popularity that the NP initially enjoyed in places like Warri, Sapele, Portharcourt 
and some other states in the South-South zone that made it to have acquired native speakership. 
Consequently, the younger generations in such places have lost their native tongues to the NP. There is no 
gainsaying that the resultant effects of such naive actions have always culminated in language extinction, 
and finally, language death. This was why Williamson (1990) as quoted in Aziza (No Date) enjoined 
‘small’ language speakers “Use your language or lose it”.  
Besides, mastering the NP by Nigerians at the expense of the English language, also negatively affects the 
acquisition and mastery of the language (English) among the citizenry, which could bring some shame 
and disrepute to some of them, particularly, when one is expected to address an audience in correct or 
standard English but finds he/she does not possess the capability to do so.  This has been confirmed by 
Ajegena (2019:100) when he commented that in addition to the corrupt nature of Nigerian politicians is 
the fact that some cannot communicate well on the floors of the State and National Assemblies because 
they lack good knowledge of the English language. Expatiatingthis point, he related how videos have 
been sent through whatsapp  displaying how honourable members make a carricature of themselves while 
delivering speeches or making presentations.  
Less percentages of the teachers employ MTs in interacting with the pupils in class. On the other hand, 
a great percentage of teachers use a mixture of MTs and English in the impartation of knowldge during 
a teaching/learning situation. A position that is contrary to the prescriptions in the NPE (2004) which 
stipulates that MT or the language of the immediate community (LIC) should be employed as a medium 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

33 
 
of instruction during the teaching/learning process in the lower primary schools in the country. 
In question (3) group (B) table II, lesser percentages of the pupils observed that their teachers employ the 
use of NP and MT and not English as channels through which instruction is delivered to them in class 
while the teaching/learning process was on-going. One vital thing worthy of note in these responses is 
that even though, the pupils that made this submission were lesser in percentage than those who did not 
make such observation across all the areas covered by the research.   
Question (1)group (C) table 3 which has to do with the use of a teacher’s native language (MT) during the 
teaching/learning process in the class since that is the language of the pupils as well, discloses that some 
percentages of the respondents(teachers) were of the opinion that theyso much feel at ease in imparting 
knowledge to the pupils in junior primary in their MTs. Not-with-standing, the percentages of these 
teachers across board were lesser than those of their counterparts whosespecification implied  thatthey do 
not so muchfeel at ease in the use of their MTs in passing instruction to the pupils in a classroom 
situation, especially, in Abia, Kogi and the FCT. In Enugu state, however, a greater percentage of the 
teachers implied that they feel so much at ease in disseminatinginformation to the pupils in a classroom 
situation in their MTs while teaching/learning is on-going.  
These results is a pointer to the fact that the prescriptions in the NPE are not being observed completely 
by some teachers in the field in all the areas covered by the research; since some percentages of the 
teachers indicated that they do not so much feel at ease in imparting knowledge to the pupils in junior 
primary in their MTs, hence, they may likely resort to the application of either the NP or English, or a 
combination of MT, NP and English. This becomes more glaring when more percentage of the teachers 
especially, in Abia, Kogi and the FCT are of the standpoint that they do notso much feel at ease in 
imparting knowledge to the pupils in junior primary in their MTs. However, in Enugu state, more 
percentage of teacher indicated that theyso much feel at easein imparting knowledge to the pupils in 
junior primary in their MTs.  
Incidentally, the result of question (2) group (C) table III showed that the  teachers  who signified that 
they feel at ease in imparting knowledge/teaching the pupils in the classrom intheir MTs and in English 
are higher when compared with the percentages of teachers in question (1) who indicated that theyso 
much feel at ease in using their MTs as a means of communication in a classroom situation.  This implies 
that in all the areas covered by this linguistic investigation, the desire to impart knowledge in a classroom 
situation in junior primary schools in their MTs and in the English language is somehow higher among 
the teachers than that of imparting knowledge in their MTs only. Needless to say that this is not in 
accordance with the prescriptions of the NPE as has been noted. 
With regards to Question (3) group (C) table 3 it is obvoius that even though the percentage of the 
teachers who did not agree to this statement are higher than those who subscribe to the assertion, the 
overall evidence from the data before us exhibits the fact that some teachers actually feel very much at 
ease in teaching in class in the junior primary in their MT and in the NP instead of teaching only in either 
their MTs or in English.  
In consideration of the questionnaire items, especially, from questions 1 & 2 group (B) table IIto question 
(4) group (C) table III which all put together concerns the actual language or the prefered languages of 
instruction by teachers as well as pupils’ observation of language use by their teachers, we have 
toacknowledge that it is worthwhile tonote that there are  indeed, incidences of code-switching or code-
mixing  between the NP and MT, and even between MT and English as well as between English and NP 
while the teaching/learning process ison-going in all the areas covered by this research. 
This phenomenon, which is not in consonance with the prescriptions of the NPE, would certainly have 
negative implications on the pupils’ ability to communicate or write correct or standard English language. 
It would as well impair their ability to consolidate in their proper knowledge and usage of their respective 
indigenous languages with their fellow ethnic groups and/or other pupils who can speak their language. 
Also important is the fact that not delivering the lessons in the language that a child knows best could 
hamper his ability to grasp the concepts that the teacher is introducing the child to, thereby negatively 
affecting the quality of education at the child’s disposal.  
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

34 
 
It was also discovered that this phenomenon of employing NP as a language of instruction in primary 
schools normally starts by the quest to introduce English as a medium of instruction right from the 
kindergarten by most private nursery and primary school entrepreneurs in the country under the influence 
of the parents of the children. This is undeniably, caused by the prevalent contemporary Anglo-centric 
inclination of a lot of Nigerian families. In our contemporary time, most families, including semi-literate 
ones want to expose their children to English language right from infancy. And this intention is with a 
view to giving such children some head-start in school as a result of the quest for “social belongingness” 
(Bukoye 2008). The funny and the most harmful aspect of it, is that such families do not know that there 
is a lot of gain in obeying rules and regulations; implying that the government that prescribed the use of 
MT or LIC at that lower level of children’s academic endeavours knows more than the parents concerning 
the issue of language and its application in a child’s upbringing whether in formal or informal situation. 
Observation has shown that in a bid to meet up with the obligation of employing English as required by 
most schools in delivering instructions to the young ones, some teachers usually end up speaking pidgin 
or even non-standard variety to the children in the name of the English language. And, this becomes more 
dangerous when the background of such teachers reveals that they have inadequate knowledge of English 
language, and are therefore half-baked teachers who rather than speak English correctly, murders the 
language.  
Further, the benefits of using the MT in our educational system cannot be over-stressed.  In this regard, 
we deem it necessary to align our thoughts with Ogbonna (1995) who insists that apart from the benefits 
of higher academic performance, when taught in the mother tongue, psychologists have proved that there 
is always that natural flow and continuity whenever the child’s home language and school language 
happens to be same. There is one hundred percent assurance that a child gets more easily adjusted to 
school in a familiar language environment than when he finds himself in a class where the medium of 
instruction is a language which is foreign to him. This, according to Alajuruonye (2001) removes the 
initial shock which many learners suffer when confronted with a foreign language at school, as well as 
reduce the rate of drop-outs from school. Alajuruonye explains that one of the reasons normally advanced 
by school drop-outs is the difficulty encountered in comprehending the curriculum contents taught in an 
unfamiliar and difficult language. From the foregoing, it is very evidential that the use of NP as a 
language of instruction in schools where the MTs of pupils are different from the NP being employed by 
teachers enormously affects academic development of the pupils concerned; in other words, it has 
negative effects on Nigerian education. 
Now, a critical look at data analysis in question(1) group (D) table 4 demonstrate that higher percentages 
of students actually observed that communicating in MT isallowed in class in the absence of a 
teacher;while other students’observations proved to be of a contrary standpoint. From our own estimation, 
one can assune that these contrary observations by these minute percentages of students across 
boardindeed suggest that communicating in MT is not allowed in the classroom in the presence of a 
teacher. The reason for believing that this is the case is because, those students who made such contrary 
observations may have actually formed the habit of not communicating with their fellow students in their 
MT in class in the prsence of a teacher due to its prohibition. Consequently, they carried that idea over to 
even when there is no teacher in class for fear of being pernalised. 
In some schools, one could even observe written conspicuously in the classroom walls thus, “speaking 
Igbo is prohibited”, or “speaking Yoruba is prohibited” depending in the area of the country one finds 
oneself.   
Going by the account fromstudents’ responsesin question (2) group (D) table 4, a higher percentage of 
students across board revealed that communicating in the NP is allowed in class in the absence of a 
teacher, hence, the tendency is that  many students would be communicating with each other in the pidgin 
language, at least whenever there is no teacher in class to initiate a teaching/learning process. Some 
students communicate more in NP and their MTs rather than in English, in higher institutions, a lot of 
students normally communicate with their colleagues more in the NP, rather than in their  MTs or in the 
standard English language.     
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

35 
 
To confirm the popularity of the NP in Nigeria, as well as the fact that it  is being spoken in our 
institutions of learning, Njoku and Njoku (2014:812) opine that Nigerian Pidgin has become our lingua 
franca, which has also gained root in all our institutions as the easiest medium of communication.   
Consequently, students are at liberty to communicate in the NP and equally code-switch between it and 
their MTs or between it and English in class in the absence of a teacher. Another point to be considered is 
that banning students from speaking their MTs without appropriate measure to check how they indulge in 
communicating in the NP in the presence or absence of a teacher would still affect their learning of 
English as well as their continued acquisition of their various MTs, such that in the long run, both their 
mastery of English or the acquistiton of their various MTs would be adversely affected, resulting to the 
lowering of the standards of education in the country, as this may equallyaffectthe students’ 
performancesin the school subjects.A very good instance is that students may fail a lot of subjects in their 
examinations for not being able to express themselves clearly or coherently in correct English language in 
examinations, thereby resulting into some of them dropping out of school unable to complete their 
academic careers.   
 
CONCLUSION  
Being that the concern of this paper was to find out the effects of the Nigerian Pidgin on the acquisition, 
learning and mastery of the Igbo, other Nigerian languages and English, we tried to determine how the 
NP affects these languages by conducting a research in schools using questionnaire instruments to elicit 
information from our respondents which included pupils, students and teachers. Other methods of data 
collection such as interview as well as observation were equally employed. The data collected proved that 
the NP is favourably accepted as any other Nigerian language. It was also discovered that some teachers 
employ the NP as a medium of instruction in the classroom, students speak the pidgin language 
indiscriminately in the schools visited, while there are some rules and regulations prohibiting the students 
from speaking Nigerian languages in class in the presence of a teacher in class.  
 The fact remains that the continued speaking of the NP in schools affects the students negatively affects 
their correct learning and mastery of the English language, while the fact that teachers do not fully 
implement the prescriptions of the NPE by not employing the indigenous languages as mediums of 
instruction in the teaching/learning process in junior primary schools hampers pupils’ understanding of 
concepts, which may lead to their drop-out of school due to inability to catch up in their bid to be 
educated. Hence, through this none-implementation of the NPE, the education of these young ones are 
adversely affected, as some of them normally become school drop-outs as have been noted. Also, 
continuous or indiscriminate use of NP also affects the continued acquisition of Nigerian indigenous 
tongues by the younger generation in schools.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
  Both federal and state governments should aid teachers in ensuring total compliance in the 
implementation of the National Policy on Education (NPE) concerning the teaching and learning 
of Nigerian indigenous languages, including Igbo in our school system. Besides, it is also 
absolutely necessary that the prescription of the NPE concerning the language of communication 
in the lower primary is effectively implemented. Both federal and state governments can 
actualize this by initiating and working with a monitoring committee that would be charged to 
monitor schools in the country for effective compliance.   
 Both federal and state governments should ensure that the English language is given a pride of 
place in our educational system and in other arms of government as prescribed in the NPE and 
Nigerian constitution  
 Speakers from Igbo extraction, and by extension, other Nigerian languages whether educated or 
illiterate should try to eschew from all forms of code-switching or code-mixing in either the 
Nigerian Pidgin or the English language and communicate only in Igbo (other Nigerian 
languages) when engaged in communication exchanges with their fellows from the same ethnic 
nationalities. This will enhance the sustainability of the Igbo (other indigenous languages) and 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

36 
 
further, enhance the development of these languages because, such actions will make the 
speakers to really inculcate the habit of speaking more of their various languages whenever they 
are in the company of one another.  
 Although the research data disclosed that the NP is favourably accepted by many Nigerians as a 
Nigerian language, caution should  nevertheless, be employed in its usage as a means of 
communication, which to the researcher should be relegated to only informal situations, such as 
in communicating with the illiterate members of the society, some designated programmes in 
radios, televisions, newspaper columns, and in some sporting commentaries or events where 
communicating in the NP is designed to be employed as a medium of communication in an effort 
to reach the less educated citizens in the society whose only means of communication apart from 
their MTs is the NP.  
 For the growth and development of our various native languages, as well as for effective and 
proper mastering of the English language, it is imperative that communicating in the NP should 
totally be banned from the school system in all its entirety, except for communicating with the 
less or uneducated fellows in school environments such as cooks, labourers, cleaners, hawkers 
and the likes. Proper guiding principles should be put in place to ensure that teachers, pupils and 
students are discouraged from indulging in its usage in school environments. 
  It is very vital that the use of NP as a medium of communication should be banished in the class.  
 
REFERENCES 
Abawua, J. M. (2018). Primary education as a tool for economic development. Journal of National 
Association of Women in Colleges of Education (WICE), 22 (2), 177 - 182.   
Adalikwu, M. T. and Tolorunleke, C. A. (2021). The role of content and language integrated learning in 
enhancing communicative competence among Early Childhood Care and Education students in 
tertiary institutions in Nigeria. Capital Journal of Education Studies (CAJES), 7 (3), 10 – 17.  
 Adegbite, W. (2009). The Psycholinguistics of English language in Nigeria. Ibadan: Kraft Books 
Limited.   
Adeyanju, D. (2004). Historicity and language function: A case of the English language in Nigeria, in 
Oyeleye, L. (Ed.) Language and Discourse in Society. Ibadan: Hope Publications. 62-70  
Agbegha, C. B. (2002). Developing an endangered language: The Izon example. The development of 
minority languages in Nigeria. Association of Nigerian Language Teachers (ANLAT). New 
Town, Ondo: Complete Computers and Educational Services.   
Ajegena, Dinatu J. O. (2019). The role of English language in educational and politics in Nigeria: 
challenges and prospects. Journal of National Association of Women in Colleges of Education 
(WICE), 23 (1), 99 – 105.  
Akudolu, L. I. & Olibie, E. I. (2009). Head teachers’ curriculum and instructional leadership in primary 
education for all in Anambra state. In Ivowi, U. M. O. (Ed.) Journal of Curriculum and 
Instruction (Pp 105 – 118) 7 (3).  
Alajuruonye, L. (2001).Mother-tongue education and the universal basic education (UBE) programme in 
Nigeria. In Arohunmolase O (Ed.) NigerianLanguages, the Past, the Present and Future.  Akure. 
3BS: Printing & Publishing Company. 
Anyanwu, E. O. (1975). Igbo curriculum for schools and colleges, in Ogbalụ, F. C. and Emenanjo, E. N. 
(Eds.) Igbo language and culture. Ibadan: Oxford University Press. 54-69 
Arasanyin, O. On Nigerian Pidgin Marking Counter-factuality in Modal Constructs.  
www.msu.edu/-dwyer/05-Arasanyin.doc. Web accessed: 13/02/2019 
Atechi, S. and Fonka, H. (2007).  Pidgin English as a Lingua Franca in Cameroun. In Atoye, R.o. 
                       (Ed.) Papers in English and LinguisticsVol. 7 & 8. Ile-Ife: Linguistic Association,   
                       Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife. 40 - 55  
Awonusi, V. (1990). Planning for a national (Nigerian) language, in Eruvetine, A. E. (Ed.)     
Aesthetics and Utilitarianism in Languages and Literature. Ojo: Lagos State  
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

37 
 
Azịza, R. (No Date). Teaching and Learning in Nigerian Languages: Developed versus Developing 
Languages. Teaching Nigerian Languages: Experiences from the Delta.  In Aziza, R. O. and 
Emenanjo, E. N. Eds. Warri: COEWA Publishers  112 – 121                           
Bukoye, A. (2008). Language and education: Motion without progress.InUjai, S. B. (Ed.) Language 
forum. A Journal of Languages and Literature. Internet Version 
Chima, A. N. E. (1998). Nigerian Pidgin as a Nigerian language, in Arohunmolase, O. (Ed.) Nigerian 
Languages for National Development and Unity. Ibadan: Lolyem Communications 
Dada, S. A. and Owolabi, D. (2013). Language use in Christian religious practices in Nigeria, in 
Adegbite, W. Ogunsiji, A. and Taiwo, O. (Eds.) Linguistics and the Globalisation of African 
Languages for Sustainable Development, a Festschrift in Honour of Professor Kọla Owolabi   
Egbokhare, F. (2003). The story of a language: The Nigerian Pidgin in spatiotemporal, social and 
linguistic context. In Lucko, P. L Peter and H. Wolf (Eds.) Studies in African Varieties of 
English. Frankfurt: Longman. 21 – 40 
Elugbe, B. O. and Omamor, A. (1991). Nigerian Pidgin: Background and prospects. Ibadan: Heinemann 
Educational Books Nigeria Plc. 
Elugbe, B. O. 1995. Nigerian Pidgin: Problems and prospects, in Banjo. A. and Andrew, T. (Eds.) New 
Englishes. Ibadan: Mosurp Publishers. 
Elugbe, B. (2015). Nigerian Pidgin: Some matters arising. In Kamalu, I. and Tamunobelema, I. (Eds.) 
Issues in the Study of Language. Ibadan: Kraft Books Limited. 
Federal Republic of Nigeria: National Policy on Education (2004).Minimum Standards for Early      Child 
Care Centre in Nigeria, National policy for integrated early childhood development in Nigeria: 
Roadmap for Nigerian education sector. Lagos: NERDC. 
Fortune-Nwakanma, N. (2018) The role of the language teacher in actualising the goals of language 
education in Nigeria. In Ijioma, N. P. (Ed.) A Journal of the National Institute for Nigerian 
Languages (NINLAN), (pp 119 - 127) 3 (3) Aba: Nigerian Languages’ Studies.   
Hari, N. B. (2015). The Role of Nigerian Pidgin English: A Case Study of Army Day Secondary School, 
Sokoto. A Project Submitted to the Department of Modern European Languages and Linguistics, 
Faculty of Arts and Islamic Studies, Usmanu Danfodiyo University, Sokoto, in partial 
Fulfillment of the Requirement for the Award of Bachelor of Arts in English Language.  
Igboanusi, H. (2008). Empowering Nigerian Pidgin in Lagos: A challenge for status planning?   World 
Englishes. 27. 68 – 82  
Jowitt, D. (2015).The history of the English language: A sketch, in Kamalu, I. and Tamunobelema, I. 
(Eds.) Issues in the Study of Language. Ibadan: Kraft Books Limited. 
Mann, C. (2000). Reviving ethno-linguistic vitality: The case of Anglo-Nigerian Pidgin. Journal of 
Sociolinguistics vol. 4. 458 – 574   
Nlem, A. O. and Anurudu, S. M. (2013) Diglossia with Multilingualism? Language Choice in 
Portharcourt City, in Adegbite, W., Ogunsiji, A., and Taiwo, O. (Eds.) Linguistics 
and the Globalisation of African Languages for Sustainable Development: A Festschrift in Honour of 
Prof. Kọla Owolabi.Ibadan: Universal Akada Books Limited, a Subsidiary of Centre for Yoruba 
Language Engineering. 198 – 211   
Njoku, C. N. and Njoku, M. N. (2014). Language education: The candidature of Nigerian Pidgin as a 
language of instruction over the English and indigenous languages. In Tabotndip, J. E. (Ed.) 
Journal of Teacher Perspective. Calabar: Association of Nigerian Teachers (ASSONT).8 (3) 809 
– 817  
NOUN (2004). Education Research Method. National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) 
Nwadike, I. U. (2002). Igbo Language in education: A historical study. Uruowulu-Obosi: Pacific 
Publishers 
Nwadike, I. U. (2008). Igbo studies: From the plantations of West Indies to the forestlands of West 
Africa, 1766 – 2008. An inaugural lecture of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, delivered on 
June 12, 2008 by Inno Ụzọma Nwadike (33rd Inaugural lecture of the University of Nigeria) 
Nsukka: University of Nigeria Press Ltd  

38 
 
Ogbonna, S.O. (1995). Parental Preferences for medium of instruction in primary schools with 
implication for long planning in education. Ahmadu Bello University Zaria.     
Oloruntimehin (2018) Problems militating against the Nigerian teachers for effective implementation of 
primary school curriculum. In Usman, D. B. (Ed.) Journal of languages, Arts and Social 
Sciences (JOLASS) Okene: School of Languages, Arts and Social Sciences, FCE, Okene. Vol. 9 
& 10 (pp127 – 133)   
Onomamadu, E. O. (2017). Ọgba-nje myth and Nigerian stories & folklores. Ilorin: Chridamel Publishing 
House  
Oribhabor, (2009). The Use of Naija in the media, arts and entertainment. NAIJA: Proceedings of the 
conference on Nigerian Pidgin, University of Ibadan, Nigeria. 8 – 9, July, 2009 (2010). Web 
accessed:13/02/2019      
Oreoluwa, A. S. (2016). Nigerian Pidgin: An endangered language. In Taiwo, O. and Yuka, L. C. (Eds.) 
New Findings in West African Languages and Literaturein commemoration of the 50th 
anniversary of the West African Linguistic Society (WALS) La Société de Linguistique de L 
‘afrique de L ‘ouest (SLAO). 424 – 430     
 Suleiman, H. and Adaji, O. V. (2016). Challenges and prospects of cluster school model of teacher 
education professional development, North-Central, Kogi State, Nigeria. An unpublished 
institutional based research (IBR) 2014 Tertiary Education Trust Fund (TETFUND) Intervention   
Tamunobelema, I. (2015). Language varieties, in Kamalu, I. and Tamunobelema, I. (Eds.) Issues in the 
Study of Language. Ibadan: Kraft Books Limited. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eze ….. ..Int. J. Inn. Lit., Lang. & Arts Studies 11(2):23-38, 2023 

