Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3, 1-16 
 
© The Author, 2023. Published by York University Libraries ISSN 2564-2855 
 
69
Nigerian Pidgin: The identity of a Nigerian away from home  
Precious Affia1 
York University, Toronto, Canada 
Abstract: Nigerian Pidgin (hereafter NP) is the most widely spoken 
language in Nigeria, but many Nigerians view it negatively, as they 
associate it with uneducated people in the country and often caricature it 
as a bad form of English. However, attitudes towards NP in the diaspora 
and its role as a marker of social identity within and outside Nigeria have 
not been researched. Through informal interviews and focus group 
discussions with 10 Nigerians (5 men; 5 women) in Canada, I find that the 
participants choose NP as the language they use to express their identity 
as Nigerians in Canada. While the women embraced Standard English, the 
men had more positive attitudes towards NP suggesting covert prestige. 
Therefore, this study provides a good pilot project for analyzing attitudes 
towards NP and its role as a language of identity for Nigerians in the 
diaspora.  
Keywords: language and identity; Nigerian Pidgin; sociolinguistics; 
diaspora; language attitudes   
1 
Introduction 
Even though NP has the highest population of speakers in Nigeria, previous studies have 
shown that it is still associated with people of the lower class that lack formal education in the 
country, and NP is often defined as a caricature and a bad form of English (Akande and Salami 
2010). It is commonly used as a lingua franca between interactants who share neither a common 
mother tongue, nor English, the official language of Nigeria. NP is also used for familiarity 
purposes in informal settings among close acquaintances, and to bridge the gap of communication 
between the highly educated and the non-educated that have little or no knowledge of Standard 
English. Notwithstanding, NP is looked down upon for its lack of status and recognition. 
Previous research mostly focused on attitudes towards NP in relation to its possible use as 
the language of education (Akande, 2010), the national language (Mann, 2009), language policy, 
and other language standardization and development issues with their results being mostly 
negative. Some studies have looked at the attitudes of educated Nigerians because they have 
alternative languages, that is, they have a good command of English and their native languages 
(Herbert, 2008). Therefore, educated Nigerians are in a better position to influence and participate 
in policymaking in the country (Herbert, 2008). The case of NP relating to one’s “Nigerianess” or 
one’s identity as a Nigerian has not necessarily been captured in the literature. This study, therefore, 
focuses on the identity of Nigerians in Canada as it relates to their use and interactions with other 
Nigerians in NP. 
 
1 Precious Affia: affia689@yorku.ca 

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
70
This study is important because it explores both one’s identity as a Nigerian in Canada 
(away from home) and Nigerians’ attitudes towards NP in Canada, and it serves as a step towards 
determining the role of NP in constructing a Nigerian identity in the diaspora. This study also 
examines the usefulness and impact of NP as a language that unites Nigerians in countries far away 
from home. This may shed more light on the importance of empowering NP in Nigeria because 
the knowledge of the importance of NP as a language in the diaspora may enable NP to be more 
appreciated and valued in Nigeria. 
2 
Context 
2.1 
Demography of Nigeria 
Nigeria is the most densely populated country in Africa, with over 196 million people 
(Akinyemi 2014). It is a multilingual nation and home to over 250 ethnic groups speaking over 
500 languages, reflecting the great cultural diversity in the country (Reed & Mberu, 2014). Located 
in West Africa (Figure 1), it is made up of 36 states—with each state divided into local government 
areas—and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja (Gayawan, Arogundade, & Adebayo, 2014) 
(Figure 2). In each state, five or more languages are spoken. The exact number of languages in 
Nigeria is difficult to ascertain because of its extreme linguistic diversity (Omachonu, 2015). It is 
however estimated by Blench (2012) that there are about 550 languages spoken in Nigeria, of these, 
English and NP are used as languages of wider communication and for interaction between people 
of different ethnic groups (Omachonu, 2015). Nigeria has three dominant ethnic groups: Yoruba, 
Igbo, and Hausa. Other ethnic groups include the Efik, Ibibio, Anaang, Ijaw, Urhobo-Isoko, Edo, 
Itsekiri, Kanuri, Chibok, Bali, and Nupe, among others. 
 
Figure 1. Map of Africa, showing the location of Nigeria in green (Discott, 2010). 
The English language, which was adopted from the British colonial government, is the 
official language of the country, while NP is used as a social language with no official status 
attributed to it. Social language here means an informal language that Nigerians use when 
conversing with family members or friends and in informal situations in Nigeria, as well as outside 
Nigeria when among Nigerians. Agheyisi (1988), explains that in the past, NP served primarily as 
a trade language in markets and other informal commercial settings, or as a medium of interaction 

NIGERIAN PIDGIN; THE IDENTITY OF A NIGERIAN AWAY FROM HOME 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3 (2023) 
71
with uneducated employees and domestic servants. But more recently, NP has come to serve as an 
unofficial lingua franca used in entertainment, for newscasting, and for public enlightenment, even 
though it does not have any official status (Agheyisi, 1988, p. 229).  
A national policy on education adopted in Nigeria in 1977 addressed the national language 
question, and this policy was seen as “a bold step and a deliberate plan towards national 
multilingualism” (Afolayan and Bamgbose, 1980, p. 220). In the policy, every child is encouraged 
to learn one of the three major languages (i.e., Yoruba, Igbo, and Hausa) in addition to their own 
mother tongue. The 1979 constitution of Nigeria, established on October 1st during the 
administration of President Shehu Shagari, outlined the functional status of different languages in 
the country. English was established as the lingua franca, and Yoruba, Igbo, and Hausa as the 
national languages. These national languages are the three main recognized ethnic languages in 
Nigeria and are allowed to be a) used in national functions such as the civil service, law, and 
commerce, b) taught as subjects in schools, and c) used in official domains (Ayeomoni, 2012). 
Other minor ethnic languages are only officially recognized within their ethnic groups, like Ibibio 
and Efik, spoken in the South-South part of the country (see Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2. Map of Nigeria showing its States (Panonian, 2022).  
NP is not mentioned at all in official language policy of Nigeria. However, while English 
functions as the official code and as the main medium of instruction in school, NP is used in 
informal settings for intra and inter-ethnic communication (Ferguson, 1959). It is used as a means 
of communication between speakers who share different native Nigerian languages and among 
family and friends. Therefore, English enjoys high prestige while NP has low prestige (Akande, 
2010). 
2.2 
NP  
NP, previously referred to as “broken English” or “bad English” by most Nigerians, is 
spoken by more than thirty million Nigerians (Holms, 1989), and forms a continuum with the West 
African Pidgin English that stretches from Sierra Leone to Gabon in Central Africa (Barbag-stoll, 
1983) with the exception of Liberia. The BBC (2016) estimates that between three and five million 
speakers primarily use NP in their day-to-day interactions. It is said to be a second language to up 

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
72
to seventy-five million people in Nigeria alone, about half the population (BBC, 2016). In a more 
recent study, Faraclas (2021) comprehensively assessed the number of people who speak NP in 
Nigeria and puts the number at about 110 million, making it not just the most widely spoken 
language in Nigeria but one of the most widely spoken languages in the world. In tracing the 
inception of NP, Faraclas (2002) explains that with its large and vigorous population and linguistic 
diversity and tolerance, Nigeria was able to develop a highly mercantile society with major urban 
centres, centuries before the landing of European merchants’ ships in the 15th century. Lifestyles 
such as trading, travel, and intermarriage, etc. had brought Nigerians who speak different 
languages into close contact with one another for years. For this reason, it is possible that 
pidginized versions of Nigerian languages were widely spread in many areas before Europeans 
(e.g., Portuguese and British traders) arrived. After their arrival, some European words, namely 
English and Portuguese-derived items (such as sabi ‘know’) would have been substituted for 
Nigerian words to facilitate communication (Faraclas, 2002). However, it has also been argued 
that West African Pidgin arose from contact and from a desire to communicate with Africans in 
West Africa, and was generally known as West African Pidgin English, with its varieties such as 
NP and Ghanaian Pidgin spoken in specific West African countries (Yakpo, 2016). In the highly 
multilingual states in Nigeria, which also lack widespread ethnic lingua francas, such as Rivers 
and Cross River (in the South-South region), NP readily complements English to meet this 
important communication need (Agheyisi, 1984). 
NP has come to dominate urban spaces in Nigeria and has been accepted in a widespread 
level to the extent of it being the first language of many Nigerians, especially in Edo state, Warri, 
Port Harcourt, and Sapele (Elugbe & Omamor, 1991). The widespread use of NP has led some 
linguists over the years to propose its adoption as the national language of Nigeria. One reason for 
this proposal is that choosing a single ethnic official language out of 500 possible languages is not 
easy to do, which may be why Nigeria still maintains English as its official language after its 
independence (Ogunmodimu, 2015). Under such circumstances, NP, a language that originated 
within Nigeria, can be seen as ethnic to an extent and has justification to be promoted as a national 
language. Another advantage of NP is that its lexicon embodies a composite of diverse Nigerian 
linguistic heritages (Agbali, 2005). NP is a language that is spoken by Nigerians from all social 
strata, both educated and non-educated, young and old, as well as people with different religious 
affiliations, and even Nigerians in the diaspora. Despite NP being an informal lingua franca which 
transcends regional, ethnic and linguistic boundaries, it has no official status or recognition in 
Nigeria (Ogunmodimu, 2015). It is therefore important to look at NP as an aspect of identity 
formation for Nigerians away from Nigeria. A study like this has not yet been done in the diaspora, 
and it is interesting to access the attitudes of diasporic Nigerians towards NP.  
2.3 
Literature review on language attitudes 
Language may vary in multiple ways. Variation may occur at the level of sound, morpheme, 
word, phrase, discourse, or in paralinguistic cues. Speakers and listeners may have attitudes and 
reactions towards variation along all these dimensions and more. Attitudes can be defined as a 
“disposition to react favorably or unfavorably to a class of objects” (Sarnoff, 1970, p. 279). In the 
context of this study, a language attitude is referred to as “any affective, cognitive, or behavioural 
index of evaluative reactions towards different language varieties or their speakers” (Ryan, Giles 
& Sebastian, 1982, p. 7). Attitudes may not always be positive or negative, but they may subsume 
both positivity and negativity (Haddock & Maio, 2004, p. 1). Some techniques used to access 
speakers’ attitudes in the literature include quantitative methods such as surveys and 
questionnaires, and/or qualitative methods such as sociolinguistic interviews, matched guise tests, 

NIGERIAN PIDGIN; THE IDENTITY OF A NIGERIAN AWAY FROM HOME 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3 (2023) 
73
and verbal guise techniques. These techniques are used to access speakers’ attitudes towards 
language and the attitudes of people around them. For example, Haugen’s (1966) study elicited 
language attitudes in a survey on mutual intelligibility in Scandinavia. The result of the study 
showed that 42% of the Danish participants thought that Swedish sounded more beautiful than 
their own language, while none of the Swedish participants thought that Danish sounded more 
beautiful than Swedish. In another study focussing on Danish and Swedish (Schuppert et al., 2015), 
a matched-guise experiment, a test that consists of lexically identical speech samples from a 
balanced bilingual speaker, was carried out with recordings of a balanced bilingual speaker of 
Danish and Swedish. The participants were groups of Danish and Swedish children between 7 and 
16 years old who were tasked with judging the Swedish and Danish recordings and four other 
languages on a 5-point semantic differential scale indicating how normal, beautiful, smart, modern, 
kind, and rich the speakers sounded to them. Although the participants judged the bilingual speaker  
positively when she spoke the listener’s own language, the Danes rated the Swedish guise more 
positively than the Danish guise because they believed that Swedish sounded more beautiful than 
Danish as found in Haugen (1966). These studies show that people may have positive or negative 
attitudes towards languages (including ones they may speak) but may view the language they speak 
more positively than the one they do not, as a sign of solidarity. 
Leibscher and Dailey-O’Cain (2009) discussed their observation of language attitudes in 
interaction, arguing that the approach provides invaluable insights for the study of language 
attitudes. They maintain that interactional approaches particularly, should be viewed as at least as 
fundamental to language attitude research as more commonly used quantitative methods of 
analysis, since the interactional method (e.g., conversational interviews and focus groups) provides 
more insight to the researcher than the quantitative methods. For this reason, the current study 
makes use of qualitative methods—conversational interviews and focus group discussions— and 
quantitative methods—language proficiency and preference questionnaires—to assess Nigerians’ 
attitudes towards NP in Canada. 
2.4 
Literature review on attitudes towards NP 
Some Nigerians view NP as a bad form of English and attribute NP to those without formal 
education (Akande 2010). As found in the literature (e.g., DeGraff, 2003, 2005), NP, like other 
creoles and pidgins with European language lexifiers, has been perceived as bastardized English, 
or as a lesser language (Mann 1996), which could be linked to colonialism and prejudice against 
speakers of pidgins and creoles (see Section 2.5 below). By contrast, linguistic scholarship has 
recognized NP as a distinct language separate from English. An example of such studies is 
Agheyisi (1984) who argues that there are educated speakers of NP that incorporate English into 
NP, but that NP is a separate language from English. Elugbe and Omamor (1991) solidify this by 
explaining that the sentence structure and sound system of NP are sufficiently different from those 
which operate in English to warrant it being classified as a separate language (p. 61).  
Some studies regarding attitudes towards NP have been conducted in urban centres in 
Nigeria, including places where NP is used as a native language. An example of such a study is 
Igboanusi (2008), who investigates attitudinal dispositions of his participants towards empowering 
NP and giving it a recognized status and higher function in education. The majority of the 
participants (over 73%), who were students at the University of Ibadan and Benin (where NP is 
dominant), disagreed with the proposal that NP should be taught in schools. Yet, despite its lack 
of status, linguistic scholarship has suggested that NP be used as an official or national language 

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
74
(Egbokhare, 2003) and as a medium of instruction in the early stage of primary school education, 
especially for NP-speaking children (Egbokhare, 2003), 
Another study conducted to assess Nigerians’ attitudes towards NP was completed by 
Ihemere (2006). His study explored language shift in Port-Harcourt, a city in Nigeria where NP 
and Ikwerre are spoken as a first language. He investigated the Ikwerre people’s attitudes towards 
their languages (Ikwerre and NP), as they relate to language choices. A language proficiency and 
preference questionnaire, as well as the matched-guise technique, were used as tools for analysis 
in the study. For the matched-guise test, two Ikwerre bilinguals (a man and a woman) were each 
recorded reading the same 40-second passage twice, once in Ikwerre and once in NP. The four 
voices were ordered so that Ikwerre versions alternated with NP ones, and no voice was followed 
immediately by its matched guise. The respondents were told at the beginning of the test that they 
would hear four speakers reading the same passage, some in Ikwerre and some in NP. The fact 
that they would hear the same speakers’ voices twice was concealed from them. Before listening 
to each voice, they were given a response sheet containing ten traits on which they had to rate the 
speaker. Each voice was played once, and the respondents were given enough time to complete all 
their ratings for this voice before the next one was played to them (p. 197). All the participants 
(across three generations, i.e., grandparents, parents, and children) judged NP more favorably than 
their native language Ikwerre, because they used it more frequently than Ikwerre. However, the 
Ikwerre guise was judged to be more honest, friendly, and generous (echoing feelings of traditional 
values). Although the speakers judged NP more favourably than Ikwerre, their judgement towards 
Ikwerre showed signs of solidarity towards their native language.  
Although negative attitudes have been expressed towards NP as analyzed in previous 
studies, the language still assumes a significant role in Nigeria as it is used for interaction between 
people of different ethnic groups who do not share a common language and in informal situations 
in Nigeria. Therefore, NP can be seen, in a sense, to reflect national identity in Nigeria (Akande 
and Salami, 2010). It reifies a sense of Nigerian identity; it defines “Nigerianess”; and it is expected 
to rise above a social language identity to become a national language (Agbali, 2005). 
2.5 
Hypotheses 
2.5.1 Hypothesis 1 
NP will be rated as the language of identity for Nigerians in the diaspora by all the 
participants in informal situations. 
NP is the language that bridges the gap between English and ethnic languages in Nigeria 
(Ogunmodimu, 2015). It is a language of familiarity; therefore, Nigerians in Canada may easily 
choose NP over English as a tool with which to identify with other Nigerians in informal situations. 
Since there are over 500 ethnic languages in Nigeria, it is likely that the Nigerian person with 
whom one interacts speaks a different ethnic language. While English continues to perform “high” 
language functions in Nigeria, NP has almost taken over the role of lingua franca in informal 
domains. It is to be noted that NP is used by individuals in every social stratum in Nigeria, i.e., 
educated and uneducated, upper class and working class (Ogunmodimo, 2015). Therefore, 
Nigerians in Canada will choose NP as the language they speak when they relate with other 
Nigerians in informal situations, and NP may likely be chosen as the language of identity of 
Nigerians in Canada. 

NIGERIAN PIDGIN; THE IDENTITY OF A NIGERIAN AWAY FROM HOME 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3 (2023) 
75
2.5.2 Hypothesis 2 
Female speakers will prefer English to NP when interacting with other Nigerians in 
informal situations in Canada. The men will prefer NP to English language in this context.  
Female speakers are more likely to prefer the prestigious form (Standard English) over NP 
while interacting with other Nigerians in informal situations in Canada, since English is highly 
prestigious in Nigeria. Literature in sociolinguistics has shown that women typically produce 
linguistic forms that closely approach that of the standard language or have higher prestige than 
those produced by men (e.g., Trudgill 1972, p. 180; Wolfram, 1969; Labov, 1966; Tagliamonte, 
2012). As for the male speakers, they will embrace NP and prefer to speak it in informal situations 
with other Nigerians because NP may have covert prestige. Indeed, Trudgill (1972) argues that 
women and men respond to different norms: men to covert vernacular prestige norms and women 
to overt, standard-language prestige norms. In the Nigerian context, English is the standard 
language while NP is the non-standard form, which is more “vernacular” than Standard English. 
3 
Methodology 
The methodology used in this research project involves both qualitative and quantitative 
methods. Focus groups and informal conversational interviews (held and recorded over Zoom) 
were used to explore participants’ beliefs and to view the emergence of those beliefs in interactions 
with others within the group and in the individual interviews. The focus group and the individual 
interviews were particularly important to encourage discussions of issues surrounding NP which 
participants may not have considered earlier. The discussions helped facilitate more in-depth 
exploration of participants’ views and allowed for sufficient structuring and management by the 
researcher to ensure a focus on the specific topic areas (Yitzhaki, 2010). For the quantitative 
method, participants were given a language preference and proficiency questionnaire to fill out to 
indicate which language (between NP and English) they prefer to speak with other Nigerians in 
informal situations and how proficiently or well they speak NP as rated by the participants. 
3.1 
Participants 
A total of ten participants took part in this study. Out of this number, focus groups were 
divided by gender with one including three male participants and the other involving three female 
participants. The other four participants (2 males and 2 females) took part in the informal 
individual interviews all conducted by the researcher. All the participants are immigrants to 
Canada who lived in Nigeria for the most part of their lives before relocating to Canada. This 
criterion was enforced to ensure that they could speak and understand NP satisfactorily. The 
participants were located in different parts of Canada; one married couple was in Calgary, Alberta, 
another was in Winnipeg, Manitoba, and all the other participants were in Toronto, Ontario. 
Altogether, 3 married couples (male and female) participated in the study while the other four 
individuals were single. The participants were recruited through snowball sampling (Hoffman, 
2014). They were between the ages of 30-45 years old, and they were all highly educated (graduate 
level). They all speak a variety of different languages, that is, they have a good command of 
English, NP, and their native languages, and are thus in a good position to talk about, influence, 
and participate in policymaking in Nigeria (Herbert, 2008). They all have had to use NP in different 
situations and are all professionals in different fields including health, academia, and information 
technology. The reason for ensuring that all the participants are university graduates and working 
professionals is to be able to assess participants’ attitudes by gender without the confounds of class 
or education interfering. A table summarizing the participants’ demographic information is 
provided in Appendix D. 

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
76
3.2 
The questionnaire 
For the quantitative method, a questionnaire was used. The focus group/interviews together 
with the questionnaire were used to investigate and account for each participant’s degree of 
integration within the group of Nigerians in the diaspora and interaction with NP. The 
questionnaire asked the participants for sociodemographic information such as their age, gender, 
region or state in Nigeria they are from, language proficiency, and language preference in informal 
interactions with other Nigerians in Canada. The question about language proficiency and 
preference would provide insights into which language—English or NP—is the preferred choice 
when the participants communicate with other Nigerians in their routine day-to-day interactions. 
The questions (adapted from Ihemere, 2006) are listed in Appendix B. The open-ended questions 
discussed in each focus group session and individual interview are provided in Appendix C. 
3.3 
The focus groups and the individual interviews 
Two focus groups and four individual interviews were conducted. Since the participants 
were not all located in Toronto where the researcher is located, some of the interviews were held 
on Zoom. The male focus group was held on Zoom, the female focus group was held in person in 
Toronto, and the four individual interviews were held on Zoom. The two couples in Winnipeg and 
in Calgary were interviewed individually to avoid being influenced by their partners’ views. They 
made up the four participants interviewed individually. The members of the third couple, located 
in Toronto, participated in the male and female focus groups. The focus groups and the individual 
interviews involved discussions of language preference, choice, and reasons for these choices. The 
group and individual interview discussions were done informally to enable participants to speak 
freely with people of their age group. Attitudes that may not have been discovered previously by 
other methods may be revealed. The focus group and interviews involved discussions of people’s 
views, feelings, and concerns towards NP, how the language relates to their identity as Nigerians, 
and other important issues like standardizing NP, and increasing its status to a language used in 
education/the national or official language in Nigeria, as obtained in previous studies. 
4 
Results 
In this section, I present and discuss the responses of the participants in different themes 
based on their responses to the open-ended questions in the interviews and focus group discussions. 
I begin with some of the general descriptions of NP in 4.1, responses to the discussion regarding 
NP as the identity of Nigerians in Canada in 4.2, gender and NP in 4.3, language proficiency and 
attitudes towards NP in 4.4, partners’ (married couples) opposing views on the usage of NP in their 
homes in 4.5, and NP and the individual in 4.6. The names of the participants provided are 
pseudonyms.  
4.1 
General description of NP 
In the focus groups and interviews, I asked the participants some open-ended questions that 
facilitated discussions about NP and their general views on it. When asked what their opinion 
about NP was, the participants gave responses describing their experience and background with 
NP. The following are responses from two participants. 
(1) Unfortunately, when we were growing up, NP was not encouraged because it was seen 
as a language for commoners or a motor-garage language, so it was seen as something 
for people who could not speak proper English, and then it immediately delineates you 
to a certain social class, and because we didn’t want to identify with that social class, 
NP was not encouraged. It was highly frowned upon in classrooms while going to 
school, so it was forbidden in school, it was forbidden at home. However, over the 

NIGERIAN PIDGIN; THE IDENTITY OF A NIGERIAN AWAY FROM HOME 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3 (2023) 
77
years, it has evolved to see that if you want to communicate with your maid, your driver, 
your gate-guard, you go to market and other places, it is better to speak NP… To a 
foreigner, I will say that Pidgin English [NP] is a non-formal official language of 
Nigeria… (Samuel, male, 37 years, moderate NP speaker) 
(2) I was raised to see it as a social barrier breaker, so the way I was raised was that pidgin 
language [NP] is not a language for the educated, it is not a language for the refined, 
but if you find yourself in a situation where you need to communicate with people who 
don’t know, exactly, who aren’t exactly educated, it becomes an easy barrier breaker…. 
so, that’s the way I was raised to view Pidgin, and I guess that has also.. that’s still the 
way I see Pidgin language because the only time I still use it is when I’m in these 
situations… (Cherry, female, 30 years, moderate NP speaker) 
In (1) above, Samuel’s response to the question about his opinion of NP expresses his 
background and experience with the language. He grew up with negative attitudes expressed 
towards NP in his environment, where NP is regarded as a language for “commoners” and as being 
used by those who cannot speak Standard English. Therefore, using NP signals that one is a 
member of a particular social class. This shows that some of the negative attitudes towards NP are 
taught to children by the society in which they are raised. 
Similarly, in example (2), the speaker expresses that she was raised to view NP as a language 
for the uneducated, as she must use it when she speaks with the uneducated. This is a negative 
attitude towards NP because, although the language is commonly used as a lingua franca between 
interactants who don't share a common mother tongue, nor understanding of English, it is seen as 
not “refined” or “educated”, despite the fact that NP has also been shown to be used as a language 
of communication by the highly educated in informal situations, in previous studies (Ogunmodimu, 
2015). 
4.2 
NP as the language of identity of the Nigerian in Canada 
Eight out of ten speakers (the male speakers and three female speakers) identified NP as 
the language of identity for Nigerians in Canada. The following are the comments some speakers 
made about NP with regard to identity: 
(3) Pidgin is our heritage, the stigma from NP has eroded a great lot, it is our new 
identity…we see that those of us who were forbidden from speaking NP because it was 
a motor garage English, are now trying to struggle to speak it to show that we belong 
(Samuel, male, 37 years, moderate NP speaker) 
In (3), Samuel, who earlier expressed how NP was used by commoners in (1), here explains 
how NP is Nigerians’ heritage and how there is a change in the perception of the language given 
that those who were not allowed to speak NP as kids are trying to speak it as adults, because 
according to him, NP is Nigerians’ “new” identity. This is interesting because the expression “new” 
suggests that it was not the case that he viewed NP as a language of identity in the past, but that 
view has changed in the present. It seems that in leaving Nigeria, Samuel, who is no longer among 
family, friends, and his immediate community who share his ethnic language now has a different 
view about NP in the diaspora. This shows the role of NP in constructing the Nigerian identity in 
the diaspora. This may be because NP is what most Nigerians communicate with in informal 
situations in the diaspora, given that most Nigerians one meets may not speak one’s native 
language, and thus, for purposes of solidarity and identity, the only other language option for 
indexing specifically Nigerian identity, is NP (as has been expressed by the majority of the 
participants in this study, n=8/10). Consider also examples (4) and (5) below. 

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
78
(4) I try to teach [my children] as much as I can, that’s part of the foundation of who they 
are, that’s their identity (IT, male, 43 years, fully fluent NP speaker) 
(5) I will like them [her children] to learn and speak [NP] because I will like them to feel 
as Nigerian as possible (Olive, female, 31 years, moderate NP speaker) 
In (4), IT explains how important it is for his children to speak NP because it is their identity 
and the foundation of who they are. IT, who speaks NP fluently, expressed that he teaches his 
children the language because the language identifies them as Nigerians. This view is also 
expressed by Olive in (5) when she explains the need for her children to speak NP, as a way to feel 
as Nigerian as possible, therefore relating NP to their “Nigerianess”. 
4.3 
Gender and NP 
Male and female speakers had different views in their responses to some of the questions 
asked in the group discussions and interviews. An example is for the question Would you like your 
kids to speak NP? All the male speakers said yes, but three out of the five female speakers said no. 
This supports the hypothesis that male speakers will embrace NP more than female speakers. When 
asked what their favourite Nigerian language is in Canada, four out of five female speakers chose 
English as their favourite language in Canada. For the male speakers, three out of five chose NP. 
However, this apparent gender divide may instead relate to language proficiency. The two male 
speakers who chose English as their favourite language expressed that they chose it because they 
speak NP moderately well and have a stronger command of English, but the four female speakers 
maintained that they preferred to speak English on all occasions rather than speaking NP. The only 
female speaker who chose NP speaks NP fluently as a native speaker. The difference in the 
proficiency of the speakers is mostly due to their backgrounds and their exposure to the language. 
4.4 
Language proficiency and attitudes towards NP 
Six out of the ten participants spoke NP moderately well, and the other four participants 
belong to the “fully fluent” or “very well” group. Participants who speak NP fluently or very well, 
as indicated in their language proficiency and preference questionnaires (Appendix B), had more 
positive comments about NP than those who spoke it moderately well. Examples of their 
comments are seen below: 
(6) (In response to the question about his opinion of NP)  
Whoever thought of it [NP] in the first place did something brilliant right … I try to 
teach my colleagues the language, I try to indoctrinate my Canadian friends to NP. 
Pidgin language to me is just awesome, it is a good way for us to communicate at 
different levels back home (IT, male, 44 years, fully fluent NP speaker) 
(7) (In response to the question about his opinion of NP)  
For me, NP is not ugly; it is attractive (Uby, male, 45 years, speaks NP very well) 
(8) I love speaking Pidgin with my friends, there is this connection, this happiness, this joy 
that we are Nigerians, and it is an easy language to speak and to communicate (Nsy, 
female, 39 years, fully fluent NP speaker) 
(9) I think NP is a fun language, and it is also easy to learn (UY, male, 33 years, fully fluent 
NP speaker) 
Examples (6)-(9) above are positive comments expressed by speakers with high 
proficiency in NP. They all had generally positive attitudes towards the language, more so than 
those in this study who speak NP moderately well. This can be related to the findings of previous 
attitudes studies as discussed in Section 2 (e.g., Schuppert et al., 2015; Ihemere, 2006) that showed 

NIGERIAN PIDGIN; THE IDENTITY OF A NIGERIAN AWAY FROM HOME 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3 (2023) 
79
that speakers rate their own language more positively than the one they do not speak. Here, those 
with higher proficiency in NP rated NP more positively than those who spoke it moderately, 
showing their solidarity towards NP. 
4.5 
Partners’ opposing views on NP usage in their household 
As mentioned earlier, some of the participants interviewed were married couples with kids. 
An interesting pattern emerged concerning men’s and women’s opinions of their kids speaking 
NP. The men strongly agreed that their kids should speak NP while the women disagreed. The 
interviews were held separately, so each partner did not know what the response of the other was, 
thereby discouraging bias in their responses. In response to the question Would you like your kids 
to speak NP? What would be your take on that? the couples provided the following responses: 
(10) 
100%. I try to teach them as much as I can, that’s part of the foundation of who 
they are… Not just to be all about English (IT, male, 44 years, fully fluent NP 
speaker-Miriam’s husband) 
(11) 
Right now, I will prefer them to learn regular English, or Queen’s English, and 
when they grow up, they can decide to speak [NP] (Miriam, female, 43 years, 
moderate NP speaker-IT’s wife) 
In (10) and (11), we see opposing views of NP from Miriam and IT who are married and 
have two children. While Miriam does not want the children to learn NP, her husband, IT strongly 
approves of the children speaking NP. Consider also the views expressed by Samuel and Dora 
below:  
(12) 
I want my children to embrace pidgin English because that is what identifies you 
as a Nigerian, that’s your tool of communication (Samuel, male, 37 years, moderate 
NP speaker-Dora’s husband) 
(13) 
I think I would like my son to speak NP, but if he can speak English fully fluently 
well, what is the point really? (Dora, female, 33 years, moderate NP speaker- 
Samuel’s wife) 
In (12) and (13), Dora and her husband Samuel had separate views. This further shows how 
women embrace Standard language more than their male counterparts, as the women both gave 
more prominence to their children speaking English, though they do not object to them not 
speaking NP. 
4.6 
NP and the individual speaker 
I observed that two individual speakers, one male and one female who spoke NP 
moderately well, had positive attitudes towards NP. Olive (31 years, female) was the only female 
in this category (i.e., female and moderate NP speaker) who expressed value for NP.  
(14) 
I will like them [her children] to learn and speak [NP] because I will like them to 
feel as Nigerian as possible (Olive, female, 31 years, moderate NP speaker) 
I find this interesting because her views of NP were different from those of the other 
participants in her category. She is highly educated, speaks other ethnic Nigerian languages, has 
spent most of her life in the diaspora, grew up in a community where NP was not appreciated, yet 
desires that her kids speak the language (as seen in (14), above), and that NP be developed and 
given a status of a national language in Nigeria. This shows that individuals may have diverse 
views of the language they speak despite their backgrounds or experiences.  

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
80
Samuel (37 years, male) was also a moderate NP speaker who used positive adjectives to 
describe NP (as seen in (15), below):  
(15) 
How do you interpret the beauty of the word gidigba (a word in NP that means 
“strong”) how do you say that in English? I mean the language has become so 
beautiful…   (Samuel, male, 37 years, moderate NP speaker). 
Samuel’s case may be attributed to his gender, as men have more positive attitudes towards 
non-standard varieties of language than women (Trudgill, 1972).  
Cherry (30 years, female, moderate NP speaker) was the only speaker who maintained that 
up until the time of the interview, she still viewed NP as a language for the uneducated and 
unrefined because she only speaks NP when she talks to Nigerians who are uneducated back in 
Nigeria (as seen in (16), below, and also in (2) above).  
(16) 
I was raised to see it as a social barrier breaker, so the way I was raised was that 
Pidgin language is not a language for the educated, it is not a language for the 
refined, so, that’s the way I was raised to view Pidgin, and I guess that has also… 
that’s still the way I see Pidgin language (Cherry, female, 30 years, moderate NP 
speaker). 
The reason for this attitude could be attributed to her background since she had stated that 
she was raised to view NP that way and that her mother refers to NP as “gutter language”. This is 
an example of attitudes that were adopted by reason of societal and familial background. 
5 
Patterns observed and conclusion 
As was hypothesized, almost all the participants (n=8/10) viewed NP as the language of 
identity of Nigerians in Canada. The men exhibited more knowledge about the history and 
importance of NP than the women, which may be linked to their positive attitudes towards the 
language. There was an observed pattern in which more men had positive attitudes towards NP 
than the women, which may suggest covert prestige (Trudgill, 1972). Although not tested 
statistically, I observed that more women (n=4/5) in this study embraced Standard English more 
than the men, as is common in sociolinguistics studies. I also noticed that most of the participants 
who have higher fluency and speak NP most of the time (e.g., Nsy, Uby and IT) did not express 
any negative attitude towards NP, e.g., “That it is a broken English, gutter language, motor-garage 
language” as opposed to the others. They all had more positive attitudes towards NP and used 
positive adjectives to describe the language compared to the other speakers who spoke the 
language moderately. This may be attributed to their background, as they did not express that they 
were exposed to negative attitudes when growing up as the others did. This tells us that the 
background and immediate community a Nigerian is raised may influence their attitudes towards 
NP. When comparing responses by interview type (focus group and individual sociolinguistic 
interviews), there were no differences attributable to methodological variation. From the responses 
of the participants, it appears that NP is the language of identity of the Nigerian away from home 
(at least in Canada). However, the study is limited by its few participants, so it is not possible to 
draw such general conclusions. The findings of this research can inform further research on 
attitudes towards NP and NP as the identity of a Nigerian in the diaspora. This study may add to 
the methodology of research on qualitative studies of attitudes towards NP. It also serves as a good 
pilot study for future work that seeks to determine attitudes towards NP in the diaspora and 
Nigerian identity construction in Canada. Further studies can be done to test NP speakers’ overt 
and covert prestige towards the language.  

NIGERIAN PIDGIN; THE IDENTITY OF A NIGERIAN AWAY FROM HOME 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3 (2023) 
81
References 
Afolayan, A. & Bamgbose, A. (1980). The changing pattern of bilingualism in Nigeria. In E. 
Afendras (Ed.), Patterns of Bilingualism. Singapore University Press.  
Agbali, A. A. (2005). Nigerian Pidgin, urban spaces and the construction of social identity. In T. 
Falola & S. J. Salm (Eds.), Urbanization and African cultures (pp. 295-321). Carolina 
Academic Press.  
Agheyisi, R. (1984). Minor languages in the Nigerian context: Prospects and problems. Word    
35(3), 235-253. 
Akande, A. T. (2010). Is Nigerian Pidgin English? Dialectologia et Geolinguistica 18(0), 3-22.  
Akande, A. T. & Salami. L. O. (2010). Use and Attitudes towards Nigerian Pidgin among Nigerian   
University Students. In Millar, Robert McColl (Ed.), Marginal Dialects: Scotland, Ireland 
and Beyond (pp.70-89). Forum for Research on the Languages of Scotland and Ireland. 
Akinyemi, A. I. (2014). Demographic dynamics and development in Nigeria. African Population 
Studies, 27(2), 239–248. https://doi.org/10.11564/27-2-471 
Atkinson, D. & Kelly-Holmes. H. (2016). Exploring language attitudes and ideologies in 
university students’ discussion of Irish in a context of increasing language diversity. 
Language 
and 
intercultural 
communication 
16(2), 
199-215. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14708477.2015.1136317.  
Barbag-Stoll, A. (1983). Social and linguistic history of Nigerian Pidgin. Verlag. 
Blench, R. (2012). An atlas of Nigerian languages. Kay Williamson Educational Foundation. 
http://www.rogerblench.info/Language/Africa/Nigeria/Atlas%20of%20Nigerian%20Lan
guages-%20ed%20III.pdf 
Decamp, D. (1971). Introduction: the study of pidgin and Creole Languages. In D. Hymes (Ed.) 
Pidginization and creolization of languages: proceedings of a conference held at the 
university of West Indies, Mon, Jamaica, April 1968 (pp. 13-39). Cambridge University 
Press. 
Discott (2010). File:Nigeria South Africa Locator (Orthographic projection ).png. Wikipedia 
Commons. 
Deuber, D. (2005). Nigerian Pidgin in Lagos: language contact, variation and change in an 
African urban setting. Battlebridge. 
Egbokhare, F. O. (2003). The story of a language: Nigerian Pidgin in Spatiotemporal, social and 
linguistic context. In P. Lucko, L. Peter & H. Wolf (Eds.) Studies in African varieties of 
English (pp. 21-40). Lang.  
Elugbe, B. O. & Omamor, A.P. (1991). Nigerian Pidgin: Background and prospects. Heinemann 
Educational Books. 
Faraclas, N. (2002). Nigerian pidgin. Routledge. 
Ferguson, C. A. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 15(2), 325–340. 
Gayawan, E., Arogundade, E., & Adebayo, S. (2014). Possible determinants and spatial patterns 
of anaemia among young children in Nigeria: A Bayesian semi-parametric modelling. 
International Health, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/inthealth/iht034 
Haddock, G., & Maio, G. R. (Eds.). (2004). Contemporary perspectives on the psychology of 
attitudes. Psychology Press. 
Haugen, E. (1966). Semicommunication – The Language Gap in Scandinavia. Sociological Inquiry, 
36(2), 280-297. 
Hoffman, M. (2014). Sociolinguistics interviews. In J. Holmes & K. Hazen (Eds.) Research 
Methods in Sociolinguistics: A Practical Guide (pp. 25-41). John Wiley & Sons. 

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
82
Holm, J. (1989). Pidgin and Creoles: Vol 2. Reference survey. Cambridge University Press. 
Herbert, I. (2008). Empowering Nigerian Pidgin: a challenge for status planning? World Englishes, 
27(1), 68–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-971X.2008.00536. 
Igboanusi, H. (2008). Empowering Nigerian Pidgin: a challenge for status planning? World 
Englishes 27, 68-82. 
Ihemere, K. U. (2006). An Integrated Approach to the Study of Language Attitudes and Change 
in Nigeria: The Case of the Ikwerre of Port Harcourt City. In O.F. Arasanyin & M.A. 
Pemberton (Eds.), Selected proceedings of the 36th Annual conference on African 
Linguistics: Shifting the center of Africanism in Language Politics and Economic 
Globalization (pp.194–207). Cascadilla proceedings project. 
Labov, W. (1966). The social stratification of English in New York City. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Liebscher, G., & Dailey‐O'Cain, J. (2009). Language attitudes in interaction 1. Journal of 
sociolinguistics, 13(2), 195-222. 
Mann, C. C. (1996). Anglo-Nigerian Pidgin in Nigerian education: A survey of policy, practices 
and attitudes. In T. Hickey and J. Williams (Eds.) Language, education and society in a 
changing world (pp. 93-106). IRAAL/Multilingual Matters. 
Omachonu, G. S. (2015). Language documentation: A dependable linguistic practice for 
minimizing the effects of endangerment on languages in Nigeria. In O. Ndimele (Ed.), 
Language endangerment: Globalisation and the fate of minority languages in Nigeria (pp. 
1–16). African Books Collective. 
PANONIAN (2022) File:Afro Asiatic peoples Nigeria.png. Wikipedia commons. 
Reed, H. E., & Mberu, B. U. (2014). Capitalizing on Nigeria's demographic dividend: Reaping the 
benefits and diminishing the burdens. African Population Studies, 27(2), 319–330. 
https://doi.org/10.11564/27-2-477 
Ryan, E. B., Giles, H., & Sabastian, R. J. (1982). An integrative perspective for the study of 
attitudes toward Nigerian Pidgin. In E. B. Ryan & H. Giles (Eds.), Attitudes and language 
variation: Socialand Applied Contexts (pp. 1-19) Edward Arnold. 
Sarnoff, I. (1970) Social attitudes and the resolution of motivational conflict. In M. Jahoda, & N. 
Warren (Eds.), Attitudes (pp. 279-284). Penguin. 
Schüppert, A., Hilton, N.H. & Gooskens, C. (2015). Swedish is beautiful, Danish is ugly? 
Investigating the link between language attitudes and intelligibility. Linguistics, 53(2), 
375–403. 
Trofimovich, P., & Turuševa, L. (2015). Ethnic Identity and Second Language Learning. Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics 35, 234–252. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190514000166. 
Trudgill, P. (1972). Sex, covert prestige, and linguistic change in the urban British English of 
Norwich. Language in Society, 1(2), 179–195. 
Wolfram, W. A. (1969). A sociolinguistic description of Detroit Negro speech (Urban Language 
Series, 5). Center for Applied Linguistics.  
Yakpo, K. (2016). “The only language we speak really well”: the English creoles of Equatorial 
Guinea and West Africa at the intersection of language ideologies and language 
policies. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 2016(239), 211-233. 
Yitzhaki, D. (2010). The discourse of Arabic language policies in Israel: Insights from focus 
groups. Language Policy, 9(4), 335–356.  
 
 

NIGERIAN PIDGIN; THE IDENTITY OF A NIGERIAN AWAY FROM HOME 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3 (2023) 
83
Appendix A: Sociodemographic questionnaire 
 
1. Nationality ------------------- 
2. State of Origin ------------ 
3. Age ------------ 
4. Gender ----------- 
5. Languages spoken ---------- 
6. How many years have you lived in Canada? ------------ 
7. How long did you live in Nigeria? 
Appendix B: Questionnaire for language proficiency and language preference. 
Language proficiency:  
a. If you had to describe how well you speak NP which would you say? 
 3 = Fully fluent NP  
 2 = Very well.   
 1 = Moderately well.  
 0 = Hardly at all. 
Language preference: 
b. Which language do you use when you talk to other Nigerians in Canada: English or NP?   
3 = All the time.  
2 = Most of the time.  
1 = Sometimes.  
0 = Not at all.    
Appendix C: Open-ended questions for the focus groups discussion and individual 
interviews. 
1. Do you consciously try to sound Canadian? 
2. What is your favorite Nigerian language in Canada and why is it your favorite 
language?  
3. If you want others to identify you as a Nigerian through the language you speak, which 
would you speak and why? 
4. What language do you prefer to speak with your friends that are Nigerians who do not 
share same indigenous language with you? 
5. What is your opinion about NP? 
6. How would you describe NP to a foreigner? 
7. Would you like your kids to speak NP? What would be your take on that? (follow up 
question). 
8. Between English, NP and your indigenous language(s) which would you prefer to be 
the national/official language of Nigeria. Can you give reasons for your choice? 
9. What is your take on English being taught and used as a medium of instruction in 
school and not NP? 
10. What is your take on the idea of having NP textual materials like stories and moonlight 
tales? (Follow up question: would you buy it for your kids?) 
 
 
 
 

PRECIOUS AFFIA 
Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 3  (2023) 
84
Appendix D: Participant information 
 
Participants Age 
Gender Lang. 
Preference 
NP 
Proficiency 
Frequency of 
use 
Location 
Years 
lived in 
Canada 
Years 
lived in 
Nigeria 
Kenneth 
38 
M 
English 
Moderate 
Most times 
Toronto 
3 
27 
Samuel 
37 
M 
English 
Moderate 
Most times 
Toronto 
1 
36 
Uby 
45 
M 
NP 
Very well 
Most times 
Calgary 
3 
28 
IT 
44 
M 
NP 
Fully fluent 
Most times 
Winnipeg 
12 
32 
UY 
33 
M 
NP 
Fully fluent 
Most times 
Toronto 
2 
20 
Olive 
31 
F 
English 
Moderate 
Most times 
Toronto 
1 
23 
Dora 
33 
F 
English 
Moderate 
Most times 
Toronto 
1 
32 
Nsy 
39 
F 
NP 
Fully fluent 
Most times 
Calgary 
3 
27 
Miriam 
43 
F 
English 
Moderate 
Most times 
Winnipeg 
3 
40 
Cherry 
30 
F 
English 
Moderate 
Most times 
Toronto 
1 
26 
 

