 Olga Frąckiewicz
ORCID 0000-0003-2449-380X
University of Warsaw
 Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology 
in the context of areal influences
Abstract
The development of Nigerian Pidgin English (NPE) and the expansion of its communicative func-
tions is connected to the use of multiword expressions as new means of expression. The question is to 
what extent the NPE phraseology is derived from the original lexiﬁ er, i.e. English, and what the inﬂ uence 
of substratum languages belonging to diﬀ erent genetic and typological groups is. The article presents 
 various types of multiword expressions which are based on English words, but in terms of structural 
features and conceptualization patterns represent collocations copied from other West  African native lan-
guages. In this connection, special attention is given to the use of body-related terms in NPE phraseology. 
Keywords: Nigerian Pidgin English, phraseology, West African languages, areal features
1. Introduction
Nigerian Pidgin English (hereinafter presented also by acronym NPE) is an Eng-
lish-based pidgin spoken as a lingua franca across Nigeria. Being the result of contacts 
between Europeans and native habitants in the coastal area of the Niger delta around 
19th century, in contemporary times it became an important medium of communication 
with its social and regional variants (cf. Caron in this volume). 
Linguistic studies on this language are still not much advanced, although the descriptive 
grammars (Faraclas 1996; Elugbe & Omamor 2007) are now available and characteristics 
of the language structure have been established (Faraclas 2013a; 2013b). One of the most 
interesting aspects of linguistic studies on Nigerian Pidgin English is contributing to the 
knowledge on language development as universal process, but equally important are contact 
phenomena that occur between the lexiﬁ er, i.e. English language and languages of the 
substratum area in which the language has been developing. 
 The testimony for growing importance of the language and its communicative role 
can be found in phraseology. This layer has its signiﬁ cance in the language structure, as 
it allows to create new units in lexical inventory. As more-in-depth research (Frąckiewicz 
2019) indicates, multiword expressions in NPE are very speciﬁ c units which ﬁ rst and 
foremost are copied from other West African native languages. Even though they are based 
on English words, they are newly created collocations which are unique and not consistent 
either with the rules of English grammar or the patterns of English phraseology. Sometimes 
they even seem to be created against those rules.

214 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
All data used for the analyses was ﬁ rstly classiﬁ ed in the light of their structural 
properties, secondly in terms of source domain of their linguistic components, which the 
particular expression was based on1. The most common structures are verbal phrases and 
nominal compounds in which some lexical elements are viewed as a source of calques 
from native languages. 
The interpretation of the data is based on their comparison with similar structures of West 
African languages, Hausa and Yoruba in particular. These similarities also furnish a basis for 
claims that Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology represents West African conceptualisation 
rather than follows English multiword structures or universal creole-like patterns. 
In Nigerian Pidgin English some notions are expressed by analytical structures, which are 
perceived as metaphoric and/or metonymic expressions. They make grounds for expressing 
grammatical categories, such as gender, but they are also source of many other conceptual 
models. The use of body part terms in metaphoric functions is the most characteristic feature 
of NPE phraseology and is given more attention on the following pages. 
The selection of examples was based on the meaning of the phrase components which 
are diﬀ erent than in English. In other words, they constitute a group of lexemes which have 
an idiomatic character, but at the same time they are not a copy of English idioms. The 
analysis primarily refers to the sequence of source lexemes rather than the grammatical 
form of their combination eﬀ ect. Since the classiﬁ cation of phrasal units is based on cate-
gorisation of their constituents, some questions related to this issue will be discussed ﬁ rst.
2. Syntactic categorisation of lexemes in NPE
Categorisation of lexemes in Nigerian Pidgin English is highly problematic. According 
to Mensah, this is not only a problem of this language, but it is in this language that it is 
clearly manifested. “The diﬃ  culties in classifying the nature of the word are largely due 
to the fact that the term ‘word’ is used in a variety of senses, which usually are not clearly 
distinguished” (Mensah 2011: 211). For example, according to Faraclas, the category of 
adjective is absent in the language and there is no possibility to “distinguish the category 
of ‘adjective’ from the categories of ‘noun’ or ‘verb’ ” (Faraclas 1996: 128) or simply 
adjectival meanings are expressed by stative verbs (Faraclas 1996: 30).
As a result of multifunctionality, the lexical items may “belong to more than one 
grammatical class or part of speech” (Mensah 2012: 171). Moreover, due to the lack of 
morphological elements in marking the diﬀ erences between verbs and nouns, it is necessary 
to rely on syntactic criteria (i.e. the function in the sentence) in their identiﬁ cation. As the 
same lexeme may represent many grammatical categories, i.e. chop ‘to eat’ or ‘food’, for 
the purposes of the present analysis, some reference points were established in order to 
deﬁ ne the particular grammatical categories. They are as follows:
Verb – a word used to describe an action, state, or occurrence, which forms the main 
part of the predicate of a sentence, […]2.
1 The examples were extracted from various written texts in NPE, as well as dictionaries and  linguis-
tic articles indicated in references.
2 https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁ nition/verb

 
215
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
Noun – a word which denotes “concrete entities, whose basic role in syntax is in 
phrases representing arguments of a verb” (Matthews 2014: 269).
Adjective – stated as non-existing in NPE (Faraclas 1996: 30), the category of adjec-
tive is perceived as “any form which is reﬂ ected by an English adjective in translation, 
without reference to its derivation or grammatical function in the language being described” 
(Welmers 1974: 249).
In addition, in examples extracted from the existing works on NPE, the categories 
follow the classiﬁ catory scheme adopted by the author. 
3. Structural patterns of idiomatic expressions
From a structural point of view, the most common idiomatic expressions constitute 
a sequence of the following constituents: verb-verb, noun-noun, verb-noun. Subtypes 
involving some particular words can be distinguished. A separate group is the adjective-noun 
pattern which is based on English-like adjectival phrases. On the other hand, the compounds 
which consist of verb-adverb, noun-adverb, adverb-verb, adverb-noun, adverb-adjective, 
adjective-verb and adjective-adverb were not found among the analysed expressions. 
3.1. Verbal compounds
Verbal compounds are the result of a combination of two verbs (Mensah 2011). The 
analysed sources provide the examples as follows:
Compound
Literal meaning
Translation
born throwaway
born, throw away
not in touch with one’s cultural heritage
chop i chop
eat and eat
mutual corruption
cut and sew
cut and sew
Tailor
die wake
die, wake
recover from a desperate ﬁ nancial situation
dry die
dry, die 
HIV/AIDS
du kwanagida3
do, sleep over
sleep over
krai dai
cry, die
Lament
kwat nkpe
scratch, pay
a prostitute
sidonlook
sit down, look
(be) passive
Table 1. A list of compounds which consist of two verbs.
Expressions distinguished in this group remain multiverb constructions in the sentence 
structure, but the lexical units of the combination are unrecognizable. They were lexicalised 
to collocations and gained new meanings which are not related to the original one. As 
shown in the examples, the two verbs make up the compound of two independent units. 
3 The noun kwanagida is a lexicalised phrase borrowed from Hausa, i.e. kwana gida ‘spend a night at 
home’.

216 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
In some cases the conjunction may occur, but it does not change the status of verbs, which 
remains the same in the two items. It is worthwhile indicating that newly created phrases 
(compounds) have the status of either verbs or nouns. This strategy of creating nouns on 
the basis of verb compounds occurs in Akan, e.g.: nsɔ hwε (lit. try, see) ‘temptation’. Other 
examples which involve ﬁ nite verb forms are presented in Table 6. 
3.1. Nominal compounds
The next group of examples includes the combination of lexemes which belong to 
the category of nouns: 
Compound
literal meaning
Translation
babi pancake
babe pancake
‘girl fond of make-up’
bathroom slippers
bathroom slippers
‘rubber ﬂ ip ﬂ ops’
bush man
bush man
‘unsophisticated man’
chop money
food money
‘housekeeping allowance’
chop-remain
food remains
‘leftovers of meal’
country paper
country paper
‘passport’
doll baby
doll baby
‘dumb person’
koko waves
koko waves
‘unbrushed hair’
papa battalion
father battalion
‘a man with many children’
shoe maker
shoe maker
‘shoe repairer’
short knicker
shorts knicker
‘shorts’
stone ground
stone ground
‘fall heavily’
sun shade
sun shade
‘sunglasses’
tear race
tear race
‘to run’
tori man
story man
‘journalist’
weather man
weather man
‘poor man’
Table 2. List of compounds which consist of two nouns.
As presented in the above examples, the constituents, in contrast to verbal  compounds, 
are not always syntactically equal, in some cases they have a head-modiﬁ er structure in the 
nominal phrase. The examples manifest the variety of conceptualisation patterns used to 
create new expressions. In most cases this type of compounding results in the creation of 
nouns which are names of professions, i.e. shoe maker, tori man. This pattern also functions 
in Standard English, i.e. policeman, camera-man and candlestick maker, barrel maker, beer 
maker. Some combinations seem to be inspired by Standard English lexicalised phrases, 
i.e. sun shade ‘sunglasses’, which is similar to the lexeme raincoat in a functional relation
between the two elements (‘protect from’) and has the meaning ‘shade protecting from
sun’. In examples tear race, country paper, papa battalion the ﬁ rst element functions as
the possessor, while the second is the possessed one, which in Standard English would

 
217
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
rather appear as the following: race’s tear, country’s paper, papa’s battalion. In the next 
two examples, even though they are structurally similar, the constituents have inverse 
functions and regarding the result they are based on another Standard English pattern. In 
the expressions pepper eye and tear eye it is rather the second element which denotes the 
possessor, while the ﬁ rst one is possessed and the structures pepper of eye and tear of eye, 
respectively, would be their equivalents. Therefore, the genitive constructions in NPE are 
not marked by morphemes, but by the context. Structurally, these types of constructions 
with no genitive linker are common patterns of many African languages, including Igbo 
and Yoruba (but not Hausa). However, the expressions which consist of two nouns are 
also found in the Hausa language, but they are compounds of syntactically independent 
constituents, e.g. bindigā̀ -dāɗī (lit. gun-pleasantness) ‘ready’ (Pawlak 2010: 195), uwā-ùbā 
(lit. mother-father) ‘an umbrella organization’.
The questions related to the sequence of nominal components and their functional 
interpretation is more complex, when particular examples are taken into consideration. The 
two expressions: doll baby and short knicker are examples of free combinations of Standard 
English lexical units which form new phraseological units. While doll baby constitutes the 
reversed colloquial Standard English term baby doll4, the second expression short knicker 
is a kind of redundant repetition of the two terms for ‘shorts’.
Among expressions consisting of two adjectives there is only one: doti doti (lit. dirty 
dirty) ‘rubbish’. As a result of reduplication, a new noun was created. It follows the pattern 
based on reduplication which is a derivational strategy commonly found in West African 
languages (Frąckiewicz 2019: 85f).
3.1.1. Nominal compounds for marking gender identity 
In the group of nominal compounds a small subgroup which has the status of a regular 
grammatical pattern might be distinguished. These are phrases with the lexemes man/
woman which are used to mark gender identity, i.e. man pikin (lit. man child) ‘male child’, 
wuman pikin (lit. woman child) ‘female child’, man sela (lit. man seller) ‘male seller’, 
wuman sela (lit. woman seller) ‘female seller’. Analogically, the lexemes boi ‘boy’ and 
gel ‘girl’ may be used to mark gender, i.e. house boi (lit. house boy) ‘male servant’, house 
gel (lit. house girl) ‘female servant’, baby-boi (lit. baby boy) ‘male infant’, baby-gel (lit. 
baby girl) ‘female infant’.
A nominal compound with lexemes man ‘man’/wuman ‘woman’ has a special status 
in Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology and grammar. Developed on the basis of Standard 
English, the pattern manifested in policeman/policewoman was extended to the gender 
marker. However, as demonstrated in the examples, the pattern is not directly copied from 
Standard English. While in examples with boi/gel the lexemes follow the noun, in the 
expressions which consist of man/wuman they precede the noun, which is incompatible 
with the Standard English pattern.
4 Baby doll: 1. A doll that looks like baby, 2. A short, frilly ultra-feminine dress (https://www.collin-
sdictionary.com/dictionary/english/baby-doll)

218 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
3.3. Verb-noun combinations
This group of expressions is the largest one in the corpus of data. The combination of 
a verb with a noun seems to be the most productive model for word compounding leading 
to the formation of new lexical items. One of the most productive groups of verb-noun 
combinations are those based on the verb chop ‘to eat’, i.e.:
Expression
Literal meaning
Translation
chop beans
eat beans
fail at something
chop bullet
eat bullet
get shot
chop burger
eat burger
put on weight
chop cockroach
eat cockroach
be pregnant
chop knuckle
eat knuckle
high ﬁ ve
chop life
eat life
to enjoy
chop maut
eat mouth
to kiss
chop slap
eat slap
be slapped
Table 3. Expressions based on the verb chop ‘to eat’ in verb-noun combinations.
The above-mentioned expressions are regular structures based on a verb-object pattern.5 
In most cases, the received eﬀ ect of combining the verb ‘to eat’ with nouns is a verb. 
Therefore, chop functions as a verbal constituent of phrasal verbs in which the second 
element determines the meaning (chop slap ‘be slapped’, chop life ‘to enjoy’).
The use of the verb which means ‘to eat’ as a constituent of phrasal verbs is a char-
acteristic feature of derivational patterns in some West African languages. In Hausa, the 
verb ci ‘eat’ (also shā ‘drink’) constitutes the source “of metaphorical mappings into 
a variety of (sometimes overlapping) semantic domains with basic correlates rooted in real-
world physical experiences” (Jaggar & Buba 2009: 230), e.g.: ci mutuncī̀ (lit. eat decency) 
‘humiliate, treat with disrespect’, ci wākē (lit. eat black-eyed peas) ‘become pregnant’, ci 
kwâf (lit. eat cup) ‘won cup’. As for shā ‘drink’, examples are as follows: shā wàhàlā̀  (lit. 
drink problem) ‘suﬀ er trouble’, shā rānā (lit. drink sun) ‘suﬀ er sun’, shā azùmī (lit. drink 
fasting) ‘temporarily break the fast’, shā kùnū (lit. drink gruel) ‘frown’ (Newman 2007). 
Other verbs may also be used in this function, e.g. in Hausa kashè idṑ  (lit. kill eye) ‘to 
wink’, bugā̀  wayā̀  (lit. hit a wire) ‘make a telephone call’. Other languages of the area 
extensively use verb-noun combinations as a derivational pattern in which the verbal meaning 
‘do’ is very common, e.g. in Igbo: gbaa ego (lit. do money) ‘to pay in’, gbaa egbe (lit. 
do weapon) ‘to shoot up’, gbaa egwu (lit. do dance) ‘to dance’ (Pawlak 2010: 196-197).
In Nigerian Pidgin English, the phrases based on a sequence of a verb and a noun in 
which some other verbs are used also occur. Among them, the verb get in combinations with 
nouns is very common. As most examples with the verb get are combined with nouns which 
denote parts of the body, they will be presented separately later, where the phrases with 
5 In Hausa, the ﬁ xed verb-object collocations are distinguished as idiomatic phrasal verbs (Newman 
2000: 260).

 
219
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
parts of the body-related terms will be discussed. Verb-noun combinations with some other 
verbs are presented below. 
Expression
Literal meaning
Translation
carry woman
carry woman
Womaniser
catch trips
catch trips
entertain usually at the expense of another
cry blood
cry blood
Threat
do anyhow
do anyhow
Unruly
do river
do river
well done
drink garri
drink corn ﬂ our
in trouble
komot mind
come out mind
to forget
kul tempa
cool temper
to calm down
kwanagida bag
sleep over bag
sleepover bag
shine eye
shine eye
be on [one’s] guard/be careful
skata brain
scatter brain
(be) puzzled
watch nait
watch night
security guard
Table 4. Expressions based on other verb-noun combinations.
The presented examples demonstrate that units based on verb-noun combinations are 
syntactic representation of various grammatical categories: nouns, verbs or and adjectives. 
The term adjective is used here to distinguish the so-called stative verbs which are used to 
express the “adjectival” meanings. They are equivalents of the English adjectival phrases 
with the verb ‘to be’, e.g.: sidonlook ‘be passive’, chop cockroach ‘be pregnant’, get liver 
‘be brave’, skata brain ‘be puzzled’, do river ‘well done’. However, the structural pattern 
of examples from Nigerian Pidgin English is not based on the verb ‘to be’ but on other 
verbs, and their conceptual basis is diﬀ erent.
The question of grammatical category seems to be irrelevant in many nominal and 
verbal compounds which are created on the basis of their semantic units rather than their 
grammatical category. Therefore, the sequence of phrasal components may be diﬀ erent 
from the examples presented above, i.e. mama put (lit. mother put) ‘local restaurants’, 
heart cut (lit. heart cut) ‘be afraid, shocked’.
3.4. Adjective-noun lexical units 
The adjectival phrases which include English adjectives are a speciﬁ c type of expressions 
which form one lexical unit. The new item has the status of a noun.
Here are examples extracted from the sources: 
Expression
Literal meaning
Translation
bad name
bad name
a person with a negative image
big grammar
big grammar
long and diﬃ  cult English words
brokun plate
broken plate
breakable plates, especially from China

220 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
carbon copy
carbon copy6
look alike; replica
monin fud
morning food
Breakfast
native doctor
native doctor
Herbalist
personal person
personal person
best friend
popular side
popular side
cheap seats
pure wata
pure water
bottled water
remote control
remote control
to control a person with voodoo
small chop
small food
Appetizers
strong head
strong head
stubborn; persistent
strong thing
strong thing
something bad
tum-tum belle
round belly
big rounded belly; beer belly
whole man
whole man
Adult
yellow fever
yellow fever
a traﬃ  c warden
yellow man
yellow man
Albinos
Table 5. Expressions based on a combination of adjectives with nouns.
Those expressions are assumed to be endocentric compounds7 in which the ﬁ rst part 
of the expressions is the modiﬁ er of the head which follows it.
Although in terms of structure expressions from this group follow the rules of Standard 
English syntax, they are original constructions speciﬁ c to Nigerian Pidgin English. They are 
not a copy of expressions which are part of Standard English, therefore they constitute an 
unique set of adjective phrases. The collocations are copied from native African languages 
or created ad hoc and have a metaphoric provenance. They do not necessarily lead to direct 
equivalents from African languages, they rather refer to conceptual patterns used to code 
the particular notion in a particular language. For example, brokun plate ‘breakable plates, 
especially from China’ has the same conceptual basis as the Hausa term fā̀ ɗi-kà-mutù (lit. 
fall down – die) ‘chinaware, breakable dishes’ (Newman 2007: 57). 
The African-based origin of these phrases is also reﬂ ected in the violation of the rules 
of English syntax, when the adjective follows the noun, as in belle sweet ‘happiness’, belle 
full ‘satiety (full from eating)’.
The word order in an adjective phrase is speciﬁ c to a language, and in West African 
languages the head-modiﬁ er sequence varies. In some languages, e.g. in Mande (Creissels 
2016: 3f), attributive adjectives are placed in postposition to the noun, in Hausa they may 
either precede or follow the noun, similarly as in the case of Akan (Appah 2013) in which 
both types (adjective-noun and noun-adjective) of compounding are possible, i.e. opanyin 
bon (lit. adult bad) ‘irresponsible adult’, but also asɛm kɛse (lit. matter big) ‘big issue’, 
ade tantan (lit. thing ugly) ‘ugly thing’ (Appah 2013: 77).
6 Even though the expression occurs in Standard English it has a diﬀ erent semantic motivation
7 Endocentric compound – “is the one that has head. The head expresses the core meaning of the 
compound , and it belongs to the same lexical category as the compound as a whole” (Aronoﬀ , Fudeman 
2011:114).

 
221
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
3.5. Lexicalised sentences mirrored from substrate languages
Replacing a word by a sentence or a phrase is a feature of many languages, including 
Standard English, i.e. merry-go-round, forget-me-not. In Nigerian Pidgin English this 
type of phrases is very common and they have diﬀerent translation equivalents. They 
have various structural patterns of a clause, very often they are based on an imperative 
paradigm. However, some phrases presented in the table below are assumed to be exocentric 
compounds8, where there is no head of expression and any part restricts the other parts: 
Expression
Literal meaning
Translation
beat am die
beat him die
beat to death
belle-turn me
belly turn me
Diarrhoea
berry don black
berries became black
a way to express that there is enough money
berry never black
berries have not become 
black
a way to express that you are not wealthy 
enough yet
bodi du mi
body do me
Premonition
butta my bread
butter my bread
answered prayer
carry am for head
carry it in head
take up too much responsibility for sth; 
become obsessed with
chuk bodi put
chook body put
to squeeze into a tight corner; getting involved 
with other people’s business
dig am out
dig it out
Fight
draw bodi take
draw body take
Withdraw
ejika ni shop
shoulder is shop (Yoruba 
ejika ni ‘shoulder is’)
a tailor walking on the street with his portable 
sewing machine on his shoulder
eye go come down
eye will come down 
come back to reality
go here go there
go here go there
Indecisive
leg no dey comot leg 
no dey house
leg is not coming out leg one who goes out too much
leg no dey stay one 
place
leg is not staying one 
place
restless; constantly moving about
leg no komot
leg no come out
someone who seems to always be present
mind tell me
mind tell me
Intuition
pe wit tit
pay with teeth
(be) too expensive
put leg for road
put leg on road
start going
take eye see
take eye see
look without touching
wash hand now
wash hand now
come and join me in this meal
your hand reach
your hand reach
to aﬀ ord
Table 6. List of lexicalised sentences.
8 Exocentric compound – “compounds whose lexical category or meaning are not determinable from 
the head” (Aronoﬀ  & Fudeman 2011: 114).

222 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
Some other examples enrich the list, but they may be qualiﬁ ed as phrases rather than 
clauses, i.e. betta follow ‘good fortune’ (lit. better follow), money for hand ‘no credit’ (lit. 
money in hand), head no correct ‘mad; eccentric’, (lit. head [is] no correct), weak for 
bodi ‘in a state of shock’ (lit. weak in body). The two examples: belle-turn me and mind 
tell me seem to be a reverted lexicalised form of imperative sentences, where the object 
has been moved to the ﬁ rst position and it precedes the ﬁ nite verb and pronominal object.
The lexicalised sentences used as nominal constituents are a characteristic feature 
of Nigerian Pidgin English. They represent another example of analytical structures and 
determine the stylistic peculiarities of this language. 
This type of desentencisation and the replacing of lexemes by a whole clause is com-
mon in West African languages. In Yoruba: kóiyèsíara (lit. put mind to body) means ‘to be 
observant’, whereas Babalawo (lit. old man/father has cult) ‘herbalist’ (Taiwo 2014: 50). 
Examples from Hausa are as follows: mālàm-bū̀ɗe-littāfī̀ (lit. Mr open book) ‘butterﬂ y’ 
(Newman 2007: 149), fā̀ ɗi – tā̀ shi (lit. fall down and get up) ‘struggle, eﬀ ort’, dà-na-sanī̀ 
(lit. if I had known) ‘regret, repentance’, kà-cī̀ci-kà-cī̀ci (lit. make a guess, make a guess) 
‘riddle, quiz’ (Piłaszewicz 1990).
4. Parts of the body as a source domain of idiomatic expressions
As constituents of phrasal units, body-related terms occur in diﬀ erent combinations. 
Regarding the structural patterns, the most common type is represented by combinations with 
verbs. The second largest group consists of expressions with adjectives. On semantic grounds, 
the most productive words are bodi (‘body’), belle (‘belly’), ai (‘eye’), hed (‘head’), maut 
(‘mouth’). Expressions based on other body parts are also possible, but they are not so common.
4.1. Expressions with bodi ‘body’
Following the patterns present in other languages, the term ‘body’ in Nigerian Pidgin 
English may denote a reﬂ exive concept (Heine 2014: 21), but it had not been grammati-
calised into a reﬂ exive pronoun as it happened in other languages of West Africa, i.e. in 
Yoruba Nwosu rí ara rε (lit. Nwosu saw his body) ‘Nwosu saw himself’ (Heine 2011: 50).
Other semantic extensions of bodi ‘body’ are demonstrated below.
Expression
Literally
Meaning
get bodi
to have a body
Overweight
Gumbodi
to gum a body
to stalk
Joinbodi
to join a body
strike, group
Karibodi
to carry a body
(be) proud
shake bodi
to shake a (one’s) body
to spend money
Table 7. Expressions with the term bodi.
The examples indicate that word combinations are seen as units, but the process of their 
lexicalisation is not complete and the rules of spelling are not consistent. In some cases the 

 
223
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
expression consists of two separate words, in some other they are merged. Moreover, the 
result of this combination  may refer to either verbal or nominal constituent, the meaning 
of karibodi ‘(be) proud’ is an equivalent of adjective. 
4.2. Expressions with belle ‘belly/stomach’
Another term which is productively used in the expressions is the word belle ‘belly/
stomach’, i.e.:
Expression
Literally
Meaning
belle-turn me 
belly-turn me 
diarrhoea
get belle
to have a belly
(be) pregnant
get belle to ﬁ t laf
to have a belly to be able to 
laugh
(be) able to laugh
give belle 
to give a belly
add volume
hold belle
to hold a belly
prevent hunger
Table 8. Expressions with the term belle.
As belly is perceived as the source of emotions in many African languages, Nige-
rian Pidgin English also shares this feature, but the above-mentioned examples show that 
the  idiomatic expressions involving belle may also have other conceptualisations. Most 
of the expressions are verbal compounds, the compound belle-turn me is somehow irregular 
in this context.
4.3. Expressions with ai ‘eye’
The table below presents compounds with the word ai which in some texts also appear 
as eye, as in the original Standard English spelling. The collected examples are as follows:
Expression
Literally
Meaning
big ai
big eye
ambitious; greedy
chook ai
to chook an eye
to glance
cut ai
to cut an eye
to give an eye signal
difren ai
diﬀ erent eye
opinion
mek ai
to make an eye
to wink
pour ai
to pour an eye
to check out place or something
sharp ai
sharp eye
(be) observant
Table 9. Expressions with the term ai.
Collocations which contain the word ai are also very common in the language. In 
most examples ai occurs in combination with verbs, therefore mek ai, chuk ai, pour ai, cut 
ai. These are phrasal verbs which are equivalents of English verbs. Only few expressions 

224 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
are built as phrasal structures with adjectives, i.e.: difren ai, sharp ai. They are nominal 
components of the clause.
4.4. Expressions with hed ‘head’
Examples presented in Table 10 are to demonstrate that in Nigerian Pidgin English the 
word ‘head’ is perceived diﬀ erently than in many West African languages where ‘head’ is 
the source of a reﬂ exive pronoun (Heine 2011: 41). For example, in Hausa Ni da kaina 
ba na sonta (lit. I and my head do not like her) ‘I don’t like her myself’ (Pawlak 2014: 
147). Also in Fulani the reﬂ exive pronoun is derived from the lexeme hoore ‘head’ (Heine 
2011: 57). Semantic derivations of hed in Nigerian Pidgin English extend to senses related 
to the character, state of mind, e.g.:
Expression
Literally
Meaning
bad hed
bad head
unlucky person
get big hed
to have a big head
(be) able to do something
get hed
to have a head
(be) reasonable
trong hed
strong head
Stubborn
Table 10. Expressions with the term hed.
Many expressions with hed are adjectival phrases, i.e. big hed, bad hed, trong hed, hot 
hed. When used in verbal expressions, i.e. get hed, the term ‘head’ is still used to code an 
adjectival meaning (in the form of stative verb).
4.5. Expressions with maut ‘mouth’
The meaning of expressions which contain the word maut is diﬀ erentiated by other 
words which determine its phrasal collocation. Here are examples extracted from the sources:
Expression
Literally
Meaning
basket maut
basket mouth
(be) blabbermouth
chop maut
to eat a mouth
to kiss
get maut
to have a mouth
talkative
mek maut
to make a mouth
to boast
mek maut like mumu
to make the mouth like a fool
(be) surprised
open mout
to open one’s mouth
to talk
put maut
to put one’s mouth
to comment
sharp maut
sharp mouth
acid tongue
shuk/chuk maut
to shake a mouth
to interfere
smel maut
to smell a mouth
to use oﬀ ensive words
sweet maut
sweet mouth
sweet tooth; silver tongued
Table 11. Expressions with the term maut.

 
225
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
Among the phrases with the word maut ‘mouth’, the largest number is represented 
by combination with verbs, therefore shuk/chuk maut, put maut, but nominal compounds 
(smel maut, basket maut) or adjective phrases (sharp maut) are also possible. The idiomatic 
expression mek maut like mumu (lit. make mouth like stupid) ‘to be surprised’ is an instance 
of African conceptualisation which is based on presenting various states of the human body.
4.6. Expressions with other parts of the body
Many other parts of the body-related terms are used in idiomatic expressions, among 
them ‘nose’(NPE: nose), ‘face’ (NPE: face, fes), ‘hand’ (NPE: han, hand), ‘leg’ (NPE: leg), 
‘teeth’ (NPE: tit, teeth), ‘skin’ (NPE: skin), ‘throat’ (NPE: throat), ‘neck’ (NPE: neck, nek), 
‘liver’ (NPE: liver), ‘heart’ (NPE: heart, hat) which occur in the available sources. It is 
interesting to note that also ‘mind’ and ‘brain’ are used in this function.
Expression
Literally
Meaning
(get) meni leg
to have many legs 
complications
back hand
back hand
to slap someone with the back of your hand
blue tooth 
blue tooth
to harm (by supernatural means)
cut hat
to cut the heart
to surprise 
cut neck 
to cut a neck
when you like something so much
drai skin
dry skin
skinny person
drai skin 
dry skin
skinny person
draw throat
draw the throat
stimulate appetite
fall hands
fall hands
to act immature/ disappoint
ﬁ nger foot 
ﬁ nger (of the) foot 
toe
get liver
to have a liver 
(be) brave
komot mind 
come out one’s mind
to forget 
long leg
long leg
well connected
long throat
long throat
glutton (Mensah 2011) greedy (naijalingo)
mind tell me
mind tell me
intuition
pe wit tit
to pay with teeth
(be) too expensive
poke nose
poke one’s nose
to interpose
raise hand
raise one’s hand
to salute
show 32 
to show 32 
to smile
shuk leg autsaid 
to shook leg outside 
to engage in an adulterous relationship by 
married woman 
skata brain
to scatter brain
(be) puzzled
tie face
to tie face 
to sulk 
troway fes
to throw away face
to ignore
Table 12. Expressions with other parts of the body. 

226 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
The phrases involving body-part terms represent various structural patterns and refer 
to many ways of coding the meaning through metaphoric expressions. Along with verbal 
and nominal phrases, they include lexicalised sentences, such as mind tell me ‘intuition’. 
Particular examples which refer to a speciﬁ c African conceptualisation draw attention to 
the use of teeth as a source of other notions, i.e. pe wit tit (lit. to pay with teeth) ‘(be) too 
expensive’, show 32 (lit. to show 32) ‘to smile’.
5. Concluding remarks: English lexicon – 
African conceptualization patterns in Nigerian Pidgin 
English phraseology
Nigerian Pidgin English is very productive in terms of creation of phraseological units 
which become new lexical items. Even though they are based on the English lexicon, their 
conceptual basis and structural patterns are copied from indigenous languages. 
The examples used to present the structure of idiomatic expressions in NPE  conﬁ rm that 
their patterns are found in many African languages of the area. Moreover, the expressions 
have the same lexical basis. The data allows distinguishing conceptual patterns which they 
follow in expressing the meaning. From this perspective, the most productive sources of 
conceptualisation may be distinguished. The collected material justiﬁ es the statement that 
the human body is the richest reservoir of metaphoric expressions which further develop 
into stable grammatical or lexical units. The examples from West African languages conﬁ rm 
that Nigerian Pidgin English shares the property of using parts of the body- related terms in 
phraseological units with languages of the area and that their conceptual patterns are similar.
5.1. Verbal phrases and nominal compounds as a source of calques 
from native languages
Various types of phrases which represent verbal phrases or nominal compounds, as 
shown in the preceding sections, were also recognized as a strategy for new word forma-
tion in a number of West African languages. In many cases, the Nigerian Pidgin English 
expressions seem to be directly copied from indigenous languages. Whereas the most 
convincing examples can be taken from Yoruba or Igbo, numerous examples are also found 
in Hausa, which is not the main source of its structural borrowings,9 i.e. NPE pour ai ‘to 
check out a place or something’ is an equivalent of Hausa zuba ido (lit. pour eye) ‘to gaze’, 
while joinbodi ‘to gather, strike’ is a structural copy of haɗa jiki (lit. join body) ‘collect in 
a group’ in Hausa (Pawlak 2014: 145). Similarly tie face (lit. to tie face) ‘to sulk’ in NPE 
resembles Hausa expression for an angry look: ɗaure fuska (lit. to tie face) (Almajir 2013: 
96). The Hausa compound yi girman kai (lit. do big head), which denotes the feature of 
being ‘full of concepts’ (Almajir 2013: 97) was mirrored in the Nigerian Pidgin English 
expression get big hed ‘(be) able to do something’. Also NPE sweet mouth ‘silver tongue’ 
probably has its source in Hausa yi zaƙin baki (lit. do sweet mouth) ‘present convincing 
9 See also (Frąckiewicz 2019).

 
227
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
speech’ (Almajir 2013: 99). Even if the meanings of some expressions are slightly diﬀ erent10, 
mutual inspirations for using the linguistic structures to code the meaning are clear. The 
phrases chop cockroach (lit. eat cockroach) ‘be pregnant’, belle sweet (lit. belly sweet) 
‘happiness’ and bad-belle (lit. bad belly) ‘malice’ are assumed to be direct copies of the 
Hausa patterns. Even though in Hausa the ﬁ rst example is rendered as ci wākē (lit. eat 
black-eyed peas) ‘become pregnant’, conceptually it seems to be similar and in both cases 
it is related to the idea of eating (something). Similarly, expressions with ‘belly’ might be 
perceived as conceptually common with Hausa: farin cikī̀ (lit. white belly) ‘happiness’ and 
bā̀ kin cikī̀ (lit. black belly) ‘sadness, envy’ (Hollington 2015: 95).
5.1.1. The use of the body-related terms in metaphoric functions
The use of body-part terms to create new expressions is common in many languages 
of the world. “Body parts are typically animate concepts, being inalienable components 
of living human or animal organisms. Accordingly, combining these concepts with inan-
imate possessor nouns constitutes an unconventional process that results in the creation 
of new concepts” (Heine 2014: 13). Combining the body-related terms with other words 
brings about the creation of a new compound, phase, idiomatic expression or grammatical 
construction (Heine 2014: 13).
In Nigerian Pidgin English, the body-part terms furnish a conceptual basis for phrases 
which constitute the largest group of metaphoric expressions. In some cases, the same 
word may be used as a term related directly to a body function or is a metaphoric expo-
nent of a more abstract notion. For example, a lexeme bodi, when used metaphorically, 
denotes a ‘person’, i.e. how yo bodi dey (lit. how is your body) ‘how are you’, while in 
other expressions its original meaning ‘body’ is preserved, i.e.: get bodi ‘overweight’. 
The following nouns were identiﬁ ed (Heine 2014;  Corum 2015) as a basis for metaphors 
characteristic of some West African languages. 
The metaphoric usage of parts of the body-related terms includes:
1) identifying bodi with the meaning ‘person’, as in the greeting formula How yo bodi de? 
(lit. how is your body?) ‘how are you?’ and its response bodi dey in cloth (lit. body 
is in clothes) ‘I’m ﬁ ne’. Similarly the concept of person/life’ is identiﬁ ed with word 
‘body’ in many West African languages. In Hausa the question Yaya jiki? (lit. how 
is body) means ‘how are you?’ In Ewe “the body and the mind, perceiving, feeling, 
thinking and knowing, are much closer connected, in fact, inseparable, as compared 
to the perspectives of the body in the Western culture” (Hollington 2015: 92).
2) expressing the notion of SELF with the word meaning ‘life’, as in my life don spoil 
(lit. my life spoiled) ’I’m destroyed’, what can be compared to Hausa: Raina ya ɓaci 
(lit. my life became spoiled) ‘I’m sad’ (Pawlak 2014: 156). Another expression which 
conﬁ rms this thesis is Kom giv your life (lit. come and give your life) ’sacriﬁ ce yourself’ 
which could be compared with Hausa: Ransa yana sansa (lit. his life wants it) ‘he 
wants it’ (Pawlak 2014: 150). This notion has many structural and semantic variants, 
as demonstrated under 4.5.1.
10 As an example of semantic shift is the lexeme raincoat, which was borrowed from English but in 
Nigerian Pidgin English it is used to denote the meaning ‘condom’.

228 
 
Olga Frąckiewicz
3) perceiving belly/stomach as a seat of emotions, i.e.: belle full (lit. belly full) ‘satiety’ 
(full from eating) , belle sweet (lit. belly sweet) ‘happiness’, bad-belle (lit. bad belly) 
‘malice’.
According to Hollington (2015), this conceptualisation pattern has a wider African 
perspective. As opposed to (modern) European languages, where the heart is perceived as 
a seat of emotions, in many African languages it is rather the belly/stomach which functions 
as a seat of emotions (Hollington 2015: 94). 
That kind of conceptualisation is also found in NPE, where expressions with ‘belly’ 
are related to emotions, e.g. Make Nigerians pick candidates wey go sweet their belle ‘let 
Nigerians choose candidates who will make them happy’ (lit. make their belly sweet).
The question of how deep these conceptual patterns of expressing the notions are 
rooted in the West African languages and whether they are shared by other languages of 
the area, remains the subject of future research.
References
Almajir, Tijani Shehu. 2013. “The Polysemy of Body Part Terms in Hausa within the Frame of Image 
Schemas”. Studies of the Department of African Languages and Cultures 47, 93-111.
Appah, Clement Kwamina Insaidoo. 2013. “The Case against A-N Compounding in Akan”. Journal of West 
African languages 40 (1), 73-87. 
Aronoﬀ , Mark & Kirsten Fudeman. 2011. What is morphology?. United Kingdom: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Corum, Micah. 2015. Substrate and Adstrate: The Origins of Spatial Semantics in West African Pidgincreoles. 
Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter Mouton.
Creissels, Denis. 2013. “Existential predication in typological perspective”, paper presented at the 46th 
Annual Meeting of the Societas Linguistica Europaea, Split, 18–21 September 2013, http://www.
deniscreissels.fr/public/Creissels-Exist.Pred.pdf. 
Elugbe, Ben Ohiomambe & Augusta Phil Omamor. 2007. Nigerian Pidgin English. Backgrounds and 
Prospects. Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books. 
Faraclas, Nicholas. 1996. Nigerian Pidgin English Descriptive Grammar. London: Routledge. 
Faraclas, Nicholas. 2013a. “Nigerian Pidgin structure dataset”. In: Susanne Maria Michaelis, Philippe Maurer, 
Martin Haspelmath & Magnus Huber (eds.). Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures Online. 
Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, http://apics-online.info/contributions/17. 
Faraclas, Nicholas. 2013b. “Nigerian Pidgin”. In: Susanne Maria Michaelis, Philippe Maurer & Martin 
Haspelmath (eds.). The Survey of Pidgin and Creole Languages, vol 1. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 176-184. 
Frąckiewicz, Olga. 2019. The Image of African languages structures in Nigerian Pidgin English, PhD 
dissertation, University of Warsaw.
Frąckiewicz, Olga. 2019. “Some common patterns of grammatical structures and linguistic conceptualization 
in Hausa and Nigerian Pidgin English”. In: Nina Pawlak (ed.).  Linguistic Evidence of Cultural Distance. 
Hausa in Cross-Cultural Communication. Warszawa: Elipsa, 194-204.
Heine, Bernd. 2011. “Areas of Grammaticalization and Geographical Typology”. In: Osamu Hieda, Christa 
König, Hirosi Nakagawa (eds.). Geographical Typology and Linguistic Areas: with special reference 
to Africa. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 41-66. 
Heine, Bernd. 2014. “The Body in Language: Observations from Grammaticalization”. In: Matthias Bren zinger, 
Iwona Kraska-Szlenk (eds.). The Body in Language: Comparative Studies of Linguistic Embodiment.  
Leiden: BRILL, 13-32.
Hollington, Andrea. 2015. Travelling Conceptualizations. A cognitive and anthropological linguistic study 
of Jamaican. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.

 
229
Nigerian Pidgin English phraseology in the context of areal influences 
Jaggar, Philip & Malami Buba. 2009. “Metaphorical extensions of ‘eat’ =>[OVERCOME] and ‘drink’ 
=>[UNDERGO] in Hausa”. In: John Newman. The linguistics of eating and drinking [Typological 
Studies of the language, vol 84]. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 229-252.
Matthews, Peter Hugoe. 2014. The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Linguistics.  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mensah, Eyo Oﬃ  ong. 2011. “Lexicalization in Nigerian Pidgin”. Concentric: Studies in Linguistics 37(2), 
209-240. 
Mensah, Eyo Oﬃ  ong. 2012. “Grammaticalization in Nigerian Pidgin English”. Íkala, revista de lenguaje 
y cultura 17 (2), 167-179. 
Newman, Paul. 2000. The Hausa language. An Encyclopedic Reference Grammar. New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Newman, Paul. 2007. A Hausa-English Dictionary. New Haven & London: Yale University Press. 
Pawlak, Nina. 2010. Języki afrykańskie. Warszawa: Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego.
Pawlak, Nina. 2014. “The notion of SELF in Hausa”. In: Matthias Brezinger & Iwona Kraska-Szlenk (eds.). 
The Body in Language: Comparative Studies of Linguistic Embodiment. Leiden/Boston: BRILL, 140-159.
Piłaszewicz, Stanisław. 1990. “Phraseologisms in Hausa. New development or an old tradition”. Studies in 
of the Department of African Languages and Cultures, Hausa Studies III, 5-21.
Taiwo, Oye Paul. 2014. “The morpho-syntactic interaction and the derivation of nominal compounds in 
Yorùbá”. International Journal of Language Studies 8 (1), 49-71.
Welmers, William Everett. 1974. African Language Structures. Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: University 
of California Press.

