See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/346627523
Nigerian Pidgin English: A Cultural Universal for National Communication and
Policy Enactment
Article · November 2020
DOI: 10.7176/JPCR/50-09
CITATIONS
6
READS
7,308
1 author:
Beryl Ehondor
Pan-Atlantic University
21 PUBLICATIONS   47 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Beryl Ehondor on 04 December 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Journal of Philosophy, Culture and Religion                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2422-8443 An International Peer-reviewed Journal 
 
Vol.50, 2020 
 
69 
Nigerian Pidgin English: A Cultural Universal for National 
Communication and Policy Enactment  
 
Beryl Ehondor 
School of Media & Communication, Pan-Atlantic University, Lagos, Nigeria 
beryl.ehondor@pau.edu.ng  
Abstract 
Recurrent ethnic conflicts and political strife are threats to national unity and pride. Some argue, this phenomenon 
is related to the impact of prior Western dominance, globalisation and neo-colonialism. As panacea, this paper 
leans on Kwasi Wiredu’s proposition of Language, a Cultural Universal, as essential for intercultural and national 
communication. The paper, using discourse analysis argues that the Nigeria Pidgin English Language has a 
unifying potential for Nigeria. Nigerian Pidgin speaking is currently more popular compared to the 3 regional 
languages, Hausa, Igbo, Yoruba, and English language. This proposition further explored Spolsky’s National 
Language Policy Theory. It concludes that Nigeria’s multi-ethnic reality and antecedents’ challenges be resolved 
by the pragmatic positivist approach of language unification. Recommendations include a review of the National 
communication policy, creation of language policy, declaration that Nigerian Pidgin be officially added to the list 
of languages for National Communication, in the interest of National Unity.  
Keywords: Spolsky’s Theory, National Communication Policy, Cultural Universal, Nigerian Pidgin English  
DOI: 10.7176/JPCR/50-09 
Publication date:November 30th 2020 
 
1. Introduction  
Africa and indeed Nigeria are still in the dilemma of the definition of self, the problem of identity, aggravated by 
the impact of British intrusion and amalgamation of different regions and ethnic groups to form the Nigerian state. 
With a concocted, forced identity, Nigeria continues to struggle to remain together, having controversies over what 
‘really’ connects all the citizens.  
There is an assumption that the division in the country is tied to the fact that many different ethnic groups were 
lumped together without a buy-in. Still, since language has a unifying potential, especially for African communities, 
then a drive for a common language is imperative. A common language is essential because when human persons 
gather, they communicate, they talk, express feelings and opinions, requiring a language to do the same. A language 
frames the mindset pulls down walls of resistance or conflicting philosophies and eases a unified purpose within 
the communication.  
In contemporary times of global and intercultural relations, there is a myriad of incentive for a person to learn a 
contact language beyond his mother tongue (Davydov, Shapoval, & Weber, 2018), reasons including business, 
social networking, politics etc. Selten & Pool (1991) in Davydov et al. (2018) further argues that the gross 
communicative benefits a person is positively correlated with the number of persons he communicates with and 
sharing at least a common language. This language potential directly impacts business and all aspects of living, 
ease inter-relations and communicativity.  
So as a pragmatic panacea, there have been several calls for the Nigerian Pidgin English to be adopted as lingua 
franca in Nigeria and virtually the language of National communication to facilitate effective communication and 
peace in Nigeria. The Nigerian Pidgin is widespread and spoken throughout the country (Ifechelobi & Ifechelobi, 
2015), as should a national (indigenous) language, thus necessitating a National Language Policy. 
A national language policy is inspired by the pursuit to ‘minimise internal differences & maximise external ones’. 
However, to minimise internal differences, the ideal national language policy purposes that all citizens of the nation 
speaking the same language (McConville, 2016). In recognition of the impact of a language several countries have 
made a case for implementation of a National language policy (Bruen, 2013), (Albury, 2015), (McConville, 2016), 
(East, Chung, & Arkinstall, 2012) (Gao, 2017).  Nigeria also has a gap in this regard, as it has no language policy 
in Nigeria despite calls for it plus a language planning (Ogunmodimu, 2015) (East, Chung, & Arkinstall, 2012), 
However, in an attempt at a ‘balanced’ approach, the government via the National communication policy carries 
that the national languages are three regional indigenous ones, Hausa, Igbo & Yoruba, and then the English 

Journal of Philosophy, Culture and Religion                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2422-8443 An International Peer-reviewed Journal 
 
Vol.50, 2020 
 
70 
Language (Davydov, Shapoval, & Weber, 2018). With the English language being the language of formal education 
and legislation, and business, locally and internationally. It is worthy of note that Nigeria has over 500 local 
languages and rich cultures, some of which are gradually going extinct. The minority groups and languages feel 
maligned even from political roles at the national level, as it appears only persons mostly from two of the major 
tribes get the big positions and make room for their ‘brothers’. Many have little or no sense of belonging towards 
the Nigerian state. This palpable division has led to and continues to fuel civil unrest and external intrusions to 
polity, from Western powers and recently, the Asians. 
This quandary’s root cause as mentioned before can be traced to an identity crisis, not just of Nigeria but Africa, 
and it is not unrelated to the negative impact of Western domination in years past, globalisation and neo-
colonialism. As a panacea, this paper leans on Kwasi Wiredu’s proposition of Cultural Universals (language 
communication in particular) as essential for intercultural communication (Fayemi, 2011). Effective intercultural 
communication, in our context, implies a means for national unity, communication, growth and development. 
Findings from empirical reviews validate the assumption that Nigerian Pidgin speaking is more popular compared 
to the three regional languages, Hausa, Igbo, Yoruba. English language is learnt within formal school structure, 
thus making it elitist and reducing development and eloquence on a mass scale. Even now, adverts and general 
announcements from the government are broadcasted in Pidgin to ease the dissemination and understanding of the 
message. From the foregoing, objective reality indicates that the languages for national communication via the 
national communication policy appear incapable of effective national communication. However, Pidgin English 
cuts across all socioeconomic classes, ethnicities and literacy level. 
Because of this objective reality, this paper proposes that the pragmatic approach for the government is a review 
of the National communication policy, creation of a language policy and declaration that the Nigerian Pidgin be 
included and top the list of languages for National Communication, in the interest of National Unity. The subject 
matter will be considered by looking at the Nigerian Pidgin English origins and place in National communication. 
The study also tests the Nigerian Pidgin English against the Spolsky National Language Policy Theory. It also 
looks at the language’s dynamic position as a cultural universal to cater for the nation’s multi-ethnic milieu. Finally, 
the paper considers prospects of Nigerian Pidgin for nation unification, while concluding with a call for a National 
Language Policy with Nigerian Pidgin as National Language. 
 
2. 
Methodology   
This study adopted the discourse analysis methodology and archival research to review constructs to take a 
conceptual position. Sources of data are online libraries, journal repository platforms like Ebsco and Google 
scholar. Other sources were books, conference resources, academic journals and relevant magazines. 
 
3. 
Theoretical Framework 
Spolsky’s National Language Policy Theory on Nigerian Pidgin English  
Spolsky’s theory on National Language Policy further aids the argument of this paper. Spolsky (2009) proposes 
that four common and co-existing forces drive language policies at the national level: 
1) 
National (or ethnic) ideology or claims of identity; 
2) 
the role of English as a global language; 
3) 
A nation’s sociolinguistic situation; and 
4) 
An increasing interest in linguistic rights within the social and civil rights framework. (Albury, 2016) 
In light Spolsky’s theory and the factors or forces that drive national language policies, the Nigerian Pidgin 
Language has a national identity. It draws some bits of the English language and fuses bits of some of the national 
languages (i.e. Hausa, Igbo, Yoruba), in understandable contexts. Nigeria’s sociolinguistic situation makes the 
country appear like a multiverse, hence the need for a unifying national language.  
The Nigerian Pidgin accommodates all ethnic groups as the dynamism of the language accommodates ethnic 
variations. It further quells the battle around linguistic rights, politicking around language divides, dousing the 
label of ‘major or minor’ and other regional civil entitlement mindsets. This sufficiently positions the Nigerian 
Pidgin as a cultural universal, and strategically position for adaptation in the National Language Policy. 
 

Journal of Philosophy, Culture and Religion                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2422-8443 An International Peer-reviewed Journal 
 
Vol.50, 2020 
 
71 
4. 
Literature Review 
4.1      National Communication Policy, the Nigerian Pidgin English, Universalist theory  
‘Lingua instrumentum regni’ is the language policy adopted by European countries (up till the 20th century), and 
it means that ‘language is the instrument of political control’ (Bernini, 2013). This policy manifested in the 
enforcement of English as national communication language is nations dominated by Britain and other western 
powers. 
While there are different theories as to the origin of the Nigerian Pidgin, this paper aligns with the Universalist 
theory to explain the source of the Nigerian Pidgin. The Universalist Theory is based on the assumption that human 
persons have the innate capacity and tendency to simplify the language. English was first heard from the 
Portuguese traders as they traded around the Niger Delta region. Pidgin English thus developed as a contact 
language from their interaction, collaboration and cohabitation, to ease trade and communication (Ifechelobi & 
Ifechelobi, 2015). The Pidgin language has however evolved incorporating bits and pieces of Niger Delta and other 
Nigerian language inclusions like chai (Igbo), abi (Yoruba), yama-yama (Hausa). 
Nigerian Pidgin is described as a contact, and marginal language (Balogun, 2013) used to achieve communication 
needs in well-defined situations but combining elements of the indigenous language of its speakers (Elugbe & 
Omamor, 1991). Ifechelobi & Ifechelobi (2015) further describe pidginisation as a complex process of 
sociolinguistics where the indigenous and English language are substrate and superstrate, consecutively.  
It is worthy of note that the Nigerian Pidgin has phonological and morphological structure distinct from broken 
English, which is actually ‘bad grammar’, a deliberately flawed or failed attempt at speaking the English Language. 
Case in point is the bad grammar used by Chief Zerubudaya in the old soap opera, ‘Village Headmaster’. 
In a study that reviewed the challenge of globalisation on the linguistic equilibrium between indigenous and global 
languages considering the scenarios in Nigeria, India, former USSR and Russia. The common phenomena in the 
nations studied is a 3-language formula which implied compulsory learning of one’s language, a regional language 
and a global language, which is the English language in this context. Isolating the Nigerian context, the 3-language 
formula (Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba), plus English were purposed to unify the over 500 ethnic group country. The 
failed abinitio as strategic implementation and action plans were not in place, particularly the equipping and 
dispatch of trained language instructors throughout the country (Davydov et al., 2018). These are gaps a language 
planning and policy ought to have made provision for. 
National ideology and identity refer to the set-up of beliefs and principles relevant to a collective psyche that may 
manifest in a language policy (McConville, 2016). Spolsky’s theory then suggests that language policies at the 
national level are driven by four common and co-existing forces viz national (or ethnic) ideology or claims of 
identity,  the role of English as a global language,  a nation’s sociolinguistic situation; and an increasing interest in 
linguistic rights within the human and civil rights framework. (Albury, 2015).  Spolsky furthers draws attention to 
how Arabisation introduced Arabic as an official language, thus impacting National culture and identity. He 
described the English language as a ‘tidal wave’ moving into almost every sociolinguistic repertoire’ all through 
the global language ecosystem. But this wave can create tensions between linguistic internationalisation and local 
language interests implying the tidal wave may be resisted by way of interventions to protect the status or vitality 
of local languages (McConville, 2016). The tensions predicted by Spolsky are apparent, with ethnic languages and 
essence of some cultures at the verge of extinction, thus the calls for National Language Planning and Policy in 
discerning countries. 
Language planning is the conscious effort by the government to review the state and propagation of the national 
language. Any changes or modifications are aimed at modifying the eminence of a language, plus its phonological 
and or morphological range and functionality (Ifechelobi & Ifechelobi, 2015). Invariably language planning 
employs a policy to empower and improve the status of a language. This is an exercise that needs to happen 
consciously in Nigeria, considering Spolsky’s theory of policy development and current socio-political milieu. The 
above indicates Nigeria as ripe for a National Language Policy, having already the global language, yet a national 
spread of a dynamic, creative and indigenous language, the Nigerian Pidgin, despite inter-ethnic tensions and 
politics 
4.2     Nigerian Pidgin as Cultural Universal  
Cultural Universals may be described as social elements that rank as commonalities yet divergent between cultures 
(Lumen Learning), significantly impacting behaviours and values. Typical examples of the concept include gender 
roles, society, myth, ritual, aesthetics, cognition, language etc.  
This paper is focused on language as a cultural universal because every society has one and is distinguished by 

Journal of Philosophy, Culture and Religion                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2422-8443 An International Peer-reviewed Journal 
 
Vol.50, 2020 
 
72 
same (Wiredu, 1995). Languages are imperative in any society, however what the language encompasses and 
embodies is a matter of exigency (Fayemi, 2011). Language homogenisation beyond merely being a cultural 
universal is a nation-building tool (Bernini, 2013).  
In spite of language imperialism and push to enforce speaking of English language in Nigeria particularly via 
formal education, mass media (Bernini, 2013) and globalisation, the Nigerian Pidgin language appears as an inter-
ethnic code for communicativity where there is no common tongue, with persons from every tribe in the country 
able to speak it (Balogun, 2013). Further findings from that study indicate over 98% fluency in Nigerian Pidgin 
within formal and informal circles, reflecting the language’s national identity potential (Balogun, 2013). The 
Federal Government of Nigeria also implicitly acknowledge this when government campaigns and mass 
broadcasts are transmitted in Nigerian Pidgin, not to mention the approval of radio and television license for 
(strictly) Pidgin speaking stations (Akande & Salami, 2010). This invariably makes Nigerian Pidgin an unofficial 
lingua franca and national identity marker, distinct in every way, flexible yet understandable by Nigerians 
regardless of socioeconomic status and literacy level, hence the call to implement same in a National Language 
policy and revised National Communication policy document. 
Wiredu’s objective in discussing the cultural universal concept was borne from the African state’s quest for identity 
and meaning as a people (Fayemi, 2011) and this cannot be independent communicativity with an African ‘tone’. 
He emphasised that intercultural differences can be a unification factor.  
With human and cultural universals, the excuse of our diversity as Nigerians as cause for continuous division, is 
no longer an excuse. What needs to be done, is to look and objective realities with sympathetic impartiality, then 
agree on common norms and thought, communicate, Nigerian Pidgin is our national language for unity and 
communication. Thus this paper, reviewing the position of Nigerian Pidgin as a cultural universal to foster 
intercultural communication in Nigeria’s multi-ethnic society for effective national communication, unity, 
development, security and peace. 
4.3      Prospects of Pidgin English Language 
Several scholars have attempted arguments for and against the adoption of Nigerian Pidgin English as a national 
language to foster effective intercultural and nation communication. Elugbe & Omamor (1991) recount the bias 
for Pidgin, its relegation as a make-shift and inferior language, not taking cognisance of the bridge the language 
builds between different ethnic groups, religious, literacy and socioeconomic class boundaries. Pidgin English is 
spoken in several West African countries, including Ghana and Sierra Leone. However, the Nigerian Pidgin is 
better positioned as an indigenous and National Language worthy of being engrained because nobody and 
everybody in Nigeria owns it. This eliminates the grievance of its acceptance for reasons of being from a ‘majority’, 
‘minority’ or ‘regional’ ethnic divide, compared to a scenario in Sierra leone for instance where Creo (Pidgin) was 
associated with the domineering upper-class, who equally lacked goodwill of the populace, thus the despise for 
the language. 
The call for elevation and adopting Pidgin is not exclusive, considering some countries already use as it as a 
parliamentary language, particularly Papua New Guinea and Tanzania (Tok, 2012). 
Some excuses for not adopting the language include that its restriction of communicative use to informal and 
verbal situations (Balogun, 2013), the error of mistaking Pidgin for broken English (Ifechelobi & Ifechelobi, 2015), 
perception as the language of the illiterate (Akande & Salami, 2010) and the absence of standard lexical structure 
for Pidgin. 
There are counter-arguments however, including that Nigerian Pidgin is a wholly advanced language equipped 
with an impressive lexico-semantics and syntax, due its natural evolution characteristic of languages, through 
contact and modification (Balogun, 2013) even having an online dictionary today (Tok, 2012). 
The Nigerian Pidgin is a dynamic language, widespread across the nation with a myriad of fluent speakers who 
have passed the language across generations, creating history (Ifechelobi & Ifechelobi, 2015). Thus, in a multi-
ethnic nation-state like Nigeria, any language that can foster national identity and democratic cohesion is 
imperative (Ogunmodimu, 2015) , and Nigerian Pidgin fits the bill for its ethnic neutrality, linguistic flexibility 
and communicative simplicity. 
 
5. 
Discussion and Conclusion  
5.1      Discussion  
This conceptual paper re-echoes the call for a review of the national communication policy, language planning, 

Journal of Philosophy, Culture and Religion                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2422-8443 An International Peer-reviewed Journal 
 
Vol.50, 2020 
 
73 
creation of national language policy and adoption of Nigerian Pidgin English as lingua franca, being a cultural 
universal in Nigerias’ richly multi-cultural and multi-ethnic society. 
National communication embodies how people relatively use communicativity to make meaning within and across 
broader contexts. The quest for National identity has hitherto been elusive for Nigeria, considering the history of 
western contact and tensions amongst the many ethnic groups herein. This phenomenon was traced to an identity 
crisis, of Nigeria and a large part of Africa, due to the negative impact of Western domination in years past, 
globalisation, neo-colonialism and self-doubt in our potential as a people.  
Going further, the paper highlights optimising cultural universals, an approach discussed by Kwasi Wiredu while 
discussing African Philosophy, as imperative in facilitating intercultural and inter-ethnic communications. The 
cultural universal thus zeroed on by this conceptual paper is language.  And for the complex social context of 
Nigeria, this paper identifies and proposes the adoption of the Nigerian Pidgin English (as lingua franca) to the 
hot-list for language planning and policy, hitherto non-existent in the country, for the intent of national 
communication, unity, growth and development. 
The tensions predicted by Spolsky are apparent, with ethnic languages and essence at the verge of extinction, thus 
the calls for National Language Planning and Policy by discerning countries. Instituting a National Language 
Planning and Policy is a turnkey development; this desire and unique potential for national unity, growth and 
development in all ramifications are long overdue since Nigeria’s independence in 1960. 
Nigerian Pidgin speaking is currently more popular compared to the three regional languages, Hausa, Igbo, Yoruba, 
and English language. This is the case because the English language is learnt within formal school structure, 
making it elitist and reducing development and eloquence on a mass scale. Government broadcasts and national 
communication in Nigerian pidgin attest to the proliferation of the language.  Clearly indicating the languages for 
national communication via the national communication policy is incompetent for effective national 
communication. However, Pidgin English cuts across all socioeconomic classes, ethnicities and literacy level. 
5.2 
Conclusion and Recommendations 
In view of objective reality in the Nigerian context and ethnic conflicts, this paper thus proposes a pragmatic 
approach for the government. This approach is an immediate review of the National communication policy, 
creation of a language policy and declaration that the Nigerian Pidgin be added and top the list of languages for 
National Communication. This approach is in the interest of National Unity, security and development. 
The perspectives discussed in this paper are key information for the Ministry of Communications, the National 
Orientation Agency, and the Senate, House of Representatives, the Presidency and other relevant stakeholders, to 
review and act upon. Communication scholars are also required to help fine-tune the policy document in 
preparation for strategic implementation. 
Considering the Nigerian Pidgin speaking is currently more popular, compared to the three regional languages, 
Hausa, Igbo, Yoruba, and English language, and does not require the government to send instructors around the 
country for training others, it is more economical to implement. The language is laced with humour, entertaining 
and should be introduced to schools, in order to make learning fun, fast and effective. 
Government broadcasts and national communication (even in the senate and political houses) in Nigerian pidgin 
will ease proliferation of the language, connection between the government and the citizens, plus allowing more 
persons interact with government and each other with concrete understanding and within the communication 
context.  
In essence, the Nigerian Pidgin English may be the key to a unified Nigeria with one sense of purpose and potential 
for outstanding accomplishments, as one people, in spite of the multi-ethnic reality. Finally, in alignment with the 
5th line of the first stanza of the Nigerian National anthem, the adoption of the Nigerian Pidgin English as a 
national language for unification represents ‘the labour of our heroes past not being in vain’; this towards peace 
and unity; ‘so help us God!’ (last line of the Nigerian National pledge). 
5.3 
Limitations and future directions for research  
This research had some limitations. The study is primarily conceptual and does not delve deeply into the historical 
and socioeconomic circumstance around the development of the Nigerian Pidgin English. The research also 
focuses on the Nigerian Pidgin English even though Pidgin English is spoken in other African countries like Sierra 
Leone.  
Future studies can test the concept proposed by this study by conducting compulsory nation-wide surveys in 
partnership with the Federal Government, to test the acceptability of Pidgin English as a National Language in the 

Journal of Philosophy, Culture and Religion                                                                                                                                     www.iiste.org 
ISSN 2422-8443 An International Peer-reviewed Journal 
 
Vol.50, 2020 
 
74 
interest of peace and unity. 
 
References 
Akande, A. T., & Salami, L. O. (2010). Use and Attitudes towards Nigerian Pidgin English among Nigerian 
University Students. In R. M. Millar, Marginal Dialects: Scotland, Ireland and Beyond (pp. 70-89). Aberdeen: 
Forum for Research on the Languages of Scotland and Ireland. 
Alberts, M. (2010). National Language and Terminology Policies — A South African Perspective. Lexikos 20, 20, 
599-620. 
Albury, N. J. (2015, March 1). National language policy theory: exploring Spolsky’s model in the case of Iceland. 
doi:10.1007/s10993-015-9357-z 
Balogun, T. A. (2013, July). In defence of Nigerian Pidgin. Journal of Languages and Culture, 4(5), 90-98. 
doi:10.5897/JLC12.007 
BBC News. (2016, November 16). Pidgin-West African Lingua Franca. Retrieved July 6, 2019, from 
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-38000387 
Bernini, A. (2013). Local Languages and Cultural Differences in the Age of GlobaliSation: the Example of 
Cremonese Dialect. Socialinių mokslų studijos/Societal Studies, 5(1), 87–100. Retrieved July 2019 
Bruen, J. (2013). Towards a national policy for languages in. European Journal of Language Policy, 5(1), 99–114. 
doi:10.3828/ejlp.2013.5 
Davydov, D., Shapoval, A., & Weber, S. (2018). Linguistic equilibrium with local and world languages: Challenges 
of globalisation. The World Economy. doi:DOI: 10.1111/twec.12645 
East, M., Chung, H., & Arkinstall, C. (2012). A FAIR GO FOR ALL: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE CALL FOR 
A NATIONAL LANGUAGES POLICY IN AOTEAROA NEW ZEALAND. New Zealand Studies in Applied 
Linguistics, 18(2), 05-20. Retrieved July 9, 2019 
Elugbe, B. O., & Omamor, A. P. (1991). Nigerian Pidgin Background and Prospects. English: A Sociolinguistic 
Approach. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Leeds. Ibadan: Heinemann. 
Fayemi, A. K. (2011). A Critique of Cultural Universals and Particulars in Kwasi Wiredu's Philosophy. TRAMES, 
15(65/60), 259-276. doi:10.3176/tr.2011.3.03 
Gao, X. (2017). Linguistic instrumentalism and national language policy in Mainland China’s state print media 
coverage of the Protecting Cantonese Movement. Chinese Journal of Communication, 10(2), 157–175. 
Idang, G. E. (2015). African Culture and Values. Phronimon, 16(2), pp. 97-111. 
Ifechelobi, J. N., & Ifechelobi, C. U. (2015, June). Beyond Barriers: The Changing Status of Nigerian Pidgin. 
International Journal of Language and Literature, 3(1), 208-216. doi:10.15640/ijll.v3n1a26 
Lumen Learning. (n.d.). Cultural Universals. Cultural Anthropology. Retrieved July 12, 2019, from 
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/culturalanthropology/chapter/cultural-universals/ 
McConville, M. (2016). Towards a holistic national language policy for Scotland. Glasgow: Association for 
Scottish Literary Studies. 
Ogunmodimu, M. (2015, September). Language Policy in Nigeria: Problems, Prospects and Perspectives. 
International Journal of Humanities and Social Science , 5(9). 
Osoba, J. B., & Alebiosu, T. A. (2017). Language Preference as a Precursor to Displacement and Extinction in 
Nigeria: The Roles of English Language and Nigerian Pidgin. Journal of Universal Language, 17(2), 111-143. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.22425/jul.2016.17.2.111 
Sue, W. (2016). Language Policy and Language Planning: From Nationalism to Globalisation (2nd ed.). 
The Nation Online. (2016, July 8). Case for Pidgin English as Lingua Franca. The Nation Online Newspaper. 
Retrieved July 9, 2019, from https://thenationonlineng.net/case-pidgin-english-lingua-franca/ 
Tok, P. (2012). Pidgin-English Online Dictionary. Retrieved July 13, 2019, from www.calibercreations.com/pisin 
Wiredu, K. (1995). Are there Cultural Universals? The Monist: An International Journal of General Philosophy, 
78(1), 52-64. Retrieved July 12, 2019, from www.jstor.org 
 
View publication stats

