51 
 
                            RELATIVIZATION IN NIGERIAN PIDGIN ENGLISH 
 
Ofoegbu Cyril Okechukwu 
Department of English 
Anambra State University, Igbariam Campus 
Email: ofoegbucyril@yahoo.com 
ABSTRACT  
Relativization is a concept in syntax that deals with the relationship between an NP (or Noun) 
earlier mentioned and another part of that same sentence, represented by a relative 
pronoun. This other part of the sentence is headed by a pronoun and this gives us a reason 
to call it a relative clause. A relative clause is usually a subordinate clause that modifies a 
noun. It is formed when one clause is embedded into an NP of another clause to produce 
grammatical sentences. The questions are now then do we relativize in Nigerian Pidgin 
English and is it possible for relativization to take place in Nigerian Pidgin English given the 
fact that some people still look at it as a debased form of standard English in Nigeria? 
Nigerian Pidgin English is a pidgin, which has a geographic base in Nigeria. It is politically and 
sociolinguistically different form other pidgins in the world. This Nigerian Pidgin English is 
English based or English related because most of its vocabulary is derived from English. It 
also has Nigerian local languages as its underlying influence, it can be said that its vocabulary 
is English while its grammar is Nigerian. This paper will discuss the syntactic structure of 
relative clauses in Nigerian Pidgin English, a language spoken and understood by nearly all 
Nigerians (though with variations) in Nigeria. One thing worthy of mention here is that the 
process of relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English is quite different from that of English 
language (even when it is the parent language). The relativization structure in Nigerian 
Pidgin English allows the relative pronoun to come after the subject of the sentence. It can 
also come after the direct object in a sentence.. In some cases there are two relativizers in a 
sentence in which case the first relativizer is downplayed for the second to function properly. 
Finally, this paper will explore how the movements of relative pronouns are determined in 
the structure of the Nigerian Pidgin English. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Relativization is a process in syntax. It deals with an earlier mentioned NP in a sentence and 
another part of that same sentence. It tries to show their relationship. This other part of the 
sentence is usually headed by a pronoun and thus permits us to call it a relative clause. 
According to Ndimele (2008), relativization is a syntactic process of turning an otherwise full 
fledged sentence into a subordinate or embedded clause, so that it becomes a mere 
modifier of a noun phrase in the matrix clause. This process according to him gives birth to 
a relative clause.  A relative clause according to Finegan (2004) is formed when one clause 
is embedded into an NP of another clause. This relative clause is a subordinate clause that 
takes its bearing from the main clause in the sentence. Again when a clause performs the 
role of giving detailed information about an NP (earlier mentioned in a sentence). Then we 
can call it a relative clause Ndimele (2008). Tallerman (2009) opines that a relative clause 
must say something about the head noun in the matrix clause by way of modification. The 
function of a relative clause is to restrict what a speaker wants to talk about in a given 
Volume 4, March 2012 
© 2012 Cenresin Publications 
www.cenresinpub.org 
ISSN 2277-0046 
Journal of Arts and Contemporary Society  

52 
 
sentence structure. The structure of relativization in English language is quite different from 
other languages. The Nigerian Pidgin English is our focus in this paper. It is a language that 
takes its bearing from English language in Nigeria. This Nigerian Pidgin English is different 
from other pidgins in the world. This is because most of its vocabulary is derived from 
English. It has Nigerian Local languages as its underlying influence. We can rightly conclude 
that its vocabulary is English while its grammar is Nigerian. English language has a variety of 
relative pronouns and these can be used depending on the situation or sentence structure. 
The relative clauses, are usually introduced by these relative pronouns such as who, where, 
whose, which, wherever, those, that etc. In Nigerian pidgin English a relative clause  
is usually introduced by “wey” and “ im”. It is worthy to note here that these two relativizers 
have not been established as relative pronouns. For the purpose of this research work, I 
shall not refer to them as relative pronouns but relativizers. 
 
The Syntactic structure of Relativization Nigerian Pidgin English  
The process of relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English is quite distinct and different. Every 
language has it own structure(s) and this structure(s) differ from one another. The 
application of linguistic theories and concepts to these individual languages opens us to the 
fact that every language is different in structure from one another. 
A. In Nigerian Pidgin English relativization can occur after the main subject in a sentence. 
This means the relativizer ‘wey’ can be found immediately after the subject in a sentence. 
For example: 
1a. De maths wey the teacha teach us hard wel wel. This sentence can be divided thus. 
b. De teacha teach us maths. 
c. De maths hard wel wel. The relativized position is not after the verb rather it is after the 
subject in this sentence. Thus if we have something like this: 
d. De maths de teacher teach us wey hard wel wel. Then our relativization process in this 
case is wrong. That relativizer ‘wey’ must move to the position immediately after the 
subject to create meaning as in the examples below: 
e.   De maths de teacha teach us wey hard wel wel. 
This in turn will give us a sentence like this. 
f. De maths wey de teacha teach us hard wel wel. 
B. Relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English can also occur after the direct object in a 
sentence. The relativizer “wey” is inserted in the position immediately after this direct 
object in a sentence structure. This can be illustrated below: 
2a. De man catch de goat wey run  yesterde. This sentence can be divided thus. 
 b. De man catch de goat. 
 c. De goat run yesterde. Our relativization structure will now look like this: 
 d. De man catch  de goat ________ run yesterde. 
Instead or repeating the direct object in this sentence, we insert “wey” in the gap that 
follows the direct object in order to realize a process of relativization in Nigerian Pidgin 
English. 
3a. de girl slap de boy wey touch am. 
 b. De girl slap de boy 
 c. De boy touch am 
Ofoegbu Cyril Okechukwu 
Relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English 

53 
 
 d. De girl slap de boy ________ touch am. 
It has also been identified that if the relativizer “wey” occurs in the position immediately 
after the subject in such constructions as above the process of relativization in such 
construction is lost for example. 
e. De girl “ wey” slap de boy touch am 
The relativizer must occur in the position immediately after the direct object in such 
sentence constructions. The process of relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English in examples 
(1a.) - (f) is quite distinct from that of (2a) - (d) and (3a) - (e) above. 
C. Another form of relativization in Nigeria Pidgin English is the combination of the relativizer 
“Wey” and the pronoun “im” for example. 
 4a. Na de boy wey im papa get dat haus die. 
  b.  Na de boy papa get dat haus. 
  c.  De boy die 
  d.  Na de boy wey im papa get dat haus die. 
In this sentence, the relativizer “wey” has a pronoun ‘im’ attached to it. They combine to give 
us the English equivalent which is “whose”. In this kind of instance “wey” cannot do without 
“im” such that if we try to separate them, then we will lose meaning in the sentence. For 
example. 
 e. Na de boy wey [      ] papa get dat house die. 
 Note that the pronoun ‘im’ must always occur in such instance(s) to give us a grammatical 
sentence(s). However, this combination of ‘wey’ plus ‘im’ to form a relative clause, apply only 
to human beings. It cannot function nor occur in animals or objects. For example we can’t 
say 
5a. Na de dog ‘wey’ “im” papa tall get dat house 
 b. Na de chair “wey” “im” hand long get dat key. 
The concept of relativization may be applied to these sentences perfectly, but language is not 
complete without semantics. We can rightly say that “wey” is a relative element in Nigerian 
Pidgin English that can stand for who, which and that. It can also combine in some cases 
with “im” to give us “whose”. Our attention again will be drawn to “im” as a relative element. 
Though there is the presence of “wey” in such sentence constructions, its function is reduced 
(it still functions as a relativizer but the main focus here is on theme or patient and 
benefactive) we can rightly conclude that ‘im’ becomes the main relativizer in such sentence 
constructions because it is carrying the weight of the whole sentence. Examples of such 
sentences include:  
6a Na my broda wey r bi police na im R buy dat skirt for me. 
  b Na my dog wey r bi bingo na im R I buy dat chain for. 
  c Na my sister wey r live for Onitsha na im R buy dat shirt for me 
 
We can see that the Nigerian Pidgin English has another distinct way of forming relative 
clauses given the fact that “im” can function as a relativizer in a Nigerian Pidgin English 
sentence, it can also downplay or reduce the function of ‘wey’ to a minor relativizer. The 
Nigerian Pidgin English in such sentences, usually has two relativizers, “wey” and ‘im’, 
separated by an NP or a VP.  “Wey” in this instance is a relativizer but its function is lesser in 
2 
3 
Volume 4, March 2012 
Journal of Arts and Contemporary Society  

54 
 
these and bears the major function of relativizing the clause. It bears the theta role of theme 
or patient as well as benefactive. 
D) Relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English can be realized by way of sentence arrangement. 
No two languages are the same. According to Di Pietro (1971) the interpretation of the 
grammar of one language with the grammar of another is called transfer and the mistakes 
that arise from such misplacements are called interference. We cannot interprete the 
grammar of Nigerian Pidgin English with that of English language. This will amount to wrong 
Sentence constructions because the structures of the two languages are different and distinct 
even when English language is the parent language owing to the above fact, it has also been 
noticed that the Nigerian Pidgin English has another way of relativizing by way of sentence 
arrangement.The element “wey” is seen immediately after the first indirect object while the 
direct object comes at the sentence final position. In standard English, it is also the first 
indirect object that carries the relativization element but the direct object comes before this 
first indirect object. For example 
Nigerian Pidgin English. 
7a I give my broda  wey dey go sukul  my buk. 
    Subj        direct Obj 
              indirect obj  direct object. 
Standard English 
 b I gave my books to my brother who is a student 
    Subj      direct Obj    indirect obj           direct object. 
The structure for this type of relativization process in Nigerian Pidgin English is: 
Subject + indirect object+ indirect object + direct object. 
 In Standard English we have: 
Subject + direct object + indirect object +indirect object 
(E) Another important aspect of relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English can be seen in the 
area of complementizers. This in English language is often called the COMP node. I will for 
the purpose of this paper, refer to it in Nigeria pidgin English as a COMP node too. It is called 
the S and pronounced as “Es Bar”. According to Ofoegbu (2008), It is a clause that have 
introducers like who, what, that, which, when e.t.c in English language and  it is used to 
introduce another sentence in a sentence. in Nigerian Pidgin English, the COMP node whose 
introducer in only “wey” can be used to relativize NPs in Nigerian Pidgin English sentences. 
As noted above, English language has very many COMP Node introducers but the Nigerian 
Pidgin has only one, “wey” which usually occurs after the direct object in a sentence for 
example : 
8a John marry de girl wey I show am 
  b John marry  de girl 
  c I show am de girl 
  d John marry de girl wey I show am {      } 
 
9a Peter buy de moto wey I show am 
  b Peter buy de Moto 
  c I show am  de moto 
  d Peter buy de moto wey I show am {    } 
 
R – Major Relativizer 
r – Minor Relativizer 
4 
Ofoegbu Cyril Okechukwu 
Relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English 

55 
 
10a Sunny learn de market wey we teach am 
   b Sunny learn de market 
   c We teach am de market 
   d Sunny learn de market wey we teach am {    } 
 
In English Language in order to produce a relative clause by way of complementizers 
according to Finegan (2004). The relativized NP is pronominalized and moved to the front of 
a clause by the WH-movement  operation. Ndimele (2008) points that this process of turning 
a noun, noun phrase or nominal element into a pronoun, is known as pronominalization. In 
Nigerian Pidgin English, this movement is not obtainable. The reason is that there is already 
a pronoun “am” before the “wey” and “wey” is used to relativise the NP in the above 
example. The WH-movement in English language is quite distinct from that of the Nigerian 
Pidgin English. This distinction is seen in the fact that in English language, when the NP is 
relativized, it is also pronominalized and moved to the front of its clause but in Nigerian 
Pidgin English, when the NP is relativized, it is not pronominalized but it is still moved to the 
front of its clause while a pronoun “am” is retained in the sentence final position. 
Another aspect of relativization by way of complementizers in Nigerian Pidgin English is when 
they are found immediately after the subject in a sentence . For example 
11a See de boy  wey I dey tell you 
    b See de boy______ I dey tell you 
12a Na de dog wey tif de meat dey run dey go 
    b Na de dog _______ tif de meat dey run dey go. 
In the above examples, if “wey” is inserted into the gaps, it will represent it’s English 
equivalent “that” and it will serve its purpose of complementing two clauses or sentences or 
better still, it will be used to introduce the second clause in the sentences. Also we can 
always replace the “wey” with the direct object (repetition) and still make sense but our 
focus here is to relativise by way of complementizer. The same thing is obtainable when the 
COMP Node in the Nigerian Pidgin English, “wey” follows the direct object in a Nigerian Pidgin 
English  construction for example: 
13a James slap de boy wey call im name 
    b James  slap de boy ______ call im name 
14a Joe flog im pikin wey tif im moni 
    b Joe flog im pikin _________ tif im moni 
3. Summary and Conclusion: 
This paper has tried to draw attention to the fact that syntactic concepts can be effectively 
applied to the Nigerian pidgin English. It has also exposed us to the fact that the process of 
relativizaton in Nigerian Pidgin English is quite different and distinct from other languages 
including its parent language, English language. 
 
There is no doubt that a lot more needs to be done to ascertain further peculiar ways that 
the Nigerian pidgin English relativizes. This paper can therefore be seen as an invitation to 
others to further one’s knowledge on the identified structure. 
 
 
5 
Volume 4, March 2012 
Journal of Arts and Contemporary Society  

56 
 
REFERENCES  
Carnie, Andrew. 2007. Syntax: A Generative Introduction.  Second Edition. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishing. 
 
Crystal, David. 2008. A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics. Sixth Edition. Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing. 
 
Finegan, Edward. 2004. Language: Its Structure and use. Fourth Edition. Masschusetts: 
Thomson Wadsworth 
 
Ndimele, Ozo-Mekuri. 2008. Morphology and Syntax .Port Harcourt: M&J Grand Orbit 
Communications Limited and Emhai Press. 
 
Ofoegbu, Cyril Okechukwu. 2005. The Nigerian Pidgin English as a National Language and 
Bedrock of National Development in a Nigeria. Makurdi: Benue State University 
Dissertation. 
 
Ofoegbu ,Cyril Okechukwu. 2008. Syntax: An Introductory Text. Enugu: Malchjay Publishers 
Limited. 
 
 
 
Tallerman, Maggie 2009. Understanding Syntax. Second Edition. London: Hodder Arnold. 
 
 
Ofoegbu Cyril Okechukwu 
Relativization in Nigerian Pidgin English 

