Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 40 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Nigerian Pidgin English: A tool for 
National Integration 
 
Onome Ojo 
 
Department of English 
University of Jos, Jos Nigeria 
 
Ogunjimi Florence Taiye 
Gombe State University, Nigeria 
 
Abstract 
The fact that Nigeria is a multilingual and multicultural 
speech community is no longer new. Hence, the need for a 
national language to foster national unity and peace has 
been a debate among linguistic scholars. Because of its 
diverse tongues, all indigenous languages (especially the 
"big three" - Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba) have been ruled out 
as possible solutions to Nigeria's national language problem. 
This paper therefore is concerned with providing sufficient 
facts that the Nigerian Pidgin English can contribute to the 
national development of Nigeria as a whole. Heedful of this, 
this paper adopts that the Nigerian Pidgin English is the 
possible 
language 
capable 
of 
providing 
common 
intelligibility among all based on the following evaluations - 
it is devoid of ethno political affiliation, it's grammar, syntax 
and phonology are purely Nigerian, it is the most proximate 
language among the low, middle and high class, it is being 
used in the media and even in literary texts. Conclusively, 
this paper suggests that the Nigerian Pidgin English holds 
the key to foster unity and national integration. 
 
Keywords: multilingual, multicultural, national integration, 
Nigerian Pidgin English  
 
Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at:  
https://royalliteglobal.com/languages-and-literatures 
This article is published by Royallite 
Global, P. O. Box 26454-Nairobi 
00504 Kenya in the:  
 
Research Journal in 
Modern Languages and 
Literatures 
 
Volume 1, Issue 1, 2020 
© 2020 The Author(s)  
This open access article is 
distributed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution (CC-BY) 
4.0 license. 
Article Information 
Submitted: 9th September 2019 
Accepted:   5th October 2019 
Published:  19th March 2020 
Conflict of Interest: No potential 
conflict of interest was reported 
by the author 
Funding: None 
 
Additional information is 
available at the end of the article 
 
https://creativecommons.org/lice
nses/by/4.0/ 
 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 41 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
1.0 Introduction 
It is a well-known fact that at the moment English language is the official language in 
Nigeria. However, its status as a foreign language has made it almost impossible to cater 
for the overwhelming needs of the ever increasing Nigeria populace. Nigeria as a 
multiethnic, multilingual and multicultural nation is faced with quite a number of socio-
political, cultural, economic and linguistic problems to mention a few. Linguists have 
agreed that Nigeria has many languages spoken by its citizens. Several linguistic scholars 
have also given different accounts of how many languages exist in the nation. In fact, 
some have claimed that Nigeria has over five hundred (500) languages spoken by different 
ethnic groups while other claims have it that the country has between 350 - 400 different 
languages. As a result of its linguistic complex nature, it becomes difficult if not impossible 
for a proper communication system to be established and maintained in the country. 
Hence, the need for an independent and neutral language that can serve as a panacea for 
the country’s development and which many can speak and understand effortlessly. For 
this reason, there has been a call for a national language which can act as the driving force 
for the nation’s development and at the same time foster national peace and unity. 
Advocates for a national language have always argued that the multilingual nature of the 
Nigerian society has made English language superior over other indigenous languages 
especially “the big three”- Igbo, Hausa and Yoruba. This has made English language 
adopted as the nation’s official language. As a result of this adoption, government 
policies/businesses are conducted in English language. Also, at all levels in schools; English 
language is used as the language of instruction. Consequently, the language is used to 
pass information across to all its citizenry. The linguistic implication for this, is that, 
majority of Nigerians especially those at the grassroots cannot properly access these 
information owing to the fact that they are non-literates. Therefore, rather than serve the 
society positively, the English language has proven to be disadvantaged because it has 
failed to function as a language of wider communication. Supporting this fact, Bamgbose 
(1991) argued that for a language to be recognised as a national language, it must either 
be a language indigenous to the people and must have spread to a wider region of that 
populace or it must be a language of wider communication. Government on its part has 
ignored the vital role of harnessing a neutral language as a way of achieving national 
development. Rather, a language alien to the people is promoted. This has resulted in 
poor communication between the people and government who itself does not know the 
rudiments of the adopted language.  Consequently, majority of the Nigerian populace are 
not only cut off from government business especially in areas of national development 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 42 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
but have become active participants in the policies of government. In this wise, following 
existing knowledge related to this argument, this paper adopts the Nigerian pidgin English 
as not only the neutral language for national integration but also as the possible language 
that can act as a bridge through which the different ethno-cultural, social and linguistic 
groups can cross to attain the main stream of a unified goal. 
 
2.0 English Language as a National Language  
The English language is no doubt one of the colonial legacies left by colonial power after 
Nigeria’s independence. The language has also to a large extent been accorded a more 
envious status over other indigenous languages in the country. Many language and 
linguistic scholars have agreed that the English language since its emergence in Nigeria 
has been accorded unparalled importance. For instance, Jowitt (1999) remarks on the 
attitude of Nigerians towards the English language that: 
 
Positive attitudes to the English language was generally shared by Nigerian 
elites - lawyers, academics, leading journalists, bishops... during the colonial 
and post-colonial era... They were practitioners of highly refined English 
style both in speaking and in writing (15). 
 
Thinking along the same line, Bamgbose  (1991) recognises the role of English language 
in a multilingual nation as Nigeria as indispensable. According to him the English Language 
is one of the lasting legacies of the nation's colonisers. He further states that the language 
is now the language of government, business and commerce, education, media to 
mention a few. Nonetheless, despite these indispensable roles accorded the English 
language in Nigeria, the country seems not to be making headway in terms of 
development, most especially in key areas. Omachonu (2012) in his words tags the 
learning of the English language as a "parrot learning". The reason is, according to him 
learners find it difficult especially those in the field of Science and Technology to 
internalise the language and knowledge gained in their field like an average Japanese or 
Chinese. He therefore, submits that using “our own languages” for science and 
technology education may improve the sector better than a foreign language. In a similar 
opinion, Jowitt (1999) notes with dismay that, the continuous learning and use of English 
language in Nigeria is becoming problematic. The reason is, learners of the language are 
yet to acquire the required level of proficiency in the language. This problem is even more 
common among students who are graduates of English yet were illiterates in the major 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 43 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
mechanics of the language not to mention those from other fields. Therefore, in this 
paper, the researchers like other researchers alike advocate for the use of a neutral 
language – Nigerian pidgin English that would enhance vital government business 
especially in the areas of national development and national integration. Although not 
officially recognised, the Nigerian pidgin English is already a language for social 
interaction, commercial activities, political campaigns and also it provides an enabling 
environment for effortless communication among Nigerians irrespective of any class 
affiliations. Thus, Elugbe and Omamor (1991) argue that: "Nigerian Pidgin English should 
be treated as a language in its own right, with  well-ordered system just like any other 
language in Nigeria and should therefore be accorded national and official recognition" 
(151). 
 
3.0 Overview of the Nigerian Pidgin English 
Several linguists have attempted to give a working definition for Pidgin. Some scholars 
see it as a deviant form of a standard language in which its structure, vocabulary and 
syntax have been reduced to a large extent. In the words of (Crystal, 2008, p.36) a “Pidgin 
is a language with a markedly reduced grammatical structure, lexicon and stylistic range 
compared to other languages and which is a native of no one." Fromkin et al (2011) on 
the other hand, are of the opinion that pidgin emerged when speakers of unintelligible 
languages have been brought in contact under socio-economic and political conditions, 
thereby developing a language to communicate with one another that is not native to 
anyone. There have been different approaches and theories, postulated to explain the 
emergence of pidgin, generally. These theories have been grouped into monogenetic and 
polygenetic theories. While monogenetic theory agree that every single pidgin has its 
origin form a single source the polygenetic theory argue that pidgins of different speech 
communities result from separate processes of creation and development (Ike 2012). 
Wholistically, it would be agreed that one thing is common between the two groups. 
Pidgin originate as a contact language. 
In view of these assumptions, it can be said the Nigerian Pidgin English is a debased 
form of the Standard English found in Nigeria. For instance, Okechukwu (2012) opines 
that looking at the linguistic map of Nigeria, it would be agreed that, the Nigerian Pidgin 
English flourished in areas that Nigerians first made contact with the English Language in 
the 16th and 17th centuries. To buttress this point further, Jowitt (1999) points out that 
most early pidgin words reflect older English usage. He gave examples of such words in 
“yonder” and “quench”. In a more substantial argument Mafeni (1997) is of the opinion 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 44 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
that the Nigerian Pidgin English has not depended solely on European languages but has 
widened in its scope to include major Nigerian indigenous languages. That is, it has 
susccessfully borrowed from the many varieties of local languages within Nigeria. 
Examples of these borrowings include among others: 
 
“Wayo” – trick (Hausa origin) 
“Obodo” – Country (Igbo origin) 
“Oyinbo” – whiteman (Yoruba origin) 
 
From the examples given above, it would be agreed that the Nigerian Pidgin English is a 
kind of English which has its geographic root in Nigeria. Although it is English based, it is 
different socio-linguistically from what is obtained from other pidgins outside the shores 
of Nigeria. This is because, it has the Nigerian local languages as its underlying influence 
and its grammar, of course, is better understood by Nigerians. Put simply, the Nigerian 
Pidgin English use English words but these words are structured by Nigerians to suit their 
socio-linguistic environments. Although the Nigerian Pidgin English has no official status 
but its existence is widely recognised. Virtually every class identifies with it, making it a 
language of solidarity among the Nigerian populace who have no other language in 
common. Mafeni (1997) in agreement posits that the language can be recognised as a 
"Tolerance Language" (TL). The language of course is not without its own setbacks. That 
is, the Nigerian Pidgin English is said to be informal and inferior some scholars.  Some 
have even marked the language as the bastardisation of Standard. English as it is seen as 
the language of the uneducated and slaves. Despite all these setbacks, it is advertently 
recognised across the country as it has function at both the national and grassroot levels 
positively to a large extent. 
 
4.0 Acceptance and Use of the Nigerian Pidgin English. 
The use and acceptance towards a language simply implies a way of understanding how 
such language is used, identified with and its acceptance among a target populace. Before 
now, the Nigerian Pidgin English has been seen as a language of the non-iliterates as well 
as the murder of Standard English. To say the least, it has been argued that users of the 
Nigerian Pidgin English are those with little or no formal education. More recently, 
however advocates for the Nigerian Pidgin English are of the opinion that the Nigeria 
Pidgin English is spoken by not only the non-literates but also by elites. It has also been 
observed that the language is not only used in informal settings but in formal settings too. 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 45 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
By implication, the earlier claim by some linguists that the language is associated with 
slaves and non-literates seem to have no validity. 
Today, the Nigerian Pidgin English enjoys patronage from many educated speakers who 
can use the language proficiently alongside Standard English. A large percentage of these 
speakers falls within the range of the Nigerian Youths that cut across various linguistic 
areas of the Nigerian Society. To substantiate this point, Faraclas (1996) points out that: 
 
Well over half of the 140 million inhabitants of Nigerians are now fluent 
speakers of the language (NPE), making Nigeria Pidgin (NPE) the most 
widely spoken language in Nigeria, as well as the indigenous of African 
language with the largest number of speakers. Given the rapid spreads of 
Nigeria Pidgin (NPE) among younger Nigerians, this proportion should 
increase to cover over 70 to 80% by the time the present generation of 
children reaches adulthood.. (828). 
 
The validity of this ascertain can be said to be true owing to the acceptance, use and 
vitality of the Nigeria Pidgin English especially among the teaming youths in the country 
and a such assumed the role of a language that reflects national identity in Nigeria. 
 
5.0 Nigerian Pidgin English and National Integration. 
This paper agrees that a pidgin is a contact language where people of diverse tongues 
must comprehend one another. Therefore, it would be agreed that pidgin is a language 
that arises to fulfil a number of restricted communicative needs among people with no 
common language. Following the definition of the concept of pidgin, the thesis of this 
paper is that the Nigerian Pidgin English is to a large extent a remedy towards achieving 
national integration for sustainable development and achieving national goals and 
objectives. It has been observed that understanding Standard English is faulty for so many 
reasons. For this reason, government should ensure that the Nigerian Pidgin English be 
incorporated into its key sectors for speedy development and active participation of the 
Nigerian populace. For instance, in the education sector, the Nigerian Pidgin English 
should be incorporated such that the language can be taught in schools while books 
should be written in Pidgin. This can be achieved if the Nigerian Pidgin is incorporated in 
the education policy of the country. After all, it is no longer news that the language has 
found its way among the highly educated and non-educated alike. The language 
therefore, if well-polished and given a chance it is not only promising but would function 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 46 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
well in teaching and learning in schools. Besides the national policy on education 
promulgated by the federal government of Nigeria in 1977 and revised in 1981 and 2004 
respectively, contains a definite statement on the role of language in education. A part of 
that policy states that at the early stage of a child’s education (primary school), the child’s 
language of instruction should be initially the mother-tongue or the language of the 
child’s immediate community. It therefore implies that in the absence of a local language 
or where it is inadequate the Nigeria Pidgin English can serve the purpose of instruction 
in schools. After all, the essence of a classroom instruction is to communicate effectively, 
hence, the appropriate language needs to be employed.  
In the area of communication, the Nigerian Pidgin English has assumed a significant 
role especially among the diverse ethnic groups in the country. This owes to the fact that, 
the language has to a large extent enhanced the propagation of mass literacy campaigns 
in the nation. More recently, the Nigerian government has not only realised the 
importance of the language, it has also recognised its usefulness in helping to get closer 
to the masses. Such has become the language of the media – jingles, adverts, posters, 
campaigns, awareness, conscientization among others. In most television and radio 
stations, programmes and news broadcast are now aired using the Nigerian Pidgin 
English. In fact, the BBC now has a news service broadcast in what it calls “West African 
Pidgin English”. In supporting the role of Nigeria Pidgin English in this aspect, (Adeshina 
and Butari, 2012, p.154) opines that: 
 
"… The various broadcasting corporations have in recent years done much 
popularise the language by allowing its use in radio and television..." 
 
Following this ascertain the same can be said of the entertainment industry. Infact very 
sensitive issues of national interest have been jokingly passed across to the people using 
Nigerian Pidgin English. Integrating the Nigerian Pidgin into the nation's economic system 
fully is will go a long in carrying its citizens along in the countries developmentat process. 
For instance, many of Nigeria's financial institutions have employed the use of the 
Nigerian Pidgin English over the years to promote their goods and services. Thus, if duly 
integrated, it will to a large extent ease financial businesses as many customers of these 
finance houses (banks, insurance and pension on house among others) are mostly the 
average Nigerians. Also, other sectors of the Nigerian economy likes industries, private 
organisations among others can market and sell their product effortlessly especially to 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 47 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
those who are non-literates. This fact has proven to be true as multi-national companies 
like MTN and their likes have effectively advertise and sell their products effectively. 
As it stands today, the Nigeria Pidgin English is not only accepted but it has served 
as a true national symbol. This is because, the language does not have any political or 
cultural affiliations. Therefore is has little or no threat to national unity. Although same 
can be said of the Standard English. However, it does not follow that the Standard English 
is neutral and accepted by all. This is owing to the linguistic fact that all languages are 
culture bound. Simply put, the Standard English carries with it the cultural values of its 
owners. On the contrary, the Nigerian Pidgin English does not have any cultural affiliation 
rather, it is a mixture of the people’s culture and a little of other foreign cultures. This 
makes it difficult for any region or tribe to lay claim of its ownership as it is neither a major 
or minor language. More importantly, by population, the language has enjoyed large 
numbers of speakers who understand the language fairly. Thus, integrating the language 
into the Nigerian System will go a long way in making its large population have a sense of 
belonging. After all, it is a language indigenous to Nigerians. 
In terms of language development, of all the languages available in Nigeria, only 
three (Igbo, Hausa and Yoruba) languages are recognised as major languages. This makes 
other minor languages have little or no recognition. This disparity among the different 
languages in Nigeria is either based on political or numerical strengths. The linguistic 
implication of this, is that most indigenous languages grow up speaking one or more 
indigenous languages alongside English and or Pidgin English. If therefore, made a 
functional part of the Nigerian System and develop adequately, the language stands a 
good chance of taking the nation out of its quagmire and possibly destroy the “tower of 
Babel" bedeviling the nation as mentioned in Ike (1998). 
 
6.0 Conclusion 
For the Nigerian nation to remain indivisible, interact freely in all areas and achieve a 
common and unified goal and objective, the Nigerian Pidgin English provides a good level 
playing ground for all Nigerians. The integration of the language into the Nigerian overall 
system gives hope that every citizen will be able to contribute their quota to the 
development of the nation. This because the language will serve as a source of power, 
development and a unifying force among the diverse tongues in the nation Nigeria. 
Heedful of all its potentials, this paper takes a stand that if the Nigerian Pidgin English is 
integrated into the nations system will encourage national development. If other African 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 48 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
countries like Tanzania can achieve this goal, the Nigerian Nation can do better as it is the 
“The Giant of Africa”. 
 
 

Research Journal in Modern Languages and Literatures 
https://royalliteglobal.com  
P a g e  | 49 
 
Volume 1 (No 1), 2020 
Languages & 
Literatures 
Works Cited 
Adesina, L. & Butari, N. (2012). “The Impact of Pidgin English in the Political Economic 
Discourse in Nigeria”. KADA Journal of Liberal Arts. Vol.6 No.1. 
Bamgbose, A. (1991). Language and the Nation: The Language Question in the Sub-Sahara 
Africa. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Crystal, D. (2008). A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
Elugbe, B. & Omanor, A. (1991). Nigerian Pidgin: Background and Prospects. Ibadan:
 
Heinemann Educational Books Nigeria Limited. 
Elugbe, B. (2004). National Language and National Development in Emenajo E.W (Ed.)
 
Multilingualism, Minority Languages and Language Policy in Nigeria. Agbor: 
Central Books Limited. 
Faraclas, N. (1996). Nigerian Pidgin: Descriptive Grammar. Routledge: USA 
Fromkin, V. et al (2011). An Introduction to language. International Edition: United States: 
Wadsworth. 
Ike, J. N (1998). Language and National Development: The Nigerian Experience Abuja:
 
Wilbest Educational Books. 
Jowitt, D. (1991). Nigerian English Usage. Lagos: Longman Nigeria Limited. 
Mafeni, B. (1997). “Nigerian Pidgin” in Spencer J. (Ed) 
Ndimele, I. (2008). Understanding Sociolinguistics. Aba: Clearprint Publishing. 
Okechukwu, O. C (2012). The Nigerian Pidgin English and Creolisation: Towards the Search
 
for a National Language. International Journal of Humanities. Accra, Ghana. 
Omachonu, G. S (2010). “The challenges of using English for Science and Technology 
Education in Nigeria” in Ndimele, O (Ed.) English Studies and National Development 
in Nigeria. Port Harcourt: English Language Teachers Association in Nigeria.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

