 
 
1 
 
Approaches in International Journal of Research Development, Volume 11 No. 1, April, 2019: ISSN 2141-1409 
7 
Internationalization of the English Language in Nigeria 
 
DR. VERO-EKPRIS GLADSTONE URUJZIAN 
Department of English, 
Akwa Ibom State University, Obio Akpa, 
Akwa Ibom State. 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper entitled internationalization of the English language in Nigeria, is 
a survey of the concept of internationalization generally and that of the 
English language in Nigeria in particular. Nigeria is a country with an 
extreme case of complex linguistic heterogeneity (multilingual set up). In the 
course of the survey, several issues like the prevalent chaotic social order, 
youth unemployment and accompanying unrest, endemic poverty, lingering 
sufferings, 
boko 
haram 
crises, 
IPOB 
agitations, 
AREWA/Niger 
Delta/Oduduwa youths quit notices etc. are considered. In the midst of these 
tiger headed crises there is a rise in the need for internal and international 
communication. Emphasis has no doubt shifted from the standard of the 
communicative tools. It is the opinion of this paper that internationalization of 
the English language is the way forward on the one hand, but the synergy or 
intercourse among Nigerian English, (NE) Nigeria Pidgin English and other 
indigenous Nigerian languages will enhance culture preservation, conflict 
resolution, internal or national relations. The paper therefore aims at giving a 
fresh insights into the teaching and learning of English language in Nigeria. 
Suggestions that will enhance learning and make the English classroom more 
interesting and result yielding were given. A reversal to what is practicable 
was upheld. 
 
 
The world has been divided over the years by a “Babel” of voices and this 
same world is of recent, going global and international by its drift or urge to establish 
mutual impact among persons and events through interconnectivity and ICT 
(International Communication and Technology) English has emerged the world most 
sought after language. It features as the uniting tongue for the development of humanity 
globally. It is viewed as a central conveyor belt: moving ingredients and products from 
the feeder belt of other disciplines, to churn out a developed and globalized human 
capital (Osakwe, 2011: P 13). 
There is no argument as to the way the English language is heading for in the 
international and global market. English has been universally associated with 
international missions, hence the general scramble for the English language across the 
globe. English as an international language (EIL) is established. English is the empires 

 
 
2 
 
Approaches in International Journal of Research Development, Volume 11 No. 1, April, 2019: ISSN 2141-1409 
language and anyone who must relate at the international level must Learn and speak 
the international standard. Compulsory education worldwide is including English in 
their time tables. English teachers are imported from across the globe to help realize 
these dreams. 
From the foregoing, English has become a global language, a window to the 
world and the key to being a global citizen. Its mastery enhances global awareness, 
global connections and participations. These and many more reasons have escalated the 
unprecedented growth of the English language in the last few decades and a sudden 
change of its status as a post-colonial heritage in countries like Singapore, Philippines, 
Nigeria and South Africa to a global language. (Osakwe 2011: P. 7) has this in support 
of the above: 
“English has risen from the status of a vernacular of men standing………. to a 
language of education, science, diplomacy and ultimately as the quintessential world 
language”.  
Assessing the function loads of English as reflected in (Osakwe 2011: P7), the 
process of making English the language of international organizations an in diplomatic 
relations is far gone. Nigeria is indeed the primus inter pares in this regards. 
In the face of the hydra-headed monsters eating up the fabrics of unity, peace and 
tranquility in Nigeria, in a stratified society like Nigeria, where social groupings is the 
order of the day, is it this international English language standard that will be used to 
address issues in all social groups? It is good to mention that these social groupings are 
usually differentiated by disciplines, kind of institutions, levels of education, religions, 
tribes etc. What can be gathered from the insinuation above is that English language 
use can be conditioned to suit the audience and societal needs of the discourse 
community in order to facilitate communication effectiveness. Thus the variety of 
English language that will enhance mass participation and culture preservations may 
not most likely be suitable for conflict resolution and peace talks within Nigeria. 
 
Internationalization: Meaning 
It is on record that internationalization initiatives have developed in virtually 
all sectors of life in the last decades. “Internationalization is on the tables of policy 
makers everywhere” (Rizvi and Lingard 2010: p 15). This source sees 
internationalization as a process of integrating international education into the 
curriculum in order to increase international cooperation, enhance security and improve 
economic competitiveness. (Egron Polak 2013) says that internationalization is a 
dynamic process and a means to multiple ends that can bring numerous benefits. It can 
be generalized that internationalization is seen in the light of sustainable process of 
integrating international and intercultural standards into teaching, research and services. 
It is largely related to collaborative studies, study abroad programs and students/facility 
exchanges. De Wit (2011: p 12) criticizes these tenets of internationalization. To this 
source, there are misconceptions and misunderstanding of internationalization policies. 
Internationalization is less promising than it is conceived and defined. He says that in 
practice, internationalization is limited to teaching in English, studying abroad and 
teaching international subjects to international students, worst still having many 
International Journal of Research Development 

 
 
3 
 
Approaches in International Journal of Research Development, Volume 11 No. 1, April, 2019: ISSN 2141-1409 
international students on campus is inclusive. This source laments that these 
conceptions of internationalization are short sighted. 
Internationalization has transcended the nation-state boundaries and has great impacts 
on the teaching and learning of English Language. English as an international 
Language (EIL) will affect the students’ English proficiency and identity development. 
“The language a group of people speaks can sharpen and influence their beliefs 
about the world, this is because the vocabularies of a language can limit ones 
expression of ideas, thoughts, emotions and feelings about the. (Urujzian 2016:399)” 
to keep pace with the current trend of internationalization of the English language, text 
books writers in Nigeria have shifted away from local culture subjectivity. Traditional 
names are seldom included in examples. Meanwhile, it is believed that ‘when familiar 
features and names are seen in English textbooks, comprehension could be enhanced. 
The Marxists are worried about the domineering spread and status of the 
English language. They see it as the ammunition of the powerful English speaking 
Britons and Americans. They view internationalization of English language as 
Linguistic imperialism. The Functionalist on the other hand view the uniting roles of 
the English language as a neutral tool serving the communication needs of people with 
different languages. Other critical Scholars and the Culturalists are deeply worried 
about the fast disappearance of our culture in favour of the English culture. According 
to these groups of Scholars one cannot separate language from culture. They are of the 
opinion that local languages should be promoted so as to preserve the ecology of 
languages. 
To do the above as suggested by the Culturalists, alongside embracing 
internationalization squarely, our cultural contents must be incorporated into the global 
vehicle of communication (The English Language) i.e. Our local names, names of 
streets, our idioms and idiomatic expressions, names of mountains and rivers etc. 
should form parts of comprehensive passages and literature texts should promote our 
cultural values. By so doing the (vehicle) English Language will be used to transport 
our cultural values across the globe. 
 
Internationalization of English Language in Nigeria 
In the course of reviewing the internationalization of the English language in 
Nigeria a lot of conflicting concepts have cropped up. Linguistic issues like language 
and its functions, language and regional variations i.e. mothers tongue interference, 
language and culture, productivity and creativity etc. Also glaring is the present chaotic 
nature of the Nigerian communities and states and the prevalent hate speeches, quit 
notices etc. in these circumstances, in the face of these moral decadence, religious wars 
and tribal rancour, there is a great doubt as to if English language in its international 
standard (EIL) can serve these purposes . Already in order to address these prevalent 
disequilibrium and chaotic social order, endemic poverty, lingering suffering and 
unemployment, Nigerians and other users of English have twisted or bastardized the 
English language positively or negatively to enable them communicate effectively as 
noted by (Udoinwang D. and Urujzian V. 2017.P. 74). 
Internationalization of the English Language in Nigeria - Dr. Vero-Ekpris Gladstone 
Urujzian 

 
 
4 
 
Approaches in International Journal of Research Development, Volume 11 No. 1, April, 2019: ISSN 2141-1409 
“African writers and other users of English resort to diverse means of translating 
traumatizing experiences…. by deploying culturally symbiotic languages and 
creatively coded linguistic signs that serve to signify the dynamics and the complex 
webs of our post-colonial socio political reality (Udoinwang D. and Urujzian V. 
2017:P74)” 
The above suggest creativity and intentional deviation from the common core 
(EIL) to perfect and widen communication. Language is used to respond to recurring 
situations around us. For instance one needs a suitable variety of English to address the 
Fulani cattle rearers menace, Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB) agitations, AREWA 
youths quit notice, Oduduwa and Niger Delta youths agitations etc. lexical choices are 
often affected by the audience and register. From the analysis above, should one 
completely criticize the alarming spread of the Nigerian English language and Nigerian 
Pidgin in the face of these predicaments? 
Humans, as well as Nigerians are continually creating new expressions and 
novel utterances by manipulating their linguistic resources to describe new objects and 
situations. This property is described as productivity or creativity or open mindedness. 
Pidgin English is wide spreading and becoming popular in Nigerian movies, music 
industry, markets, parks and campuses etc. There is also a recent shift from the internal 
structure of language (its form) and the articulation of words (Phonology). Preference is 
on varied uses of languages in human life (its functions) basically its communicative 
and interactive functions. 
Encouraging Nigerian English in the background will enable the Nigerian users 
to task their linguistic facilities and their creative genius. They will incorporate lexical 
items from the indigenous languages into English thus moderating English to suit 
peculiar Nigerian situations. Nigerian English is evolving into an internationally 
recognizable standard so while clamouring for the international standard of English for 
students, professionals and any one with international concerns, linguistic nationalism 
should be cultivated as well. Chinua Achebe should be our role model. He presents his 
literary works in “a new English, still in full communion with its ancestral home but 
altered to suit its new African (Nigerian surroundings)” (Achebe 1981: 62). This takes 
us to the concept of communicative competence. 
 
What is Communicative Competence? 
The issue of internationalization of the English language cannot be fully 
explored without mentioning communicative competence which is the general ability to 
use language accurately, appropriately and flexibly. Language serves a great number of 
social purposes. It is not limited to any specific role or function, it is generally accepted 
that language is used for communication but the two basic communicative functions 
are:- transactional and interactional functions. Just as the terminologies suggest, 
communication could be to enhance transaction between participants or to enhance 
mere interaction among participants. In most cases there is a confluence between the 
two. Conversation is often a mix of transaction and interaction. Since language can be 
put into multiple purposes, accurate, appropriate and flexible usage (communicative 
competence) is needed. Sociolinguistic competence, the ability to use L2 (second 
International Journal of Research Development 

 
 
5 
 
Approaches in International Journal of Research Development, Volume 11 No. 1, April, 2019: ISSN 2141-1409 
language) to suit the social context is what this paper professes. Strategic competence, 
the ability to organize a message effectively and to compensate, via strategies for any 
difficulties is also professed. This flexibility in L2 use is a key element in 
communicative success. 
Also worthy of mention is the facts concerning language and regional 
variations. Every language has a lot of variations, especially at the level of phonology 
(the way it is spoken). English language is not an exception. A range of variation is 
found in different parts of the country all traceable to mother tongue (L1) interference. 
As people migrate to different part of Nigeria the English language which is the official 
language becomes equally impaired phonologically as there are deviant usages among 
users of English in Nigeria. The L1 interference gives L2 a new African flavour. This is 
reported thus: 
“Retroactive interference of mother tongue (MT) with second language (L2) at all 
levels of language studies is a glaring issue with English language teaching and 
learning” (Urujzian 2016: p 403). 
From the foregoing, the question now is; where is the place of regional 
varieties of English i.e. Yoruba English, Igbo English, Hausa English, Akwa Ibom 
English etc. in the face of this clamour for English language as an international 
standard (EIL)? Internationalization of English language in Nigeria is in progress but 
Nigerian English and Nigerian Pidgin English are competing favourably and gradually 
gaining international recognition. 
 
Conclusion 
The advent of internationalization has permeated all facets of human endeavours. Its 
effect on the English language is great as it has broadened mass knowledge. There is a 
great flexibility as to what variety of English language to be put to use at all situations. 
Nigerians are speaking international Standard English to international audience, 
Nigerian Standard English to national audience and Nigerian pidgin at different 
occasions. Nigerian beats or music are now presented in Pidgin English. The Nigerian 
Movie Industry (Nollywood) is having a smooth glide with Nigerian English and 
Nigerian Pidgin of assorted varieties. As useful as these medium are, the L2 classroom 
must reflect all the usable standards especially within this season of volatility in 
Nigeria. Communication should be the key word i.e. internationally, nationally and 
locally. Teachers must also have a firm grasp of language function and culture in order 
to cultivate in students good communicative competence. English language teachers 
should place less emphasis on international standards and focus on teaching English 
from cultural point of view as this will improve students’ cultural sensitivity and 
cultural acceptance. Understanding cultural differences will promote cultural tolerance 
in the face of Nigeria’s near war postures. 
 
Suggestions 
Since this paper posits a mutual coexistence of English as an International Language 
(EIL), Nigerian English (NGE) and Pidgin English and other Nigerian languages, the 
following suggestions are given: 
Internationalization of the English Language in Nigeria - Dr. Vero-Ekpris Gladstone 
Urujzian 

 
 
6 
 
Approaches in International Journal of Research Development, Volume 11 No. 1, April, 2019: ISSN 2141-1409 
1. Suitable materials should be put in place to organize an [2 class room experience that 
will have salutary effect on our economic situations and communal crises. 
2. The fundamental shift from total eradication of Nigerian coinages and tagging 
innovative expressions as errors should be applauded. These innovative expressions 
should be looked at as common L2 acquisition process in act on. 
3. The different opinions on how to create communicative experiences for L2 learners 
should be re-visited and emphasis should be on the function of language (what is it 
used for) not on (form) correct grammatical or phonological structures. 
4. Transfer should be seen as an active learning not error. Transfer means using sounds, 
expressions or structures from L1 when performing in the L2. 
 
 
References 
Achebe, C. (1981) A Morning Yet and Creation Day. London, Heinemann. 
 
Adegbite, A. B. (2010) English Language Usage, Uses and Misuses in a non-host 
second Language context, Nigeria Unpublished inaugural lecture series 231. 
OAU, Ile-Ife 2010. 
 
De Wit (2011) Trends, Issues and Challenges in Internationalization of higher 
Education Amsterdam: Centre for Applied Research on Economic and 
Management, Hoge School Van Amsterdam. 
 
Egron — Polak, E. (2013) Re-thinking internationalization of higher education 
equality, diversity and shared benefits. Paper presented in Norwegian 
internationalization conference Bergen, March 6, 2013. 
 
Rizvi and Lingard, B. (2010) Globalizing Educational Policy. UK: London, Routledge. 
 
Osakwe, M. I. (2011) Tending, Bending and Breaking Vagabond English for Global 
Needs. 24th in the series of inaugural lectures, Delta State University, Abraka. 
 
Udonwang, D and Uruzian, V. (2016) of Semiotics and Politics of Postcolonial. In 
Journal of assertiveness. 11 (1), 112-118. 
Urujzian, V. (2016) “English Language issues in open education resources in Nigeria” 
The International Journal of Academia 1, 100-115 May, 2016, university of 
Education, Winneba — Ghana. 
 
 
International Journal of Research Development 

