In the spring, I’ll delve even deeper into Deep Learning, with a class that explores counter-intuitive results and how surprisingly effective DL is sometimes. How is it even possible to “learn” using nothing but vector math? What are these models really doing, and why are some models better than others? Should be fun. I’ll also be delving into the math of chaos and fractals. I hope that will be useful for my research into self-modifying dynamic systems (ie, simulated life 😛), and lead to some very pretty visuals I can share. We’ll see!

Anyway, I’ll share the post about Transformers right after this, and that will wrap up another year of blog posts. More to come in January!

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onDecember 7, 2024CategoriesStatus UpdatesTagsclasses, deep learning, evolutionary computation, experiment, research7 Commentson Status Update: End of Semester 3
The Universe Evolves
The Universe Evolves
(This month’s featured image is a photo of the Carina Nebula taken by NASA’s James Webb telescope. It’s a vast cloud of gas and dust, slowly condensing, with hundreds of stars visible in the background behind it. The colorized image almost looks like orange mountains with a blue mist rising from them, set on a black background with bright, six-sided starbursts.)

Normally, when we talk about evolution, we mean what life does. It’s Darwin’s magic formula. You need reproduction. You need to pass on a copy of your genes, with a little variation, so things don’t just stay the same. Natural selection will weed out the less fit individuals, so they have fewer kids. The more fit individuals become more prevalent and, over time, life as a whole evolves to be more fit. Yet, this isn’t a very satisfying story. For one thing, how did it begin? Did life just start evolving out of the blue? I think story is more compelling if we think about evolution a bit more abstractly. In a sense, the physical universe itself evolves. It doesn’t have reproduction and inheritance, but it sure does have variation and selection, and this has caused it to change dramatically over the course of history.

For the first 370,000 years or so, all of space was filled with a boring, homogeneous cloud of energy and plasma. That universe is now extinct, and for one simple reason: it was unstable. In our universe, stability is the ultimate definition of “fitness.” What persists, exists. Patterns of matter and energy that get generated more often and stick around longer become more prevalent. Those that are rare and fragile exist only fleetingly. The plasma universe is gone because gravity causes matter to clump together. It was like a pencil, balanced on its tip. As soon as it became just a little unbalanced, it rapidly fell farther and farther away from that delicate equilibrium. Plasma condensed into molecules, gas clouds, and stars.

Of course, evolution needs variation to work. To find what’s better, you need to weed out what’s worse. For life, reproduction is the engine of variation, but that isn’t necessary if you have unimaginably vast scale. The universe started out with very little variation, but it steadily increased as matter interacted with itself. Gravity caused hydrogen molecules to group together in uneven clumps, and held them there. They sat around for millions of years, slowly growing bigger, until the force of their own weight ignited a fusion reaction. The gas clouds became stars, and in their cores new elements were born. The universe’s population gradually became more diverse.

That’s the counterintuitive thing about stability: it can generate diversity. When patterns become more numerous, and they stick around for longer, chaos starts to kick in. Every star and every planet is a little different. They have unique histories and influences and opportunities. They might be richer in this element or that one, bigger or smaller, hotter or colder, more or less affected by collisions. This diversity only compounds over time, as these objects smash together and interact in complex ways. The longer they stick around, the more they change, recombine, and become more elaborate.

So, for 13 billion years, the universe evolved. Its population became stranger and more complicated. Today we have about a hundred “naturally occurring” elements that didn’t exist at first, but had to evolve through multiple generations of stars fusing atoms, exploding violently, and gradually reforming. We have many kinds of stars, planets, solar systems, and galaxies, that support an astonishing variety of chemical processes that have had a very, very long time to develop. They produce “primordial soups,” pocket environments full of useful molecules for life, a steady energy source, and self-perpetuating chemical reactions. We think this happened at least once to seed all life on Earth, but it may in fact be very common.

I think this story is an essential foundation for understanding evolution as life does it. Because life didn’t start this process. The universe provides energy and raw materials in vast amounts. It provides the chaos and entropy that drives seemingly random variation, and the slow, continual breaking down that causes natural selection to prefer stable, commonly made forms. The laws of physics cause the universe to evolve towards stability, diversity, and complexity, at least for a while, until it starts to wind down again and settle into entropy. Life merely constrains that process, making it more efficient and productive, for the simple reason that matter that does so becomes more prevalent.

In these primordial soups, some chemical systems evolved to enclose themselves in bubbles, protecting delicate reactions from the outside world. These self-made “individuals” evolved regular cycles of reproduction, explicitly making copies of themselves rather than waiting for the right reactants to come together again by chance. They evolved DNA to constrain these copies, and make them more precise reproductions of the original. They evolved sophisticated error checking, which made the copies more robust and reliable. But this also gave life the power to manage variation across generations, and thus shape its own evolution. Life evolved sex to further manage variation, accelerating innovation by sharing genetic recipes across lineages. Life evolved an astonishing variety of sexual and reproductive practices, allowing it to evolve in different ways, with different patterns of variation and selection, each suited to a different range of environments and lifestyles.

The physical Universe evolves—in the most primitive way imaginable, but it still produces stability and complexity in a vast number of diverse forms. It generates the seeds of life, without any guidance or direction. Life evolves differently, because it constrains this process, making it discrete, digital, and managed. This started very simply, just discovering chemical reactions that isolate and maintain themselves. But perhaps this is the origin of what we think of as “intelligence” or “agency”? Without noticing, matter became “opinionated,” preferring certain forms and acting explicitly to promote them. From there, life’s “opinions” about itself only became more demanding and elaborate.

We often present evolution as one simple story, but there are many ways to evolve. Evolution is more like a general principle than a specific algorithm. Even just life as we know it, all based on the DNA molecule, has invented an astonishing variety of different and complex ways of evolving. Bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals use DNA differently. They grow, behave, and reproduce in completely different ways. How many other ways might there be to do it? When we present evolution as a single, constant thing, we limit our imagination. Evolution evolves, and it takes as many diverse forms as it makes.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onOctober 2, 2024CategoriesBeyond DarwinTagsagency, biology, complexity, diversity, evolution, intelligence, life, origin of life, philosophy, physics, science20 Commentson The Universe Evolves
Status Update: Semester 3
I’m at an interesting moment in my studies, so I thought I’d let you know what’s going on!

Year two of my PhD program has begun. I’m about a month into my third semester, and things are going well. I’m taking two classes right now: Evolutionary Computation, and Deep Learning. Most of my Computer Science education has been about how to design algorithms and write software to solve different kinds of problems, but these classes are different. This semester, I’m learning how to get computers to discover their own algorithms, and write their own software. Honestly, the state of the art here is still quite primitive. We’ve found some very impressive techniques, but they each apply to a narrow domain, and we don’t understand them nearly as well as we’d like. Which makes them fun topics to study. 🙂

The other fun thing about this semester is that both of my classes are built around student projects. More or less, I get to pick projects that fit with my research, and the class is there to help me find the time, resources, and guidance to complete the projects successfully. I like this much better than undergraduate style courses built around assignments and exams that are very generic and may not be relevant to my work. We’ll see how things unfold, but I’m currently planning to work on two projects that I’m excited about.

For Evolutionary Computation, I’m working on an experiment about endosymbiosis. I was inspired by this classic experiment, which examined how bacteria evolve antibiotic resistance, and how genetic innovations spread through the population spatially. I’m going to try evolving a host environment that supports an inner population, a bit like how my gut supports a microbiome. The hope is that the host will be able to design a supportive environment, with different regions that cultivate “microbes” with different traits, such that it can guide and coax them into evolving more specialized forms. This is an exciting experiment for me, because I’m not sure what to expect, but I’m pretty confident that something interesting will happen.

A screenshot from the video linked above, showing strains of bacteria gradually growing into bands with increasing concentrations of antibiotic, fanning out from points where key mutations occurred.

A screenshot from the video linked above, showing strains of bacteria gradually growing into bands with increasing concentrations of antibiotic, fanning out from points where key mutations occurred.

For Deep Learning, I’m going to use computer vision techniques to detect interesting patterns in the Game of Life, since I’ve been using that as an environment for my evolution experiments. The Game of Life has very simple rules, but it evolves in complex ways. Most patterns quickly dissolve into empty space or settle into a few boring, stable forms. But rarely, you get something much more interesting. For decades, people have been exploring this space, finding interesting patterns and classifying them. You get huge complex structures that stabilize themselves, change continuously in repeating cycles, or even propel themselves and move at a steady pace. I’ll build a system that can detect and categorize these patterns, so that when my evolutionary algorithm finds them, I can reward it and ask for “more like that.”

Eater 2, a static shape that persists forever, but has the special property of being able to “eat” gliders that collide with it, recovering its shape after.	Monogram, a period-four oscillator, which is small, but occurs very rarely from random conditions.	
Examples of interesting patterns in the Game of Life. The first is a static shape that persists forever, but has the special property of being able to “eat” gliders that collide with it, recovering its shape after. The second is a period-four oscillator, which is small, but occurs very rarely from random conditions. The third is a middleweight spaceship, which moves forward two spaces as it repeats itself in four time steps.

This month’s essay is inspired by my Evolutionary Computation class, and the work I’ve been doing to develop the specific research questions I want to focus on for my PhD. So, check back on Wednesday to learn more about how evolution got started, and why it’s worth asking: how does evolution evolve?

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onSeptember 29, 2024CategoriesStatus UpdatesTagsai, antibiotic resistance, artificial-intelligence, computer vision, deep learning, endosymbiosis, evolution, game of life, machine-learning, research, technology7 Commentson Status Update: Semester 3
GECCO Follow-Up
GECCO Follow-Up
(I took this post’s photo at the Star Trek Original Series Set Tour in Ticonderoga, New York. It’s a view of the warp core of the USS Enterprise, which is only a few feet deep but looks much larger thanks to forced perspective. The room is filled with structures with complicated geometric shapes, technical looking panels, and dramatic lighting in red, blue, and purple.)

In my last post, I wrote about my latest research project and why I was so excited to present it at GECCO, the premier conference for evolutionary computation. I promised a follow-up, and here it is! Unfortunately, I didn’t make it to Melbourne. Instead, I had a very complicated and protracted battle with my University’s travel planning system, United Airlines, and the Australian visa office, all from the comfort of my home in Vermont. I couldn’t even participate in the event remotely, because of the time zone difference. This is all very disappointing, but I tried to make the best of it. I’ve been busy with the next iteration of this project, and enjoying a bit of “staycation” time here in New England (hence this month’s cover photo).

In any case, my paper did get published, and I’d still like to share the materials I presented virtually at the conference. It’s mostly intended for a technical audience, but I hope at least some of my readers will find it interesting. The paper is titled A Meta-Evolutionary Algorithm for Co-evolving Genotypes and Genotype / Phenotype Maps, and is available for free online. I had to cut it down to just four pages, since it was accepted as a poster, so I also wrote up an extended analysis of my results and an hoverview of my algorithm’s implementation, for those who want to go deeper. There’s also a digital version of my poster and a short video overview of my experiment.

I continue to work on this idea, and it is starting to evolve beyond what I presented in that paper. Right now, I’m actively deconstructing and rebuilding the algorithm. CPPNs are an important and well known part of the AI field, so I’m trying to describe precisely how my algorithm is different, and which of those differences account for the remarkable results I found. Originally I thought of this research as being about epigenetics specifically, but as I try to generalize and simplify, what I’m left with looks like straight-up endosymbiosis. I’ve been thinking of this algorithm as a metaphor for a cell and its genes / nucleus, but it could just as easily be a metaphor for an animal and its community of microbes. This is exciting, since I’d love to do more research on endosymbiosis, and I really like the idea that perhaps symbiosis is the driving force behind intelligence as we know it, fundamentally changing the dynamics of evolution.

Anyway, that’s how I see it for the moment, and where I hope my research will lead in the near future. For now, though, I’m wrapping up my summer with a few more fun outings, and preparing for the start of classes later this month. I’ll be diving deep into both evolutionary computation and deep learning, which I’m really looking forward to.
