
Decentralized brains work extremely well, but they have their limitations. More complex animals have more versatile behaviors that need more explicit coordination to generate coherent, reliable, and goal-directed behavior. Most large animals seem to have this ability. In all mammals, it’s more or less identified with a brain region known as the prefrontal cortex, or PFC. The PFC is responsible for monitoring all the activity in the brain. It builds up a rich model of the self, its relationships, needs, and long-term goals. It’s responsible for planning and for exerting control over other parts of the brain. It can shut out distractions and use willpower to encourage good behaviors and discourage bad ones, even when I’d selfishly prefer to do something else.

The PFC tells the story of “you,” and has strong opinions about how that story is supposed to go.

Although all mammals have a PFC (and many other species have something analogous), the relative size of the PFC varies quite a bit between species, and that seems to correlate with executive control and what people often think of as “intelligence.” Animals with large PFCs are better at self-control, problem solving, and forming complex social relationships. Humans have exceptionally large PFCs, which partly explains why we’re so different from other species. It’s important to remember, though, this is a difference in magnitude, not in kind. It’s likely that every mammal and many other species have human-like self-awareness and self-control. It’s just a weaker faculty for them, one that acts less often, and is less able to dominate the rest of the mind.

The PFC is the closest thing to a “pilot” the brain has, but it’s better to think of it as just one brain region among many. It’s one voice in a chorus. It tends to be more bossy, spending a lot of energy trying to influence or even override other parts of the brain, but it’s not “in control.” Like a corporate executive, the PFC has only limited visibility into what the rest of the brain is doing, can’t afford to stay ever-vigilant, and can’t force a brain region to fall in line, especially when the orders run counter to that region’s nature. The PFC also isn’t capable of doing much on its own. It depends on the rest of the brain to notice things, interpret them, suggest actions, and implement them. All it can do is adjudicate and coordinate. It resolves conflict, makes plans, and advises each brain region about when and how to do its thing.

One consequence of all this is that self-control is actually a very limited and fragile thing. Often, my PFC just sits back and lets the rest of the brain work with minimal intervention. Usually that works great, but sometimes it means I miss something important. I may act out of impulse or habit and not notice until it’s too late that I’m going against my values, intentions, or best interests. Other times I know exactly what I should do, but can’t seem to make it happen. I feel unmotivated and uninspired. I can’t force myself to sit down, focus, and avoid distractions. Perhaps I’m grumpy, tired, or impatient and I do something rude or inappropriate without meaning to at all.

When this happens, it’s easy to blame myself. I lost control. I did something foolish. I acted selfishly and impulsively, like a bad person. In reality, though, this happens all the time, usually for mundane reasons that I have little control over. The PFC is energy intensive, so it gets impaired whenever my blood sugar is low, I’m tired, or I’m stressed. Other brain regions also have the ability to interfere with the PFC, especially the limbic system which manages emotions and the fight-or-flight response. Some diseases (like depression and long COVID) can cause “brain fog,” which is closely related to reduced executive function. It’s also possible to injure the PFC, from a stroke, a tumor, or a physical injury (as in the famous case of Phineas Gage).

Knowing this helps me feel a little less personally responsible when I have a lapse of self-control. It really is inevitable, common, and completely natural. Still, I want to have good judgment and do the right thing as much as possible! How do I do that? One answer is to simply be aware of my limitations and to work around them. I try to notice when I’m hungry, tired, or emotional and avoid making big decisions or socializing at those times. Instead, I might get a snack, take a break, or sleep on it so I feel more in control. The only other good technique I know is mindfulness meditation. Despite the mystical reputation, the main purpose of meditation is quite practical: it trains the PFC. By practicing the skill of observing the mind and exerting influence over it, I can build that muscle. It’s not a silver bullet, but meditation helps me use my PFC more often and more effectively, and it makes me more aware of when my PFC is in a weakened state.

So, in a sense, there really is a “pilot” in every brain. It’s just not an ever vigilant, intelligent, wise, and rational person. Instead, it’s one brain region out of many, with limited visibility and a narrow job description. The PFC observes what the other brain regions are seeing, thinking, and doing and uses that top-down view to nudge them into more coherent and effective patterns of behavior. It’s not “the self” and it’s not “in control.” In fact, it has very limited influence, isn’t always active, and even with training there are lots of common reasons it might grow weak or misbehave. For this reason, having great self-control is often less about will power in the moment, and more about avoiding temptation in the first place.

What do you think? Does this agree with your first-hand experience? Do you have any insights you could share about self-awareness, self-control, or motivation? What about being kind to yourself when your self-control inevitably falls short? If so, I’d love to hear from you in the comments.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onApril 3, 2024CategoriesAnimal Minds, IntrospectionTagsbrains, collectives, control, health, meditation, mental-health, minds, neuroscience, pfc, pilot, prefrontal cortex, psychology, self7 Commentson The Brain’s “Boss”
Pre-Genetic Life
One thing that fascinates me about life on Earth is that it’s all built with proteins and genetics. Every living cell, even the most primitive microbe, has at its core a universal molecular-scale 3D printer, controlled by an evolved programming language, which gets read and error-corrected from a highly stable gigabit-scale molecular data storage medium (DNA).

In short, every living thing, every single cell, is a mechanism of astonishing complexity and sophistication, and they all share a common design. That’s wild. Life could not have started that way. The very first cells must have been much simpler and then evolved to be like this. But then… where are they? What happened to those pre-genetic cells? We’ve never found them. There are a few good answers to why, and I find them all fascinating.

One interesting possibility is that pre-genetic life is long gone. After all, it originated billions of years ago! Earth is a hostile place, and those early life forms must have been even more fragile than the ones we see today. Not to mention, there’s nothing life likes more than to eat other life. If “modern” cells with genetics outperformed their more primitive cousins, maybe they drove them extinct and replaced them?

Or, perhaps pre-genetic life never existed on this planet at all. Maybe the mechanism of genetics is so complex it needs much more time to evolve from scratch. Maybe the process got started elsewhere in the universe, and then got deposited here in cosmic debris. In that case, genetic cells just colonized Earth and adapted to living here. That’s an exciting possibility, because that might mean there’s more life “out there,” and we could find other living planets like our own.

Just as fascinating is the idea that pre-genetic life is still alive and well on this planet. That universal 3D printer for proteins is an incredibly powerful tool for cells, but its primary value is exploration. It makes it possible to invent new molecules and thus new lifestyles. It enables life to spread, complexify, and settle every corner of this planet.

But it doesn’t make the cell any better at living one particular lifestyle. It may be that cells evolved diversity to escape the dominance of the first life forms, that cornered their particular niche so well that finding a new niche was the only option. Perhaps genetics was invented to escape and branch out from this overcrowded primordial environment. If that’s the case, then maybe there’s a thriving colony of pre-genetic life, still clinging to a hydro-thermal vent somewhere, just as it has for billions of years. It’s terribly unlikely, but in theory, we could find it. How exciting would that be?

But what if pre-genetic life isn’t rare at all? What if we just can’t see it? Certainly, if it exists, it would be microscopic, and that already makes it very difficult to find and study. We’ve been cataloging single-celled organisms for centuries now, yet we’ve observed just a tiny fraction of them, and gene sequenced even fewer.

Maybe we overlook pre-genetic life because it looks like “normal” cells? We can now take a census of whole microbial communities by sequencing their DNA in bulk and using a computer to sort out the different species, but pre-genetic life would be invisible to that technique. It has no DNA to catalog. Maybe it uses RNA, which degrades more quickly, and is harder to study? Maybe the RNA is organized differently, in ways that would defy current sequencing technology? Maybe it uses a completely different mechanism, with molecules we don’t even know to look for? It’s fascinating to think there could be a whole other kingdom of life hiding in plain sight.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onJanuary 12, 2024CategoriesSnack-SizedTagsdna, extinction, genetics, life, origins, panspermia8 Commentson Pre-Genetic Life
Learning to Move: Three Kinds of Learning
Learning to Move: Three Kinds of Learning
(This post’s image is a photo I took of my yoga gear. Specialized tools like my mat, blocks, and strap work together to make my practice possible. They extend my body, and help arrange it in the ways my mind imagines)

I was pretty sedentary as a kid, and didn’t get serious about physical fitness until I was an adult. One nice thing about that is I got to watch myself learn, knowing all I do now about the brain. By practicing yoga and working with physical therapists, I’ve learned a lot about myself, but also how mind and body work together. Mastering a new physical skill actually recruits at least three separate learning processes working together. Understanding this changed my expectations, helped me gain more control over my body, and made exercise much more enjoyable.

When I first started yoga, I was startled by how little I knew about my body. My teachers were asking me to observe and discern sensations I’d never noticed before. They asked me to get into certain poses, using certain muscle groups, and I didn’t know how! I didn’t have the names for these things. Worse, I could see what I was supposed to do, but I didn’t know how to make my body do that, or even if I could. It was frustrating.

It’s weird to think how ignorant we are of our bodies, given that we live in them our whole lives. For me, a prime example comes from physical therapy. When recovering from an injury, I relearned how to walk up stairs. I’ve climbed stairs thoughtlessly my whole life, and I never considered there were different ways to do it. But the leg is controlled by opposing muscle groups. I used to climb stairs by lifting each leg, using just the muscles on the front side. I learned to also use the muscles on the back side, to push up and straighten the leg. Either set of muscles can do the job alone. Now, I consciously try to balance the effort from both sides, but this never would have occurred to me without knowing a little anatomy.

That knowledge was game changing for me, but unfortunately knowing how the body works isn’t good enough. I can memorize anatomical diagrams, muscle names, and facts about body mechanics, but the only interface between the brain and body are the spinal nerves. How’s the brain supposed to know what nerve impulses correspond to which movements? There’s actually a region of the brain dedicated to this problem, the cerebellum, but it’s not consciously accessible. This is why yoga instructors use cues: they teach little mental tricks for recruiting muscles, and associate them with relevant postures.

Try this. Bend your elbows ninety degrees to extend your forearms out from your body, palms up. Imagine someone’s handing you a heavy platter. You might notice the trapezius and rhomboid muscles engage between your shoulders. These muscles largely serve a supportive role. For many people, they aren’t needed much in daily life, but using them can improve posture and reduce strain on other muscles. The problem is, they’re easy to ignore and hard to describe. But I can turn them on with the cue, and then I can learn what it feels like to use those muscles. Once I can tell whether they’re working, I can often activate them at will. Or, I can just use the cue, as needed.

Of course, conscious knowledge of form and cues are just step one. Muscle control is mostly unconscious, and for good reason. Remembering all the cues, monitoring my body, and continuously correcting my posture is work. It takes my full attention, leaving no room for anything else. Luckily, that’s just a phase. With enough practice, my cerebellum learns the patterns and can take over. I can hand off that work to my unconscious motion control sub-processor, freeing my conscious mind to think about something else.

This is why physical therapy can be so effective. After an injury, some muscles and joints may not perform like they used to. Some links between mind and body might even be severed or scrambled. Recovery means learning new ways to do old activities. At first, this is a nightmare. Without the support of the cerebellum, even just walking is an intensive conscious effort. Physical therapy can be a painful, tedious, and drawn-out process, but for many patients it makes a world of difference. It teaches the cerebellum new motion programs. Potentially, walking can become fully automatic again. The conscious mind can be used to retrain the unconscious mind in profound and lasting ways.

Yet knowing how to move isn’t enough if the body can’t follow through. The hardest part about learning a new physical activity is that the body usually isn’t ready for it. When I first started yoga, my muscles were weak, rigid, and lazy. They quickly became tired and sore, which just made me want to use them less. They struggled to move my body weight, and were so tight that my range of motion was limited. Some postures were hard, uncomfortable, or impossible. I couldn’t keep up, and when I pushed myself harder, I only injured myself.

That taught me a lesson about patience and acceptance. My body wasn’t ready, so I couldn’t do those poses, but I could work towards them. I learned to listen to my muscles complain, and to distinguish between different sensations. Some indicate hard limits I should not push past, but most are just signs of stress, and those can be good. When muscles, bones, and tendons get stressed, they respond by becoming bigger, stronger, and tougher in a process called anti-fragility. The discomfort I feel is just that physical learning process in action. By embracing the discomfort, I could slowly reshape my body.

