This form of collective intelligence is incredibly powerful. It requires individuals who are intelligent, social, and good at communicating, so that’s what we evolved to be. We’re born craving social connection, stories, and gossip. We have powerful instincts to trust one another, to contribute, to be liked, and to fit in. The result is that whenever humans come together, we spontaneously form communities. Just by talking and telling stories, we build up a consensus about who we are, what we’re doing, and how to be together.

Language was a key innovation, but new communication technologies have made much larger collectives possible, with different forms and capacities. Broadcast media is one such technology worth a closer look. For most of our history, we could only coordinate as many people as we could gather and talk to (this is why the Romans built a vast network of coliseums, with paved roads and courier routes between them). The printing press changed that, making it relatively fast, cheap, and easy to reach hundreds or even millions of people. Radio and television only turbo-charged this capability.

The power of broadcast media comes from delivering the same message to everyone at the same time. Not only can it plant ideas in many minds, but it gets people talking about those ideas, iterating on them and integrating them into daily life. And we talk about them because we care. Our media, especially video, is designed to tap into our evolved need for knowledge and connection. We crave information. We see people in the media, and they become part of our extended social circles. We trust them, emulate them, and integrate their ideas with our own, usually without meaning to or even noticing that we’re doing this.

The problem is that the people on the screen aren’t our community. They don’t know us and we don’t know them. They’re usually personas or characters that don’t even exist in real life. We know this, yet our brains—evolved to be social—tend to embrace them as community members anyway. This illusion changes the way culture is formed. What used to be a more egalitarian, peer-to-peer process is now centralized. A few powerful individuals can put their ideas into the mouths of characters that stir the hearts and minds of many millions of people. Governments, corporations, social movements, and others work very hard to shape the thoughts and behavior of the whole population, and in some ways they are very successful.

Social media is a powerful new innovation, of course. Unlike broadcast media, where the same message goes out to everyone, social media makes it possible to shape every aspect of communication. The platform influences how people find each other and cluster into communities. The platform decides which voices and topics to amplify or stifle. The platform helps advertisers precisely target their audience, understand their biases and preferences, and craft messages with the biggest impact. They construct a customized media environment for each individual (a “filter bubble”) and attempt to monitor and influence each community and society as a whole.

This isn’t to say that social media is bad. It’s an incredibly powerful tool for understanding and influencing human culture, and we need that to get through the many crises we’re facing. The question is, who gets to wield that power, and what is it used for? Today, we let big corporations design and control these platforms with minimal restraint. They shape human culture, which decides every aspect of our lives and the fate of the planet, primarily for the purpose of making money; the consequences for society and the world aren’t their concern. That seems deeply problematic, but how could we do it differently?

There are two main problems with the status quo: the goal is unhealthy, and power is too centralized. It would be nice if the purpose of social media was to make society better, rather than trying to make the most money. The main problem is, who gets to decide what’s “better”? There’s no one right answer. This is why new social media sites like Mastodon are focused on the second part of the problem. By breaking up big platforms into many small, independent, but interconnected pieces, they can make a huge and thriving network without any one individual holding too much power. The result is more chaotic and fragmented. Different groups shape their discourse as they please in a more bottom-up fashion. This doesn’t prevent exploitation or toxic communities, but at least it’s more egalitarian and human-centric.

What makes humans special is how we build collectives that adapt continuously. This made our species successful, so we evolved innate biases to socialize. Over time, we learned to exploit those biases to exert more control over society as a whole. People are lured to big media for entertainment and connection, but these days it often feels like the true purpose of these platforms is to manipulate us and extract value from our participation. This raises a big question we each need to answer for ourselves: how do we want to shape our culture, and who should wield that power?

I don’t have answers, but I hope this perspective is useful. It’s uncomfortable to think of myself as so persuadable that I can’t even watch YouTube without some of the ideals of the creators and the platform rubbing off on me, but it’s kinda true. I can try to resist that, but it takes a conscious effort which I rarely even think to put in. The truth is, our minds are designed by evolution to be porous and to integrate with each other. This makes us both powerful and vulnerable, so it’s worth thinking about! We ought to be mindful of what we expose ourselves to, and what ideas we let in.

What do you think? I’d love to hear from you in the comments.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onJune 7, 2023CategoriesProgramming with PeopleTagsadvertisement, broadcast media, capitalism, culture, evolution, influence, media, minds, propaganda, social intelligence, social media6 Commentson The Programmable Species
Getting into Grad School
Getting into Grad School
(Photo is a shot I took of downtown Burlington, VT at twilight with lights in the trees and a clock tower in the background)

A year and a half ago, I took a big risk by leaving my comfortable career in the tech industry to pursue a graduate degree. Like many people, recent events inspired me to find more meaningful work, but it’s an intimidating change. How do you even do that? I have ideas I want to pursue, but they’re not exactly mainstream, and grad school is competitive. I didn’t know where to start, but I decided to try. I pushed my way through, and I’m very happy with the results. I don’t claim to have a secret recipe for career change, but I want to share my experience in case it’s helpful for you or someone you know.

My first challenge was realizing: I have no idea what grad school is even like. Most universities have two parallel programs: they provide a baseline education to the masses for a profit, and then they actually do science and train scientists. Generally speaking, the only thing these have in common is the college where they happen. I got my baseline undergraduate education at Brown, but that didn’t teach me anything about grad school. While I was on campus, I had the opportunity to learn about grad school, but I wasn’t interested then, so I let that chance pass me by.

Many years later, I tried to learn what grad school is and how to succeed there by talking to students and professors. This was surprisingly painful. In general, folks did a poor job explaining what grad school is like, and gave me all sorts of conflicting advice. Gradually, I began to see two big reasons why:

Diversity. There’s no one “grad school experience.” Every school, discipline, program, and lab is different. They have their own jargon, priorities, and expectations. Yet, when asking someone about it, they will describe their experience as typical, and give specific advice that would have helped them. The best way to get a sense of what’s “normal” is to talk to lots of folks and pay careful attention to where they disagree. Conflicting advice helped me understand the full range of programs out there.
Immersion. Grad school is an immersive experience. I expect I’ll show up on campus, get swept up in things, and gradually discover I’m “being a grad student” without ever being taught how. This sort of experiential learning is fast and effective, but it’s hard to explain. People just don’t have the words. They shared lots of details, but without context those mostly went over my head. They didn’t mention the “obvious stuff,” because it’s intuitive for them, and I didn’t know to ask about it. To learn the fundamentals, I had to read between the lines. When something didn’t add up, I’d look for hidden assumptions that could explain the reasoning. Cross referencing multiple conversations was important.
The next challenge was finding the right place for me. At a high level, academia is divided into disciplines, like Physics, Biology, or Computer Science, and each of those has many sub-disciplines nested within. Each one is working on a certain set of problems using certain tools and methods. Many grad students start with no clear idea of what they’ll do. They just pick a discipline, learn about it, and find a way to make themselves useful. My situation is different: I have specific ideas I want to pursue. Unfortunately, scientists aren’t very interested in cool ideas from outsiders, unless they happen to fit within their field of research.

It took me a long time to figure out what discipline to join. It seems like it should be obvious, but many research questions like mine are interdisciplinary, and don’t fit the usual options. Ultimately, it came down to what tools I wanted to use. Even though my ideas are about life, self-making, and meaning, I want to study these phenomena as algorithms, analyze their behavior, and recreate them in a computer. This led me to focus on Computer Science, and the sub-field of Artificial Intelligence. I’m ambitious and experienced, so naturally I thought I’d apply to the top schools for CS and AI. That was a mistake.

The problem is,the big-name schools are mainstream by definition, and my research is not. I’m actually quite concerned that the field has lost its way. They have too narrow a definition for “intelligence,” and tend to worry more about new consumer technology than understanding nature. But the big schools are the ones setting this agenda. Their programs are highly competitive, and they’re looking for people who will advance their goals. Even if I somehow managed to get in, they would not provide a supportive environment for me as a student.

If not the big name schools, then where? There are many options, covering an enormous range. How do I find the right one? The promotional materials online are quite generic and unhelpful, so again I turned to people. I cold emailed professors doing vaguely related work, and maybe one in five replied. At first, they barely understood what I was talking about or what to suggest, but usually they could point me at someone slightly more relevant than themselves. That way, I gradually worked my way to folks who “got it.” This led me to a totally new list of schools to apply to. It took nearly a full year, and I wish I had longer.

Figuring out where I fit in was also about looking inwards. I had ideas, but they were vague and complex. To talk to people, I had to explain myself in ways they could understand. That was hard, but useful. It forced me to consolidate my ideas, disentangle them, and look at them from many angles. I wrote it all down, which was important. Most professors don’t have time for extra reading, but the writing process helped me organize my thoughts, making them much easier to talk about. Some of that writing even ended up on this blog.

I also did a lot of reading, which was invaluable. I read books and journal articles covering a wide swath around my ideas in different fields. This let me survey the kinds of work people were actually doing, and imagine myself in their shoes. I was surprised by how many ideas excited me in theory, but sounded like a drag in practice. I also learned about the jargon, ideas, and thinkers in this space. That made it much easier to talk to professors, helped me find new leads, and gave me new tools for my research.

What are my big takeaways from all of this? Grad school is a bit of a catch-22. It’s a big, complex, and opaque institution. It’s hard to learn about it without being a part of it. It’s hard to get accepted or be successful without knowing the field, the professors, the incentive structures—in other words, being an insider already. Luckily, it’s possible to pick up this knowledge. It’s just a difficult and time-consuming process, and it helps to have connections. Most professors don’t have time for outsiders, but some are eager to help, especially for ideas near and dear to their hearts. Once I finally found folks who shared my interests, they welcomed me with open arms.

So that’s my journey, what I did, what I learned, and how it went. Now I’d love to hear from you. Does any of this surprise you, or resonate with your own experience? Do you have any questions about getting into higher education, or advice for others just getting started? Any thoughts on the state of academia generally? Join the conversation in the comments! It’s my favorite part of this blog, so don’t miss out.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onMay 3, 2023CategoriesPersonal ReflectionsTagsadmissions, career, grad school, phd, research6 Commentson Getting into Grad School
Back to School
Back to School
I’m excited to share that I will begin a PhD program with the University of Vermont (UVM) this Fall. That means Christina, Socks, and I are moving to Burlington, far from our home in Silicon Valley. We think it’s worth it, because the Vermont Complex Systems Center is a unique community, with a perspective on intelligence that really speaks to me, and a wealth of projects and experts on the niche topics I want to explore. They’re also great people. I look forward to working with Josh Bongard, Nick Cheney, and their labs on research at the intersection of cellular biology, robotics, and machine learning. I’m particularly excited at the prospect of joining the Xenobots research program, which is perhaps the coolest thing ever. It seems like a great opportunity to study the intelligence of cells and bodies first hand, to build computer models of intelligence without brains, and potentially to contribute to some truly amazing medical applications in the distant future. More on this as I learn and get involved first hand…

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onApril 6, 2023CategoriesStatus Updates14 Commentson Back to School
What ChatGPT Can Teach Us About Being Human
What ChatGPT Can Teach Us About Being Human
(This post’s featured image is not a photo of the idyllic California vineyard my wife and I visited in 2015, but a similar looking AI-generated fiction)

The excitement around large language models (LLMs) continues. Often just called “AI,” this new technology takes instructions in plain English, and generates new text or images so good you’d think a human made them. There are some serious concerns about the ethics of how this is done (see the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots), and many articles warning people that LLMs aren’t as human as they seem. Still, these LLMs are clearly doing something smart, and it’s weirdly compelling. What’s going on here? What can LLMs teach us about the human mind, our strengths and weaknesses, and why we’re so easily fooled and mesmerized by this tech?
