
Like the first living thing, each human is born into a new and unfamiliar world, forced to figure out how to survive from scratch. We do have a major leg up, though: we’re born with senses and instincts and the ability to move our bodies. Our nervous systems carry and integrate the sensations from our many cells to our brain as a coherent bundle of information. Our brains are highly structured, with all the tools we need to make sense of those signals set up and ready to go. For instance, our multi-stage vision pipeline takes in light signals from our optic nerve, then processes them to detect edges, shape, movement, and even faces from day one. As infants, we don’t know what these things mean yet, but our bodies present the information to our minds in a convenient form and draw our attention, making them quick and easy to learn.

But our innate ontology is very vague. We are born with a sort of “knowledge” (or at least a predisposition to learn) that we are bodies that can move around in a 3D world. That world is filled with objects we can interact with. Some of these objects can move, some are useful, and some are alive. We get tired, hungry, and sick. We need to breathe, drink, and eat other living things to survive. That’s all obvious from a very young age. The rest is on us to figure out. How do we tell friend from foe? How do we find shelter? What’s good to eat around here? How do we make a living? What is the purpose of our existence? These questions are context dependent and quick to change, so life hasn’t evolved answers for us. It can’t. Instead, it gave us brains so we could find our own answers.

What makes humans truly special, though, is that we don’t build our ontologies just by trial and error. We talk about our ontologies. We point things out, name them, tell stories, give demonstrations. We learn from our parents, peers, teachers, and the media. We’re immersed in the collective ontology of our species, something all of humanity has been cultivating for over a hundred thousand years. Our minds are built to soak it all in and to very quickly adopt a picture of reality that’s much richer, more accurate, and more nuanced than what’s available to any other species. Much more than any one human could possibly figure out in their lifetime.

This way of understanding reality is powerful, but it leads to a great big illusion: we tend to see our ontology as reality itself. That’s understandable. Our ontology is our window on the world. It encompasses everything we can perceive, understand, and do. Yet, it is not a real thing. It’s an image in our minds, our bodies, and our genes. It’s informed by our genetic ancestors, our senses, and what we’ve learned from each other. But we perceive much more than our senses actually take in. Our brains are running a sort of “image enhancement” algorithm, as seen in Sci Fi classics like Blade Runner and now made manifest by deep learning software. We take in a little data, then use our knowledge and expectations to extrapolate something much bigger, fuller, and richer, making up the details that we can’t directly perceive. That is, we see what we believe. We perceive concepts, not reality as it truly is.

Of course, if our ontology is not a real thing and lives inside our minds, the consequence is that every human being must have a different ontology. They are in many ways similar, sure. We are the same species, living in the same world, with the same basic needs. We may even be from the same community, with a shared culture. Yet, we might disagree about the meaning of important concepts like “freedom,” “equity,” and “justice.” We might have very different ideas about what money is, what purpose a government serves, or how to be a good person. These are not disagreements about facts, but about the structure of reality itself—the framework we use to fit facts together into a coherent picture. These disagreements are particularly hard to reconcile, since it’s hard to even imagine what doesn’t fit inside my ontology.

That was a bit of a whirlwind tour of ontology. I went fast and skipped over plenty, so I’ll ask: what would you like me to go deeper on? Is there anything that doesn’t make sense? Anything that fascinates or excites you? Let me know in the comments. If you’d like to learn more about ontology in its many forms and how it evolved, I highly recommend From Bacteria to Bach and Back by Daniel Dennett.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onFebruary 1, 2023CategoriesArmchair PhilosophyTagsbodies, cells, culture, evolution, instinct, learning, meaning, minds, ontology12 Commentson In Every Mind, a Universe
Best Intentions
Best Intentions
For the most part, people have good intentions. We generally want to be kind, responsible, and respected by our communities (at least, once our own personal needs are met). We have worthy goals and dreams for how to make life better. Yet, we all know that doesn’t always work out. We struggle with our impulses and willpower. We break our New Year’s resolutions as soon as we set them. We say one thing, then find ourselves doing another. This is true of individuals, but also for teams, communities, and organizations. Why does this happen, and what can we do about it?

Intentions are an important part of what makes us human. All sorts of animals set goals and make plans, but they’re usually very basic, short-term intentions, like “I’m gonna eat that bug.” In most species, lifestyle is largely innate, defined by genetics and the environment with only limited flexibility. Humans are different in that we design our lifestyles, both as individuals and as a society. We set abstract, long-term intentions like “I’m gonna save up for college” or “all people in this company should have equal opportunity.” These ambitious visions can help us imagine possible futures, and guide us to make them a reality.

It’s easy to set good intentions and stop there. Sometimes that’s enough, but often it’s not. Those delayed goals can be tricky for our animal minds, after all. I meant to pick up eggs on my way home, but I forgot. I know I ought to make a healthy dinner, but I’m exhausted, so I’ll order pizza. I said I’d learn Japanese, but maybe I was just kidding myself. I wanted to build a shed in the backyard, but I didn’t really know how, so it never got started. When one of my female engineers at work was criticized unfairly, I thought I was being supportive when I swooped in to defend her. When she pointed out how I was preventing her from proving herself, I had to unlearn that habit. In each of these cases, I meant well, yet I fell short.

This highlights some of the key problems with intentions. They aren’t rules that the brain enforces. If I keep my intentions in mind, I might notice when they should affect my decisions, and act accordingly. Or I might not. Like all people, I spend a lot of time on auto-pilot. I often get tired or distracted. I make countless choices in a day I’m not even aware of. Then there’s willpower. Just because I know I ought to do the right thing, doesn’t mean I will after a long and frustrating day. Lastly, intentions don’t come with step-by-step instructions. It’s often not clear how to achieve my goals, so I have to think about the steps involved, what my options are, and what outcomes are likely. Even if I do everything right, reality doesn’t always play along. I have to watch to make sure things turn out the way I intended, and respond when they don’t.

At their best, intentions serve as a frame for thinking and planning. They’re a first step in a process that leads to an outcome. To improve the chances of success, I must design that process. I must compensate for my cognitive blind spots and mitigate the risk of accidents and surprises. This is a form of self-programming. What can I do now to shape my future behavior? How do I make sure I get into the right situations and avoid the wrong ones? How will I notice when that happens? Can I prepare so that I know what to do in the moment, and have everything I need to act? How will I know if my plan is working, and change course if I need to?

I’ve found there are two essential tools for this sort of planning:

Write and revisit. Intentions are often too vague to be useful. They can be easy to forget, and can drift over time without our notice. To remedy this, I write my intentions down. When possible, I share them with others to make sure I’m rigorous about it, and to create a sense of accountability. Then I set a reminder to revisit those intentions in a few weeks or months. I try to be brutally honest with myself. Am I living up to my expectations? Do I still think about the problem in the same way? If not, I try not to feel guilty, but instead focus on what to do about it. What’s wrong? Should I change my behavior? My intentions? Both? I force myself to think about this.
Prepare yourself. When I set intentions, I think through how to achieve them. Not in full detail, but at least I’ll identify a few major sub-goals that are essential for success. I think about when and how I might do those things, and create some structure around that to make it real. I write TODO lists and set time aside for specific tasks. I leave notes or physical reminders in the real world to nudge me at crucial moments. I think about what decisions I’ll have to make, and how to make them. This is a way of front-loading the effort, doing the thinking and willpower work when I have time for it. That way, when the crucial moment comes, my actions can be fully automatic.
Critically, these two things go hand in hand. Writing down my intentions doesn’t help much if I don’t take some action to ensure they happen. Similarly, making a plan and following it rigorously can be a disaster if it’s the wrong goal, the wrong plan, or if the situation changes. The benefit comes from cycling through these two modes of thinking regularly. What should I do? How should I do it? Is it working? What should I do next?

The same problems appear in teams, communities, and organizations, often amplified dramatically. Aligning intentions across many people is very hard, and aligning behaviors is impossible. Each person has their own motivations, and is gifted and fallible in their own unique ways. To be fully effective, they must set their own intentions, and find their own ways to reliably achieve them. Many leaders are good at setting intentions for their groups, but struggle to make them happen. Sometimes they just say what they want to accomplish and assume everyone gets it and will (somehow) make it happen without any guidance or coordination. Other times they micromanage, trying to force people to deliver by robbing them of their autonomy.

I lead others the same way I lead myself. I just apply the concepts at different levels of abstraction. As a leader, my main responsibility is to keep intentions fresh in my team’s minds and to encourage each individual to be productive in their own way. Rather than telling people what to do and how to do it, I make sure my team has policies and tools to help with common challenges. This gives them freedom and flexibility, but also reduces their burden in the moment and encourages consistency. I create timelines, schedule check-ins, and set reminders in the right time and place. I often don’t care about the timing, I just want to give folks a nudge when they need it, and encourage them to prioritize, pace themselves, and track their own progress. Every quarter, we revisit our intentions together and try to think: are these still the right goals? Is our approach working? Is there a better way?

What makes humans so remarkable is our flexibility. We work creatively within constraints, figuring out the details as we go along. Intentions are a powerful tool for doing that, but they’re just part of the story. Acting intentionally, either as a person or as a group, is about creating the conditions for success. It’s not enough to want something. We’re just animals, after all. We can’t see the future, we can’t be “on” all the time, and it’s very easy to get distracted or to deceive ourselves. If we embrace our limitations, we can try to work around them and do better. Or, at least we can forgive ourselves more easily when we inevitably let that New Year’s resolution slip.

What do you think? Have you sometimes struggled to live up to your own intentions? Do you have any advice for how to overcome that? What about in the work setting? Have you noticed any practices that make a team / company better or worse at living up to their own ideals? I’d love to hear from you in the comments.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onJanuary 4, 2023CategoriesProgramming with PeopleTagsintentionality, leadership, management, minds, productivity11 Commentson Best Intentions
It’s Been a Year.
Well, that’s a wrap on 2022. I’ve been sharing my ideas with you here for twelve whole months now. The year sure did go by fast, and it’s been both exciting and productive. In addition to this blog, I’ve done some fascinating reading, met like-minded professors from around the country and explored their work (if you like my blog, you might also want to check out the Many Minds podcast, it’s awesome), and even published a new open source software prototype. I applied to five different graduate programs, and should hear back from them in the Spring. What a whirlwind!

Thanks for coming on this journey with me and taking the time to explore these big ideas. It means the world to me, and it helps keep me motivated. I plan to post here for years to come, and I hope you’ll stick around. If you’ve enjoyed reading along so far, please go back and “like” your favorite posts. This will give me a clear signal of what you appreciate most, so I can make more like that in the future. I’d also love to hear from you in the comments if you have any feedback, requests, or just wanna say hi. I’m still getting to know you and figuring out what this blog should be, so don’t be a stranger. If you know anybody else who might enjoy this blog, please do share it with them, too, and help us connect.

I hope you have a cozy and peaceful holiday season. See you all in the new year,

  — Nate

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onDecember 7, 2022CategoriesStatus Updates5 Commentson It’s Been a Year.
Learning to Move
Learning to Move
Most people identify their intelligence with their conscious mind. That’s the part that knows it’s intelligent. That’s the part that understands and makes decisions. But looking closely, there’s plenty of intelligent things we do below the conscious level. Perhaps the most striking example is movement. We use our bones and muscles continuously during our waking hours. We learn complex motor skills and perform them over and over again with great precision and reliability. Yet, we rarely think about how we do those things. It’s actually an under-appreciated superpower that helps us multitask, overcome injuries, and adapt to new opportunities over evolutionary time. How does that work, and what does it teach us about intelligence?

The human body is a large and complex machine. Over 200 bones give our bodies shape, support their bulk, and articulate through 400 joints. Over 600 muscles hold those bones together, move them relative to each other, and maintain position and posture. Unlike a building with a rigid, static structure, the body is like a floppy ragdoll. It can only hold a shape through the constant effort of its muscles. Imagine a team of circus workers, lifting a long tent pole by ropes tied to the top. They work together to overcome gravity, hoisting the heavy thing and keeping it in a precarious upright position. They carefully balance the forces from all directions, adjusting how hard they pull to keep the pole vertical, even compensating for the wind if necessary. Now imagine another tent pole balanced on top of that one. Then another, and another… it’s pretty amazing that the body can perform this feat at all.

And that’s just for standing still. Actually moving the body in useful ways is much more difficult. It requires the same coordination of many muscles, balancing and constantly adjusting their effort to hold a bone in position, but now the joints need to move. The body must choreograph, synchronize, and precision control dozens of muscles for even small, subtle movements. Thankfully, all of this is completely unconscious, because doing it manually would be a nightmare. To get a sense of this, check out the game QWOP. It’s a stupid, frustrating game, but a good illustration of the problem. It’s much easier to unconsciously control the thirty-odd muscles in each hand to type those four letters than it is to consciously control the four simulated muscles that make the QWOP guy run.

How do we do it? The brain has a dedicated subprocessor for controlling the body. The largest part of the human brain is the cortex, home to our perception, comprehension, higher level thought, and decision making. It’s a sort of general purpose computer that works across many modalities. Below that are several special-purpose brain regions that serve as an interface to the body. They are “neural networks” by definition, but with highly specialized design and function very different from the cortex. One of these brain regions is the cerebellum, and its main job is to produce precisely timed sequences of nerve impulses to control the body. We aren’t conscious of what’s happening in the cerebellum because it’s actually much older than our conscious minds. Every vertebrate has one, going back hundreds of millions of years.
