
The key trick to the cerebellum’s function is a feedback loop. The cerebellum doesn’t just “move the body.” It can only get it right by constantly monitoring how the body and each muscle responds to its signals, noticing any deviations from the ideal, and then adjusting its signals to compensate. This is necessary, because the body has to perform in any position, even under the influence of outside forces, even when some muscles are stiff, weak, tired, or injured. There’s no fixed control program that can work in all of those circumstances, so the cerebellum must adapt in real time. This is also how it learns. Each error is a lesson for the future. With practice, the cerebellum gets better at predicting how the body will respond to its signals, the errors get smaller, and the necessary corrections become more subtle.

As an example, my cerebellum wasn’t born knowing how to do yoga. I had to learn by trial and error. When I first tried getting into those shapes, I did a pretty bad job of it. My form was sloppy, and “wrong” in many details. My balance was precarious. My motion was awkward and jerky. I overused some muscles and neglected others entirely. But my teachers pointed out what I did wrong, and I made corrections. By performing the same motions again and again, learning what the right posture feels like and what adjustments to make, I built up muscle memory. Now I can just think “warrior II” and my body delivers effortlessly. I taught my cerebellum a new motion control program, and now I can invoke that program at will.

The real value of this unconscious mastery is how it frees up my mind. For instance, when I walk a familiar path, it’s like turning on autopilot. While my cerebellum takes care of putting one foot in front of the other, my default mode network can reflect, imagine, and make plans. This is a powerful form of multitasking, but it’s not always desired. For instance, in my yoga practice, I pay close attention to what my body is doing, even though that’s no longer necessary to perform the poses. The result is increased awareness, precision, and control in my movements, both right now and in the future. Practice lets my cerebellum refine its programming and learn layers of nuance that increase my skill level, but only if I pay attention. In other words, mastering a movement gives me the freedom to turn my mind to other things, or to focus on the performance, resulting in better quality and learning. I can’t do both at the same time.

The ability to control large, complex bodies and to think about other things at the same is amazing, but the cerebellum’s adaptability is even more important. Although some vertebrates are born knowing how to walk or swim, we all learn new ways of moving. This is how we adapt and recover after an injury, whether it’s a twisted ankle or a lost limb. It’s also how many species are able to use tools. The cerebellum doesn’t have a fixed image of the body and its limits, it can learn to contract or expand that image as needed. This also means it can learn to operate whatever body it’s born into. Vertebrates have evolved a huge range of bodies which can swim, crawl, walk, dig, climb, or fly. Each new form started off as a “birth defect,” but thanks to the adaptive powers of the cerebellum, sometimes these were not fatal flaws, but opportunities to explore new ways of living.

This is just one example of how our unconscious intelligence improves our daily lives and our ability to adapt over evolutionary time. This one happens to be part of the brain, but not the mind as we usually think of it. How does this fit with your experience? What’s it like coordinating the conscious and unconscious parts of your brain? If you’re into athletics, how do you think about training your mind as well as your body? Does this raise any more questions for you about how we think and move? If so, I’d love to hear from you in the comments.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onDecember 7, 2022CategoriesThe Intelligent BodyTagsbody, bones, brain, cerebellum, default_mode_network, dmn, evolution, mindfulness, movement, multitasking, muscles, yoga7 Commentson Learning to Move
I Built a Thing.
This blog allows me to explore a very wide range of ideas, usually from a high level and for a general audience. I’m also doing some very specific, very technical research inspired by these ideas.

Today, I’m launching my first prototype. It’s just a proof of concept, really. A chance for me to flesh out some half-baked ideas and make them concrete. The results aren’t very interesting yet, but if you’d like to know what the technical side of my work looks like, here’s a sneak peek.

You can find the source code and a detailed walk-through of the project here.

You can find the results and analysis here, complete with lots of pretty videos and charts.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onNovember 20, 2022CategoriesStatus Updates2 Commentson I Built a Thing.
Emotions and Cognitive Resonance
Emotions and Cognitive Resonance
Emotions are a challenging topic. I’ve spent years learning to recognize and manage my own emotions in a productive way. I’ve also done a lot of reading, learning from psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and behavioral biology how emotions work on a theoretical and practical level. That’s useful, but the actual experience of emotions and how they shape our minds, our well-being, and our lives is incredibly subtle and complicated. I don’t think I’ll ever fully understand it, but I find it fascinating because emotions serve as a sort of interface between two different kinds of human intelligence: the body and the mind.

I like to think of the body as an autonomous robot. It does its best to survive, sustain itself, and react appropriately to whatever’s happening, recruiting the mind to understand the world and make wise decisions. That robot has evolved many different modes of behavior, each suited to particular needs, problems, and contexts. One of the main challenges for controlling the body, then, is choosing which state to be in right now. Should I look for food? Flirt with a potential mate? Take shelter and conserve my energy? Run for my life? Being successful means constantly monitoring my situation, dynamically switching from state to state, to make sure my behaviors fit the moment.

In human beings, there are tons of these “states,” but they’re hard to count since they’re so multi-dimensional and blurred at the edges. Some of the most notable ones are the core emotions (happiness, sadness, fear, and anger), but others are directly tied to the body’s function, like hunger, arousal, and fatigue. The state of the body is decided by a cocktail of hormones and neurotransmitters in the bloodstream, which coordinate activity across all the organ systems. They evolved before the brain, which is why the mind has only an indirect awareness of them. It experiences them as “feelings,” often by interpreting subtle and ambiguous signals like a flush of heat, a stirring in the guts, or a racing pulse.

That said, the brain plays a crucial role in emotions. The mind interprets what’s going on in the world to help trigger the right emotions, and emotions reconfigure the brain to serve in whatever activity the body is doing. Those chemicals in my bloodstream tune parts of my brain to be more or less active, reshaping my perception, judgment, and impulses. They shift my patterns of thought and behavior dramatically, whether I like it or not. When I’m angry, I’m more likely to perceive someone as a threat. I’m less likely to stop and think, and more likely to lash out. Looking back at the situation later with a clear head (that is, one that’s not flooded with neurotransmitters), I might see things very differently. That’s part of why recognizing emotions is so hard. Noticing and understanding are cognitive processes, happening inside my mind, while it’s being warped or even impaired by those emotions.

Another important factor at play here is how non-linear brains are. They’re collections of many different special-purpose sub-networks. These all work together in concert, combining their efforts, calling on each other, and riffing off each other to produce my stream of consciousness. This is an extremely powerful tool for creative thinking, quick intuitive action, and using metaphor to recall relevant experiences from the past. The flip side is that causality becomes very muddled. Ideas flow into one another in a sort of free-associative cascade, often forming self-reinforcing cycles. Every thought in my head is simultaneously cause and effect.

All these brain networks, ideas, and memories are linked together by associations, which cause them to resonate with each other and activate at the same time. These associations are often based on similarity or relevance, but emotions make some of the strongest and most common links. Most thoughts have emotional significance, and thinking those thoughts will evoke the associated feelings. Similarly, feelings evoke associated thoughts. More subtly, emotions also change my sense of salience. When I’m mad, I’m more likely to notice and fixate on thoughts and observations that resonate with that feeling of anger, while others get ignored.

This explains why it’s so hard to identify why I’m feeling an emotion. As a human being, I have a body evolved to react to immediate threats and opportunities, and a mind that spends much of its time thinking about abstract concepts, world events, and possible futures. This makes it very easy to misattribute my emotions. When I notice a feeling, I tend to associate it with whatever I was thinking or experiencing at that moment. This is often wrong, and that can cause problems.

A perfect example is displaced aggression. When my father was diagnosed with cancer, I was suddenly faced with many intense emotions, like anger, sadness, and fear. I carried these with me all the time, but there was little I could do to help, so I tried not to dwell on them. Nonetheless, I was much more irritable than usual. It was like my personality changed, and in a sense, it really did. I’d overreact to small slights and setbacks. I was more critical, aggressive, and impatient. I’d fixate on some insignificant detail from an email or meeting to the point where I’d be fuming about it when I got home. I managed to stay professional and respectful at work, but it took a real effort to do so.

It’s worth emphasizing how harmful misattributing emotions can be. When I’m mad, anyone who crosses my path may stir that anger just by chance, tempting me to lash out. This means the people I interact with most—my coworkers, family, and friends—are the ones most at risk. There’s also the harm done to myself. When my dad was sick, I managed not to worry about that all the time, but mostly by worrying about other things instead. The distractions were easier to face, but also emotional and not really more productive. They did nothing to relieve my stress and irritability, which lingered on until I faced the root cause and processed those emotions.

Understanding all this has led me to a practice that I find works really well. Sometimes an idea or an experience gets me suddenly riled up and emotional. Often it’s something small and petty, or something grand and abstract, both good signs that the emotion is an overreaction. Whatever thought I’m having stirs up strong feelings, which in turn drives me to obsess more on the thought in an escalating cycle. I find myself ranting or ruminating. When I notice that happening, I try to calm myself down, get some exercise, and take a break to let the neurotransmitters dissipate so I can think clearly. Then, I can use the following technique.

I set aside the idea that bothered me, and instead I focus on the feelings that idea stirs up. I sit with them for a moment, and then I look at what other ideas resonate with them. Usually, there are several. Some are big, some small. Some are immediate and concrete, some distant and abstract. Often there’s one that stands out among all the others as the most salient, and it isn’t necessarily the idea I started with. That’s when I think, “Oh! So that’s what this is really about.” In other cases, I find lots of little things, unrelated, but piling on all at once. This helps me realize there’s no one cause for how I’m feeling right now, and it’s not fair or useful to blame a scapegoat for my generally bad day.

Emotions are a critical part of how the mind works. They define human values, shape our activities, and motivate everything we do. I hope reflecting on my own experience helps illuminate that. How does it resonate with you? Is your experience similar or different? Have you noticed other quirks about your emotions, your thoughts, and how they interact? Computers are generally emotionless, but a few chat bots simulate human-like emotion, and some agent-based AIs have their own system of states and “feelings,” suited to their artificial task and environment. How do you feel about emotional AIs?  I’d love to hear from you in the comments.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onNovember 2, 2022CategoriesIntrospectionTagsbody, emotions, endocrinology, hormones, interfaces, mindfulness, minds, neuroscience, neurotransmitters9 Commentson Emotions and Cognitive Resonance
Why Genetic Algorithms?
Why Genetic Algorithms?
These days, the Artificial Intelligence community is pretty fixated on Deep Learning, a software tool inspired by the human brain. It’s popular because it’s successful. Deep Learning technology has driven incredible advances in natural language processing, image perception / generation, and game playing (not to mention ad targeting, feed ranking, and surveillance). That success was partly driven by luck. It turns out, even a fairly simple DL algorithm, given enormous amounts of data and computational power, can do pretty remarkable things. Other attempts at reproducing intelligent behavior haven’t been so successful, and are relatively neglected for that reason. That’s a shame, because I believe there are big opportunities in areas where we aren’t looking, they’re just a little more difficult to uncover.

Recently, I’ve taken particular interest in Genetic Algorithms. Put very simply, these are computer programs which use the principle of “survival of the fittest” at their core. They’ve been a popular topic of research since the 1960’s. Since then, they’ve found moderate success and have become standard kit for solving certain kinds of computational problems. Unfortunately, the fundamental design principles for GAs haven’t changed much since the 70’s, despite the fact that our understanding of evolution and our computing hardware have improved dramatically since then. I think today’s GAs are a shadow of what they could be, and I have ideas for how to unlock that potential.

But first, let’s establish what a traditional Genetic Algorithm is. Like Deep Learning, GAs are a tool for training a computer to do a task without explicitly telling it how to do the work step by step. There’s one big difference, though. DL is good at replicating what a human being would do, but to learn that it needs hundreds (or better yet, millions) of examples to study and imitate. So, it’s mostly good for automating work that people already do routinely. In contrast, GAs don’t need any example data. They’re good at solving problems where we don’t know the best solution or how to find it, just so long as we can recognize a good answer when we see it. The main challenge is framing the problem in such a way that the GA can learn to solve it.

Genetic Algorithms are often used when the space of possible answers is so big it would be impossible to try them all, or even to explore them in a systematic way. Instead, a GA depends on randomness. It starts by just guessing a bunch of solutions. Most of these will be garbage, so they get thrown out right away. The ones that are slightly better than complete garbage become the starting point for the next iteration. The algorithm makes more possible solutions by mixing the best previous solutions together and sprinkling in some extra randomness for variety. By sheer luck, some of those solutions may be better than the previous ones, and the process repeats. This simple method can be surprisingly effective, gradually transforming garbage into gold. But it depends a lot on giving the algorithm the right pieces to start with such that randomly mashing them together might actually work.

Natural selection is a kind of design process. Like human designers do, nature gets inspiration from random sources, tests ideas against harsh reality, and iterates to discover and build highly functional objects. Genetic Algorithms are basically an automated version of that process, so they’re frequently used as design tools. For instance, modern Computer Aided Drafting (CAD) software for architecture and industrial design often use GAs. A human designer specifies some constraints (how big an object can be, how much weight it must hold, etc.) and fitness goals (minimize weight and material costs, but maximize tensile strength), then the software automatically finds good solutions. Recently, there’s also been a great deal of interest in using GAs to design effective architectures for Deep Learning systems.
