
So, that’s Genetic Algorithms in a nutshell. Why do I feel there’s unrealized potential here? What do I want to do differently? There are several insights from modern evolutionary theory that I want to apply to GAs. Generally speaking, though, it’s all about what work is done by the programmer vs. what is left up to evolution. A GA uses a “gene sequence” (usually just a string of digits) to represent each of its attempted solutions. A gene sequence can either be a solution in itself, or a program that generates the solution. Traditionally, what the gene sequence means and how to derive an answer from it is entirely up to the programmer. This is very different from nature, where life evolved the language of genetics and species-specific genomes along with all the organisms built using those tools.

Then there’s the search process itself. In a traditional Genetic Algorithm, the programmer takes great care to tune the rate of mutation and the process of recombining genes from multiple individuals. They often hand design “custom mutations” that are more clever than just randomly changing digits in the gene sequence. They use their knowledge and intuition to avoid testing obviously bad gene sequences, to make changes that seem useful, and to preserve good patterns in the gene sequence that might otherwise get clobbered or broken up. This can help enormously, but it’s a lot of hard work for the programmer. The science of epigenetics shows that nature uses many of the same tricks, but it discovered them through natural selection, without any human guidance.

In a nutshell, life has an element of self-determination. Life designs itself, and optimizes the search process for better designs, using evolution by natural selection as its tool. I think it’s a mistake to imagine life as a passive product of evolution, like traditional Genetic Algorithms do. I think it’s a mistake to leave the hardest parts of GA development to a human being. Not only does that make human creativity a limiting factor, it means we aren’t studying or reproducing the most remarkable thing about natural evolution.

I hope this perspective will be valuable. One of the biggest shortcomings of Genetic Algorithms so far is that they aren’t nearly as open-ended or creative as life itself. Very rarely do they exhibit the sort of accumulated layers of complexity and sophistication that are the hallmark of natural intelligence. Perhaps that will change, if we can hand over more of the creative work to the GA? Perhaps a new paradigm in GA designs could make them applicable to new kinds of problems, or produce more clever solutions? I’m working on a prototype that I hope will demonstrate that potential.

The main drawback of my approach is that evolving the design for a Genetic Algorithm takes way more time and computing power than just running a GA designed the old fashioned way. I’m not too worried about that, though. I’m using the same parallel processing hardware that has become ubiquitous for Deep Learning applications to make my code efficient and scalable. My hope is that this new approach to GAs will make it possible to improve their performance by just throwing more computational power at the problem, like we already do so successfully with DL. This would also make GAs less cumbersome, by replacing expert design and hand-tuning with automation.

There’s lots more beyond this that I hope to explore in time. For instance, life evolves whole ecosystems and environments where organisms collaborate and support each other, producing intelligence, robustness, and efficiency far greater than the sum of its parts. By comparison, many Genetic Algorithms work on single individuals that exist in total isolation. Then there’s the way life evolves layer upon layer of emergent complexity, building communities out of brains, bodies, cells, and proteins. I’m excited to build multi-layered intelligent systems, and especially to try combining evolved programs and neural networks in a biologically realistic way.

Turns out, there’s much more to AI than Deep Learning. I’m pretty excited by the untapped potential of Genetic Algorithms, but that’s just me. Are there other areas of AI research that interest you? Can you think of more examples of natural intelligence that computers can’t seem to replicate? I’d love to hear from you in the comments. This post is also a preview of my research. I hope to share my first prototype by the end of the year. So, stay tuned for more on that.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onOctober 6, 2022CategoriesBeyond DarwinTagsdeep_learning, design, epigenetics, evolution, genetic_algorithms, machine_learning, systems6 Commentson Why Genetic Algorithms?
Plants Move
Plants Move
(featuring an illustration by Sarina Mitchel)

Big brains are essential to our success as a species. That’s how we dominated this planet, so we tend look there to understand the secrets of intelligence. Yet, this perspective blinds us to other species’ achievements. Take plants, for instance. They don’t have brains at all, yet they make up over 82% of Earth’s biomass (source). They range in size from single celled algae to the largest organism on earth (learn about Pando here). Many of our greatest discoveries in chemistry, medicine, and material science amount to finding some plant that already solved a problem better than we could. Yet, we tend to see them as material resources rather than intelligent living beings. I suspect we underestimate plants because, from a certain perspective, they don’t do very much. They just sit there, letting food and water come to them. What’s so smart about that?

This perspective says more about human impatience than anything else. Plants can climb and tunnel and build. They search their environment for resources, relocate to prime spots, and wrestle with each other for access. They capture prey, hide from predators, and actively defend themselves from attackers. They can transform themselves dramatically, switching between totally different strategies depending on time of day, time of year, and environmental conditions. Plants are very active. It’s just on a different time scale than we’re used to. Plant movement is most obvious over hours, days, and years, though in some cases they move dramatically in just seconds.

Brains allow us to move quickly, which gives us a big advantage over plants, but I don’t think it makes us “more intelligent.” It’s better to say we found different strategies, specializing in different kinds of intelligence. Plants are slow and stationary because that’s energy efficient. It allows them to thrive in otherwise barren environments. Animals can’t do this. We all depend on plants for survival. Our extravagant, free-moving lifestyle is only possible because plants do the slow, hard work of capturing energy and nutrients from the air and soil, making concentrated fuel for our activity. Plants don’t need brains to live the way they do, and they don’t let that stop them from adopting all sorts of complex behaviors and lifestyles.

This is possible in part because plants often root themselves to the ground. That may seem like a poor choice, since it limits their options dramatically. They have to commit to one environment for their whole lives. Either that spot provides what they need, or it doesn’t and they’re doomed to die there. But there’s a major upside to this strategy: their lives are much more predictable than ours. This makes it possible for evolution to carefully plan responses to just about every threat or opportunity a plant might encounter in its lifetime. This is a different kind of intelligence than what we’re used to, one focused on exquisite design and finely crafted behavioral scripts, rather than spontaneity. Plants do respond in the moment, though, and even rooted to the ground they can be surprisingly mobile.

The most common and obvious way that plants move is through growth. Animals can’t really move until they’ve grown a body, but plants move by growing. They use their senses to track and follow the sun, water, and chemical nutrients they depend on. They feel the pull of gravity, the strain caused by the wind, and physical touch along their bodies. They change their shape by growing cells larger, faster, or in thicker layers on this side, but not that side. This allows them to reinforce themselves and stay upright, grope and crawl around obstacles to reach food, navigate wide open spaces with roots or runners, or wrap around trellises to pull themselves toward the sun.

Plants can also move by shifting water around their bodies in a process known as turgor. Cells with more water swell, while those with less shrink. By shifting water between cells in its stalk, a sunflower can rotate throughout the day to track the arc of the sun. Morning glories and lotuses use similar methods to hide and protect their delicate flowers at night, then unfurl them into extravagant displays to attract pollinators during the daytime. Although turgor is much slower than muscle contraction, it’s still fast enough to react to animals. The touch-me-not mimosa, sundew, and venus fly trap all move quickly in response to physical touch. A few species, like hairy bittercress and the squirting cucumber, are much more dramatic. They build up pressure behind a catch mechanism, then suddenly launch their seeds into the air with explosive force.

Plants are also masters of using weather and animals to help them move. Plants have evolved specialized seeds that travel great distances, allowing whole populations of plants to migrate and colonize new territory. You’ve probably encountered helicopter seeds that gracefully twirl through the air, dandelion seeds that ride the wind on floofy parasols, and burrs that hitch a ride on your pant leg. The energy for this motion doesn’t come from the plant itself, so should that even count? As an engineer, that sort of practical laziness just makes the design more impressive to me. The plant doesn’t bother capturing and reshaping energy for this, because it doesn’t have to. All it has to do is build the seed in the right shape and “let go” at the right moment.

What does all this tell us about intelligence? For one thing, life doesn’t need a brain to navigate obstacles, seek out resources, climb, glide, follow a daily routine, catch prey, or even launch projectiles. Plants are full of amazing behaviors that are completely mindless, yet elegant, successful, and highly optimized. We’ll never understand those behaviors by studying brains or Deep Learning algorithms, but they tell us a lot about ourselves. Our brains do not replace the kind of embodied intelligence we see so clearly in plants, they merely extend it. We depend very much on the same evolutionary design and “script-making” that governs the plant kingdom. Under the hood, much of what makes us intelligent comes down to the cells of our bodies, dynamically shifting chemical concentrations and patterns of growth, very much like plants do.

I hope to share several more posts about plants and fungi in the future, because there really is a lot to say. If you’re interested in going deeper on the topic of plant intelligence, I highly recommend the 1996 film Microcosmos. It explores the plants and tiny creatures in a meadow with some extraordinary macro and time-lapse photography. No other movie has given me a more vivid and profound sense of awe at how alive the world is, at every scale. Sadly, the streaming options are limited right now, but it’s worth it if you can get your hands on it.

As always, I’d love to hear your thoughts. What are your favorite examples of plants being amazing? Are there other kinds of “mindless intelligence” you’d like to see me write about? How do you think about the intelligence of plants and animals? How are they similar and how are they different? Let me know in the comments.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onSeptember 7, 2022CategoriesMindless IntelligenceTagsdesign, evolution, growth, illustration, Mindless Intelligence, movement, plants, sarina_mitchel10 Commentson Plants Move
Incentive Landscapes
Incentive Landscapes
We tend to think of human intelligence as the power of a single brain, but human beings aren’t meant to work in isolation. Our intelligence is only fully realized in a group setting, where we can riff off each other, collaborate, and compete. But humans behave very differently in groups, and coordinating group behavior is hard. I didn’t fully appreciate that until I became a leader at Google. Leaders can’t just tell people what they want to make it happen. Their work is much more subtle: they shape incentive landscapes.

Ultimately, each person decides for themselves what to do at any moment. This is one of our superpowers as a species. We understand our environment, our place within it, and the choices available to us. We make decisions and plans that benefit us and our communities. This is not a particularly rational process. It’s heavily influenced by our instincts and emotions, through neurotransmitters like dopamine and oxytocin. Ultimately, it all comes down to what makes us feel good, whether that’s a literal reward like a doughnut or a paycheck, or more subtle pleasures like helping others or earning respect.

The theory of evolution often talks about “fitness landscapes.” Each organism is more or less “fit”, or likely to survive, thrive, and produce offspring in its environment. Across generations, a species explores different body shapes and behaviors, searching this fitness landscape for better lifestyles. Incentive landscapes are more or less the same thing, just on a different time scale. Evolution has equipped us with the ability to perceive and predict risks and rewards. It has hard-wired us to make real time decisions that, on average, should improve our reproductive fitness.

As a leader, this mostly means I have limited control over my team’s behavior. Yet, their decisions aren’t entirely free. Our team culture makes some paths much more likely than others. The best metaphor for this comes from sailing. Culture creates headwinds and tailwinds, which determine which paths are harder or easier. Tailwinds mean the wind is at my back, pushing me forward. Paths with a tailwind are more obvious, encouraged, and supported. Headwinds are the exact opposite. Those paths are obscured, high-friction, and full of obstacles. I can still go down a path with headwinds, and may even find success there, it just requires more effort and determination.

Leaders can’t decide what each person will do. Instead, they use incentives to influence all those independent choices, making the desired outcomes more likely on average. The most direct way to do this is with reward and punishment. When they’re transparent and consistent, they can guide group behavior quite effectively. Sometimes. A big challenge is that everyone perceives incentives differently. Some folks are highly motivated by a good speech, while others will simply roll their eyes. Extroverts may thrive on public recognition and fame, while introverts may dread the spotlight. Sometimes, money is the best motivator, and sometimes it feels demeaning. Punishment is just as problematic. How well a fine works depends on wealth. Some people take perverse pride in breaking the rules, and foster a reputation as a rebel. Sometimes punishment is just an incentive not to get caught.

For this reason, incentive landscapes are quite complex. Making them robust means combining many different factors that reinforce each other, so all together they will have similar effects across a diverse group. Incentives are hard to manage, since they’re not in the leader’s control–every person in a group influences the others by the behaviors they normalize, the feedback they give, and their social interactions. Just being aware of the incentive landscape and how each team member perceives and experiences it differently can be a tremendous challenge for a leader. It’s also critically important. When someone’s goals and motivations don’t align with group incentives, they leave.

One example of how different people experience incentives differently is racial equity. At Google, there is no rule saying black people can’t be hired, promoted, or given positions of authority. Just the opposite, actually. Leaders work hard to encourage those things. But black names on resumes sound less professional. Black students are less likely to attend prestigious schools, or master all the jargon folks look for in interviews. No one will say “I don’t trust a black person to do this right,” but they will scrutinize the work more closely, hold it to a higher standard, or reassign it to someone with more experience. Despite leaders’ best intentions, black people face greater friction on every path. A supportive leader needs to recognize that, and attempt to compensate without playing favorites.

A leader does a lot of talking. We talk about our team’s purpose, our goals, and why they matter. We talk about what success looks like. We talk about our values, and how to be a good citizen. We do this in big meetings, so everyone can hear. We depend on folks to repeat the message, model good behavior, and pressure their peers. This can be a powerful tool, but only if incentives truly align with the talk. My infrastructure team at Google talked about the importance of code health for years, but it was neglected until we actually held people accountable and rewarded grungy clean-up work. Tech companies love to talk about their respect and appreciation for women. They make commercials, throw parties, and host lavish recruiting events. But if women must work much harder to achieve the same salary and career progression as their male peers, then the talk is meaningless.

The incentive landscape is highly volatile, as world events and many people continually shape it. I led a project to rebuild the user interface infrastructure for Google Search. I crafted a story and designed incentives to guide us. Then, an adjacent team announced a major redesign of the Search page. It was like our plan to repave the downtown streets and redesign signal patterns to streamline traffic was suddenly preempted by a massive parade with the governor giving the keynote speech. How could we do our job without getting in the way? Anything perceived as a risk to the redesign suddenly had massive headwinds.
