That was probably very easy to imagine. The concept shows up all the time in the media, whether we’re talking about the literal giant robots from Power Rangers, or the psychological metaphors from movies like Inside Out. This way of conceiving the mind comes naturally to us, in part because that’s how it feels to be a person, sometimes. Great thinkers like René Descartes built whole philosophies around this duality of body and mind / soul. It has come to shape how our society works in many profound ways. Unfortunately, science tells a different story.

Perhaps the first clue that something is off is how human-centric this picture is. Life was around for billions of years before people or brains came onto the scene. Even single-celled organisms perceive the world and quickly respond in ways that show awareness of their situation and how the world works, no brains necessary. When cells band together to make bodies, they often have tiny brains (like insects) or no brains at all (like plants). Humans are among the small minority of species who are entirely dependent on their big brains for survival. Does that mean that we’re one of the only intelligent species on this planet? Are all the others just empty robots with no one in the pilot seat?

Some might think of DNA as a blueprint that specifies every detail about how to build and operate a living thing, but the reality is much more complicated than that. It’s better to think of DNA as a family’s collection of cookbooks, passed on from generation to generation. They’re full of ingredient lists, recipes, and instructions. The family wouldn’t know how to cook at all without those books, so they’re critical to survival. They include all of the family’s daily staples and seasonal favorites. Even if, in theory, the family could get by on a more exotic diet, they don’t. Their cookbooks cover the full range of cuisine that they’re comfortable with, and they don’t often branch out.

And yet, there’s plenty of interpretation involved. What should the family cook for dinner tonight? Which recipes and books are more popular, and which go unused? How do they manage the pantry, and what do they do when they don’t have all the right ingredients? Just because the recipe says one thing, it doesn’t mean they have to do it that way. In fact, the recipe books are littered with sticky notes which suggest variations. They mark which parts of the recipe to skip, which ingredients to go heavy on, and recommend substitutions. The family can even mix and match parts from multiple recipes, or exchange recipes with friends to try something new.

This is getting a little too anthropomorphic. Cells don’t think about this sort of thing, because “thinking” isn’t how they do it. In reality, we’re talking about molecules, banging around together in chaotic but reliable ways according to the laws of physics. They don’t have any “intentions,” except maybe the ones implicit in their evolved recipes. But this is how they behave. Each cell is autonomous, responding to the environment with spontaneity. The DNA serves as a reference book, not a program. It isn’t even used to construct the cell. Remember, cells reproduce by dividing in half. Nature never builds a cell from scratch. Instead, half the family takes half the house, half the pantry, and a full copy of all the cookbooks. They wave goodbye, then carry on living as they always have, just as a separate cell with a separate fate.

DNA is a crucial resource, representing countless generations of acquired knowledge and wisdom. But it is not a blueprint, and that’s critical to how evolution works. Every cell and every organism lives an open-ended life, doing their best to survive with what they’re given. When circumstances change, life improvises and diversifies. The same genes may cause different behaviors in new contexts. When one way of living is blocked, old neglected genes may resurface, bringing back old ways of living. In stressful times, cells increase their own mutation rates, taking a risk to generate new variations which might get them out of a bind. This makes life far more flexible than if every aspect of design and behavior was explicitly laid out in the genome.

This becomes even more important for organisms with complex bodies. If DNA really was a blueprint, then building a human body would require precisely positioning and configuring each one of 37 trillion cells. Even if that process was 99.99999% perfect, there’d still be millions of errors. Luckily, this process is bottom-up, with each cell coordinating with its neighbors to figure out their relationships, what needs doing, and how to work together. That makes errors much more tolerable, since one cell can take over for another, or work around whatever defect is in the way. If the body were built from literal blueprints with no room for improvisation, then even a single cell out of line could potentially throw off everything that comes after. Errors would be much more likely to cascade and accumulate, potentially becoming fatal.

Perhaps the most astounding thing is that each cell in a body has a copy of the same set of cookbooks. They just read them differently, adopting a lifestyle to fit their place in the body. A bit like people in a society, each cell in the body tries to play its own role, and many different roles interact to make something much more than the sum of its parts. From many independent observations, decisions, and actions made locally by each cell, higher order structures and behaviors emerge. Cells make up organs and bodies. They manage bodily resources, capture and aggregate information about the world, and respond in coordinated ways. They perform extraordinary feats, like moving 37 trillion cells through space, gracefully and without damage.


Imagine you are a swarm of nanobots, clinging together to form a giant mecha. This mecha has evolved to do something useful, but its shape and function are only loosely defined. Each nanobot is a mindless automaton, operating independently within some constraints that are just specific enough for it to serve some purpose within the greater whole. These nanobots cluster to form dynamic structures, nested machines made of machines, in constant motion, building up to massive size and complexity. In order to manage this unwieldy bulk, the nanobots weave together into a neuromorphic computer. This specialized sub-processor simulates the world in real time, predicts what comes next, and carefully coordinates the timing of activity across this whole vast assemblage.

Part of that computer is responsible for imagining what it’s like to be the giant mecha. Its whole existence is within a simulated environment, extrapolated from the trillions of tiny motes of sensory data provided by the swarm. It watches the behaviors and emotions produced by the swarm, and uses them to tell stories about the values, needs, and intentions that guide the mecha’s behavior. It makes educated guesses about what the mecha will do next, which the swarm uses as hints to guide their behavior. As the only part of the mecha that is self-aware, and having no direct perception of the nanobots themselves, this simulation imagines itself to be in charge, and assumes the whole arrangement is for its benefit.

I know this is an uncomfortable image for many people. It’s not warm and fuzzy. It probably feels strange, maybe even disgusting. It’s not how we like to think of ourselves. However, “strange” and “disgusting” are also excellent words to describe living bodies, in all their infinite variety. Human beings are machines made of meat and bone. They are also unique souls, with meaningful lives, profound experiences, and extraordinary talents. The challenge is to see this not as a contradiction, but as two sides of the same coin. We can be the pilot in the cockpit, and the nanobot swarm.

What do you think? Is this a useful way of thinking about mind and body? Have you ever noticed moments when your body dominates your mind and the “pilot in the cockpit” illusion seems to break down? Or do you think I’m under-selling the power and importance of the brain? Is it right to say that “nobody’s home” in life without a brain, or is it more complicated than that? Any questions about this “cookbook” metaphor and what’s really going on in the cell? I’d love to hear from you. Please, join the conversation in the comments section.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onJune 1, 2022CategoriesThe Intelligent BodyTagsbody, cells, dna, epigenetics, genetics, illustration, sarina_mitchel11 Commentson Beyond Blueprints
Animal Minds: The Herd Life
Animal Minds: The Herd Life
(This post’s photo from the family farm circa 2004. From left to right: Tommie, Josh, and Trevor. This post’s content is inspired by conversations with vet tech, horse person, and my mother, Sandie Gaylinn)

My childhood home life was centered around animals. I grew up on a working farm, with cats and dogs as siblings, and a responsibility to help care for the horses, chickens, and all the rest. I had daily close contact with many animals and we formed long-lasting relationships. We grew up together, did activities together, and enjoyed each other’s company. I cared for them when they were sick, and sometimes they would reach out to me when I was in need of comfort. Although we were obviously very different, and by necessity the animals had less freedom, I found it hard to think of them as “just” pets or livestock. They were part of the family.

I believe that all mammals are very similar in terms of their emotions and intelligence. This comes from many years of observation, empathy, and intuition. It’s hard for me to prove it, yet it’s harder still for me to dismiss it. Humans are more intelligent than other animals in a few narrow yet critical ways, but when I hear someone say non-human animals are “less conscious”, or that they can’t possibly comprehend the world like us, I get offended. It just seems naive, given what I’ve seen. I don’t fault others for that opinion. I assume it comes from a lack of exposure, or from human-centric bias. Of course, I have my own biases. The scientific evidence is far from conclusive, so I figure we should all keep an open mind.

What do I mean when I say all mammals are very similar? For one, it seems the palette of emotions is basically the same. We experience happiness, sadness, anger, fear, and pain in roughly the same way (which is why animal abuse is morally wrong). Each species has different body language, but if you pay close attention, you can learn to read their emotions quite clearly. We also respond to the world in similar ways. A sudden windfall makes us happy and excited, but it may inspire envy in others who see it. This is true whether we’re talking about humans, dogs, or squirrels. Many emotional responses seem universal.

Each individual has a unique personality, which means some emotions and responses are more common for them. Some folks are more optimistic, quick to anger, or self-conscious. Some less. Each species has personalities in a particular range. Dogs tend to be outgoing approval-seekers; cats are aloof and independent; horses are social, but skittish. But these stereotypes only apply on average. It’s common to see cats who act like dogs, or vice versa. There’s also a lot of overlap between species, which is why it’s easy to make friends with an animal whose personality aligns with your own.

When it comes to intelligence, there’s a lot more variation between species, but I wouldn’t rank animals by IQ. Each species and each individual is different, with unique strengths and weaknesses. Animals can be incredibly intelligent, but only in ways that are relevant to their lives. It’s unfair to judge a horse by its ability to do arithmetic, just as it’s unfair to judge a human by its ability to discriminate odors. Sadly, this makes humans generally blind to the ways animals may be more intelligent than us. We don’t tend to see or appreciate what doesn’t matter in our lives, we only see what we have in common. That makes social intelligence a good example, since many mammals specialize in it.

Horses are very social animals. A herd has a strict pecking order, but it’s not so straightforward as an ordered list. Their relationships can be just as nuanced, contextual, and tangled as with humans. Since horses spend so much of their time grazing, a school cafeteria feels like the right metaphor. They form cliques, with different levels of status. Some individuals move freely from table to table, hanging out with the nerds one day and the social climbers the next, while others get chased away if they try to do the same. Horses with higher status will tease, harass, and steal from those with lower status, mostly just to assert dominance. Certain foods or activities may become trendy, starting with one individual, then spreading to a clique or the whole herd. Sometimes, this is how a horse manages to climb the social ladder.

When a new kid comes to the lunch room, they usually get hazed. As a prey species that depends on the support of their herd for survival, horses are generally shy and cautious by nature. The newcomer knows they are at the mercy of the herd and must make a good impression, so they tend to suck it up and bear the torment. Usually, they’re welcome to join the nerd table, hanging out with their fellow losers until they work their way up the ladder. Horses with higher social status will make a point of asserting dominance at every opportunity. Occasionally, they choose to extend an olive branch instead, but this is a risky move which can have complex social repercussions.

At least, that’s how it usually goes. When my mom introduced Dakota to the herd, that’s what we prepared for. To try and head-off the worst of the hazing, we put Dakota in an adjoining paddock for a week. This way, the herd could get over their initial excitement, and Dakota got a chance to learn how things worked and what she was getting into. She observed the herd’s schedule, habits, and social dynamics. She saw them waiting in the lunch line and bickering over the water trough and the best grazing spots. She could see who the cool kids were, what set them apart from the others, and how they would assert themselves over the nerds.

When we let Dakota into the main field, we were all on hand to make sure it didn’t get out of hand, and to intervene if necessary. The whole herd quickly figured out what was going on and lined up (in their usual cliques, sorted by pecking order) near the fence to get a good look and wait their turn to pick on the newcomer. But Dakota took everyone by surprise. She stood tall and proud, walked straight up to the dominant male, and kicked him so hard it knocked him off his feet! The gelding, Johnny, couldn’t let this stand, of course. He gave her back as good as she dished out, but after that demonstration of her strength and confidence, he didn’t want to push his luck. It was over in under a minute, and the others were left so in awe of her that they’d spend the next few weeks sucking up.

Of course, violence was what we on the sidelines most feared. Even with no shoes on, as was the case here, a direct kick from a horse can be incredibly powerful and damaging. But we were actually relieved at what we saw. Dakota was going for dramatic effect, not injury. Her blow wasn’t very hard. She managed to hit Johnny in just the right spot with just enough force to throw him off balance. It only worked because she caught him off guard. It ended the conflict so quickly because it made him look like a fool, and shook his confidence. In effect, it was a bluff, and one that worked really well on this mild-mannered herd where even the “tough guys” were pretty gentle. A well-timed sucker punch made her look like a total badass, even though she would have lost in a fair fight.

It’s easy to imagine this scene in a cafeteria, but it was remarkable to see with horses, who are rarely so audacious. With one decisive move, Dakota asserted herself as the dominant female, upending the pecking order, and bypassing weeks or months of conflict and social climbing. It was smart, effective, and seemingly premeditated. She had a week to prepare. When she was led to the main field, she knew all eyes were on her. She put on her game face and acted smoothly, without hesitation. Did she reason about social dynamics and fight tactics? Did she choose a strategy and plan its execution? Or was she just improvising, driven by instinct to do what “felt right”? It’s hard to say. I’d say it was probably a blend of both, and that the balance doesn’t matter. Intelligence is intelligence. This was a smart move, regardless of where it came from.

I hope this is a compelling example of animal intelligence. If you’re thinking, “maybe that looks like a school cafeteria, but what humans do is totally different,” then I ask you to reconsider. People are very good at finding reasons for what we do. The nerds are outcasts, not because of some arbitrary social hierarchy, but because they like Pokémon and other objectively uncool things. We don’t bite one another on the flank just to inflict pain and embarrassment, like horses do. We use words and reasoning to settle disputes, like when we sling insults at each other. To me, it often feels like humans (self included) are behaving exactly like “more primitive” mammals. We just cover everything with a social veneer that makes it feel more sophisticated. When looking at human conflicts, I find it’s quite helpful to strip the words and meaning away and instead look at the raw power dynamics and emotions. Often that explains the situation much better than the stories people tell.

What do you think? Am I being too generous with animals, and seeing what I want to see? Does this remind you of another cool animal story you’d like to share? Any questions about horses that need answering? If so, please leave a comment below and join the conversation. If you want to learn more about animal intelligence, I recommend these books about ravens and octopuses. Very cool animals, far less familiar to most of us than mammals, and yet surprisingly similar in many ways.

Author Nate Gaylinn (he/him)Posted onMay 4, 2022CategoriesAnimal MindsTagsfarm, horses, mammals, minds, social intelligence9 Commentson Animal Minds: The Herd Life
Programming with People
Programming with People
Introduction
