This is Audible.
The Martyr of the Catacombs, A Tale of Ancient Rome
Chapter 1, The Colosseum
Butchered to Make a Roman Holiday
It was a great festival day in Rome.
From all quarters vast numbers of people came pouring forth to one common destination.
Over the Capitoline Hill, through the Forum, past the Temple of Peace and the Arch of Titus
and the Imperial Palace, on they went till they reached the Colosseum, where they entered
its hundred doors and disappeared within.
There a wonderful scene presented itself.
Below the vast arena spread out surrounded by the countless rows of seats which rose to
the top of the outer wall over a hundred feet.
The whole extent was covered with human beings of every class and every age.
So vast an assemblage gathered in such a way, presenting to view long lines of stern faces
ascending far on high in successive rows, formed a spectacle which has never elsewhere been
equaled and which was calculated beyond all others to awe the soul of the beholder.
More than one hundred thousand people were gathered here, animated by one common feeling and incited
by one single passion.
It was the thirst for blood which drew them hither, and nowhere can we find a sadder commentary
on the boasted civilization of ancient Rome, than this her own greatest spectacle.
Here were warriors who had fought in ancient wars and were familiar with deeds of valour,
yet they felt no indignation at the scenes of cowardly oppression displayed before them.
Nobles of ancient families were here, but they could find in these brutal shows no stain upon their country's honour.
Philosophers, poets, priests, rulers, the highest as well as the lowest in the land, crowded these seats.
But the applauding shout of the patrician was as loud and as eager as that of the plebeian.
What hope was there for Rome when the hearts of her people were universally given up to cruelty
and brutal oppression?
Upon a raised seat, in a conspicuous part of the amphitheatre, was the Emperor Decius,
near whom the chief people among the Romans were gathered.
Among these there was a group of officers belonging to the Praetorian guards,
who criticized the different points in the scene before them with the air of connoisseurs.
Their loud laughter, their gaiety, and their splendid attire made them the object of much attention from their neighbours.
Several preliminary spectacles had been introduced, and now the fights began.
Several hand-to-hand combats were presented, most of which resulted fatally,
and excited different degrees of interest according to the courage or skill of the combatants.
Their effect was to whet the appetite of the spectators to a keener relish,
and fill them with eager desire for the more exciting events which were to follow.
One man in particular had drawn down the admiration and applause of the multitude,
He was an African from Mauritania, of gigantic strength and stature.
But his skill seemed equal to his strength.
He wielded his short-sword with marvellous dexterity, and had thus far slain every opponent.
He was now matched with a gladiator from Batavia,
a man fully equal in stature and strength to himself.
The contrast which the two presented was striking.
The African was tawny, with glossy, curling hair and glittering eyes.
The Batavian was light in complexion, with blonde hair and keen grey eyes.
It was hard to tell which had the advantage, so nearly were they matched in every respect,
but as the former had already fought for some time, it was thought that the odds were rather against him.
The contest, however, began with great spirit and eagerness on both sides.
The Batavian struck tremendous blows, which were parried by the adroitness of the other.
The African was quick and furious, but he could do nothing against the cool and wary defence of his vigilant adversary.
At length, at a given signal, the battle was suspended, and the gladiators were led away,
not through anything like mercy or admiration,
but simply through a shrewd understanding of the best mode of satisfying the Roman public.
It was well understood they would return again.
Now a large number of men were led into the arena.
These were still armed with the short sword.
In a moment they had begun the attack.
It was not a conflict between two sides, but a general fight,
in which every man attacked his neighbour.
Such scenes were the most bloody, and therefore the most exciting.
A conflict of this kind would always destroy the greatest number in the shortest time.
The arena presented a scene of dire confusion.
Five hundred armed men in the prime of life and strength all struggled confusedly together.
Sometimes they would all be interlocked in one dense mass.
At other times they would violently separate into widely scattered individuals
with a heap of dead upon the scene of the combat.
But these would assail one another again with undiminished fury.
Separate combats would spring up all around.
The victors in these would rush to take parts in others,
until at last the survivors had once more congregated in one struggling crowd.
At length their struggles became weaker.
Out of five hundred, but one hundred remained, and these were wearied and wounded.
Suddenly a signal was given, and two men leapt into the arena
and rushed from opposite sides upon this crowd.
They were the African and the Batavian.
Fresh from their repose, they fell upon the exhausted wretches before them,
who had neither the spirit to combine nor the strength to resist.
It became a butchery.
These two giants slaughtered right and left without mercy,
until they alone stood upright upon the arena,
and the applause of the innumerable throng came down in thunder to their ears.
The two again attacked each other and attracted the attention of the spectators,
while the bodies of the wounded and slain were being removed.
The combat was as fierce as before and precisely similar.
The African was agile, the Batavian cautious.
But finally the former made a desperate thrust.
The Batavian parried it and returned a stroke like lightning.
The African sprang back and dropped his sword,
but he was too late, for the stroke of his foe had pierced his left arm.
As he fell, a roar of joy arose from one hundred thousand human beings.
But this was not the end, for even while the conqueror stood over his victim,
the attendants sprang forward and drew him away.
Yet the Romans knew, and the wounded man knew, that it was not mercy.
He was merely to be reserved for a later but certain fate.
The Batavian is a skillful fighter, Marcellus,
said one young officer to a companion among the group which has been alluded to.
He is indeed Lasoulis, replied the other.
I do not think that I ever saw a better gladiator.
Indeed, both of them were much better than Common.
They have a better man than Ivor inside there.
Ah, who is he?
The gladiator Mesa.
I think he is about the best I have ever seen.
I have heard of him.
Do you think he will be out today?
I understood so.
The short conversation was interrupted by a loud roar which came from the Vivarium,
a place where the wild beasts were confined.
It was a fierce and terrific roar, such as the most savage beasts give
when they are at the extremity of hunger and rage.
Soon iron gratings were flung open by men from above,
and a tiger stalked forth into the arenas.
He was from Africa whence he had been brought but a few days previously.
He had been kept three days without food,
and his furious rage, which hunger and confinement had heightened to a terrible degree,
was awful to behold.
Lashing his tail, he walked round the arena,
gazing with bloodshot eyes upward at the spectators.
But their attention was soon diverted to another object.
From the opposite side a man was thrust out into the arena.
He had no armor but was naked like all gladiators,
with the simple exception of a cloth round his loins.
Bearing in hand the customary short sword,
he advanced with a firm pace toward the center of the scene.
All eyes at once were fixed upon this man.
Macer! Macer!
was called round by the innumerable spectators.
The tiger soon saw him and uttered a short, savage growl of fearful import.
Macer stood still with his eyes calmly fixed upon the beast,
who, lashing its tail more madly than ever, bounded toward him.
Finally the tiger crouched and then, with one terrific spring,
leapt directly upon him.
But Macer was prepared.
Like a flash he darted to the left,
and just as the tiger fell to the earth,
he dealt a short, sharp blow straight to its heart.
It was a fatal stroke.
The huge beast shuddered from head to foot,
and drawing all its limbs together,
he uttered a last howl that sounded almost like the scream of a human being,
and fell dead upon the sand.
Again the applause of the multitude rose like a thunder-peal all around.
Wonderful! cried Marcellus.
I never saw skill equal to that of Macer.
Without doubt he has been fighting all his life, rejoined his friend.
But soon the carcass of the tiger was drawn away,
and again the creak of a grating as it swung apart attracted attention.
This time it was a lion.
He came forth slowly, and looked all around upon the scene as if in surprise.
He was the largest of his species, a giant in size,
and had long been preserved for some superior antagonist.
He seemed capable of encountering two animals like the tiger that had preceded him.
Beside him, Macer was like a child.
The lion had fasted long, but he showed no fury like that at the tiger.
He walked across the arena, and then completely around it in a kind of trot,
as though searching for escape.
Finding every side closed, he finally retreated to the center,
and putting his face close to the ground, he uttered a roar,
so deep, so loud, and so long,
that the ponderous stones of the Colosseum itself vibrated at the sound.
Macer stood unmoved.
Not a muscle of his face changed.
He carried his head, erect, with the same watchful expression,
and held his sword ready.
At length the lion turned full upon him.
The wild beast and the man stood face to face, eyeing one another,
but the calm gaze of the man seemed to fill the animal with wrath.
He started back with his hair and tail erect,
and tossing his mane he crouched for the dreadful spring.
The vast multitude stood spellbound.
Here, indeed, was a sight worthy of their interest.
The dark form of the lion darted forward,
but again the form of the gladiator, with his customary maneuver,
leapt aside and struck.
This time, however, his sword struck a rib and fell from his hand.
The lion was slightly wounded,
but the blow served only to rouse his fury to the highest point.
Yet Macer lost not one jot of his coolness in that awful moment.
Perfectly unarmed, he stood before the beast, waiting his attack.
Again and again the lion sprang,
but each time he was evaded by the nimble gladiator,
who, by his own adroit movements,
contrived to reach the spot where his weapon lay
and regain possession of it.
Armed with his trusty sword, he waited a final spring.
The lion came down as before, but this time Macer's aim was true.
The sword pierced his heart.
The enormous beast fell, writhing in pain.
Rising again to his feet, he ran across the arena,
and with a last roar he fell dead by the bars at which he had entered.
Macer was now led away, and the Batavian reappeared.
The Romans required variety.
A small tiger was let loose upon the Batavian and was vanquished.
A lion was then set upon him.
He was extremely fierce, although of only ordinary size.
It was evident that the Batavian was not at all equal to Macer.
The lion made a spring and was wounded, but on making a second attack,
he caught his opponent, and literally tore him to pieces.
Upon this, Macer was sent out again and killed this lion easily.
And now, while Macer stood there, the recipient of unbounded applause,
a man entered from the opposite side.
It was the African.
His arm had not been bound up, but hung down by his side, covered with blood.
He staggered toward Macer with painful steps.
The Romans knew that he had been sent out to be killed.
The wretch knew it himself also, for as he drew near to his antagonist,
he dropped his sword and cried out in a kind of desperation,
Quick, kill me and put me out of pain!
To the amazement of all, Macer stepped back and flung down his sword.
The spectators stared and wondered.
Still more amazed were they when Macer turned toward the emperor
and stretched out his hands.
August Emperor, he cried, I am a Christian.
I will fight wild beasts, but I will not raise my hand against a fellow man.
I can die, but I will not kill.
Whereupon a mighty murmur arose.
What does he say? cried Marcellus.
A Christian!
When did that happen?
I heard, said Lusulus, that he was visited in his cell by some of these wretched Christians
and joined their contemptible sect.
They are made up of the off-scouring of mankind.
It is very probable that he is a Christian.
And will he incur death rather than fight?
That is the way with these fanatics.
Rage took the place of surprise in the fierce multitude.
They were indignant that a mere gladiator should dare to disappoint them.
The attendants rushed out to interfere.
The fight must go on.
If Macer would not fight, he should take the consequences.
But he was firm.
Unarmed, he advanced toward the African, whom he could have slain even then with a blow of
his fist.
The face of the African was like that of a fiend.
Surprise, joy, and triumph gleamed in his sinister eyes.
Seizing his sword with a firm grasp, he struck Macer to the heart.
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.
The words were drowned in a torrent of blood, and this humble but bold witness for Christ
passed away from earth to join the noble army of martyrs.
Are there many such scenes as this?
Asked Marcellus.
Often, whenever Christians appear, they will fight any number of beasts.
Young girls will come firmly to meet lions and tigers, but not one of the madmen will
fight with men.
The populace are bitterly disappointed with Macer.
He is the very best of all the gladiators, and in becoming a Christian, he has acted like
a fool.
It must be a wonderful religion which could make a common gladiator act thus, said Marcellus.
You'll have a chance to learn more about it.
How so?
Haven't you heard?
You are appointed to unearth some of these Christians.
They have got down in the catacombs, and they must be hunted up.
I should think they have enough already.
Fifty were burned this morning.
And a hundred were beheaded last week.
But that is nothing.
The city is swarming with them.
The emperor has determined to restore the old religion perfectly.
Since these Christians have appeared, the empire has been declining.
He has made up his mind to annihilate them.
They are a curse and must be dealt with accordingly.
You will soon understand.
I haven't been in Rome long enough to know, said Marcellus meekly, and I do not understand
what the Christians really believe.
I have heard almost every crime imputed to them.
However, if it be as you say, I will have a chance of learning.
But now another scene attracted their attention.
An old man entered upon the scene.
His form was bowed and his hair silver-white with extreme old age.
His appearance was hailed with shouts of derision, although his majestic face and dignified manner
were only calculated to excite admiration.
As the shouts of laughter and yells of derision came down to his ears, he raised his head and uttered a few words.
Who is he? asked Marcellus.
Alexander, a teacher of the abominable Christian sect.
He is so obstinate that he will not recant.
Hush, he is speaking.
Romans, said the old man.
I am a Christian.
My God died for me, and I gladly lay down my life for him.
A loud outburst of yells and execrations from the fierce mob drowned his voice.
Before it was over, three panthers came bounding toward him.
He folded his arms, and looking up to heaven, his lips moved as if in murmuring prayers.
His lips moved as if murmuring prayers.
The savage beasts fell upon him as he stood, and in a few minutes he was torn in pieces.
Other wild animals were now let in.
They bounded around the enclosure, they leapt against the barrier, and in their rage assailed one another.
It was a hideous scene.
In the midst of this, a helpless band of prisoners were rudely thrust.
They were chiefly young girls who were thus sacrificed to the bloodthirsty passions of the savage Roman mob.
The sight would have moved to pity, any heart in which all soft feelings had not been blighted.
But pity had no place in Rome.
Cowering and fearful, the poor young maidens showed the weakness of human nature when just confronted with death in so terrible a form.
But after a few moments, faith resumed its power and raised them above all fear.
As the beasts became aware of the presence of their prey and began to draw near, these young maidens joined hands, and raising their eyes to heaven, sang out a solemn chant which rose clear and wondrously sweet upward to heaven.
Unto him that loved us, to him that washed us from our sins, in his own blood, to him that made us kings and priests, to God and the Father, to him be glory and dominion, forever and ever.
Hallelujah. Amen.
One by one the voices were hushed in blood, and agony and death.
One by one the shrieks of anguish were mingled with the shouts of praise, and these fair young spirits, so heroic unto suffering and faithful unto death, had carried their song to join it with the psalm of the redeemed on high.
Chapter 2. The Praetorian Camp
Cornelius the Centurion, a just man, and one that feared God
Marcellus was born in Gades, and had been brought up in the stern discipline of a Roman army.
He had been quartered in Africa, in Syria, and in Britain, where he had distinguished himself not only by bravery in the field, but also by skill in the camp.
For these reasons he had received honors and promotions, and upon his arrival in Rome, to which place he had come as the bearer of dispatches, he had so pleased the emperor that he had been appointed to an honorable station among the Praetorians.
He was charmed by the bold and frank nature of Marcellus, and the two young men had become firm friends.
The intimate knowledge of the capital, which Lasullus possessed, enabled him also to be of service to his friend, and the scene which has been described in the preceding chapter, was one of the first visits which Marcellus had made to the renowned Colosseum.
The Praetorian camp was situated close to the city wall, where it was joined by another wall which enclosed it.
The soldiers lived in rooms like cells made in the wall itself.
They were a numerous and finely appointed body of men, and their situation at the capital gave them a power and an influence so great that for ages they controlled the government of the capital.
A command among the Praetorians was a sure road to fortune, and Marcellus could look forward with well-grounded prospects of future honors.
On the morning of the following day, Lasullus entered his room.
After the usual salutation, he spoke of the fight which they had witnessed.
Such scenes are not to my taste, said Marcellus.
They are cowardly.
I like to see two well-trained men engage in fair combat, but such butchery as you have in the Colosseum is detestable.
Why should Masa be murdered?
He was a brave man, and I honor his courage.
And why should old men and young children be handed over to wild beasts?
It is the law.
They are Christians.
That is always the answer.
What have the Christians done?
I have seen them in all parts of the world, but I have never known them to be engaged in disturbances.
They are the worst of mankind.
So it is said, but what proof is there?
Proof?
It is too well known.
Their crime is that they plot in secret against the laws and religion of the state.
So intense is the hatred which they bear toward our institution that they will die rather than offer sacrifice.
They own no king or monarch, but the crucified Jew who they believe is alive now.
And they show them a levelance to us by asserting that we shall all hereafter be tortured in Hades forever.
This may be true.
I know not.
I know nothing at all about them.
The city is swarming with them.
The empire is overrun.
And mark this, the decline of our empire, which all see and lament, the spread of weakness and insubordination, the contraction of our boundaries, all this increases as the Christians increase.
To what else are these evils owing if not to them?
How have they produced this?
By their detestable teachings and practices.
They teach that fighting is wrong, that soldiers are the basest of men, that our glorious religion under which we have prospered is a curse, and that the immortal gods are accursed demons.
In their teachings they aim to overthrow all morality.
In their private practices they perform the darkest and foulest crimes.
They always keep by themselves an impenetrable secrecy, but sometimes we overhear their evil discourses and lewd songs.
All this is indeed serious, and if true they deserve severe punishment.
But according to your own statement they keep by themselves, and but little is known of them.
Tell me, did those who suffered yesterday seem like this?
Did that old man look as though he had passed his life in vicious scenes?
Did those fair young girls sing lewd songs as they waited for the lions?
Unto him that loved us, to him that washed us from our sins.
And Marcellus sang in a soft voice the words which he had heard.
I confess, my friend, that I mourned for them.
And I, said Marcellus, could have wept had I not been a Roman soldier.
Consider for a moment.
You tell me things about these Christians which you confess only to have learned from those who themselves are ignorant.
You assert that they are infamous and base, the off-scouring of the earth.
I see them confronted with a death that tries the highest qualities of the soul.
They meet it nobly.
They die grandly.
In all her history Rome can produce no greater scene of devotion than that of yesterday.
You say they detest soldiers, yet they are brave.
You tell me they are traitors, yet they do not resist the laws.
You declare that they are impure, yet if purity is on earth, it belongs to those maidens who died yesterday.
You are enthusiastic for those outcasts.
Not so, Lasoulis.
I wish to know the truth.
All my life I have heard these reports, but yesterday for the first time I suspected that they might be false.
I now question you earnestly, and I find that your knowledge is based upon nothing.
I now remember that throughout all the world these Christians are peaceable and honest.
They are engaged in no riots or disturbances, and none of these crimes in which they are charged can be proved against them.
Why, then, should they die?
The Emperor has good reasons, no doubt, for his course.
He may be instigated by ignorant or malicious advisors.
I think it is entirely his own design.
The number of those that have been put to death is very large.
Oh, yes, some thousands, but plenty more remain.
These, however, are out of reach, and that reminds me of my errand here.
I bring you the Imperial Commission.
Lasoulis drew from the folds of his military mantle a scroll of parchment, which he handed to Marcellus.
The latter eagerly examined its contents.
It appointed him to a higher grade, and commissioned him to search out and arrest the Christians in their hiding places,
mentioning particularly the catacombs.
Marcellus read it with a clouded brow, and laid it down.
You do not seem very glad.
I confess this task is unpleasant.
I am a soldier, and I do not like to hunt out old men and weak children for the executioner.
Yet, as a soldier, I must obey.
Tell me something about these catacombs.
The catacombs?
It is a subterranean district that extends to unknown bounds underneath the city.
The Christians fly to the catacombs whenever there is danger,
and they are also in the habit of burying their dead there.
Once there, they are beyond the reach of the utmost power of the state.
Who made the catacombs?
No one knows, exactly.
They have existed for ages.
I believe that they were excavated for the sake of getting building sand for cement.
At present, all our cement comes from there, and you may see workmen bringing it into the city along any of the great roads.
They have to go far away for it now, for in the course of ages they have excavated so much beneath us
that this city now rests upon a foundation like a honeycomb.
Is there any regular entrance?
There are innumerable entrances.
That is the difficulty.
If there were but few, then we might catch the fugitives,
but we cannot tell from which direction to advance upon them.
But we cannot tell from which direction to advance upon them.
Is any district suspected?
Yes, about two miles down the European Way, near the tomb of Cecilia Metella,
the large round tower, you know, bodies have frequently been discovered.
It is conjectured that these are the bodies of the Christians
which have been obtained from the amphitheatre and carried away for burial.
On the approach of the guards, the Christians have dropped the bodies and fled.
But after all, this gives no assistance, for after you enter the catacombs,
you are no nearer your aim than before.
No human being can penetrate that infinite labyrinth without assistance from those who live there.
Who live there?
The fossers, who still excavate sand for the builders,
they are nearly all Christians and are always at work cutting out graves for the dead of the Christians.
These men have lived there all their lives and are not only familiar with the passages,
but they have a kind of instinct to guide them.
Were you ever in the catacombs?
Once, long ago, a fosser guided me.
I remained but a short time.
My impression was that it was the most terrible place in all the world.
I have heard of the catacombs, but never before knew anything about them.
It is strange that they are so little known.
Could not these fossers be engaged to lead the guards through this labyrinth?
No, they will not betray the Christians.
Have they been tried?
Certainly.
Some comply and lead the officers of justice through a network of passages till they get bewildered.
Their torches become extinguished, they grow terrified, then they ask to be led back.
The fosser declares that the Christians must have fled, and so takes back the soldiers to the starting point.
Are none resolute enough to continue on till they find the Christians?
If they insist upon continuing the search, the fosser will lead them on forever,
but he merely leads them through the countless passages which intersect some particular district.
Are none found who will actually betray the fugitives?
Sometimes, but of what use is it?
Upon the first alarm, every Christian vanishes through the sideways which open everywhere.
My prospect of success seems small.
Very small, but much is hoped from your boldness and shrewdness.
If you succeed in this enterprise, it will be your fortune.
Now, farewell.
You have learned from me all that I know.
You will find no difficulty in learning more from any of the fossers.
So saying, Lusoulis departed.
Marcellus leaned his head on his hands and lost himself in thought.
But ever amid his meditations came floating the strains of that glorious melody
which told of triumph over death.
Unto him that loved us, to him that washed us from our sins.
Chapter 3
The Apean Way
Sepulchres, in sad array, guard the ashes of the mighty, slumbering on the Apean Way.
Marcellus entered upon the duty that lay before him without delay.
Upon the following morning, he set out upon his investigations.
It was merely a journey of inquiry, so he took no soldiers with him.
Starting forth from the Praetorian barracks, he walked out of the city and down the Apean Way.
This famous road was lined on both sides with magnificent tombs,
all of which were carefully preserved by the families to whom they belonged.
Further back from the road lay houses and villas as thickly clustered as in the city.
The open country was a long distance away.
At length he reached a huge round tower, which stood about two miles from the gate.
It was built with enormous blocks of travertine and ornamented beautifully, yet simply.
Its severe style and solid construction gave it an air of bold defiance against the ravages of time.
At this point Marcellus paused and looked back.
A stranger in Rome, every view presented something new and interesting.
Most remarkable was the long line of tombs.
There were the last resting places of the great, the noble, the brave of elder days,
whose epitaphs announced their claims to honor on earth, and their dim prospects in the unknown life to come.
Art and wealth had reared these sumptuous monuments, and the pious affection of ages had preserved them from decay.
Here where he stood was the sublime mausoleum of Cecilia Metella.
Further away were the tombs of Calatinus and the Sarveli.
Still further on his eye fell upon the resting place of the Scipios,
the classic architecture of which was hallowed by the dust of its heroic dwellers.
The words of Cicero recurred to his mind.
When you go out of the Porta Capena and see the tombs of the Calatinus,
of the Scipios, of the Sarveli, and the Metelli,
can you consider that the buried inmates are unhappy?
There was the Arch of Drusus spanning the road.
On one side was the historic Grotto of Egeria,
and further on the spot where Hannibal once stood and hurled his javelin at the walls of Rome.
The long lines of tombs went on till in the distance
it was terminated by the lofty pyramid of Caius Cestius,
and the whole presented the grandest scene of sepulchral magnificence that could be found on earth.
On every side the habitations of men covered the ground,
for the imperial city had long ago burst the bounds that originally confined it,
and sent its houses far away on every side into the country,
till the traveller could scarcely tell where the country ended, and the city began.
From afar the deep hum of the city,
the roll of innumerable chariots,
and the multitudinous tread of its many feet greeted his ears.
Before him rose monuments and temples,
the white sheen of the imperial palace,
the innumerable domes and columns towering upward like a city in the air,
and high above all the lofty Capitoline mount,
crowned with the shrine of Jove.
But more impressive than all the splendor of the home of the living
was the solemnity of the city of the dead.
What an array of architectural glory was displayed around him!
There arose the proud monuments of the grand old families of Rome.
Heroism, genius, valor, pride, wealth,
everything that man esteems or admires,
here animated the eloquent stone and awakened emotion.
Here were the visible forms of the highest influences of the old pagan religion.
Yet their effects upon the soul never corresponded
with the splendor of their outward forms, or the pomp of their ritual.
The epitaphs of the dead showed not faith, but love of life, triumphant.
Not the assurance of immortal life,
but a sad longing after the pleasures of the world.
Such were the thoughts of Marcellus as he mused upon the scene,
and again recalled the words of Cicero.
Can you think that the buried inmates are unhappy?
These Christians, thought he, whom I am now seeking,
seem to have learned more than I can find in all our philosophy.
They not only have conquered the fear of death, but have learned to die rejoicing.
What secret power have they which can thus inspire even the youngest and feeblest among them?
My religion can only hope that I may not be unhappy.
Theirs leads them to death with triumphant songs of joy.
But how was he to prosecute his search after the Christians?
Crowds of people passed by, but he saw none who seemed capable of assisting him.
Buildings of all sizes, walls, tombs, and temples were all around,
but he saw no place that seemed at all connected with the catacombs.
He was quite at a loss what to do.
He went down into the street, and walked slowly along,
carefully scrutinizing every person whom he met,
and examining closely every building.
Yet no result was obtained from this beyond the discovery
that the outward appearance gave no sign of any connection with subterranean abodes.
The day passed on, and it grew late,
but Marcellus remembered that there were many entrances to the catacombs,
and still he continued his search,
hoping before the close of the day to find some clue.
At length his search was rewarded.
He had walked backward and forward and in every direction,
often retracing his steps and returning many times to the place of starting.
Twilight was coming on, and the sun was near the edge of the horizon,
when his quick eye caught sight of a man who was walking in an opposite direction,
followed by a boy.
The man was dressed in coarse apparel, stained and damp with sand and earth.
His complexion was blanched and pallid,
like that of one who has long been imprisoned,
and his whole appearance at once arrested the glance of the young soldier.
He stepped up to him, and laying his hand upon his shoulder, said,
You are a fossa. Come with me.
The man looked up.
He saw a stern face.
The sight of the officer's dress terrified him.
In an instant he darted away, and before Marcellus could turn to follow,
he had rushed into a side lane and was out of sight.
But Marcellus secured the boy.
Come with me, said he.
The poor lad looked up with such an agony of fear that Marcellus was moved.
Have mercy for my mother's sake.
She will die if I am taken.
The boy fell at his feet, murmuring this in broken tones.
I will not hurt you.
Come.
And he led him away toward an open space out of the way of the passers-by.
Now, said he, stopping and confronting the boy,
tell me the truth.
Who are you?
My name is Polio, said the boy.
Where do you live?
In Rome.
What are you doing here?
I was out on an errand.
Who was that man?
A fossa.
What were you doing with him?
He was carrying a bundle for me.
What was in the bundle?
Provisions.
To whom were you carrying it?
To a destitute person out here.
Where does he live?
Not far from here.
Now, boy, tell me the truth.
Do you know anything about the catacombs?
I have heard about them, said the boy quietly.
Were you ever in them?
I have been in some of them.
Do you know anybody who lives in them?
Some people.
The fossa stays there.
You are going to the catacombs, then, with him?
What business would I have had there at such a time as this?
said the boy innocently.
That is what I want to know.
Were you going there?
How would I dare go there when it is forbidden by the laws?
It is now evening, said Marcellus abruptly.
Come with me to the evening service at yonder temple.
The boy hesitated.
I am in a hurry, said he.
But you are my prisoner.
I never neglect the worship of the gods.
You must come and assist me at my devotions.
I cannot, said the boy firmly.
Why not?
I am a Christian.
I knew it.
And you have friends in the catacombs, and you are going there now.
They are the destitute people to whom you are carrying provisions, and the errand on
which you are is for them.
The boy held down his head and was silent.
I want you now to take me to the entrance of the catacombs.
Oh, generous soldier, have mercy.
Do not ask me that.
I cannot do it.
You must.
I will not betray my friends.
You need not.
It is nothing to show the entrance among the many thousands that lead down below.
Do you think that the gods do not know every one?
The boy thought for a moment, and at length signified his assent.
Marcellus took his hand and followed his lead.
The boy turned away to the right of the European Way and walked a short distance.
Here he came to an uninhabited house.
He entered and went down into the cellar.
There was a door which apparently opened into a closet.
The boy pointed to this and stopped.
I wish to go down, said Marcellus firmly.
You would not dare to go down alone, surely, would you?
The Christians say that they do not commit murder.
Why then should I fear?
Lead on.
I have no torches.
But I have some.
I came prepared.
Go on.
I cannot.
Do you refuse?
I must refuse, said the boy.
My friends and my relatives are below.
Sooner than lead you to them, I would die a hundred deaths.
You are bold.
You do not know what death is.
Do I not?
What Christian can fear death?
I have seen many of my friends die in agony and have helped bury them.
I will not lead you there.
Take me away to prison.
The boy turned away.
But if I take you away, what will your friends think?
Have you a mother?
The boy bowed his head and burst into a passion of tears.
The mention of that dear name had overcome him.
I see that you have and that you love her.
Lead me down and you shall join her again.
I will never betray them.
I will die first.
Do with me as you wish.
If I had any evil intentions, said Marcellus, do you think I would go down unaccompanied?
What can a soldier and a praetorian want with the persecuted Christians if not to destroy them?
Boy, I have no evil intentions.
If you guide me down below, I swear I will not use my knowledge against your friends.
When I am below, I will be a prisoner and they can do with me what they like.
Do you swear that you will not betray them?
I do, by the life of Caesar and the immortal gods, said Marcellus solemnly.
Come along then, said the boy.
We do not need torches.
Follow me carefully.
And the lad entered the narrow opening.
Chapter 4 The Catacombs
No light, but rather darkness, visible, served only to discover sights of woe, regions of sorrow, doleful shades.
They went on in utter darkness, until at length the passage widened, and they came to steps which led below.
Marcellus held the boy's dress and followed him.
It was certainly a situation that might provoke alarm.
He was voluntarily placing himself in the power of men whom his class had driven from the upper air into these drear abodes.
To them he could only be known as a persecutor.
Yet such was the impression which he had formed of their gentleness and meekness that he had no fear of them.
It was in the power of this boy to lead him to death in the thick darkness of these impenetrable labyrinths, but even of this he did not think.
It was a desire to know more of these Christians, to get at their secret, that led him on.
And as he had sworn, so had he resolved that this visit should not be made use of to their betrayal or injury.
After descending for some time, the steps ended, and they walked along the level ground.
Soon they turned and entered a small vaulted chamber, which was lighted from the faint glow of a furnace.
The boy had walked on with the unhesitating step of one perfectly familiar with the way.
Arriving at the chamber, he lighted a torch which lay on the floor and resumed his journey.
There is something in the air of a burial place which is unlike that of any other place.
It is not altogether the closeness, or the damp, or the sickening smell of earth,
but a certain subtle influence which unites with them and intensifies them.
The smell of the dead is there, and it rests alike on mind and body.
Such was the air of the catacombs.
Cold and damp, it struck upon the visitor like the chill atmosphere from the realms of death.
The living felt the mysterious power of the dead.
The boy, Polio, went on before, and Marcellus followed after.
The torch but faintly illumined the intense dark.
No beam of day, no ray, however weak, could ever enter here to relieve the thickness of the oppressive gloom.
It was literally darkness that might be felt.
The torchlight shone out but a few paces, and then died in the darkness.
The path went winding on with innumerable turnings.
Suddenly, Polio stopped and pointed downward.
Peering through the gloom, Marcellus saw an opening in the path which led further down.
It was a pit to which no bottom appeared.
Where does this lead to?
Below.
Are there more passages below?
Oh, yes, as many as there are here, and still below that again.
I have been in three different stories of these paths, and some of the old fosses say that in certain places they go down to a very great depth.
The passage wound along till all idea of locality was utterly lost.
Marcellus could not tell whether he was within a few paces of the entrance or many furlongs off.
His bewildered thoughts soon began to turn to other things.
The first impressions of gloom departed, and he looked more particularly upon what he passed,
and regarded more closely the many wonders of this strange place.
All along the walls were tablets, which appeared to cover long and narrow excavations.
These cellular niches were ranged on both sides so closely that but little space was left between.
The inscriptions that were upon the tablets showed that they were Christian tombs.
He had not time to stop and read, but he noticed the frequent recurrence of the same expression,
such as,
Honoria, she sleeps in peace.
Fausta, in peace.
On nearly every tablet he saw the same sweet and gentle word.
Peace, thought Marcellus.
What wonderful people are these Christians, who even amid such scenes as these,
can cherish their lofty contempt of death.
His eyes grew more and more accustomed to the gloom as he walked along.
Now the passageway grew narrower, the roof drooped, the sides approached.
They had to stoop and go along more slowly.
The walls were rough, and rudely cut as the workmen left them,
when they drew along here their last load of sand for the edifices above.
Subterranean damps and fungus growths overspread them in places,
deepening their sombre color and filling the air with thick moisture,
while the smoke of the torches made the atmosphere still more oppressive.
They passed hundreds of side passages and scores of places where many paths met,
all branching off in different directions.
These innumerable paths showed Marcellus how hopelessly he was now cut off from the world above.
This boy held his life in his hands.
Do any ever lose their way?
Often.
What becomes of them?
Sometimes they wander till they meet some friends, sometimes they are never heard of again.
But at present most of us know the place so well that if we lose our way,
we soon wander into familiar paths again.
One thing particularly struck the young soldier,
and that was the immense preponderance of small tombs.
Polio told him that they were the graves of children,
and thus opened to him thoughts and emotions unfelt before.
Children, thought he,
what do they hear, the young, the pure, the innocent?
Why were they not buried above where the sun might shine kindly
and the flowers bloom sweetly over their graves?
Did they tread such dark paths as these on their way through life?
Did they bear their part in the sufferings of those that lingered here flying from persecution?
Did the noxious air and the never-ending gloom of these drear abodes
shorten their fair young lives and send their stainless spirits out of life before their time?
We have been a long time on the way, said Marcellus.
Will we soon be there?
Very soon, said the boy.
Whatever ideas Marcellus might have had about hunting out these fugitives before he entered here,
he now saw that all attempts to do so must be in vain.
An army of men might enter here and never come in sight of the Christians.
The further they went, the more hopeless would be their journey.
They could be scattered through the innumerable passages and wander about till they died.
But now a low sound arose from afar which arrested his attention.
Sweet beyond all description, low and musical,
it came down the long passages and broke upon his charmed senses like a voice from the skies.
As they went on a light beamed before them which cast forth its rays into the darkness.
The sounds grew louder, now swelling into a magnificent chorus,
now dying away into a tender wail of supplication.
In a few minutes they reached a turn in the path and then a scene burst upon their sight.
Stop, said Polio, arresting his companion and extinguishing the torch.
Marcellus obeyed and looked earnestly at the spectacle before him.
It was a vaulted chamber, about fifteen feet in height and thirty feet square.
In this place there were crowded about a hundred people, men, women, and children.
At one side there was a table, behind which stood a venerable man who appeared to be the leader among them.
The walls of the room seemed to have been rudely decorated with coarse pictures.
The place was illuminated with the glare of torches which threw a lurid glow upon the assembly.
The people were careworn and emaciated,
and their faces were characterized by the same pallor which Marcellus had observed in the fosser.
But the expression which now rested upon them was not of sorrow, or misery, or despair.
Hope illumined their eyes, their upturned faces spoke of joy and triumph.
The scene moved the soul of the beholder to its inmost depths,
for it confirmed all that he had seen of the Christians,
their heroism, their hope, their peace, which rested on something hidden from him.
As he listened he heard their song, chanted by the whole congregation.
Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty.
Just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints.
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?
For thou only art holy.
For all nations shall come and worship before thee,
for thy judgments are made manifest.
Then there was a pause.
The venerable leader read something from a scroll which was new to Marcellus.
It was a sublime assertion of the immortality of the soul and life after death.
The congregation seemed to hang upon the words as though they were the words of life.
Finally the reader came to a burst of joyous exclamation,
which drew murmurs of gratitude and enthusiastic hope from the audience.
The words thrilled upon the heart of the listener,
though he did not understand their full meaning.
O death, where is thy sting?
O grave, where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
These words seemed to open to his mind a new world with new thoughts.
Sin, death, Christ, with all the infinite train of ideas that rested upon them,
arose dimly before his awakening soul.
The desire for the Christian secret which he had conceived
now burned more eagerly within him.
The leader raised his head and, stretching out his hands, uttered a fervent prayer.
Addressing the invisible God, he poured forth a confession of sin and guilt.
He pled for pardon through the atoning death of Christ.
He prayed for the Spirit from on high so that they might become holy.
Then he enumerated all their sorrows and prayed for deliverance, asking for faith in life,
victory in death, and immortality in heaven for the sake of the Redeemer, Jesus.
After this followed another chant which was sung as before.
Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people.
And God himself shall be with them, and be their God.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, no more sorrow, nor sighing.
Neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away.
Amen.
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God, forever and ever.
Amen.
Now the congregation began to disperse.
Polio walked forward, leading Marcellus.
At the sight of his martial figure in glittering armor, they all started backwards, and would have fled by the different paths.
But Marcellus called in a loud voice,
Fear not, Christians. I am alone and in your power.
Upon this they all turned back, and looked at him with anxious curiosity.
The aged man who led the meeting advanced, and looked earnestly upon him.
Who are you, and why do you seek us out in the last resting place that is left to us on earth?
Do not suspect me of evil. I come alone, unattended. I am at your mercy.
But what can a soldier and a praetorian wish of us?
Are you pursued? Are you a criminal? Is your life in danger?
No. I am an officer, high in rank and authority.
But I have all my life been seeking anxiously after the truth.
I have heard much of you Christians, but in these times of persecution, it is difficult to find you in Rome.
I have sought you here.
At this the aged man requested the assembly to withdraw, that he might converse with the newcomer.
The others readily did so, and retired by different ways, feeling much relieved.
A pale lady advanced eagerly to Palio, and caught him in her arms.
How long you were, my son!
I encountered this officer, dear mother, and was detained.
Thank God you are safe. But who is he?
I think he is an honest man, said the boy. See how he confides in us.
Cecilia, said the leader, do not go away for a little time.
The lady remained, and a few others did the same.
I am Honorius, said the old man, addressing Marcellus, a humble elder in the Church of Christ.
I believe that you are sincere and earnest. Tell us now what you want with us.
My name is Marcellus, and I am a captain in the Praetorian Guard.
Alas! cried Honorius, and clasping his hands, he fell back in his seat.
The others looked at Marcellus with mournful eyes, and the lady Cecilia cried out in an agony of grief,
Palio, how you have betrayed us!
Chapter 5. The Christian's Secret
The Mystery of Godliness, God Manifest in the Flesh
The young soldier stood astonished at the effect which his name produced.
Why do you all tremble so? said he. Is it on my account?
Alas! said Honorius, though we are banished to this place we have constant communication with the city.
We have heard that new efforts were making to persecute us more severely,
and that Marcellus, a captain in the Praetorians, had been appointed to search us out.
We see you here among us, our chief enemy.
Have we not cause to fear? Why should you track us here?
You have no cause to fear me, cried Marcellus, even if I were your worst enemy.
Am I not in your power? If you chose to detain me, could I escape?
If you killed me, could I resist? I am helpless among you.
My situation here, alone among you, is proof that there is no danger from me.
True, said Honorius, assuming his calm demeanor.
You are right. You could never return without our assistance.
Hear me, then, and I will explain all to you.
I am a Roman soldier. I was born in Spain, and was brought up in virtue and morality.
I was taught to fear the gods and do my duty.
I have been in many lands, and have confined myself chiefly to my profession.
Yet I have never neglected religion.
In my chamber I have studied all the writings of the philosophers of Greece and Rome.
The result is that I have learned from them to despise our gods and goddesses,
who are no better and even worse than myself.
From Plato and Cicero I learn that there is one supreme deity whom it is my duty to obey.
But how can I know him, and how shall I obey him?
I learn, too, that I am immortal, and shall become a spirit when I die.
How shall I be, then?
Shall I be happy or miserable?
How shall I secure happiness in that spiritual life?
They describe the glories of that immortal life in eloquent language,
but they give no directions for common men like me.
To learn more of this is the desire of my soul.
The priests can tell me nothing.
They are wedded to old forms and ceremonies in which they do not believe.
The old religion is dead, and men care for it no more.
In different lands I have heard much of Christians.
Shut up in the camp I have not had much opportunity to see them.
Indeed, I never cared to know them until lately.
I have heard all the usual reports of their immorality,
their secret vice, their treasonable doctrines.
I believed all this until lately.
A few days ago I was in the Colosseum.
There, first, I learned something about the Christians.
I saw the gladiator Mesa, a man to whom fear was utterly unknown,
lay down his life calmly rather than do what he believed to be wrong.
I saw an old man meet death with a peaceful smile,
and above all I saw a band of young girls give themselves up to the wild beasts
with a song of triumph on their lip.
Unto him that loved us, that washed us from our sins.
As Marcellus spoke, a wonderful effect was produced.
The eyes of his listeners glistened with eagerness and joy.
When he mentioned Mesa, they looked at each other with meaning glances.
When he spoke of the old man, Honorius bowed his head.
And when he spoke of the children and murmured the words of their song,
they turned away their faces and wept.
For the first time in my life, I saw death conquered.
I myself can meet death without terror,
and so can every soldier when he comes in the battlefield.
It is our profession.
But these people rejoiced in death.
Here were not soldiers, but children,
who carried the same wonderful feeling in their hearts.
Since then I have thought of nothing else.
Who is he that loved you?
Who is he that washes you from your sins?
Who is he that causes this sublime courage and hope to arise within you?
What is it that supports you here?
Who is he to whom you were just now praying?
I have a commission to lead soldiers against you and destroy you,
but I wish to learn more of you first,
and I swear by the Supreme that my present visit shall bring no harm to you.
Tell me, then, the Christian secret.
Your words, said Honorius, are true and sincere.
Now I know that you are no spy or enemy,
but an inquiring soul sent here by the Spirit
to learn that which you have long been seeking.
Rejoice, for he that cometh unto Christ
shall be in no wise cast out.
You see before you men and women
who have left friends and home and honor and wealth
to live here in want and fear and sorrow,
and they count all this as nothing for Christ.
Yes, they count even their own lives nothing.
They give up all for him who loved them.
You are right, Marcellus,
in thinking that there is some great power which can do all this.
It is not fanaticism, nor delusion, nor excitement.
It is the knowledge of the truth and love for the great God.
What you have sought for all your life is our dearest possession.
Treasured up in our hearts,
it is worth far more to us than all the world can give.
It gives us happiness in life, even in this place of gloom,
and in death it makes us victorious.
You wish to know the Supreme Being.
Our religion is his revelation,
and through this he makes himself known,
infinite in greatness and power.
He also is infinite in love and mercy.
This religion draws us so closely to him that he is our best friend,
our guide, our comfort, our hope, our all,
our creator, our redeemer, and our final savior.
You wish to know of the immortal life.
Our religion tells of this.
It shows us that by loving and serving God on earth,
we shall dwell with him in infinite blessedness in heaven.
It shows us how to live so as to please him here,
and it makes us know how we shall praise him hereafter.
By this we learn that death is no longer a curse,
but rather a blessing,
since it becomes but the sure passageway
unto happiness unspeakable in the presence of him who loved us.
Oh, then, cried Marcellus,
if this be so, make known to me this truth,
for I have looked for years,
for this I have prayed to that Supreme Being of whom I have heard.
You are the possessor of that which I long to know.
The end and aim of my life lies here.
The whole night is before us.
Do not put me off, but at once tell me all.
Has God, indeed, made known all this,
and have I been ignorant of it?
Tears of joy glistened in the eyes of the Christians.
Honorius murmured a few words of silent thankfulness and prayer,
after which he drew forth a manuscript,
which he handled with tender care.
Here, said he, beloved youth,
is the word of life which came from God,
which brings such peace and joy to man.
In this we can find all that the soul desires.
In these divine words we learn that which we can find nowhere else,
and though the mind may brood over it for a lifetime,
yet the extent of its glorious truths can never be reached.
Then Honorius opened the book and began to tell of Jesus.
He told him of the long succession of prophets which had heralded his coming,
of the chosen people of God who had kept alive the knowledge of the truth
for so many ages,
and of the marvelous works which they had witnessed.
He spoke of his birth, his childhood,
his first appearance, his miracles, his teachings.
All this he read, with a few comments of his own,
from the sacred manuscript.
Then he related the treatment which he received,
the scorn, contempt, and persecution which hurried him on to his betrayal.
Finally, he read the story of his death on Calvary.
Upon Marcellus, the effect of all this was wonderful.
Light seemed to burst upon his mind,
the holiness of God which turned with abhorrence from human sin,
his justice which demanded punishment,
his patience which endured so much,
his mercy which contrived a way to save his creatures
from the ruin which they drew on themselves,
his amazing love which brought him down
to sacrifice himself for their salvation.
All were clear.
When Honorius reached the end of the mournful story of Calvary
and came to the cry,
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
He was roused by a sob from Marcellus.
Looking up through the tears which dimmed his own eyes,
he saw the form of the strong man bowed
and his frame quivering with emotion.
No more, no more now, he murmured.
Let me think of him.
Him who loved us,
who washed us from our sins,
in his own blood.
And Marcellus buried his face in his hands.
Honorius raised his eyes to heaven and prayed.
The two were alone,
for their companions had long since departed.
The light from a lamp in a niche behind Honorius
but dimly illumined the scene.
Thus they remained in silence for a long time.
At last Marcellus raised his head.
I feel, said he,
that I too had a part in causing the death of the Holy One.
Read on, more of that word of life,
for my own life hangs upon it.
Then Honorius read the story of the burial,
the resurrection,
the appearance again to the disciples,
and the ascension.
Nor did he end with this.
He sought to give peace to the soul of his friend.
He read to him all the words of Jesus,
which invite the sinner,
and assure to him a gracious reception
and complete forgiveness.
It is the word of God, cried Marcellus.
It is a voice from heaven.
My heart responds to everything that I have heard,
and I know that it must be eternal truth.
But how can I be a sharer in these blessings?
I am a sinner.
I seem now to have my eyes cleared of mist.
I know myself at last.
Before I thought I was a just and righteous man.
But beside the Holy One of whom I have heard,
I sink down into the dust.
I see that I am a sinner before him.
He has atoned for us all.
But how can I be benefited?
He will pardon everything,
even to the uttermost.
How can he pardon me?
Lift up your soul to him,
and pray for pardon.
If you ask, you shall receive.
Oh, then, if I may dare to approach,
if it be permitted for me to utter a word to him,
teach me the words, tell me the way.
In the dimness of the gloomy vault,
in solitude and solemn silence,
Honorius bent down,
and Marcellus bowed himself by his side.
The venerable Christian lifted up his soul in prayer.
Marcellus felt as though his own soul
was being lifted up to the courts of heaven,
to the presence of the Savior,
by the power of that fervent and agonizing prayer.
The words seemed to find an echo in his own soul.
In his deep abasement,
he rested his wants upon his companion
so that he might present them in a more acceptable manner.
But finally, his own desires grew stronger.
Hope came to him, timidly, tremblingly,
yet still it was hope,
and his soul grew stronger at her presence.
At last, when Honorius ended,
his feelings burst forth.
It was the prayer of the publican,
God be merciful unto me, a sinner!
Hours passed on.
But who can fittingly describe
the progress of a soul on its way to God?
Enough that when morning dawned on the earth above,
a better day had dawned
over the soul of Marcellus in the vaults below.
His longings were completely satisfied,
the load was all removed,
the Christian's secret was his,
and with rapture unfelt before,
he could now sing the song of the Christian.
Unto him that loved us,
to him that washed us from our sins,
in his own blood,
to him be the glory and dominion,
for ever and ever.
These all died in faith.
The new convert soon learned more of the Christians.
After a brief repose,
he rose and was joined by Honorius,
who offered to show him the nature
of the place where they lived.
Those whom he had seen at the chapel's service
formed but a small part of the dwellers
in the catacombs.
Their numbers rose to many thousands,
and they were scattered throughout its wide extent
in little communities,
each of which had its own means
of communication with the city.
He walked far on,
accompanied by Honorius.
He was astonished at the numbers of people
whom he encountered,
and though he knew that the Christians were numerous,
yet he did not suppose that so vast a proportion
would have the fortitude to choose a life
in the catacombs.
Nor was he less interested in the dead
than in the living.
As he passed along,
he read the inscriptions upon their tombs,
and found in them
all the same strong faith
and lofty hope.
These he loved to read,
and the fond interest which Honorius took
in these pious memorials
made him a congenial guide.
There, said Honorius,
lies a witness for the truth.
Marcellus looked where he pointed
and read as follows.
Prometheus, in peace,
after many torments,
a most valiant martyr.
He lived about thirty-eight years.
His wife raised this to her dearest husband,
the well-deserving.
These men, said Honorius,
show us how Christians ought to die.
Yonder is another who suffered like Prometheus.
Paulus was put to death in tortures,
in order that he might live in eternal bliss.
And there, said Honorius,
is the tomb of a noble lady,
who showed that fortitude
which Christ can always bestow
even to the weakest of his followers
in the hour of need.
Clementia, tortured, dead,
sleeps, will rise.
We do not die, said Honorius.
We but sleep,
and when the last trump shall sound,
we shall wake to be forever with the Lord.
Here, he continued,
lies Constance,
doubly constant to his god
by a double trial.
Poison was given to him first,
but it was powerless over him,
so he was put to the sword.
The deadly draught
dared not present to Constance
the crown which the steel
was permitted to offer.
Thus they walked along,
reading the inscriptions
which appeared on every side.
New feelings came to Marcellus
as he read the glorious catalogue of names.
It was to him
a history of the Church of Christ.
Here were the acts of the martyrs
portrayed before him
in words that burned.
The rude pictures
that adorned many of the tombs
carried with them a pathos
that the finest works
of the skillful artist
could not produce.
The rudely carved letters,
the bad spelling
and grammatical errors
that characterized many of them
gave a touching proof
of the treasure of the gospel
to the poor and lowly.
Not many wise,
not many mighty are called,
but to the poor
the gospel is preached.
On many of them
there was a monogram
which was formed
of the initial letters
of the name of Christ,
X and P
being joined
so as to form one cipher.
Some bore a palm branch,
the emblem of victory
and immortality,
the token of that palm of glory
which shall hereafter wave
in the hands
of the innumerable throng
that are to stand
around the throne.
Others bore other devices.
What is this?
said Marcellus,
pointing to a picture of a ship.
It shows that the redeemed spirit
has sailed from earth
to the haven of rest.
And what is the meaning
of this fish
that I see represented so often?
The fish is used
because the letters
that form its name in Greek
are the initials of words
that express the glory
and hope of the Christian.
Iota stands for Jesus,
Chai for Christ,
Theta and Gamma
for the Son of God,
and Sigma for Savior,
so that the fish
symbolizes under its name
Iota, Chai, Theta, Gamma, Sigma,
Jesus Christ,
the Son of God,
the Savior.
What means this picture
that I see so often?
A ship and a huge sea monster.
That is Jonah,
a prophet of God,
of whom as yet
you are ignorant.
Honorius then related
the story of Jonah
and showed him
how the escape
from the bowels
of the fish
reminded the Christian
of his deliverance
from the darkness
of the tomb.
This glorious hope
of the resurrection
is an unspeakable comfort,
said he,
and we love to bring it
to our thoughts
by different symbols.
There, too,
is another symbol
of the same blessed truth,
the dove carrying
an olive branch
to Noah.
He related to his companion
the story of the flood,
so that Marcellus
might see the meaning
of the representation.
But of all the symbols
which are used,
said he,
none is so clear
as this.
And he pointed
to a picture
of the resurrection
of Lazarus.
There, too,
said Honorius,
is an anchor,
the sign of hope,
by which the Christian,
while tossing amid
the stormy billows
of life,
holds on to his heavenly home.
There you see the cock,
the symbol of watchfulness,
for our Lord has said,
Watch and pray.
There is also the lamb,
the type of innocence
and gentleness
which also brings
to our mind
the Lamb of God,
who bore our sins,
and by whose sacrifice
we receive pardon.
There again is the dove,
which, like the lamb,
represents innocence,
and yet again you see it
bearing the olive branch
of peace.
There are the letters
Alpha and Omega,
which represent our Lord,
for you know that he said,
I am Alpha and Omega.
And there is the crown,
which reminds of that crown
of immortality,
which the Lord,
the righteous judge,
shall give us.
Thus we love
to surround ourselves
with all that can remind us
of the joy
that lies before us.
Taught by these,
we look up
from the surrounding gloom
and see above us
the light
of immortal life.
Here,
said Marcellus,
pausing,
is something that seems
adapted to my condition.
It sounds prophetic.
Perhaps I, too,
may be called upon
to give my testimony
for Christ.
May I then
be found faithful.
In Christ,
in the time
of the Emperor Adrian,
Marius,
a young military officer
who lived long enough
as he shed his blood
for Christ
and died in peace.
His friends set up this
with tears
and in fear.
In this world
ye shall have tribulation,
but be of good cheer.
I have overcome the world.
Thus Christ assures us,
but while he warns us
of evil,
he consoles us
with his promise of support.
In him
we can find grace
sufficient for us.
May the example
of this young officer
be for me,
said Marcellus.
I may shed my blood
for Christ like him.
May I die as faithfully.
To lie here
among my brethren
with such an epitaph
would be a higher honor
for me
than a mausoleum
like that of
Cecilia Metella.
They walked on
as before.
How sweet,
said Marcellus,
is the death
of a Christian.
Its horror
has fled.
To him
it is a blessed sleep,
and death
instead of
awakening terror
is associated
with thoughts
of rest
or of victory.
The sleeping place
of Elpis.
Zoticus
laid here
to sleep.
Acellus
sleeps in Christ.
Martyria
in peace.
Vidalia
in the peace
of Christ.
Nikephoros
a sweet soul
in the place
of refreshment.
Some of those
inscriptions
tell of the
characters
of the departed
brethren,
said Honorius.
Look at these.
Maximeus
who lived
twenty-three years
friend of all men.
In Christ
on the fifth
calends of November
slept Gorgonius
friend of all
and enemy to none.
And here too,
he continued,
are others
which tell
of their private lives
and domestic experiences.
Cacelius
the husband
to Cacelia
Placidinia
my wife
of excellent memory
with whom
I lived
ten years
without any quarrel
in Jesus Christ
Son of God
the Savior.
Sacred to Christ
the Supreme God
Vitalis
buried on Saturday
calends of August
aged twenty-five years
and eight months
she lived
with her husband
ten years
and thirty days
in Christ
the first
and the last.
To Damnina
my sweetest
and most innocent wife
who lived sixteen years
and four months
and was married
two years
four months
and nine days
with whom
I was not able
to live
on account
of my traveling
more than six months
during which time
I showed her
my love
as I felt it.
None else
so loved each other
buried on the fifteenth
before the calends
of June.
To Claudius
the well-deserving
and affectionate
who loved me
he lived about
twenty-five years
in Christ.
There's the tribute
of a loving father
said Marcellus
as he read the following
Lawrence
to his sweetest son
Severus
born away
by angels
on the seventh
ides of January
and here of a wife.
Domitius
in peace
Leah
erected this.
Yes
said Honorius
the religion
of Jesus Christ
changes the nature
of man
and while it
awakens within him
love to God
it makes him
susceptible
of more tender
affections
to his friends
and relatives.
Passing on
they found
many epitaphs
which exhibited
this tender love
of departed relatives.
Constantia
of wonderful
beauty
and amiability
who lived
eighteen years
six months
and sixteen days
Constantia
in peace.
Simplicius
of good
and happy memory
who lived
twenty-three years
and forty-three days
in peace
his brother
made this monument.
To adcert her
our son
dear
sweet
most innocent
and incomparable
who lived
seventeen years
six months
and eight days
his father
and mother
set up this.
To Januarius
sweet and good
son
honored and
beloved by all
who lived
twenty-three years
five months
and twenty-two days
his parents
Laurinia
sweeter than honey
sleeps in peace
to the holy soul
in a sentence
who lived
about three years
Domitianus
an innocent soul
sleeps in peace
farewell
oh Sabina
she lived
eight years
eight months
and twenty-two days
mayest thou live
sweet in God
in Christ
died on the
calends of
September
Pompeianus
the innocent
who lived
six years
nine months
eight days
and four hours
he sleeps
in peace
to their
deserving son
Calpurnius
his parents
made this
he lived
five years
eight months
and ten days
and departed
in peace
on the
thirteenth
of June
unto the epitaph
of this child
said Marcellus
they have added
the symbols
of peace
and of glory
he pointed
to a child's tomb
upon the slab
of which
was engraved
a dove
and a laurel crown
together with
the following inscription
respectus
who lived
five years
and eight months
sleeps in peace
and this one
continued Marcellus
has a palm branch
the symbol
of victory
yes
said Honorius
the savior
has said
suffer little
children
to come
unto me
and he read
the following
inscription
Marcus
an innocent
boy
you have
already begun
to be among
the innocent
ones
how enduring
is such a
life to you
how gladly
will your
mother
the church
of God
receive you
returning
to this
world
let us
restrain
our groans
and cease
from weeping
their attention
was also
attracted
by epitaphs
over the
graves of
women
who had
been the
wives
of Christian
ministers
my wife
Laurentia
made me
this tomb
she was
ever suited
to my
disposition
venerable
and faithful
at length
disappointed
envy lies
crushed
the bishop
Leo
survived
his
eightieth
year
the place
of Basil
the presbyter
and his
Felicitas
they made
it for
themselves
once the
happy daughter
of the
presbyter
Gabinus
here lies
Susanna
joined
with her
father
in peace
Claudius
Adesianus
a lector
and Claudia
Felissima
his wife
I see
here
said
Marcellus
a larger
tomb
are two
buried
here
yes
this is
a
bisemum
and two
occupy
that cell
read the
inscription
the
bisemum
of
Sabinus
he made
it for
himself
during his
lifetime
in the
cemetery
of
Balbina
in the
new
crypt
sometimes
continued
Honorius
three are
buried in
the same
grave
in other
places
Marcellus
you will
see that
large numbers
are buried
for when
persecution
rages
it is not
always possible
to pay
to each
individual
the separate
attention
that is
required
yonder
is a
tablet
that
marks
the
burial
place
of
so
many
martyrs
whose
names
are
unknown
but
whose
memories
are
blessed
he
pointed
to a
slab
bearing
the
following
inscription
Marcella
and
five
hundred
and
fifty
martyrs
of
Christ
here
is a
longer
one
said
Marcellus
and
its
words
may
well
find
an
echo
in
the
hearts
of
us
all
with
deep
emotion
they
read
the
following
in
Christ
Alexander
is not
dead
but
lives
above
the
stars
and
his
body
rests
in
this
tomb
he
ended
his
life
under
the
emperor
Antonine
who
although
he
might
have
foreseen
that
great
benefit
would
result
from
his
services
rendered
unto
him
hatred
instead
of
favor
for
while
on
his
knees
and
about
to
sacrifice
unto
the
true
God
he
was
led
away
to
execution
oh
sad
times
in
which
even
among
sacred
rites
and prayers
not even
in
caverns
could
we
be
safe
what
can
be
more
wretched
than
such
a
life
and
what
than
such
a
death
where
they
cannot
be
buried
by
their
friends
and
relations
at
length
they
sparkle
in
heaven
he
has
scarcely
lived
who
has
lived
in
christian
times
this
said
honorius
is
the
resting
place
of
a
well
loved
brother
whose
memory
is
still
cherished
in
all
the
churches
around
this
tomb
we
shall
hold
the
agape
upon
the
anniversary
of
his
birthday
at
this
feast
the
barriers
of
different
classes
and
ranks
of
different
kindreds
and
tribes
and
tongues
of
people
are
all
broken
down
we
are
all
brethren
in
christ
jesus
for
we
remember
that
as
christ
loved
us
so
ought
we
also
to
love
one
another
in
this
walk
marcellus
had
ample
opportunity
to
witness
the
presence
of
that
fraternal
love
to
which
honorius
alluded
he
encountered
men
women
and
children
of
every
rank
and
of
every
age
men
who
had
filled
the
highest
stations
in
Rome
associated
in
friendly
intercourse
with
those
who
were
scarcely
above
the
level
of
slaves
those
who
had
once
been
cruel
and
relentless
persecutors
now
associated
in
pleasant
union
with
the
former
objects
of
their
hate
the
jewish
priest
released
from the
fetters
of
bigotry
and
stubborn
pride
walked
hand
in
hand
with
the
once
hated
gentile
the
greek
had
beheld
the
foolishness
of
the
gospel
transformed
into
infinite
wisdom
and the
contempt
which he
had
once
felt
for
the
followers
of
jesus
had
given
place
to
tender
affection
selfishness
and
ambition
haughtiness
and
envy
all
the
baser
passions
of
human
life
seem
to
have
fled
before
the
almighty
power
of
christian
love
the
religion
of
christ
blessed
influences
were
seen
here
as
they
might
not
be
witnessed
elsewhere
not
because
its
nature
or
its
power
had
been
changed
for
their
sakes
but
because
the
universal
persecution
which
pressed
on
all
alike
had
robbed
them
of
earthly
passions
cut
them
off
from
earthly
temptations
and
by
the
great
sympathy
of
common
suffering
had
forced
them
closer
to
one
another
the
worship
of the
one
true
god
said
honorius
differs
in
one
respect
from
all
false
worship
the
heathen
must
enter
into
his
temple
and
there
through
the
medium
of
the
priest
offers
up
his
prayers
and
his
sacrifice
but
for
us
christ
has
made
a
sacrifice
once
for
all
every
one
of
his
followers
can
now
approach
god
for
himself
for
each
one
is
made
through
jesus
a
king
and
a
priest
unto
god
to
us
then
it
is
a
matter
of
no
are
left
unto
us
or
whether
we
are
banished
from
them
out
of
the
sight
of
earth
heaven
is
the
throne
of
god
and
the
universe
is
his
temple
and
each
one
of
his
children
can
lift
up
his
voice
from
any
place
and
at
any
time
to
worship
the
father
marcellus
journey
extended
for
a
long
time
and
for
a
great
distance
prepared
as
he
was
to
find
a
great
extent
he
was
told
that
this
was
but
a
fraction
of
the
whole
extent
the
average
height
of
the
passage
ways
was
about
eight
feet
but
in
many
places
it
rose
to
twelve
or
fifteen
feet
then
the
frequent
chapels
and
rooms
which
had
been
formed
by
widening
the
arches
gave
greater
space
to
the
inhabitants
and
made
it
possible
for
them
to
live
and
move
in
greater
freedom
in
some
places
also
there
were
for
resort
but
not
for
living
the
presence
of
the
blessed
light
of
day
however
faint
was
pleasant
beyond
expression
and
served
in
some
slight
degree
to
mitigate
the
surrounding
gloom
Marcellus
saw
some
places
which
had
been
walled
up
forming
a
sudden
termination
to
the
passage
way
but
other
paths
branched
off
and
encircled
them
and
went
on
as
before
what
is
this
place
which
is
thus
enclosed
he
asked
it
is
a
Roman
tomb
said
Honorius
on
excavating
this
passage
the
workmen
struck
upon
it
so
they
stopped
and
walled
up
the
place
and
carried
on
their
excavation
around
it
it
was
not
from
the
fear
of
disturbing
the
tomb
but
because
in
death
no
less
than
in
life
the
Christian
desires
to
follow
the
command
of
his
lord
and
come
out
from
among
them
and
be
separate
persecution
rages
around
how long
shall
the
enemy
distress
us
such
are
the
cries
of
many
among
us
said
Honorius
but
it
is
wrong
to
complain
the
lord
has
been
good
to
his
people
throughout
the
empire
they
have
gone
on
for
many
generations
protected
by
the
laws
and
unmolested
true
we
have
had
terrible
persecutions
in
which
thousands
have
died
in
agony
but
these
again
have
passed
away
and
left
the
church
in
peace
all
the
persecutions
which
we
have
yet
received
have
served
only
to
purify
the
hearts
of
the
people
of
God
and
exalt
their
faith
he
knows
what
is
best
for
us
we
are
in
his
hands
and
he
will
give
us
no
more
than
we
can
bear
let
us
be
sober
and
watch
and
pray
oh
Marcellus
for
the
present
storm
tells
us
plainly
that
the
great
and
terrible
day
so
long
expected
things
every
hour
about
the
doctrine
of
God's
truth
and
the
experiences
of
his
people
the
sight
of
their
love
their
purity
their
fortitude
their
faith
sank
deeply
into
his
soul
the
experience
which he
too
had
felt
was
not
transient
every
new
sight
but
strengthened
his
desire
to
unite
himself
with
the
faiths
and
fortunes
of
the
people
of
God
accordingly
before
the
following
Lord's
day
he
was
baptized
in
the
name
morning
of
the
Lord's
day
he
sat
around
the
table
of
the
Lord
in
the
company
with
other
Christians
there
they
held
that
simple
and
affecting
ceremony
by which
the
Christians
showed
forth
the
death
of
Jesus
Honorius
offered
up
the
prayer
for
blessing
on
the
repast
and
for
the
first
time
Marcellus
partook
of
the
wine
and
the
bread
the
sacred
symbol
of
the
body
and
blood
of
his
dying
Lord
and
when
they
had
sung
a
hymn
they
went
out
chapter
seven
the
confession
of
faith
yea
and
all
that
will
live
godly
in
Christ
Jesus
shall
suffer
persecution
four
days
had
elapsed
since
the
young
soldier
had
left
his
chamber
eventful
days
they
had
been
to
him
days
full
of
infinite
importance
endless
wheel
or
woe
had
hung
upon
their
issue
but
the
search
of
this
earnest
soul
after
the
truth
had
not
been
in
vain
his
resolution
had
been
taken
on
the
one
side
lay
fame
honor
and
wealth
on
the
other
poverty
want
and
woe
yet
he
had
made
his
choice
and
turned
to
the
latter
without
a
moment's
hesitation
he
chose
rather
to
suffer
affliction
with the
people
of
God
than
to
enjoy
the
upon
his
return
he
visited
the
general
and
reported
himself
he
informed
him
that
he
had
been
among
the
Christians
that
he
could
not
execute
his
commission
and
was
willing
to
take
the
consequences
the
general
sternly
ordered
him
to
his
quarters
here
in
the
midst
of
deep
meditation
while
conjecturing
what
might
be
the
issue
of
all
of
this
he
was
interrupted
by
the
entrance
of
Lasoulas
his
friend
greeted
him
most
affectionately
but
was
evidently
full
of
anxiety
I
have
just
seen
the
general
said
he
who
sent
for
me
to
give
a
message
for
you
but
first
tell
me
what
is
this
that
you
have
done
Marcellus
then
related
everything
from
the
time
he
had
left
until
his
return
concealing
nothing
whatever
his
deep
earnestness
showed
how
strong
and
true
the
impression
was
that
had
been
made
upon
him
he
then
feeling
the
importance
of
the
step
I
was
taking
I
was
about
to
commit
an
act
of
virtual
treason
a
crime
which
can
only
be
punished
with
death
yet
I
could
do
nothing
else
he
received
me
graciously
for he
thought
that I
had
met
with
some
important
success
in
my
search
I
told
him
that
since
I
left
I
had
been
among
the
Christians
and
from
what
I
had
seen
of
them
I
had
been
forced
to
change
my
feelings
towards
them
I
had
thought
that
they
were
enemies
of
the
state
and
worthy
of
death
but
I
found
that
they
were
loyal
subjects
of
the
emperor
and
virtuous
men
I
could
never
use
my
sword
against
such
as
these
and
rather
than
do
so
I
would
give
it
up
a
soldier's
feelings
said
he
have
no
right
to
interfere
with
his
duties
but
my
duties
to
the
god
who
made
me
are
stronger
than
any
which
I
owe
to
man
has
your
sympathy
with
the
christians
made
you
mad
said
he
do
you
not
know
that
this
is
treason
I
bowed
and
said
that
I
would
take
the
consequences
rash
youth
he
cried
sternly
go
to
your
quarters
and
I
will
communicate
to
you
my
decision
and
so
I
came
here
at
once
and
have
been
here
ever
since
then
anxiously
awaiting
my
sentence
Lusoulis
had
listened
to the
whole
of
Marcellus's
recital
without
a word
or even
a gesture
an expression
of sad
surprise
upon his
face
told what
his
feelings
were
he
spoke
in a
mournful
tone
as
Marcellus
ended
and
what
that
sentence
must
be
you
surely
know
as
well
as
I
Roman
discipline
even
in
ordinary
times
can
never
be
trifled
with
but
now
the
feelings
of
the
government
are
excited
to an
unusual
degree
against
these
Christians
if you
persist
in your
present
course
you
must
fall
I
have
told
you
all
my
reasons
I
know
Marcellus
your
pure
and
sincere
nature
you
have
always
been
of
a
devout
mind
you
have
loved
the
noble
teachings
of
philosophy
can
you
not
satisfy
yourself
with
these
as
before
why
should
you
be
attracted
by
the
wretched
doctrine
of a
crucified
Jew
I
have
never
been
satisfied
with
the
philosophy
of
which
you
speak
you
yourself
know
that
there
is
nothing
certain
in
it
on
which
the
soul
may
trust
but
the
Christian
religion
is
the
truth
of
God
brought
down
by
himself
and
sanctified
by
his
own
death
you
have
thoroughly
explained
the
whole
Christian
creed
to
me
your
own
enthusiasm
has
made
it
appear
attractive
I
will
confess
and
if
all
its
followers
were
really
like
yourself
my
dear
Marcellus
it
might
be
adapted
to
bless
the
world
but
I
come
not
here
to
argue
upon
religion
I
come
here
to
speak
about
yourself
you
are
in
danger
my
dear
friend
your
station
your
honor
your
office
your
very
life
is
at
stake
consider
what
you
have
done
an
important
commission
was
entrusted
to
you
upon
the
execution
of
which
you
set
out
it
was
expected
that
you
and
inform
the
general
that
you
have
gone
over
to
the
enemy
that
you
are
one
of
them
in
heart
and
that
you
refuse
to
bear
arms
against
them
if
the
soldier
is
free
to
choose
whom
he
will
fight
what
becomes
of
discipline
he
must
obey
orders
am
I
right
you
are
the
the
question
for you
to
decide
is
not
whether
you
will
choose
philosophy
or
Christianity
but
whether
you
will
be
a
Christian
or
a
soldier
for
as
the
times
are
now
you
see
it
is
impossible
for
you
to
be
a
soldier
and
a
Christian
at
the
same
time
one
of
the
two
must
be
given
up
and
not
only
so
but
if
you
decide
upon
being
a
Christian
you
must
at
once
share
their
fate
for
no
distinction
can
be
made
in
favor
of
you
on
the
other
hand
if
you
continue
as
friends
who
are
willing
to
forget
you
you
have
warm
friends
who
are
willing
to
forget
your
great
offense
Marcellus
I
know
your
enthusiastic
nature
and I
have
pleaded
with
the
general
for
you
he
too
respects
you
for
your
soldierly
qualities
he
is
willing
to
forgive
you
under
certain
circumstances
what
are
they
the
most
merciful
of
all
conditions
let
the
past
four
days
be
forgotten
banish
them
from
your
memory
resume
duty
in
arresting
these
Christians
Lusoulis
said
Marcellus
rising
from
his
seat
with
folded
arms
I
love
you
as
a
friend
I
am
grateful
for
your
faithful
affection
never
can
I
forget
it
but
I
have
had
that
within
me
to
which
you
are
a
stranger
which
is
stronger
than
all
honours
of
state
it
is
the
love
of
God
for
this
I
am
ready
to
give
up
all
honour
rank
and
life
itself
my
decision
is
irrevocable
I
am
a
Christian
for
a
moment
Lusoulis
sat in
astonishment
and grief
looking at
his
friend
he
was
well
acquainted
with
his
resolute
soul
and
saw
with
pain
how
completely
his
persuasions
had
failed
at
length
he
spoke
again
he
used
every
argument
that
he
could
think
of
he
brought
forward
every
motive
that
might
influence
him
he
told
him
of
the
terrible
fate
that
vengeance
that
would
be
directed
against
him
but
all
his
words
were
completely
useless
at
length
he
rose
in
deep
sadness
Marcellus
he
said
you
tempt
fate
you
are
rushing
madly
upon
a
terrible
destiny
everything
that
fortune
can
bestow
is
before
you
but
you
turn
away
from
all
to
cast
your
lot
among
wretched
outcasts
I
have
done
the
duty
of
a
friend
in
trying
to
turn
you
from
your
folly
but
all
that
I
can
do
is
of
no
avail
I
have
brought
you
the
sentence
of
the
general
you
are
degraded
from
office
you
are
put
under
arrest
as a
Christian
tomorrow
you
will
be
seized
and
handed
over
to
punishment
but
many
hours
are
yet
before
you
and
I
may
still
have
the
mournful
satisfaction
of assisting
you
to
escape
fly
then
at
once
hasten
for
there
is
no
time
to
lose
there
is
only
one
place
in
the
world
where
you
can
be
secure
from
the
vengeance
of
Caesar
Marcellus
heard
in
silence
slowly
he
took
off
his
splendid
arms
and
laid
them
down
sadly
he
unfastened
his
gorgeous
armor
which
he
had
worn
so
proudly
he
stood
in
his
simple
tunic
before
his
friend
Lusulis
again
I
say
that
I
can
never
forget
your
faithful
friendship
would
we
were
flying
together
that
your
prayers
might
ascend
with
mine
to
him
whom
I
serve
but
enough
I
will
go
farewell
farewell
Marcellus
we may
never
meet
in
life
again
if
you
are
ever
in
want
or
peril
you
know
on
whom
you
can
rely
the
two
young
men
embraced
and
Marcellus
hastily
took
his
departure
he
walked
out
of
the
camp
and
onward
until
he
reached
the
forum
all
around
him
were
stately
marble
temples
and
columns
and
monuments
the
arch
of
titus
spanned
the
via
sacra
there
the
imperial
palace
reared
its
gigantic
form
on
high
rich
in
stately
architecture
in
glorious
adornments
of precious
marbles
and
glowing
in
golden
decorations
on
one
side
the
lofty
walls
of
the
coliseum
arose
beyond
the
stupendous
dome
of
the
temple
of
peace
and
on
the
other
the
capitoline
hill
upraised
its
historic
summit
crowned
with a
cluster
of
stately
temples
that
stood
out
in
sharp
relief
against
the
sky
to
to
this
he
directed
his
steps
and
ascended
the
steep
declivity
up
to
the
top
of
the
hill
from
the
summit
he
looked
around
upon
the
scene
the
place
itself
was
a
spacious
square
paved
with
marble
and
surrounded
with
lordly
temples
on
the
one
side
was
the
campus
martius
bounded
afar
onward
to
the
mediterranean
on
every
other
side
the
city
spread
its
unequaled
extent
crowding
to
the
narrow
walls
and
over
leaping
them
to
throw
out
its
radiating
streets
far
away
on
every
side
into
the
country
temples
and
columns
and
monuments
reared
their
lofty
heads
innumerable
statues
filled
the
streets
with a
population
of
sculptured
forms
fountains
dashed
into
the
air
chariots
rolled
through
the
streets
the
legions
of
Rome
marched
to
and
fro
in
military
array
and
on
every
side
surged
the
restless
tide
of
plain
extended
dotted
with
countless
villages
and
houses
and
palaces
rich
in
luxuriant
verdure
the
dwelling
place
of
peace
and
plenty
on
one
side
arose
the
blue
outline
of
the
apennines
crowned
with
snow
on
the
other
the
dark
waves
of
the
Mediterranean
washed
the
far
distant
shore
suddenly
Marcellus
was startled
by a
shout
he
turned
an
old
man
in
scant
clothing
with
emaciated
face
and
frenzied
gestulation
was
shouting
out
a
strain
of
fearful
denunciation
his
wild
glance
and
fierce
manner
showed
that
he
was
partly
insane
Babylon
the
great
is
fallen
is
fallen
and
is
become
the
habitation
of
devils
and
the
hold
of
every
foul
spirit
and
a
cage
of
every
unclean
and
hateful
bird
for
God
hath
remembered
her
iniquities
reward
her
even
as
she
rewarded
you
and
double
unto
her
double
according
to
her
works
how
much
hath
she
glorified
herself
and
lived
deliciously
therefore
shall
her
plagues
come
in
one
day
death
and
mourning
and
famine
and
she
shall
be
utterly
burned
with
fire
for
strong
is
the
Lord
God
who
judgeth
her
the
kings
of
the
earth
shall
bewail
and
lament
seeing
the
smoke
of
her
burning
standing
afar
off
for
fear
of
her
torment
crying
alas
alas
that
great
city
Babylon
that
mighty
hour
is
thy
judgment
come
the
merchants
of
the
earth
standing
afar
off
for
fear
of
her
torment
shall
weep
and
wail
crying
alas
alas
that
great
city
Babylon
she
was
clothed
in
fine
linen
and
purple
and
scarlet
and
decked
with
gold
and
precious
stones
and
pearls
for
in
one
hour
so
great
riches
is
come
to
naught
and
every
ship
master
and
the
company
and
ships
and
sailors
and
traitors
by
sea
shall
cry
when
they
see
the
smoke
of
her
burning
standing
afar
off
for
fear
of
her
torment
what
city
is
like
unto
that
great
city
and
casting
dust
on
their
head
they
shall
cry
weeping
and
wailing
alas
alas
that
great
city
wherein
were
made
rich
all
that
had
ships
at
sea
for
in
one
hour
is
she
brought
to
naught
rejoice
over
her
thou
heaven
and
ye
holy
apostles
and
prophets
for
god
hath
avenged
you
on
her
a
vast
crowd
collected
around
him
in
amazement
but
scarcely
had
he
ceased
when
some
soldiers
appeared
and
led
him
away
doubtless
it is
some
poor
christian
whose
brain
has
been
turned
by
suffering
thought
marcellus
as
the
man
was
led
away
he
still
shouted
out
his
terrific
denunciations
and a
great
crowd
followed
yelling
and
deriding
soon
the noise
died
there
is
no
time
to
lose
i
must
go
said
marcellus
and
he
turned
away
chapter
eight
life
in
the
catacombs
oh
dark
dark
dark
amid
the
blaze
of
noon
irrevocably
dark
total
eclipse
without
all
hope
of
day
upon
his
return
to
the
catacombs
he
was
welcomed
with
tears
of
joy
most
eagerly
they
listened
to
the
account
of
his
interview
with
his
superiors
and
while
they
sympathized
with
his
troubles
they
rejoiced
that
he
had
been
found
worthy
to
suffer
for
christ
amid
these
new
scenes
he
learned
more
of
the
truth
every
day
and
saw
what
its
followers
endured
life
in
the
catacombs
opened
around
him
with
all
its
wondrous
variety
the
vast
numbers
who
dwelt
below
were
supplied
with
night
the
most
resolute
and
daring
of
the
men
volunteered
for
this
dangerous
task
sometimes
also
women
and
even
boys
went
forth
upon
this
errand
and
the
lad
polio
was
the
most
acute
and
successful
of
all
these
amid
the
vast
population
of
Rome
it
was
not
difficult
to
pass
unnoticed
and
consequently
the
supply
was
well
kept
up
yet
sometimes
the
journey
met
with
a
fatal
termination
and
the
bold
adventurers
supply
in
the
passage
ways
of
the
lowermost
tier
wells
and
fountains
here
supplied
sufficient
for
all
their
wants
at
night
too
were
made
the
most
mournful
expeditions
of
all
these
were
in
search
of
the
dead
which
had
been
torn
by
the
wild
beasts
or
burned
at
the
stake
these
loved
remains
were
obtained
at
the
greatest
risk
and
brought
down
amid
a
thousand
dangers
then
the
friends
of
the
lost
would
perform
the
funeral
service
and
hold
the
burial
feast
after
this
they
would
deposit
their
remains
in
the
narrow
cell
and
close
the
place
up
with
a
marble
tablet
graven
with
the
name
of
the
occupant
the
ancient
Christian
inspired
by
the
glorious
doctrine
of
the
resurrection
looked
forward
with
ardent
hope
to
the
time
when
corruption
should
put
on
incorruption
and
the
mortal
immortality
he
was
unwilling
that
the
body
which
so
sublime
a
destiny
awaited
should
be
reduced
to
ashes
and
thought
that
even
the
sacred
funeral
flames
were
a
dishonor
to
that
temple
of
God
which
had
been
so
highly
favored
of
heaven
so
the
cherished
bodies
of
the
dead
were
brought
here
out
of
the
sight
of
man
where
no
irreverent
hand
might
disturb
the
solemn
stillness
of
their
last
repose
to
lie
until
the
last
trump
should
give
that
summons
for
which
the
primitive
church
waited
so
eagerly
in
daily
expectation
in
the
city
above
the
Christian
religion
had
been
increasing
for
successive
generations
and
during
all
this
time
the
dead
had
been
coming
here
in
ever
increasing
numbers
so
that
now
the
catacombs
formed
a
vast
city
of
the
dead
whose
silent
population
slumbered
in
endless
ranges
rank
above
rank
waiting
till
the
wakeful
trump
of
doom
should
thunder
through
the
deep
in
many
places
the
arches
had
been
knocked
away
and
the
roof
heightened
so
as
to
form
rooms
none
of
them
were
a
very
great
size
but
they
formed
rooms
where
the
fugitives
might
meet
in
larger
companies
and
breathe
more
freely
here
they
passed
much
of
the
time
and
here
too
they
had
their
religious
services
the
nature
of
the
times
in
which
they
lived
will
explain
their
situation
the
simple
virtues
of
the
old
republic
had
passed
away
and
freedom
had
taken
her
everlasting
flight
corruption
had
moved
over
the
empire
and
subdued
everything
beneath
its
numbing
influence
plots
rebellions
and
treasons
cursed
the
state
by
turns
but
the
fallen
people
stood
by
in
silence
they
saw
their
bravest
suffer
their
noblest
die
all
unmoved
the
generous
heart
the soul
of
fire
awakened
no more
only
the
basest
passions
aroused
their
degenerate
feelings
into
such
a
state
as
this
the
truth
came
boldly
and
through
such
enemies
as
these
it
had
to
fight
its
way
over
such
obstacles
to
make
it
slow
but
sure
progress
they
who
enlisted
under
her
banner
had
no
life
of
ease
before
them
her
trumpet
gave
forth
no
uncertain
sound
the
conflict
was
stern
and
involved
name
and
fame
and
fortune
and
friends
and
life
all
that
was
most
dear
to
man
ages
rolled
on
if
the
followers
of
truth
increased
in
number
so
also
did
vice
intensify
her
power
and
her
malignity
the
people
sank
into
deeper
corruption
the
state
drifted
on
to
more
certain
ruin
then
arose
those
terrible
persecutions
which
aimed
to
obliterate
from
the
earth
the
last
vestige
of
Christianity
a
terrible
ordeal
awaited
the
Christian
if he
resisted
to
those
who
followed
her
the
order
of
truth
was
inexorable
and
when
a
decision
was
made
it
was
a
final
one
to
make
that
decision
for
Christianity
was
often
to
accept
instant
death
or
else
to
be
driven
from
the
city
banished
from
the
joys
of
home
and
from
the
light
of
day
the
hearts
of
the
Romans
were
hardened
and
their
eyes
blinded
neither
childhood's
innocence
nor
womanly
purity
nor
love
triumphant
over
death
could
touch
them
or
move
them
to
pity
they
did
not
see
the
black
cloud
of
desolation
that
hovered
over
the
doomed
empire
nor
know
that
from
its
fury
those
whom
they
persecuted
alone
could
save
them
yet
in
that
reign
of
terror
the
catacombs
opened
before
the
Christian
like
a
city
of
refuge
here
lay
the
bones
of
their
fathers
who
from
generation
to
generation
had
fought
for
the
truth
and
their
worn
bodies
waited
here
for
the
resurrection
morn
here
they
brought
their
relatives
as
one
by
one
they
had
left
them
and
gone
on
high
here
the
son
had
borne
the
body
of
his
aged
mother
and
the
parent
had
seen
his
child
committed
to
the
tomb
here
they
had
carried
the
mangled
remains
of
those
who
had
been
torn
to
pieces
by
the
wild
beasts
of
side
out
their
lives
amid
the
lingering
agonies
of
death
by
crucifixion
every
christian
had
some
friend
or
relative
lying
here
in
death
the
very
ground
was
sanctified
the
very
air
hallowed
it
was
not
strange
that
they
should
seek
for
safety
in
such
a
place
moreover
in
these
subterranean
abodes
they
found
their
only
place
of
refuge
from
persecution
they
could
not
seek
foreign
countries
nor
fly
beyond
the
sea
because
for
them
there
were
no
countries
of
refuge
and
no
lands
beyond
the
sea
held
out
a
hope
the
imperial
power
of
rome
grasped
the
civilized
world
in
its
mighty
embrace
her
tremendous
police
system
extended
through
all
lands
and
none
might
escape
her
wrath
so
resistless
was
this
power
that
from
the
highest
noble
down
to
the
meanest
slave
all
were
subject
to
it
the
dethroned
emperor
could not
escape
her
vengeance
nor
was
such
an
escape
even
hoped
for
when
Nero
fell
he
could
only
go
and
kill
himself
in
a
neighboring
villa
yet
here
amid
these
infinite
labyrinths
even
the
power
of
rome
was
unavailing
and
her
baffled
emissaries
faltered
at the
very
entrance
here
then
the
persecuted
christians
tarried
and their
great numbers
peopled
these
paths
and grottoes
by day
assembling
to exchange
words of
cheer
and comfort
or to
bewail
the death
of some
new
martyr
by night
sending
forth
the boldest
among them
like a
forlorn hope
to learn
tidings
of the
upper
world
or to
bring
down
the
blood
stained
bodies
of some
new
victims
through
the
different
persecutions
they lived
here so
secure
that although
millions
perished
throughout
the empire
the power
of christianity
at rome
was but
slightly
shaken
their safety
was secured
and life
preserved
but on
what terms
for what
is life
without light
or what
is the
safety
of the
body
in gloom
that
depresses
the soul
the physical
nature
of man
shrinks
from such
a fate
and his
delicate
organization
is speedily
aware
of the
lack
of that
subtle
renovating
principle
which is
connected
with light
only
one
by one
the functions
of the
body
lose
their
tone
and
energy
this
weakening
of the
body
affects
the
mind
predisposing
it to
gloom
apprehension
doubt
and despair
it is
greater
honor
for a
man
to be
true
and
steadfast
under
such
circumstances
than to
have died
a heroic
death
in the
arena
or to
have
perished
unflinchingly
at the
stake
here
where
there
closed
about
these
captives
the
thickest
shades
of
darkness
they
encountered
their
sorest
trial
fortitude
under
the
persecution
itself
was
admirable
but
against
the
persecution
blended
with
such
horrors
as
these
it
became
sublime
the
cold
blast
that
forever
drifted
through
these
labyrinths
chilled
them
but
brought
no
pure
air
from
above
the
floors
the
walls
the
roofs
were
covered
over
with
the
foul
deposits
of
damp
vapors
that
forever
hung
around
the
atmosphere
was
thick
with
impure
exhalations
and
poisonous
miasma
the
dense
smoke
from
the
ever
burning
torches
might
have
mitigated
the
noxious
gases
but
it
oppressed
the
dwellers
here
with
its
blinding
and
suffocating
influence
yet
amid
all these
accumulated
horrors
the soul
of the
martyrs
stood up
unconquered
the
Roman
the
Roman spirit
rises up
to
grander
proportions
than
were
ever
attained
in
the
proudest
days
of
the
old
republic
the
fortitude
of
Regulus
the
devotion
of
Curtius
the
constancy
of
Brutus
were
here
surpassed
not
by
the
strong
man
but
by
the
tender
virgin
and
the
weak
child
thus
scorning
to
yield
the
fiercest
power
of
persecution
these
men
went
forth
the
good
the
pure
in
heart
the
brave
the
noble
for
then
death
had
no
terrors
nor
that
appalling
life
in
death
which
they
were
compelled
to
endure
here
in
the
dismal
regions
of
the
dead
they
knew
what
was
before
them
and
they
accepted
it
all
willingly
they
descended
here
carrying
with
them
all
that
was
most
precious
to
the
soul
of
man
and
they
endured
all
this
for
the
great
love
wherewith
they
were
loved
the
constant
efforts
which
they
made
to
diminish
the
gloom
of
their
abodes
were
visible
all
around
in
the
ancient
world
art
was
cultivated
more
universally
than
in
the
modern
wherever
any
large
number
of
men
was
collected
a
large
proportion
had
the
taste
and
the
talent
for
art
when
the
Christians
peopled
the
catacombs
the
artist
was
here
too
and
his
art
was
not
unemployed
in
these
chapels
which
to
the
population
here
were
like
what
public
squares
are
to
the
inhabitants
of
a
city
every
effort
was
made
to
lessen
the
surrounding
cheerlessness
so
the
walls
were
in
some
places
covered
over
with
white
stucco
and
in
others
these
again
were
adorned
with
pictures
not
of
deified
mortals
for
idolatrous
worship
but
of
those
grand
old
heroes
of
the
truth
who
in
former
generations
had
through
faith
subdued
kingdoms
wrought
righteousness
obtained
promises
stopped
the mouths
of lions
quenched
the
violence
of
fire
escaped
the
edge
of
the
sword
out
of
weakness
were
made
strong
waxed
valiant
in
fight
turned
to
flight
the
armies
of
the
aliens
if
in
the
hour
of
bitter
anguish
they
sought
for
scenes
or
thoughts
that
might
relieve
their
souls
and
inspire
them
with
fresh
strength
for
the
future
they
could
have
found
no
other
objects
to
look
upon
so
strong
to
encourage
so
mighty
to
console
such
were
the
decorations
at
the
chapels
the
only
furniture
which
they
contained
was
a
simple
wooden
table
upon
which
they
placed
the
bread
and
wine
of
the
sacrament
the
symbols
of
the
body
and
blood
of
their
dying
lord
christianity
had
struggled
along
and it
was a
struggle
with
corruption
it
will
not
be
thought
strange
then
if
the
church
contracted
some
marks
of
a
too
close
contact
with
her
foe
or
if
she
carried
some
of
them
down
to
her
place
of
refuge
yet
if
they
had
some
variations
from
the
apostolic
model
these
were
so
trifling
that
they
might
be
overlooked
altogether
were it
not
that
they
opened
the
way
to
greater
ones
still
the
essential
doctrines
of
christianity
knew
no
pollution
no
change
the
guilt
of
man
the
mercy
of
the
father
the
atonement
of
the
son
the
inspiration
of
the
holy
spirit
salvation
through
faith
in
the
redeemer
all
these
foundations
of
truth
were
cherished
with
a
fervor
and an
energy
to which
no
language
can
do
justice
theirs
was that
heavenly
hope
the
anchor
of
the
soul
so
strong
and
so
secure
that
the
storm
of
an
empire's
wrath
failed
to
drive
them
from
the
rock
of
ages
where
they
were
sheltered
theirs
was that
lofty
faith
which
upheld
them
through
the
sorest
trials
a
sincere
trust
in
god
that
could
not
doubt
there
was
no
need
here
either
of
discussions
about
the
theological
term
faith
or
of
formal
prayers
that
regarded
it
as
some
immaterial
essence
faith
with
them
was
everything
it
was
the
very
breath
of
life
so
true
that
it
upheld
them
in
the
hour
of
cruel
sacrifices
so
lasting
that
even
when it
seemed
that
all
the
followers
of
christ
had
vanished
from
the
earth
they
could
still
look
up
trustfully
and
wait
theirs
was
that
love
which
christ
when
on
earth
defined
as
compromising
all
the
law
and
the
prophets
sectarian
strife
denominational
bitterness
were
unknown
they
had
a
great
general
foe
to
fight
how
could
they
quarrel
with
one
another
here
arose
love
to
man
which
knew
no
distinction
of
race
or
class
but
embraced
all
in
its
immense
circumference
so that
one
could
lay
down
his
life
for
his
brother
here
arose
to
God
which
stopped
not
at
the
sacrifice
of
life
itself
the
persecutions
which
raged
around
them
gave
them
all
that
zeal
faith
and
love
which
glowed
so
brightly
amid
the
darkness
of
the
age
it
confined
their
numbers
to
the
true
and
the
sincere
it
was
the
antidote
to
hypocrisy
it
gave
to
the
brave
the
most
daring
heroism
and
inspired
the
faint
hearted
with
the
courage
of
despair
they
lived
in
a
time
when
to
be
a
Christian
was
to
risk
one's
life
they
did
not
think
but
boldly
proclaimed
their
faith
and
accepted
the
consequences
they
drew
a
broad
line
between
themselves
and
the
heathen
and
stood
manfully
on
their
own
side
to
utter
a
few
words
to
perform
a
simple
act
could
often
save
from
death
but
the
tongue
refused
to
speak
the
formula
and
the
stubborn
hand
refused
to
pour
the
libation
the
vital
doctrines
of
Christianity
met
from
them
far
more
than
a
mere
intellectual
response
Christ
himself
was
not
to
them
an
idea
a
thought
but
a
real
existence
the
life
of
Jesus
upon
earth
was
to
them
a
living
truth
they
accepted
it
as
a
proper
example
for
every
man
his
gentleness
humility
patience
and
meekness
they
believed
were
offered
for
imitation
nor
did
they
ever
separate
the
ideal
Christian
from
the
real
they
thought
that
a
man's
religion
consisted
as
much
in
the
life
as
in
the
sentiment
and
had
not
learned
to
separate
experimental
from
practical
Christianity
to
them
the
death
of
Christ
was
a
great
event
to
which
all
others
were
but
secondary
that
he
died
in
very
deed
and
for
the
sons
of
men
none
could
understand
better
than
they
among
their
own
brethren
they
could
think
of
many
a
one
who
had
hung
upon
the
cross
for
his
brethren
or
died
at
the
stake
for
his
God
they
took
up
the
cross
and
followed
Christ
bearing
the
reproach
that
cross
and
that
reproach
were
not
figurative
witness
these
gloomy
labyrinths
fit
home
for
the
dead
names
of
martyrs
those
words
of
despair
the
walls
carry
down
to
later
ages
the
words
of
grief
of
lamentation
and
of
ever
changing
feeling
which
were
marked
upon
them
during
successive
ages
by
those
who
were
banished
to
these
catacombs
they
carry
down
their
mournful
story
to
future
times
and
bring
to
imagination
the
forms
the
feelings
and
the
deeds
of
those
who
are
imprisoned
here
as
the
forms
of
life
are
taken
upon
the
plates
of
the
camera
so
has
the
great
voice
once
forced
out
by
suffering
from
the
very
soul
of
the
martyr
become
stamped
upon
the
wall
humble
witnesses
of
the
truth
poor
despised
forsaken
in vain
their
calls
for
mercy
went
forth
to
the
ears
of
man
they
were
stifled
in
the
blood
of
the
slaughtered
and
the
smoke
of
sacrifice
yet
where
their
own
race
only
answered
more
merciful
they
heard
their
sighs
they
took
them
to
their
bosoms
and
so
their
cries
of
suffering
lived
here
treasured
up
and
graven
in
the
rock
forever
the
conversion
of
Marcellus
to
Christianity
had
been
sudden
yet
such
quick
transitions
from
error
to
truth
were
not
unfrequent
he
had
tried
the
highest
forms
of
pagan
superstition
and
heathen
philosophy
but
had
found
them
wanting
and
as
soon
as
Christianity
appeared
before
him
he
beheld
all
that
he
desired
it
possessed
exactly
what
was
needed
to
satisfy
the
cravings
of
his
soul
and
fill
his
empty
heart
with
the
fullness
of
peace
and
if
the
transition
was
quick
it
was
nonetheless
thorough
having
opened
his
eyes
and
seen
the
light
of
the
sun
of
righteousness
he
could
not
close
them
rather
than
relapse
into
his
former
blindness
he
gladly
welcomed
his
share
in
preaching
of
the
gospel
throughout
the
heathen
world
there
were
countless
souls
who
felt
as
Marcellus
did
and
had
gone
through
the
same
experiences
it
needed
only
the
preaching
of
the
truth
accompanied
by
the
power
of
the
Holy
Spirit
to
open
their
eyes
and
bring
them
to
see
the
light
apart
from
divine
influence
over
human
reason
we
see
here
a
cause
for
the
rapid
spread
of
Christianity
living
and
moving
and
conversing
with
his
new
brethren
Marcellus
soon
began
to
enter
into
all
their
hopes
and
fears
and
joys
their
faith
and
trust
communicated
themselves
to
his
heart
and
all
the
glorious
expectations
which
sustained
them
became
the
solace
of
his
own
soul
the
blessed
word
of
life
became
his
constant
study
and
delight
and
all
its
teachings
found
him
an
ardent
disciple
meetings
for
prayer
and
praise
were
frequent
throughout
the
catacombs
cut
off
from
ordinary
occupations
of
worldly
business
they
were
thrown
entirely
upon
other
and
higher
pursuits
deprived
of the
opportunity
to make
efforts
for the
support
of the
body
they
were
forced
to
make
their
chief
business
the
care
of
the
soul
they
gained
what
they
sought
earth
with
its
cares
its
allurements
and
its
thousand
attractions
lost
their
thoughts
and
their
language
were
of
the
kingdom
they
loved
to
talk
of
the
joy
that
awaited
those
who
continued
faithful
unto
death
to
converse
upon
those
departed
brethren
who
to
them
were
not
lost
but
gone
before
to
anticipate
the
moment
when
their
own
time
should
come
above
all
they
looked
every
day
for
that
great
final
summons
which
should
rouse
the
quick
and
dead
and
arraign
all
before
the
was
not
left
to
the
silent
slumber
of
the
dead
but
filled
with
thousands
of
the
living
wan
and
pale
and
oppressed
they
found
even
amid
this
darkness
a
better
fate
than
that
which
might
await
them
above
busy
life
animated
the
haunts
of
the
dead
the
pathways
rang
to
the
sound
of
human
voices
the
light
of
truth
and
virtue
banished
from
the
upper
air
burned
anew
with
a purer
radiance
amid
this
subterranean
gloom
the
tender
greetings
of
affection
of
friendship
of
kinship
and
of
love
arose
amid
the
moldering
remains
of
the
departed
here
the
tear
of
grief
mingled
with
the
blood
of
the
martyr
and
the
hand
of
affection
wrapped
his
pale
limbs
in
the
shroud
here
in
these
grottoes
the
heroic
soul
rose
up
superior
to
sorrow
hope
and
faith
smiled
exultingly
and
pointed
to
the
light
of
immortal
life
and
the
voice
of
praise
breathed
forth
from
the
lips
of
the
mourner
chapter
nine
the
persecution
ye
have
need
of
patience
that
after
ye
have
done
the
will
of
god
ye
might
receive
the
praise
the
persecution
raged
with
greater
fury
in
the
few
weeks
that
passed
since
Marcellus
had
lived
here
great
numbers
had
sought
refuge
in
this
retreat
never
before
had
so
many
congregated
here
generally
the
authorities
had
been
content
with
the
more
conspicuous
christians
and
the
fugitives
to
the
catacombs
were
consequently
composed
of
this
class
it
was
a
severe
persecution
indeed
which
embraced
all
and
such
indiscriminate
rage
had been
shown
only
under
a few
emperors
but
now
there
was
no
distinction
of
class
or
station
the
humblest
follower
as well
as the
highest
teacher
was
hurried
away
to
death
until
this
time
the
communication
with
the
city
was
comparatively
easy
for the
poor
christians
above
ground
never
neglected
those
below
or
forgot
their
wants
provisions
and
assistance
of all
kinds
were
readily
obtained
but
now
the
very
ones
on
whom
the
fugitives
relied
for
help
were
themselves
driven
out
to
share
their
fate
and
become
the
partakers
instead
of the
bestowers
of
charity
still
their
situation
was
not
desperate
there
were
many
left
in
rome
who
loved
them
and
assisted
them
although
they
were
not
christians
in
every
great
movement
there
will
be
an
immense
class
composed
of
neutrals
who
either
from
interest
or
indifference
remain
unmoved
these
people
will
invariably
join
the
strongest
side
and
where
danger
threatens
will
evade
it
by
any
concessions
such
was
the
condition
of
large
numbers
in
rome
they
had
friends
and
relatives
among
the
christians
whom
they
loved
and
for
whom
they
felt
sympathy
they
were
always
ready
to
assist
them
but
had
too
much
regard
for
their
own
safety
to
cast
in
their
lot
with
them
they
attended
the
temples
and
assisted
at
the
worship
of
the
heathen
gods
as
before
and
were
nominally
adherents
of
the
old
superstition
upon
these
now
the
Christians
were
forced
to
depend
for
the
necessities
of
life
the
expeditions
to
the
city
were
now
accompanied
with
greater
danger
and
only
the
boldest
dared
to
venture
such
however
was
the
contempt
of
danger
and
death
with
which
they
were
inspired
that
there
was
never
any
scarcity
of
men
for
this
perilous
duty
to
this
task
Marcellus
offered
himself
glad
that
he
could
in
any
way
do
good
to
his
brethren
his
fearlessness
and
acuteness
which
had
formerly
raised
him
so
high
as
a
soldier
now
made
him
conspicuous
for
success
in
this
new
pursuit
numbers
were
destroyed
every
day
their
bodies
were
sought
for
and
carried
away
by
the
Christians
for
purposes
of
burial
this
was
not
very
difficult
to
accomplish
since
it
relieved
the
authorities
of
the
trouble
of
burning
or
burying
the
corpses
one
day
tidings
came
to
the
community
beneath
the
death
Marcellus
and
another
Christian
went
forth
to
obtain
their
bodies
the
boy
Polio
also
went
with
them
to
be
useful
in
case
of
need
it
was
dusk
when
they
entered
the
city
gate
and
darkness
came
rapidly
on
soon
however
the
moon
arose
and
illumined
the
scene
they
threaded
their
way
through
the
dark
streets
and
at
length
came
to
the
Colosseum
the
place
of
martyrdom
for
so
many
of
their
companions
its
dark
form
towered
up
grandly
before
them
vast
and
gloomy
and
stern
as
the
imperial
power
that
reared
it
crowds
of
keepers
and
guards
and
gladiators
were
within
the
iron
gates
where
the
vaulted
passageways
were
illuminated
with
the
glare
of
torches
the
keepers
knew
their
errand
and
rudely
ordered
them
to
follow
they
led
them
on
till
they
came
to
the
arena
here
lay
a
number
day
they
were
fearfully
mangled
some
indeed
were
scarcely
distinguishable
as
human
beings
after
a
long
search
they
found
the
two
whom
they
sought
their
bodies
were
then
placed
in
large
sacks
in
which
they
prepared
to
carry
them
away
Marcellus
looked
in
upon
the
scene
all
around
him
rose
the
massive
walls
ascending
by
many
terraces
back
to
the
outer
circle
its
black
form
seemed
to
shut
him
in
with
how
long
will
it
be
he
thought
before
I
too
shall
take
my
place
here
and
lay
down
my
life
for
my
savior
when
that
time
comes
shall
I
be
true
lord
jesus
in
that
hour
sustain
me
the
moon
had
not
yet
risen
high
enough
to
shine
into
the
arena
within
it
was
dark
and
forbidding
the
search
had
been
made
with
torches
obtained
from
the
keepers
at
this
moment
Marcellus
with
startling
distinctness
and
were
heard
high
above
the
rude
clamor
of
the
keepers
now
is
come
salvation
and
strength
and
the
kingdom
of
our
god
and
the
power
of
his
christ
for
the
accuser
of
our
brethren
is
cast
down
which
accused
them
before
our
god
night
and
day
and
they
overcame
him
by
the
blood
of
the
lamb
and
by
the
word
of
his
testimony
and
they
loved
not
their
do
not
notice
him
said
his
companion
it
is
brother
sinna
his
griefs
have
made
him
mad
his
only
son
was
burned
at
the
stake
in
the
beginning
of
the
persecution
and
since
then
he
has
gone
about
the
city
denouncing
woe
hitherto
they
have
let
him
alone
but
now
at
last
they
have
seized
him
and
is
he
a
prisoner
here
again
the
voice
of
sinna
rose
fearfully
menacingly
and
terribly
how
long
oh
lord
holy
and
true
dost
thou
not
avenge
our
blood
on
them
that
dwell
upon
the
earth
this
then
is
the
man
that
i
heard
in
the
capital
yes
he
has
been
all
through
the
city
and
even
in
the
palace
uttering
his
cry
let
us
go
they
took
their
sacks
and
started
for
the
gates
after
a
short
delay
they
were
allowed
to
pass
as
they
went
Babylon
the
great
is
fallen
is
fallen
and
is
become
the
habitation
of
devils
and
the
hold
of
every
foul
spirit
and
the
cage
of
every
unclean
and
hateful
bird
come
ye
out
of
her
my
people
none
of
them
spoke
until
they
had
reached
a
safe
distance
from
the
coliseum
i
felt
afraid
said
marcellus
that
we
should
be
kept
in
there
your
fears
were
reasonable
said
the
other
any
sudden
whim
of
the
keepers
might
be
our
doom
but
this
we
must
be
prepared
for
in
times
like
this
we
must
be
ready
to
meet
death
at
any
moment
what
says
our
lord
be
ye
also
ready
we
must
be
able
to
say
when
the
time
comes
i
am
now
ready
to
be
offered
yes
said
marcellus
our
lord
has
told
us
what
we
will
have
in
this
world
ye
shall
have
so
through
him
said
marcellus
we
can
come
off
more
than
conquerors
over
death
the
afflictions
of
this
present
time
are
not
worthy
to
be
compared
to
the
glory
that
shall
be
revealed
to
us
thus
they
solaced
themselves
with
the
promises
of
that
blessed
word
of
life
which
in
all
ages
and
under
all
circumstances
can
give
such
heavenly
consolation
bearing
their
burdens
they
finally
reached
their
destination
in
safety
thankful
marcellus
went up
for
provisions
this
time
he
was
alone
he
went
to
the
house
of
a
man
who
was
friendly
to
them
and
had
been
of
much
assistance
it
was
outside
of
the
walls
in
the
suburb
nearest
the
appian
way
after
obtaining
the
requisite
supply
he
began
to
inquire
after
the
news
the
news
is
bad
for
you
said
the
man
one
of
the
praetorian
officers
was
recently
converted
to
after
the
christians
they
are
catching
some
every
day
no
man
is
too
poor
to
be
seized
in
these
days
ah
do
you
know
the
name
of
this
praetorian
officer
who
is
seeking
the
christians
lesulis
lesulis
cried
marcellus
how
strange
he
is
said
to
be
a
man
of
great
skill
and
energy
i
have
heard
of
him
this
is
indeed
bad
news
for
the
christians
the
conversion
of
the
other
praetorian
officer
has
greatly
enraged
the
emperor
a
price
is
now
set
upon
his
head
if
you
chance
to
see
him
or
be
in
his
way
friend
you
had
better
let
him
know
they
say
he
is
in
the
catacombs
he
must
be
there
there
is
no
other
place
of
safety
these
are
indeed
terrible
times
you
have
need
to
be
cautious
they
cannot
kill
me
more
than
once
said
marcellus
ah
you
christians
have
wonderful
fortitude
i admire
your
bravery
yet
still
i think
you
might
conform
outwardly
to
the
emperor's
decree
why
should
you
rush
so
madly
upon
death
our
redeemer
died
for
us
we
are
ready
to
die
for
him
and
since
he
died
for
his
people
we
also
are
willing
to
imitate
him
and
lay
down
our
lives
for
our
brethren
you
are
wonderful
people
said
the
man
raising
his
hands
marcellus
now
bade
him
farewell
and
departed
with
his
load
the
news
which
he
had
just
heard
filled
his
mind
so
Lusoulis
has
taken
my
place
thought
he
I
wonder
if
he
has
turned
against
me
does
he
now
think
of
me
as
his
friend
marcellus
or
only
as
a
christian
I
may
soon
find
out
it
would
be
strange
indeed
if
I
should
fall
into
his
hands
yet
if
I
am
captured
it
will
probably
be
by
him
yet
if
I
am
captured
it
will
probably
be
by
him
yet
it
is
his
duty
as
a
soldier
and
why
he
can
only
treat
me
as
an
enemy
of
the
state
he
may
pity
or
love
me
in
his
heart
yet
he
must
not
shrink
from
his
duty
if
a
price
is
put
on
my
head
they
will
redouble
their
efforts
for
me
my
time
I
believe
is
at
hand
let
me
be
prepared
for
it
with
such
thoughts
as
these
he
walked
down
the
European
way
he
was
wrapped
up
in
his
own
meditations
and
did
not
see
a
crowd
of
people
that
had
gathered
at
a
corner
of
a
street
until
he
was
among
them
then
he
suddenly
found
himself
stopped
ho
friend
cried
a rude
voice
not
so
fast
who
are
you
and
where
are
you
going
away
cried
Marcellus
in a
tone
of
command
natural
to
one
who
has
ruled
over
men
and
he
motioned
the
man
aside
the
crowd
were
awestruck
by his
authoritative
tone
and
imperious
manner
but
their
spokesman
showed
more
courage
tell
us
who
you
are
or
you
shall
not
pass
fellow
cried
Marcellus
stand
aside
do
you
not
know
me
I
am
a
praetorian
at
that
dreaded
name
the
crowd
quickly
opened
and
Marcellus
passed
through
it
but
scarcely
had
he
moved
five
paces
away
than
a
voice
exclaimed
seize
him
it
is
the
Christian
Marcellus
a
shout
arose
from
the
crowd
Marcellus
needed
no
further
warning
dropping
his
load
he
started
off
down
a
side
street
toward
the
Tiber
the
whole
crowd
pursued
it
was
a
race
for
life
and
death
but
Marcellus
had
been
trained
to
every
athletic
sport
and
increased
the
distance
between
himself
and
his
pursuers
at
last
he
reached
the
Tiber
and
leaping
in
he
swam
to
the
opposite
side
the
pursuers
reached
the
river's
bank
but
followed
no
further
chapter
ten
the
arrest
the
trial
of
your
faith
worketh
patience
honorius
was seated
in the
chapel
with one
or two
others
among
whom
was
the
lady
cecilia
the
feeble
rays
of a
single
lamp
but
faintly
illuminated
the
scene
they
were
silent
and
sad
a
deeper
melancholy
than
usual
rested
upon
them
around
them
was
the
sound
of
footsteps
and
of
voices
and
a
confused
murmur
of
life
suddenly
a
quick
step
was
heard
and
marcellus
entered
the
occupants
of
the
chapel
sprang
up
with
cries
of
joy
where
is
palio
cried
cecilia
eagerly
i
have
not
seen
him
said
marcellus
not
seen
him
said
cecilia
and
she
fell
back
upon
her
seat
why
is
he
beyond
his
time
he
ought
to
have
returned
six
hours
ago
and
i
am
sick
with
anxiety
oh
there
is
no
danger
said
marcellus
soothingly
he
can
take
care
of
himself
he
tried
to
pass
it
off
with
a
careless
tone
but
his
looks
belied
his
words
no
no
danger
said
cecilia
alas
we
know
too
well
what
new
dangers
there
are
never
has
it
been
so
dangerous
as
now
what
has
delayed
you
marcellus
we
have
begun
we
had
begun
to
give
you
up
i
was
stopped
near
the
via
alba
said
marcellus
i
dropped
my
load
and
ran
to
the
river
the
crowd
followed
but
i
jumped
into
the
river
and
swam
across
there
i
took
safety
you
had
a
narrow
escape
a
price
is
on
your
head
have
you
heard
it
yes
and
much
more
we
have
heard
of
the
redoubled
efforts
which
they
are
making
to
crush
us
all
through
the
day
tidings
of
sorrow
have
been
reaching
us
we
must
rely
more
than
ever
on
him
who
alone
can
save
us
we
can
baffle
them
still
said
marcellus
hopefully
they
watch
our
principal
entrances
said
honorius
then
we
can
make
new
ones
the
openings
are
numberless
they
have
offered
rewards
for
all
the
prominent
brethren
what
then
we
will
guard
those
brethren
more
carefully
than
ever
our
means
of
living
are
gradually
lessening
but
there
are
as
many
bold
and
faithful
hearts
as
ever
who
is
afraid
to
risk
his
life
now
there
will
never
cease
to
be
a
supply
of
food
so
long
as
we
live
if
we
die
we
receive
the
crown
of
martyrdom
you
are
right
marcellus
your
faith
puts
my
fear
to
shame
how
can
those
who
live
in
the
catacombs
be
afraid
of
death
it
is
but
a
momentary
gloom
and
it
will
pass
but
this
day
we
have
heard
much
to
distress
our
hearts
and
fill
our
spirits
with
dismay
alas
continued
honorius
in a
mournful
voice
how
are
the
people
scattered
and
the
churches
left
desolate
but
a few
months
ago
and
there
were
fifty
christian
churches
within
this
city
where
the
light
of
truth
shone
and
the
sound
of
prayer
and
praise
ascended
to the
most
high
now
they
are
overthrown
the
people
dispersed
and
driven
out
of the
sight
of
men
he
paused
overcome
by
emotion
and
then
in
a
low
and
plaintive
voice
he
repeated
the
mournful
words
of
the
how
long
wilt
thou
be
angry
against
the
prayer
of
thy
people
thou
feedest
them
with
the
bread
of
tears
and
givest
them
tears
to
drink
in
great
measure
thou
makest
us
a
strife
unto
our
neighbors
and
our
enemies
laugh
amongst
themselves
turn
us
again
O
God
of
hosts
and
cause
thy
face
to
shine
and
we
shall
be
saved
thou
hast
brought
a vine
out
of
Egypt
thou
hast
cast
out
the
heathen
and
planted
it
thou
preparest
room
before it
and didst
cause it
to take
deep root
and it
filled
the land
the hills
the hills
the hills
were covered
with the
shadow
of it
the
boughs
thereof
were like
goodly
cedars
she sent
out her
boughs
to the
sea
and her
branches
unto the
river
why
hast thou
broken
down
her
hedges
so that
all
who
pass
by the
way
do
pluck
her
the
boar
out
of
the
wood
doth
waste
it
and
the
wild
beast
of
the
field
doth
devour
it
return
we
beseech
thee
oh
god
of
hosts
look
down
from
heaven
and
behold
and
visit
this
vine
and the
vineyard
which
thy
right
hand
planted
and
the
branch
which
thou
madest
strong
for
thyself
it
is
burned
with
fire
it
is
cut
down
they
perish
at
the
rebuke
of
thy
countenance
you
are
sad
honorius
said
marcellus
our
sufferings
it is
true
increase
upon
us
but
we
can
be
more
than
conquerors
through
him
who
loved
us
what
says
he
to
him
that
overcometh
i
will
give
to
eat
of
the
tree
of
life
which
is
in
the
midst
of
the
paradise
of
god
be
thou
faithful
unto
death
and
i
will
give
thee
a
crown
of
life
he
that
overcometh
i
will
give
to
eat
of
the
hidden
manna
and
will
give
him
a
white
stone
and
in
the
stone
a
new
name
written
which
no
man
knoweth
saving
he
that
receiveth
it
he
that
overcometh
and
keepeth
my
words
unto
the
end
to
him
will
I
give
power
over
the
nations
and
I
will
give
him
the
morning
star
he
that
overcometh
the
same
shall
be
clothed
in
white
raiment
and
I
will
not
blot
his
name
out
of
the
book
of
life
but
I
will
confess
his
name
before
my
father
and
before
his
angels
him
that
overcometh
I
will
make
a
pillar
in
the
temple
of
my
God
and
he
shall
go
no
more
out
and
I
will
write
upon
him
the
name
of
my
God
and
the
name
of
the
city
of
my
God
which
is
new
Jerusalem
which
cometh
down
out
of
heaven
from
my
God
and
I
will
write
upon
him
my
new
name
to
him
that
overcometh
I
will
grant
to
sit
with
me
on
my
throne
even
as
I
also
overcame
and
am
set
down
with
my
father
in
his
throne
as
Marcellus
spoke
these
words
his
form
grew
erect
his
eye
brightened
and
his
face
flushed
with
enthusiasm
his
emotions
were
transmitted
to
his
companions
and
as
one
by
one
these
glorious
promises
fell
upon
their
ears
they
forgot
for a
while
their
sorrows
in the
thought
of
their
approaching
blessedness
the
new
Jerusalem
the
golden
streets
the
palms
of
glory
the
song
of
the
lamb
the
face
of
him
who
sitteth
upon
the
throne
all
these
were
present
to
their
minds
Marcellus
said
Honorius
you
have
driven
away
my
gloom
by
your
words
let
us
rise
superior
to
earthly
troubles
come
brethren
lay
aside
your
cares
the
youngest
born
into
the
kingdom
puts
our
faith
to
shame
let
us
look
to
the
joy
set
before
us
for
we
know
that
if
this
earthly
tabernacle
be
destroyed
we
have
a
house
not
made
with
hands
eternal
in
the
heavens
death
comes
nearer
he
continued
our
enemies
encircle
us
and the
circle
grows
narrower
let
us
die
like
christians
why
these
gloomy
forebodings
said
marcellus
is death
nearer to
us than
it was
before
are we
not safe
in the
catacombs
have you
not heard
then
what
of the
death
of
chrysippus
chrysippus
dead
no
how
when
the
soldiers
of the
emperor
were led
down
into
the
catacombs
by
someone
who
knew
the
way
they
advanced
upon
the
room
where
service
was
going
on
this
was
in
the
catacombs
beyond
the
tiber
the
brethren
gave
a
hasty
alarm
and
fled
but
the
venerable
chrysippus
either
through
extreme
old age
or
else
through
desire
from
martyrdom
refused
to fly
he
he threw
himself
upon
his
knees
and
raised
his
voice
in
prayer
two
faithful
attendants
remained
with
him
the
soldiers
rushed
in
and
even
while
chrysippus
was
upon
his
knees
they
dashed
out
his
brains
he
fell
dead
at
the
first
blow
and
his
two
attendants
were
slain
by
his
side
they
have
gone
to
join
the
noble
army
of
martyrs
they
have
been
faithful
unto
death
and
will
receive
the
crown
of
life
said
marcellus
but
now
they
were
interrupted
by a
tumult
without
instantly
everyone
started
upright
the
soldiers
exclaimed
all
but
no
it
was
not
the
soldiers
it
was
a
christian
a
messenger
from
the
world
above
pale
and
trembling
he
flung
himself
upon
the
floor
and
wringing
his
hands
cried
out
as
he
panted
for
breath
alas
alas
upon
the
lady
Cecilia
the
sight
of
this
man
back
against
the
wall
trembling
from
head
to
foot
her
hands
clenched
each
other
her
eyes
stared
wildly
her
lips
moved
as
though
she
wished
to
speak
but
no
sound
escaped
speak
speak
tell us
all
cried
honorius
polio
gasped
the
messenger
what
of
him
said
marcellus
sternly
he
he
is
arrested
he
is
in
prison
at
that
intelligence
a
shriek
burst
forth
which
sounded
fearfully
amid
the
surrounding
horrors
it
came
from
the
lady
Cecilia
the
next
moment
she
fell
heavily
to
the
floor
the
bystanders
hurried
to
attend
her
they
carried
her
away
to
her
own
quarters
there
they
applied
the
customary
restoratives
and she
revived
but the
blow
had struck
heavily
and though
sense
and feeling
returned
yet she
seemed
like one
in a
dream
meanwhile
the
messenger
had
recovered
strength
and told
all that
he
knew
polio
was with
you
was he
asked
marcellus
no he
was alone
on what
errand
finding out
the news
i was on
one side of
the street
a little
behind
he was
coming home
we walked
on until
we came
to a
crowd of
men
to my
surprise
polio
was stopped
and questioned
i did not
hear what
passed but i saw
their threatening
gestures and at
length saw them
seize him
i could do
nothing
i kept at a
safe distance
and watched
in about half
an hour a
troop of
praetorians
came along
polio was
handed over
to them
and they
carried him
away
praetorians
said marcellus
do you know
the captain
yes it was
lasoulis
it is well
said marcellus
and he fell
into a deep
fit of
musing
chapter 11
the offer
greater love
hath no man
than this
that a man
may lay down
his life
for his
friends
it was
evening
in the
praetorian
camp
lasoulis
was in
his room
seated
by a
lamp
which
threw
a bright
light
around
he was
roused
by a
knock
at the
door
at once
rising
he opened
it
a man
entered
and advanced
silently
to the
middle
of the
room
he then
disencumbered
himself
of the
folds
of a
large
mantle
in which
he was
dressed
and faced
lasoulis
marcellus
cried the
other in
amazement
and springing
forward he
embraced his
visitor with
every mark
of joy
dear friend
said he
to what
happy chance
do i owe
this meeting
i was just
thinking of you
and wondering
when we should
meet again
our meetings
i fear
said marcellus
sadly
will not be
very frequent
now
i make this
one at the
risk of my
life
true
said lasoulis
participating in
the sadness
of the other
you are pursued
and there is a
price on your
head
yet here you
are as safe
as you ever
were in those
happy days
before this
madness
seized you
oh marcellus
why can they
not return
again
i cannot
change my
nature
nor undo
what is
done
moreover
lasoulis
though my
lot may
appear to
you a
hard one
i was
never so
happy
happy
cried the
other in
deep
surprise
yes
lasoulis
though
afflicted
i am
not
cast down
though
persecuted
i am
not in
despair
the
persecution
of the
emperor
is no
slight
matter
i know
it well
i see
my
brethren
fall
before it
every day
every day
the circle
that surrounds
me is
lessened
friends
leave me
and never
appear again
companions
go up to
the city
but when they
return they
are carried
back dead
to be
deposited
in their
graves
and yet
you say
you can
be happy
yes
lasoulis
i have
a peace
that the
world
knows
nothing
of
a peace
that cometh
from above
that passeth
all understanding
i know
marcellus
that you are
too brave
to fear
death
but i never
knew that you
had sufficient
fortitude
to endure
calmly
all that i
know you
must now
suffer
your courage
is
superhuman
or rather
it is the
courage of
madness
it comes
from above
lasoulis
once i was
incapable
of feeling
it
but now
old things
have passed
away
and all
has become
new
sustained
by this
new power
i can
endure
the utmost
evils
that can
be dealt
upon me
i expect
nothing but
suffering
in life
and know
that i shall
die in
agony
yet the
thought
cannot
overcome
the strong
faith
that is
within
me
it pains
me
said lasoulis
sadly
to see you
so determined
if i saw
the slightest
sign of
wavering
in you
i would
hope
that time
might
change
or modify
your feelings
but you
seem to me
to be fixed
unalterably
in your new
course
god grant
that i may
remain
steadfast
unto the
end
said marcellus
fervently
but it is
not of my
feelings
that i came
to speak
i come
lasoulis
to ask
your assistance
to claim
your sympathy
and help
you promised
me once
to show me
your friendship
if i needed
it
i come
now
to claim
it
all that is
in my
power
is yours
already
marcellus
tell what
you want
you have
a prisoner
yes
many
this is
a boy
i believe
my men
captured a boy
a short time
since
this boy
is too
insignificant
to merit
capture
he is beneath
the wrath
of the emperor
he is yet
in your power
i come
lasoulis
to implore
his delivery
alas
marcellus
what is it
that you
ask
have you
forgotten
the discipline
of the roman
army
or the military
oath
do you not
know that if i did
this i would violate
that oath and make
myself a traitor
if you ask me to
fall upon my sword
i would do it more
readily than this
i have not forgotten
the military oath
or the discipline
of the camp
lasoulis
i thought that this
lad being scarcely
more than a child
might not be considered
a prisoner
do the commands
of the emperor
extend to children
he makes no distinction
of age
have you not seen
children as young
as this lad
suffer death
in the coliseum
alas i have
said marcellus
as his thoughts
reverted to those
young girls
whose death song
once struck
so painfully
and so sweetly
upon his heart
this young boy
then must also
suffer
yes
said lasoulis
unless he abjures
christianity
and that he will
never do
then he will
rush upon his fate
the law
does this
not i marcellus
i am but the
instrument
do not blame me
i do not blame you
i know well
how strongly
you are bound
to obedience
if you hold
your office
you must perform
its duties
yet let me make
another proposal
surrender of
prisoners is not
allowed
but an exchange
is lawful
yes
if i could tell
you of a prisoner
far more important
than this boy
you would exchange
would you not
but you have taken
none of us prisoners
no but we have
a power over
our own people
and there are
some among us
on whose heads
the emperor
has placed a large
reward
for the capture
of these
a hundred lads
like this boy
would be gladly given
is it then
a custom
among christians
to betray
one another
asked lasoulis
in surprise
no but sometimes
one christian
will offer
his own life
to save
that of another
impossible
it is so
in this instance
who is it
that is offered
for this boy
i
marcellus
at this astounding
declaration
lasoulis
started back
you
he cried
yes
i myself
you are jesting
it is impossible
i am serious
it is for this
that i have already
exposed my life
in coming to you
i have shown
the interest
that i take
in him
by this great risk
i will explain
this boy
palio
is the last
of an ancient
and noble
roman family
he is the only
son of his mother
his father died
in battle
he belongs
to the servili
the servili
is his mother
the lady
cecilia
yes
she is a refugee
in the catacombs
her whole life
and love
is wrapped up
in this boy
every day
she lets him go
up into the city
a dangerous adventure
and in his absence
she suffers
indescribable agony
yet she is afraid
to keep him there
always
for fear
that the damp air
which is so fatal
to children
may cut him off
so she exposes him
to what she thinks
is a smaller danger
this boy
you have
a prisoner
that mother
has heard of it
and now lies
hovering between
life and death
if you destroy him
she too will die
and one of the noblest
and purest spirits
in rome
will be no more
for these reasons
i come to offer myself
an exchange
what am i
i am alone
in the world
no life
is wrapped up
in mine
no one depends
on me
for the present
and the future
i fear not death
it may as well
come now
as at any other time
it must come
sooner or later
and i would rather
give my life
as a ransom
for a friend
than lay it down
uselessly
for these reasons
lasoulis
i implore you
by the sacred ties
of friendship
by your pity
by your promise
to me
give me your assistance
now
and take my life
in exchange for him
lasoulis rose
to his feet
and paced the room
in great agitation
why
oh marcellus
he cried at last
do you try me
so terribly
my proposal
is easy to receive
you forget
that your life
is precious to me
but think
of this young lad
i pity him deeply
but do you think
i can receive
your life
as a forfeit
it is forfeited already
and i will be surrendered
sooner or later
i pray you let it be
yielded up
while it may be
of service
you shall not die
as long as i can
prevent it
your life is not
yet forfeited
by the immortal gods
it will be long
before you take
your place in the arena
no one can save me
when once i am taken
you might try
your utmost
what could you do
to save one
on whom the emperor's
wrath is falling
i might do much
to avert it
you do not know
what might be done
but even if
i could do nothing
still i would not
listen to this proposal
now
if i went to the emperor
himself he would grant
my prayer
he would take you
prisoner at once
and put both of you
to death
i could send a messenger
with my proposal
the message would never
reach him
or at least not until
it would be too late
there is then no hope
said marcellus
mournfully
none
and you absolutely
refuse to grant
my request
alas
marcellus
how can i be guilty
of the death
of my friend
you have no mercy
on me
forgive me
if i refuse
so unreasonable
of a proposal
the will of the lord
be done
said marcellus
i must hasten back
alas
how can i carry
with me
this message
of despair
the two friends
embraced in silence
and marcellus
departed
leaving lucullus
overcome
with amazement
at this proposal
marcellus
returned
to the catacombs
in safety
the brethren
there
who knew
of his errand
received him
again with mournful
joy
the lady
cecilia
still lay
in a kind
of stupor
only half
conscious
of surrounding
events
at times
her mind
would wander
and in her
delirium
she would talk
of happy scenes
in her earlier
life
but the life
which she had led
in the catacombs
the alternating
hope and fear
joy and sorrow
the ever-present
anxiety
and the oppressive
air of the place
itself
had overcome
both mind
and body
her delicate nature
sank beneath
the fury
of such an ordeal
and this last
heavy blow
completed her
prostration
she could not
rally from its
effects
that night
they watched
around her couch
every hour
she grew feebler
and life was slowly
but surely
passing away
from that descent
unto death
not even the
restoration of her
son could have
saved her
but though earthly
thoughts had left her
and earthly feelings
had grown faint
the one master
passion of her
later years
held undiminished
power over her
her lips
murmured still
the sacred words
which had so long
been her support
and consolation
the name of her
darling boy
was breathed
from her lips
though his present
danger was forgotten
but it was the
blessed name of
Jesus that was
uttered with the
deepest fervor
at length
the end came
starting from a
long period of
stillness
her eyes
opened wide
a flush
passed over her
wan and emaciated
face
and she uttered
a faint cry
come lord
jesus
with the cry
life went out
and the pure
spirit of the
lady cecilia
had returned
unto god
who gave it
chapter 12
polio's trial
out of the mouths
of babes
and sucklings
thou hast
ordained praise
it was a large
room
in a building
not far
from the imperial
palace
the pavement
was of
polished marble
and columns
of porphyry
supported a
paneled dome
an altar
with a statue
of a heathen
deity
was at one
end of the
apartment
magistrates
in their robes
occupied raised
seats on the
opposite end
in front of them
were some soldiers
guarding a prisoner
the prisoner
was the boy
polio
his face
was pale
but his bearing
was erect
and firm
the remarkable
intelligence
which had always
characterized him
did not fail him
now
his quick eye
took in everything
he knew the
inevitable doom
that impended
over him
yet there was
no trace of fear
or indecision
about him
he knew that
the only tie
that bound him
to earth
had been severed
early that morning
the news of his
mother's death
had reached him
it had been carried
to him
by a man
who thought
that the knowledge
of this
would fortify
his resolution
that man
was Marcellus
the kindness
of Lassoulis
had granted him
an interview
his judgment
had been correct
while his mother
lived
the thought of her
would have weakened
his resolution
now that she was dead
he was eager
to depart also
in his simple faith
he believed
that death
would unite him
at once
to the dear mother
whom he had loved
so fondly
with these feelings
he awaited
the examination
who are you
Marcus
Servilius
Palio
what is your age
thirteen years
at the mention
of his name
a murmur
of compassion
went round
the assemblage
for that name
was well known
in Rome
you are charged
with the crime
of being a Christian
what have you
to say
I am guilty
of no crime
said the boy
I am a Christian
and I am glad
to be able
to confess it
before men
it is the same
with them all
said one of the judges
they all have
the same formula
do you know
the nature
of your crime
I am guilty
of no crime
said Palio
my religion
teaches me
to fear God
and honor the emperor
I have obeyed
every just law
and am not a traitor
to be a Christian
is to be a traitor
I am a Christian
but I am not
a traitor
the law
of the state
forbids you
to be a Christian
under pain of death
if you are a Christian
you must die
I am a Christian
repeated Palio firmly
then you must die
be it so
boy do you know
what it is
to suffer death
I have seen much
of death
during the last few months
I have always expected
to lay down my life
for my religion
when my turn
should come
boy you are young
we pity your tender age
and inexperience
you have been trained
so peculiarly
that you are scarcely
responsible
for your present folly
for all this
we are willing
to make allowance
this religion
which infatuates you
is foolishness
you believe
that a poor Jew
who was executed
a few hundred years ago
is a god
can anything
be more absurd
than this
our religion
is the religion
of the state
it has enough
in itself
to satisfy
the minds
of young and old
ignorant and learned
leave your foolish
superstition
and turn to our
wiser
and older religion
I cannot
you are the last
of a noble family
the state recognizes
the worth
and nobility
of the servili
your ancestors
lived in pomp
and wealth
and power
you
are a poor
miserable boy
and a prisoner
be wise
polio
think of the glory
of your forefathers
and throw aside
the miserable obstacle
that keeps you away
from all their
illustrious fame
I cannot
you have lived
a miserable
outcast
the poorest beggar
in Rome
fares better than you
his food is obtained
with less labor
and less humiliation
his shelter
is in the light
of day
above all
he is safe
his life
is his own
he need not live
in hourly fear
of justice
but you
have had to drag out
a wretched existence
in want
and danger
and darkness
what has your
boasted religion
given you
what has this
defied Jew
done for you
nothing
worse than nothing
turn
then
from this deceiver
wealth
and comfort
and friends
and the honor
of the state
and the favor
of the emperor
will all be yours
I cannot
your father
was a loyal subject
and a brave soldier
he died in battle
for his country
he left you
an infant
the heir
of all his honors
and the last prop
of his house
little did he think
of the treacherous
influences
that surrounded you
to lead you astray
your mother's mind
weakened by sorrow
surrendered
to the insidious wiles
of false teachers
and she again
ignorantly wrought
your ruin
had your noble father
lived
you would now
have been the hope
of his ancient line
your mother too
would have followed
the faith
of her illustrious
ancestors
do you value
your father's memory
has he no claims
on your filial duty
do you think
it no sin
to heap dishonor
on the proud name
that you bear
and throw
so foul a blot
upon the unsullied fame
handed down to you
from your fathers
away with this delusion
that blinds you
by your father's memory
by the honor
of your family
turn from your present course
I can do them
no dishonor
my religion
is pure
and holy
I can die
but I cannot be false
to my savior
you see
that we are merciful
to you
your name
and your inexperience
excites our pity
were you
but a common prisoner
we would offer you
in short words
the choice between
retraction or death
but we are willing
to reason with you
for we do not wish
to see a noble family
become extinct
through the ignorance
or obstinacy
of a degenerate heir
I thank you for your consideration
said Polio
but your arguments
have no weight
with me
beside the higher claims
of my religion
rash and thoughtless boy
there is another argument
which you will find
more powerful
the wrath of the emperor
is terrible
yet still more terrible
is the wrath of the lamb
you speak
an unintelligible language
what is the wrath
of the lamb
you do not think
on what is before you
my companions
and friends
have already endured
all that you can inflict
I trust that I may have
like fortitude
can you endure
the terrors
of the arena
I hope to have
more than mortal strength
can you face
the savage lions
and tigers
that will then
rush upon you
he in whom I trust
will not desert me
in my time of need
you are confident
I confide in him
who loved me
and gave himself for me
have you thought
of death by fire
are you ready
to meet the flames
at the stake
alas
if I must bear it
I will not shrink
at the worst
it will soon be over
and then I shall be
forever with the lord
fanaticism
and superstition
have taken
complete possession
of you
you know not
what awaits you
it is easy
to face threats
it is easy
to utter words
and make professions
of courage
but how will it be
with you
when the dread reality
comes upon you
I will look to him
who never deserts
his own
in their hour of need
he has done nothing
for you thus far
he has done all
for me
he gave his own life
that I might live
through him
I receive a nobler life
than this
which you take from me
this is but a dream
of yours
how is it possible
that a miserable Jew
can do this
he was the fullness
of the Godhead
God manifest in the flesh
he suffered death
of the body
that we might receive
life for the soul
can nothing open your eyes
is it not enough
that thus far
your mad belief
has brought you
nothing but misery
and woe
must you still
hold on to it
when you see
that death is inevitable
will you not turn away
from your errors
he gives me strength
to overcome death
I fear it not
I look upon death itself
as but a change
from this life of sorrow
to an immortality
of bliss
whether I die
by the wild beasts
or by the flames
it will be all the same
if I continue faithful
he will support me
and lead my soul
at once
to immortal life
in heaven
the death
which you threaten me with
has no terrors
but the life
to which you invite me
is more terrible
to me
than a thousand deaths
for the last time
we give you
an opportunity
rash
youth
pause for one moment
in your mad career
of folly
forget for an instant
the insane counsels
of your fanatical teachers
think of all that
has been said to you
life
is before you
life
full of joy
and pleasure
a life rich
in every blessing
honor
friends
wealth
power
all is yours
a noble name
and the possessions
of your family
await you
they are all yours
to gain them
you have but to take
this goblet
and pour the libation
on yonder altar
take it
it is but
a simple act
perform it quickly
save yourself
from a death
of agony
every eye
was fixed
upon palio
as this last
offer was held
out to him
amazement
had filled
the minds
of the spectators
to find him
thus far
so unmoved
they could not
account for it
but even this
last appeal
had no effect
pale but resolute
palio motioned
away
the proffered
goblet
i will never
be false
to my savior
at these words
there was a
moment's pause
then the chief
magistrate
spoke
you have
uttered
your own
doom
away with him
he continued
addressing
the soldiery
chapter 13
the death
of palio
be thou
faithful
unto death
and i will
give thee
a crown
of life
the sentence
of palio
was swift
and sure
on the following
day there was
a spectacle
at the
coliseum
crowded to
its topmost
terrace of
seats with
the bloodthirsty
roman multitude
it displayed
the same
sickening
succession
of horrors
which has
been before
detailed
gladiators
again fought
and slew
one another
singly
and in
multitudes
there was
every different
mode of
combat known
in the arena
and of these
the most deadly
were sure
to find
the most
favor
again
were the
ever-recurring
scenes of
blood
and agony
presented
the fierce
champion
of the day
received the
short-lived
congratulations
of the fickle
spectators
again
man fought
with man
or waged
a fiercer
contest
with the
tiger
again
the wounded
gladiator
looked up
despairingly
for mercy
but received
only the
signal of
death
from the
pitiless
spectators
the
satiated
appetites
of the
multitude
now demanded
a larger
supply
of
slaughter
the
combats
between
men
who were
equally
matched
had lost
their
attraction
for that
day
it was
known
that
Christians
were
reserved
for the
concluding
spectacle
and the
appearance
of these
was
impatiently
demanded
Lusulus
stood
among the
guards
near the
emperor's
seat
yet his
brow
was more
thoughtful
and his
olden
gaiety
had all
departed
high up
among the
loftier seats
behind him
was a
pale
stern
face
that was
conspicuous
among all
around it
for the
concentrated
gaze
which it
fixed
upon the
arena
there was
an expression
of deep
anxiety
upon that
face
which made
it far
different
from all
within the
vast
enclosure
now the
harsh
sound
of the
gratings
arose
and a
tiger
leaped
forth
into the
arena
throwing up
its head
and lashing
its sides
with its
tail
it stalked
about
glancing
with fiery
eyes
upon the
vast
assemblage
of human
beings
which
hemmed
it
in
soon
a murmur
arose
a boy
was thrust
into the
arena
pale in face
and slight
in limb
his slender
form was
nothing before
the huge
bulk of the
furious beast
as if in derision
he was dressed
like a gladiator
yet in spite of his
youth and his
weakness there was
nothing in his
face or manner
that betrayed
fear
his glance was
calm and
abstracted
he moved
forward
quietly
to the
center
of the
arena
and there
in sight
of all
he joined
his hands
together
and lifted
up his
eyes
and prayed
meanwhile
the tiger
moved around
as before
he had seen
the boy
but the sight
had no effect
he still raised
his bloodshot
eyes toward
the lofty
walls
and occasionally
uttered a
savage
growl
the man
with a
stern
sad
face
looked on
with all
his soul
absorbed
in that
gaze
there appeared
to be no
desire
on the part
of the tiger
to attack
the boy
who still
continued
praying
the multitude
now grew
impatient
murmurs
arose
and cries
and shouts
with the
intention
of maddening
the tiger
and urging
him on
but now
even in the
midst of the
tumult
there came
forth the
sound of a
voice
deep
and terrible
how long
oh lord
holy and
true
dost thou
not avenge
our blood
on them
that dwell
upon the
earth
a deep
stillness
followed
everyone
in surprise
looked at
his neighbor
but the
silence
was soon
broken
by the
same
voice
which rang
out
in terrific
emphasis
behold
he cometh
in the
clouds
and every
eye
shall see
him
and they
also
which
pierced
him
and all
the
kindreds
of the
earth
shall
wail
because
of him
even
so
amen
thou
art
righteous
o lord
which art
and was
and shall
be
because thou
hast judged
thus
for they
have shed
the blood
of saints
and prophets
and thou
hast given
them blood
to drink
for they
are worthy
even
so
lord
god
almighty
true
and
righteous
are
thy
judgments
but
but now
murmurs
and cries
and shouts
passed
around
soon
the cause
of the
disturbance
became
known
it is
an accursed
christian
it is
the
fanatic
sinner
he
has
been
confined
four
days
without
food
bring
him
out
throw
him
to
the
tiger
shouts
and execrations
rose on high
and mingled
into one
vast roar
the tiger
leaped
in frenzy
about
the keepers
within
heard the
words of
the multitude
and hurried
to obey
soon the
gratings
opened
the victim
was thrust
in
fearfully
emaciated
and ghastly
pale
he tottered
forward
with tremulous
steps
his eyes
had an
unearthly
luster
his cheeks
a burning
flush
and his
neglected
hair
and long
beard
were matted
in a
tangled
mess
the
tiger
saw him
and came
leaping
toward him
then at a
little distance
away
the furious
beast
crouched
the boy
arose from
his knees
and looked
but
sinner
saw no
tiger
he fixed
his eyes
on the
multitude
and waving
his withered
arm on
high
he shouted
in the
same
tone
of
menace
woe
woe
woe
to the
inhabitants
of the
earth
his voice
was hushed
in blood
there was a
leap
a fall
and all
was over
and now
the tiger
turned toward
the boy
his thirst
for blood
was fully
aroused
with bristling
hair
flaming eyes
and sweeping
tail
he stood
facing his
prey
the boy
the boy
saw that
the end
was coming
and again
fell upon
his knees
the crowd
was hushed
to stillness
and awaited
in deep
excitement
the new
scene of
slaughter
the man
who had been
gazing so
intently
now rose
upward
and stood
erect
still watching
the scene
below
loud cries
arose from
behind him
which increased
still louder
down
down
sit down
you obstruct
the view
but the man
either did not
hear
or else
purposely
disregarded it
at length
the crowd
grew so noisy
that the officers
below
turned to see
the cause
Lasoulis
was one of them
turning round
he saw
the whole scene
he started
and grew pale
as death
Marcellus
he cried
for a moment
he staggered
back
but soon
recovering
he hurried
away
to the scene
of the disturbance
but now
a deep murmur
broke forth
from the multitude
the tiger
who had been
walking round
and round
the boy
lashing himself
to greater fury
now crouched
for a spring
the boy
arose
a seraphic
expression
was upon
his face
his eyes
beamed
with a lofty
enthusiasm
he saw
no longer
the arena
the high
surrounding
walls
the far
extending
seats
with innumerable
faces
he saw
no more
the relentless
eyes
of the cruel
spectators
or the gigantic
form of his
savage enemy
already
his soaring
spirit
seemed to enter
into the golden
gates of the new
Jerusalem
and the ineffable
glory of the
noonday of heaven
gleamed upon
his sight
mother
I come to thee
lord jesus
receive my spirit
his words
his words
sounded
clearly
and sweetly
upon the ears
of the multitude
they ceased
and the tiger
sprang
the next moment
these were nothing
but a struggling
mass
half hidden
in clouds
of dust
the struggle
ended
the tiger
started back
the sand
was red
with blood
and upon it
lay the mangled
form of the
true-hearted
the noble
polio
then amid the
silence that
followed
there came forth
a shout
that sounded
like a trumpet
peal
and startled
everyone
in the assembly
oh death
where is thy
sting
oh grave
where is thy
victory
thanks be to
god who give
us the victory
through our
lord jesus christ
a thousand
men rose
with a
simultaneous
burst of
rage
and indignation
ten thousand
hands were
outstretched
toward the
bold intruder
a christian
a christian
to the flames
with him
throw him
to the tiger
hurl him
into the
arena
such were
the shouts
that answered
the cry
lasoulis reached
the spot
just in time
to rescue
marcellus
from a crowd
of infuriated
romans
who were about
to tear him
in pieces
the tiger
below was not
more fierce
more bloodthirsty
than they
lasoulis rushed
among them
dashing them
to the right
and left
as a keeper
among wild
beasts
overawed
by his authority
they fell back
and soldiers
approached
lasoulis
gave
marcellus
in charge
to them
and led
the company
out of the
amphitheater
outside
he took charge
of the prisoner
himself
the soldiers
followed them
alas
marcellus
was it well
to throw away
your life
i spoke
from the impulse
of the moment
that dear boy
whom i loved
died before my eyes
i could not
restrain myself
yet i do not
repent
i too
am ready
to lay down
my life
for my king
and my god
i cannot
reason with you
you are beyond
the reach
of argument
i did not
intend to
betray myself
but since it
is done
i am content
nay
i am glad
and i rejoice
that it is my
lot to suffer
for my redeemer
alas
my friend
have you no
regard
for life
i love
my savior
better than
life
see
marcellus
the road
before us
is open
you can run
quickly
fly and be
saved
lasoulis
spoke this
in a hurried
whisper
the soldiers
were some
twenty paces
behind
the chances
were all
in favor
of escape
marcellus
pressed the
hand of his
friend
no
lasoulis
i would not
gain life
by your
dishonor
i love
the warm
heart
that prompted
it
but you
shall not
be led
into difficulty
by your
friendship
for me
lasoulis
sighed
and walked
on in
silence
chapter 14
the temptation
all this
will i give
thee
if thou
wilt fall
down
and worship
me
that night
lasoulis
remained in
the cell
with his
friend
he sought
by every
possible
argument
to shake
his resolution
he appealed
to every
motive
that commonly
influences
men
he left
no means
of persuasion
unused
all in
vain
the faith
of marcellus
was too
firmly
fixed
it was
founded
on the
rock
of ages
and neither
the storm
of violent
threats
nor the
more tender
influences
of friendship
could weaken
his determination
no
said he
my course
is taken
and my
choice
is made
come
weal
come
woe
i must
follow it
out to
the end
i know
all that
is before
me
i have
weighed
all the
consequences
of my
action
but in
spite of
all
i will
continue
as i
have
done
it is
but a
small
thing
that i
ask
said
lasoulas
i do
not wish
you to
give up
this
religion
forever
but only
for the
present
a terrible
persecution
is now
raging
and before
its fury
all must
fall
whether
young
or old
high
or low
you have
seen
that no
class
or age
is
respected
palio
would have
been
saved
if it
had been
possible
there was
a strong
sympathy
in his
favor
he was
young
and scarcely
accountable
for his
errors
he was
also
noble
the last
of an
ancient
family
but the law
was inexorable
and he suffered
its penalty
sinner too
might have been
overlooked
he was neither
more nor less
than a madman
but so vehement
is the zeal
against christians
that even his
evident madness
was no security
whatever for him
i know
i know it
well
the prince
the prince of
the prince of
darkness
struggles
against the
church
of god
but it
is founded
on a rock
and the gates
of hell
cannot prevail
against it
have i not
seen the good
the pure
the noble
the holy
and the innocent
all suffer
alike
do i not know
that there is no
mercy for the
christian
i knew it
well
long ago
i have always
been prepared
for the
consequences
hear me
marcellus
i have said
that i asked
for a small
thing
this religion
which you
prize so
highly
need not
be given
up
keep it
if it
must be
so
but make
allowance
for
circumstances
since the
storm is
raging
bow
before it
take the
course of
a wise
man
not of
a fanatic
what is
it that
you would
have
me
do
it is
this
in the
course
of a few
years
a change
will take
place
either
the persecution
will wear
itself out
or a reaction
will take
place
or the emperor
may die
and other rulers
with different
feelings may
succeed
it will then
be safe
to be a
christian
then these
people who are
now afflicted
may come back
from their hiding
places to occupy
their old places
and to rise to
dignity and
wealth
remember this
do not therefore
throw away a life
which may yet be
serviceable to the
state and happy
to yourself
cherish it for
your own sake
look about you
now
consider all
these things
leave aside
your religion
for a time
and return to
that of the
state
it need only
be for a time
thus you may
escape from
present danger
and when happier
times return
you may go back
and be a christian
again
this is impossible
the soulis
it is abhorrent
to my soul
what can i thus
be doubly
a hypocrite
would you ask me
to perjure my
immortal soul
to the world
and to my god
better to die
at once
by the severest
tortures
that can be
inflicted
you take such
extreme views
that i despair
of saving you
will you not
look at this
subject rationally
it is not
perjury
but policy
not hypocrisy
but wisdom
god forbid
that i should
do this thing
and sin against
him
look further
also
you will not
only benefit
yourself
but others
these christians
whom you love
will be assisted
by you
far more
than they are
now
in their present
situation
you know well
that they are
enabled to live
by the sympathy
and assistance
of those
who profess
the religion
of the state
but in secret
prefer the religion
of the christians
do you call
these men
hypocrites
and perjurers
are they not
rather your
benefactors
and friends
these men
have never
learned the
christians faith
and hope
as i have
they have never
felt the new
birth of the soul
as i have
they have not
known the love
of god
springing up
in their hearts
to give them
new feelings
and hopes
and desires
for them
to sympathize
with the christians
and to help them
is a good thing
but the christian
who could be
base enough
to abjure his faith
and deny the savior
that redeemed him
could never have
enough generosity
in his traitorous soul
to assist his
forsaken brethren
then marcellus
i have but one
more offer to make
and i go
it is a last
hope
i do not know
whether it will
be possible
or not
i will try it
however if i can
but gain your
consent
it is this
you need not
abjure your faith
you need not
sacrifice to the
gods
you need not
do anything
whatever of which
you disapprove
let the past
be forgotten
return again
not in heart
but in outward
appearance
to what you were
before
you were then
a gay
light-hearted
soldier
devoted to your
duties
you never took
part in any
religious services
you were seldom
present in the
temples
you passed your
time in the camp
and your devotions
were in private
you gathered your
instruction from the
books of the
philosophers and not
from the priests
be all this again
return to your
duties
appear again in
public in company
with me
again join in
pleasant conversation
and devote yourself
to your old
pursuits
this will be easy
and pleasant to
do and it will
not require anything
that is base or
distasteful
the authorities will
overlook your absence
and your misconduct
and if they are not
willing that you should
be restored to all
your former honors
then you can be placed
in your former command
of your old legion
all then will be well
a little discretion
will be needed
a wise silence
an apparent return
to your former
round of duties
if you remain in
Rome it will be
thought that the
tidings of your
conversion to
Christianity was wrong
if you go abroad
it will not be known
I do not think
Lusoulis
that the plan
which you propose
would be possible
for many reasons
proclamations have
been made about me
rewards have been
offered for my
apprehension
and above all
my last appearance
in the coliseum
before the emperor
himself was sufficient
to take away
all hope of pardon
yet even if it were
possible I could not
consent
my savior cannot be
worshipped in this way
his followers must
confess him openly
whosoever he says
is ashamed to
confess me before
men of him will
I be ashamed before
my father and the
holy angels
to deny him in my
life or an outward
appearance is precisely
the same as denying
him by the formal
manner which the law
lays down
this I cannot do
I love him who
first loved me and
gave himself for me
my highest joy is to
proclaim him before
men to die for him
will be my noblest
act and the martyrs
crown my most glorious
reward
Lusulus said no more
for he found that all
persuasion was useless
the remainder of the
time was passed in
conversation about other
things
Marcellus did not waste
these last precious
hours which he passed
with his friend
filled with gratitude
for his noble and
generous affection
he sought to
recompense him by
making him acquainted
with the highest treasure
that man can possess
the religion of Christ
Lusulus listened to
him patiently more
through friendship
than interest
yet some at least
of Marcellus's words
were impressed upon
his memory
on the following day
the trial took place
it was short and
formal
Marcellus was
immovable and
received his
condemnation with a
calm demeanor
the afternoon of the
same day was the
time appointed for
him to suffer
he was not to die
not by the wild
beasts nor by the
hand of the gladiator
but by the keener
torments of death
by fire
it was in that place
where so many
Christians had already
borne their witness
to the truth that
Marcellus sealed his
faith with his life
the stake was placed
in the center of the
Colosseum and the
faggots were heaped
high around it
Marcellus entered
led on by the
brutal keepers who
added blows and
ridicule to the
horrors of the
approaching punishment
he looked around
upon the vast
circle of faces
hard cruel and
pitiless he looked
upon the arena and
thought of the
thousands of
Christians who had
preceded him in
suffering and had
gone from thence to
join the noble army
of martyrs who
worship forever around
the throne
he thought of the
children whose death
he had witnessed and
recalled once more the
triumphant song
unto him that loved
us to him that washed
us from our sins
now the keepers
seized him rudely
and led him to the
stake where they
bound him with
strong chains so
that escape was
impossible
I am now ready to
be offered murmured
he and the time of
my departure is at
hand henceforth there
is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness
which the lord the
righteous judge shall
give me at that day
now the torch was
applied and the flames
rose up and dense
volumes of smoke
concealed the martyr
for a while from
view when it passed
away he was seen
again standing amid
the fire with
upturned face and
clasped hands
the flames increased
around him nearer
and nearer they came
devouring the faggots
and enveloping him in
a circle of fire
now they threw over
him a black veil of
smoke again they
dashed forward and
licked him with their
forked tongues
but the martyr stood
erect calm amid
suffering serene amid
his dreadful agony by
faith clinging to his
savior he was there
though they saw him
not his everlasting
arm was around his
faithful follower and
his spirit inspired
him nearer grew the
flames and yet nearer
life assailed more
violently trembled in
her citadel and her
spirit prepared to wing
its way to its mansion
of rest at last the
sufferer gave a
convulsive start as
though some sharper
pang flashed
resistlessly through
him but he conquered
his pain with a
violent effort then
he raised his arms
on high and feebly
waved them then with
a last effort of
expiring nature he
cried out in a loud
voice victory with
the cry life seemed
to depart for he fell
forward amid the
rushing flames and
the soul of marcellus
had ascended to the
bosom of the father
chapter fifteen
lusoulis the memory
of the just is
blessed at the scene
of torture and of
death there was one
spectator whose face
full of agony was
never turned away from
marcellus whose eyes
saw every act and
expression whose ears
drank in every word
long after all had
departed he remained in
the same place the only
human being in all the
vast extent of deserted
seats at length he
rose to go the old
elasticity of his step
had departed he moved
with a slow and feeble
gait his abstracted
gaze and expression of
pain made him look like
a man suddenly struck
with disease he motioned
to some of the keepers
who opened for him the
gates that led to the
arena bring me a
cinerary urn he said
and he walked forward to
the dying embers a few
fragments of crumbled
bone pulverized by the
violence of the flames
were all that remained
of marcellus silently
lusoulis took the urn
which the keeper brought
him and collecting what
human fragments he could
find carried away the
dust as he was leaving
he was accosted by an old
man he stopped
mechanically i am honorius an
elder among the christians a
dear friend of mine was put
to death this day in this
place i have come to see if i
could obtain his ashes it is
well that you have addressed
yourself to me venerable man
said lusoulis had you
proclaimed your name to
others you would have been
seized for there is a price on
your head but i cannot grant
your request marcellus is dead
and his ashes are here in
this urn they will be
deposited in the tomb of my
family with the highest
ceremonies for he was my
dearest friend and his loss
makes the earth a blank to me
and life a burden
you then said honorius can be no
other than lusoulis of whom i
have so often heard him speak in
words of affection i am he never
were there two friends more
faithful than we if it had been
possible i would have saved him he
would never have been arrested had
he not thrown himself into the
hands of the law oh hard fate at a
time when i had made arrangements
that he should never be arrested he
came before the emperor himself and i
was compelled with my own hands to
lead him whom i loved to prison and to
death what is your loss is to him
immeasurable gain he has entered into
the possession of immortal happiness
his death was a triumph said lusoulis
the death of christians i have noticed
before but never before have i been so
struck by their hope and confidence
marcellus died as though death were an
unspeakable blessing it was so to him but
not more so than to many others who lie
buried in the gloomy place where we are
forced to dwell to their numbers i wish to
add the remains of marcellus would you be
willing to part with them i had hoped
venerable honorius that since my dear
friend had left me i might have at least
the mournful pleasure of giving to his
remains the last pious honors and of weeping at his tomb
but noble lusoulis would not your friend have preferred a burial with the sacred ceremonies of his new faith and a resting place among those martyrs with whose name his is now forever associated
lusoulis was silent and thought for some time at length he spoke of his wishes there can be no doubt i will respect them and deny myself the honor of performing the funeral rites take them honorius
but i will nevertheless assist at your services will you permit the soldier whom you know only as your enemy to enter your retreat and to witness your acts
you shall be welcome noble lusoulis even as marcellus was welcome before you and perhaps you will receive among us the same blessing that was granted to him
do not hope for anything like that said lusoulis i am far different from marcellus in taste and feeling
i might learn to feel kindly towards you or even to admire you but never to join you
come with us then whatever you are and assist at the funeral services of your friend a messenger will come for you to-morrow lusoulis signified his assent and after handing over the precious urn to the care of honorius he went sadly to his own home
on the following day he went with the messenger to the catacombs there he saw the christian community and beheld the place of their abode but from the previous accounts of his friend he had gained a clear idea of their life their sufferings and their afflictions
again the mournful wail arose in the dim vaults and echoed along the arched passageways that wail that spoke of a new brother committed to the grave
but the grief that spoke of mortal sorrow was succeeded by a loftier strain that expressed the faith of the aspiring soul and a hope full of immortality
honorius took the precious scroll the word of life whose promises were so powerful to sustain amid the heaviest burden of grief and in solemn tones read that chapter in the first epistle to the corinthians which in every age and in every clime has been so dear to the heart that looked beyond the realms of time to seek for refuge in the prospect of the resurrection
then he raised his head and in fervent tones offered up a prayer to the holy one of heaven through christ the divine mediator by whom death and the grave had been conquered and immortal life secured
the pale sad face of lasoulis was conspicuous among the mourners if he was not a christian he could still admire such glorious doctrines and listen with pleasure to such exalted hopes
it was he who placed the loved ashes within their final resting place he whose eyes took the last look at the dear remains and he whose hands lifted to its place the slab whereon the name and the epitaph of marcellus was engraven
lasoulis went to his home but he was a changed man the gaiety of his nature seemed to have been driven out by the severe afflictions that he had endured
he had rightly said that he would not become a christian the death of his friend had filled him with sadness but there was no sorrow for sin no repentance no desire for a knowledge of god he had lost the power of taking pleasure in the world but had gained no other source of happiness
yet the memory of his friend produced one effect on him he felt a sympathy for the poor and oppressed people with whom marcellus had associated he admired their constancy and pitied their unmerited sufferings he saw that all the virtue and goodness left
left in rome were in the possession of these poor outcasts these feelings led him to give them his assistance he transferred to them the friendship and the promise of aid which he had once given to marcellus his soldiers arrested them no more or if they did arrest any they were sure to escape in some way his high position vast wealth and boundless influence were all at the service of the christians
his palace was well known to them as their surest place of refuge or assistance and his name was honoured as that of their most powerful human friend
but all things have an end and so the constant sufferings of the christians and the friendship of the sulis at length were brought to a termination in about a year after the death of marcellus the stern emperor decius was overthrown and a new ruler entered into the imperial power
the persecution was stayed peace returned to the church and the christians came forth from the catacombs again to dwell within the glad light of day again to sound in the ears of men the praises of him who had redeemed them and again to carry on their never-ending contest with the hosts of evil
years years passed on but no change came to lusulis when honorius came from the catacombs he was taken by lusulis to his own palace and maintained there for the rest of his life
he sought to repay his debt of gratitude to his noble benefactor by making him acquainted with the truth but he died without seeing his desires gratified
the blessing came at last but not till years had passed away far on beyond the prime of manhood even upon the borders of old age lusulis found the savior
for years the world had lost all charms wealth and honor and power were nothing to him his life was tinged with sadness that nothing could cure
but the spirit of god at length entered into his heart and through his divine power he at last was enabled to rejoice
in the love of that savior of whose power over the human heart he had witnessed so many striking proofs
fifteen centuries have rolled over the city of the caesars since the persecution of decius drove the humble followers of jesus into the gloomy catacombs
let us take our stand upon the epian way and look around
before us goes the long array of tombs up to the ancient city here the mighty men of rome once found a resting place carrying with them even to their graves all the pomp of wealth of glory and of power
beneath our feet are the rude graves of those whom in life they cast out as unworthy to breathe
the same air of heaven
now what a change
around us lie these stately tombs
all in ruins
their sanctity desecrated
their doors broken down
their dust scattered to the winds
the names of those who were buried here are unknown
the empire which they reared has fallen forever
the legions which they led to conquer
have slept the sleep that knows no waking
but on the memory of the persecuted ones who rest below
a world looks back adoring their sepulchre
has become a place of pilgrimage
and the work in which they took such a noble part
has been handed down to us to be perpetuated forevermore
humbled
despised
outcast
afflicted
fame may not have written their names upon the scroll of history
yet this much we know
these are they which came out of great tribulation
and have washed their robes
and made them white in the blood of the lamb
therefore are they before the throne of god
and serve him night and day in his temple
and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them
they shall hunger no more
neither thirst any more
neither shall the sun light on them nor any heat
for the lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them
and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters
and god
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes
from their eyes
the end
hopes you've enjoyed this program
hope you have enjoyed this program
