This is Audible.

 Simon & Schuster Audio presents Abundance by Ezra Klein and Derek Thompson Read by the authors From Ezra to Annie, Moses, and Kieran, My Abundance And from Derek to Laura and Isla Author's Note Some of the details and the language in this book appeared previously in columns, articles, newsletters, and conversations.

 That were written and produced for the New York Times and the Atlantic.

 Introduction Beyond Scarcity You open your eyes at dawn and you turn in the cool bedsheets.

 A few feet above your head, on the top of your roof, a layer of solar panels is blinking in the morning sun.

 Their power mixes with electricity pulled from several clean energy sources.

 Towering wind turbines to the east, small nuclear power plants to the north, deep geothermal wells to the south.

 Forty years ago, your parents cooled their bedrooms with jewels dredged out of coal mines and oil pits.

 They mined rocks and burned them, coating their lungs in the byproducts.

 They encased their world, your world, in a chemical heat trap.

 Today, it seems barbaric.

 You live in a cocoon of energy so clean, it barely leaves a carbon trace, and so cheap, you can scarcely find it on your monthly bill.

 The year's 2050.

 You walk to the kitchen to turn on the sink.

 Water from the ocean pours out of the faucet.

 It's fresh and clear, piped from a desalination plant.

 These facilities squeeze out the ocean salt.

 Today, they provide more than half of the country's fresh, used water.

 Previously, overtaxed rivers, such as a Colorado, have surged back now that we don't rely on them to irrigate our farms and to fill our coffee mugs.

 In Phoenix and Las Vegas, previously parched cities are erupting in green foliage.

 You open the refrigerator.

 In the fruit and vegetable drawer are apples, tomatoes, and an eggplant, all of them shipped from the nearest farm, mere miles away.

 These crops don't grow horizontally across fields, taking up vast tracts of land.

 They grow vertically on tiered shelves inside a tall greenhouse.

 Banks of LED lights deliver the photons a plant's need in precisely timed increments.

 These skyscraper farms spare countless acres for forests and parks.

 As for the chicken and beef, much of it comes from cellular meat facilities, which grow animal cells to make chicken breasts and ribeye steaks.

 No live animals needed, which means no confinement and no slaughter.

 Once prohibitively expensive, cultivated meat scaled with the help of plentiful electricity.

 When your parents were young, nearly 25% of all global land was used to raise livestock for human consumption.

 That is unimaginable now.

 Much of that land is rewilded.

 Out the window and across the street, an autonomous drone is dropping off the latest shipment of star pills.

 Several years ago, daily medications that reduced overeating, that cured addiction, that slowed cellular aging, were considered miracle drugs for the rich, particularly after we learned the key molecules were best made in the zero-gravity conditions of space.

 But these days, automated factories thrum in low orbit.

 Cheap rocketry conveys a medicine down to Earth, where it has saved millions of lives and billions of healthy years.

 Outside, the air is clean and humming with a purr of electric machines all around you.

 Electric cars and trucks glide down the road, quiet as a light breeze and mostly self-driving.

 Children and adult commuters follow on electric bikes and scooters, some personally owned and some belonging to subscription networks run by the city.

 Another last-mile delivery drone descends from canopy level, pauses over a neighbor's yard like a hummingbird, and drops off a package.

 These e-bots now deliver a sizable chunk of online orders, reducing the drudgery of much human delivery work.

 Your micro-ear piece pings, a voice text from a friend and his family.

 They're on their way to the airport for another weekend vacation.

 Across the economy, the combination of artificial intelligence, labor rights, and economic reforms have reduced poverty and shortened the work week.

 Thanks to higher productivity from AI, most people can complete what used to be a full week of work in a few days, which has expanded the number of holidays of long weekends and vacations.

 Less work has not meant less pay.

 AI is built on the collective knowledge of humanity and so its profits are shared.

 Your friends are flying from New York to London.

 The trip will take them just over two hours.

 Modern jetliners now routinely reach Mach 2, twice the speed of sound, using a mix of traditional and green synthetic fuels that release far less carbon into the air.

