 The world has changed, not just the virtual world.

 That dance of pixels on our screens.

 The physical world, too.

 Its houses, its energy, its infrastructure, its medicines, its hard tech.

 How different this era is from the opening decades of the 21st century, which unspooled a string of braided crises.

 A housing crisis, a financial crisis, a pandemic, a climate crisis, political crises.

 For years, we accepted homelessness and poverty and untreated disease and declining life expectancy.

 For years, we knew what we needed to build to alleviate the scarcity so many faced and create the opportunities so many wanted.

 But we simply didn't build it.

 For years, we failed to invent and implement technology that would make the world cleaner, healthier, and richer.

 For years, we constrained our ability to solve the most important problems we faced.

 Why?

 Scarcity is a choice.

 This book is dedicated to a simple idea.

 To have the future we want, we need to build and invent more of what we need.

 That's it.

 That's a thesis.

 It sounds, even to us, too simple.

 And yet, the story of America in the 21st century is a story of chosen scarcities.

 Recognizing that these scarcities are chosen, that we could choose otherwise, is thrilling.

 Confronting the reasons we choose otherwise is maddening.

 We say that we want to save the planet from climate change, but in practice, many Americans are dead set against a clean energy revolution, with even liberal states shutting down zero-carbon nuclear plants and protesting solar power projects.

 We say that housing is a human right, but our richest cities have made it excruciatingly difficult to build new homes.

 We say we want better health care, better medicine, and more cures for terrible diseases.

 But we tolerate a system of research, funding, and regulation that pulls scientists away from their most promising work, denying millions of people the discoveries that might extend or improve their lives.

 Sometimes these blockages reflect differences of beliefs or interests.

 A thousand square acres of solar panels can be a godsend to the city they power, and a blight to the community they abut.

 A seven-story affordable apartment building in San Francisco means homes for those who would otherwise live hours from their work, even as it blocks views and clogs parking for those who lived there before.

 Other times, our crises reflect the overhang of the past into the present.

 One generation's solutions can become the next generation's problems.

 After World War II, an explosion of housing and infrastructure enriched the country.

 But without regulations for clean air and water, the era's builders despoiled the environment.

 In response, the U.S. rushed to pass new environmental regulations.

 But these well-meaning laws to protect nature in the 20th century now blocked the clean energy projects needed in the 21st.

 Laws meant to ensure that government considers the consequences of its actions have made it too difficult for government to act consequentially.

 Institutional renewal is a labor that every generation faces anew.

 But some of this reflects a kind of ideological conspiracy at the heart of our politics.

 We are attached to a story of American decline that is centered around ideological disagreement.

 That makes it easy to miss pathologies rooted in ideological collusion.

 Over the course of the 20th century, America developed a right that fought the government and a left that hobbled it.

 Debates over the size of government obscured the diminishing capacity of government.

 An abundance of consumer goods distracted us from a scarcity of homes and energy and infrastructure and scientific breakthroughs.

 A counterforce is emerging, but it is young yet.

 The Supply Side Mistake At the heart of economics is supply and demand.

 Supply is how much there is of something.

 Demand is how much of that thing people want.

 Economies balance when supply and demand meet and derange when they part.

 Too much demand chasing too little supply causes shortages, price increases, and rationing.

 Too much supply pooling around too little demand brings gluts, layoffs, and depressions.

 Supply and demand are linked.

