 At least, they are in the real world.

 In our politics, they have been cleaved apart.

 Republicans and Democrats divvied them up.

 The word supply side are coded as right-wing.

 They summon memories of the curve that the conservative economist Arthur Laffer jotted on a napkin in the 1970s, showing that when taxes are too high, economies slow and revenues, paradoxically, fall.

 This led, in part, to decades of Republican promises that cutting taxes on the rich would encourage the nation's dispirited John Galtz to work smarter and harder, leading economies to boom and revenues to rise.

 Tax cuts are a useful tool, and it is true that high taxes can discourage work.

 But the idea that tax cuts routinely lead to higher revenues is, as George H.W. Bush said, voodoo economics.

 It has been tried.

 It has failed.

 It has been tried again.

 It has failed again.

 These failures and the Republican Party's dogged refusal to stop trying the same thing and expecting a different result made it vaguely disreputable to worry about the supply side of the economy.

 It's as if the nonsense of phrenology made it sordid for doctors to treat disorders of the brain.

 But the conservative agenda did something else, too.

 It cast production as a function of unfettered markets.

 Supply-side economics was about getting the government out of the private sector's way, cutting taxes so people would work more, cutting regulations so companies would produce more.

 But what of the places where society needed to supply something that the market could not, or would not, provide on its own?

 This is where you might have expected Democrats to step in, but Democrats cowed by the Reagan revolution and frightened of being seen as socialists largely confine themselves to working on the demand side of the ledger.

 When Americans in 1978 heard that government cannot solve our problems, it can't set our goals, it cannot define our vision, the words didn't come from Ronald Reagan.

 They came from President Jimmy Carter, a Democrat in his State of the Union.

 This was a preview of things to come.

 In 1996, the next Democratic president, Bill Clinton, announced that the era of big government is over.

 The notion that the U.S. government cannot solve America's problems was not unilaterally produced by Reagan and the GOP.

 It was co-produced by both parties and reinforced by their leaders.

 Progressivism's promises and policies for decades were built around giving people money, or money like vouchers, to go out and buy something that the market was producing but that the poor could not afford.

 The Affordable Care Act subsidizes insurance that people can use to pay for health care.

 Food stamps give people money for food.

 Housing vouchers give them money for rent.

 Pell grants give them money for college.

 Tax credits for child care give people money to buy child care.

 Social Security gives people money for retirement.

 The minimum wage and the earned income tax credit give them more money for anything they want.

 These are important policies and we support them.

 While Democrats focused on giving consumers money to buy what they needed, they paid less attention to the supply of the goods and services they wanted everyone to have.

 Countless taxpayer dollars were spent on health insurance, housing vouchers, and infrastructure without an equally energetic focus, sometimes without any focus at all, on what all that money was actually buying and building.

 This reflected a faith in the market that was, in its way, no less touching than that offered by Republicans.

 It assumed that so long as enough money was dangled in front of it, the private sector could and would achieve social goals.

 It revealed a disinterest in the workings of government.

 Regulations were assumed to be wise.

 Policies were assumed to be effective.

 Cries that government was stifling production or innovation typically fell on deaf ears.

 A blind spot emerged.

 Political movements consider solutions where they know to look for problems.

 Democrats learned to look for opportunities to subsidize.

 They lost the knack for making it easier to build.

 The problem is that if you subsidize demand for something that is scarce, you'll raise prices or force rationing.

 Too much money chasing too few homes means windfall profits for homeowners and an affordability crisis for buyers.

 Too much money chasing too few doctors means long wait times or pricey appointments.

 This leads to the standard Republican riposte.

