 Just don't subsidize demand.

 Keep the government out of it.

 Let the market work its magic.

 Well, that's fine for goods where access is not a matter of justice.

 If virtual reality headsets are expensive, well, so be it.

 It's not a public policy problem if most households can't afford a VR headset.

 But that cannot be said for housing and education and medicine.

 Society cares about access to these goods and services as well it should.

 Democrats and Republicans passed policies into law that, collectively, spend trillions of dollars helping people afford them.

 But giving people a subsidy for a good whose supply is choked is like building a ladder to try to reach an elevator that is racing ever upward.

 The results of that mistake are everywhere.

 In 1950, the median home price was 2.2 times the average annual income.

 By 2020, it was six times the average annual income.

 Between 1999 and 2023, the average premium for employer-based family health insurance rose from $5,791 to $23,968, an increase of more than 300%, and the worker contribution to that premium more than quadrupled.

 In 1970, the average annual cost of tuition and fees was $394 in public colleges and $1,706 at private colleges.

 In 2023, it was $11,310 in public colleges, and that was for in-state students, and it was $41,740 at private colleges.

 Child care for an infant and a four-year-old costs on average, $36,008 in Massachusetts, $28,420 in California, and $28,338 in Minnesota.

 An uncanny economy has emerged in which a secure, middle-class lifestyle receded from many, but the material trappings of middle-class success became affordable to most.

 In the 1960s, it was possible to attend a four-year college debt-free, but impossible to purchase a flat-screen television.

 By the 2020s, the reality was closer to the reverse.

 We papered over the affordability crisis with the low prices for consumer goods, soaring asset values that kept richer Americans happy, and mountains of debt, housing debt and student loan debt and medical debt that kept the working class semi-afloat.

 This makes some sense of the last few decades of our economic debates, a crisis of housing debt, a huge new program to subsidize health insurance costs, debates about making college-free and forgiving student loans, endless rounds of tax cuts, proposal after proposal for the government to pay for child care and preschool, a bubble in crypto that attracted so many investors in part because it seemed like a rocket ship into wealth that anyone could ride.

 But then came inflation.

 For years, the central problem in the American economy was demand.

 We both reported on the financial crisis.

 Back then, every conversation with Obama administration economists was about how to get employers to hire and consumers to spend.

 The 2009 stimulus was too small, and while we avoided a second Great Depression, we sank into an achingly slow recovery.

 Democrats carried those lessons into the COVID pandemic.

 They met the crisis with overwhelming fiscal force, joining with the Trump administration to pass the $2.2 trillion CARES Act and then adding the $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan Act and the trillion dollar infrastructure bill on top.

 Democrats made clear that they preferred the risks of a hot economy, including inflation, to the threat of mass joblessness.

 They succeeded, but solving the crisis of the pandemic economy created a new crisis for the post-pandemic economy.

 Too much demand.

 Supply chains had been battered by the pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine began to break.

 Inflation returned with a vengeance.

 The conversations we had with the Biden administration's economists were different from the ones we had with the Obama administration's economists.

 That was true even when we were talking to the same people.

 They needed companies to make more goods and make them faster.

 They needed more chips so there could be more cars and computers.

 They needed ports to clear more shipments and Pfizer to make more antiviral pills and shipping companies to hire more truckers and schools to upgrade ventilation systems.

 They needed more supply and if they could not get that, they needed less demand.

 If car prices are too high right now, there are two solutions, President Biden said.

 You increase the supply of cars by making more of them or you reduce demand for cars by making Americans poorer.

 That's the choice.

 By 2024, the surge in prices had slowed.

 Inflation, as economists measure it, had eased.

 But the broader affordability crisis that predated the bout of inflation persisted.

 The fear that we did not or would not have enough of what we needed settled heavily on politics.

 Policymakers began to rethink globalization, warning that we cannot depend on critical exports from China if conflict or crisis came between our nations.

 Governors and mayors turned their attention to housing supply as homeless encampments spread across their streets.

 The Inflation Reduction Act began the work of building the green infrastructure necessary to migrate our economy to clean energy.

