 The Chips and Science Act dangled tens of billions of dollars to restart semiconductor manufacturing in America.

 Whether these policies will work remains to be seen.

 These policies represent a break with recent decades of American politics is undeniable.

 Politics is not just about the problems we have.

 It's about the problems we see.

 The supply problem has lurked for years, but it has not been the core of our politics.

 That's changing.

 A new theory of supply is emerging, and with it, a new way of thinking about politics, economics, and growth.

 Society is not a pie.

 Perhaps you've heard the cliché that the economy is a pie must grow rather than slice.

 It's hard to know where to begin with what this image gets wrong because it gets almost nothing right.

 If you somehow grew a blueberry pie, you'd get more blueberry pie.

 But economic growth is not an addition of sameness.

 The difference between an economy that grows and an economy that stagnates is change.

 When you grow an economy, you hasten a future that is different.

 The more growth there is, the more radically the future diverges from the past.

 We've settled on a metaphor for growth that erases its most important characteristic.

 If you dig within the equations of power modern economics, you'll find that growth comes from one of a few places.

 An economy can grow because it adds more people.

 It can grow because it adds more land or natural resources.

 But once those avenues are exhausted, it needs to do more with what it has.

 People need to think up new ideas.

 Factories need to innovate new processes.

 These new ideas and new processes must be encoded into new technologies.

 All this is grouped under the sterile label of productivity.

 How much more can we produce with the same number of people and resources?

 When productivity surges, what we get is not more of what we had, but new things that we never imagined.

 Imagine going to sleep in 1875 in New York City and waking up 30 years later.

 As you shut your eyes, there is no electric lighting, no Coca-Cola or basketball or aspirin.

 There are no cars or sneakers.

 The tallest building in Manhattan is a church.

 When you wake up in 1905, the city has been remade with towering steel skeleton buildings called skyscrapers.

 The streets are filled with novelty.

 Automobiles powered by new internal combustion engines, people riding bicycles and rubber-soled shoes, all recent innovations.

 The Sears catalog, the cardboard box, aspirin, all new arrivals.

 People have enjoyed their first sip of Coca-Cola and their first bite of what we now call an American hamburger.

 The Wright brothers have flown the first airplane.

 When you passed into slumber, nobody had taken a picture with a Kodak camera or used a machine that made motion pictures or bought a device to play recorded music.

 By 1905, we have the first commercial versions of all three, the simple box camera, the cinematograph, and the phonograph.

 Now imagine dozing off for another 30-year nap between 1990 and 2020.

 You would wonder at the dazzling ingenuity that we funneled into our smartphones and computers.

 But the physical world would feel much the same.

 That is reflected in the productivity statistics, which record a slowing of change as the 20th century wore on.

 This is not just a problem for our economy.

 It is a crisis for our politics.

 The nostalgia that permeates so much of today's right and no small part of today's left is no accident.

 We have lost the faith in the future that once powered our optimism.

 We fight instead over what we have or what we had.

 Our era features too little utopian thinking, but one worthy exception is Aaron Bastani's fully automated luxury communism, a leftist track that puts the technologies in development right now.

 Artificial intelligence, renewable energy, asteroid mining, plant and cell-based meats, and gene editing at the center of a post-work, post-scarcity vision.

