 What if everything could change, he asks.

 What if more than simply meeting the great challenges of our time, from climate change to inequality to aging, we went far beyond them, putting today's problems behind us like we did before, with large predators and, for the most part, illness.

 What if, rather than having no sense of a different future, we decided history hadn't actually begun?

 It is routine in politics to imagine a just present and work backwards to the social insurance programs that would get us there.

 It is equally important to imagine a just, even a delightful, future and work backward to the technological advances that would hasten its arrival.

 Bastani's vision is bracing because it insists that those of us who believe in a fairer, gentler, more sustainable world have a stake in bringing forward the technologies that will make that world possible.

 That is a political question as much as a technological one.

 Those same technologies could become accelerators of inequality and despair if they're not embedded in just policies and thoughtful institutions.

 What Bastani sees is that the world we want requires more than redistribution.

 We aspire to more than parceling out the present.

 New technologies create new possibilities.

 They allow us to solve once-impossible problems.

 In a world where many of the countries with the largest greenhouse gas emissions are middle-income nations like China and India, the only way for humanity to limit climate change while fighting poverty is to invent our way to clean energy that is plentiful and cheap and then spend enough to deploy it.

 The only reason we have even the barest hope of avoiding catastrophic warming is that the cost of solar power has fallen by 89% and onshore wind costs by almost 70% in just 10 years.

 California's decision to ban the sale of new gas-powered cars after 2035 would be unthinkable without the rapid advances in battery technology.

 Much that we need for the world we want we already know how to build.

 But much that we need for the world we want still needs to be invented and improved.

 Green hydrogen and cement, nuclear fusion, treatments for the terminal cancers that overwhelm today's therapies and the shadowy autoimmune diseases that baffle today's doctors.

 AI that molds itself to the needs of children who learn and think differently.

 Markets will, we hope, proffer some of these advances but not nearly enough of them.

 The market cannot on its own distinguish between the riches that flow from burning coal and the wealth that is created by bettering battery storage.

 Government can.

 The market will not on its own fund the risky technology whose payoff is social rather than economic.

 Government must.

 But let us not be naive.

 It is childish to declare government the problem.

 It is just as childish to declare it the solution.

 Government can be either the problem or the solution.

 It is often both.

 By some counts, nuclear power is safer than wind and cleaner than solar.

 It is inarguably safer than burning coal and petrol.

 And yet the U.S., facing a crisis of global warming, has almost stopped building nuclear power reactors and plants entirely.

 Between 1973 and 2024, the country started and finished only three new nuclear reactors.

 And it has shut down more nuclear plants than it has opened in most of our lifetimes.

 That is not a failure of the private market to responsibly bear risk, but of the federal government to properly weigh risk.

 To take technology seriously as a force for change is to take it seriously as infused with values and, yeah, politics.

 The relationship is bi-directional.

 It's not just that the politics we have will affect the technologies we develop.

 The technologies we develop will shape the politics we come to have.

 A world where renewable energy is plentiful and cheap permits a politics that is different than a world where it is scarce and pricey.

 A world where modular construction has brought down the cost of building opens different possibilities for state and local budgets.

 In 1985, the great technology critic Neil Postman wrote, To be unaware that a technology comes equipped with a program for social change, to maintain that technology is neutral, to make the assumption that technology is always a friend to culture, is, at this late hour, stupidity, plain and simple.

 But the corollary is also true.

 To have no program to harness technology in service of social change is, at this late hour, its own form of blindness.

 Too often, the right sees only the imagined glories of the past, and the left sees only the injustices of the present.

 Our sympathies there lie with the left, but it's not a debate we can settle.

 What is often missing from both sides is a clearly articulated vision of the future and how it should differ from the present.

 This book is a sketch of, and an argument for, one such a vision.

 A Liberalism That Builds We are both liberals in the American tradition.

 The problems we seek to solve are mostly problems that exist within the zone of liberal concern.

