 We worry over climate change and health inequality.

 We want more affordable housing and higher median wages.

 We want children to breathe cleaner air and commuters to move easily on mass transit systems.

 We have many disagreements with the modern American right, but we focus in this book on the pathologies of the broad left.

 One reason for that is we don't see ourselves as effective messengers to the right.

 There are people seeking complementary reforms in that coalition, such as James Pethokoukis, author of The Conservative Futurist, the economist Tyler Cowen, who has called for a state-capacity libertarianism, and the array of policy experts organized in the Niskanen Center.

 We wish them well.

 But we focus on the left for larger reasons.

 This book is motivated in no small part by our belief that we need to decarbonize a global economy to head off the threat of climate change.

 To the extent that the right simply does not believe this, and in America, at least, it does not, it strikes us as naive to describe the policies that would help Republicans build green infrastructure faster.

 It is folly to expect a coalition that does not share our goals to do the work to achieve them.

 It is more interesting to ask, as we will, why it is often easier to build renewable energy in red states and in blue states, despite Republican opposition to the cause of climate change.

 Then there is the anger any liberal should feel when looking at the states and cities liberals govern.

 One of us was born in California and lived there throughout much of the writing of this book.

 California's most populous cities are run by Democrats.

 Every statewide elected official in California, every single one, is a Democrat.

 Both chambers of the legislature are run by Democrats.

 And California is, make no mistake, a land of wonders.

 It leads the world in developing new technology.

 It creates a culture that much of the world consumes.

 It is astonishingly, breathtakingly beautiful.

 If it were its own country, it would have the fifth largest GDP in the world.

 Liberals should be able to say, vote for us and we will govern the country the way we govern California.

 Instead, conservatives are able to say, vote for them and they will govern the country the way they govern California.

 California spent decades trying and failing to build high-speed rail.

 It has the worst homelessness problem in the country.

 It has the worst housing affordability problem in the country.

 It trails only Hawaii and Massachusetts in its cost of living.

 As a result, it is losing hundreds of thousands of people every year to Texas and Arizona.

 California's problems are often distinct in their severity, but not in their structure.

 The same dynamics are present in other blue states and cities.

 In this era of rising right-wing populism, there is pressure among liberals to focus only on the sins of the MAGA right.

 But this misses the contribution that liberal governance made to the rise of Trumpism.

 In their book Presidents, Populism, and the Crisis of Democracy, the political scientists William Howell and Terry Moe write that populists don't just feed on socioeconomic discontent.

 They feed on ineffective government.

 And their great appeal is that they claim to replace it with a government that is effective through their own autocratic power.

 In the 2024 election, Donald Trump won by shifting almost every part of America to the right.

 But the signal Democrats should fear most is that the shift was largest in blue states and blue cities.

 the places where voters were most exposed to the day-to-day realities of liberal governance.

 Nearly every county in California moved towards Trump, with Los Angeles County shifting 11 points towards the GOP.

 In and around the blue wall states, Philadelphia County shifted 4 points right, Wayne County, where Detroit is, shifted 9 points right, and Cook County, the home of Chicago, shifted 8 points right.

 In the New York City metro area, New York County, where Manhattan lies, shifted 9 points right.

 Kings County, which holds Brooklyn, shifted 12 points right.

 Queens County shifted 21 points right.

 And Bronx County shifted 22 points right.

 Voting is a cheap way to express anger.

 Moving is expensive.

 But residents of blue states and cities have been doing that, too.

 In 2023, California lost 342,000 more people than it gained.

 In Illinois, the net loss was 115,000.

