 In New York, 284,000.

 And in the American political system, to lose people is to lose political power.

 If current trends hold, the 2030 census will shift the Electoral College sharply to the right.

 Even adding Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin to the states Kamala Harris won won't be enough for Democrats to win future presidential elections.

 The problem here is not just political.

 Young families are leaving large urban metros so quickly that several counties, including those encompassing Manhattan, Brooklyn, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco, are on pace to lose 50%, 50% of their under-five childhood population in the next 20 years.

 Democrats cannot simultaneously claim to be the party of middle-class families while presiding over the parts of the country that middle-class families are leaving.

 A good way to marginalize the most dangerous political movements is to prove the success of your own.

 If liberals do not want Americans to turn to the false promise of strongmen, they need to offer them the fruits of effective government.

 Redistribution is important, but it is not enough.

 The Abundant Society There is a word that describes the future we want.

 Abundance.

 We imagine a future not of less, but of more.

 We do not subscribe to the seductive ideologies of scarcity.

 We will not get more or better jobs by closing our gates to immigrants.

 We will not turn back climate change by persuading the world to starve itself of growth.

 It's not merely that these visions are unrealistic.

 It's that they are counterproductive.

 They will not achieve the futures they promise.

 They will do more harm than good.

 But the abundance we envision is not indiscriminate.

 It's not an omnidirectional mournus.

 We take inspiration from People of Plenty, the historian David M. Potter's brilliant 1954 book on how abundance shaped American thought and culture.

 If abundance is to be properly understood, he wrote, it must not be visualized in terms of a storehouse of fixed and universally recognizable assets.

 reposing on shelves until humanity, by a process of removal, strips all the shelves bare.

 Abundance, he said, is a physical and cultural factor involving the interplay between man, himself a geological force, and nature.

 The kind of abundance we seek differs from the kind of abundance our generation has seen.

 Potter wrote of the way America was being reoriented to convert the producer's culture into a consumer's culture.

 and the rupture deepened in the decades that followed.

 American policy has been focused on enacting what the historian Elizabeth Cohen calls a consumer's republic.

 And it has been remarkably successful at that.

 Catastrophically successful.

 We have a startling abundance of the goods that fill a house and a shortage of what is needed to build a good life.

 We call for a correction.

 We are interested in production more than consumption.

 we believe we believe that what we can build is more important than what we can buy.

 Abundance as we define it is a state.

 It is a state in which there is enough of what we need to create lives better than what we have had.

 And so we are focused on the building blocks of the future.

 Housing, transportation, energy, health.

 And we are focused on the institutions and the people that must build and invent that future.

 Let's begin.

 Let's begin.

 Let's begin.

 Chapter One Grow Go west, young man.

 Go west.

 There is health in the country and room away from our crowds of idlers and imbeciles.

 It's not clear if Horace Greeley, the newspaper editor and liberal presidential candidate, ever uttered the advice so famously attributed to him.

 What is clear is that he never followed it.

 Greeley was born in 1811 to a poor family in rural Amherst, New Hampshire.

