 He did not seek his fortune in the vast expanse of the American West.

 He made his way to New York City in 1831.

 It was there in the teeming center of urban American life that he built his wealth and his name, founding the New York Tribune, winning election to Congress, and losing the presidency to Ulysses S. Grant.

 The tension between Greeley's life and his legacy echoes that of the country he loved.

 Americans have long lionized the frontier, but our futures have largely been made in our cities.

 Though he preferred the romance of the West to the math of the tenements is no new fact.

 In David Potter's People of Plenty, he writes, We often forget that the country as a whole offered abundance in the form of fuel resources, mineral resources, bumper crops, industrial capacity, and the like, and provided the city as a locus for the transformation of this abundance into mobility.

 More Americans have changed their status by moving to the city than have done so by moving to the frontier.

 But that's not the story America told itself.

 The Western expanse lingered in our mind as a true guarantor of our prosperity.

 Its settlement inflicted a kind of psychic trauma.

 Europe and cities, too.

 What America had was open, often stolen, land.

 Without that, wouldn't we, too, fall into stagnation?

 The fear held well into the 20th century, emerging as a partial explanation for the Great Depression.

 Senator Louis Schwellenbach, a New Dealer who would serve as President Harry Truman's Secretary of Labor, warned that, so long as we had an undeveloped West, new lands, new resources, new opportunities, we had no cause to worry.

 But those days were over.

 Alvin Hansen, an influential economist, offered a more sophisticated version of his view.

 We are more or less through the heavy task of equipping the continent with giant capital expenditures, he said.

 The Depression, in this telling, heralded a new normal.

 A mature America could not expect the torrid growth of an expanding America.

 But economies are not bounded by land.

 Ideas, and the technologies and companies and products they power, they draw the outer borders of growth.

 The land that matters most is the land that aids in the fiery creation of the new.

 That land is in the heart of our cities, not at the edge of our settlements.

 And that land reveals a problem America faces now.

 A young family can still follow Horace Greeley's advice and find a cheap home in the rural West.

 What they typically cannot do is follow Horace Greeley's example and build a life in Manhattan where the median home now sells for $1.1 million.

 Or in San Francisco where the median home sells for $1.3 million.

 Or in Los Angeles where the asking price hovers around $1 million.

 Or in Seattle where the median home is over $900,000.

 Or in Boston where it's $830,000.

 Housing follows the laws of supply and demand.

 When supply is thick and demand is light, prices fall.

 You can see that in Cleveland where the average home now sells for about $115,000.

 But when supply is tight and demand is hot, prices rise.

 That's the story of the pricey blue cities.

 America used to be adept at building homes.

 In 1950, the U.S. Census Bureau reported, that America had added 8.5 million units in the previous decade, even with the interruption of a world war.

 This is the greatest numerical growth on record, the authors announced.

 But in the late 1970s, home construction started to fall behind the pace of population growth.

 New permits per capita declined in the 1980s and declined again in the 1990s.

 After the Great Recession, the housing market crashed and home construction in the 2010s was obliterated.

 Today, the average number of dwellings per thousand people in the developed world is about 470, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

 France and Italy have nearly 600 dwellings per thousand people.

 Japan and Germany have about 500.

 The U.S.

 only has about 425.

 So where did all the houses go?

 The answer is that they were never built at all.

