 The result is a housing crisis of staggering proportions.

 Almost 30% of American adults are house poor, spending 30% or more of their income on housing.

 But that understates the problem because it doesn't take into account where people live.

 Housing costs are highest in the superstar cities and now drive the economy.

 But millions endure multi-hour commutes or far worse jobs because they have to live instead in a far-flung city where they can afford a home.

 These choices are missed in raw estimates of affordability but they are a drag on the economy and an anchor on people's lives.

 To immerse yourself in analyses of American housing is to drown yourself in data.

 Trust me.

 But sometimes a number stands out.

 Here's one that stood out to me.

 The economist Ed Glazer calculates that before the 1980s wages in New York City were unusually high even after you corrected for the local cost of living.

 The city had its problems but most people would make more money by moving there.

 But now that's flipped.

 By the year 2000 moving to New York meant, for most people, taking an effective pay cut.

 It's not because paychecks have shrunk but because housing costs have risen.

 People now pay to live in New York City.

 They aren't paid to live there.

 If New York City is a business it isn't Walmart.

 It isn't trying to be the lowest priced product in the market.

 That's Michael Bloomberg, the mayor of New York City speaking in 2003.

 He went on to say it's a high-end product maybe even a luxury product.

 New York was once where you went to make your fortune.

 It's now where you go to spend it.

 Comments like Bloomberg's are common.

 If you cannot afford to live in the city don't.

 Every so often social media will convulse over some urbanite claiming they can't afford a middle-class lifestyle on $450,000 a year or some similarly princely sum.

 A common retort even among self-styled progressives is that they opted out of a middle-class lifestyle the moment they opted into an apartment on the Upper West Side.

 They chose to spend their money on an unattainable luxury no different than if they purchased a speedboat or begun collecting pricey art.

 Too many have bought into a perverse inversion of what the city should be.

 Cities are where wealth is created not just where it is displayed.

 They are meant to be escalators into the middle-class not penthouses for the upper-class.

 But through bad policy and worse politics we are doing in the 21st century what we so feared in the 19th.

 We are finally closing the American frontier.

 Why cities matter now more than ever.

 A capsule history of the past few centuries of transportation and communication technology might simply say this we fought distance and we won.

 In 1800 it took a month and a half to travel from New York City to Chicago.

 In 1830 it took three weeks.

 In 1850 it took two days.

 Today a flight takes two to three hours.

 The telegraph and the telephone and email and teleconferencing made further mockery of space.

 It is now faster to FaceTime family across a continent than to rouse a neighbor across the street.

 What are cities at their most elemental?

 Cities are the absence of physical space between people and companies writes Ed Glazer in his book Triumph of the City.

 It's a great definition.

 Cities are the ancient answer to the difficulties of distance.

 But technology eroded their obvious advantages.

 Cities should have languished.

 They have so often been expected to languish.

 But they have stubbornly refused to accept their fate.

 Instead they thrived attaining a centrality and modernity they didn't possess even in antiquity.

