 This, Glazer writes, is the central paradox of the modern metropolis.

 Proximity has become ever more valuable as the cost of connecting across long distances has fallen.

 In the new Geography of Jobs, Enrico Moretti, an economist at the University of California at Berkeley, explains why.

 A century ago, the American economy produced primarily physical goods.

 But now, we make ideas and services.

 Some of those are encoded into physical goods, but even then, the raw production often happens elsewhere.

 The iPhone made Apple, which is based in Cupertino, California, into the most valuable company in the world, even though two-thirds of the iPhones that made it so valuable are assembled in Foxconn factories in Shenzhen, China.

 Microsoft and Alphabet mostly sell bits of intangible code.

 Tesla's value lies in the software and battery advances that have taken electric vehicles from the automotive equivalent of Granola to the sleek, fast cars of the future.

 We do not trade in the fallacious belief that manufacturing and innovation are distant domains.

 Taiwan started out manufacturing commodity semiconductor chips that Intel cared little about.

 Over time, its lead in production allowed it to develop advanced chips that American companies cannot yet replicate, and that American policymakers' fear falling into Chinese hands.

 America lost its primacy in semiconductor innovation because much is learned in the making of things, a theme to which we'll return.

 The economic frontier is where new discoveries allow for the making of new things that can be sold to ever more people.

 The rising returns to innovation are a result of the same technological forces that should have decimated the city.

 As distance collapsed, markets expanded.

 It was once difficult to expand your business to another region.

 Shipping was costly and communication was challenging.

 That gave local producers a modest advantage.

 The factory nearby might not be best, but it was close, and that often made its products cheaper.

 Today, it is routine for many businesses to sell across state lines and across national borders.

 Goods that can be produced anywhere can also be purchased anywhere.

 Omnipresence is yet easier for digital products, where all that's needed is a download or the quick flash of an advertisement across a browser screen.

 Less than half of Apple's revenue comes from North America.

 Slightly more than half of Alphabet's revenue is international.

 The same holds for Tesla.

 Cities are engines of creativity because we create in community.

 We are spurred by competition.

 We need to find the colleagues and the friends and the competitors and the antagonists who unlock our genius and add their own.

 Ed Glazer writes that Americans who live in metropolitan areas with more than a million residents are, on average, more than 50% more productive than Americans who live in smaller metropolitan areas.

 These relationships are the same even when we take into account the education, experience, and industry of workers.

 They're even the same if we take individual workers' IQs into account.

 This is not just a dumb gift of density.

 Jamming a mass of people into a chosen place will not allow you to recreate what other groups of people have achieved elsewhere, as the Soviet Union found out again and again.

 Cities are not interchangeable.

 What each offers is a specific gift of the ecosystems of people and practice it has nurtured.

 Once deep communities of interest and industry form, they are difficult to dislodge and they prove nearly impossible to replicate.

 New York leads the world in finance.

 San Francisco and Silicon Valley lead the world in technology.

 New York has tried hard to take Silicon Valley's crown.

 But if you look for multi-billion dollar technology companies in New York, you will find few of them.

 Where New York City has seen technological success is where code serves finance.

 Bloomberg is a multi-billion dollar technology business built around providing data to financial firms.

 Banks like Goldman Sachs and J.P. Morgan Chase now employ thousands of software engineers.

 The same is true in reverse in San Francisco.

 There are successful banks and investment firms, but they mostly serve technology companies.

 The result is that even global businesses are rooted in local phenomena.

 Take the rise of generative AI companies.

 Outside China, the industry is concentrated within a few square miles along the California coast.

 Open AI is not far from Anthropic, which is a quick drive to Google, which is located near Meta.

