 The sole exception is DeepMind, which is based in London, but sold itself to Google in part because it needed the computing expertise their Silicon Valley-based engineers provided.

 So why doesn't Toronto or Atlanta or New York or Barcelona or Los Angeles or Berlin have a major entrant in the industry?

 Why not build your AI behemoth somewhere really nice to live, like Maui or Bali?

 These companies are feeding digital data to algorithms running on off-site server farms.

 In theory, this arrangement should be possible anywhere.

 In practice, the frontier of ideas is best breached by people who know each other well and work with each other closely and move between different companies with different cultures and specialties smoothly.

 Those much-mocked Bay Area parties where young AI engineers gather in group houses to ingest psychedelics and contemplate the singularity, they matter.

 Enrico Moretti writes that companies appear to locate in absolutely the worst places.

 They pick very expensive areas, the Boston, San Francisco's, and New York's of the world.

 With sky-high wages and office rents, these are among the costliest places in America to operate a business.

 We would expect these cities to be unattractive for firms, especially those that compete globally.

 But they're not.

 It's the firms that locate outside these cities that struggle.

 The money you save in rent doesn't make up for the talent and knowledge that dissipate over distance.

 Walmart is famously frugal, maintaining its headquarters in Bentonville, Arkansas, and insisting top executives locate there, too.

 But when it wanted to enter into e-commerce, it didn't pile software engineers into a new wing of its headquarters.

 Moretti notes that instead, it chose Brisbane, California, just seven miles from downtown San Francisco, one of the most expensive labor markets in the world.

 Walmart saw what many tech executives see.

 If you want the best software products, you need to locate amid the best software engineers.

 Those engineers aren't cheap to hire, but if a few dozen or a few hundred of them can build you an e-commerce platform that you will use for millions or billions in sales, it'd be foolish to locate elsewhere.

 Walmart now trails only Amazon in annual online sales.

 Some thought that the dislocations of the pandemic, combined with the rise of videoconferencing, would finally sever the link between place and innovation.

 And it's undeniable that white-collar employees are more likely now to work remotely.

 Some have used this opportunity to move to smaller and cheaper cities while clocking in for firms based many miles away.

 But America's superstar cities still draw many of the country's most talented workers.

 And while remote and hybrid work have stabilized at a much higher level than before COVID, it is notable that in August 2023, the videoconferencing company Zoom itself announced that they were demanding employees be in the office at least a few days each week.

 Eric Yuan, Zoom's CEO, explained that it was simply too hard to build trust without nearness.

 He said, Trust is a foundation for everything.

 Without trust, we will be slow.

 Zoom was no outlier.

 Amazon and Meta and JPMorgan Chase and Alphabet and Tesla and Pfizer and almost every other major company one could name had, by mid-2023, announced a plan for employees to return to the office for at least a few days each week.

 Remote work is a powerful force, but the centripetal power of the city is stronger.

 To defeat the human need for face-to-face contact, Glazer writes, are technological marvels we need to defeat millions of years of human evolution that has made us into machines for learning from the people next to us.

 This resolves the paradox of the metropolis.

 We vanquish distance for shipping and sales, but innovation, innovation still thrives amid closeness, which is to say it thrives in cities.

 And because it thrives in cities, so does much else.

 It's in missing how much else that we made a terrible mistake.

 The Great Divergence Cities play two roles.

 They are engines of innovation and they are engines of mobility.

 High housing costs have blunted the role in innovation, but only modestly.

 The richest firms and most productive workers can still afford to locate in expensive zip codes.

 But high housing costs wreak havoc on the city's offering of opportunity.

 Think of it as a firefighter test.

 Could a firefighter serving a city afford to live in that city?

 If not, then not only is that firefighter going to be forced into a longer commute or an economically strained life, but his children, too, will be deprived of the awesome possibilities of the city their father works to safeguard.

 Most jobs aren't in firms like Google and Goldman Sachs.

 About two-thirds of the jobs in the American economy are in the local service sector.

 And that number has been steadily growing for 50 years.

 These are hairstylists and DMV employees and nurses and line cooks and retail workers and real estate agents.

 They don't see the kinds of wild productivity improvements that tradable goods do.

