 Because while one software programmer can write code for a million users, one line cook cannot make food for a million mouths.

 But these jobs pay better in dynamic cities.

 Those Googlers, they have money to spend.

 And the consequences here ring out across generations.

 As economist Raj Chetty and his team have covered in several papers, upward mobility is in structural decline in the U.S.

 In 1940, a child born into an American household had a 92% chance of making more money than her parents.

 But a child born in the 1980s has just a 50% chance of surpassing their parents' income.

 In 40 years, the American dream went from being a widespread reality to a coin toss.

 Mobility, Chetty found, is a product of place.

 A child born poor in San Jose is three times the likelihood of ending up wealthy as a child born poor in Charlotte.

 Among children who moved from a more economically stagged zip code to a richer neighborhood, Chetty finds that the likelihood of better outcomes improves steadily with every extra year the child spends in their new city, with the kids who moved earliest faring best.

 Chetty's team also found that children who moved to a high innovation area when they were young are much likelier to patent inventions of their own when they matured.

 The effect was specific to the specialty of the place.

 He and his authors write, Children who grow up in a neighborhood or family with a high innovation rate in a specific technology class are more likely to patent in exactly the same class.

 But that depends on their parents being able to move to and live in high innovation areas.

 In the past, higher incomes would attract them.

 In the present, sky-high cost of living repels them.

 A 2017 study by Peter Ganong and Daniel Schoag reveals the scale of what's lost when housing prices gate cities to working-class migrants.

 From 1880 to 1980, the income gap between residents of different states closed steadily each year.

 Today, that convergence has dissolved almost entirely.

 Ganong and Schoag estimate that America's mid-century mobility accounted for more than a third of its mid-century drop in income inequality.

 Now it is gone.

 This is the quiet destruction of an ancient path to opportunity.

 Consider the fortunes of janitors and lawyers, Ganong and Schoag write.

 Janitors and lawyers have long made more money working in New York than in the Deep South.

 As a result, many migrated from the Deep South to New York.

 But as housing costs in New York rose, the benefits of migration crumbled, at least for the janitors.

 The lawyers still came out ahead, but the janitors saw housing consume more than 50% of their paychecks.

 It used to be that both high-wage and low-wage workers moved from poor areas to richer ones.

 By the 1990s, poor workers were moving away from high-income areas and away from the opportunities they once offered.

 It is, then, no surprise that income inequality began rising in the 70s and reached such striking peaks in recent decades.

 We took a process responsible for much of the march towards income convergence and threw it into reverse.

 We made mobility into an engine of inequality and we did it on purpose using policy levers that made life in dynamic cities too costly for the poor to afford.

 But the we here is hiding some uncomfortable culprits.

 It is liberals, and particularly a strain of liberalism that began to develop in the 60s and 70s, that bears much of the blame.

 The problem with lawn sign liberalism There's an old finding in political science that Americans are symbolically conservative but operationally liberal.

 That means Americans talk like conservatives, but they want to be governed like liberals.

 The Tea Party-era sign saying, keep your government hands off my Medicare, is perhaps the most famous example of this divided political soul.

 Americans like both the rhetoric and reality of low taxes, but they also like the programs the taxes fund.

 They thrill to politicians who talk of personal responsibility, but want a safety and a tight end if they, or those they know and love, fall.

 This dynamic is so well known, so easy to see, that we miss how often it gets reality exactly backwards.

 In many blue states, voters exhibit the same split political personality but in reverse.

 They are symbolically liberal but operationally conservative.

 In much of San Francisco, you can't walk 20 feet without seeing a multicolored sign declaring that Black Lives Matter, kindness is everything, and no human being is illegal.

 Those signs sit in yards zoned for single families, in communities that organize against efforts to add the new homes that would bring those values closer to reality.

 San Francisco's Black population has fallen in every census count since 1970.

 Poor families, disproportionately non-white and immigrant, are pushed into long commutes, overcrowded housing, and street homelessness.

 Texas has been the single largest beneficiary of California's housing crisis.

 And that is in part because Texas is California's mirror image on housing.

 The Austin metro area led the nation in housing permits in 2022, permitting 18 new homes for every 1,000 residents.

