 Los Angeles's and San Francisco's metro areas permitted only 2.5 units per 1,000 residents.

 In our political typologies, it is liberals who embrace change and conservatives who cling to stasis.

 But that is not how things work when you compare red state and blue state housing policies.

 To be fair to California, change is messy and uncomfortable everywhere.

 Any growing community that likes itself roughly the way it is faces a problem.

 If more people want to live in that community, then developers will build places for them to live.

 Worse, they might build dense places for them to live.

 A plot of land that houses a large single-family house could become a plot of land housing a small building with six units.

 It can make more money typically selling homes to six families than selling to one family.

 So it's relatively easy for a developer to offer one family that is living there now a good price for their home, raise a building to the ground, stack six units on top of each other and make a profit.

 This can be done in many places at once fairly quickly and the community will soon wake to find that it is unrecognizable to itself.

 But how do you stop people from selling homes they own and developers from building on land they own and people from moving to a city they would like to be part of?

 Who invented this whole business of cutting cities into zones and creating rules about what can and can't be built there?

 The answer takes us back more than a hundred years.

 Go back to the 1800s and no American city had zoning rules.

 The economist William Fishel writes in his aptly titled book, Zoning Rules.

 In the early 1900s, Los Angeles adopted a small package of regulations that divided the city between zones for industrial buildings and zones for residential construction.

 New York City followed and soon enough so did almost everywhere else.

 Fishel writes, eight cities had zoning by the end of 1916.

 By 1926, 68 more cities had adopted it.

 And between 1926 and 1936, zoning was adopted by 1,246 additional municipalities.

 So the concept of zoning, unheard of in 1900, covered 70% of the U.S. population by 1933.

 Fishel's explanation for why begins with trucks and buses, which forever changed the spatial geometry of the city.

 Before these big, gas-powered vehicles took over the streets, it was easy to keep the different functions of the city separate.

 If you didn't want to live near a manufacturing plant or the masses of workers who worked in it, you could always live or build somewhere else.

 But trucks and buses changed that.

 Fishel writes, the truck liberated heavy industry from close proximity to downtown railroad stations and docks.

 Now, factories could be located anywhere.

 Buses liberated urban workers, too.

 They didn't have to live within walking distance of their jobs or on a streetcar line.

 They could reside anywhere and working-class apartments could be built anywhere.

 Homeowners could no longer rely on geography to protect them from the people and producers they wanted to avoid.

 If distance couldn't keep them safe, rules would have to do so instead.

 The first zoning rules did little to prevent housing construction at scale.

 Instead, they dictated what kind of buildings could go where.

 James Metzenbaum, an Ohio litigator, compared these early rules to good housekeeping in the 1930s.

 It keeps the kitchen stove out of the parlor, the bookcase out of the pantry, he said.

 Of course, the rules also often kept non-white Americans out of owning in rich parts of the city.

 But the American zoning experiment wasn't finished, not even close.

 It's what came next that really put the clamps on housing supply.

 Zoning as a form of anti-growth regulation.

 It is this form of zoning that still governs cities and suburbs today.

 Two communities in California trace a rise of the anti-growth movement.

 After World War II, millions of veterans returned from the European and Pacific theaters.

 They started families in a hurry.

 Birth rates spiked, and young parents balancing babies in their arms scoured the country for houses.

 No suburban development epitomized this go-go era more than Lakewood, California, a planned community built on open farmland just north of Long Beach.

 Between 1950 and 1953, more than 17,000 homes went up.

 At its most furious pace, the city's builders finished a new home once every seven and a half minutes.

 The houses sold almost as fast as they were built.

