 On March 24, 1950, 30,000 people lined up to check out the inventory at Lakewood's grand opening.

 In July, the first resident, a Navy veteran named Jim Huffman, moved in with his family.

 Through the end of the year, 20 more families bought a Lakewood home on average every single day.

 By the spring of 1954, a sparse farmland for sugar beets and lima beans had been transformed into one of California's 20 largest cities.

 Two decades later, several hundred miles north of Lakewood, another city revealed how rapidly the politics of housing were changing.

 Petaluma is nestled in the windy hills north of San Francisco, where a gap in the coastal mountain range pulls cool, moist marine air into the farmland.

 Petaluma also saw its population bloom after the war.

 But unlike Lakewood, the city became famous for stopping growth rather than for welcoming it.

 In 1971, city officials introduced the Petaluma Plan.

 It included a growth rate cap of 500 annual new housing units and an urban growth boundary to prevent sprawl.

 Despite facing several legal challenges, the law was largely upheld in the courts.

 In the following decades, the Petaluma Plan offered a useful formula for Californians who wanted to freeze development in their neighborhoods, and other cities quickly adopted its quota system for building permits.

 Today, California is more Petaluma than Lakewood.

 In the 1950s and 1960s, California routinely built more than 200,000 homes each year.

 Since 2007, California has never once permitted more than 150,000 new homes in a year.

 In Cities of Amber, historian Jacob Anbender traces the rise of this anti-growth liberalism.

 He writes, In Los Angeles, fewer homes were built in the 70s and the 60s, fewer in the 80s than in the 70s, and fewer in the 90s and in the 80s, even as the city's overall population grew.

 And it wasn't just California.

 As Anbender points out, much of America has become more like Petaluma than like Lakewood.

 He writes, A slew of new zoning laws in Westchester County, New York, reduced the maximum permissible population of the county by 1.4 million people, largely by banning forms of home construction other than large-lot, single-family houses.

 Bergen County, New Jersey, made it illegal by 1970 to build apartments on all but 131 acres of land.

 A 1973 survey of city and county governments found that one in five had passed laws in the previous two years that limited new residential development by halting expansions of public sewer systems.

 New York City's first historic district was created in 1965.

 Three decades later, more than 15,000 buildings were protected from redevelopment by its Landmarks Law.

 By the 1990s, 71% of cities and 77% of counties in California practiced some form of growth control with hundreds of such measures enacted in the 80s alone.

 Fast forward to the present.

 In 2020, with home prices at record levels, the Petaluma Plan reached its logical endpoint.

 For the first time in the history of the state, California, which, as late as the 1960s, was growing twice as fast as the rest of the country, actually shrank.

 The state is dominated by Democrats, but many of the people Democrats claim to care about can't afford to live there.

 In the same progressive zip codes where homeowners press signs into the soil of their front lawns bearing the message kindness is everything, affordable housing cannot be found, and homelessness is endemic.

 This is your state on a housing shortage.

 In 2015, when the California Legislative Analyst's Office investigated the cause of the state's housing cost and availability crisis, the authors were unambiguous in their diagnosis.

 First and foremost, they wrote, far less housing has been built in California's coastal areas than people demand.

 That was almost a decade ago, but little has changed since the publication of that document.

 Since 2015, the state has authorized construction on about half as many housing units as Texas, despite now having nine million more residents.

 California is about 12% of the nation's population, 30% of the nation's homeless population, and about 50% of its unsheltered homeless population.

 To walk the streets of the Tenderloin in San Francisco or Skid Row in Los Angeles is to tumble into the dystopia tucked amid the plenty of these cities.

 Tents line the buildings, feces line the sidewalks, needles crunch underfoot.

 This is not what anyone trying to preserve the idyllic conditions of California's Central Coast wanted, but it is what they got.

 It is what they made.

 Homelessness has been particular grist for conservatives who see, in California's homelessness crisis, the roosting of liberal licentiousness.

 Heather McDonald of the Manhattan Institute writes, Failure to enforce basic standards of public behavior has made one of America's great cities increasingly unlivable.

 But McDonald is mistaken.

 San Francisco is eminently livable, which is why the average apartment sells for more than a million dollars.

 If San Francisco were unlivable and people ceased to want to live there, the price of homes would plummet, and so too would the ranks of the homeless.

 There have been no end of explanations offered for the severity of California's homelessness crisis.

 Perhaps it's nice weather which makes sleeping on the streets comfortable even in winter.

 But then, why is homelessness so much less prevalent in Houston, where the winters are even warmer?

 Maybe it's a generosity of California's social services.

 Perhaps it's a liberal drug and policing policies.

