 Maybe it's something to do with mental health.

 Perhaps California is simply a magnet of social service compassion, attracting all the rest of the country's homeless.

 In their book, Homelessness is a Housing Problem, Greg Colburn and Clayton Page-Aldern test these and other explanations and find them worse than lacking.

 When we tell the stories of the homeless, we focus on the individual events that pockmarked a life path.

 The loss of the job, the workplace injury, the onset of schizophrenia, the first glow of an opioid high.

 What Colburn and Aldern wanted to understand is why homelessness varies so much across cities and regions.

 If a driver of homelessness doesn't predict these differences, then it is probably not a cause of mass homelessness.

 It might explain why an individual became homeless in a particular place, but it cannot explain why one place has a homelessness crisis and another does not.

 And so they begin ticking through the list of explanations and testing them against the data.

 An obvious place to begin is poverty rates.

 Does more poverty predict more homelessness?

 No.

 A number of cities with high rates of poverty, Detroit, Miami, Dallas, Cincinnati, Philadelphia, have low rates of homelessness.

 It is richer cities with low overall poverty rates that see more homelessness.

 And a similar story emerges for unemployment.

 Homelessness is low where unemployment is high, and it is high where unemployment is low.

 Odd.

 Then Colburn and Aldern move on to mental illness.

 It is hard to find reliable data on the rates of mental illness across cities, but the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services does collect data across states.

 Here, too, the obvious relationship eludes us.

 Homelessness is slightly less common in the states with the highest rates of mental illness, and vice versa.

 Hawaii, which has among the lowest rates of serious mental illness, has among the highest rates of homelessness.

 There is a slightly positive relationship between measured drug use and homelessness, but not much of one.

 More drug use explains only about 5% of the difference between places.

 So what does explain homelessness?

 The availability and the cost of housing.

 When Colburn and Aldern begin testing these variables, their charts, which had just been these masses of disconnected bubbles, coalesce into lockstep lines.

 As the cost of rent rises, so too does the number of homeless.

 As the vacancy rate plummets, meaning that the housing market is tight with too many buyers and too few sellers, homelessness rises.

 The way to think about homelessness, they write, is to imagine a game of musical chairs.

 With 10 chairs and 10 people, everyone will find a chair when the music stops.

 That will be true even if one of the players is on crutches.

 With 9 chairs, someone will inevitably be left out.

 And that's when individual life circumstances begin to predict homelessness.

 If you live in a city with too few homes, poverty and drug abuse and unemployment and mental illness make it likelier that you will be among those who end up without a home.

 But the cause of homelessness isn't the poverty or the addiction or the unemployment.

 All those conditions are far more prevalent in, say, West Virginia than in California.

 And yet, California is six times the per capita homelessness of West Virginia.

 This leads to a reality many prefer not to acknowledge.

 If homelessness is a housing problem, it is also a policy choice.

 Or, more accurately, it is a result of many, many, many small policy choices.

 The writer Matthew Iglesias, who has spent a decade trying to persuade liberals of where they've gone wrong in housing, illustrated this nicely in a 2021 essay.

 Iglesias quotes the urban planner Peyton Chung's description of the 1951 sci-fi classic The Day the Earth Stood Still, which features Klaatu, an alien, escaping captivity at what was then known as Walter Reed General Hospital and moving into a Washington, D.C.

 boarding house at 14th and Harvard Streets.

 Boarding houses were a common place for adults to live through much of American history.

 They worked something like today's college dorms.

 The rooms were small, the bathrooms and kitchenettes shared, and the cost was low.

 They weren't as nice to live in as a single-family home with a detached garage, but they were far nicer than a tent in the middle of an encampment in the dark of winter.

 So where did all the boarding houses go?

 The answer is that they were made, in most jurisdictions, functionally illegal.

