 By the 1950s, rooming houses were already a target for city planners looking to maintain high home prices and orderly neighborhoods.

 The St. Louis Post-Dispatch in 1957 wrote, If rooming houses are permitted to spread to the city's one- and two-family neighborhoods, there is not much use in talking brave words about fighting blight.

 Rooming houses are not compatible with one- and two-family districts.

 When the rooming houses come in, the families move out, and the whole area starts downhill.

 A report from the American Society of Planning Officials that same year offered guidance to planners looking to creatively rid their cities or their neighborhoods of such nuisances.

 Zoning is not the only tool available to control the blighting effects of rooming houses, they wrote.

 Housing codes in an increasing number of cities require that decent, though often minimal, standards be maintained in them.

 Besides protecting the rumors, enforcement of these codes can do a great deal to assure that rooming houses do not harm districts in which they are properly located.

 Over time, planners did exactly that.

 Zoning and building codes required homes to be built with ever more features and amenities, minimum parking requirements were added, and maximum residency limits appeared.

 Some of this was done to upgrade housing stock or protect health and safety.

 Some of it was done to eliminate entire forms of housing that gave the poor or the unlucky a continued toehold in richer neighborhoods.

 Does it really protect the rumors to move them from a boarding home without parking spaces to a tent beneath the overpass?

 It took a while, Iglesias writes, but over the generations, the planners have been very successful at mostly eliminating the accommodations for down-and-outers, with the consequence that if you are down-and-out in a city where real estate is expensive, you end up on the street.

 The point is not that cities wanted the homelessness crises they now face.

 They didn't.

 Their hope was that people who couldn't afford the kind of housing they allowed would leave.

 And many did exactly that.

 But some had nowhere else to go.

 Others needed to stay near their families or jobs.

 And these policies did not generate crisis in a single year or even a single decade.

 It took time before choices to limit housing led to mass homelessness.

 But it is not surprising that choices to limit housing led to mass homelessness.

 And it is not even surprising that cities often choose to limit the forms of housing or the amount of housing that can be built nearby.

 After all, if you already own a home, scarcity makes the asset you own all the more valuable.

 What happened in the 1970s?

 There's an odd website called WTF Happened in 1971.

 It's a long stack of charts gathered magpie-like from all manner of books and papers and articles, recording the many ways society began to tilt on its axis as the 70s dawned.

 The most convincing of them are economic.

 Starting in the 70s, wages began to stagnate, inequality began to soar, inflation began to rise, and housing prices began their inexorable march upward.

 Our favorite among these charts shows how many years an average wage earner would presumably need to save to buy a home.

 In 1950, it's 2.3 years.

 In 1960, it's 2.6 years.

 In 1970, it's 2.4 years.

 And then something happens.

 By 1980, it's 3.8 years.

 By 1990, it's 5.4 years.

 By 2000, it's 7 years.

 And this forward march is hiding the regional differences.

 That home you could buy with 2.4 years of labor in 1970 was in a different kind of city than that home you could buy after even 7 years of work at median wages in 2000.

 Real wages stagnated over these decades, but they didn't fall.

 The action was in housing prices, which rose and rose and rose.

 And this was something new.

 Prior to 1970, housing wasn't a prime asset.

 You bought a home mainly to live in it.

 But that changed in the 1970s.

 Inflation was part of the reason.

 One of the main aims of federal housing policy has been to make possible the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, a peculiar financial device it wouldn't survive a day in the economic wild.

 What lender in their right mind would hand out 30-year loans on fixed terms to virtually anybody with a job?

 But the federal government backed those mortgages and made the interest payments on them into large tax deductions, and they became the cornerstone of the American housing market.

