 But they became something else, too, a hedge against inflation.

 A fixed-rate mortgage holds payments flat on an appreciating asset.

 While inflation eats away at the real value of those payments, the value of the thing the payments are going toward, the house, just goes up and up.

 From 1955 to 1970, owner-occupied housing held at about 21% of total household net wealth.

 Between 1970 and 1979, it climbed to 30% of net wealth.

 For those who owned a home, it was much more of their total wealth than that.

 But a home is a peculiar form of wealth.

 You typically need to live in it.

 Selling stocks or bonds liquidates an asset you don't use in your day-to-day life.

 Selling a home liquidates the place you sleep, the walls within which you may have raised your children or grow into adulthood yourself.

 Financial interest merges with sentimental attachment and daily need.

 But it gets worse, as Fischel explains.

 It is worth a moment to consider how financially problematic an owner-occupied home was at the beginning of the 20th century and remains to the present.

 An investment advisor, whom you have consulted, looks at your middle-income portfolio and tells you that you should put almost all of your liquid assets in a single investment.

 It is not a diversified mutual fund, it is a single firm.

 And the firm makes only one product in a single location.

 It has a great upside in that its returns are almost entirely untaxed under federal and state income tax laws.

 And it ensures you against rent increases by the landlord.

 But its asset value is subject to a multitude of risks.

 Not least are those from the neighborhood and the single municipality in which the firm is located.

 Bad events next door, down the street, at the school district, and in-city hall can put your life savings in a tailspin.

 In the 70s, rising inflation and slowing home building turned the homes people did own into the center of their wealth.

 But how do you protect the value of that asset?

 You can insure a home against fire, but you can't insure it against rising crime rates or local schools slipping in quality or a public housing complex being built down the block.

 To manage those risks, you need to control what happens around your home.

 And you do that through zoning and organizing.

 You do it through restricting how many homes and what kinds of homes can be built near you.

 You do it by making the minimum allowable lot sizes bigger and the parking requirements more expansive because both those rules ensure that only wealthier people will be able to buy into your community.

 You do it through organizing and planning meetings to defeat proposals for apartment buildings.

 They'll change the character of the neighborhood and think of the traffic.

 And you do it by refusing to expand sewer systems to areas where developers might want to build new homes.

 In her essay, the Homeownership Society was a mistake.

 Jerusalem Dempsis, who covers housing at the Atlantic, traces the politics of treating homes as assets.

 Housing is often spoken of as a safe investment, but it's not.

 Homes rise in price when there are too few of them to go around.

 The greater the gap between supply and demand, the higher the returns for homeowners.

 At the core of American housing policy is a secret hiding in plain sight, she writes.

 Home ownership works for some because it cannot work for all.

 If we want to make housing affordable for everyone, then it needs to be cheap and widely available.

 And if we want that housing to act as a wealth-building vehicle, home values have to increase significantly over time.

 How do we ensure that housing is both appreciating and value for homeowners, but cheap enough for all would-be homeowners to buy in?

 We can't.

 The logic of this is inescapable, and the politics it creates are predictable.

 A home's value is directly tied to the scarcity of housing for other people, Dempsis writes.

 This system, by its nature, pits incumbents against newcomers.

 The 70s were a period of ferment for this form of politics.

 The run-up in housing prices was part of it, but Fischl emphasizes a few other forces.

 The interstate highway system, coupled with the growth of car use, allowed people to live farther from their workplaces than was possible even a few decades before.

 Then came civil rights legislation that made it illegal to directly discriminate against homebuyers based on race.

 Communities it wanted to, in the sanitized language of real estate, preserve their character, needed to find other means by which to do it.

