 And they did, through rules like setting a large minimum lot size for new construction.

 Lot size requirements forced developers to build fewer and more expensive homes, in turn guaranteeing that the homes would be sold to wealthier, whiter buyers, writes Anvander.

 He quotes a homeowner in Greenwich, Connecticut, giving up the game in 1967.

 It's like going into Tiffany and demanding a ring for $12.50, said the homeowner.

 Tiffany doesn't have rings for $12.50.

 Well, Greenwich is like Tiffany.

 If he's owned Greenwich so the only people who can afford homes that are multimillionaires, then only multimillionaires will live in Greenwich.

 Fischel's an economist, so he takes a materialist view of what was happening here.

 To him, the core of the story is home prices and the desire of homeowners to keep those prices rising and everything else was more or less a rationalization.

 Economic advantage is a powerful private motivator, but it plays poorly in public discourse, he writes.

 It is considered gauche, I have tried it, to mention in a public meeting that a particular public policy will raise or lower home values, even though what is acceptable to mention, traffic, crime, walkable streets, local pollution, pretty clearly maps onto home values.

 Something less obviously selfish is required to get other community residents to rally around the cause.

 But while there is plenty of selfishness in the housing politics of the 70s, something less obviously selfish was going on too, something noble, even necessary.

 The story of rising housing prices in America isn't a simple morality play of greedy homeowners and feckless city planners.

 This is a story, at least in part, of how the solutions of one era created the problems of the next.

 America the Ugly In May 1964, Lyndon B. Johnson stepped onto the podium at the University of Michigan to deliver that year's commencement address.

 The president began with a capsule history of the country he now led.

 For a century, we labored to settle and to subdue a continent, he said.

 For half a century, we called upon unbounded invention and untiring industry to create an order of plenty for all of our people.

 But the age of untrammeled growth, that whirlwind economic expansion that the New Dealers had set into motion was revealing its limits.

 What was the cost of all this plenty?

 Johnson continued, The catalog of ills is long.

 There is the decay of the centers and the despoiling of the suburbs.

 There is not enough housing for our people or transportation for our traffic.

 Open land is vanishing and old landmarks are violated.

 Worst of all, expansion is eroding the precious and time-honored values of community with neighbors and communion with nature.

 We've always prided ourselves on being not only America the strong and America the free, but America the beautiful.

 Today, that beauty is in danger.

 The water we drink, the food we eat, the very air that we breathe are threatened with pollution.

 Our parks are overcrowded, our seashores overburdened, green fields and dense forests are disappearing.

 A few years ago, we were greatly concerned about the ugly American.

 Today, we must act to prevent an ugly America.

 This was a change.

 The problem the New Deal faced was straightforward.

 People had too little and they needed much more.

 But by the time Johnson took office, the difficulties of deprivation had been joined by diseases of affluence.

 In his 1958 bestseller, The Affluent Society, John Kenneth Galbraith described in America cosseted by new comforts, yet unable to shake a sense that something had gone fundamentally awry.

 He writes, The family which takes its mauve and cerise air-conditioned, power-steered, and power-braked automobile out for a tour passes through cities that are badly paved, made hideous by litter, blighted buildings, billboards, and posts for wires that should long since have been put underground.

 They picnic on exquisitely packaged food from a portable icebox by a polluted stream and go on to spend the night at a park which is a menace to public health and morals.

 Just before dozing off on an air mattress beneath a nylon tent amid the stench of decaying refuse, they may reflect vaguely on the curious unevenness of their blessings.

 Is this, indeed, the American genius?

 Modern American liberalism may have been born in the New Deal, but it was reborn in its aftermath.

 It matured into a political movement with a divided soul.

 Much of mid-century liberalism evolved in reaction to the excesses and consequences of New Deal liberalism.

 Anbender puts this well.

 One of the most consequential conflicts in post-war America was between two systems of values, he writes.

 An older growth politics which extolled the benefits of metropolitan development and a newer anti-growth politics which rejected the idea that such development improved society.

 It is hard now to imagine how quickly the built environment of America changed in these years.

 In 1900, there were scarcely 8,000 cars in the entire country.

 By 1970, 118 million cars sluiced through a nearly complete interstate highway system.

