 In 1900, no one had ever flown in an airplane.

 By 1970, millions of passengers boarded wide-bodied jetliners like the Boeing 747 to travel across the oceans to thousands of airports around the world.

 To a previous generation, this technology would have been indistinguishable from sorcery.

 But as every reader of fantasy novels knows, great magic carries a terrible price.

 In 1943, Los Angeles residents woke up to air so dark and noxious that they feared the Japanese had launched a gas attack.

 Five years later, a lethal smog in Donora, Pennsylvania, caused by industrial pollutants from zinc-smelting plants and a temperature inversion that trapped toxins in the air, killed 20 people and sickened thousands.

 In New Hampshire, the Merrimack River, lined with textile mills in Manchester and Nashua, ran in different colors by the day as dyes and chemicals dumped into the river tinged the water red, then green, then yellow.

 In Cleveland, Ohio, on June 22, 1969, oily waste and debris were ignited, possibly by a flare thrown into the Cuyahoga River, sparking a fire as tall as a four-story building.

 In Pittsburgh, mid-century drivers had to use their windshield wipers to clear away the soot so they could see the road.

 America, in the 1950s and 60s, was paradoxically the richest superpower in world history and functioned as a kind of mass industrial conspiracy to kill and sicken its own residents.

 The toxicity of growth triggered a reaction among intellectuals and, later, within government.

 In 1962, Rachel Carson, a marine biologist suffering from breast cancer, published Silent Spring, which argued that chemical pesticides were devastating our ecosystems and destabilizing the biosphere.

 The book is broadly credited with founding the environmental movement.

 Like any founding document, it hit a nerve because it concretized anxieties that already existed.

 Environmentalism soon permeated the broader culture.

 In the late 1960s, Gaylord Nelson, the senator from Wisconsin, who had been closely watching the student-led protests around the Vietnam War, was inspired to channel that energy and enthusiasm to protest on behalf of the environment.

 He hired a young activist named Dennis Hayes who came up with the idea of a walkout on the first day of spring, which they would call Earth Day.

 On April 22, 1970, more than 20 million people, roughly 10% of the U.S. population, poured into the streets.

 It was the largest single demonstration in American history.

 Between 1966 and 1973, the U.S. passed almost a dozen laws that required the government to be more responsive to local citizens and the environment.

 They were the National Historic Preservation Act, the Department of Transportation Act, the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1968, the National Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act of 1970, the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act, the Noise Control Act of 1972, the Clean Water Act, the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1973, and the Endangered Species Act.

 In seven years, America compiled an arsenal of regulation to slow or outright stop the era of big government building.

 These were not partisan fights.

 to read President Richard Nixon's State of the Union Address from 1970 is to tumble into a politics very different than our own where Republicans talked in ways that even few Democrats dare speak today.

 He said, The great question of the 70s is, Shall we surrender to our surroundings or shall we make our peace with nature and begin to make reparations for the damage we have done to our air, to our land, and to our water?

 Restoring nature to its natural state is a cause beyond party and beyond factions.

 It has become a common cause of all the people of this country.

 It is a cause of particular concern to younger Americans because they, more than we, will reap the grim consequences of our failure to act on programs which are needed now if we were to prevent disaster later.

 Clean air, clean water, open spaces, these should once again be the birthright of every American.

 If we act now, they can be.

 We still think of air as free, but clean air is not free, and neither is clean water.

 The price tag on pollution control is high.

 Through our years of past carelessness, we incurred a debt to nature.

 And now, that debt is being called.

 Nixon went on to promise that the program I shall propose to Congress will be the most comprehensive and costly program in this field in America's history.

 He went on to sign the National Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act, and the Endangered Species Act, and he created the Environmental Protection Agency, making him arguably the most important environmentalist president of the 20th century.

 But Nixon was not aberrant as a Republican taking the environmental worries of the moment seriously.

 In 1984, President Ronald Reagan told the nation, I might be letting you in on a little secret, as a matter of fact, one of the best-kept secrets in Washington.

 He went on to describe California's leadership role in passing environmental legislation.

 He talked about how the nation had followed California's lead, and then he delivered the punchline.

 The secret I mentioned is that I happened to have been governor of California back when much of this was being done, Reagan said.

 In Cities of Amber, Ann Bender tells the story in more detail.

 Reagan signed the California Environmental Quality Act, CEQA as it's called, into law in 1970, but he did not know what he was signing, and the legislature did not know what it was passing.

 The bill was thought to be modest.

 Despite the environmental consciousness rising in the state and in the media at the moment, the Los Angeles Times didn't devote a single full article to the legislation.

 Then, in 1972, came a case called Friends of Mammoth versus Board of Supervisors of Mono County.

 A developer proposed to build six buildings worth of condominiums and shops and restaurants near Mammoth Lakes, one of California's beloved ski resort areas.

 Friends of Mammoth, a homeowner's association, sued to stop the build, arguing that it would strain water and sewage resources.

 The novelty of their argument was that they sued under CEQA.

 The legislation, as it was passed, held that government entities in California needed to produce environmental impact reports before embarking on major new projects.

