 But the developer of the proposed Mammoth Lakes condos was not an arm of the California state, and this was not a public project.

 The argument of the Mammoth homeowners held that, yeah, actually it was, because any development that required public permits to be built was inherently a public project.

 Friends of Mammoth lost the case in the lower courts, but appealed up to the state Supreme Court, which ruled in their favor in a six-to-one decision.

 CEQA, the court held, applies not only to situations in which the government itself engages in construction, acquisition, or other development, but also in those instances in which the state regulates private activity.

 That meant it applied to, well, almost anything that anyone might try to build in the state of California.

 As a lobbyist for the Sierra Club put it, CEQA now covered anybody engaged commercially in putting two sticks of wood together.

 The Sacramento Bee called the decision probably the most important such ruling by any court in the field of environmental concern since the daisy pickers came out of the woods and plunged into the tangle of government influence.

 San Francisco froze all new plumbing, building, and electrical permits until it could fully understand the scope of the ruling.

 As Ambitur dryly notes, having been informed of what the law they had passed two years earlier actually said, the legislature moved quickly to impose a four-month moratorium on CEQA's implementation so that worksites across the state would not come to a complete standstill.

 A couple of years later, government agencies in California were reviewing more than 4,000 environmental impact statements annually, four times more than the entire federal government was generating under the facially similar National Environmental Policy Act.

 CEQA became a potent weapon against construction of new homes.

 Between 1972 and 1975, 29,000 proposed homes in the Bay Area, roughly a fifth of the region's total housing production at the time, were subject to environmental litigation, Ambitur writes.

 The Plague of Growth We think now of the interstate highway system as one of the grand achievements of the post-war era.

 The reaction at the time, particularly among liberals, was more mixed.

 The most charitable thing to assume about the highway bill is that they hadn't the faintest notion of what they were doing, the critic and historian Lewis Mumford wrote in 1958.

 Within the next 15 years, they will doubtless find out, but by that time, it will be too late to correct all the damage to our cities and our countryside.

 Robert Caro published The Power Broker, the study of how Robert Moses carved up New York in 1974.

 Much of what Moses was building was highways, and he was not alone.

 Moses might have been distinctive in his power, but planners were slicing highways through communities all across the nation.

 Cities fought back, culminating in the so-called highway revolts, in which residents organized to block the roads being cut into their neighborhoods, and in doing, they built connections and coalitions and tactics for opposing all manner of development.

 California was ground zero for both the possibilities and the predations of growth.

 In the 1950s, the five fastest-growing municipalities were all in California.

 New suburbs sprung like poppies across the state.

 Before Californication was a red-hot chili pepper song or a TV series starring David Duchovny.

 It was shorthand, Ann Bender writes, for the moral bankruptcy that many believed was inextricable from the physical form of sprawl itself.

 In 1972, Time magazine reported on conversations happening in other western states where legislators, scientists, and citizens are now openly concerned about the threat of Californication.

 This was growth unleavened by concern for beauty or community or conservation.

 The term ticky-tacky comes from a song recorded by Malvina Reynolds and then later covered by Pete Seeger describing the soulless, same-same tract housing covering the hills of Daly City just south of San Francisco.

 Anti-growth politics could, and often did, tip into a kind of misanthropy aimed at newcomers.

 Those who already lived in a place were its stewards, its guardians, its voice.

 Those who wanted to move to that place were recast as a consumptive horde.

 Harold Gilliam, who wrote the This Land column for the San Francisco Chronicle, put it grimly, Ultimately, every conservation problem is a population problem.

 Every effort to save some vestige of California's pristine splendor, every campaign to preserve the bay or the hills or a natural coastline or a grove of redwoods, every attempt to curb galloping slurbinism or to save breathing space for the future would be defeated by the unending advance of new hordes of population like a swarm of locusts devouring everything in sight.

 But what could you do about it?

 Chapter 2 Build No less in housing, climate change makes a hash of our traditional political categories.

 Here, it is typically the right that is willing to leap into the unknown, confident that humanity can adapt to unimaginable change.

 Here, it is largely the left that wants to conserve the climate that the entirety of human civilization has known.

 But to conserve our climate requires more than mere inaction.

 To do nothing, to let greenhouse gas emissions accelerate as they would if we kept burning coal and oil and gas heedlessly, is to welcome warming of 4 or 5 or 6 degrees Celsius.

 These are numbers that diverge from the climate of the 18th century as sharply as the climate of the 18th century diverges from the Ice Age.

 These are numbers inside which the planetary systems we rely on could simply break.

 To maintain the climate we've had or anything close to it requires us to remake the world we've built.

 One vision that is popular in some corners of the left is called degrowth.

 It holds that climate change reflects humanity's thrall to an impossible dream of endless growth.

 Rich countries must accept stasis, shuttering or scaling down major industries, and poor countries must grow more gently and prudently.

 Degrowth is simultaneously much more and much less than an answer to the climate crisis.

 It is much more than an answer because it is not really about climate at all.

 It is an anti-materialist philosophy that holds that humanity made its fundamental errors hundreds of years ago, trading the animism of our ancestors for Christianity's promise of dominion over nature.

 The problem is not simply greenhouse gas emissions or microplastics.

 It is Cartesian dualism and American-style capitalism and everything these systems of thought and practice have taught us to value and prize and want.

