 Those who sought to pave the way for capitalism in the 16th century first had to destroy other, more holistic ways of seeing the world and either convince or force people to become dualists.

 That's Jason Hickel writing in Less is More, How to Growth Will Save the World.

 He continues, Dualist philosophy was leveraged to cheapen life for the sake of growth and it is responsible at a deep level for our ecological crisis.

 Hickel compares the scale of the philosophical and economic revolution DeGroeth imagines to Darwin persuading the world of evolution or Copernicus spreading the knowledge that the earth revolves around the sun.

 He envisions a wholesale shift in humanity's relationship to other living things and to itself.

 But shifts of that size take decades or centuries to play out.

 In the case of evolution, the victory is yet only partial.

 We do not have decades or centuries to convince the world to act on climate change.

 To the extent that DeGroeth has a specific climate plan, it is to shut off or scale down areas of production it deems destructive like military investment, meat and dairy production, advertising, and fast fashion.

 There is some appeal to this.

 All of us can identify some aspect of the global production system that seems wasteful, unnecessary, or harmful.

 The problem is that few of us identify the same aspects of the global production system.

 Take meat and dairy production.

 When we think of humanity's land footprint, we mostly think of buildings and roadways.

 But only 2 or 3% of habitable land is taken up by cities.

 We do not primarily use land to live on.

 We primarily use land to feed ourselves.

 About half of all habitable land is used for agriculture.

 Of that, three quarters is given over to raising livestock or growing feed for livestock.

 It is difficult to find an environmental challenge that is not tied up in raising animals for human consumption.

 It's a driver of climate change.

 It's a driver of deforestation.

 It's a driver of mass extinction as the land we turn over to cows and sheep and goats is the land that other species need to survive.

 It is a driver of drought and water scarcity as it takes about 1,800 gallons of water to produce a single pound of boneless beef.

 To the vegetarians and vegans among us, this is an obvious target for elimination.

 Humans thrive on a vegetarian diet and the factory farms that produce most of our meat are abattoirs of unimaginable cruelty and suffering.

 Industrial animal agriculture is more than a climate problem.

 It is a moral stain upon modernity.

 There is probably no single change that would do more for our interlinked environmental problems than for the world to cease using cows and goats and sheep for food.

 But to suggest such a thing is to court political ruin.

 People want to eat meat and they want that meat to be cheap and plentiful.

 The right accuses the left of scheming to ban hamburgers for a reason.

 The left denies those accusations and leaves direct confrontation with the meat industry out of its legislation for the same reason.

 There is no near-term politics that will ban meat consumption or redistribute it from richer countries to poorer countries.

 For all the radicalism of his book, even Hickel flinches from the task he sets for himself.

 He does not suggest anything akin to ridding the world of the factory farms that produce most of our beef.

 Instead, he proposes to end the subsidies high-income countries give to beef farmers and notes that researchers are also testing proposals for attacks on red meat.

 Fine proposals, but not the revolutionary upheaval that will cut our emissions rapidly enough to limit global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius.

 And that is even assuming you could pass a global or multinational tax on meat, which you could not.

 DeGroeth criticizes other approaches as unrealistic, noting the ease with which countries slip from their climate commitments or the ways that clean energy may allow other human cruelties to persist.

 In a telling passage, Hickel imagines what would happen if we perfected and deployed nuclear fusion tomorrow, bringing to life the clean energy economy of green dreams.

 What would we do with it, he asks, exactly what we are doing with fossil fuels.

 Raise more forests, trawl more fish, mine more mountains, build more roads, expand industrial farming, and send more waste to landfill.

 In this sense, DeGroeth recognizes the difficulty that politics poses to climate policy.

 It knows people want more of what they have, and although it blames capitalism and plutocracy for these wants, it sees the challenges these wants pose to traditional climate politics.

 But those challenges apply to the DeGroeth vision with even greater force.

 If you cannot imagine convincing people to change their desires in the presence of energy abundance, how do you imagine convincing them to accept the rapid, collective scarcity that DeGroeth demands?

 We know what it looks like when governments face a political fury of rising energy prices or fuel rationing.

 In 2022, 90 countries and territories experienced often violent protests over the rising price of fuel between January and September, according to a BBC analysis.

 In Sri Lanka, a country that Hickel holds out as a model for DeGroeth development, those protests led to the collapse of the ruling government.

