 It is not much easier in rich countries where DeGroethers insist on the most radical restrictions in energy use.

 In France, the 2018 Yellow Vest protests followed a modest hike in the fuel tax.

 In America, rising energy costs resulting from sanctions against Russia forced the Biden administration to open up domestic fossil fuel production and beg Saudi Arabia for more oil.

 Germany's government tried to ban fossil fuel heating systems in favor of greener heat pumps.

 The outcry nearly split the ruling coalition and the compromised cut-up bill that ultimately passed was a shadow of the initial proposal.

 In 2023, a wave of electoral defeats for the UK's Conservative Party were blamed on high energy costs, leading Prime Minister Rishi Sunak to delay a suite of climate policies.

 In the 2024 election in America, Vice President Kamala Harris emphasized the record levels of oil and gas production achieved under the Biden administration far more than she talked about the historic climate investments she had helped pass into law.

 When Eric Voden, a political scientist, picked through the political consequences of recent climate policies, he found that people who bear the cost of climate policies increasingly flock to the far right.

 The only policy that seemed to blunt the backlash was directly compensating the people who suffer under green policies.

 But you can't both compensate residents of rich countries for lost growth and cut that growth in those same countries.

 Turning global politics into a zero-sum contest for allotted energy rations will not deliver a greener future.

 The cost of trying and failing to implement the degrowth vision would not merely be missing our climate targets by a few tenths of a percentage point.

 It would be to deliver a future of populist authoritarians who drill and burn their way back to a false prosperity.

 It is to discredit parties that care about climate change and empower strongmen who will give people what they have always wanted, the gift of abundant energy.

 We just burned it.

 Take any variable of human well-being, longevity, nutrition, income, mortality, overall population, and draw a graph of its value over time.

 Charles Mann writes in The Wizard and the Prophet, In almost every case, it skitters along at a low level for thousands of years, then rises abruptly in the 18th and 19th centuries as humans learn to wield the trapped solar power in coal, oil, and natural gas.

 Without energy, even material splendor has sharp limits.

 Mann notes that the visitors to the Palace of Versailles in February 1695 marveled at the furs worn to dinners with the king and the ice that collected on the glassware.

 It was frigid in Versailles and no treasury could warm it.

 A hundred years later, Thomas Jefferson had a vast wine collection and library in Monticello and the forced labor of more than a hundred slaves, but his ink still froze to the tip of his pen during winter.

 Today, heating is a solved problem for many, but not for all.

 There are few inequalities more fundamental than energy inequality.

 The late demographer Hans Rosling had a vivid way of framing this.

 In 2010, he argued that you could group humanity by the energy people had access to.

 At the time, roughly two billion people had little or no access to electricity.

 They still cooked food and heated water by fire.

 About three billion had access to enough electricity to power electric lights.

 An additional billion or so had the energy and wealth for labor-saving appliances like washing machines.

 It's only the richest billion who could afford to fly, and we used around half of global energy.

 Energy is the nucleus of wealth.

 Can we all be energetically wealthy?

 Not for burning coal and oil.

 The stocks of fossil fuel are finite and their continued combustion is lethal.

 This would be true even if climate change was a hoax.

 Air pollution kills between 7 million and 9 million people each year.

 That is six or seven times the death toll from traffic accidents and hundreds of times the death toll from war or terrorism or all natural disasters combined.

 It is deadliest where people cook by burning wood or charcoal and farm by burning the end of last season's crops.

 That is to say, it is deadliest where people are energy poor because where people are energy poor, they burn fuel and breathe in the byproducts.

 For most of human history, there was no other choice.

 That is why nearly every society that has become rich since the Industrial Revolution has seen air pollution build to crisis levels.

 Human beings choked on smog in London in the 19th century and in New York and Los Angeles in the 20th century.

 A few years ago, Beijing's air quality was an international scandal and now the same is true for Delhi.

 But notice, the problem passes.

 Los Angeles got richer and its residents now breathe clean air.

 The same is true in London where air pollution in the 18th century was worse than Delhi is today.

 Environmental action is often framed as at odds with the economy.

 writes Hannah Ritchie in Not the End of the World.

 It's either climate action or economic growth.

 Pollution versus the market.

