 This is just wrong.

 As societies become economically and technologically rich, they clean their air and water.

 Air pollution is not a problem of using too much energy or pursuing too much growth.

 It is a problem of using dirty energy because you do not have the money or the know-how to grow another way.

 The same is true for climate change.

 We do not always know how to power economies without using fossil fuels.

 We do now.

 This is the technological miracle of our age.

 The cost of solar energy fell by about 90% from 2010 to 2020.

 The cost of wind power fell by nearly 70%.

 Solar power does not choke the lungs.

 Wind power does not sting the eyes.

 Neither of them warms the planet.

 Two decades ago, it was not possible to imagine that modernity was compatible with renewable energy.

 Now we do not imagine it.

 The world installed more solar power in 2023 than it did between 1954 and 2017.

 We've seen repeated periods now in California and Texas of negative energy prices.

 Moments where consumers are, mind-bendingly, paid to consume electricity because there is more of it than the system needs.

 The cost of solar is falling so fast that for much of the day, it will be effectively free in much of the world by 2030.

 I simply cannot believe where we are with solar, Jenny Chase, the Bloomberg NEF analyst, told the New York Times.

 And if you'd told me nearly 20 years ago what would be the case now, 20 years later, I would have just said you were crazy.

 I would have laughed in your face.

 There is genuinely a revolution happening.

 In a thrilling paper with the very unthrilling title, Empirically Grounded Technology Forecasts and the Energy Transition, a team of researchers found that the price of oil, gas, and coal after adjusting for inflation is about what it was 140 years ago.

 But renewable energy keeps crushing expectations.

 The authors looked at 2,905 projections for solar costs made by the most popular forecasting models and found that solar costs were expected to fall by 2.6% a year and never by more than 6%.

 In reality, they fell by 15% per year, year after year.

 In 2022, the U.S.

 Energy Information Administration released a report estimating life cycle costs for new energy installations in the coming decades.

 Solar was already cheaper than natural gas.

 Wind was a dollar more.

 Both were about half the price of coal.

 As a climate writer and activist Bill McKibben put it, in the place of those fires we keep lit day and night.

 It is possible for us to rely on the fact that there was a fire in the sky, a great ball of burning gas about 93 million miles away, whose energy can be collected in photovoltaic panels and which differentially heats the earth, driving winds whose energy can now be harnessed with great efficiency by turbines.

 The electricity they produce can warm and cool our homes, cook our food, and power our cars and bikes and buses.

 The sun burns, so we don't need to.

 To this miracle, one might add humanity's harnessing of nuclear power or a growing ability to tap the geothermal energy pulsing beneath the earth or the hydropower generated by the waves.

 So much clean energy is possible and available if we can muster the ingenuity and the will to harness it.

 And so there was nothing inevitable about the pace of greenhouse gas emissions.

 To see this clearly does not require imagining any new energy technology.

 It simply requires looking at the way different countries power themselves now.

 America emits about 15 tons of carbon per person per year.

 Canada and Australia belch out almost the same.

 In Germany and Japan, it's 8 tons.

 In France and the United Kingdom, it's less than 5 tons.

 These are vast differences across fairly similar lifestyles.

 A wanderer in London or Paris or Tokyo or Berlin would not notice material deprivation compared to Toronto or Sydney or Houston.

 What is true across space is also true across time.

 In 1979, Americans pumped out 22.7 tons of CO2 per person.

 Among Canadians, it was 18.2 tons.

