 For Germans, 14.3 tons.

 Australians, 13.2.

 The UK, 11.5.

 France, 10 tons per person.

 All these countries are richer today than they were then, and yet they emit less carbon per person than they did then.

 Nor is it the case that their emissions have simply been offshore to the developing countries that manufacture many of the goods that richer countries buy.

 Researchers use trading data to track the movement of manufacturing emissions.

 Adjusting for offshore manufacturing blunts the cuts to emissions somewhat.

 In the United States, a 21% drop becomes a 14% drop, while in Germany, there's almost no difference.

 But it doesn't come close to erasing it.

 What is changing in all these countries is the source of power.

 In 1900, nearly all of the UK's energy came from coal, and by 1950, it was still supplying over 90%, writes Ritchie.

 Now, coal supplies less than 2% of our electricity, and the government has pledged to phase it out completely by 2025.

 Indeed, the last coal-fired power station operating in the UK shuttered in September of 2024.

 It is possible to power a modern economy with clean energy.

 It is possible to develop an economy with clean energy.

 And it will be possible to go beyond where any economy is today with clean energy.

 While we were writing this book, researchers at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory generated more energy than they used in a test of laser-ignited nuclear fusion.

 We know nuclear fusion can work.

 It is how stars generate power.

 We have never known if we can make it work here on Earth, at least not affordably and at scale.

 But we are getting closer.

 It is tempting to assume we in the United States sit at the terminus of what energy can achieve and all that is left is for the rest of the world to catch up.

 We do not.

 We are early in the story of humanity's relationship with energy.

 Today's technologies will come to seem comical, even barbaric.

 In 100 or 200 years, everything will look radically different, says Melissa Lott, the former director of research at Columbia University's Center on Global Energy Policy.

 Folks will look back and be blown away by how we used energy today.

 They'll say, wait, you just burned it?

 Too many see clearly the cost that dirty energy can impose on the environment, but do not dare imagine the possibilities clean and abundant energy unlocks for it.

 In a paper imagining energy superabundance, which they define modestly as simply every human being having access to the energy that the residents of Iceland enjoy, Austin Vernon and Eli Dorado sketch out some of the near-term possibilities.

 Vertical greenhouses could feed far more people while using far less land.

 Desalination is a major contributor to water supplies in Israel now and could supply more than half of the demand in Singapore by the middle of the century.

 That technology could become affordable for poorer, populous nations that need new water sources the most.

 Directly removing carbon dioxide from the air would become more plausible, giving us a path to reversing climate change over time.

 But the first step to building the clean economy of tomorrow is building the clean economy of today.

 and that is a daunting task.

 Electrify everything.

 Start with the major ways that most U.S. households warm the planet.

 We drive.

 We heat homes.

 We cook food.

 We dry clothes.

 These activities require millions and millions of machines, most of which now run on fossil fuels.

 To decarbonize, they all will need to run on electricity.

 The energy analysts Sam Kalish and Saul Griffith estimate that in the next few years, consumers will need to replace about 1 billion machines with clean alternatives.

 That means when old cars give out, they are replaced by electric vehicles.

 It means when old furnaces cough their last breath, they are replaced by heat pumps.

 It means trading gas stoves for induction stoves and clothes dryers that run on natural gas for dryers that work off of heat pumps.

 Producing all these new machines is itself a steep manufacturing challenge.

