 It's also a persuasion challenge.

 People need to want these alternatives.

 That means the alternatives need to be excellent, which in many cases they now are.

 Electric cars accelerate faster and run quieter than cars powered by combustion engines.

 Induction stoves boil water in a fraction of the time it takes those little licks of fire.

 Because these advantages are not universally known and because new technologies are more expensive than mature ones, subsidies need to be generous and advertising needs to be everywhere.

 Making these replacement decisions needs to be a no-brainer every time.

 But assume that challenge can be met fully or at least partially.

 Now we have a billion more machines using more electricity than ever before.

 Where is all that electricity coming from?

 About 60% of the electricity generated in the United States in 2022 came from fossil fuels.

 The precise mix varies by state.

 South Dakota gets 84% of its power from renewables, mainly wind, and Washington gets 74% from renewables thanks to hydropower.

 But Nevada gets 56% of its electricity from natural gas.

 Wyoming gets 71% from coal.

 Florida gets only around 6% of its electricity from solar.

 So much for the sunshine state.

 The first task is to convert that 60% of energy coming from fossil fuels to something closer to 0%, or at least 0% coming from energy that releases carbon emissions into the atmosphere, which could leave a role for natural gas with carbon capture.

 That would be task enough, but with 1 billion new machines plugging into the country's grid, we don't just need the electricity we generate now to be clean.

 We need much more of it.

 One way to put that is for every 15 years from 2020 to 2050, we need to build the entirety of our electricity grid worth of supply again, says Jesse Jenkins, an energy expert at Princeton University.

 And we need to build it out of solar panels and wind turbines and storage batteries.

 Jenkins' team has modeled that build out in detail.

 A plausible path to decarbonization sees wind and solar installations spanning up to 590,000 square kilometers.

 That is roughly equal to the landmass of Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Ohio, Rhode Island, and Tennessee.

 And we need to do it fast.

 In their 2023 paper, The Green's Dilemma, J.B. Rule and James Salzman, professors of environmental law at Vanderbilt and UCLA, respectively, put this vividly.

 Consider that the largest solar facility currently online in the United States is capable of generating 580 megawatts, they write.

 To meet even a middle-road renewable energy scenario would require bringing online two new 400 megawatt solar power facilities, each taking up at least 2,000 acres every week for the next 30 years.

 Installing that much wind and solar capacity isn't just a manufacturing challenge, it's a political challenge.

 Wind and solar require far more land than coal or natural gas to produce the same amount of energy.

 Some of the viable land is open and easy to purchase, much of it isn't.

 Neighbors have fears about a wind farm rising near their homes, and communities have concerns about becoming the site of a major solar array.

 If the land is publicly owned, the project has to negotiate with an overlapping set of federal and state authorities.

 It can take years to merely get the plans and permits approved.

 Once we've generated this electricity, we'll have to move it.

 This will sometimes require sending power across states, even across the country.

 The wind blows harder in Oklahoma than in Oregon, and the sun shines brighter in Arizona than in Maine.

 But a fully electric economy will require these far-flung states to be connected by an integrated energy grid.

 The name for the infrastructure that moves electricity from one place to another is transmission lines.

 And we've never completed more than 4,100 miles of transmission lines in one year, ever.

 We'd have to build more than that, year after year, to hit these goals.

 Transmission projects often come in late and over budget, and many planned projects stall.

 A 2016 report by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory looked at five major transmission projects with projected completion dates of 2021.

 Only one of them has been completed.

 Construction has not even begun on the other four.

 For decades, American liberalism has measured its successes in how near it could come to the social welfare system of Denmark.

 Liberals fought for expansions of health insurance and paid vacation leave and paid sick days, and a heftier earned income tax credit and an expanded child tax credit and decent retirement benefits.

 Worthy causes all.

 But those victories could be won when they were won, largely inside the tax code and the regulatory state.

