 Building a social insurance program does occasionally require new buildings, but it rarely requires all that many of them.

 This was and is a liberalism that changed the world through the writing of new rules and the moving about of money.

 The climate crisis demands something different.

 It demands a liberalism that builds.

 The Infrastructure and Investment Jobs Act, the Inflation Reduction Act, and the Chips and Science Act add up to about $450 billion in clean energy investments, subsidies, and loan guarantees.

 This is how the scale of such bills is normally described in Washington by a price tag.

 The more money, the bigger the bill.

 It's an incomplete measure at best.

 If we could build faster, the numbers could rise.

 If we could build cheaper, the money would go further.

 That $450 billion, it's only an estimate.

 Many of the subsidies in these bills are open-ended.

 They will go to as many projects as can use them.

 These bills could spend trillions of dollars if we could build that infrastructure fast enough.

 They could spend far less than $450 billion if projects become too hard to permit or to construct.

 They could waste tens or hundreds of billions of dollars on projects that are never completed.

 What matters is not how much money gets spent.

 What matters is what gets built.

 California's no-speed rail rail system is not a high-speed rail system across California.

 Californians liked what they saw.

 In 1996, California formed a high-speed rail authority to plan for the construction of what would be America's fastest rail system.

 Planners imagined a silver shell whistling along beams of steel, carrying millions of parents, children, Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, Hollywood actors, and solo travelers through America's largest state at speeds reaching 220 miles per hour.

 Goodbye traffic and pollution choked freeways, hello classy dining cars and reclinable seats.

 High-speed rail is not some futuristic technology like cold fusion or flying cars.

 France and Japan broke ground on these projects back in the 1960s.

 Both of us have boarded bullet trains in foreign countries, taking the TGV from Paris to Bordeaux, or the Shinkansen from Tokyo to Kyoto.

 Ah, but California.

 The years ticked by.

 The governors came and went.

 In 2008, voters approved a plan to build the first segments by 2020 for $33 billion.

 Then in 2011, high-speed rail's foremost champion returned when Brown improbably won back the governor's mansion, almost 30 years after last leaving it.

 In his 2012 state-of-the-state address, he marked high-speed rail as his signature project.

 If you believe that California will continue to grow, as I do, and the millions more people will be living in our state, this is a wise investment, he said.

 And California was ready to make it.

 We are within weeks of a revised business plan that will enable us to begin initial construction before the year is out, he promised.

 And this time, Brown had allies.

 In 2009, President Barack Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act into law.

 The recovery bit was obvious.

 The housing bubble had caused a financial crisis, a financial crisis had caused mass joblessness, the economy needed help and it needed it now.

 But the administration wanted to do more than mere stimulus.

 It wanted a legacy.

 It wanted the kinds of ambitious projects upon which another century of American might and prosperity could be built.

 You never want a serious crisis to go to waste, Rahm Emanuel, Obama's chief of staff said.

 And what I mean by that is an opportunity to do things that you think you could not do before.

 This was a reinvestment side of the bill.

 Hundreds of billions of dollars to build the infrastructure of the future.

 And high-speed rail was a glitzy headline project at the center of it.

 Imagine boarding a train in the center of a city, Obama said in April of 2009.

 No race into an airport and across the terminal.

 No delays.

