 No sitting on the tarmac.

 No lost luggage.

 No taking off your shoes.

 Imagine whisking through towns at speeds of over 100 miles an hour, walking only a few steps to public transportation and ending up just blocks from your destination.

 Imagine what a great project that would be to rebuild America.

 Now, all of you know there's not some fanciful pie-in-the-sky vision of the future.

 It is now.

 It is happening right now.

 It's been happening for decades.

 The problem is it's been happening elsewhere, not here.

 Obama wanted it to happen here.

 And the most obvious place for it to happen was California, where, Obama continued, voters have already chosen to move forward with their own high-speed rail system, a system of new stations and 220-mile-per-hour trains that links big cities to inland towns, that alleviates crippling congestion on highways and at airports, and it makes travel from San Francisco to Los Angeles possible in two and a half hours.

 In 2009, then, this was the status of high-speed rail in California.

 It was a signature project of the President of the United States, a signature project of the most powerful and experienced governor California had in decades.

 Voters in California had set aside billions to make it real, and the federal government was adding billions more.

 It is hard to imagine a more favorable climate for the project.

 A spokesman for the California High-Speed Rail Authority joined a call-in radio show, told listeners that they'd be able to ride that train from San Francisco to L.A. in the year 2020.

 But progress crawled and costs ballooned.

 In his final state-of-the-state address in 2018, Brown tried to rally Californians to the task.

 Difficulties challenge us, but they can't discourage or stop us, he said.

 The next year, Gavin Newsom, who had served as lieutenant governor, succeeded Brown.

 Let's be real, Newsom said in his first state-of-the-state.

 The project is currently planned, would cost too much, and take too long.

 There's been too little oversight and not enough transparency.

 Right now, there simply isn't a path to get from Sacramento to San Diego, let alone from San Francisco to L.A.

 I wish there were.

 Ambitions were cut.

 No longer was California trying to build high-speed rail, to connect the megacities of San Francisco and Los Angeles.

 Now, it was trying to salvage something, anything.

 A line between the agricultural centers of Merced and Bakersfield.

 A line no one would have authorized if it had been the plan presented in the first place.

 The scaled-down plan was estimated at $22 billion.

 But even the price tag on that line has ballooned.

 The latest estimate is it will cost $35 billion to complete, and it won't begin carrying passengers until sometime between 2030 and 2033.

 And that's if all goes well from here.

 The U.S. has contributed as much to rail technology as any other country in the world, or more than any other country.

 Americans invented the airbrake and led the world in rail construction at the end of the 1800s.

 California businessmen helming the Central Pacific Railroad Company built all but a few hundred miles of the western portion of the transcontinental railroad in the 1860s.

 The project spanned nearly 1,800 miles.

 It took just six years to finish.

 These days, six years is roughly the amount of time it takes California to realize that its bullet train needs to be pushed back by another decade.

 In the time California spent failing to complete its 500-mile high-speed rail system, China has built more than 23,000 miles of high-speed rail.

 In October of 2023, I went to Fresno, California, and toured the miles of rail infrastructure that the California High-Speed Rail Authority has built.

 The project is caught in a strange limbo between political fantasy and physical fact.

 The agency doesn't have anywhere near the money or political capital it would need to complete the Los Angeles to San Francisco system Californians actually want.

 It doesn't even have the money to complete the Bakersfield to Merced system that Newsom proposed.

 It is no line of sight on how it will get that money or that political capital.

 But since it has some money and some political capital, it is building anyway in the hopes that Californians will eventually want to finish what they've started.

 As I walked the path of the track with the engineers who were building it, I heard less about engineering problems than political problems.

 I stood on a patch of the 99 freeway that had been moved in order to clear the hoped-for train's path.

