 Not far from there had been a Daryl's mini-storage.

 In folk imagination, eminent domain is a simple process by which the state simply tells you it wants your land, gives you some money, and takes it from you.

 In reality, it took the High-Speed Rail Authority four separate requests for possession and two and a half years of legal wrangling to get that land.

 I heard a story like that repeated again and again and again.

 There are parts of the build that intersect with freight rail lines, but the freight rail lines are so busy in the holiday season that some impose a construction moratorium from October to December.

 So in those areas, no construction can happen for a large chunk of the year.

 Trains are cleaner than cars, but High-Speed Rail has had to clear every inch of its route through environmental reviews, with lawsuits lurking around every corner.

 The environmental review process began in 2012, and by 2024, it still wasn't finished.

 I talked with Brian Kelly, who served as CEO of the High-Speed Rail Authority from 2018 to 2024.

 I'm always amazed his staff has been working on these segments for a decade or longer to get through the environmental process, he said.

 What has taken so long on high-speed rail is not hammering nails or pouring concrete, it's negotiating.

 Negotiating with courts, with funders, with business owners, with homeowners, with farm owners, those negotiations cost time, and time costs money.

 Those negotiations lead to changes in the route, or the build, or the design, which costs money.

 Those negotiations lead to public disappointment and frustration, which leads to loss of money that might otherwise have been approved if the project was speeding toward completion.

 There is one school of thought that says it is worth taking the time to do these projects right.

 If the reviews and the negotiations and the consultations take a few more years, then those are years well spent, but they carry a price tag.

 Kelly said to me, time is a killer on the estimate of a project's cost.

 When you don't have funding and can't make decisions and can't drive to get operational and you can't move the ball, the cost is huge.

 Two to three percent a year, and in higher inflation periods like we just had, five percent.

 As delays mount, costs keep rising.

 The project becomes more expensive to finish.

 The public loses faith.

 The politicians begin second-guessing.

 Governor Gavin Newsom knows how bad this looks.

 He knows how bad this is.

 I watched as a mayor and then a lieutenant governor and now governor as years became decades on high-speed rail, he said.

 People are losing trust and confidence in our ability to build big things.

 People look at me all the time and ask, what the hell happened to the California of the 50s and 60s?

 But it's not just California.

 Democrats today are as searing in their criticisms of public sclerosis as any Republican.

 John Podesta, the graybeard who oversell the rollout of the Inflation Reduction Act for Joe Biden, bemoaned that delays are pervasive at every level of government, federal, state, and local.

 We got so good at stopping projects that we forgot how to build things in America.

 Brian Deese, then the director of Biden's National Economic Council, noted in April 2022 that the Empire State Building was completed in a little over a year.

 He said that government needs to demonstrate that America can build, fast as we've done before, and fairly as we've sometimes failed to do.

 One response, the typical Republican response, is that government is intrinsically inefficient.

 But the data doesn't bear that out.

 The transit cost project tracks the price tags on rail projects in different countries.

 It's hard to get an apples-to-apples comparison here because different projects are different, and it matters whether they include, say, a tunnel, which is expensive for all the obvious reasons.

 Even so, the U.S. is notable for how much we spend and how little we get for it.

 It costs about $609 million to build a kilometer, about 0.6 miles, of rail here.

 But Germany builds a kilometer of rail for $384 million.

 Canada gets it done for $295 million.

 Japan clocks in at $267 million.

 Portugal is the cheapest country in the database at $96 million.

 All those countries, by the way, they build more tunnels than we do, perhaps because they retain the confidence to regularly try.

 The better you are at building infrastructure, the more ambitious you can be when imagining infrastructure to build.

 We looked into it, and it turns out that all those countries, they also have governments.

 So the problem can't simply be government.

 There is a problem in unions, another favored bugaboo of the right.

 Union density is higher in all those countries than it is in the United States.

