 The Construction Puzzle Think of the technology we have today that we didn't have in the 1970s.

 The new generations of power tools and computer modeling and teleconferencing and advanced machinery and prefab materials and global shipping.

 You'd think we could build so much more, so much faster, for so much less money than in the past.

 But we can't.

 Or at least, we don't.

 Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, productivity in the construction sector, how much more could be done given the same number of workers and machines and the same amount of land, grew faster than productivity in the rest of the economy.

 Then, around 1970, it began to fall, even as economy-wide productivity kept rising.

 Today, a chasm yawns.

 A construction worker in 2020 produced less than a construction worker in 1970, at least according to the official statistics.

 Contrast that with the economy overall, where labor productivity rose by 290 percent between 1950 and 2020, or to the manufacturing sector, which saw a stunning nine-fold increase in productivity.

 In the sharply titled The Strange and Awful Path of Productivity in the U.S.

 Construction Sector, Austin Goolsby, the president of the Chicago Federal Reserve and a former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors under President Obama, and Chad Severson, an economist at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, set out to uncover whether this is all just a trick of statistics, and if not, what has gone wrong.

 Their paper works by process of elimination.

 First, they look at whether there's been less capital investment in construction than elsewhere in the economy.

 Nope.

 Then they examine whether we're mismeasuring construction, which would mean that sometimes starting in the 1970s, we began overestimating the labor or materials of the construction industry used, or underestimating how much it built with them, or maybe both.

 They test this a few different ways, but the most interesting is to look at how many houses were built per worker, adjusted for square footage.

 There, the trend looks more flat than negative, and maybe slightly positive for single-family homes.

 But it's far from bringing construction productivity anywhere near level with the rest of the economy.

 This isn't a quirk of American record-keeping.

 The slowdown is actually international.

 The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development tracked construction productivity in 29 countries between 1996 and 2019.

 In 55% of them, productivity fell during that time.

 The only countries in which productivity rose at more than two percentage points per year were the Slovak Republic, Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania, poor countries rebuilding after the crack-up of the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc.

 So, if it's not under investment, and it's not a statistical illusion, what is it?

 Here, Goolsby and Severson seem stumped.

 The Warden School, for example, tracks building regulations across cities.

 And Goolsby and Severson tested regulatory burden against construction productivity.

 There was a slight relationship, but nothing all that impressive.

 They looked at which states saw the highest and lowest rates of productivity increases.

 The worst performers, Severson told me, were Alaska, Idaho, Wyoming, Delaware, and Michigan.

 The relative stars were Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, and Colorado.

 That doesn't lend itself to a clean story of red states and blue states, or urban states and rural states.

 Severson, for one, is skeptical that there's any single answer.

 I don't know how you'd get 50 years of decline without having multiple problems, he said.

 Everyone has their pet theory, but everyone has a different pet.

 But Goolsby and Severson are economists.

 Maybe the cause is obvious to industry insiders.

 Ed Zarensky worked in construction, largely as an estimator, for more than 40 years, and he now runs a market analysis firm, Construction Analytics.

 Zarensky, who tracks construction costs and business volume closely, agrees that there has been a slowdown.

 And he agrees that there is no single cause for it.

 But when he thinks back on what the construction industry looked like when he began his career, and what it looks like now, the anecdotes tumble out.

 When I first started, back in the 70s, you did one estimate on a project, he said.

 You put it in, you got your bid, and if you won, you began construction.

 By the time I left in 2014, you did three estimates for every job before you even put the bid in.

 That becomes part of the cost of the job.

 Or take the job site, he continued.

 The safety features on jobs when I started in the industry were not even noticeable.

 Safety on a job today is incredibly different.

 You don't walk across a beam.

