 You walk around on a pathway marked for you to stay safe so you don't fall off the side of the building.

 By the time I retired, one thing that took place every day on every job site was a mandatory 15 minutes of calisthenics before you started your workday.

 That's totally non-productive, but it led to fewer worksite injuries during the day.

 And behind all that is paperwork and paperwork and more paperwork, he said.

 The work we do today takes hundreds more people in the office to track and bring to completion.

 The level of reporting that you have to send to the government, to the insurance companies, to the owner, to show you're meeting all the requirements on the job site, all of that has increased.

 And so the number of people you need to produce that has increased.

 The Organizations of Affluence The economist Mansur Olson's famous 1982 book, The Rise and Decline of Nations, begins with its own productivity mystery.

 After World War II, Germany's and Japan's cities were bombed out, their people dispirited, their economies wrecked.

 The question of the age, Olson writes, was whether these abjectly defeated societies would be able to provide themselves with even the rudiments of survival.

 Instead, West Germany and Japan thrived, growing far faster in that era than Britain, which had emerged victorious from the war.

 Olson was known for seminal work on how groups cooperate, and why so often they don't.

 In The Rise and Decline of Nations, he developed a deeper theory of why nations often stagnate amid affluence, yet thrive in the aftermath of chaos.

 His key insight is that groups capable of collective action, imagine the Sierra Club or the Chamber of Commerce, are slow to build, but powerful and persistent when they coalesce.

 America has long had seniors, but the emergence of the AARP gave them a new level of political power.

 Workers become far stronger once they organize into unions.

 Forming these groups is difficult, but power creates persistence.

 Once a group is successfully organized, it can fight for its own survival and invest in its future strength.

 And so, Olson suggests, if organizations and collusions for collective action usually emerge only in favorable circumstances and develop strength over time, a stable society will see more organization for collective action as time passes.

 So the more organized groups you have, Olson says, the more fights over distribution you'll have, the more lobbying you'll have, the more complex regulations you'll have, the more bargaining you'll get between groups, and the harder it will be to get complex projects done.

 Affluent, stable societies have more negotiations, and that means they have more negotiators.

 There's great good in that.

 It means people's concerns can be voiced.

 It means their needs can be met, their ideas can be integrated, their insights can be shared.

 It also means it becomes difficult to get much of anything done.

 This is why China can build tens of thousands of miles of high-speed rail in the time it takes California to fail to build hundreds of miles of high-speed rail.

 China does not spend years debating with judges over whether it needs to move a storage facility.

 That power leads to abuse and imperiousness.

 It also leads to high-speed rail.

 The Rise and Decline of Nations is a classic economics text, but time has exposed gaps in the theory.

 Japan has gone from economic poster child to growth laggard.

 Olson's argument would seem to imply that the United States, with its geographic protection against invasion, and its long history of continuity, would be far more sclerotic than Germany.

 But it isn't.

 And Olson has no real answer for why so few countries that fall into crisis subsequently grow into affluence.

 Olson's biggest error is his assumption that groups organize around redistribution.

 Olson almost completely missed the post-materialist turn in the politics of affluent countries.

 Some groups seek to fill their coffers, but others are organized to protect the environment, to increase safety standards, to preserve the feel of their communities, or to express their values.

 These kinds of groups have been engines of social progress.

 Their existence is a gift of affluence, not just a disease of affluence.

 But Olson, who died in 1998, was right when he said that affluence is a gift that comes with costs.

 And those costs concentrate in the areas of the economy, in which the numbers of groups that have to be consulted mounts.

 From this perspective, the productivity woes in the construction industry don't seem so puzzling.

 It's relatively easy to build inside the confines of computer code.

 It's harder, but manageable, to manipulate matter within the four walls of a factory.

 When you construct a new building, or subway tunnel, or highway, you have to navigate neighbors and communities, and existing roads, and emergency access vehicles, and politicians, and beloved views of the park, and the possibility of earthquakes, and on, and on.

 Construction may well be the industry with the most exposure to Olson's thesis.

 And construction of public projects, like high-speed rail, is almost uniquely vulnerable.

 It is the government's job, after all, to balance society's many competing perspectives.

 They need to do more than turn a profit, or satisfy shareholders.

 Zarensky's experience often felt like a narrativization of Olson's thesis.

