 There are so many people who want to have some say over a project, he told me.

 You have to meet so many parking spaces per unit, it needs to be this far back from the sight lines, you have to use this much reclaimed water, you didn't have 30 people sitting in a hearing room for the approval of a permit 40 years ago.

 Severson told a similar story.

 There are a million veto points, he said.

 There are a lot of mouths at the trough that need to be fed to get anything started, or done.

 So many people can gum up the works.

 That's particularly true in richer areas.

 There's a reason so much of the housing construction in Washington, D.C., since 2000, has happened in the city's southwest, rather than in Georgetown.

 When richer residents want something stopped, they know how to organize, and they often already have the organizations, to say nothing of the lobbyists and access needed to stop it.

 These dynamics help explain a curious finding that ends Severson and Goolsbee's paper.

 After looking at the states with the highest construction productivity, they note that the more productive states don't seem to gain market share in the construction industry.

 That doesn't make much sense if you assume that the difficulties of construction are primarily the organization of manpower and materials.

 It makes more sense if you assume that the frictions are navigating local regulations, community considerations, neighbors' qualms, and politicians' interests.

 Developers are often fixtures in the local political scene.

 They have to be.

 My feeling, Zarensky told me, is the guys that know the system have a much easier time getting through the system.

 They know ahead of time what they have to come into the party with, and how to speak to those people, and how to satisfy them, and so it goes a lot smoother for them.

 But a thorough knowledge of one city or state, and establishing relationships with its decision makers, won't necessarily translate to success in another.

 In a separate paper, Ed Glazer and four co-authors add to this story.

 They begin with another astonishing fact.

 From 1935 to 1970, the number of homes produced per construction worker increased at the same pace as, and sometimes even faster than, the number of cars produced per automobile industry worker, or the total manufactured output per industrial worker.

 The world we live in, where manufacturing productivity rises and rises, even as construction productivity falls, it's a new phenomenon, a new world, not a historical inevitability.

 Glazer and his colleagues go on to look at the size of the firms involved.

 It turns out that big home construction companies are much more efficient than small home construction companies.

 No surprise there.

 But the market in home construction is dominated by small firms.

 More than 60% of employment in single family home construction is in firms with fewer than 10 employees.

 In manufacturing, most employees work in firms of more than 500 people.

 So why is home construction in America dominated by such small firms?

 The researchers pick through the data, and they find that firms are allowed to build on less and less land, and are subject to more and more land use regulations, in ways that choke off their ability to grow and scale their work across cities and states.

 A manufacturing plant can locate in one place and sell everywhere.

 Builders have to negotiate through the regulations and interest groups and political relationships of each parcel of land they work on individually.

 One of Olson's insights is that a complex society begins to reward those who can best navigate complexity.

 That creates an incentive for its best and brightest to become navigators of complexity, and perhaps even creators of further complexity.

 Every society, whatever its institutions and governing ideology, gives greater rewards to the fittest.

 The fittest for that society, Olson writes.

 A young country that is still in its building phase creates opportunities for engineers and architects.

 A mature country that has entered its negotiations phase creates opportunities for lawyers and management consultants.

 Then there's the incentive to avoid bureaucracy and its attendant frustrations.

 Patrick Collison, the CEO of the online payments behemoth Stripe, was once asked whether too much talent is flowing into Silicon Valley.

 I don't think that the ambitious upstarts who go into high-speed rail, in America anyway, are going to have a great time or have much success in convincing their friends to follow them.

 And I suspect that, for various reasons, too many domains look somewhat like high-speed rail.

 There's a view that the internet is a frontier of last resort, and I don't think it's totally wrong.

 Nader's Raiders America's post-war politics are often shorthanded as the rise of New Deal liberalism and the backlash of small government conservatism.

 But it wasn't just conservatives who came to thank the government reckless and dangerous and in need of new rules and strictures.

 Liberals did too.

 After World War II, as highway construction grew, vehicle sales soared.

 So did road deaths.

 Motor vehicle fatalities rose from about 30,000 in 1946 to more than 50,000 in the late 1960s.

 In 1965, a lawyer named Ralph Nader published the book Unsafe at Any Speed, a blistering expose of car manufacturers resisting safety improvements while blaming individual drivers for rising fatalities.

