 The book was a sensation.

 In 1966, Lyndon Johnson signed the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act and the Highway Safety Act, which mandated a new set of auto safety standards.

 Nader soon became one of the most famous lawyers in America.

 To replicate his success, he recruited teams of young activists to join the cause of bird-dogging government and big business on behalf of consumers.

 His disciples, known as Nader's Raiders, transformed politics with their blend of expertise and advocacy.

 So far as anyone can remember, a Christian Science Monitor reporter wrote in 1969, nothing quite like this has happened in Washington before.

 A group of unofficial but informed outsiders as a sort of civilian posse has descended on a rather stuffy government commission, poked under sofas, and asked some rough questions.

 As the historian Paul Sabin writes in his book Public Citizens, reformers like Ralph Nader were right to concentrate their fury on government and its safety record in the 1960s.

 The government was allowing strip mines to ravage the Appalachian Mountains and leaving coal miners to suffer from black lung disease with little compensation, he writes.

 Government policies were permitting oil refineries to freely dump toxic emissions into low-income communities of color and letting oil spills pollute the nation's waterways and coasts.

 Nader didn't just criticize the government, he launched a movement to tame it.

 His rate was contributed to some of the most important environmental laws in history, including the Clean Water Act.

 With each win, they made it easier for more citizens and groups to sue the government for wrongdoing.

 But what they were building was an arm of liberalism with associated institutions, laws, and leaders designed to relentlessly sue the government itself and that would go on to fight for more bills and rules that would widen the opportunities to sue the government.

 Sabin writes, Litigation by leading public interest environmental law firms in the early 1970s almost exclusively targeted the government for legal action.

 The Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund boasted 77 legal accomplishments between 1971 and 1973.

 Approximately 70 sought to block government actions or to intervene in public proceedings to influence government regulatory and permitting practices.

 The Environmental Defense Fund similarly began its 1972 case summary with a list of acronyms for the 10 federal agencies named in its legal interventions.

 In more than 60 of its 65 listed legal actions, the Environmental Defense Fund either intervened in public proceedings, such as government permitting processes for private projects, or directly assailed a government-led initiative.

 Fewer than five of EDF's legal actions directly targeted companies or private parties.

 Similarly, only three out of 29 of NRDC, the National Resource Defense Council's legal action initiatives from its first seven months, directly named a corporate defendant.

 The environmentalist movement succeeded brilliantly.

 Between 1970 and 2020, the combined emissions of the six most common pollutants, which include lead, carbon monoxide, and sulfur dioxide, dropped by roughly 80 percent.

 New cars, SUVs, and trucks that run against today are more than 99 percent cleaner than in 1970.

 Imagine that, more than 99 percent cleaner.

 The benefits of the Clean Air Act, which was amended in 1977 and 1990, have prevented between 400,000 and several million premature deaths in the last 50 years.

 The reduction in lead furthermore saved tens of thousands from senseless poisoning and saved millions of IQ points.

 The number of very unhealthy or hazardous air days in Los Angeles fell from 160 in 1981 to an average of two in the 2010s.

 But behind these victories, NATO's revolution created a new layer of government, democracy by lawsuit.

 The number of lawyers and cases soared in the 1970s and 1980s.

 The result, Sabin argues, was a new kind of liberalism, which regarded government not as a partner in the solution of societal problems, but rather as a source of those very problems.

 When the PBS news anchor Jim Lehrer asked Nader why he was qualified to be president in 2000, Nader told him, I don't know anybody who has sued more agencies and departments.

 Nader and his raiders believed in government.

 They defended it from conservative assault.

 When they criticized it, when they fought it, sued it, restrained it, they did so to try to make it better.

 But those same laws and processes were available for anyone else to use, too.

 You can bog clean energy projects down in environmental reviews.

 You can use a process meant to stop the government from building a highway through your town, to keep a non-profit developer from building affordable housing down the block.

 It was as if liberals took a bicycle part to fix it, but never quite figured out how to get it running properly again, Sabin writes.

 Liberalism's Lawyer's Problem Nicholas Bagley, a law professor at the University of Michigan, has seen the broken bicycle up close.

 When he served as Governor Gretchen Whitmer's chief legal counsel, he noticed that Republicans were consistent in the way they tried to weaken the government.

 They would bury it in paperwork and procedure and hearings and disclosure demands and lawsuits.

 It was as if the right had studied the tactics of Nader's Raiders and adopted them for their own purposes.

 The 2017 Regulatory Accountability Act, which Republicans proposed but couldn't ultimately pass, was a good example.

 For every major regulation, it would have forced the government to open a period of comment and solicit alternative approaches from the public.

 It would have given those affected the opportunity to cross-examine the agency proposing the rule at an oral hearing.

 It would have forced the publication of ongoing frameworks for evaluation, and much more.

 Some of these ideas, they sound fine in theory, but multiplied across the entire swath of major regulations the government proposes or carries out, and weaponized by groups and individuals who oppose those regulations and want to destroy or slow them down, the burden of compliance would become overwhelming.

 What Bagley saw was that Democrats would defend the government against these salvos, but they didn't seem to notice what the defenses implied.

 If Republicans were proposing more paperwork and process to make the government less effective, wasn't it likely that less paperwork and process would make the government more effective?

