 Or as Bagley asked, if new administrative procedures can be used to advance a libertarian agenda, might not relaxing existing administrative constraints advance progressive ones?

 In 2019, Bagley published an incendiary article in the Michigan Law Review, which he later turned into a policy paper for the Niskanen Center.

 The procedure fetish, as he called it, argued that something had gone wrong inside government, inside liberalism, inside Bagley's own profession.

 Liberal legalism, and through it liberal government, had become process-obsessed rather than outcomes-oriented.

 It had convinced itself that the state's legitimacy would be earned through compliance with an endless catalog of rules and restraints, rather than through getting things done for the people it claimed to serve.

 Inflexible procedural rules are a hallmark of the American state, Bagley wrote.

 The ubiquity of court challenges, the artificial rigors of notice and comment rulemaking, zealous environmental review, pre-enforcement review of agency rules, picayune legal rules governing hiring and procurement, nationwide court injunctions, the list goes on and on.

 Collectively, these procedures frustrate the very government action that progressives demand to address the urgent problems that now confront us.

 Behind these procedures, Bagley suggested, were two very real concerns, legitimacy and accountability.

 How can a government as powerful and vast as that of the United States maintain legitimacy?

 How can it maintain accountability to citizens?

 These fears reflect, in part, the age in which the rules were written.

 The 1946 Administrative Procedure Act, which governs much of the federal government's bureaucratic workings, was adopted to soothe the jangled nerves of legal and business communities alarmed by the New Deal and the muscular wartime exercise of state power.

 Then came the buildup of procedural architecture in the 70s, when liberal lawyers, inspired by the courtroom heroics of the civil rights movement, turned to the legal system to make sure that the government actually worked on behalf of the people.

 The system we developed is unique.

 Decisions that are often made by bureaucracies in other countries are made by judges in our country.

 Robert Kagan, a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley, calls it adversarial legalism.

 It is only a slight oversimplification to say that in the United States, lawyers, legal rights, judges, and lawsuits become functional equivalents for the large central bureaucracies that dominate governance in the activist states of Western Europe, he writes.

 There's a reason, Kagan thinks, that America's ended up with a system we have.

 Americans have always mistrusted the government.

 They've particularly mistrusted centralized power.

 But they also need a government able to wield power.

 They want the good a government can do.

 That tension became unbearable after the New Deal and the Great Society.

 Between 1965 and 1977, responding to the new political movements, Congress passed 25 major environmental and civil rights acts, plus far-reaching statutes regulating workplace safety, consumer lending, product safety, private pension funds, and local public education, Kagan writes.

 It created federal regulatory agencies or bureaus to issue implementing regulations, binding on millions of business firms.

 But to enforce those laws and regulations, Congress was compelled to bow to the inherited demands for decentralization of government.

 Americans were asking the government to do more than it ever had, but they were not willing to give the government the trust and authority it needed to do it.

 But reformers could not simply devolve power to state and local governments.

 Liberals had just seen, in the fight against Jim Crow, that you could not trust the states, much less the localities, to do what the federal government asked.

 And so they turned to the courts, which had, under Chief Justice Earl Warren, become newly beloved by liberals.

 Adversarial legalism was a way of reconciling the government we wanted with the suspicions we harbored.

 America is unusually legalistic.

 It always has been.

 In 1835, Alexis de Tocqueville wrote, Scarcely any political question arises in the United States that is not resolved, sooner or later, into a judicial question.

 What was true then is truer now.

 America has twice as many lawyers per capita as Germany, and four times as many as France.

 Much of this energy is now devoted to suing the government.

 In 1967, there were three cases per 100,000 Americans directed at enforcing federal laws.

 By 1976, there were 13.

 By 2014, there were 40.

 The prevalence of lawyers in American life is unusual, but their dominance at the top of American politics is startling.

 Bagley writes that, though they make up less than 1% of the population, lawyers currently constitute more than one-third of the House of Representatives, and more than half the Senate.

 Fully half of the last ten presidents were lawyers, as are more than a third of the officials now serving in the states as governor, lieutenant governor, and secretary of state.

 In the Democratic Party, every presidential and vice presidential nominee from Walter Mondale to Kamala Harris attended law school.

 Tim Wall's, in this respect, was an almost radical break with tradition.

 When you make legal training the default training for a political career, you make legal thinking the default thinking in politics.

 And legal thinking centers around statutory language and commitment to process, not results and outcomes.

 Olson predicted that a thriving, successful society would become more complex to navigate over time.

 There would be more groups and voices and laws and processes.

