 Those who succeeded would be those best suited to operating at the nexus of that complexity.

 In the economy, that might be management consultants and financiers.

 In politics, it'll be lawyers.

 Now, there's nothing wrong with lawyers.

 There might be something wrong with a country or political system that needs so many of them, and that makes them so central to its operations.

 There might be a system so consumed, trying to balance its manifold interests, that it can no longer perceive what is in the public's interest.

 Legitimacy is not solely, not even primarily, a product of the procedures that the agencies follow, Bagley writes.

 Legitimacy arises more generally from the perception that government is capable, informed, prompt, responsive, and fair.

 And that is where government is failing.

 California's high-speed rail authority has been scrupulous in following the law, but it has been unable to deliver a train.

 The result is less, not more, faith in government.

 The Pew Research Center has aggregated decades of polls tracking the public's trust in government.

 The higher mark of the chart is in 1964, when 77% of the public believed that the government would do the right thing all or most of the time.

 Confidence plummets from there.

 In the 70s, after Watergate, it sits in the 30% range.

 Confidence rebounds into the 40s in the 1980s, and briefly brushes the 60s after 9-11.

 But the downward trend is undeniable.

 By 2023, only 16% of the country expressed confidence in government.

 This is not, in our view, attributable solely or even mainly to cumbersome government processes.

 But the collapse in trust across the same decades that so many processes were being built to affirm that government could be trusted should make us question whether we've yoked the state to a failed theory of legitimacy.

 Now the government has taken on the task of decarbonization and the responsibility of coordinating a once-in-a-century transformation of America's built landscape, but is doing so with laws and agencies and habits that are better designed to block green construction than to allow it.

 The Green Dilemma In 2020, J.B. Ruhle and James Salzman published a paper titled, What Happens When the New Green Deal Meets the Old Green Laws?

 They began by imagining a presidential debate in which two opposing candidates describe their vision for remaking America's energy infrastructure.

 One candidate proposes doubling down on oil and gas production, building more freeways, and crisscrossing the country in natural gas pipelines.

 The other candidate imagines an all-out race to an economy built atop renewables, with electric vehicle chargers everywhere and a national high-speed rail system anchoring American transit.

 These two infrastructure agendas could not be more different in vision, but they are very much alike in one key respect, Ruhle and Salzman write.

 Each is an environmental impact assessment and project permitting nightmare.

 The problem, Ruhle and Salzman argued, is that the Green New Deal must undertake multiple national-scale infrastructure initiatives of magnitudes never before processed through existing siting and environmental law standards and procedures.

 And there was little reason to believe that was possible.

 Examples were already piling up of renewable projects being stalled or killed by coalitions akin to those that formed against dirty energy projects and that were deploying the same environmental laws and rules.

 Most people do not like the idea of an oil pipeline or electric transmission line running through their backyard, write Ruhle and Salzman.

 And guess what?

 They do not like the idea of wind turbines or solar panels in their backyard either.

 In their follow-up, The Green's Dilemma, Ruhle and Salzman tried to diagnose a problem more precisely.

 The raft of environmental laws in the 1970s, he said, represented a grand bargain of sorts.

 The quid pro quo for a cleaner environment was that development would become slower and more expensive due both to permitting and to the litigation that often ensued.

 In many respects, this has turned out to be a good deal.

 Apart from greenhouse gases, which effectively have been unregulated, every major air pollutant has decreased significantly over the last five decades, from carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide to airborne lead and others.

 Surface water quality has similarly improved substantially since the 1970s.

 But that bargain has broken down.

 The problem we faced in the 1970s was that we were building too much and too heedlessly.

 The problem we faced in the 2020s is that we were building too little and we are too often paralyzed by process.

 And this is not just a view of a few law professors.

 The environmentalist movement evolved to stop bad people from destroying the world.

 And so we have perfected the art of saying no.

 That's Larry Selzer, the president and CEO of the Conservation Fund.

 He continues, But we can't know our way to the kind of growth we need.

 The interstate highway system is 49,000 miles of road.

 The interstate clean energy system, the solar farms, the wind turbines, the geothermal land, the transmission lines, the pipes, will touch more than 500,000 miles of land.

 This will be an enormous project.

