
One occupier quoted by Milkman, Luce, and Lewis said that “OWS [Occupy Wall Street] was a floating signifier that everybody saw different things in.”10The idea of the floating signifier was one of the most important tenets of poststructuralist theory. It was based on the linguistic theory of Ferdinand de Saussure applied by Claude Levi-Strauss to the cultural sphere in general. For Saussure, the linguistic signifier was untethered from any referential determination to objects in the empirical world. Saussure’s structuralist theory of meaning generated by difference rather than intention was highly influential in the fields of anthropology and literary theory. For Saussure, the combination of the signified (referent) and the signifier (the linguistic unit of meaning) together made up the “sign.” Poststructuralism took the principles of linguistics and transferred them to philosophy, culture, and literary texts. Meaning could “float” above the signified world: signifiers became both empty and playful, detached from signifieds or referents. Puns became a form of thinking while “difference” replaced contradiction (in either Hegelian or Marxist terms) as the sinews that held together and determined flexible structures of interpretation.11In 1994, Alan Sokal tried to puncture the poststructuralist approach to politics and culture by showing that it was foolish to “apply” poststructural ideas to physics and scientific attempts to describe physical reality, but in 2012, students of theory were happily applying the findings of Saussurean linguistics to one of the most significant popular protest movements of the new millennium. Sokal’s project failed to put any of the poststructural nostra to rest, as a generation of theory-trained young people took to the public spaces of New York City to protest a financial system that was in fact very compatible with floating signifiers, radical pluralism, and the untethering of financial values from empirical realities. Signs emptied of meaning gave stock brokers, financial analysts, and occupiers alike a sophisticated way of talking about value, cons, lies, and grifts.


In the same set of interviews, activist Arun Gupta talks about Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe’s concept of chains of equivalence, where everyone’s grievances could be seen as equal to everyone else’s grievances. Laclau and Mouffe’s tortured theory of populism risked no popular appeal, but it created the illusion of analyzing a “new” form of politics.12The highly educated members of Occupy fetishized the procedural regulation and management of discussion to reach consensus about all collective decisions. Daily meetings or General Assemblies were managed according to a technique called the progressive stack. Its fanatical commitment to proceduralism an administrative strategy suppressed real discussion of priorities or politics and ended up promoting only the integrity of the progressive stack itself. Protecting the stack became more important than formulating political demands that might have resonated with hundreds of millions of Americans whose lives were being directly destroyed by finance capital. PMC/New Left ideas about mass movements dominated Occupy’s dreams of politics and limited the effectiveness of its activism. Demographically and politically, Occupy was squarely a PMC elite formation: “Changing the Subject” is a fundamentally sympathetic account of Occupy’s politics, but its demographic findings about the movement paint a stark portrait of the typical occupier, who was downwardly mobile, male, young, white, educated at an elite university, and in student loan and credit card debt. The heavy union representation at Occupy reflected the predominance of unionized graduate students.
