When Obama’s heir apparent, Hillary Clinton, lost the 2016 election to Donald Trump, Timesreaders needed solace. The Timesdelivered. “Not since Lincoln has there been a president as fundamentally shaped in his life, convictions and outlook on the world by reading and writing as Barack Obama.” In Obama’s own words, reading allowed him to “slow down” and put himself in “someone else’s shoes.”1Obama was paraphrasing Atticus Finch, hero of To Kill a Mockingbird.In Harper Lee’s award-winning novel about a lynching in Maycomb, Alabama, that took place during the Depression, Atticus teaches his daughter Jean Louise/Scout and readers a critical lesson about literature and empathy: “You never understand a person until you consider things from his point of view  .  .  . until you climb into his skin and walk around in it.” For Obama, as for most liberal readers, that metaphorical walk takes place through the act of reading. At the end of the Obama presidency, we were bombarded with studies about how reading literature expanded our capacity for understanding the experiences of others. Atticus and Obama showed us that individual acts of empathy and private self-cultivation would produce justice and understanding in a world torn apart by racism and violence. For liberals, this narrative was reassuring: Atticus was not just genteel and antiracist but he was the most virtuous member of his community and a member of the PMC. As a country lawyer, Atticus also became the ethical center of a barbaric and racist world.


In 2010, on the fiftieth anniversary of the novel’s publication, NPR celebrated Harper Lee’s fiction with a frothy article in praise of the book: one of the interviewees made sure to emphasize that Oprah Winfrey called To Kill a Mockingbird“our national novel.”2In the 1970s, To Kill a Mockingbirdwas an embarrassing curiosity of Cold War propaganda, but in the Obama administration’s Common Core curriculum for ninth-grade language arts, To Kill a Mockingbirdonce again occupied pride of place in the canon and tradition of post–World War II American literature. The Obama administration wanted to revive the early 1960s era of high liberalism, but in style only. Although Obama had the opportunity, especially in his first term, to invest new federal funds into public education, his administration was reluctant to match the mobilization that took place in 1959, when the USSR’s launch of Sputnik forced Americans to match Soviet investment in both science (STEM) research and the humanities. Obama’s Common Core curriculum was allegedly a smarter set of federal standards imposed by a well-educated president to reform the dumbed-down, standardized test–oriented federal education reform instituted by his predecessor, George W. Bush, in the form of No Child Left Behind. Obama’s educational reforms, however, did not spur a massive reinvestment in public schools and public universities.

