
As both Diane Ravitch and Megan Kilpatrick have argued, educational reform is a euphemism for an ongoing war against unionized workers and the lower ranks of white-collar professionals.3Fomenting public panic about the state of American schools, educational reformers, supported by for-profit corporations and not-for-profit private foundations, set out to create new assessment regimes to reward and punish teachers with merit pay and austerity budgets. For the past four decades, politicians have been trotting out the “schools are failing our children” as high neoliberal strategy in their antiworker rhetoric, attacking unionized public school teachers by undermining job security and their creative and intellectual autonomy in their classrooms. Improvement of educational outcomes for students is directly related to teacher compensation, smaller class sizes, and adequate funding, but under the Clinton, G. Bush, G.  W. Bush, and Obama administrations, education reform has been designed to punish teachers for poor student performance. It is no accident that school teachers’ union strikes from Chicago to West Virginia were the first signs that workers were not going to put up with austerity policies any longer. In recent years, teachers’ strikes and their organized advocacy for their communities and their students provided some small signs of hope in labor action during times of ideological chaos.4Let’s not forget that in the 1980s, Bill Clinton made national waves by courageously “standing up” to teachers’ unions, which became a part of the centrist politicians’ playbook to curry favor with conservtives. As governor of Arkansas, Clinton listened to think tank elites and proposed raising educational standards without raising school budgets. To improve Arkansas’s educational attainment ranking at forty-eighth out of fifty states, Clinton imposed a standards test on teachers. In return for passing the required teacher testing as law, Clinton pushed through a slight tax increase.5The Heritage Foundation had found that Arkansas citizens’ lawsuits to maintain per-student funding levels at $5,400 was a sign of public profligacy that needed to be tamed.6Bill Clinton agreed. Inciting moral panic about the state of public education has been a political expedient for liberals and conservatives alike. Bill Clinton’s unique style was able to combine post-1968 institutionalized identity politics with a fervor for austerity and budget cutting that made the wealthiest Democratic Party donors as happy as their Republican counterparts.


In 2011, Harvard Business Reviewcalled for federal curriculum reform that would encourage creativity, complexity, curiosity,and collaboration.7Shortly thereafter, then president Obama hired Yale literature major David Coleman, an assessment “expert” with an “interest” in underserved populations, to oversee the reinvigoration of the language arts requirements in the Common Core. Obama and Coleman were interested, like all educational reformers, in “raising standards.” Their way of doing it? Through a program branded Race to the Top (RTT), which included the usual assessment (testing) of students and concomitant budgetary rewards and punishments for schools and teachers. Whatever the effectiveness of Common Core and RTT in raising educational attainment standards, the Obama administration left 19.3 percent of American children under the age of five living in extreme poverty.8Coleman left his government position to become grand master of the meritocracy, or CEO of the College Board, the highly profitable “nonprofit” organization that oversees the SATs, GREs, and MCATs and all the multiple-choice exams that are meant to predict future academic success of test takers by sorting them into ordinary and extraordinary students.
