Rolling Stone,a magazine born in the crucible of the rock ’n’ roll, drug-fueled, libertine counterculture of San Francisco in 1967, covered one of the most lurid campus sexual violence stories of the Obama era. The magazine was once a highly successful media outlet for the rock ’n’ roll–fueled generation of middle-class consumers with growing buying power. By 2014, it had become just another mainstream magazine competing for eyeballs on the internet. The economic crisis of 2008 hit the magazine particularly hard. Ad revenues for print magazines peaked in 2007 and declined steadily year after year, with no respite from either digital sales or the supposed economic “recovery” engineered by the Bush and Obama administrations.4It is quite understandable that when contributing editor Sabrina Erdely uncovered the story of an alleged gang rape at the University of Virginia (UVA), Jan Wenner and Rolling Stone’s editorial board rushed to publish her piece, “Rape on Campus.” The nine-thousand-word story detailed from the point of view of “Jackie,” the alleged victim, a horrifying gang rape that had taken place at the Phi Beta Kappa Psi fraternity house in 2012. The story got 2.7 million online views on Rolling Stone’s site, more than any other noncelebrity feature the magazine had ever published. When the WashingtonPostdecided to launch an independent investigation into Jackie’s story, it became apparent that Erdely had not corroborated any of the details that Jackie had given her. Among the many gaps in Jackie’s story, the Washington Postreporters discovered that there was no record of a party at the frat house on the night Jackie alleged she was raped. In 2015, the magazine published a retraction of the story along with a detailed forensic investigation into Erdely’s journalistic failings performed by a team from the Columbia School of Journalism.5Rolling Stoneand Sabrina Erdely were then sued by the fraternity Phi Beta Kappa Psi and by Nicole Eramo, dean of students at UVA, for defamation. The wider, cultural and political consequences of such a flagrant case of professional failure are difficult to assess, but the Right certainly knew how to inflame popular hatred and resentment of the “mainstream media” and professional journalists and it took full advantage of this flagrant failure in reporting. Far right news site The Daily Callerbecame obsessed with the case and gloated over Rolling Stone’s and Erdely’s disgrace and legal troubles. For the Conservatives and the far right incubators of incel anger, the UVA story confirmed their narrative: liberal media were filled with sensation-seeking hypocrites looking to cash in on fake news stories demonizing young men.6
Fifty years after the Summer of Love, college-going women were armed with more information and more sex educationthan any generation before them, but they seemed less capable of assuming sexual agency and more in need of protection than previous generations of women, who had had to deal with sexual autonomy and male desire without the help of university Title IX officers. For Laura Kipnis, self-described “left-wing feminist,” “rebel,” and freethinker and professor at Northwestern University, we were living through a new period of sexual paranoia. Kipnis’s account of her own Title IX investigation and the case against her former Northwestern colleague Peter Ludlow, make up the heart of her book on this topic, Unwanted Advances: Sexual Paranoia Comes to Campus.7Kipnis presents a clear, evenhanded account of the Kafkaesque Title IX investigation launched against her after she published a series of articles about Northwestern and Peter Ludlow’s case in the Chronicle of Higher Education.8The first half of Kipnis’s book is about the accusations against the philosophy professor and the Title IX investigation that Northwestern launched against both Ludlow and Kipnis herself. Kipnis concludes that section with the observation that even though Ludlow was certainly guilty of inappropriate behavior with an undergraduate and a graduate student, the loss of his job as punishment was entirely incommensurate with his crime, which Kipnis describes as motivated by naive childishness rather than raw abuse and exploitation. In the second half of Unwanted Advances,Kipnis summarizes many of the stories of the abuse of Title IX that she heard after going public as the subject of a Title IX investigationherself. For her trouble, Kipnis became a target of campus feminists and activists, but Kipnis would not be silenced. She is a liberal, a high liberal, which is the very best kind of liberal there is. She believes in robust debate and vigorous public dissent in the university, and her presentation of the abuse of Title IX is a courageous act in the cancel culture demonization of anyone who dares to question the protocols and assumptions behind sexual harassment investigations on college campuses.


For Kipnis, the worst thing about sexual paranoia is that it makes us “dumb.” Sex panics provide “a formula for intellectual rigidity.” She blames the witch hunt atmosphere on campuses for undermining the traditional ideals of the university—as a refuge for freethinkers, who are now being buried by an “avalanche of platitudes and fear.”9The ideal university that Kipnis cherishes is a fantasy built on the social ideal of an egalitarian society, where students and professors are libertine-like freethinkers, free of material want. While this ideal was operative between 1945 and 1972, intensifying inequality and the increasing cost of higher education have destroyed this mid-century American idea of the university. In Kipnis’s fantasy university, everyone lives in the affluent society: therein lies the basis of her ideal of intellectual freedom. Kipnis came of age at the tail end of an unprecedented expansion of higher education in the United States, and she exudes the confidence and bravado of someone who has not known real professional or economic insecurity. She is remarkably cut off from the torture chamber buzz of anxiety that afflicts students today. She gives sexual paranoia too much credit for the intellectual torpor of contemporary university life: in my experience, professional and economic insecurity is the greatest thought inhibitor of all.
