The Obama administration’s zealous enforcement of Title IX is very different from the way in which Hank Paulson and Timothy Geithner engineered the bailout of criminal financial institutions after the financial meltdown of 2008. Why didn’t the Obama administration send a “Dear Colleague” letter to investment bankers and financial advisors, warning them about helping their clients evade billions of dollars in taxes, taxes that used correctly could be reinvested in public universities and public education programs? What about a “Dear Colleague” letter addressed to Big Pharma, warning it about federal regulations coming down the pipeline about opioid dumping in rural areas? What about a “Dear Colleague” letter addressed to Wells Fargo, Goldman Sachs, AIG, JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America, or any other institution that insured, sold, and packaged bad mortgages to the detriment of borrowers and investors? What about “Dear Colleague” letters to fossil fuel companies warning them about their cover-up about their knowledge of carbon production and climate change? In the absence of such letters, we have to conclude that PMC elites prefer fomenting moral panics to implementing even the most modest redistributive or progressive economic policies, even after a global financial catastrophe.


To close out our discussion of campus sex panics, we have to turn to the story of Emma Sulkowicz. In 2015, Sulkowicz graduated from Columbia University with a BA in visual arts, for which her performance Mattress Performance: Carry That Weightfulfilled a degree requirement. Sulkowicz’s piece was staged as a protest and “performance” against the fact that her 2013 allegations of rape against fellow undergraduate Paul Nungesser had not led to any consequences for him and that he was allowed to continue being a student at Columbia. Sulkowicz had wanted him expelled for the alleged attack, but after an internal inquiry, Columbia University found Nungesser without responsibility for the alleged assault. Sulkowicz was furious about the findings, and she spent her senior year on the campus carrying the mattress upon which the alleged violation took place. Sulkowicz’s sense of revanchist entitlement, her confident disregard for due process (the centerpiece of liberalism’s rule of law), her indifference to privacy—of her alleged attacker and her own—became realized in her “performance” as art.

