Brahmi, the Fountainhead
Mother of scripts of all native Indian languages

SINCE THE turf is our own land, we are dealing with a living tradition.
In fact, many of the inscriptions cited can be seen ‘alive’ or in the
museums, in India and, more likely, abroad. This is more so with Tamil
inscriptions. Hence I have made it elaborate.
I have even attempted tutorial like explanation that can whet
I have even attempted tutorial-like explanation, that can whet
the appetite of the curious minded. A leisurely going through could be
rewarding, and can even find holes in my arguments! But, my being not
quite knowledgeable, has some virtue; none of the subject-matter in the
presentation is mine, and were taken for authoritative sources.

As for as the Brahmi descendants are concerned, we may consider three
lines of successions: the northern, which gave rise to Devanagari and
the scripts for all the Indo-Germanic languages of India, scripts of the
south and the pan-Indian scripts.
Thi
f h
i
i l d
l
i h h d
l
This part of the presentation mainly deals with the development
of Devanagari and touches upon the scripts of the Southeast, while the
next part would deal with scripts of the Tamil country, and that of its
Dravidian siblings.

The discussion starts with the role of writing medium on the shape of
letters. When writing went beyond royal proclamations, alternate media
chosen were palm-leaf, in the coastal areas and bhoj patra, bark of a
tree, elsewhere. The corresponding tools were iron-nail for the former
and reed-pen with ink This greatly affected the shape of letters as can
and reed pen with ink. This greatly affected the shape of letters, as can
be seen in the presentation.
Specimens from significant periods have been chosen for
discussion. The selections have been chronologically arranged, and I
have tried add features that would make the presentation interesting,
and, wherever possible teasing.

Scripts for all languages native to India 
Development of Indian scripts
originated in Brahmi, 
which had a number of regional variations, 
like Southern Brahmi, Tamil-Brahmi, Sinhala Brahmi etc.

Over a period of time changes happened 
in the shape of Brahmi letters,
the main reason being 
the use of various writing materials: 
the base on which the writing is caused and the writing tools
Effect of writing materials
Palm-leaf
Stone
Bhoja patra

From the period of Asoka 
we have inscriptions 
on stone 
using metal chisels.
Straight lines were easier. 
Brahmi script consisted 
predominantly 
of short straight strokes. 

Till a few centuries ago, we 
used a metal needle 
to engrave on palm leaves.
In this, rounded letters were 
preferable, as straight strokes 
may tear the leaf, 
particularly, along the length. 

In the regions, where palm-leaf was
the predominant writing medium, 
the script was rounded,
like of all southern languages and of Orissa.
Kannada
Sinhalese
Oriya

Bhojapatra roll
In North India, 
it was a pen on tree-bark, 
called, bhoja-patra, 
using a reed pen.
Bark of the tree

Devanagari and the north Indian scripts
didn’t have to avoid straight lines, particularly the top line.
Gurmukhi for Punjabi
Tibetan
Bengali

BCE-CE


Here is a sample Table 
from the Brahmi-based Indian scripts

‘The unity in diversity”

Brahmi changed over the period
giving rise to the later Indian scripts.
We shall see in this direction 
Development of Devanagari 
through some examples

Bhattiprolu Brahmi, 3rd-2nd century BC 
Some caskets found in a stupa in 
Bhattiprolu in the Krishna valley, 
contained Brahmi inscriptions. The 
script was close to Asokan Brahmi, 
but there were differences
but there were differences.
Called Southern variety of Brahmi, 
this was the only sample.
This freak sample was a cause of 
confusion to the experts 
who were deciphering Brahmi.

Bhattiprolu Brahmi

Bhattiprolu Brahmi
On the lid –
Members of the guild 
Members of the guild 
Members of the guild 
Members of the guild ---- Vacha (Vatsa), Chagha, Jeta (Jayanta), Jambha,
Vacha (Vatsa), Chagha, Jeta (Jayanta), Jambha,
Vacha (Vatsa), Chagha, Jeta (Jayanta), Jambha,
Vacha (Vatsa), Chagha, Jeta (Jayanta), Jambha,
Tisa (Tisya) Reta Achina Sabhika Akhasgha (Aksanghna) Kela Kesa
Tisa (Tisya) Reta Achina Sabhika Akhasgha (Aksanghna) Kela Kesa
Tisa (Tisya) Reta Achina Sabhika Akhasgha (Aksanghna) Kela Kesa
Tisa (Tisya) Reta Achina Sabhika Akhasgha (Aksanghna) Kela Kesa
Let us follow the meaning:
Tisa (Tisya), Reta, Achina, Sabhika, Akhasgha (Aksanghna), Kela, Kesa, 
Tisa (Tisya), Reta, Achina, Sabhika, Akhasgha (Aksanghna), Kela, Kesa, 
Tisa (Tisya), Reta, Achina, Sabhika, Akhasgha (Aksanghna), Kela, Kesa, 
Tisa (Tisya), Reta, Achina, Sabhika, Akhasgha (Aksanghna), Kela, Kesa, 
MAha, SeTa, Chhadika (Chhandika), OkhabUlA, SoNuttara (ShoNottara),
MAha, SeTa, Chhadika (Chhandika), OkhabUlA, SoNuttara (ShoNottara),
MAha, SeTa, Chhadika (Chhandika), OkhabUlA, SoNuttara (ShoNottara),
MAha, SeTa, Chhadika (Chhandika), OkhabUlA, SoNuttara (ShoNottara),
Samana (ShramaNa), SamaNadAsa )ShramaNadAsa), 
Samana (ShramaNa), SamaNadAsa )ShramaNadAsa), 
Samana (ShramaNa), SamaNadAsa )ShramaNadAsa), 
Samana (ShramaNa), SamaNadAsa )ShramaNadAsa), 
SAmaka (ShyAmaka), KAmuka, Chitaka.
SAmaka (ShyAmaka), KAmuka, Chitaka.
SAmaka (ShyAmaka), KAmuka, Chitaka.
SAmaka (ShyAmaka), KAmuka, Chitaka.
On the rim:
A casket and box are given by the Council of followers of the Arahadina 
A casket and box are given by the Council of followers of the Arahadina 
A casket and box are given by the Council of followers of the Arahadina 
A casket and box are given by the Council of followers of the Arahadina 
(Arhadatta). The work is executed by him whom the king Kubiraka got 
(Arhadatta). The work is executed by him whom the king Kubiraka got 
(Arhadatta). The work is executed by him whom the king Kubiraka got 
(Arhadatta). The work is executed by him whom the king Kubiraka got 
to prepare the carving.    
to prepare the carving.    
to prepare the carving.    
to prepare the carving.    

Kushana Brahmi
There are a number 
of inscriptions found 
in Mathura.
Here is a headless statue of 
Kanishka, the Great
and inscription can be seen
on the lower part 
of his tunic.

Kushana Brahmi, Sanskrit, 2nd century CE
This script is very similar to those found in Mathura.
This is on among the finest in Indian epigraphy
Nasik inscription of King Uasavadatta 

Kshatrapa Brahmi, Sanskrit, 2nd century CE
This is the earliest Sanskrit inscription
Junagadh inscription of King Rudradaman

This inscription is a fine example 
of classical Sanskrit.
That the phrases used in this have been
That the phrases used in this have been 
directly lifted from 
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata 
shows that the poet of this inscription 
was well-versed in these epics.
Let us transliterate one word of this inscription.  

Junagadh inscription – a portion transliterated

Greek & Kshatrapa Brahmi, Prakrit, 2nd century CE
Bust of Rudradaman, 
With Greek legend 
Ovoniλoocvλchλno. 
We have also some bi-lingual coins of Rudradaman
Three-arched hill with river, 
crescent and sun.
Brahmi legend: 
Rajno Ksatrapasa Jayadamasaputrasa 
Rajno Mahaksatrapasa Rudradamasa 
(King and Great Satrap Rudradaman, 
son of King and Satrap Jayadaman) 

Satavahana Brahmi, Sanskrit, 3rd century CE
The Satavahanas ruled a major part of the Deccan,
And the later scripts of the Ikshvakus and the Pallavas 
were derived from the Satavahana script. 
Satavahana Nasik inscription of Queen Balasri

This inscription is an excellent literary piece. 
We find the qualities of the king extolled.
“whose command was accepted by the entire circle of kings, 
“whose command was accepted by the entire circle of kings, 
“whose command was accepted by the entire circle of kings, 
“whose command was accepted by the entire circle of kings, 
“whose face was lovely and pure like the lotus opened 
“whose face was lovely and pure like the lotus opened 
“whose face was lovely and pure like the lotus opened 
“whose face was lovely and pure like the lotus opened 
by the rays of the sun, . . ., 
by the rays of the sun, . . ., 
by the rays of the sun, . . ., 
by the rays of the sun, . . ., 
“whose fearless hand was wet with the water poured out 
“whose fearless hand was wet with the water poured out 
“whose fearless hand was wet with the water poured out 
“whose fearless hand was wet with the water poured out 
i
f
i
i
f
i
i
f
i
i
f
i
in assurance of protection, . . ., 
in assurance of protection, . . ., 
in assurance of protection, . . ., 
in assurance of protection, . . ., 
“who well divided the place and time for the pursuit of 
“who well divided the place and time for the pursuit of 
“who well divided the place and time for the pursuit of 
“who well divided the place and time for the pursuit of 
the triple objects, that is, dharma, artha and kama, 
the triple objects, that is, dharma, artha and kama, 
the triple objects, that is, dharma, artha and kama, 
the triple objects, that is, dharma, artha and kama, 
“who equally rejoiced and sorrowed 
“who equally rejoiced and sorrowed 
“who equally rejoiced and sorrowed 
“who equally rejoiced and sorrowed 
at the joys and sorrows of his citizens, . . ., 
at the joys and sorrows of his citizens, . . ., 
at the joys and sorrows of his citizens, . . ., 
at the joys and sorrows of his citizens, . . ., 
“who utilised taxes acquired righteously, 
“who utilised taxes acquired righteously, 
“who utilised taxes acquired righteously, 
“who utilised taxes acquired righteously, 
“who disliked hurting life even in the case of an enemy at fault, . . .” 
“who disliked hurting life even in the case of an enemy at fault, . . .” 
“who disliked hurting life even in the case of an enemy at fault, . . .” 
“who disliked hurting life even in the case of an enemy at fault, . . .” 

Ikshvaku Brahmi, Prakrit-Sanskrit, 3rd century CE
Some letters acquired longer vertical lines and curves.
The last line is in Sanskrit.
Hirahatahalli inscription of Sivaskandavarman

Gupta Brahmi 4th – 5th centuries CE
During the Gupta period two styles developed
- monumental for inscription
- cursive for writing on 
palm-leaf, bhoj-patra and leather

Gupta Brahmi (Northern), Sanskrit, 4th century CE
Allahabad inscription of Samudragupta 
The above inscription is an example of nail-headed 
letters characteristic of the Gupta   

Gupta Brahmi, Sanskrit, 4th century CE
The King, standing holding parashu
with a dwarf and a standard on the left.
Here is a gold coin of Samudragupta.
Brahmi legend `samudra’ is below his arm.
Goddess Lakshmi on a throne, 
holding cornucopiae 
and a bouquet of flower on the left. 
The Brahmi legend on the right reads
‘krtantaparasuh’ 

Gupta Brahmi, Sanskrit, 4th-5th century CE
Here is a gold coin of Chandragupta Vikramaditya

Gupta Brahmi (Southern), Sanskrit, 4th century CE
Eran inscription of Samudragupta 
The first line is nail-headed and the other two box-headed, 
both characteristic of the Gupta-s.

Gupta Brahmi in Bhoja-patra

Kadamba Brahmi , Sanskrit, 4th-5th century CE
Talagunta inscription of Kakusthavarman 
This, of great charm and beauty, retains 
the box-headed features of the Guptas.
This is also the basis of the Old Kannada script.

Vakataka Brahmi , Sanskrit, 5th century CE
Sivani Copper-plate Inscription of Pravarasena 
The Vakatakas follow the box-headed features 
of the Gupta who were related to the Vakataka-s. 
But later these features are not present.

Pallava Brahmi , Prakrit, 5th century CE
Inscription of Simhavarman 
The Pallava-s continue the Gupta features,
But in the later Pallavas these are absent.

The change over from Brahmi 
to Devanagari and other scripts
begins in the 6th century, 
with Yashodharman, the Gurjar King, 
who ruled the Malwa region.

From the Gupta Brahmi two forms branched off:
_ the cursive, eastern branch to form 
Bengali-Assamese script, and 
- the non-decorative, western style 
to evolve into Sharada script

First let us follow the development of Nagari script,
a branch of which, called Devanagari
g
became to be the most important script 
for writing Sanskrit throughout India.
The final from of Devanagari 
was reached by the 15th century.

The name Nagari is from Nagara (Pataliputra).
The Nagari script was first developed 
in the Deccan in the 8th century, 
then in the north in the 10th century.
then in the north in the 10 century.
The former came to be known as Nandanagari, 
(after the place Nanded in the Deccan) and 
the northern variety as Devanagari 
(after a name of Chandragupta Vikramaditya)

Devanagari of Yashodharman
Sanskrit, 6th century CE
Here we see the beginning of 
settled and beautiful Nagari script.
Mandasor Inscription of Yashodharman 

Devanagari of Harshavardhana
Sanskrit, 7th century CE
Now we can see the complete change into Nagari script. 
The beautiful script testifies to the taste of the emperor.
The ‘acute-angle’ script is called kutila, 
and can be seen the Pallava inscriptions also.   
Banskhera Copperplate Inscription of Harshavardhana 

King Harshvardhana was not only a mighty king, 
but also a man of literature, and also a calligrapher. 
Here is a beautiful signature of the emperor.

This great temple-building clan 
has to its credit great strides in writing too.
The Pallava contribution
7th-8th century CE
They followed the Harshavardhana style of Devanagari, 
but also developed Grantha script 
to write Sanskrit in the Tamil country. 
They have also contributed to the development 
of the Tamil script.  

Devanagari during the Pallavas
Sanskrit, 7th century CE
Saluvakkuppam Inscription of Rajasimha 
The ‘acute-angle’ script, kutila, seen in the Harshavardhana 
inscription can be seen here also.   

Rajasimha Pallava’s inscriptions 
Pallava calligraphy
in the Kailasantha Temple 
in Kanchipuram 
are calligraphy at its best.
Using Devanagari and 
simple to floriated Grantha scripts, 
he inscribed hundreds of his titles
In this temple.

In these, like the one below, the calligraphic rendering
in addition to beautiful curves, 
there are suggestions of plumes and neck of peacocks.

Devanagari during the Western Chalukyas
Sanskrit, 8th century CE
Here the nail-headed character of the Guptas is retained . 
This, along with the Pallava inscription in Saluvakkuppam, 
are the earliest Devanagari script in the south
Pattadikkal Inscription of Kirtivarman 

Devanagari during the Rashtrakutas
Sanskrit, 10th century CE
Begumra Copperplate Inscription of Indraraja III 
Here is an example of next stage of 
development of Nagari in the Deccan

Devanagari during the Sena Dynasty
Sanskrit, 12th century CE
Deogarh Inscription of Vijayasena 
The significant changes from the northern variety in the North-
east can be seen here.
This ultimately led to the Bengali script.

Devanagari during the Vijayanagaras
Sanskrit, 15th century CE
Satyamangalam copper plate Inscription of Devaraja 
Final shape of Devanagari was reached 
during the reign of Krishnadevaraya

