JOURNAL OF MEMORY AND LANGUAGE 35, 101–117 (1996)
ARTICLE NO. 0006
The Role of Mental Imagery in the Creation
of False Childhood Memories
IRA E. HYMAN, JR., AND JOEL PENTLAND
Western Washington University
We investigated whether guided imagery instructions would increase the likelihood of false
memory creation and of remembering previously unremembered true events. In three interviews,
participants repeatedly were asked to remember several true events (based on parent reports)
and one false event (created by the experimenters). In a guided imagery condition, if participants
could not recall an event (either a true of a false event) they were asked to form a mental image
of the event and describe the image to the interviewer. In a control condition, if participants
could not recall an event they were asked to quietly think about the event for 1 min. Participants
in the imagery condition were more likely to create a false event and recover memories of
previously unavailable true events (although it was unclear whether the recovered memories
were truly recalled or created in response to the interview demands). We argue that the creation
of false childhood memories involves both memory reconstruction and errors in source monitor-
ing.
q 1996 Academic Press, Inc.
Will adults create false memories of child-
strated in material from word lists (Roe-
diger & McDermott, 1995), to short stories
hood experiences in response to the demands
of an interview? In many respects this is a
(Bartlett, 1932), songs (Hyman & Rubin,
1990), and personal experiences (e.g. Bar-
question about what happens in therapy fo-
cused on memory recovery: When clients re-
clay & DeCooke, 1988, Neisser, 1982). Some
of the clearest work showing that interviewers
cover child abuse memories, are they retriev-
ing previously repressed memories or are they
can suggest memory errors comes from eye-
witness memory research (e.g. Belli, 1989;
creating false memories? This is an applied
question because there is a large body of evi-
Lindsay, 1990; Loftus, 1979; Loftus, Donders,
Hoffman, & Schooler, 1989; Zaragoza &
dence indicating that human memory is recon-
structive and thus open to error.
Lane, 1994). In traditional eyewitness mem-
ory research, a person views an original event
Since Bartlett (1932), many researchers
have documented that remembering is a re-
and is later given information either consistent
with (control condition) or contradictory to
constructive process. People do not retrieve a
memory as a whole entity, but rather construct
(misled condition) the original event. In gen-
eral, researchers ﬁnd that a person given mis-
or create a memory using the information re-
maining in memory combined with other re-
leading postevent information is more likely
to incorporate the misleading information into
lated knowledge (or schemata according to
their recollection of the original event than
Bartlett). Reconstruction has been demon-
someone given consistent information. Al-
though the misinformation effect is easily rep-
We thank the following individuals for their help in
data collection: Cara Benchwick, Anneliese Kraiger,
licated, the explanation of such memory errors
Sarah Rankin, Marla Shaffer, and Rob Winningham. We
is hotly contested (Belli, 1989; Lindsay, 1990;
thank Henry Roediger, Maria Zaragoza, Douglas Nelson,
Loftus, 1979; Loftus, et al., 1989; McClos-
and Elizabeth Loftus for their comments on an earlier
key & Zaragoza, 1985; Tversky & Tuchin,
draft. Address reprint requests to Ira Hyman, Psychology
1989; Zaragoza & Lane, 1994).
Department, Western Washington University, Belling-
ham, WA 98225. E-mail: hyman@henson.cc.wwu.edu.
Although the eyewitness memory research
101
0749-596X/96 $18.00
Copyright q 1996 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

102
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
shows that memory is reconstructive, it may
Would the creation of false childhood memo-
ries be better explained in terms of schematic
not generalize to the possible creation of child
abuse memories in therapy (Berliner & Wil-
integration and reconstruction, or source confu-
sion? A schematic integration approach would
liams, 1994; Olio, 1994; Pezdek, 1994). In
eyewitness memory research, people change
emphasize other sets of knowledge activated by
the suggested information. That underlying
aspects of events and the events are rarely
emotional or self-involving. In order to create
knowledge may be changed by the suggested
event and may cause elaborations of the sug-
a false memory of child abuse, a person would
have to create a whole, emotional, self-involv-
gested information. In contrast, a source confu-
sion explanation would emphasize that a person
ing event. Such an error is much larger than
that typically observed in memory research
comes to believe that an externally suggested
event is an internally generated recollection (an
and may be more difﬁcult, if not impossible,
to introduce. For these reasons, it is important
individual may also acknowledge both sources,
but this would still be an error since the event
to demonstrate that people can create false
childhood memories and to describe the fac-
was not an internally generated recollection, see
Zaragoza & Lane, 1994). We will argue, based
tors that contribute to such memories.
In addition to the applied issues at stake,
on the results of the research conducted in our
lab, that the creation of false childhood memo-
theoretical questions also can be addressed
through research on false childhood memo-
ries involves both schematic integration and re-
construction and errors in source/reality moni-
ries. Such research may contribute to the de-
bate on the underlying explanation of the mis-
toring.
A second important issue raised by false
information effect. Integration, or schema the-
ory, explanations posit that the postevent
childhood memory research is the inﬂuence
that memory changes have on an individual’s
information is stored with the original event
and erases, or overwrites, the original infor-
self-concept. Several authors have argued that
autobiographical
memories
contribute
to
mation (e.g., Loftus, 1979; Loftus et al.,
1989). Source confusion explanations counter
one’s sense of self (e.g., Bruner, 1986; James,
1890; Neisser, 1988). In addition, an individu-
that both pieces of information are stored in-
dependently in memory. An individual may
al’s autobiography is constantly updated to ﬁt
changing self-knowledge, changing views of
forget one piece or simply forget the source
of the postevent information. When trying to
others, and different social contexts (Bruner,
1986, 1987; Cohler, 1994; Greenwald, 1980;
retrieve the original information, the postevent
information may come to mind and the person
Neisser & Fivush, 1994; Spence, 1982). This
process of rewriting one’s autobiography (or
may erroneously claim that the source was the
original event (e.g., Lindsay, 1990; Zara-
creating ‘‘narrative’’ as opposed to ‘‘historical
truth’’ (Spence, 1982)) is often a healthy, nor-
goza & Lane, 1994). A primary difference be-
tween integration and source confusion expla-
mal process: Rewriting the past allows one to
adapt to changes with a revised personal his-
nations is that integration views claim that
memory for the original information is altered
tory that opens possibilities for future activi-
ties. The addition of suggested events to one’s
by the postevent information while source
confusion views argue that the original infor-
personal history is also a normal process.
Families often tell stories that one individual,
mation remains unchanged and possibly ac-
cessible. Recent work in eyewitness memory
who previously did not remember, eventually
comes to ‘‘remember.’’ Often these adopted
indicates that both types of errors may be re-
sponsible for some errors in the typical eye-
memories may include errors or be wholly
erroneous (see Lindsay & Read, 1994, for in-
witness memory paradigm (Belli, 1989; Lind-
say, 1990, 1995; Loftus et al., 1989; Tver-
teresting examples). However, how far can
this rewriting of the past be pushed? Will an
sky & Tuchin, 1989; Zaragoza & Lane, 1994).

103
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
individual accept as a personal memory only
school children (Ceci, 1994a, 1994b), college
students (Hyman & Billings, 1995; Hyman et
events that are consistent with their current
understanding of the past or will a person also
al., 1995), and others (Loftus & Pickrell, in
press; Pezdek, 1995) will create false child-
accept events that are incongruent? Essentially
we are asking not only how malleable is one’s
hood memories. In these experimental investi-
gations, people have created memories of be-
autobiographical memory, but also how mal-
leable is one’s self-concept. Thus we think
ing lost (Loftus & Pickrell, in press; Pezdek,
1995), of overnight visits to hospitals (Hyman
research on the creation of false childhood
memories and factors related to memory cre-
et al., 1995), of getting ﬁngers caught in
mousetraps (Ceci, Huffman 1994a, 199b), and
ation is important for both applied and theoret-
ical reasons.
of spilling punchbowls at wedding receptions
(Hyman & Billings, 1995; Hyman et al.,
The basic methodology that we (Hyman &
Billings, 1995; Hyman, Husband, & Billings,
1995). Between 15 and 25% of adults have
been found to create false memories in the
1995) and others (Ceci, Huffman, Smith, &
Loftus, 1994; Ceci, Loftus, Leichtman, &
various studies.
Several overlapping processes are involved
Bruck, 1994; Loftus & Coan, 1994; Loftus &
Pickrell, in press; Pezdek, 1995) have fol-
in memory creation. At the very least the so-
cial demands present in the repeated inter-
lowed is an adaptation of postevent misinfor-
mation research and research on memory for
views are important. The participants are in-
formed by two reliable sources (the experi-
early childhood experiences (e.g. Sheingold &
Tenney, 1982; Usher & Neisser, 1993). In
menter and their parents) that the event
occurred. They are also told that repeatedly
false memory research, participants experi-
ence multiple interviews in which they repeat-
thinking about the events will help them re-
member more about the events (Zaragoza and
edly are asked to remember both true and false
experiences. The true events are based on in-
Mitchell (1995) and Roediger, Jacoby, and
McDermott (this issue) have recently shown
formation provided by family members. The
false events are created by the experimenters.
that the mere repetition of suggestions and
repeatedly recalling an event leads to more
The true and false events are presented to the
participants in the exact same manner—usu-
errors).
Constructive memory processes also appear
ally with an abbreviated description that
serves as a cue. The participants are asked to
to be involved. Hyman et al. (1995) found that
no participants created false memories in the
remember and describe all events. They are
usually told that repeatedly thinking about and
ﬁrst interview. In their second experiment,
they scored whether the participants talked
trying to remember will lead to more complete
memory for the events. The major question
about related self-knowledge in the ﬁrst or
second
interview
and
compared
that
to
is whether participants generate a memory in
response to the false event. With this basic
whether they created as false memory by the
third interview (e.g., talking about whose wed-
methodology, however, we can also investi-
gate if true events are ‘recovered’ over re-
ding it could have been or where it would
have been if asked about spilling punch on
peated interviews (a form of hypermnesia, see
Erdelyi, 1990; Wheeler & Roediger, 1992).
the parents of the bride at a wedding recep-
tion). They found that those individuals who
With slight modiﬁcations in the basic design,
we can study cognitive/personality differences
talked about related self-knowledge were
more likely to create false memories than
related to memory creation and manipulate
factors that may contribute to memory cre-
those who did not (see also Hyman & Billings,
1995). Similarly, Pezdek (1995) found that
ation.
In several studies using this basic methodol-
people are more likely to create false memo-
ries for experiences about which they have
ogy, it has now been demonstrated that pre-

104
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
schematic
knowledge
(getting
lost)
than
creases the tendency to create false memories.
First, we knew from the Hyman and Billings
events for which they do not (a rectal enema).
The creation of a false memory thus involves
(1995) and other research (see Schooler &
Loftus, 1993) that people with better mental
the combination of the suggested event with
related self-knowledge. When the person is
imagery abilities are more likely to accept
suggestions of remembered events and details.
later asked to think about the false event again,
they construct an image or understanding of
In addition, Johnson et al. (1988) found that
people rated actual memories as having
the event that includes both the suggested de-
tails and real self-knowledge. The self-knowl-
clearer mental images than imagined child-
hood events. In recent work in our lab, Hyman
edge is used to ﬁll in the gaps of the suggested
event (whose wedding, where it would have
and Gilstrap (1995) found that people have
clearer mental images of events they remem-
happened, who else would have been there,
the responses of parents, etc.).
ber than of events that they know about from
another source but do not remember. Thus,
Other factors that may contribute to mem-
ory creation are individual differences in cog-
clear mental images may contribute to a reality
monitoring decision to label a mental experi-
nitive abilities and personality characteristics.
Hyman and Billings (1995) looked at several
ence a memory as opposed to information
from other sources. Finally, guided mental im-
cognitive/personality differences that may be
related to memory creation: the Dissociative
agery is a technique advocated as a memory
recovery tool (Bass & Davis, 1988; Edwards,
Experiences Scale (DES; Bernstein & Put-
nam, 1986), the Creative Imagination Scale
1990; Fredrickson, 1992; Roland, 1993), and
this provides an applied motivation for in-
(CIS; Wilson & Barber, 1978), the Tellegen
Absorption Scale (TAS; Tellegen & Atkinson,
vestigating imagery as well.
The basic methodology was an extension
1974), and the Marlowe—Crowne Social De-
sirability Scale (SDS; Crowne & Marlowe,
of Hyman et al. (1995). During three inter-
views we asked college students about two to
1960; 1964). They found that both the DES (r
Å .48) and the CIS (r Å .36) were signiﬁcantly
ﬁve true childhood events (based on parent
reports) and one false childhood event (spill-
correlated to memory creation. The DES is a
measure of the tendency to have experiences
ing a punch bowl on the bride’s parents during
a wedding reception). The participants were
that disrupt the normal integration of con-
sciousness and personality while the CIS is a
divided into two groups based on how they
were treated when they failed to recall an
measure of both imagery vividness and hyp-
notizability.
These
individual
differences
event. For any event they failed to recall, the
guided imagery group was asked to form a
may, to a certain extent, reﬂect differences in
reality/source monitoring strategies. The DES
mental image of the event and describe the
image. The control group was asked to sit and
could be interpreted as a measure of individual
differences of difﬁculties in monitoring reality
think about the event for 1 min. We expected
that individuals in the imagery group would
and source. Clear images may also make real-
ity monitoring decisions difﬁcult because peo-
be more likely to create false memories for
two reasons: (1) we ensured that they con-
ple tend to associate clearer mental images
with events remembered as opposed to imag-
structed an event representation for the false
event, and (2) vivid mental images lead to
ined (Johnson, Foley, Suengas, & Raye,
1988).
difﬁculties in reality monitoring.
In the current experiment, we have at-
METHOD
tempted to investigate the role of mental im-
Participants
ages in the creation of false childhood memo-
ries. For a variety of reasons, we chose to
Two
hundred
and
twenty-six
Western
Washington University students were re-
manipulate mental imagery and see if it in-

105
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
cruited from introductory psychology class.
each student the same interviewer conducted
all three interviews (there were two male and
These students gave us permission to mail a
childhood events questionnaire to their par-
four female interviewers). All three interviews
were tape-recorded. Each participant was
ents. Parents returned 123 completed ques-
tionnaires by the end of the academic calendar
asked to describe between two and ﬁve true
events (as based on parent reports) and one
(50% return rate). Based on the order of return
and if the parents had provided at least two
false event. The false event was: When you
were 5 you were at the wedding reception of
early childhood events, the students were
called and asked to participate in a series of
some friends of the family and you were run-
ning around with some other kids, when you
interviews asking them to remember child-
hood events. Of the 89 we asked to participate,
bumped into the table holding the punch bowl
and spilled the punch bowl on the parents of
81 agreed to do so, and 72 completed all three
interviews. Tape recording errors resulted in
the bride. The false event was presented in
the same fashion as the true events and was
no recordings for four students and three oth-
ers revealed during debrieﬁng that they had
the third event the students were asked to de-
scribe. There is a possibility that for one of
talked to others about the experiment, leaving
65 participants (20 male, 45 female); 32 in
our participants this is not a false event, that
is, the person really did spill a punch bowl at
the guided imagery condition and 33 in the
control condition. There was no difference in
a wedding reception. In the parent question-
naire, we asked parents about weddings and
drop-out rates between the two groups.
in several hundred questionnaires returned in
Materials
all our studies, we have yet to encounter a
true story of a spilled punch bowl (in addition
A questionnaire regarding the students’
early childhood experiences was mailed to the
to the questionnaires from this study, this in-
cludes parent questionnaires in Hyman and
students’ parents. The questionnaire contained
items that requested the parents describe
Billings (1995) and Hyman et al. (1995).
When the students reported for the ﬁrst in-
events that their son/daughter experienced
prior to age 6 (occasionally parents supplied
terview, they were told that the experiment
was investigating how well people could re-
events from later ages). The questionnaire pro-
vided 10 categories of events within which
member early childhood experiences. We told
the students that they would be asked about a
the parents could describe events: going to the
hospital, getting lost, a family vacation, loss
series of events based on information that their
parents had supplied and told them that accu-
of a pet, interaction with a prominent ﬁgure,
an eventful birthday, weddings attended, a car
racy was important. They were informed that
they would be asked about all the events in
accident, winning a contest, and mischief with
a friend. If the parents knew about an event
each interview and that it was normal for peo-
ple to remember more as they worked at re-
in any category, they were asked to supply
information about the activities, the location,
calling the events. The students were told that
if they experienced difﬁculty remembering an
the people involved, and their child’s age at
the time.
event that they would be given advice to help
them remember.
Procedure
For each event, the students were ﬁrst given
several cues: their age at the time, the nature
Upon return of parent questionnaires with
at least two event descriptions, the students
of the event (i.e., a wedding), the location, the
people involved, and a few activities. The cues
were asked to participate in three memory in-
terviews. The interviews were scheduled 1 day
for true and false events were given in general
terms so that the false event did not appear
apart in 1 week (Monday–Wednesday–Fri-
day or Tuesday–Thursday–Saturday). For
different from the true events. If a student

106
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
recalled any event (either true or false) they
as if the event had been recalled from the
beginning. At the end of the ﬁrst and second
were encouraged to provide detailed descrip-
tions and generally asked several questions
interview, the interviewer encouraged the par-
ticipant to continue trying to recall the events
about what happened and any details remem-
bered.
that were not yet remembered by either imag-
ining the event (imagery condition) or quietly
When participants in the imagery condition
failed to recall either a true or a false event,
thinking about the event (control condition).
The interviewer also reminded the participant
they were asked to imagine the event and told
that this would help them remember the event.
of the time and day for the next interview. All
participants were asked to not talk about the
The participants then were asked to describe
the image in detail: they were asked what the
events with anyone, particularly family mem-
bers, as we were interested in what they could
objects, people, and locations looked like, and
asked to describe how they imagined the ac-
remember on their own. During the second
interview, if a participant failed to recall an
tivities occurred. The participants were re-
quired to describe their image to ensure that
event, they were again asked to either describe
their image of the event or to sit and think
they formed detailed images. We were con-
cerned that some participants might simply
about the event depending on condition.
At the end of the third interview and prior to
claim that they formed images unless we ex-
plicitly required the descriptions. We could
debrieﬁng, the participants were asked several
questions about their memories for all events.
not have all participants describe consistent
aspects of their images because what they
They were asked to rate how frequently they
had thought or talked about the event pre-
chose to describe was partially their deci-
sion—this was a reﬂection of the conversa-
viously (on a 4-point scale: never, 1–2 times,
1–2 times per year, more frequently), the
tional nature of the interviews. Instead we re-
quired that all give some description of the
emotionality of the memory (from 1 to 7: 1,
not emotional, to 7, very emotional), the direc-
location and at least three aspects of the event
(the punch bowl, the parents of the bride, their
tion of the experienced emotions (from 1 to
7: 1, negative, 4, neutral, to 7, positive), the
own clothing, their parents, the other kids,
etc.). Most participants described more than
clarity of their mental image (from 1 to 7: 1,
not at all clear, to 7, perfectly clear), and their
three aspects. The interviewer asked about the
next event only after the image had been de-
conﬁdence in the memory (from 1 to 7: 1, not
conﬁdent, to 7, very conﬁdent). These ques-
scribed in detail.
When participants in the control condition
tions were selected based on the Johnson et
al. (1988) investigation of the differences be-
failed to recall an event, they were required
to sit and quietly think about the event for 45
tween remembered and imagined autobio-
graphical experiences. We wanted to ascertain
to 60 s. The interviewer told the participants
that sitting and thinking would help them re-
how recovered true memories and created
false memories were viewed.
member the event. At the end of the quiet
time, the interviewer asked if anything was
The very end of the ﬁnal interview included
a careful debrieﬁng in which the deception
remembered. If the participant answered yes,
the interviewer asked for a complete descrip-
was revealed. The participants were told about
the purpose of the experiment and informed
tion. If the participants answered that nothing
was recalled, the interviewer moved to the
that memory creation was possible, normal,
and very likely in this experimental design. If
next event.
If the participant started to describe the
they created a memory in response to the false
event, they were told that it was possible that
event after (or in response to) the imagery
or sitting/thinking, the interviewer encouraged
they experienced something similar to the
false event that they changed to ﬁt this speciﬁc
the participant to describe the event fully just

107
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
situation. They were encouraged to discuss
in the ﬁrst interview (65.2%). The recovered
memories can be viewed as truly remembered
any concerns they had.
in response to additional thought and effort (a
form of hypermnesia, see Erdelyi, 1990) or as
RESULTS
creations in response to the interview de-
True Events
mands.
We also looked at the true events to discern
The 65 participants were asked to recall a
total of 210 true events based on the parent
differences in how the recollections (or lack
of recollections) were rated at the end of the
feedback (an average of 3.23 events per partic-
ipant). The tape recorded responses to the true
third interview. A series of two-way ANOVAs
(experimental condition by memory status)
events were rated as recalled or not recalled
based on whether the participant provided any
were computed. Experimental condition is
simply imagery or control. Memory status is
clear recollection of the event. Indications of
recollections were claims by the participant
whether the event was never remembered in
any of the interviews, recovered between the
that the event was remembered, descriptions
of the information supplied as part of the cue
ﬁrst and ﬁnal interview (not recalled in the
ﬁrst and rated as recalled in the ﬁnal), or re-
(such as describing a named location), or pro-
vision of additional information consistent
membered in all three interviews. In these
analyses, we treated the memories (rather than
with but not present in the cueing information.
In general, scoring of the true recalls was
the participants) as the instances, giving us 25
memories never remembered, 22 recovered,
straightforward as the participants would sat-
isfy all three criteria: claim to remember, de-
and 163 always remembered (not all partici-
pants answered all questions for all events and
scribe the event as cued, and provide addi-
tional information. Two raters scored the re-
thus the number of data points contributing to
the different analyses varied slightly). Using
calls of 20 participants for the true events and
agreed on the classiﬁcation of 96.2% of the
the memories as the unit of analysis is some-
what inappropriate because the instances are
responses to the true events. Disputes were
resolved by discussion and the remainder were
not independent—that is each participant con-
tributed more than one memory. Unfortu-
scored by the second author.
As in previous studies (Hyman & Billings,
nately, we could not treat memory status as a
within-subjects variable because not all indi-
1995; Hyman et al., 1995), we found that re-
call of true events increased over the course
viduals supplied memories in all three catego-
ries. Nor does it make sense to only take one
of the experiment (see Fig. 1). Overall, there
was no difference in the percentage of true
memory from each participant because that
severely limits the power of the analyses. Thus
events recalled in the imagery and control
conditions. In large measure this is the result
these analyses should be considered as de-
scriptive and suggestive rather than conclu-
of performance being near the ceiling—over
75% of the true events were recalled in the
sive. The means and standard deviations for
all ratings by condition and memory status are
ﬁrst interview regardless of condition. None-
theless, there was a difference in the frequency
provided in Table 1.
Neither condition nor memory status had
of recovering a memory of an event that was
not recalled in the ﬁrst interview, x2 (1, N Å
an effect on participants’ reports of how fre-
quently they talked and thought about the
47) Å 6.131, p Å .013. In the control condi-
tion, the participants eventually remembered
events, and there was no interaction. In gen-
eral, the participants reported talking and
7 of the 24 events that were unrecalled in the
ﬁrst interview (29.2%), while in the imagery
thinking frequencies of 1.95 (SD Å .83),
which translates to approximately once or
condition the participants eventually remem-
bered 15 of the 23 events that were unrecalled
twice per year.

108
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
FIG. 1. The percentage of true and false events recalled in ﬁrst, second, and third interviews in the control
and imagery conditions.
A 2 1 3 ANOVA found no effect of experi-
low-up comparisons indicated that memories
always remembered were rated as more emo-
mental condition on ratings of the emotional
content of the memories, a main effect of
tional than recovered memories and never re-
membered events (p õ .001), and no signiﬁ-
memory status, F(2,203) Å 66.129, p õ .001,
MSE Å 2.921, and no interaction. Tukey fol-
cant difference between recovered memories
TABLE 1
RATINGS OF TRUE EVENTS BASED ON EXPERIMENTAL CONDITION AND MEMORY STATUS
Experimental condition
Control memory status
Imagery memory status
Rating scales
Never
Recover
Always
Never
Recover
Always
Frequency
1.44
1.71
2.00
2.38
1.67
2.03
(0.63)
(0.76)
(0.81)
(0.92)
(0.82)
(0.85)
Amount of emotion
1.31
1.71
3.79
1.88
2.53
3.90
(0.48)
(0.95)
(1.90)
(0.99)
(1.41)
(1.78)
Negative/positive
4.00
4.43
4.02
4.63
3.93
4.37
emotion
(0.37)
(1.13)
(1.92)
(1.60)
(0.96)
(1.80)
Image clarity
1.38
2.33
4.87
2.88
3.60
5.00
(0.81)
(1.03)
(1.33)
(2.17)
(1.60)
(1.36)
Conﬁdence
1.25
2.86
5.35
1.38
4.00
5.57
(0.78)
(1.57)
(1.53)
(0.74)
(1.77)
(1.39)

109
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
and never remembered events. With respect
is apparent when the ratings of the false mem-
ories are also considered.
to the direction of the emotional content, from
negative to positive, there was no effect of
False Events
either experimental condition or memory sta-
The responses to the false event were scored
tus and no interaction. One way of viewing
as in Hyman and Billings (1995) as either
these two scales is that there was no tendency
clear false memory, partial false memory, no
for negative or positive events to be particu-
memory but trying to recover, and no memory
larly remembered, recovered, or forgotten;
with no effort at recovery. Clear false memo-
however, remembered events contained more
ries included reports of spilling the punch,
emotional content than did recovered memo-
consistent elaborations, and statements that
ries.
the event was a memory. Partial false memo-
For clarity of mental images, there were
ries included consistent elaborations with
main effects of both experimental condition,
some statements of remembering, but did not
F(1,201) Å 19.1834, p Å .001, MSE Å 1.854,
include memory of actually spilling the punch.
and memory status, F(2,201) Å 98.631, p õ
No memory but trying to recover was when
.001, MSE Å 1.854. With respect to experi-
participants described an image or reported
mental condition, memories provided by parti-
related self-knowledge, but made no clear
cipants in the imagery condition were rated as
claims to remember the event. No memory
higher in image clarity than memories pro-
with no effort at recovery was when the parti-
vided in the control condition. For the effect of
cipants failed to recall the event and did not
memory status, Tukey follow-up comparison
describe any related self-knowledge or any
indicated that always remembered events were
image. Two independent judges rated the re-
rated as having clearer images than either re-
sponses to the false events by all participants
covered
memories
or
never
remembered
in all interviews. The two judges agreed on
events and that recovered memories were
the classiﬁcation of 82% of the responses and
rated as having clearer images than never re-
resolved all disagreements through discussion.
membered events (p õ .005). The interaction
The emphasis was on using the more conser-
of experimental condition and memory status
vative classiﬁcation in instances of disagree-
was marginally signiﬁcant, F(2,201) Å 2.998,
ment.
p Å .052, MSE Å 1.854. Most likely, this
As can be seen in Table 2, the number of
is due to the greater effect of the imagery
clear false memories increased across inter-
manipulation for never remembered and re-
views in both conditions (one individual in
covered events than for the always remem-
the imagery condition claimed a clear memory
bered events (see Table 1).
in the second interview and retracted the recol-
For conﬁdence, there was an effect of mem-
lection in the third interview, returning to the
ory status, F(2,203) Å 182.446, p õ .001,
no but trying classiﬁcation). The actual num-
MSE Å 2.059, no effect of condition, and no
ber of partial false memories held constant,
interaction. Follow-up comparisons indicated
but those were not the same individuals—
that always remembered events generated
some people moved from no but trying,
higher reports of conﬁdence than either recov-
through partial false memory, to clear false
ered or never remembered events and that re-
memory. Since there were few false memories
covered memories resulted in higher reported
of any sort in the control condition and no
conﬁdence than never remembered events (p
complete no responses in the imagery condi-
õ .001). The general pattern of responses is
tion, we have grouped the no recovery and no
consistent with the hypothesis that the recov-
but trying to recover responses and the partial
ered memories are gradually returning true
and clear false memory responses for further
analyses. Using this distinction between no
memories. However, a more complete picture

110
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
TABLE 2
analyses are somewhat more appropriate than
with the true memories since each participant
RESPONSE TO THE FALSE EVENT IN THE IMAGERY AND
CONTROL CONDITIONS ACROSS ALL THREE INTERVIEWS
contributed only one response on each scale.
We will occasionally make qualitative com-
Interview
parisons to the ratings of the true memories
Response type and
(particularly to compare false memories to re-
experimental condition
1
2
3
covered memories). Table 3 provides the
Clear false memory
means and standard deviations of all ratings
Imagery
1
5
8 (25.0%)
based on experimental condition and false
Control
1
1
3 (9.1%)
memory status.
Partial false memory
With respect to the reported frequency of
Imagery
4
4
4 (12.5%)
talking and thinking about the event, there was
Control
1
2
1 (3.0%)
No, but trying to recover
no effect of either experimental condition or
Imagery
27
23
20 (62.5%)
false memory status and no interaction. In
Control
15
21
9 (27.3%)
general, the subjects accurately reported no
No
previous instances of talking or thinking about
Imagery
0
0
0 (0%)
the false event—on average 1.05 (SD Å 0.28).
Control
19
9
20 (60.6%)
Total N
This compares to the average talking and think
Imagery
32
about the true events of 1.95, or once or twice
Control
33
per year.
There was no effect of either experimental
condition or false memory status on the re-
ported emotional strength of the memory and
false memory and a false memory of some
sort, we found that experimental condition
no interaction. In general the emotional con-
tent was rated as low (overall mean was 1.68,
was related to the creation of a false memory
by the third interview, x2 (1, N Å 65) Å 5.639,
with SD Å 1.26). This is much lower than the
emotional strength of the always remembered
p Å .018. Of those in the imagery condition,
37.5% (12 of 32, with the retractor counted
true events and comparable to the emotional
strength of the never remembered and recov-
as a no) created a false memory, while only
12.1% (4 of 33) in the control condition cre-
ered true memories (which were not signiﬁ-
cantly different from one another, see Table
ated a false memory (see Fig. 1). Since the
participants in the imagery condition both
1). There was, however, a main effect of false
memory status on the negative to positive rat-
formed and described mental images, we can-
not be sure which process caused the more
ing of the emotion attached to the event,
F(1,61) Å 7.57, p Å .008, MSE Å 0.577. In
frequent creation of memories (in ongoing re-
search using a different methodology we are
this case, those who created false memories
rated their emotions as slightly more negative
trying to disentangle the effects of forming
and talking about an image (Hyman, Gilstrap,
than those did not create a false memory (see
Table 3). There was no effect of experimental
Decker, & Wilkinson, 1996)).
We also used a series of two-way ANOVAs
condition and no interaction.
With respect to the clarity of the mental
to investigate differences in how the responses
to the false events were rated based on the
image, there was a main effect of false mem-
ory status, F(1,61) Å 13.332, p Å .001, MSE
experimental condition and status of the false
memory. In this case false memory status was
Å 1.208, a tendency for a main effect of exper-
imental condition, F(1,61) Å 2.871, p Å .095,
simply a distinction between no false memory
(including both no recovery and no but trying
MSE Å 1.208, and no interaction. Those who
created false memories rated their images as
to recover) and a false memory (including
both partial and clear false memory). The
clearer and those in the imagery condition

111
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
TABLE 3
RATINGS OF FALSE EVENTS BASED ON EXPERIMENTAL CONDITION AND FALSE MEMORY STATUS
Experimental condition
Control false memory status
Imagery false memory status
No false
Some false
No false
Some false
Rating scales
memory
memory
memory
memory
Frequency
1.03
1.00
1.00
1.17
(0.19)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.58)
Amount of emotion
1.69
1.75
1.35
2.17
(1.34)
(1.50)
(0.81)
(1.59)
Negative/positive emotion
4.03
3.25
4.15
3.58
(0.91)
(0.96)
(0.37)
(0.79)
Image clarity
1.35
2.75
2.05
3.25
(0.72)
(1.50)
(1.35)
(1.29)
Conﬁdence
1.32
4.00
1.10
3.00
(0.86)
(2.45)
(0.45)
(1.34)
tended to rate their images as clearer. The
see Table 1 and 3). The overall pattern of
ratings leads us to two conclusions. First, it
ratings of image clarity for those with false
memories is in the range of image clarity for
will be difﬁcult to discern any differences be-
tween recovered true memories and created
recovered true memories (above never re-
membered true events and below always re-
false memories. Second, one reason for this
difﬁculty may be that the recovered true mem-
membered true events; see Tables 1 and 3).
For conﬁdence, there was again a main ef-
ories are actually creations as well.
fect of false memory status, F(1,59) Å 48.394,
CONCLUSIONS
p õ .001, MSE Å 1.015, a tendency for a main
effect of experimental condition, F(1,61) Å
The research that we have conducted (see
also Hyman & Billings, 1995; Hyman et al.,
3.444, p Å .068, MSE Å 1.015, and no interac-
tion. As expected those individuals who cre-
1995) and research conducted by others (Ceci
et al., 1994a, 1994b; Loftus & Coan, 1994;
ated false memories were more conﬁdent than
those who did not. Surprisingly, the imagery
Loftus & Pickrell, in press; Pezdek, 1995) in-
dicates that children and adults will create
manipulation resulted in lower conﬁdence. It
may be that directly asking individuals to form
false memories of complete, emotional, and
self-involving events. This research also illu-
a mental image helps deﬁne the source of the
image and thus results in lower average con-
minates the processes involved in memory
creation. At the very least, a social context
ﬁdence compared to those not directly asked
to form an image. Nonetheless, the imagery
that supports memory creation is important.
In addition, the creation of memories is a con-
manipulation did cause more people to de-
scribe their image as a memory. Thus the im-
structive enterprise that combines the content
of suggestion with related self-knowledge. A
agery manipulation may encourage careful re-
ality monitoring, but may make the task difﬁ-
person then engages in a difﬁcult source moni-
toring process when trying to discern if the
cult for those individuals able to construct
clear mental images. The conﬁdence in the
constructed memory is the product of memory
or solely due to the suggestions received from
false memories is similar to the conﬁdence
expressed in recovered true memories (again
others. Individual differences contribute to the

112
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
tendency to create false memories, although
were more likely to create a false memory by
the end of the experiment. Using a similar
the stage of the creation process inﬂuenced
(social demand, memory construction, or
methodology, Pezdek (1995) reported that in-
dividuals are more likely to create a false
source monitoring failures) is unclear at this
juncture.
memory in response to a suggested event that
is something about which they know a lot (get-
In the experiments that we and others have
conducted, the social demands to remember
ting lost) than an event about which they have
little background knowledge (a rectal enema).
the false event are quite high—the person is
expected to remember and we directly inform
She argued that without script information
about a suggested event, memory construction
the participants that we expect them to re-
member more in subsequent interviews. Orne
may be impossible (see also Pezdek, 1994).
Using very different methodology, Barclay
(1962) showed that individuals conform to ex-
perimental demands and surely the willing-
and DeCooke (1988) have also found that peo-
ple use self-schemata to reconstruct the past.
ness to believe that the event occurred and to
attempt to recall the event is partially a re-
The importance of having some background
information would seem to imply that there
sponse to the repeated demands. In addition,
the suggestions that an event occurred are of-
are important limitations on the creation of
false memories: A person can, perhaps, create
fered by powerful authority ﬁgures who are in
complete agreement (parents or other family
a memory only if they have related self-
knowledge. Thus, it would follow that an indi-
members and an experimenter). Asch (1956)
showed that people are more likely to conform
vidual with little knowledge of sexual abuse
would have difﬁculties creating memories of
in the face of a unanimous majority, and re-
cent work in the suggestibility of human mem-
abuse. Hyman et al., however, noted that how
much and what type of personal knowledge
ory has documented the importance of the au-
thority of the source of the suggestions (Betz,
is needed for memory creation is unclear. Cer-
tainly the existence of memories of alien ab-
Skowronski, & Ostrom, 1993; Ceci, Ross, &
Toglia, 1987; Dodd & Bradshaw, 1980;
ductions implies that personal experience with
the to-be-created memory is not necessary (if
Greene, Flynn, & Loftus, 1982). A demanding
social context may not be a necessary condi-
we assume that the memories are not accu-
rate). In keeping with this view, Spanos,
tion for the creation of false childhood memo-
ries (individuals may place pressure to re-
Cross, Dickson, and DuBreuil (1993) found
that the primary difference between people
member on themselves), but it may facilitate
memory creation by encouraging individuals
who claimed to have close encounters and
controls without such memories was the will-
to engage in memory construction and perhaps
by discouraging careful reality monitoring
ingness to believe in extraterrestrial life and
other exotic ideas. Spanos et al. argued that
strategies (for an extension of this argument,
see Lindsay and Read (1994)).
this minimal belief system (a form of self-
knowledge) plus an ambiguous event, such
In all of our studies, the suggestions regard-
ing an event do not appear to be adopted
as seeing lights or having an unusual sleep
disturbance, may be all that is needed for the
wholesale. Rather what appears to occur is
that the individual considers the suggestions
creation of a memory of a close encounter.
Further, when considering created memories
in light of other self-knowledge (self-schema,
personal memories, etc.), and constructs a
of sexual abuse, self-knowledge of an abuse-
related nature may be suggested ﬁrst. Many
memory that is a combination of the sugges-
tion plus related self-knowledge. Hyman et al.
books (i.e., Bass & Davis, 1988; Fredrickson,
1992) provide readers with lists to help them
(1995) and Hyman and Billings (1995) both
reported that individuals who talked about re-
identify if they might have been abused. Argu-
ments that certain memories may be repressed
lated self-knowledge in the early interviews

113
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
or dissociated provide individuals with a
condition but they were less conﬁdent about
their false memories). Repetition of interviews
means of explaining why apparently unusual
and non-self-relevant suggestions are actually
and suggestions may also contribute to confu-
sion regarding the source of a memory: we
self-relevant (as a side-note, in our research,
many individuals have themselves suggested
see an increase in claims of remembering the
image over time, and Zaragoza and Mitchell
repression or blocking as the reason for their
memory failures). With such suggestions and
(1995) reported an increase in source monitor-
ing errors with repeated suggestions (see also
memories of ambiguous actions that can be
interpreted as abuse related (memories of be-
Roediger et al., this issue).
Hyman and Billings (1995) found that indi-
ing kissed, held, and hugged), an individual
may have enough personal knowledge to sup-
vidual differences are reliably related to the
creation of false memories. At this point, there
port the creation of a memory of abuse. This
process alters the self-concept and may open
is little clear evidence concerning how indi-
vidual differences contribute to memory cre-
the way for the construction of more unusual
memories, such as of Satanic Ritual Abuse.
ation (see Schooler & Loftus, 1993). Some
individual may be more inﬂuenced by social
Thus, although the importance of related self-
knowledge in memory creation may appear to
demand and thus more likely to create false
memories (neither Hyman and Billings (1995)
argue that some sorts of memories can not be
created, this is an open question.
nor Black, Marts, Heise, and Allen (1995)
found this when using the Marlowe–Crowne
Simply because a person can create an im-
age or some mental construct with the feel of
measure of social desirability, but this may not
be the correct measure to ascertain tendency to
a memory, does not, however, mean that the
person will accept it as a memory. All of the
respond to social demands in this context).
Other individuals may be more willing to en-
participants in the imagery condition were
able to create a mental image and describe
gage in constructive memory processes—ei-
ther because of better mental imagery abilities
that image to the interviewer. Undoubtedly,
this created image was a product of the sug-
(Hyman & Billings, 1995) or because of better
memory that provides clear retention of both
gestion and some self-knowledge—the parti-
cipants drew on their knowledge of what
self-knowledge
and
the
suggested
event
(Schooler & Loftus, 1995). Finally, some indi-
weddings are like in creating the image. None-
theless, not all individuals claimed the con-
viduals may have different standards for eval-
uating the source of memory suggestions (see
structed image as a memory. The participants
were engaged in a task of reality or source
Lindsay and Read (1994) and Pezdek) (1994)
for a consideration of memory monitoring
monitoring (e.g., Johnson, Hastroudi, & Lind-
say, 1993). They were trying to attribute the
strategies). Perhaps the Dissociative Experi-
ences Scale that was correlated with memory
image to either their memory or to the sugges-
tions from their parents via the experimenter.
creation measures something about the will-
ingness to accept external suggestions as rele-
We have argued previously that this task is
made difﬁcult because the constructed mem-
vant to the self (Hyman & Billings, 1995).
We see individual differences as likely con-
ory includes actual self-knowledge. The imag-
ery manipulation may make reality monitoring
tributing to each step in the memory creation
process.
difﬁcult as well, both because it provides peo-
ple with a clear image and people tend to be-
Many people have argued about whether
research such as we reported here should be
lieve vivid memories (see Johnson et al.,
1988; Rubin & Kozin, 1984) and because it
generalized to the creation of false childhood
memories of sexual abuse (Berliner & Wil-
provides them with a clear source for the im-
age that is not memory (thus we found more
liams, 1994; Lindsay & Read, 1994; Loftus,
1993; Olio, 1994; Pezdek, 1994). We have
people claimed false memories in the imagery

114
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
already weighed in on this debate by noting
group or delineate power structures within a
group, and it is in this sense that Edwards and
the similarities and differences between the
research and therapy contexts that can lead
Middleton (1986a, 1986b; Edwards, Potter, &
Middleton, 1992) have argued that truth is ne-
to either conclusion (see Hyman et al., 1995;
Hyman & Loftus, in press a, in press b). Thus
gotiated through discourse. Another goal of
remembering is self-deﬁnition (e.g., Neisser,
we will simply restate our view that memory
creation in therapy is likely if the therapy con-
1988; Neisser & Fivush, 1994). If one’s mem-
ories are changed, then to some extent one’s
text involves demands to remember, encour-
agement of memory construction, and dis-
self-concept
also
changes.
Fivush
(1991,
1994) suggested that the self is constructed
couragement of careful reality monitoring
strategies.
through memory conversations between chil-
dren and their parents. Spence (1992) argued
Instead of focusing on the creation of mem-
ories in therapy, we want to end by discussing
that individuals can create a narrative truth, a
story of their past that allows them to move
memory creation in other settings. Memory
construction in response to social demands is
forward, that may not match the historical
truth, what actually happened (see also,
likely a common activity. Remembering is of-
ten a social activity in which people exchange
Bruner, 1986, 1987; Cohler, 1994). In this
sense, constructing a version of the past that
information and evaluations and come to some
agreement about the past (Edwards & Middle-
allows future growth can be beneﬁcial. It is
important to note that Spence saw this as one
ton, 1986a, 1986b; Edwards, Potter, & Mid-
dleton, 1992; Hyman 1994). These discus-
goal of therapy—to help individuals construct
functional narrative truths.
sions are much more likely to take place with
work associates, friends, and family members
What the recent research on false childhood
memories adds to our understanding of the
than with therapists. In this sense, life is
an ongoing misinformation experiment—an
changing self-concept is an understanding of
the size of some of these changes and thus a
event occurs and then a person receives addi-
tional information about the event (some of it
challenge concerning what is constant about
the self. William James (1890) noted that I
possibly erroneous) from conversation part-
ners. Sometimes that information will become
know that I am the same person as yesterday
because I remember what I experienced yes-
incorporated into the person’s memory of the
event. From this perspective many everyday
terday. Unfortunately, those memories may be
someone else’s suggestions that the self has
autobiographical memories will include some
small errors and some will include large er-
adopted. To the extent that memories change
over the course of a lifetime and in response to
rors. Errors may be particularly likely after
long periods of time (as would be the case for
suggestion, the self may be memory’s greatest
illusion.
childhood events) because the memory itself
will have faded, leaving gaps available for the
acceptance of information from others or con-
REFERENCES
struction guided by the self-schema.
ASCH, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and confor-
Although the creation of false child abuse
mity: I. A minority of one against a unanimous ma-
memories in therapy is clearly a horror, the
jority. Psychological Monographs, 70(9).
construction of memories in other situations
BARCLAY, C. R., & DECOOKE, P. A. (1988). Ordinary
everyday memories: Some of the things of which
is not as clearly problematic and may some-
selves are made. In U. Neisser & E. Winograd (Eds.),
times be advantageous. One goal of remem-
Remembering reconsidered: Ecological and tradi-
bering in a social context is to either initiate
tional approaches to the study of memory (pp. 91–
or strengthen social bonds (Hyman & Faries,
125). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
1992). Coming to an agreed upon version of
BARNIER, A. J., & MCCONKEY, K. M. (1992). Reports of
real and false memories: The relevance of hypnosis,
the past may add to the strength of the social

115
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
hypnotizability, and context of memory test. Journal
restructuring of early memories through guided im-
of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 521–527.
agery. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An Inter-
national Quarterly, 4, 33–50.
BARTLETT, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experi-
mental and social psychology. Cambridge: Cam-
EDWARDS, D., & MIDDLETON, D. (1986a). Text for mem-
bridge Univ. Press.
ory: Joint recall with a scribe. Human Learning, 5,
BASS, E., & DAVIS, L. (1988). The courage to heal: A
125–138.
guide for women survivors of child sexual abuse.
EDWARDS, D., & MIDDLETON, D. (1986b). Joint remem-
New York: Harper & Row.
bering: Constructing an account of shared experience
BELLI, R. F. (1989). Inﬂuences of misleading postevent
through conversational discourse. Discourse Pro-
information: Misinformation interference and accep-
cesses, 9, 423–459.
tance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
EDWARDS, D., POTTER, J., & MIDDLETON, D. (1992). To-
118, 72–85.
ward a discursive psychology of remembering. The
BERLINER, L., & WILLIAMS, L. M. (1994). Memories of
Psychologist, 5, 441–446.
sexual abuse: A response to Lindsay and Read. Ap-
ERDELYI, M. H. (1990). Repression, reconstruction, and
plied Cognitive Psychology, 8, 379–387.
defense: History and integration of the psychoana-
BERNSTEIN, E. M., & PUTNAM, F. W. (1986). Develop-
lytic and experimental frameworks. In J. L. Singer
ment, reliability, and validity of a dissociation scale.
(Ed.), Repression and dissociation (pp. 1–32). Chi-
The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 174,
cago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
727–735.
FIVUSH, R. (1991). The social construction of personal
BETZ, A. L., SKOWRONSKI, J. J., & OSTROM, T. M. (1993).
narratives. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 37, 59–81.
Shared realities: Social inﬂuence and episodic mem-
FIVUSH, R. (1994). Constructing narrative, emotion, and
ory. Submitted for publication.
self in parent-child conversations about the past. In
BLACK, S. T., MARTS, J. C., HEISE, D. S., & ALLEN,
U. Neisser & R. Fivush (Eds.), The remembered self:
U. K. (June, 1995). Relationship of false memory
Construction and accuracy in the self-narrative (pp.
induction to locus of control and social desirability.
136–157). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Poster presented at the meeting of the American Psy-
FREDRICKSON, R. (1992). Repressed memories: A journey
chological Society, New York, NY.
to recovery from sexual abuse. New York: Simon &
BRUNER, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible words. Cam-
Shuster.
bridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
GREENE, E., FLYNN, M. S., & LOFTUS, E. F. (1982). Induc-
BRUNER, J. (1987). Life as narrative. Social Research, 54,
ing resistance to misleading information. Journal of
11–32.
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 207–219.
CECI, S. J., HUFFMAN, M. L., SMITH, E., & LOFTUS,
GREENWALD, A. G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrica-
E. F. (1994a). Repeatedly thinking about non-events.
tion and revision of personal history. American Psy-
Consciousness and Cognition, 3, 388–407.
chologist, 35, 603–618.
CECI, S. J., LOFTUS, E. F., LEICHTMAN, M. D., & BRUCK,
HYMAN, I. E., JR. (1994). Conversational remembering:
M. (1994b). The possible role of source misattribu-
Story recall with a peer versus for an experimenter.
tions in the creation of false beliefs among preschool-
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 8, 49–66.
ers. International Journal of Clinical and Experimen-
HYMAN, I. E., JR., & BILLINGS, F. J. (1995). Individual
tal Hypnosis, 42, 304–320.
differences and the creation of false childhood mem-
CECI, S. J., ROSS, D. F., & TOGLIA, M. P. (1987). Suggest-
ories. Submitted for publication.
ibility of children’s memory: Psycholegal implica-
HYMAN, I. E., JR., & FARIES, J. M. (1992). The functions
tions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
of autobiographical memories. In M. A. Conway,
116, 38–49.
D. C. Rubin, H. Spinnler, & W. A. Wagenaar (Eds.),
COHLER, B. J. (1994). Memory recovery and the use of
Theoretical perspectives on autobiographical mem-
the past: A commentary on Lindsay and Read from
ory (pp. 207–221). The Netherlands: Kluwer Aca-
psychoanalytic perspectives. Applied Cognitive Psy-
demic.
chology, 8, 365–378.
HYMAN, I. E., JR., & GILSTRAP, L. L. (November, 1995).
CROWNE, D. P., & MARLOWE, D. (1960). A new scale of
Remember versus know judgments in autobiographi-
social desirability independent of psychopathology.
cal memories. Poster presented at the meeting of the
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 24, 349–354.
Psychonomic Society, Los Angeles, CA.
CROWNE, D. P., & MARLOWE, D. (1964). The approval
HYMAN, I. E., JR., GILSTRAP, L. L., DECKER, K., & WIL-
motive. New York: Wiley.
KINSON, C. (April, 1996). Manipulating remember
DODD, D. H., & BRADSHAW, J. M. (1980). Leading ques-
versus know judgments in autobiographical memo-
tions and memory: Some pragmatic constraints.
ries. Poster to be presented at the meeting of the
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Memory, 19,
Western Psychological Association, San Jose, CA.
695–704.
EDWARDS, D. J. A. (1990). Cognitive therapy and the
HYMAN, I. E., JR., HUSBAND, T. H., & BILLINGS, J. F.

116
HYMAN AND PENTLAND
(1995). False memories of childhood experiences.
that are quickly accessed and conﬁdently held. Mem-
ory and Cognition, 17, 607–616.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 181–197.
LOFTUS, E. F., LEVIDOW, B., & DUENSING, S. (1992).
HYMAN, I. E., JR., & LOFTUS, E. F. (in press-a). Memory:
Who remembers best? Individual differences in
Modern conceptions of the vicissitudes of early
memory for events that occurred in a science mu-
childhood memories. In D. A. Halperin (Ed.), False
seum. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 6, 93–107.
memory syndrome: Therapeutic and forensic per-
LOFTUS, E. F., & PICKRELL, J. E. (1995). The formation
spectives. American Psychiatric Press.
of false memories. Psychiatric Annals, 25, 720–725.
HYMAN, I. E., JR., & LOFTUS, E. F. (in press-b). Some
MCCLOSKEY, M., & ZARAGOZA, M. (1985). Misleading
people recover memories of childhood trauma that
postevent information and memory for events: Argu-
never really happened. In P. Appelbaum, L. Uye-
ments and evidence against memory impairment hy-
hara, & M. Elin (Eds.), Trauma and memory: Clini-
pothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
cal and legal controversies. London: Oxford Univ.
eral, 114, 3–18.
Press.
NEISSER, U. (1982). John Dean’s memory: A case study.
HYMAN, I. E., JR., & RUBIN, D. C. (1990). Memorabeatlia:
In U. Neisser (Ed.), Memory observed: Remembering
A naturalistic study of long-term. Memory and Cog-
in natural contexts (pp. 139–159). San Francisco:
nition, 18, 205–214.
Freeman.
JAMES, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New York:
NEISSER, U. (1988). Five kinds of self-knowledge. Philo-
Holt.
sophical Psychology, 1, 35–59.
JOHNSON, M. K., FOLEY, M. A., SUENGAS, A. G., & RAYE,
NEISSER, U., & FIVUSH, R. (Eds.) (1994). The remembered
C. L. (1988). Phenomenal characteristics of memo-
self: Construction and accuracy in the self-narrative.
ries for perceived and imagined autobiographical
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
OLIO, K. A. (1994). Truth in memory. American Psychol-
eral, 117, 371–376.
ogist, 49, 442–443.
JOHNSON, M. K., HASTROUDI, S., & LINDSAY, D. S.
ORNE, M. T. (1962). On the social psychology of the
(1993). Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin,
psychology experiment: With particular reference to
114, 3–28.
demand characteristics and their implications. Ameri-
KIHLSTROM, J. F., GLISKY, M. L., & ANGIULO, M. J.
can Psychologist, 17, 776–783.
(1994). Dissociative tendencies and dissociative dis-
PEZDEK, K. (1994). The illusion of illusory memory. Ap-
orders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 117–
plied Cognitive Psychology, 8, 339–350.
124.
PEZDEK, K. (July, 1995). Childhood memories: What
LABELLE, L., LAURENCE, J.-R., NADON, R., & PERRY, C.
types of false memories can be suggestively planted?
(1990). Hypnotizability, preference for an imagic
Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for
cognitive style, and memory creation in hypnosis.
Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, Van-
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99, 222–228.
couver, BC.
LINDSAY, D. S. (1990). Misleading suggestions can impair
ROEDIGER, H. L., JACOBY, J. D., & MCDERMOTT, K. B.
eyewitnesses’ ability to remember event details.
(1996) Misinformation effects on recall: Creating
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
false memories through repeated retrieval. Journal
Memory, and Cognition, 16, 1077–1083.
of Memory and Language, 35, 300–318.
LINDSAY, D. S. (July, 1995). Aware versus unaware uses
ROEDIGER, H. L. & MCDERMOTT, K. B. (1995). Creating
of post-event information. Paper presented at the
false memories: Remembering words not presented
meeting of the Society for Applied Research in Mem-
in lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
ory and Cognition, Vancouver, BC.
ing, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803–814.
LINDSAY, D. S., & READ, J. D. (1994). Psychotherapy and
ROLAND, C. B. (1993). Exploring childhood memories
memories of childhood sexual abuse: A cognitive
with adult survivors of sexual abuse: Concrete recon-
perspective. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 8, 281–
struction and visualization techniques. Journal of
338.
Mental Health Counseling, 15, 363–372.
LOFTUS, E. F. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge,
RUBIN, D. C., & KOZIN, M. (1984). Vivid memories. Cog-
MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
nition, 16, 81–95.
LOFTUS, E. F. (1993). The reality of repressed memories.
SCHOOLER, J. W., & LOFTUS, E. F. (1993). Multiple mech-
American Psychologist, 48, 518–537.
anisms mediate individual differences in eyewitness
LOFTUS, E. F., & COAN, D. (1994). The construction of
accuracy and suggestibility. In J. M. Pucket &
childhood memories. In D. Peters (Ed.), The child
H. W. Reese (Eds.), Mechanisms of everyday cogni-
witness in context: Cognitive, social and legal per-
tion (pp. 177–203). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
spectives. New York: Kluwer.
SHEEHAN, P. W., STATHAM, D., & JAMIESON, G. A.
LOFTUS, E. F., DONDERS, K., HOFFMAN, H. G., &
(1991a). Pseudomemory effects and their relation-
ship to level of susceptibility to hypnosis and state
SCHOOLER, J. W. (1989). Creating new memories

117
IMAGERY AND MEMORY CREATION
induction. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
USHER, J. A., & NEISSER, U. (1993). Childhood amnesia
chology, 60, 130–137.
and the beginnings of memory for four early life
SHEEHAN, P. W., STATHAM, D., & JAMIESON, G. A.
events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
(1991b). Pseudomemory effects over time in the hyp-
eral, 122, 155–165.
notic setting. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100,
WHEELER, M. A., & ROEDIGER, H. L. (1992). Disparate
39–44.
effects of repeated testing: Reconciling Ballard’s
SHEINGOLD, K., & TENNEY, Y. J. (1982). Memory for a
(1913) and Bartlett’s (1932) results. Psychological
salient childhood event. In U. Neisser (Ed.), Memory
Science, 3, 240–245.
observed: Remembering in natural contexts (pp.
WILSON, S. C., & BARBER, T. X. (1978). The Creative
201–212). San Francisco: Freeman.
Imagination Scale as a measure of hypnotic respon-
SPANOS, N. P., CROSS, P. A., DICKSON, K., & DUBREUIL,
siveness: Applications to experimental and clinical
S. C. (1993). Close encounters: An examination of
hypnosis. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis,
UFO experiences. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
20, 235–249.
102, 624–632.
ZARAGOZA, M. S., & LANE, S. M. (1994). Source misattri-
SPENCE, D. P. (1982). Narrative truth and historical truth:
butions and the suggestibility of eyewitness memory.
Meaning and interpretation in psychoanalysis. New
York: Norton.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
TELLEGEN, A., & ATKINSON, G. (1974). Openness to ab-
Memory, & Cognition, 20, 934–945.
sorbing and self-altering experiences (‘‘Absorp-
ZARAGOZA, M. S., & MITCHELL, K. J. (1995). Repeated
tion’’), a trait related to hypnotic susceptibility. Jour-
exposure to suggestion and the creation of false
nal of Abnormal Psychology, 83, 268–277.
memories. Unpublished manuscript.
TVERSKY, B., & TUCHIN, M. (1989). A reconciliation of
the evidence on eyewitness testimony: Comments on
(Received July 31, 1995)
McCloskey and Zaragoza. Journal of Experimental
(Revision received December 4, 1995)
Psychology: General, 118, 86–91.

