CALT-TH-2018-006
Mad-Dog Everettianism:
Quantum Mechanics at Its Most Minimal
Sean M. Carroll and Ashmeet Singh†
Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics
California Institute of Technology
1200 E. California Blvd., Pasadena, CA 91125
Abstract
To the best of our current understanding, quantum mechanics is part of the most funda-
mental picture of the universe. It is natural to ask how pure and minimal this fundamen-
tal quantum description can be. The simplest quantum ontology is that of the Everett
or Many-Worlds interpretation, based on a vector in Hilbert space and a Hamiltonian.
Typically one also relies on some classical structure, such as space and local conﬁguration
variables within it, which then gets promoted to an algebra of preferred observables. We
argue that even such an algebra is unnecessary, and the most basic description of the world
is given by the spectrum of the Hamiltonian (a list of energy eigenvalues) and the com-
ponents of some particular vector in Hilbert space. Everything else – including space and
ﬁelds propagating on it – is emergent from these minimal elements.
†e-mail: seancarroll@gmail.com,ashmeet@caltech.edu
Submitted to the Foundational Questions Institute Essay Competition, “What Is Fundamental?”
Corresponding author: SMC.
arXiv:1801.08132v1  [quant-ph]  23 Jan 2018

• Taking quantum mechanics seriously
The advent of modern quantum mechanics marked a profound shift in how we view the
fundamental laws of nature: it was not just a new theory, but a new kind of theory, a dramatic
shift from the prevailing Newtonian paradigm. Over nine decades later, physicists have been
extremely successful at applying the quantum rules to make predictions about what happens
in experiments, but much less successful at deciding what quantum mechanics actually is – its
fundamental ontology and indeed its relation to underlying reality, if any.
One obstacle is that, notwithstanding the enormous empirical success of quantum theory, we
human beings still tend to think in classical terms. Quantum theory describes the evolution of a
state vector in a complex Hilbert space, but we populate our theories with ideas like “spacetime,”
“particles,” and “ﬁelds.” We typically construct quantum theories by starting with some classical
theory and then “quantizing” it. Presumably Nature works the other way around: it is quantum-
mechanical from the start, and a classical limit emerges in the right circumstances.
In this essay we ask how far we can take the idea that the world is fundamentally quantum,
with a minimal plausible ontology: a Hilbert space H, a vector |ψ⟩within it, and a Hamiltonian
ˆH governing the evolution of that vector over time. This is a version of the Everettian (Many-
Worlds) approach to quantum mechanics, in which the quantum state is the only variable and
it smoothly evolves according to the Schr¨odinger equation with a given Hamiltonian,
ˆH|ψ(t)⟩= i∂t|ψ(t)⟩.
(1)
Our approach is distinguished by thinking of that state as a vector in Hilbert space, without any
preferred algebra of observables, and without necessarily representing Hilbert space as a set of
wave functions over some classical variables. All of the additional elements familiar in physical
theories, we will argue, can be emergent from the state vector (cf. [1]). We call this approach
“Mad-Dog Everettianism,” to emphasize that it is as far as we can imagine taking the program
of stripping down quantum mechanics to its most pure, minimal elements.1
• The role of classical variables
The traditional way to construct a quantum theory is to posit some classical conﬁguration
space X (which could be momentum space or some other polarization of phase space), then
considering the space of all complex-valued functions on that space. With an appropriate inner
product ⟨·, ·⟩, the subset of square-integrable functions forms a Hilbert space:
H = {ψ : X →C
⟨ψ, ψ⟩< ∞}.
(2)
This gives us a representation of H, but the Hilbert space itself is simply a complete, normed,
complex-valued vector space.
That gives us very little structure to work with: all Hilbert
spaces of the same ﬁnite dimensionality are isomorphic, as are inﬁnite-dimensional ones that are
separable (possessing a countable dense subset, which implies a countable orthonormal basis).
1The name is inspired by philosopher Owen Flanagan’s description of his colleague Alex Rosenberg’s philosophy
as “Mad-Dog Naturalism.”
2

We may therefore ask, once H is constructed, is there any remnant of the original classical space
X left in the theory?
The answer is “not fundamentally, no.” A given representation might be useful for purposes
of intuition or calculational convenience, but it is not necessary for the fundamental deﬁnition
of the theory.
Representations are very far from unique, even if we limit our attention to
representations corresponding to sensible physical theories.
One lesson of dualities in quantum ﬁeld theories is that a single quantum theory can be
thought of as describing completely diﬀerent classical variables. The fundamental nature of
the “stuﬀ” being described by a theory can change under such dualities, as in that between
the sine-Gordon boson in 1+1 dimensions the theory of a massive Thirring fermion [2]. Even
the dimensionality of space can change, as is well-appreciated in the context of the AdS/CFT
correspondence, where a single quantum theory can be interpreted as either a conformal ﬁeld
theory in a ﬁxed d-dimensional Minkowski background or a gravitational theory in a dynamical
(d + 1)-dimensional spacetime with asymptotically anti-de Sitter boundary conditions [3].
The lesson we draw from this is that Nature at its most fundamental is simply described by
a vector in Hilbert space. Classical concepts must emerge from this structure in an appropriate
limit. The problem is that Hilbert space is relatively featureless; given that Hilbert spaces of
ﬁxed ﬁnite or countable dimension D are all isomorphic, it is a challenge to see precisely how a
rich classical world is supposed to emerge.
Ultimately, all we have to work with is the Hamiltonian and the speciﬁc vector describing
the universe. In the absence of any preferred basis, the Hamiltonian is ﬁxed by its spectrum,
the list of energy eigenvalues:
{E0, E1, E2, . . .} ,
ˆH|n⟩= En|n⟩,
(3)
and the state is speciﬁed by its componenents in the energy eigenbasis,
{ψ0, ψ1, ψ2, . . .} ,
|ψ⟩=
X
n
ψn|n⟩.
(4)
The question becomes, how do we go from such austere lists of numbers to the fullness of the
world around us?
• The role of emergence
One might ask why, if the fundamental theory of everything is ﬁxed by the spectrum of
some Hamiltonian, we don’t simply imagine writing the state of the universe in the energy
eigenbasis, where its evolution is trivial? The answer is the one that applies to any example of
emergence: there might be other descriptions of the same situation that provide useful insight
or computational simpliﬁcation.
Consider the classical theory of N particles moving under the inﬂuence of some multi-particle
potential in 3 dimensions of space. The corresponding phase space is 6N-dimensional, and we
could simply think of the theory as that of one point moving in a 6N-dimensional structure. But
by thinking of it as N particles moving in a 3-dimensional space of allowed particle positions, we
gain enormous intuition; for example, it could become clear that particles inﬂuence each other
3

when they are nearby in space, which in turn suggests a natural way to coarse-grain the theory.
Similarly, writing an abstract vector in Hilbert space as a wave function over some classical
variables can provide crucial insight into the most eﬃcient and insightful way to think of what
is happening to the system.
• Local ﬁnite-dimensionality
The Hilbert spaces considered by physicists are often inﬁnite-dimensional, from a simple
harmonic oscillator to quantum ﬁeld theories. For separable Hilbert spaces (ﬁnite-dimensional
or inﬁnite-dimensional countable), the Stone-von Neumann theorem guarantees us uniqueness of
the irreducible representation of the algebra of the canonical commutation relations (CCRs), up
to unitary equivalence. In non-separable Hilbert spaces, however, there can be unitarily inequiv-
alent representations of the CCRs, implying that the physical subspaces spanned by eigenstates
of operators in a particular representation will be diﬀerent. In Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
this is described by Haag’s theorem [4]. Then diﬀerent choices of states (a unit-normed, posi-
tive linear functional) on the algebra specify diﬀerent inequivalent (cyclic) representations. One
might therefore conclude that speciﬁcation of the algebra state is also an important ingredient
in deﬁning a quantum theory, over and above the Hamiltonian.
However, there are good reasons from quantum gravity to think that the true Hilbert space
of the universe is “locally ﬁnite-dimensional” [5]. That is, we can decompose H into a (possibly
inﬁnite) tensor product of ﬁnite-dimensional factors,
H =
O
α
Hα,
(5)
where for each α we have dim(Hα) < ∞. If we have factored the Hilbert space into the smallest
possible pieces, we will call these “micro-factors.” The idea is that if we specify some region of
space and ask how many states could possibly occupy the region inside, the answer is ﬁnite,
since eventually the energy associated with would-be states becomes large enough to create a
black hole the size of the region [6]. Similarly, our universe seems to be evolving toward a
de Sitter phase dominated by vacuum energy; a horizon-sized patch of such a spacetime is a
maximum-entropy thermal state [7] with a ﬁnite entropy and a corresponding ﬁnite number of
degrees of freedom [8,9].
There are subtleties involved with trying to map collections of factors in (5) directly to
regions of space, including the fact that “a region of space” R might not be well-deﬁned across
diﬀerent branches of the quantum-gravitational wave function. All that matters for us, however,
is the existence of a decomposition of this form, and the idea that everything happening in one
particular region of space on a particular branch is described by a ﬁnite-dimensional factor of
Hilbert space HR that can be constructed as a ﬁnite tensor product of micro-factors Hα. Given
some overall pure state |ψ⟩∈H, physics within this region is described by the reduced density
operator
ρR = Tr ¯
R |ψ⟩⟨ψ|.
(6)
In that case, there is no issue of specifying the correct algebra of observables: the algebra is
simply “all Hermitian operators acting on HR.” Any further structure must emerge from the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian and the quantum state.
4

• Spacetime from Hilbert space
Fortunately, we are guided in our quest by the fact that we know a great deal about what
an appropriate emergent description should look like – a local eﬀective ﬁeld theory deﬁned on a
semiclassical four-dimensional dynamical spacetime. The ﬁrst step is to choose a decomposition
of the Hilbert space HR (representing, for example, the interior of our cosmic horizon) into
ﬁnite-dimensional micro-factors. We can say that the Hamiltonian is “local” with respect to
such a decomposition if, for some small integer k, the Hamiltonian connects any speciﬁc factor
Hα∗to no more than k other factors; intuitively, this corresponds to the idea that degrees of
freedom at one location only interact with other degrees of freedom nearby.
It turns out that a generic Hamiltonian will not be local with respect to any decomposition,
and for the special Hamiltonians that can be written in a local form, the decomposition in which
that works is essentially unique [10]. In other words, for the right kind of Hamiltonian, there
is a natural decomposition of Hilbert space in which physics looks local, which is ﬁxed by the
spectrum alone. From the empirical success of local quantum ﬁeld theory, we will henceforth
assume that the Hamiltonian of the world is of this type, at least for low-lying states near the
vacuum.
This preferred local decomposition naturally deﬁnes a graph structure on the space of Hilbert-
space factors, where each node corresponds to a factor and two nodes are connected by an edge
if they have a nonzero interaction in the Hamiltonian. To go from this topological structure to
a geometric one, we need to look beyond the Hamiltonian to the speciﬁcs of an individual low-
lying state. Given any factor of Hilbert space constructed from a collection of smaller factors,
HA = ⊗α∈AHα ⊂HR, and its relative complement H ¯
A = HR\HA, we can construct its density
matrix and entropy,
ρA = Tr ¯
A ρR ,
SA = −Tr ρA log ρA,
(7)
and given any two such factors HA and HB we can deﬁne their mutual information
I(A : B) = SA + SB −SAB.
(8)
Guided again by what we know about quantum ﬁeld theory, we consider “redundancy-constrained”
states, which capture the notion that nearby degrees of freedom are highly entangled, while far-
away ones are unentangled. In that case the entropy of ρA can be written as the sum of mutual
informations between micro-factors inside and outside HA,
SA = 1
2
X
α∈A,β∈¯
A
I(α : β).
(9)
The mutual information allows us to assign weights to the various edges in our Hilbert-
space-factor graph. With an appropriate choice of weighting, these weights can be interpreted
as distances, with large mutual information corresponding to short distances [11]. That gives our
graph an emergent spatial geometry, from which we can ﬁnd a best-ﬁt smooth manifold using
multidimensional scaling. (Alternatively, the entropy across a surface can be associated with
the surface’s area, and the emergent geometry deﬁned using a Radon transform [12].) As the
quantum state evolves with time according to the Schr¨odinger equation, the spatial geometry
does as well; interpreting these surfaces as spacelike slices with zero extrinsic curvature yields
an entire spacetime with a well-deﬁned geometry.
5

• Emergent classicality
A factorization of Hilbert space into local micro-factors is not quite the entire story. To make
contact with the classical world as part of an emergent description, we need to further factorize
the degrees of freedom within some region into macroscopic “systems” and a surrounding “en-
vironment,” and deﬁne a preferred basis of “pointer states” for each system. This procedure is
crucial to the Everettian program, where the interaction of systems with their environment leads
to decoherence and branching of the wave function. To describe quantum measurement, one
typically considers a quantum object Hq, an apparatus Ha, and an environment He. Branching
occurs when an initially unentangled state evolves ﬁrst to entangle the object with the apparatus
(measurement), and then the apparatus with orthogonal environment states (decoherence), for
example:
|ψ⟩= (α|+⟩q + β|−⟩q) ⊗|0⟩a ⊗|0⟩e
(10)
→(α|+⟩q|+⟩a + β|−⟩q|−⟩a) ⊗|0⟩e
(11)
→α|+⟩q|+⟩a|+⟩e + β|−⟩q|−⟩a|−⟩e.
(12)
The Born Rule for probabilities, p(i) = |ψi|2, isn’t assumed as part of the theory; it can be
derived using techniques such as decision theory [13] or self-locating uncertainty [14].
Two things do get assumed: an initially unentangled state, and a particular factorization into
object/apparatus/environment. The former condition is ultimately cosmological – the universe
started in a low-entropy state, which we won’t discuss here. The factorization, on the other
hand, should be based on local dynamics. While this factorization is usually done based on our
quasi-classical intuition, there exists an inﬁnite unitary freedom in the choice of our system and
environment. We seek an algorithm for choosing this factorization that leads to approximately
classical behavior on individual branches of the wave function.
This question remains murky at the present time, but substantial progress is being made.
The essential observation is that, if quantum behavior is distinguished from classical behavior
by the presence of entanglement, classical behavior may be said to arise when entanglement is
relatively unimportant. In the case of pointer states, this criterion is operationalized by the idea
that such states are the ones that remain robust under being monitored by the environment [15].
For a planet orbiting the Sun in the solar system, for example, such states are highly localized
around classical trajectories with deﬁnite positions and momenta.
A similar criterion may be used to deﬁne the system/environment split in the ﬁrst place
[16,17]. Consider a ﬁxed Hamiltonian and some Hilbert-space factorization into subsystems A
and B. Generically, if we start with an unentangled (tensor-product) state in that factorization,
the amount of entanglement will grow very rapidly. However, we can seek the factorization in
which there exist low-entropy states for which entanglement grows at a minimum rate. That will
be the factorization in which it is useful to deﬁne robust pointer states in one of the subsystems,
while treating the other as the environment.
This kind of procedure for factorizing Hilbert space is, in large measure, the origin of our
notion of preferred classical variables. Given a quantum system in a ﬁnite-dimensional part
of Hilbert space, in principle we are able to treat any Hermitian operator as representing an
observable. But given the overall Hamiltonian, there will be certain speciﬁc interaction terms
6

that deﬁne what is being measured when some other system interacts with our original system.
We think of quantum systems as representing objects with positions and momenta because those
are the operators that are most readily measured by real devices, given the actual Hamiltonian
of the universe. We think of ourselves as living in position space, rather than in momentum
space, because those are the variables in terms of which the Hamiltonian appears local.
• Gravitation from entanglement
We have argued that the geometry of spacetime can be thought of as arising from the
entanglement structure of the quantum state in an appropriate factorization. To match our
empirical experience of the world, this emergent spacetime should respond to emergent energy-
momentum through Einstein’s equation of general relativity. While we can’t do full justice to
this problem in this essay, we can mention that there are indications that such behavior is quite
natural.
The basic insight is Jacobson’s notion of “entanglement equilibrium” [18], extended to the
case where spacetime itself is emergent rather than postulated [12]. Consider a subsystem in
Hilbert space, in a situation where the overall quantum state is in the vacuum.
It is then
reasonable to imagine that the subsystem is in entanglement equilibrium: a small perturbation
leaves the entropy of the region unchanged to ﬁrst order. If we divide the entanglement into a
small-scale ultraviolet term that determines the spacetime geometry, and a longer-scale infrared
term characterizing matter ﬁelds propagating within that geometry, the change in one kind of
entropy must be compensated for by a corresponding change in the other,
δSUV = −δSIR.
(13)
Here the left-hand side represents a change in geometry, and can be related directly to the
spacetime curvature. The right-hand side represents a matter perturbation, which can be related
to the modular Hamiltonian of an emergent eﬀective ﬁeld theory on the background. At the
linearized level (the weak-ﬁeld limit), it can be shown that this relation turns into the 00
component of Einstein’s equation in the synchronous gauge,
δG00 = 8πGδT00.
(14)
If the overall dynamics are approximately Lorentz invariant (which they must be for this program
to work, although it’s unclear how to achieve this at this time), demanding that this equation
hold in any frame implies the full linearized Einstein’s equation, δGµν = 8πGδTµν.
There are a number of assumptions at work here, but it seems plausible that the spacetime
dynamics familiar from general relativity can arise in an emergent spacetime purely from generic
features of the entanglement structure of the quantum state. Following our quantum-ﬁrst phi-
losophy, this would be an example of ﬁnding gravity within quantum mechanics, rather than
quantizing a classical model for gravitation.
7

• The problem(s) of time
Given our ambition to ﬁnd the most minimal fundamental description of reality, it is natural
to ask whether time as well as space could be emergent from the wave function. The Wheeler-
deWitt equation of canonical quantum gravity takes the form
ˆH|ψ⟩= 0,
(15)
for some particular form of ˆH in a particular set of variables. In this case time dependence is
absent, but one may hope to recover an emergent notion of time by factorizing Hilbert space
into a “clock” subsystem and the rest of the universe,
H = HU ⊗HC,
(16)
then constructing an eﬀective Hamiltonian describing evolution of the universe with respect to
the clock.
Given our discussion thus far, the problem with such a procedure should be clear: what
determines the decomposition (16)? In the Schr¨odinger case we can have data in the form of
the spectrum of the Hamiltonian, but in the Wheeler-deWitt case the universe is in a single
eigenstate; no other features of the Hamiltonian, including its other energy eigenvalues, can be
relevant. This problem has been dubbed the “clock ambiguity” [19].
One potential escape would be to imagine that the fundamental state of the universe is
described not by a vector in Hilbert space, but by a density operator acting on it. Then we have
an alternative set of data to appeal to: the eigenvalues of that density matrix. These can be
used to compute a modular Hamiltonian (given by the negative of the logarithm of the density
operator), which in turn can yield an eﬀective notion of time evolution, a proposal known as
the “thermal time hypothesis” [20]. Thus it is conceivable that time as well as space could be
emergent, at the cost of positing a fundamental density operator describing the state of the
universe.2
• Prospects and puzzles
The program outlined here is both ambitious and highly speculative. We ﬁnd it attractive
as a way of deriving most of the familiar structure of the world from a minimal set of truly
quantum ingredients. In particular, we derive rather than postulating such notions as space,
ﬁelds, and particles. The fact that our Hilbert space is locally ﬁnite-dimensional suggests an
escape from the famous problems of ultraviolet divergences in quantum ﬁeld theory, and the
emergence of spacetime geometry from quantum entanglement is an interesting angle on the
perennial problems of quantum gravity.
Numerous questions remain; we will highlight just two.
One is the emergence of local
Lorentz-invariant dynamics. There are no unitary representations of the Lorentz group on a
ﬁnite-dimensional factor of Hilbert space. This might seem to imply that Lorentz symmetry
2If time is fundamental rather than emergent, there is a very good reason to believe that the entirety of Hilbert
space is inﬁnite-dimensional, even if the factor describing our local region is ﬁnite-dimensional; otherwise the
dynamics would be subject to recurrences and Boltzmann-brain ﬂuctuations [21].
8

would be at best approximate, a possibility that is experimentally intriguing but already highly
constrained. It would be interesting to understand how numerically large any deviations from
perfect Lorentz invariance would have to be in this framework, and indeed if they have to exist
at all.
The other issue is the emergence of an eﬀective ﬁeld theory in curved spacetime that could
describe matter ﬁelds in our geometric background. We have posited that a ﬁeld theory might
be identiﬁed with infrared degrees of freedom while the geometry is determined by ultraviolet
degrees of freedom, but there is much to be done to make this suggestion more concrete. A
promising idea is to invoke the idea of a quantum error-correcting code [12, 22]. Such codes
imagine identifying a “code subspace” within the larger physical Hilbert space, such that the
quantum information in the code can be redundantly stored in the physical Hilbert space. There
is a natural way to associate the code subspace with the infrared degrees of freedom of the matter
ﬁelds, with the rest of the physical Hilbert space providing the ultraviolet entanglement that
deﬁnes the emergent geometry. Once again, this is a highly speculative but a promising line of
investigation.
We are optimistic that this minimal approach to the ontology of quantum mechanics is
suﬃcient, given an appropriate Hamiltonian and quantum state, to recover all of the richness of
the world as we know it. It would be a profound realization to ultimately conclude that what
is fundamental does not directly involve spacetime or propagating quantum ﬁelds, but simply a
vector moving smoothly through a very large-dimensional Hilbert space. Further investigation
will be needed to determine whether such optimism is warranted, or whether we have just gone
mad.
Acknowledgments
We are thankful to ChunJun (Charles) Cao for helpful conversations. This research is funded
in part by the Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics at Caltech and by DOE grant DE-
SC0011632.
References
[1] S. B. Giddings, “Hilbert space structure in quantum gravity: an algebraic perspective,”
JHEP 12 (2015) 099, arXiv:1503.08207 [hep-th].
[2] S. Coleman, “Quantum sine-gordon equation as the massive thirring model,” Phys. Rev.
D 11 (Apr, 1975) 2088–2097. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.11.2088.
[3] J. M. Maldacena, “The Large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and supergravity,”
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 (1999) 1113–1133, arXiv:hep-th/9711200 [hep-th].
[4] R. Haag, “On Quantum Field Theories,” Matematisk-fysiske Meddelelser 29 no. 12,
(1955) 1–37.
[5] N. Bao, S. M. Carroll, and A. Singh, “The Hilbert Space of Quantum Gravity Is Locally
Finite-Dimensional,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. D26 no. 12, (2017) 1743013, arXiv:1704.00066.
9

[6] J. D. Bekenstein, “Universal upper bound on the entropy-to-energy ratio for bounded
systems,” Phys. Rev. D 23 (Jan, 1981) 287–298.
[7] S. M. Carroll and A. Chatwin-Davies, “Cosmic Equilibration: A Holographic No-Hair
Theorem from the Generalized Second Law,” arXiv:1703.09241 [hep-th].
[8] W. Fischler, “Taking de Sitter Seriously.” Talk given at Role of Scaling Laws in Physics
and Biology (Celebrating the 60th Birthday of Geoﬀrey West), Santa Fe, Dec., 2000.
[9] T. Banks, “QuantuMechanics and CosMology.” Talk given at the festschrift for L.
Susskind, Stanford University, May 2000, 2000.
[10] J. S. Cotler, G. R. Penington, and D. H. Ranard, “Locality from the Spectrum,”
arXiv:1702.06142 [quant-ph].
[11] C. Cao, S. M. Carroll, and S. Michalakis, “Space from Hilbert Space: Recovering
Geometry from Bulk Entanglement,” Phys. Rev. D95 no. 2, (2017) 024031,
arXiv:1606.08444 [hep-th].
[12] C. Cao and S. M. Carroll, “Bulk Entanglement Gravity without a Boundary: Towards
Finding Einstein’s Equation in Hilbert Space,” arXiv:1712.02803 [hep-th].
[13] D. Wallace, “How to prove the Born Rule,” ArXiv e-prints (June, 2009) ,
arXiv:0906.2718 [quant-ph].
[14] C. T. Sebens and S. M. Carroll, “Self-Locating Uncertainty and the Origin of Probability
in Everettian Quantum Mechanics,” Brit. J. Phil. Sci. (2014) , arXiv:1405.7577.
[15] W. H. Zurek, “Pointer Basis of Quantum Apparatus: Into What Mixture Does the Wave
Packet Collapse?,” Phys. Rev. D24 (1981) 1516–1525.
[16] M. Tegmark, “Consciousness as a State of Matter,” Chaos Solitons Fractals 76 (2015)
238–270, arXiv:1401.1219 [quant-ph].
[17] S. M. Carroll and A. Singh, “Quantum Mereology: Factorizing Hilbert Space into
Sub-Systems with Quasi-Classical Dynamics,” in preparation.
[18] T. Jacobson, “Entanglement Equilibrium and the Einstein Equation,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
116 no. 20, (2016) 201101, arXiv:1505.04753 [gr-qc].
[19] A. Albrecht and A. Iglesias, “The Clock ambiguity and the emergence of physical laws,”
Phys. Rev. D77 (2008) 063506, arXiv:0708.2743 [hep-th].
[20] A. Connes and C. Rovelli, “Von Neumann algebra automorphisms and time
thermodynamics relation in general covariant quantum theories,” Class. Quant. Grav. 11
(1994) 2899–2918, arXiv:gr-qc/9406019 [gr-qc].
[21] S. M. Carroll, “What if Time Really Exists?,” arXiv:0811.3772 [gr-qc].
10

[22] D. Harlow, “The Ryu-Takayanagi Formula from Quantum Error Correction,” Commun.
Math. Phys. 354 no. 3, (2017) 865–912, arXiv:1607.03901 [hep-th].
11

