Brainstorming about the geometric structures
in the Wolfram model of fundamental physics
Jos´e Manuel Rodr´ıguez Caballero
Institute of Computer Science
University of Tartu
Tartu, Estonia
June 4, 2020
Abstract
In this essay, we explore the geometric structures involved in the
Wolfram model of fundamental physics.
Furthermore, we propose
some directions of research aiming to get the bosons and fermions out
of this framework.
1
Introduction
The mathematical problems
that have been solved or
techniques that have arisen out
of physics in the past have been
the lifeblood of mathematics.
Michael Atiyah
On April 14, 2020, the physicist and CEO of Wolfram Research, S. Wol-
fram, announced on the oﬃcial YouTube channel [Wolc] of his company his
ambitious project [Wolb] of deriving fundamental physics from a renewed
version of the computational framework that he developed his book A new
kind of science [Wol02]. Wolfram’s approach has been previously criticized
1
arXiv:2006.01135v2  [physics.hist-ph]  3 Jun 2020

by S. Aaronson [Aar02] by showing some weak points concerning relativity
and quantum mechanics. Nevertheless, this time, Wolfram’s team provided
two papers arguing that, in their current model, both relativity [Gor20b] and
quantum mechanics [Gor20a], emerge in a rather natural way.
Wolfram’s approach to physics can be described as an inversion of the ﬁrst
line in D. Deutsch’s and R. Jozsa’s paper [DJ92] on quantum algorithms:
The operation of any computing machine is necessarily a physical
process.
Indeed, in the Wolfram model, all the physical processes emerge from
the operations of an “immaterial” computer. This computer is immaterial
in the same sense that the strings of string theory are: their status is more
fundamental than that of the elementary particles that constitute matter1.
In order to know of how the Wolfram model ﬁts into the framework of
mainstream physics, we will use a summary of this science due to E. Witten,
one of the most qualiﬁers experts for such a diﬃcult task. Following E. Wit-
ten [Wit87, page 280], the main geometric structures in which fundamental
physics is built are:
(i) A pseudo-Riemannian manifold M, modeling spacetime.
(ii) A principal bundle X over M with a non-abelian structure group G
(gauge group), responsible for the interactions among matter particles
[Has13, page 1101].
(iii) An associated bundle, specially a Cliﬀord or a spinor bundle, responsible
of the matter in the universe.
The way in which the Wolfram model ﬁt into the point (i) was already
discussed in J. Gorard’s paper [Gor20b]. Concerning the points (ii), J. Gorard
wrote [Gor20a, page 45]:
[...] local gauge invariance in the multiway evolution [...] follows
as an inevitable consequence of causal invariance of the underly-
ing replacement rules.
1A clever philosopher may ﬁnd a way to justify that both the strings and the computa-
tions in the Wolfram’s model are material in some sense, but we will avoid this discussion
in the present essay.
2

The aim of this essay is to explore the role of principal and associated
bundles in the Wolfram model.
In section 1, we give an overview of the
Wolfram model. In section 2, we explain how spacetime emerges from the
rewriting rules. In section 3, we show how principal bundles are related to
the bosons and how they may emerge in the Wolfram model. In section 4,
we explain the link between associated bundles and fermions and propose a
possible way to get these particles in the Wolfram model.
All the results in this essay are due to other researchers, the only role of
the author is to emphasize their connection. The author is only interested
in the mathematical structures and remains neutral concerning the physical
consequences. The suggestions of directions of research in the Wolfram model
are not precise conjectures, but just brainstorming.
2
Emergence of complexity
In 1944, E. Schr¨odinger [Sch67] pointed out the apparent paradox that liv-
ing systems increase their organization whereas it is expected for any closed
system to converge to a state of thermodynamic equilibrium. In 1981, S.
Wolfram began a systematic study of how complex patters emerge in nature
despite the second law of thermodynamics. In 1983, he published a paper
[Wol83] about the thermodynamic properties of extremely simple computa-
tions, e.g., the so-called Rule 30 cellular automaton, shown in ﬁgure 1, which
is manifested in nature [Coo09] as the patterns in the cone snail species Conus
textile shown in ﬁgure 2.
Figure 1: Rule 30 cellular automaton.
3

Figure 2: Textile cone snail.
In a speculative twist, from the observed fact that simple computations
may produce extremely complex patterns, S. Wolfram [Wol02] conjectured
that this is the only way in which all the complexity of the universe emerges.
In particular, the diﬀerential geometric structures which are used to describe
fundamental physics should be - according to Wolfram - asymptotic approx-
imations of the long term behavior of simple computations happening at the
smallest scales in the universe, far beyond the Plank length.
In the Wolfram model, the arena where all physical processes take place is
a combinatorial structure known as spacial hypergraph (hypergraph for short),
which is just a visual way to represent the set of all nonempty ordered subsets
of a given set. There is a rewriting rule, known as the hypergraph replace-
ment rule (rule for short2), which determine how the hypergraph should be
transformed at each step in the computation. Sometimes this rule is non-
deterministic and there are several way of doing the replacement, which are
recorded in a graph known as the causal graph.
The expressiveness of the Wolfram model have been criticized by Scott
Aaronson [Bec20]:
Its this sort of inﬁnitely ﬂexible philosophy where, regardless of
what anyone said was true about physics, they could then assert,
“Oh, yeah, you could graft something like that onto our model”.
2When we loosely speak about the properties of a “rule”, or a “which hypergraph
replacement rule”, when we want to make a distinction with other uses of the word “rule”,
we assume some initial conditions together with the rule.
4

Nevertheless, the Wolfram model is not a speciﬁc theory of how Nature
behaves in detail but a framework for such a theory: each statement “this
rule describes the universe” is a theory in the Wolfram model. When asked
the question “How could your model be proved wrong?”, S. Wolfram [Wola]
answered:
Any particular rule could be proved wrong by disagreeing with
observations, for example predicting particles that do not exist.
But the overall framework of our models is something more gen-
eral, and not as directly amenable to experimental falsiﬁcation.
Asking how to falsify our framework is similar to asking how one
would prove that calculus could not be a model for physics. An
obvious answer would be another model successfully providing a
fundamental theory of physics, and being proved incompatible.
The following hierarchy, in increasing order according to the level of struc-
ture, seems to be a natural way to proceed in the mathematical development
of the Wolfram Physics Project:
1. Deﬁning and proving combinatorial properties of the rules., including
graph-theoretical properties.
2. Deﬁning and proving algebraic topological properties of the rules, in-
cluding the cohomology and the homotopy of the hypergraph.
3. Deﬁning and proving diﬀerential geometric properties of the rules, e.g.,
when the spacial hypergraph converges to a manifold.
4. Deﬁning and proving physical properties of the rules, e.g., the emer-
gence of particles, in particular, of both bosons and fermions.
For example, in order to study the electrons (fundamental physics) using
the Wolfram model, we need to ﬁnd a rule from which the spinors emerge
(diﬀerential geometry), but in order to do that, we need a rule in which the
second Stiefel-Whitney class of spacetime vanishes (algebraic topology) and
in order to deﬁne the Stiefel-Whitney classes we need to study the combina-
torial properties of the hypergraph (discrete mathematics).
The study of the properties of the rules is an extremely diﬃcult subject.
Nevertheless there have been some progress motivated by the prizes of $
5

25,0003 and $ 30,0004 oﬀered by S. Wolfram for proofs of some conjectures
concerning the rules.
M. Gromov [Gro92a] suggested several ways to rigorously study the asymp-
totic geometry emerging from a change in scale, also known as looking the
“space at inﬁnite”. I. Polterovich, A. Shnirelman [PS98], obtained the space
at inﬁnite of the hyperbolic plane. These techniques may be useful in order
to formalize and prove of the observed asymptotic behaviors of some rules.
3
Emergence of spacetime
In some ancient civilizations, like the Greece of Plato [Pla19], space and time
were considered as separated entities.
In other Ancient civilizations, like
the Incas (South-America) space and time were regarded as a single concept
[Qui].
In the mainstream approach to physics the tradition is to consider space
and time as a continuum, named spacetime. This uniﬁcation was due to H.
Minkowski (1908) and it was exploited by A. Einstein (1915) in his theory
of gravity. Indeed, for A. Einstein, what it seems to be the gravitational
force is just the eﬀect of the deformation of spacetime caused by a massive
object. In retrospective, it is also possible to reformulate Newtonian gravity
as a theory of curved spacetime, where the curvature is, roughly speaking,
in the time direction. So, the curvature of spacetime in general relativity is
not the consequence of relativity, in the sense of ﬁnite maximum speed, but
of gravity.
The Lagrangian of general relativity is [Wit87]
SGR =
1
16πG
Z
M
R,
where R is Ricci scalar of M and G is the gravitational constant.
One of the standpoints in S. Wolfram’s approach to physics is to separate
space and time as it was before H. Minkowski.
Indeed, according to S.
Wolfram[Wolb]:
If I wanted to pick a possible wrong term in the history of physics,
which is probably about 100 years ago, it would be when people
started saying that space and time are the same kinds of things.
3https://www.wolframscience.com/prizes/tm23/
4https://www.rule30prize.org/
6

In the Wolfram model, the universe is like a computer and time is one step
in a (discrete) computation. This “computer” is processing information, but
unlike our daily life experience, this information is not an abstraction realized
by a physical device. On the contrary, the evolution of this rather immate-
rial information, which precedes everything except time, is what generates
space. Furthermore, space generates the elementary particles and reality as
we know it emerges. In particular, according to them, Minkowski spacetimes
emerges as the result of the “immaterial” computation that they postulated
as fundamental.
According to S. Wolfram [Wolc], in the same way that the ﬂuid appear-
ance of water emerges from the interaction of discrete components (H2O
molecules), the illusion of living in a continuum spacetimes is caused by the
fact that the combinatorial structures conforming the universe asymptoti-
cally behave as manifolds. So, there is the possibility that the dimension of
the physical space is not actually 3, but just an approximation of 3, e.g.,
2.99999 or 3.00001. Indeed, Wolfram asked for a generalization of the con-
cept of manifold such that the dimension can be fractal and it may change
from one point to another. Also, he asked for a generalized notion of a Lie
group associated to such a fractal manifold which becomes a traditional Lie
group when the dimension is a positive integer. Furthermore, S. Wolfram
[Wolb] and J. Gorard [Gor20b] conjectured that general relativity, in his
model, may be reformulated using the fractal dimension of the tangent space
in place of using curvature as usual. This idea came from Laurent Nottale’s
scale relativity [Not11].
The mathematical formalization of the “ﬂat” spacetime of special rela-
tivity is as a 4-dimensional real vector space endowed with a nondegenerate,
symmetric bilinear form with signature (−+ ++). In the same vein, the
“curved” spacetime of general relativity is a diﬀerentiable manifold M of
dimension 4, endowed with a covariant, second-degree, symmetric tensor,
known as the metric tensor and denoted g, which is assumed to be nonde-
generate with signature (−+ ++).
The metric tensor g, which determines causality, time, distance, volume,
curvature, angle, and separation of the future and the past, is a symmetric
bilinear form on each tangent space of M that smoothly change from point
to point.
Thus, even at this early stage in Witten’s summary of physics
[Wit87, page 280], the presence of ﬁber bundles over spacetime, in this case,
tangent bundles, is fundamental. The role of ﬁber bundles will be less and
less evident in the case of bosons and fermions as we will show in the next
7

sections.
In general relativity, the way in which matter/energy determines the cur-
vature of spacetime is given by Einstein ﬁeld equations,
Rµν −1
2Rgµν + Λgµν = 8πG
c4 Tµν,
where Rµν is the Ricci curvature tensor, Tµν is the stress energy tensor, Λ
is the cosmological constant and c is the speed of light in the vacuum. This
equation is a generalization of the law of gravity due to I. Newton.
We have seems that the arena where physics takes places is a pseudo-
Riemannian manifold (spacetime) and that its curvature is determined by
the mass/energy according to Einstein ﬁeld equation. Now, we will provide
the law of motion of particles, known as the geodesic equation,
d2xµ
ds2 + Γµ
αβ
dxα
ds
dxβ
ds = 0 ,
which is a generalization of Newton’s laws of motion.
Wolfram’s team was able to prove that their model, under some natural
assumptions, satisﬁes Einstein ﬁeld equations. Hence, the movement of a
“particle”, which according to their deﬁnition is a structure of the hypergraph
that is locally stable during the computation (evolution of the universe), will
satisfy the geodesic equation in the asymptotic limit. The idea behind their
proof is formally analogous to Chapman-Enskog theory [Gor20b, page 38].
Let’s ﬁnish the present section with an example. The hypergraph replace-
ment rule
{{1, 2, 2}, {3, 2, 4}} −→{{1, 5, 1}, {5, 4, 4}, {3, 2, 5}},
shown in ﬁgure 3, applied to the initial condition (spacial hypergraph)
{{1, 1, 1}, {1, 1, 1}},
after 198 steps generates the spacetime (causal graph) and the space (spacial
hypergraph) shown in ﬁgures 4 and 5 respectively. The ﬁrst steps in the
evolution are shown in picture 6 (the ﬁrst spacial hypergraph is the initial
condition). The open problem is to determine whether the spacetime and
the space generated by the rule converge, in some sense still to be deﬁned, to
some generalized version of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds (maybe admitting
fractal dimension, smoothly changing from one point to another).
8

Figure 3: Example of rule in the Wolfram model.
Figure 4: Example of spacetime in the Wolfram model.
4
Emergence of bosons
Our ﬁrst step toward gauge theory is to distinguish between global and local
symmetries. By global symmetry physicists mean symmetries of the laws of
nature, which are the same over any point of spacetime, e.g., translation and
rotational invariance, whereas a local symmetry varies from point to point.
Global symmetries are connected to conservation laws via Noether theorem,
but this is not the case of local symmetries, e.g., the rotational invariance of
the laws of motions is connected to the conservation of the angular momen-
tum, but the U(1)-gauge invariace of the Lagrangian of quantum electrody-
namics does not produce a new conservation law [Gro92b, page 957].
According to David Gross [Gro92b, page 971], global symmetries seems to
be accidental features of low energy physics and they are likely to be broken.
So, they are not fundamental, unlike the local symmetries, which can always
be restored at high temperature or pressure.
Roughly speaking, the standard model is a U(1) × SU(2) × SU(3) gauge
theory. This description is rather inaccurate, because the gauge group should
be the quotient (U(1) × SU(2) × SU(3)) /Γ, where Γ is one of the following
additive groups
Z/6Z, Z/3Z, Z/2Z, {0}.
9

Figure 5: Example of pure space in the Wolfram model.
Figure 6: Example of evolution in the Wolfram model (the ﬁrst hypergraph
is the initial condition).
The determination of which of the groups above is the candidate for Γ
has not been determined yet neither by theory not by experiments [Ton17,
page 1].
According to E. Witten [Wit87], over the spacetime M there is a principal
bundle X, with a structure group G such that the Lie algebra of G contains
the Lie algebra of U(1) × SU(2) × SU(3) (Witten made no claim concerning
the global structure of G). The Lagrangian given by Yang-Mills theory is
[Wit87]
SYM = −1
4e2
Z
M
|F|2,
|F|2 = gii′gjj′⟨Fij|Fi′j′⟩
10

where F is the curvature of the two form of a connection in the bundle, ⟨·|·⟩
is the Cartan-Killing form on the Lie algebra of G and e is the Yang-Mills
coupling constant.
A principal bundle [Ble81, page 26] is a 4-tuple (X, G, π, M), where X
(total space) and M (base space) are diﬀerentiable manifolds, G (structure
group) is a Lie group and π : X −→M (projection) is a surjective diﬀeren-
tiable map, satisfying the following following properties5:
(A) The structure group acts freely and diﬀerentiably on the total space to
the right.
(B) Any ﬁber is diﬀeomorphic to the structure group, but there is no natural
group structure on the ﬁber.
(C) The total space admits a local trivialization.
It is important to remark that there is an essential distinction between
the gauge gravitation theory and the diﬀerent versions of Yang-Mills theory
in particle physics. On the one hand, the gravitation theory is developed on
the total space of the principal bundle of the tangent frames of spacetime.
On the other hand, the typical gauge transformations in Yang-Mills theory
are vertical automorphisms of the total space of a principal bundle, leaving
its base space ﬁxed.
Following J. Gorard’s observation [Gor20a, page 45],
[...] for each vertex in a spatial hypergraph, there are many pos-
sible orientations in which a hypergraph replacement rule could
be applied to that vertex [...], and we may interpret each such
orientation as corresponding to a particular choice coordinate ba-
sis (i.e. some local section of a ﬁber bundle), which will subse-
quently place constraints on the set of possible orientations for
other purely spacelike-separated rule applications. Thus, we can
interpret the hypergraph itself as corresponding to some base
space, with each vertex corresponding to a ﬁber [...]
we will associate M with a spacial hypergraph and the ﬁber over x ∈M
with the set of orientations in which the hypergraph replacement rule could
5Depending on the author, some properties may be added or removed from the deﬁni-
tion.
11

be applied to x, labeled with x in order to recover this information from X
using π. The only ingredient that is missing is G, which should be associated
to a ﬁnite set of permutations. One of the open problems in the Wolfram
model is to formalize the convergence of this discrete system to the actual
principal bundle (X, G, π, M).
Notice that we are acting in the opposite way to C. N. Yang’s approach
[Gro92b, page 958],
[local gauge] symmetry dictates the form of the interaction.
Indeed, the interaction (hypergraph replacement rule) is given to us from
the beginning and we want to know the corresponding local gauge invariasnce,
whereas, for C. N. Yang, the local gauge invariance is postulated from the
beginning in order to reduce the number of “hypergraph replacement rules”
(using the terminology of S. Wolfram) which can be considered in a particular
situation.
5
Emergence of fermions
Using a geometric language, the main idea of Dirac’s theory of fermions is
that they are the sections in the associated bundle (spinor bundle) of a spin
group principal bundle and the space of spinors as ﬁber. Let’s begin with
the rather technical deﬁnition of associated bundle.
Let G be a Lie group. Given a left group action of G on a diﬀerentiable
manifold F and a principal G-bundle X −→M, the associated bundle to
X −→M with ﬁber F is the ﬁber bundle given by
X × F
∼
−→M,
where the quotient X×F
∼
is determined by the equivalence relation deﬁned on
X × F by
∀g ∈G.
(x, f) ∼
 xg, g−1f

.
The spinor bundle mentioned at the beginning of this section is a vector
bundle whose ﬁber at each point is the Cliﬀord module generated by Dirac
γ-matrices [Wit87, page 274]. The possibility of deﬁning this bundle can be
characterized by the second Stiefel-Whitney class of spacetime, which is a
topological invariant.
12

We recall that the Stiefel-Whitney classes of a vector bundle π : X −→M
are the cohomology classes wk(ξ) ∈Hk (M; Z/2Z) verifying the following
axioms:
(i) w0(π) = 1M.
(ii) wk(π) = 0 if π is an n-dimensional vector bundle and k > n.
(iii) wk(π) = f ∗(wk(η)) if there is a bundle map π −→η with base map f
(naturality).
(iv) wk(π ⊕η) = Pk
j=0 wk−j(π) wj(η) (Whitney product).
(v) w1(γ1
1) ̸= 0, where γ1
1 is the canonical line bundle over the projective
space P1 (nontriviality).
In order to study whether or not a given hypergraph replacement rule
generates fermions in the limit, it is natural to follow the steps:
1. Deﬁne a cohomology with coeﬃcients Z/2Z on the hypergraph.
2. Use the axioms above in order to deﬁne the Stiefel-Whitney classes on
the hypergraph.
3. Verify whether or not the second Stiefel-Whitney class vanishes.
If it is proved that the Stiefel-Whitney class of the hypergraph vanishes,
then the emergence of fermions should be expected from this rule.
The
cohomology may give a clue about the spinor bundle obtained in the limit.
If on the contrary, the Stiefel-Whitney class of the hypergraph does not
vanish, maybe the rule under study does not correspond to the one that is
supposed to describe physical reality or maybe the cohomology deﬁned by as
was not the right one and we need to change for another one. To change the
cohomology means to give another interpretation of the relationship between
the rule and physical reality.
13

6
Eric Weinstein’s Geometric Unity
Some days before S. Wolfram’s announcement [Wolc], the mathematician E.
Weinstein [Weib] also announced a new approach to fundamental physics
known as Geometric Unity. One recurrent question asked by people aware
of both projects is whether or not there is a connection between them.
Roughly speaking, Geometric Unity is the project of developing a frame-
work in which Einstein’s General Relativity, Yang-Mills Theory and Dirac’s
Theory of Fermions can be derived from a single and yet unknown geomet-
ric principle. As E. Weinstein [Weib] pointed out, each of the fundamental
equations of physics is optimal in itself, but maybe not optimal concerning
the compatibility with other equations. Let’s assume that such a project is
achieved and call the resulting theory also Geometric Unity for a lack of a
better word. Then, according to the point of view that we developed in this
essay, Geometric Unity is just a set of asymptotic restrictions that the rule
corresponding to our universe should satisfy.
Using a metaphor from computer science (imperative vs declarative pro-
gramming): the Wolfram model is an attempt of generating our universe via
imperative programming whereas Geometric Unity is an attempt for reaching
the same goal but using declarative programming. Another way to put it: E.
Weinstein is looking for the constrains that the source code of our universe
should satisfy whereas S. Wolfram is looking for the physical properties that
general source codes satisfy in order to select the one which generates our
universe.
Beside Geometric Unity, it would be interesting to compare the Wolfram
model with String Theory.
7
Conclusions
The Wolfram model gives a motivation for generalizing several of concepts
from diﬀerential geometry depending on the notion of integer dimension,
in order to admit fractal dimension, e.g., Lie groups, pseudo-Riemannian
structure, principal and associated bundles. Furthermore, it provides an in-
tuitive framework for the systematic study of the convergence of discrete
structures from computer science to continuous structures appearing funda-
mental physics, e.g., the convergence of the local symmetries of the hyper-
graph replacement rule (ﬁnite set of permutations) to the gauge invariance
14

(Lie group) in Yang-Mills theory.
According to the opinion of the author, independently of the role that the
Wolfram Physics Project may play in the history of physics, there is not doubt
that it is important in order to make connections between the mathematical
methods used in fundamental physics and in computer science, specially in
abstract rewriting systems, computational complexity, information theory
and distributive computing. This project may be the beginning of a cross
fertilization between both ﬁelds.
Summarizing the main idea of this essay in one sentence: Witten’s sum-
mary of physics [Wit87, page 280] seems to be an appropriated framework in
order to derive all fundamental physics using the Wolfram model. The main
mathematical obstacle is to deﬁne and prove the convergence of the discrete
structures in the Wolfram model to the geometric structures in mainstream
physics.
To close this essay in a rather poetic way, let’s allow us to dream for one
second. If the Wolfram model becomes the predominant approach to physics,
maybe someday this science will be redeﬁned as the study of the asymptotic
properties of string rewriting systems.
8
Acknowledgments
This essay was inﬂuenced by the project Graph-Wall-Tome due to Eric We-
instein [Weia].
Figure 1 belongs to S. Wolfram’s book A New Kind of Science [Wol02]
https://www.wolframscience.com/nks/p27--how-do-simple-programs-behave/
Figure 2 is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic
license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en.
The
author is James St. John. The only changes made in this picture were a resize
and a rotation in order to ﬁt the text: https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Conus_textile_(textile_cone_snail)_2_(24425421465).jpg
Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6 are copyrighted images used with permission from
Wolfram Research, Inc.(https://www.wolframphysics.org/universes/wm2644/)
The author is supported by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research
through the project “Veriﬁcation of quantum cryptography” (AOARD Grant
FA2386-17-1- 4022).
15

References
[Aar02]
Scott Aaronson. Book Review: A New Kind of Science. arXiv
preprint quant-ph/0206089, 2002.
[Bec20]
Adam Becker. Physicists criticize Stephen Wolfram’s Theory of
Everything.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
physicists-criticize-stephen-wolframs-theory-of-everything/,
May 6, 2020.
[Ble81]
D Bleecker. Gauge theory and variational principles. Addison M
Wesley Publ. Co, Inc., Reading, MA, 1981.
[Coo09]
Stephen Coombes. The geometry and pigmentation of seashells.
Techn. Ber. Department of Mathematical Sciences, 2009.
[DJ92]
David Deutsch and Richard Jozsa. Rapid solution of problems by
quantum computation. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
Series A: Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 439(1907):553–558,
1992.
[Gor20a] Jonathan
Gorard.
Some
Quantum
Mechanical
Properties
of
the
Wolfram
Model.
https://www.
wolframcloud.com/obj/wolframphysics/Documents/
some-quantum-mechanical-properties-of-the-wolfram-model.
pdf, 2020.
[Gor20b] Jonathan
Gorard.
Some
Relativistic
and
Gravita-
tional
Properties
of
the
Wolfram
Model.
https:
//www.wolframcloud.com/obj/wolframphysics/Documents/
some-relativistic-and-gravitational-properties-of-the-wolfram-model.
pdf, 2020.
[Gro92a] Mikhael Gromov. Asymptotic invariants of inﬁnite groups. Tech-
nical report, P00001028, 1992.
[Gro92b] David J Gross. Gauge Theory-Past, Present, and Future? Chinese
Journal of Physics, 30(7):955–972, 1992.
[Has13]
Sadri Hassani. Mathematical physics: a modern introduction to its
foundations. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
16

[Not11]
Laurent Nottale.
Scale relativity and fractal space-time: a new
approach to unifying relativity and quantum mechanics. World Sci-
entiﬁc, 2011.
[Pla19]
Plato. Timaeus. BoD–Books on Demand, 2019.
[PS98]
L Polterovich and A Shnirman. On the asymptotic geometry of
the hyperbolic plane. Technical report, math/9806106, 1998.
[Qui]
Eusebio Manga Quispe. Pacha: Un concepto de espacio-tiempo
andino, un constructo dinamizado por las permutas de los concep-
tos duales urin y janan.
[Sch67]
Erwin Schr¨odinger. What is life?: the physical aspect of the living
cell, and, Mind and matter. Cambridge University Press, 1967.
[Ton17]
David Tong. Line operators in the standard model. Journal of
High Energy Physics, 2017(7):104, 2017.
[Weia]
Eric Weinstein.
Graph-Wall-Tome.
https://theportal.wiki/
wiki/Graph,_Wall,_Tome.
[Weib]
Eric Weinstein. A Portal Special Presentation- Geometric Unity:
A First Look. https://youtu.be/Z7rd04KzLcg.
[Wit87]
Edward Witten. Physics and Geometry. Technical report, PRE-
30537, 1987.
[Wola]
Stephen Wolfram.
Questions and Answers about the Wol-
frma model,
Question:
How could your model be proved
wrong?
https://www.wolframphysics.org/questions/
scientific-general-interest/.
[Wolb]
Stephen Wolfram. The Wolfram physics project. https://www.
wolframphysics.org/.
[Wolc]
Stephen Wolfram.
Wolfram physics project launch.
https://
youtu.be/rbfFt2uNEyQ.
[Wol83]
Stephen Wolfram. Statistical mechanics of cellular automata. Re-
views of modern physics, 55(3):601, 1983.
17

[Wol02]
Stephen Wolfram. A New Kind of Science. Wolfram media Cham-
paign, IL, 2002.
18

