CALT-TH-2021-010
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
Sean M. Carroll1
Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
and Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM 87501
Abstract
I defend the extremist position that the fundamental ontology of the world consists of a
vector in Hilbert space evolving according to the Schr¨odinger equation. The laws of physics
are determined solely by the energy eigenspectrum of the Hamiltonian. The structure of
our observed world, including space and ﬁelds living within it, should arise as a higher-level
emergent description. I sketch how this might come about, although much work remains
to be done.
Invited contribution to the volume Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality: Naturalizing
Quantum Theory Between Scientiﬁc Realism and Ontological Indeterminacy; Valia Allori
(ed.).
1e-mail: seancarroll@gmail.com
arXiv:2103.09780v1  [quant-ph]  17 Mar 2021

[I]t would be naive in the extreme to be a ‘Hilbert-space-vector realist’: to reify Hilbert
space, and take it as analogous to physical space. – Wallace (2017)
In Hilbert space, nobody can hear you scream. – Aharonov & Rohrlich (2005)
Almost a century after the 1927 Solvay Conference, the question of the ultimate ontology
of quantum mechanics remains unsettled. Essentially all formulations of quantum theory rely
on the use of a wave function or state vector (or mathematically equivalent structures). But
researchers do not agree on whether the state vector is a complete and exact representation of
reality, whether it represents part of reality but needs to be augmented by additional variables
to be complete, or whether it is an epistemic tool rather than a representation of reality at all.
And they further do not agree on whether the state vector should be thought of as purely an
element of some abstract Hilbert space, or whether there is some fundamental ontological status
to a particular representation of that vector in terms of something more directly physical, such
as conﬁguration space or particles or ﬁelds in honest three-dimensional “space.”
Here I want to argue for the plausibility of an extreme position among these alternatives, that
the fundamental ontology of the world is completely and exactly represented by a vector in an
abstract Hilbert space, evolving in time according to unitary Schr¨odinger dynamics. Everything
else, from particles and ﬁelds to space itself, is rightly thought of as emergent from that austere
set of ingredients. This approach has been called “Mad-Dog Everettianism” (Carroll & Singh,
2019) although “Hilbert Space Fundamentalism” would be equally accurate.
Let’s see how one might end up seduced by an ideology that is so radically diﬀerent from
our direct experience of the world. When we are ﬁrst taught quantum mechanics, we are shown
how to construct quantum theories by taking classical models and quantizing them. Imagine
we have a classical precursor theory deﬁned on some phase space, expressed mathematically as
a symplectic manifold Γ, with evolution determined by some Hamiltonian function H : Γ →R.
We choose a “polarization” on phase space, which amounts to coordinatizing it in terms of
canonical coordinates Q (deﬁning “conﬁguration space”) and corresponding canonical momenta
P, where each symbol might stand for multiple dimensions. This is a fairly general setup; for
N point particles moving in D-dimensional Euclidean space, conﬁguration space is isomorphic
to RDN, but we could also consider ﬁeld theory, for which the coordinates are simply the values
of the ﬁelds throughout space.
One way to construct a corresponding quantum theory is to introduce complex-valued wave
functions of the coordinates alone, Ψ(Q) ∈C. Wave functions must be normalizable, in the
sense that they are square-integrable,
R
Ψ∗Ψ dQ < ∞, where Ψ∗is the complex conjugate of
Ψ. Momenta are now represented by linear operators ˆP, whose form can be derived from the
canonical commutation relations [ ˆQ, ˆP] = iℏ(where the operator ˆQ is simply multiplication by
Q). This lets us promote the classical Hamiltonian to a self-adjoint operator ˆH( ˆQ, ˆP) (up to
potential operator-ordering ambiguities). We then posit that the wave function evolves according
2

to the Schr¨odinger equation,
ˆHΨ = iℏ∂
∂tΨ.
(1)
This form of the Schr¨odinger equation is perfectly general, and applies to relativistic theories as
well as non-relativistic ones, as long as one uses an appropriate Hamiltonian.
This procedure gives us the beginnings of a quantum theory.
For Everettians, it gives
us the complete theory; a unitarily-evolving quantum state describes the entire ontology at a
fundamental level. Other approaches require additional dynamical rules, physical structures, or
some combination thereof. Here our interest is in seeing how far we can get from a minimal
starting point, so the Everettian approach is appropriate. [For more on structure in the Everett
interpretation, see (Saunders, 2021; Wallace, 2003).]
But how precisely should we think about this ontology? It might seem to include at least
original conﬁguration space coordinatized by {Q}, the set of wave functions Ψ(Q), and the
Hamiltonian ˆH. This has led Albert (1996) to suggest “wave function realism” – the idea that
it is the wave function Ψ(Q) that describes reality, and that the wave function is deﬁned on
conﬁguration space, so that conﬁguration space (3N dimensional for N particles in 3 dimensions,
inﬁnite-dimensional for a ﬁeld theory) is where the wave function “really lives” [see also (Ney,
2013; North, 2013)]. This point of view has been criticized by Wallace (2017), who points out
that conﬁguration space is simply one possible way of representing the wave function; it could
also be represented in momentum space (as a function of P), or an inﬁnite number of other
choices. [Wallace also has other criticisms, and other authors criticize the idea for other reasons
(Allori, 2013; Myrvold, 2015).]
The ambiguity between deﬁning wave functions in position versus momentum space is an
example of a broader issue. “Quantization” does not give us a one-to-one map from classi-
cal theories to quantum ones, or even a well-deﬁned map at all. A single classical precursor
may correspond to multiple quantum theories, due to operator-ordering ambiguities. Moreover,
distinct classical models may have identical quantizations, as in the dualities of quantum ﬁeld
theory. This makes it diﬃcult to uniquely pinpoint what a quantum theory is supposed to be
a theory “of.” In the duality between the massive Thirring model and sine-Gordon theory, a
single quantum theory can arise from classical precursors describing either fundamental bosons
or fundamental fermions (Coleman, 1975). In the AdS/CFT correspondence, a nongravitational
ﬁeld theory in D spacetime dimensions is dual to a quantum gravity theory in D +1 dimensions
(Maldacena, 1999). So from a quantum theory alone, it might be impossible to say what kinds
of ﬁelds the model describes, or even the number of dimensions they live in.
But the complicated relationship between classical and quantum theories is a problem for
physicists, not for physics. Nature simply is quantum from the start, and the classical world
arises as an emergent approximation in some appropriate limit. If our interest is in fundamental
ontology, rather than focusing on quantum theories derived by quantizing classical precursors,
it would make sense to consider the inverse problem: given a quantum theory, what kind of
3

classical limits might arise within it?
So let us think carefully about what it means to be given a quantum theory (at least from
an Everettian perspective). Wave functions, as von Neumann noted long ago, can be added
and scaled by complex numbers, and have a natural inner product deﬁned by (Ψ, Φ) =
R
Ψ∗Φ.
They therefore describe a complex, normed vector space, called Hilbert space, and the fact
that the Schr¨odinger equation is linear means that it respects this structure. In vector-space
language, the choice between expressing the wave function in conﬁguration space or momentum
space is simply a change of basis in Hilbert space, which presumably has no physical importance
whatsoever. The physical quantum state – as distinguished from its representation in some
particular basis – is simply a vector in Hilbert space, sometimes called the “state vector,” and
written in Dirac notation as |Ψ⟩.
It would therefore seem natural, if our goal is to take a nature’s-eye view of things and
specify the correct quantum theory of the world in its own right, to deﬁne that theory as a
set of state vectors |Ψ⟩in a Hilbert space H, evolving under the Schr¨odinger equation via a
speciﬁed Hamiltonian ˆH. The problem is that this is very little structure indeed. Hilbert space
itself is featureless; a particular choice of Hilbert space is completely speciﬁed by its dimension
d = dim H. A vector in Hilbert space contains no direct speciﬁcation of what the physical content
of such a state is supposed to be; there is no mention of space, conﬁguration space, particles,
ﬁelds, or any such familiar notions. Presumably all of that is going to have to somehow emerge
from the dynamics, which seems like a tall order.
One might imagine that we can somehow read oﬀthe physical structure being described
from the explicit form of the Hamiltonian. For example, if we were handed
ˆH = −ℏ2
2m
∂2
∂x2 + 1
2mω2ˆx2,
(2)
we would quickly surmise that we had a simple harmonic oscillator on our hands. But that’s
only because we have conveniently been given the Hamiltonian in a particularly useful basis, in
this case the position basis |x⟩. That is not part of the speciﬁcation of the theory itself. Hilbert
space does not come equipped with a preferred basis; we should be able to deduce that the
position basis (or some other one) is useful to our analysis of the system, rather than assuming
we have been given it from the start.
Given that the only data that comes along with Hilbert space is its dimension d, the only
other thing we have to work with is the Hamiltonian considered as an abstract operator. That
does pick out one particular basis: that of the energy eigenstates, vectors satisfying ˆH |n⟩=
En |n⟩. (For simplicity we assume non-degenerate energy eigenvalues, so that the states {|n⟩}
deﬁne a unique basis.) There is no information contained in the speciﬁcation of the energy
eigenstates themselves; they are just a collection of orthonormal vectors. The information about
the Hamiltonian is contained entirely in its set of eigenvalues {En}, called the “spectrum” of
the Hamiltonian. A speciﬁcation of a quantum theory consists entirely, therefore, of this list of
4

real numbers, the energy eigenspectrum.
There is an important caveat to this statement. If Hilbert space is non-separable (inﬁnite
non-countable dimension), there can be unitarily inequivalent representations of the canonical
commutation relations (Haag, 1955). It is therefore necessary to give additional information to
deﬁne the theory; typically this would amount to specifying an algebra of observables.
We have good reason, however, to expect that the Hilbert space for the real world is ﬁnite-
dimensional, at least if we restrict our attention to our observable universe or any other ﬁnite
region of space (Banks, 2001; Bao et al., 2017; Bekenstein, 1981; Bousso, 1999; Jacobson, 2012).
The reason is gravity. In the presence of gravity, to make a long story short, the highest-entropy
conﬁguration we can construct in a spherical region R of radius r is a black hole, and black
holes have a ﬁnite entropy SBH = A/4G = πr2/G, where A is the area of the event horizon and
G is Newton’s constant (and we set ℏ= c = 1). If we decompose Hilbert space into a tensor
product of a factor describing that region and one describing the rest of the world,
H = HR ⊗HE,
(3)
it follows that we have an upper bound on the dimensionality of HR, given by
dim HR ≤exp (eπr2/G).
(4)
If R represents our observable universe with current values of the cosmological parameters, this
works out to approximately dim HR ≤ee123, which is large but still smaller than inﬁnity.1
We don’t know whether the dimension of the full Hilbert space H is ﬁnite or inﬁnite, other
than the indirect consideration that inﬁnite time evolution in a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space
would lead to a proliferation of Boltzmann Brains (Carroll, 2008; Dyson et al., 2002). But for
our current purposes, it suﬃces that operations conﬁned to our observable universe eﬀectively
act on a ﬁnite-dimensional part of Hilbert space. In that case, the set of in-principle observables
is simply all Hermitian operators on HR. What can be observed in practice will depend on
how we split further split Hilbert space into systems and observers, but the theory is completely
speciﬁed by the Hilbert space and Hamiltonian, or in other words, by the discrete list of numbers
{En} in the energy spectrum. By which we mean the spectrum of the Hamiltonian acting on HR
itself, assuming that interactions with degrees of freedom in HE can be neglected for practical
purposes. Henceforth we will speak as if the ﬁnite-dimensional factor HR is the relevant part of
Hilbert space, and our world can be described by a unitarily-evolving state within it. Technically
it is more likely to be a mixed state described by a density operator, but that can always be
puriﬁed by adding a ﬁnite-dimensional auxiliary factor to Hilbert space, so we won’t worry about
such details.
1There are a number of nuances here. In gauge theories, we cannot precisely decompose Hilbert space into
factors representing regions of space. And we are somewhat cheating by invoking “regions of space” at all,
although this will be a sensible notion on individual semiclassical branches of the universal quantum state. For
elaboration see (Bao et al., 2017).
5

The challenge facing such an approach should be clear. The world of our experience doesn’t
seem like a vector in Hilbert space, evolving according to a list of energy eigenvalues. It seems
like there is space, and objects located in space, and those objects interact with each other, and
so forth. How in the world is all of that supposed to come from a description as abstract and
featureless as a vector evolving through Hilbert space? To make matters seemingly worse, the
actual evolution is pretty trivial; in the energy eigenbasis, an exact solution to the Schr¨odinger
equation from an initial state |Ψ(0)⟩= P
n ψn |n⟩is
|Ψ(t)⟩=
X
n
ψne−iEnt |n⟩.
(5)
Each component simply evolves via an energy-dependent phase factor. It seems like a long
way from the complicated nonlinear dynamics of our world. This challenge accounts for the
epigraphs at the beginning of this paper.
Everettians tend to think that the right strategy for understanding the fundamental nature
of reality is not necessarily to start with what the world seems like and to construct an ontology
that hews as closely as possible to that. Rather, we should start with some proposed ontology
and ask what it would seem like to observers (if any such exist) described by it.
Clearly,
“observers” are not represented directly by a vector in Hilbert space, nor is the world that they
observe. What we can instead ask is whether there could be a higher-level description, emergent
from our ontology, that can successfully account for our world. Such a description is not forced
on us at the God’s-eye (or Laplace’s-Demon’s eye) view of the world. It would always be possible
to say that reality is a vector in Hilbert space, evolving through time, and stop at that. But
that’s not the only thing we’re allowed to say. The search for emergent levels is precisely the
search for higher-level, non-fundamental descriptions that approximately capture some of the
relevant dynamics, perhaps on the basis of incomplete information about the fundamental state.
The question is whether we can recover the patterns and phenomena of our experience (space,
objects, interactions) from the behavior of our fundamental ontology.
To get our bearings, consider the classic case of N massive particles moving in three-
dimensional space under the rules of classical Newtonian gravity.
The state of the system
is speciﬁed by one point in a 6N-dimensional phase space. Yet there is an overwhelming temp-
tation to say that the system “really lives” in three-dimensional space, not the 6N-dimensional
phase space. Can we account for where that temptation comes from without postulating any a
priori metaphysical essence to three-dimensional space?
There are two features of the description as N particles that make it seem more natural than
that featuring a single point in phase space, even though they are mathematically equivalent.
The ﬁrst is that the internal dynamics of the system are more easily interpreted in the N-
particle language. For example, it is immediately clear that two particles will strongly aﬀect
each other when they are nearby and the others are relatively far away. This kind of partial
and approximate understanding of the dynamics is transparent in the N-particle description,
6

and obscured in the point-in-phase-space description. The second is that the system looks like
N particles. That is, in the real-world analogues of this toy model, when we observe the system
by interacting with it as a separate physical system ourselves, what we immediately see are N
particles. There can be multiple equivalent ways of describing the internal dynamics of a system,
but the one we think of as “natural” or describing what “really exists” is often predicated on
how that system interacts with the outside world.
Similar considerations apply to familiar examples of emergence, such as treating a box of
many atoms as a ﬂuid. In this case the two descriptions are not equivalent – the emergent ﬂuid
description is an approximation obtained by coarse-graining – but the same principles apply. The
internal dynamics of the particles in the box are more easily apprehended in the ﬂuid description
(fewer variables and equations are required, given some short-distance coarse-graining scale),
and we can measure the ﬂuid properties directly (using thermometers and barometers and so
on), while the states of each individual atom are inaccessible to us. Emergent structures that
accurately describe the dynamics of part of a system using only information accessible within
the emergent description itself have every right to be thought of as “real,” even if they are not
“fundamental” (Dennett, 1991; Wallace, 2012).
These two considerations (internal dynamics and what we see) work in tandem: we want
the information we gather by observing a system to be suﬃcient for us to predict its subsequent
behavior. The ontology that seems most natural for us to ascribe to a physical subsystem thus
depends on how that subsystem interacts with the rest of the world (Zanardi et al., 2004). For
our program of Hilbert-space fundamentalism, this suggests that we should look for emergent
descriptions by considering ways to factorize H into a tensor product of factors representing
diﬀerent subsystems, and ask how those subsystems interact with each other.
[For certain
situations we might also consider direct-sum structures (Kabernik et al., 2020).]
We are therefore interested in quantum mereology: how to decompose the whole of Hilbert
space into parts such that individual subsystems have simple internal dynamics, and those
dynamics are readily observed via interactions with other subsystems, given nothing but the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian [(Carroll & Singh, 2019); for related work see (Brun & Hartle,
1999; Hartle, 2011; Ney, 2020a; Tegmark, 2015)]. This seems ambitious, but turns out to be
surprisingly tractable.
Consider the most basic thing we might want to describe by such a factorization, the distinc-
tion between a “system” representing a macroscopic object exhibiting quasi-classical behavior
and an “environment” describing degrees of freedom that passively monitor the system and lead
to decoherence. This corresponds to expressing Hilbert space as the tensor product
H = HS ⊗HE.
(6)
Fixing the dimensions of HS and HE, diﬀerent factorizations are related by unitary transfor-
mations that mix the two factors together. For any speciﬁc factorization, we automatically
7

get a decomposition of the Hamiltonian into a self-Hamiltonian for the system, another self-
Hamiltonian for the environment, and an interaction term:
ˆH = ˆHS ⊗IE + IS ⊗ˆHE + ˆHint.
(7)
We can now ask, within the set of all possible factorizations, which ones lead to system dynamics
that can be described by approximate classical behavior in appropriate circumstances?
In this decomposition, internal dynamics of the system are governed by ˆHS and how it is
observed by the environment is governed by ˆHint. (We assume that dim HE ≫dim HS and that
the environment’s internal dynamics are largely irrelevant.) To recover classical behavior when
the system is macroscopic, we want localized wave packets in HS to stay relatively localized
and follow classical equations of motion under ˆHS, but also for unentangled states in HS ⊗HE
to remain relatively unentangled; the environment is supposed to passively monitor the system,
not rapidly reach maximal entanglement with it.
It was argued by Carroll & Singh (2019)
that generic Hamiltonians, as deﬁned by their spectra, have neither of these features in any
factorization; the Hamiltonian of the real world is apparently non-generic, to nobody’s surprise.
When the Hamiltonian and the system/environment split allow for classical behavior, the
density operator for the system rapidly diagonalizes in the dynamically-preferred pointer basis
{|φn⟩}, such that the corresponding pointer states are robust under environmental monitoring
(Zurek, 1981). The pointer basis deﬁnes a pointer observable in the system’s Hilbert space,
ˆQS = P |φn⟩⟨φn|. Pointer states are the ones that appear classical, and a standard pointer
observable is the position in space of a system; a macroscopically coherent cat is described
by a pointer state, but a superposition of cats in diﬀerent physical conﬁgurations is not (Joos
& Zeh, 1985; Riedel et al., 2012; Zurek, 1993). In the Quantum Measurement Limit, where
ˆHint dominates over ˆHS, the pointer observable satisﬁes Zurek’s commutativity criterion (Zurek,
1981),
[ ˆHint, ˆQS ⊗IE] ≈0,
(8)
reﬂecting the fact that the system in a pointer state does not continually entangle with the
environment.
These ideas about pointer states and decoherence are usually discussed within the context
of a known factorization, but they also suggest a criterion for determining the factorization
that allows for classical behavior (Carroll & Singh, 2021). Given H and ˆH, we search through
all possible factorizations, and for each one we deﬁne a candidate pointer observable as the
one that comes closest to achieving (8). This candidate pointer observable embodies the idea
that external observers “see” certain features of the system, and that those features evolve
classically. We can then calculate, from an initially localized and unentangled system state,
the rate of delocalization and entanglement growth. The correct factorization is the one that
minimizes both. Simple numerical examples verify that this criterion picks out what we usually
8

think of as the standard system/environment split. Again, the sought-after behavior is non-
generic; it doesn’t occur for random Hamiltonians, nor for random factorizations with any given
Hamiltonian.
The data contained within the spectrum of ˆH therefore seems to provide the requisite infor-
mation to pinpoint an appropriate emergent classical description, when one exists. Thus reas-
sured, let us be somewhat more ambitious, and train our sights on the ontology that seems to
accurately describe our low-energy world (Carroll, 2021): an eﬀective quantum ﬁeld theory that
includes both gravity and the Standard Model of particle physics, deﬁned in four-dimensional
spacetime.
We can again take guidance from our experience of the real world. In quantum ﬁeld the-
ory (modulo previously-mentioned nuances), we can think about degrees of freedom as being
associated with regions of space. If we partition space into regions indexed by α, there is a
corresponding decomposition of Hilbert space into a tensor product of local factors,
H =
O
α
Hα.
(9)
This lets us expand the Hamiltonian as a sum of self-Hamiltonians for each region, plus inter-
actions between pairs of regions, triplets of regions, and so on:
ˆH =
X
a
ha ˆO(self)
a
+
X
ab
hab ˆO(2−pt)
ab
+
X
abc
habc ˆO(3−pt)
abc
+ · · · ,
(10)
where the h··· are numerical parameters.
A necessary requirement for the emergence of a structure recognizable as “space,” with local
dynamics therein, is that the series (10) does not continue indeﬁnitely when the factorization (9)
corresponds to local regions. Degrees of freedom only interact with a small number of nearest
neighbors, not with regions arbitrarily far away, which means that we only need interactions be-
tween a small number of Hilbert-space factors to capture the entire Hamiltonian. Happily, this
requirement is also essentially suﬃcient. As shown by Cotler et al. (2019), generic Hamiltonians
admit no local factorization at all, and when such a factorization exists, it is unique up to irrel-
evant internal transformations (and some technicalities that we won’t go into here). Therefore,
the spectrum of the Hamiltonian is enough to pick out the correct notion of an emergent spatial
structure when one exists.
A natural next step would be to deﬁne an emergent dynamical metric on spacetime, as in
general relativity. Here results are much less deﬁnitive, but initial auguries are promising. [For
alternative perspectives see (Carlip, 2014; Giddings, 2015; Hu, 2009; Huggett & W¨uthrich, 2013;
Ney, 2020b; Nielsen & Kleppe, 2013; Raasakka, 2017).] In the local decomposition of Hilbert
space (9), given an overall state |Ψ⟩we can calculate the reduced density matrix ˆρα for each
factor or collection of factors, and the corresponding von Neumann entropy Sα = −Tr ˆρ log ˆρ.
9

The amount of entanglement between two factors can be measured by the quantum mutual
information,
I(α : β) = Sα + Sβ −Sαβ.
(11)
In the vacuum state of a quantum ﬁeld theory, we know that the entanglement between two
regions decreases monotonically (exponentially in theories with massive ﬁelds, as a power law
in conformal theories) with the distance between them. We can therefore imagine turning this
around, and deﬁning a distance metric depending inversely on the mutual information.2 If there
exists an emergent best-ﬁt smooth geometry, that can be uniquely determined using techniques
such as classical multidimensional scaling. Thus, both the dimensionality and geometry of space
can be deﬁned using the entanglement information contained in a state |Ψ⟩, at least if that state
is near to the vacuum (Cao et al., 2017).
We can go further, and show that under certain optimistic assumptions (most notably, the
eventual emergence of approximate Lorentz invariance), the resulting geometry obeys Einstein’s
equation of general relativity in the weak-ﬁeld limit (Cao & Carroll, 2018). The basic idea,
following Jacobson (1995, 2016), is to posit that perturbations in the quantum state lead to a
change in the emergent area of a codimension-one surface that is proportional to the change in
entanglement entropy across that surface,
δA ∝δS.
(12)
The area perturbation, being a geometric quantity, can then be related to the Einstein tensor,
while in the long-distance limit the entropy can be related to the stress-energy tensor. Assuming
emergent Lorentz symmetry, the resulting dynamical equation for a perturbation of the vacuum
(representing ﬂat spacetime) is
δGµν ∝δTµν,
(13)
just as Einstein leads us to expect.
This is a provocative result, but one that shouldn’t be over-interpreted. The accomplishment
is not that we recover speciﬁcally Einstein’s equation; there aren’t that many other locally
Lorentz-invariant equations one could imagine for a dynamical spacetime metric. What matters
is that the necessary information required for such a description to emerge can be found in an
abstract quantum state evolving according to a Hamiltonian speciﬁed purely by its spectrum,
without any additional ontological assistance.
Moreover, while we can use entanglement to
deﬁne an emergent metric, we haven’t shown that it is the emergent metric, the one whose
2The resulting metric is deﬁned on the same spacetime structure in which entanglement exists. This is in contrast
to the emergence of spacetime from entanglement in the AdS/CFT context (Faulkner et al., 2014; Maldacena
& Susskind, 2013; Swingle, 2012; van Raamsdonk, 2010), where entanglement is on the boundary and geometry
is in the bulk. There is no inconsistency, as the procedure described here applies to weak-ﬁeld situations far
from any horizons, while the AdS/CFT construction extends over a cosmological spacetime where large-scale
curvature is a central part of the description.
10

geodesics deﬁne the motion of localized test particles. We can imagine how this might happen;
as just one piece of the puzzle, the Lieb-Robinson bound in quantum information theory (Lieb &
Robinson, 1972) provides a natural mechanism whereby light-cone structures can emerge from
quantum information theory (Hamma et al., 2009).
What strictly emerges from entanglement in this story is the metric on space, not on space-
time; a reconstruction of the latter depends on a procedure for stitching together spatial surfaces
evolving over time. Since our entire analysis is based on the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian ap-
pearing in the Schr¨odinger equation ˆH |Ψ⟩= i∂t |Ψ⟩, we need to imagine that time itself is fun-
damental, rather than emergent. The appearance of an explicit time parameter does not imply
that this parameter is in some sense preferred. Any Lorentz-invariant theory can be written in
Hamiltonian form by choosing a frame; such a form will not be manifestly Lorentz invariant, but
the symmetry is still there, so there is no obstacle to the emergent theory being approximately
Lorentz- and diﬀeomorphism-invariant. It would be natural if Lorentz invariance is indeed only
approximate, since we are working in a ﬁnite-dimensional factor of Hilbert space, and there
are no nontrivial representations of non-compact symmetry groups on ﬁnite-dimensional vector
spaces. This raises the intriguing possibility of potential experimental signatures of these ideas,
as Lorentz invariance can be tested to high precision Liberati (2013). One might also worry
about compatibility with the Wheeler-DeWitt equation of quantum gravity, which takes the
form ˆH |Ψ⟩= 0. In this case the eigenvalues of ˆH are seemingly irrelevant, since the world is
fully described by a zero-energy eigenstate [cf. (Albrecht & Iglesias, 2008)]. But there is also
no fundamental time evolution; that is the well-known “problem of time” (Anderson, 2010).
A standard solution is to imagine that time is emergent, which amounts to writing the full
Hamiltonian as
ˆH = ˆHeﬀ−i d
dτ ,
(14)
where τ is the emergent time parameter. In that case everything we have said thus far still goes
through, only using the eigenvalues of the eﬀective Hamiltonian ˆHeﬀ.
In addition to spacetime, we still have to show how local quantum ﬁelds can emerge in the
same sense as the spacetime metric. Less explicit progress has been made in reconstructing
approximate quantum ﬁeld theories from the spectrum of the Hamiltonian, but it’s not unrea-
sonable to hope that this task is more straightforward than reconstructing spacetime itself. One
promising route is via “string net condensates,” which have been argued to lead naturally to
emergent gauge bosons and fermions (Levin & Wen, 2005).
Nothing in this perspective implies that we should think of spacetime or quantum ﬁelds as
illusory. They are emergent, but none the less real for that. As mentioned, we we may not be
forced to invoke these concepts within our most fundamental picture, but the fact that they
play a role in an emergent description is highly non-trivial. (Most Hamiltonians admit no local
decomposition, most factorizations admit no classical limit, etc.) It is precisely this non-generic
characteristic of the speciﬁc features of the world of our experience that makes it possible to
11

contemplate uniquely deﬁning them in terms of the austere ingredients of the deeper theory.
They should therefore be thought of as equally real as tables and chairs.
This has been an overly concise discussion of an ambitious research program (and one that
may ultimately fail). But the lesson for fundamental ontology is hopefully clear. Thinking of
the world as represented by simply a vector in Hilbert space, evolving unitarily according to the
Schr¨odinger equation governed by a Hamiltonian speciﬁed only by its energy eigenvalues, seems
at ﬁrst hopelessly far away from the warm, welcoming, richly-structured ontology we are used to
thinking about in physics. But recognizing that the latter is plausibly a higher-level emergent
description, and contemplating the possibility that the more fundamental vocabulary is the one
straightforwardly suggested by our simplest construal of the rules of quantum theory, leads to a
reconstruction program that appears remarkably plausible. By taking the prospect of emergence
seriously, and acknowledging that our fondness for attributing metaphysical fundamentality to
the spatial arena is more a matter of convenience and convention than one of principle, it is
possible to see how the basic ingredients of the world might be boiled down to a list of energy
eigenvalues and the components of a vector in Hilbert space. If it did succeed, this project
would represent a triumph of uniﬁcation and simpliﬁcation, and is worth taking seriously for
that reason alone.
Acknowledgments
It is a pleasure to thank Ashmeet Singh, Charles Cao, Spiros Mikhalakis, and Ning Bao for
collaboration on some of the work described here. This research is funded in part by the Walter
Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics at Caltech, by DOE grant DE-SC0011632, and by the
Foundational Questions Institute.
References
Aharonov, Y., & Rohrlich, D. (2005). Quantum Paradoxes. Wiley, New York.
Albert, D. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. Cushing, A. Fine, & S. Goldstein
(Eds.) Bohmian Mechanics and Quantum Theory: An Appraisal, (pp. 277–284). Kluwer,
Dordrecht.
Albrecht, A., & Iglesias, A. (2008). The Clock ambiguity and the emergence of physical laws.
Phys. Rev., D77, 063506.
Allori, V. (2013). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In
A. Ney, & D. Albert (Eds.) The Wave Function: Essays on the Metaphysics of Quantum
Mechanics, (pp. 58–75). Oxford University Press, Oxford.
12

Anderson, E. (2010). The Problem of Time in Quantum Gravity.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1009.2157
Banks, T. (2001). Cosmological breaking of supersymmetry? Int. J. Mod. Phys., A16, 910–921.
Bao, N., Carroll, S. M., & Singh, A. (2017). The Hilbert Space of Quantum Gravity Is Locally
Finite-Dimensional. Int. J. Mod. Phys., D26(12), 1743013.
Bekenstein, J. D. (1981). A Universal Upper Bound on the Entropy to Energy Ratio for Bounded
Systems. Phys. Rev., D23, 287.
Bousso, R. (1999). A Covariant entropy conjecture. JHEP, 07, 004.
Brun, T. A., & Hartle, J. B. (1999). Classical dynamics of the quantum harmonic chain. Physical
Review D, 60(12), 123503.
Cao, C., & Carroll, S. M. (2018). Bulk entanglement gravity without a boundary: Towards
ﬁnding Einstein’s equation in Hilbert space. Phys. Rev. D, 97(8), 086003.
Cao, C., Carroll, S. M., & Michalakis, S. (2017). Space from Hilbert Space: Recovering Geometry
from Bulk Entanglement. Phys. Rev., D95(2), 024031.
Carlip, S. (2014). Challenges for Emergent Gravity. Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci. B, 46, 200–208.
Carroll, S. M. (2008). What if Time Really Exists?
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/0811.3772
Carroll, S. M. (2021). The Quantum Field Theory on Which the Everyday World Supervenes.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.07884
Carroll, S. M., & Singh, A. (2019). Mad-Dog Everettianism: Quantum Mechanics at Its Most
Minimal. In A. Aguirre, B. Foster, & Z. Merali (Eds.) What Is Fundamental?, (pp. 95–104).
Springer.
Carroll, S. M., & Singh, A. (2021). Quantum mereology: Factorizing Hilbert space into subsys-
tems with quasiclassical dynamics. Phys. Rev. A, 103(2), 022213.
Coleman, S. (1975). Quantum sine-gordon equation as the massive thirring model. Phys. Rev.
D, 11, 2088–2097.
Cotler, J. S., Penington, G. R., & Ranard, D. H. (2019). Locality from the Spectrum. Commun.
Math. Phys., 368(3), 1267–1296.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Real patterns. The Journal of Philosophy, 88(1), 27–51.
13

Dyson, L., Kleban, M., & Susskind, L. (2002). Disturbing implications of a cosmological con-
stant. JHEP, 10, 011.
Faulkner, T., Guica, M., Hartman, T., Myers, R. C., & Van Raamsdonk, M. (2014). Gravitation
from Entanglement in Holographic CFTs. JHEP, 03, 051.
Giddings, S. B. (2015). Hilbert space structure in quantum gravity: an algebraic perspective.
JHEP, 12, 099.
Haag, R. (1955). On Quantum Field Theories. Matematisk-fysiske Meddelelser, 29(12), 1–37.
Hamma, A., Markopoulou, F., Premont-Schwarz, I., & Severini, S. (2009).
Lieb-Robinson
bounds and the speed of light from topological order. Phys. Rev. Lett., 102, 017204.
Hartle, J. B. (2011). The Quasiclassical realms of this quantum universe. Found. Phys., 41,
982–1006.
Hu, B.-L. (2009). Emergent/quantum gravity: macro/micro structures of spacetime. In Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 174, (p. 012015). IOP Publishing.
Huggett, N., & W¨uthrich, C. (2013). Emergent spacetime and empirical (in)coherence. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics, 44(3), 276–285.
Jacobson, T. (1995). Thermodynamics of Spacetime: The Einstein Equation of State. Physical
Review Letters, 75, 1260–1263.
Jacobson, T. (2012). Gravitation and vacuum entanglement entropy. Int. J. Mod. Phys., D21,
1242006.
Jacobson, T. (2016). Entanglement Equilibrium and the Einstein Equation. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
116(20), 201101.
Joos, E., & Zeh, H. D. (1985). The Emergence of classical properties through interaction with
the environment. Z. Phys. B, 59, 223–243.
Kabernik, O., Pollack, J., & Singh, A. (2020). Quantum State Reduction: Generalized Biparti-
tions from Algebras of Observables. Phys. Rev. A, 101(3), 032303.
Levin, M. A., & Wen, X.-G. (2005). String net condensation: A Physical mechanism for topo-
logical phases. Phys. Rev. B, 71, 045110.
Liberati, S. (2013). Tests of Lorentz invariance: a 2013 update. Class. Quant. Grav., 30, 133001.
14

Lieb, E. H., & Robinson, D. W. (1972). The ﬁnite group velocity of quantum spin systems.
Commun. Math. Phys., 28, 251–257.
Maldacena, J., & Susskind, L. (2013). Cool horizons for entangled black holes. Fortschritte der
Physik, 61, 781–811.
Maldacena, J. M. (1999). The Large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and supergravity.
Int. J. Theor. Phys., 38, 1113–1133.
Myrvold, W. C. (2015). What is a wavefunction? Synthese, 192(10), 3247–3274.
Ney, A. (2013). Introduction. In A. Ney, & D. Albert (Eds.) The Wave Function: Essays on
the Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics, (pp. 1–51). Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ney, A. (2020a). Finding the world in the wave function: Some strategies for solving the macro-
object problem. Synthese, 197(10), 4227–4249.
Ney, A. (2020b). From quantum entanglement to spatiotemporal distance. In C. W¨uthrich,
B. Le Bihan, & N. Huggett (Eds.) Philosophy Beyond Spacetime: Implications from Quantum
Gravity. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Nielsen, H. B., & Kleppe, A. (2013). Towards a Derivation of Space. Bled Workshops Phys.,
14(2), 171–196.
North, J. (2013).
The structure of a quantum world.
In A. Ney, & D. Albert (Eds.) The
Wave Function: Essays on the Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics, (pp. 184–202). Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Raasakka, M. (2017). Spacetime-Free Approach to Quantum Theory and Eﬀective Spacetime
Structure. SIGMA, 13, 006.
Riedel, J. C., Zurek, W. H., & Zwolak, M. (2012). The rise and fall of redundancy in decoherence
and quantum Darwinism. New Journal of Physics, 14(8), 083010.
Saunders, S. (2021). The everett interpretation: structure. To be published in The Routledge
Companion to Philosophy of Physics, E. Knox and A. Wilson (eds.).
URL http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/18772/
Swingle, B. (2012). Entanglement renormalization and holography. Phys. Rev. D, 86(6), 065007.
Tegmark, M. (2015). Consciousness as a State of Matter. Chaos Solitons Fractals, 76, 238–270.
van Raamsdonk, M. (2010).
Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement.
General
Relativity and Gravitation, 42, 2323–2329.
15

Wallace, D. (2003). Everett and structure. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part
B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 34(1), 87–105.
Wallace, D. (2012). The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett inter-
pretation. Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2017). Against wavefunction realism. In S. Dasgupta, R. Dotan, & B. Weslake
(Eds.) Current Controversies in Philosophy of Science, Current Controversies in Philosophy,
(pp. 63–74). Routledge, New York.
Zanardi, P., Lidar, D. A., & Lloyd, S. (2004). Quantum tensor product structures are observable
induced. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 060402.
Zurek, W. H. (1981). Pointer Basis of Quantum Apparatus: Into What Mixture Does the Wave
Packet Collapse? Phys. Rev., D24, 1516–1525.
Zurek, W. H. (1993). Preferred states, predictability, classicality and the environment-induced
decoherence. Progress of Theoretical Physics, 89(2), 281–312.
16

