RESEARCH BULLETIN 
No. 218 
M a y 
1 9 8 4 
DR. THOMAS' ECLECTRIC OIL 
by Catherine Sullivan 
Introduction 
Of the hundreds of patent medicines made and sold in North America during the 
19th and early 20th centuries, few attained real popularity. In Canada, empty glass 
medicine bottles embossed with the name of a remedy, and sometimes of its 
proprietor, abound, particularly on archaeological sites that date from the second 
half of the 19th century. 
Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil is one of the medicines 
frequently found, and appears to have been popularly used in Canada. It was sold in 
Canada by Northrop & Lyman of Toronto and in the United States by Foster-Milburn 
of Buffalo, N.Y. Both companies became large pharmaceutical houses in the 20th 
century, but both began as wholesalers and creators of patent medicines. 
The Foster-Milburn partnership was organized in 1876 with rights to market 
Doan's Kidney Pills in Canada and later in the U.S. 
Northrop & Lyman became 
partners in a drug store in 1859. Both partnerships consisted of one member who 
travelled for the company, creating a market for products, soliciting orders and 
establishing the company's name. 
As dealers in patent medicines, these companies 
wholesaled patent medicines for which they were agents (Northrop & Lyman, for 
example, dealt with products for J.C. Ayer, Trask, Holloway and others), made and 
wholesaled their own brand name items, and products that had been acquired from 
small proprietors. For both companies, Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil was an example of 
the latter, that is, a remedy the rights to which were purchased from an individual 
proprietor. 
To achieve widespread popularity, a medicine required vigorous promotion, 
since competition among medicines was keen. 
Large companies dealing in patent 
medicines had a network that included a facility for shipping and receiving freight 
and orders, a team of commercial travellers, a reputation on which to build, and 
established advertising methods. 
As well, large patent medicine dealers would use 
one medicine to sell another. 
Northrop & Lyman, for example, while extolling the 
virtues of Thomas' Eclectric Oil as an external remedy for skin eruptions, would 
recommend internal use of Northrop & Lyman's Vegetable Compound to cleanse the 
blood, the impurity of which was supposed to have caused the eruptions. 
There does not appear to have been any official connection between the two 
companies that made and sold Eclectric Oil, other than that both followed the trends 
that made for a successful patent medicine business. In the 1950s, Foster-Milburn 
organized Westwood Pharmaceuticals to create prescription preparations; that com-
pany is still in business at the present. The company that was Northrop & Lyman no 
longer exists (Lockie 1968; Ambrosone, pers. com.; Sullivan 1982). 
Cette publication est disponible en francais. 
Parks 
Canada 
Pares 
Canada 

[8®£[LE'£ 
ELECTRIC HAIR-DYE 
Best Hair-Dye in the World. 
This is strong language, yet BOGLE'S ELECTRIC HAIR 
DYE (recently improved) was proven to be so by the 
judges at the late Mechanic's Fair, held in Boston, 
(among whon was Dr. Hayes, the eminent chemist and 
State Assayer,) who awarded it the PRIZE MEDAL 
AND DIPLOMA, over the choicest Hair Dyes on exhi-
bition from all parts of the Union. Its unparallelled 
superiority consists in—1st, The ingredients are nou-
rishing to the hair, not destructive, as others are. 
2d, 
Does not stain nor hurt the skin. 
3d, Is easily applied, 
and dyes the hair any color required, from a delicate 
brown to a deep black, so natural as to appear marvel-
lous. 
Figure 1. An advertisement from The Canada Directory for 1857-58 (Lovell 1857: 
1357). The healing properties of electricity and animal magnetism were in vogue 
during the 19th century, and many proprietors incorporated the words electric and 
magnetic in the names of their products and devices (Photo by R. Chan; RD-2207B). 
2 

HISTORY 
In Canada, Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil was introduced by Northrop & Lyman of 
Newcastle, Canada West in 1871 (Northrop & Lyman 1886). An arrangement made 
with the proprietor, Dr. S.N. Thomas of Phelps, New York, permitted Northrop & 
Lyman to manufacture the medicine, put it up in bottles under their own name, and 
distribute it. 
This arrangement could have been an outright purchase of the 
medicine, including the name and formula. 
However, there may have been some 
restrictions on distribution under that name, since the Northrop & Lyman company 
sold the medicine as Canadian Healing Oil in many parts of the world, such as the 
West Indies, Central and South America, Nigeria, Ghana, Australia, New Zealand and 
the United States (Northrop-McGillivray wrapper). Northrop & Lyman continued to 
deal in Thomas' Eclectric Oil throughout their long history, including a move to 
Toronto in 1874 and a name change to Northrop-McGillivray in the mid-1960s 
(Sullivan 1982). Thomas' Eclectric Oil is still available in some Canadian drug stores, 
marketed by Pharmapak Ltd. (Lavoie 1980: 54). 
In the United States, Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil was manufactured under that 
name in Buffalo, New York. In either 1880 or 1884, Foster-Milburn Co. of Buffalo 
purchased the factory and secured the rights to Thomas' Eclectric Oil (Lockie 1968: 
113; Ambrosone, pers. com.). According to Foster-Milburn, the name of the medicine 
was changed to Excelsior Eclectric Oil when it became their property and changed 
again in 1906 to Thomas' Eclectic (N.B.) Oil. Domestic distribution of the product 
was discontinued altogether in 1956 (Ambrosone pers. com.). In theory, then, Foster-
Milburn never sold the product under the name Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil. 
Both Foster-Milburn and Northrop & Lyman attribute the original formula for 
Eclectric Oil to Dr. S.N. Thomas of Phelps, New York. 
The fabrication of a 
character, often a doctor of medicine, to author a nostrum was not an unusual 
practice in the 19th century. Young (1961: 34-5) records both the dubious claim by 
T.W. Dyott that formulas used in his medicines were given him by his grandfather, a 
famous Edinburgh physician named Dr. Robertson, and the adoption of the title by 
Mr. Dyott himself. However, in the case of Dr. Thomas, a Samuel N. Thomas is listed 
as resident in Phelps, N.Y. in directories from 1867-8 and 1870; his profession is 
electric physician (Child 1867: 188; Lant 1870: 176). Dr. Thomas may have been an 
adherent of the school of electro-biology, the name given in ca. 1845 to a form of 
healing through animal magnetism or hypnotism (O.E.D. 1971: 842). 
An origin for the word eclectric has not been found and may have been Dr. 
Thomas' own creation. It suggests a combination of eclectic — that is, adhering to no 
one doctrine or theory but selecting the best from several — and electric. The uses 
of electricity and magnetic forces in medicine date from the 18th century, and many 
patent medicine makers in the 19th century included the words magnetic or electric 
in the names of their remedies and devices (Young 1961: 23-7, 172; see Figure 1). 
Both Foster-Milburn and Northrop <Jc Lyman used as an emblem for the product, a 
human hand holding a clearly-marked bottle of Eclectric Oil around which electricity 
plays. It is not improbable that both firms purchased this logo from Dr. Thomas. 
3 

CURES 
RHEUMATISM, 
Lumbago, Lame 
Back, Neuralgia, 
Diphtheria, Croup, 
Coughs & Colds, 
Sore Throat, Piles, 
Frost-bites, Burns, 
Asthma, Catarrh, 
Chilblains, Corns, 
Tooth, Ear and 
Headache, Bruises, 
Wounds & Sprains 
of every descrip-
tion on man or 
beast. Actually 
the best External 
and Internal Reme-
dy known. 
CAUTIOM.-77us Cut 
represents our New 
Wrapper; take no 
other, and avoid all similar named articles 
as they are worthless. 
Figure 2. Thomas' Eclectric Oil advertisement from a Northrop & Lyman almanac, 
1886. 
The cautionary note refers to this style of carton as new in 1886, but it was 
used with very little variation for a long period. A side panel on the box in Figure 6, 
thought to date to the 1940s and beyond, reads "Owing to the many worthless 
imitations and base counterfeits of Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil, the Proprietors have 
adopted this new style of carton." Its design is very similar to this one. 
Young (1961: 166-7) has found that repetition in advertising was valuable in the 
highly competitive patent medicine business. Northrop & Lyman advertisements in 
almanacs attempted to fix in the consumer's mind the appearance of their package, 
and, once established, the package, wrapper and bottle, as well as the wording in the 
advertisement, remained virtually unchanged for many years (Photo by R. Chan, RA-
2147B). 
4 

ADVERTISING AND USES 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil was a leading product for Northrop & Lyman; in their 
almanacs, three or more pages were usually devoted to it. 
For Foster-Milburn, 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil was not a principal item, their leaders being Doan's Pills and 
Burdock Blood Bitters (Lockie 1968: 112; Foster-Milburn Co. 1925; Wilson & Wilson 
1971: 108-9). As has been noted above, Foster-Milburn purchased Thomas' Eclectric 
Oil in 1880 or 1884, renamed it Excelsior Eclectric Oil and reverted to the name 
Thomas' Eclectic Oil in 1906. The latter name change was no doubt a result of the 
American Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906, which, among other things, forbid the 
proprietor from putting on his label any misleading information about his product 
(Young 1961: 244). Since electricity had no part in this remedy, the allusion to it was 
removed (Ambrosone, pers. com.). If the company sold the medicine under another 
name between acquiring it in 1880 and 1906, one would think that Foster-Milburn 
bottles embossed with Dr. Thomas' name date to after 1906. However, the bottle 
depicted in Figure 4, embossed with the Foster-Milburn name and the product spelled 
Eclectric, was manufactured in a post-bottomed mould, a type that would have been 
very old-fashioned in 1906 (Toulouse 1969: 582). According to Wilson & Wilson (1971: 
90), bottles in three sizes with this embossing are not rare. As well, Meyer Brothers, 
in a catalogue from 1887 (1970: 192) offered Thomas' Electric (sic) Oil in three sizes, 
manufacturer unspecified. Thus, the information on Foster-Milburn's Thomas' Eclec-
tric Oil is conflicting. 
Northrop & Lyman's advertising for this product seems to have been confined to 
their almanacs. As with other Northrop & Lyman products, newspaper advertise-
ments have not been located for Thomas' Eclectric Oil, and the company appears to 
have advertised its goods through commercial travellers to druggists who recom-
mended them to their customers. This company's almanacs advise the reader that 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil's popularity has not been attained by advertising but by genuine 
worth, and that the product advertises itself (Northrop & Lyman, ca. 1887: 1). 
Universal popularity appears to have been considered a selling point; this 
message is often repeated in various ways. Eclectric Oil's imitators are said to prove 
the medicine's worth, since these people recognize a product that is worth imitating 
(Northrop & Lyman 1806; Timberlake 1877: 300). In this claim, Northrop & Lyman 
stretch the facts somewhat; some of the Electric and Electron Oils that they imply 
have been named to imitate their product pre-date Thomas' Eclectric Oil. 
For 
example, Putnam (1968) lists several Electric remedies dating from the 1850s, and 
Urquhart (1976: 48 No. 265; 53 No. 312) illustrates bottles for Hilton's Electric Oil 
and Morriss's/Electric Fluid/Peterboro, C.W.; the latter certainly pre-dates or is 
contemporary with the date of introduction of Thomas' Electric Oil. However, these 
claims serve both to discredit other remedies with similar names and to establish a 
conspiracy between the proprietor and the public to outwit the imposters. 
The 
almanacs include testimonials from druggists who, in their own words, are normally 
reluctant to recommend proprietary articles, but do so cheerfully in the case of 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil. 
Uses 
Whereas many medicines are specifics, thai: Is, with a distinct effect in curing a 
particular disease, Thomas' Eclectric Oil is an all-purpose, internal and^ external 
family remedy for man and beast. However, to recommend a cure, the need for one 
5 

must first be established. The following extract from Northrop & Lyman's Almanac 
and Guide to Health (1904: 320) is an example of persuading the public that danger is 
ever near: 
It is one of the most useful medicines that can be kept for use 
in a household, and no home should be without it. It is used on 
the railway trains and on steamboats by travellers from home 
who have learned to esteem it too highly to leave home 
without it. 
The most careful man or woman often neglects 
some precaution and finds that nails will pierce the limb, that 
knives will cut the fingers, that handsaws jump out of their 
groove, that bees sting, that flies and mosquitoes bite, and 
that the best, the handiest and surest remedy is Dr. Thomas' 
Eclectric Oil. Then the children. They are a sturdy stirring 
lot, tearing clothes and skin, and what the needle and thread 
are to a rent in a garment, Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil is to the 
wounded skin. 
And some of the bruises are ugly enough to 
cause some fear of consequences. Lockjaw, blood-poisoning 
and such casualties, happen now-a-days from small causes; 
even turned-in toe nails are a danger. 
But the use of this 
superior remedy heals the wound, cleans it out, and removes 
the remotest cause of danger. So well has its potency as a 
cure been established that no store is without it, and the 
demand for it is up in the millions yearly. 
Illness can take the form of disease or of accident. Serious disease can be prevented 
if caught in its early stages — a neglected cough can become consumption. Accident 
can strike anywhere, and the only remedy is a state of preparedness — "When puzzled 
about what to do;" "Would not be without it overnight;" "Would not leave home 
without it." 
The message is almost explicit that the home or individual without 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil is begging for disaster. 
Uses for this product guaranteed its success. Its unlimited applicability, both 
internally and externally, encouraged a constant supply on hand, while its non-
alcoholic content, it was claimed, ensured that it would not evaporate on the wound 
and implied that it had good shelf life. 
As well, it was advertised as being an 
inexpensive remedy, since so little was required to effect a cure; testimonials in 
which three or four bottles were used before the patient was cured seem to 
contradict this claim, but appear not to have conflicted with the assertion. 
Its 
efficacy for the ills that flesh is heir to included those of man, woman and child, and 
it had its place in either home or barn; instructions for its use for cattle and poultry 
are included on the wrappers that surrounded the bottle. 
The ingredients of Thomas' Eclectric Oil are not revealed in Northrop & Lyman 
almanacs from 1886, ca. 1887, 1902 and 1904; Northrop <5c Lyman excused their 
secrecy by telling the reader that he does not need to be burdened by such details and 
disclosed that six essential oils of plant origin and no alcohol were part of the 
formula (Northrop & Lyman 1902: 3, 29). Young (1961: 37) has found that the public 
became increasingly fearful of medicines that contained alcohol and minerals, such as 
mercury, and the lack of these ingredients in proprietary medicines was an important 
selling feature during the late 19th century. Another public concern was reflected in 
the claim that not only would the condition of the patient improve with the use of 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil, but that no injurious effects would result from its use 
(Northrop & Lyman 1902: 5). 
It is difficult to know how similar the Thomas' Eclectric Oil sold by Foster-
Milburn was to that distributed by Northrop & Lyman. An example of the Foster-
Milburn version, dating from ca. 1956, states on the carton and label that the remedy 
contains Spirits of Turpentine, Camphor, Oil of Tar, Red Thyme and Fish Oil specially 
processed. In an almanac from 1902, Northrop 6c Lyman claimed that six essential 
6 

plant oils formed the basis of their nostrum. 
A recent example of Northrop-
McGillivray's Dr. Thomas1 Eclectric Oil states that the active ingredients are 
camphor and Oil of Thyme; together these compose less than 1% weight by volume. 
Both companies appear to have begun to discourage internal use of Thomas1 Eclectric 
Oil sometime after the 1920s. The Foster-Milburn advertisement in Figure 3 seems 
to stress the remedy's function as a liniment, and a Northrop-McGillivray wrapper 
purchased with the bottle in Figure 9 in ca. 1969 has dropped all mention of internal 
use; that in Figure 9b specifies that it is for external use only. 
rued by Two £) r. Thomas' 
Eclectic 
Oil 
Generation. 
h a s ^ 
ft 
h o u s e b o ! d 
r e m _ 
edy for two generations. 
It is useful 
in so many ways that it has become a 
fixture 
in family medicine chests all 
over North America. 
Fine For 
Taken internally and as" 4 
Bore Throat g a r g , e j Df 
Thomas. 
£cU^ 
tie Oil is wonderfully effective for com-
mon sore throat, quinsy, etc. If used at 
night, the soreness is usually relieved by 
morning. 
Earache and 
Jjr, 
Thomas' 
Eclectic 
OH 
' e u M * , a * 
is fine for earache. Neu-
ralgia pains frequently yield to its appli-
cation. 
Applied to an aching tooth it 
usually gives welcome relief. 
BpnttmoUlc Croup, Applied tO the neck 
Croupy Courh. 
a n d 
d r e s t ( a n d 
t a k e n 
internally, at the first appearance of cold 
in the' chest or spasmodic croup. 
Dr. 
Thomas' 
Eclectic 
Oil is wonderfully ef-
fective. 
In real croup, apply the oil and 
send for doctor. 
For Cut., Sprain./>. Thomas' 
Eclectic 
and Burn* 
Q{1 
r e l j e v e s 
t h c pajn 
of a burn or scald, and the inflamma-
tion and swelling of a sprain. 
SSJf*Jj*T , 
Soreness or lameness so 
Stiff Hu.cl«« 
o f t e n b r o u g h t o n b y hard-
work, or a strain, is -usually quickly re-
lieved by rubbing the sore spots with 
Dr. Thomas' 
Eclectic 
Oil. 
For sale at 
all drug and general stores, 30c and COc 
a bottle. 
! A Family Liniment for T w o Generations 
Keeps It Always On Hand 
• ' J 
H A V E found Dr. 
Thomas' 
Eclectic 
I Oil a wonderfully fine remedy and am 
never without a supply," says Mrs. 
L. 
B. Williams. 
33 N. 4th St., Bangor, Pa. 
I 
have my children use it as a gargle for sore 
throat and croup and I also apply it exter-
nally. 
It has never failed to bring relief." 
Gets Quick Relief 
N
H. BANES. 
425 Florida Ave, 
Jack-
sonville. Pla... says: "I must say that 
• Dr. Thomas' 
Ec'lcctic Oil is the best 
remedy of its kind. I've ever known. I have 
used it for cuts, burns, and bruises and it 
removes thc soreness and pain quickly. This 
splendid remedy has never failed to relieve 
me, and I always recommend it." 
All It Is Claimed To Be 
I
CAN SAY that Dr. 
Thomas' 
Eclectic 
Oil is all it is claimed to be," says /. H. 
King, 221 Swarts 
St., Dunmorc, 
Pa. "It 
is unexcelled for sprains, stiff muscles and 
cuts. 
I have also found it fine for 
frost 
bites. 
I always keep a bottle of 
Eclectic 
Oil on hand and highly recommend it as 
the best liniment I have ever used." 
TRIAL BOTTLE, 10 CENTS 
We will mail, postpaid, to any ad-
dress, a'trial bottle of 
Dr. 
Thomas' 
Eclectic 
Oil 
for 
10 cent, in stamp. 
FOSTER-MILBURN CO. 
BUFFALO, N. Y. 
Figure 3. Foster-Milburn advertisement for Dr. Thomas' Eclectic Oil (Foster-
Milburn 1925: 27). 
The emphasis in this piece is on the remedy's efficacy as a liniment, although 
internal use is still recommended for croup and sore throats. 
Two sizes are 
mentioned here as well as a small sample size. The U.S. Pure Food and Drug Act of 
1906 forbade the use of misleading information on labels and in advertising of patent 
medicines; the tone of this example from the mid-1920s is much less hysterical than 
American nostrum advertising from before 1906 (Photo by R. Chan; RD-2215B). 
7 
Don't Neglect a Sore Throat 
or Cold on the Chest 
—Use— 
Dr. Thomas' 
Eclectic Oil 
For Coughs, Colds, Spasmodic Croup, Cuts, 
Sprains, Bruises, Burns. 

Figure *. Foster-Milburn Company's Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottle. 
This is a rectangular panel bottle with flat chamfered corners, one indented 
panel on which the contents are named, and a cylindrical neck with patent finish. 
The bottle illustrated is 175 mm in height and has a capacity of 230 ml (about 7-3M 
American fluid ounces), but bottles of similar appearance are very common in three 
sizes (Wilson & Wilson 1971: 90). 
The Foster-Milburn Company has no record of 
selling the medicine under this name; between acquiring Thomas' Eclectric Oil in ca. 
1880 and the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906, Foster-Milburn called it Excelsior 
Eclectric Oil. In 1906 they renamed the product Thomas' Eclectic Oil, removing all 
reference to electric in the name. Foster-Milburn used a standard dispensing bottle 
for Thomas' Eclectic Oil until sale of the product in the United States was 
discontinued altogether in 1956 (Ambrosone, pers. com.). 
(Drawing by S. Laurie-
Bourque; 1U3A1-34.) 
8 
FFTJ 
© 
ca 
=0 
gs) s 
S3 
eg 
S°) 
5 
& 
<sD 
t — > 
E3 
=0 
OP 
o 
G-7tj 

PACKAGING 
Foster-Milburn's bottles for Thomas' Eclectric Oil are a flat rectangular shape 
with flat chamfered corners and one indented panel with the name of the medicine. 
The two short sides are embossed with the Foster-Milburn name on one side and 
INTERNAL &: EXTERNAL on the other. The back is not embossed. A patent lip is 
the usual finish on Foster-Milburn's bottles, and they are apparently fairly common in 
three sizes (Wilson & Wilson 1971: 90; Fig. 4; Corning Museum of Glass 67.4.93). The 
bottle most recently used for the remedy by Foster-Milburn is one similar in shape to 
the unembossed labelled Northrop & Lyman version in Figure 7; it also has a paper 
label (Ambrosone, pers. com.). The date at which Foster-Milburn adopted this style 
of bottle is not known, but an end date of 1956, when sale of the product in the 
United States was discontinued, is fairly certain. It was contained in a box that lists 
the contents of the remedy. An illustration on the box depicts a human hand holding 
a bottle of Eclectric Oil from which electricity (?) radiates. 
The appearance of the container in which Northrop <5c Lyman introduced 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil in 1871 has not been ascertained. Bottles similar in shape and 
size to those used later, but without the product name embossed on them, date to 
about the 1860s or 1870s (Fig. 5a). Although these were probably used as a druggists' 
shape for dispensing a variety of medicines, the style is different from other bottles 
used by Northrop & Lyman at a later date. Possibly this bottle shape came to be 
reserved for Thomas' Eclectric Oil after use of some duration. To date, no Eclectric 
Oil bottles with Northrop & Lyman's Newcastle address have been found. It appears, 
however, that after the company's move to Toronto in 1874, and before incorporation 
in 1883, a distinctive package was developed for Thomas' Eclectric Oil. 
The earliest marked bottle used by Northrop <5c Lyman for Thomas' Eclectric Oil 
is a flat rectangular style with flat chamfered corners and one indented panel with 
the Northrop <5c Lyman company name and address embossed on it. At one period, all 
four sides of Northrop & Lyman's Thomas' Eclectric Oil were embossed, the wording 
varying slightly over time (see Table I and Figure 6). Marked Eclectric Oil bottles 
were made by hand beginning in the 1870s, and by machine by 1920. They were 
enclosed in a carton from at least the 1880s (see Figure 2), and an example in the 
Nova Scotia Museum suggests that a paper label was not used on this type of bottle. 
An inventory of bottle moulds held by the Dominion Glass Company's Hamilton 
branch in 1926 indicates that Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottles were produced in two 
sizes, two and eight ounces. 
However, the two-ounce size occurs much more 
frequently in archaeological collections and was the only size sold by Eaton's in their 
mail order catalogues between 1894 and 1929 (Eaton 1894: 78; 1929: 330). 
The adoption by Northrop & Lyman and by Foster-Milburn of the standard 
dispensing shape in Figure 7 was probably the result of container standardization 
during World War II. In the U.S., the elimination of smaller sizes and of some types 
of specialized containers had increased bottle production to such an extent that 
glassmakers were reluctant to re-introduce discontinued bottle styles once the war 
was over (see Miller & Sullivan 1981: 10). Northrop & Lyman, and later Northrop-
McGillivray, apparently continued to use this type of bottle until the 1970s (Lavoie 
1980: 54), but Northrop-McGillivray also offered Thomas' Eclectric Oil in a four-
ounce Prince of Wales Oval and a more modern standard dispensing bottle during the 
1970s and 1980s (Figs. 9a and b). 
9 

10 
Figure 5a, b, c. Northrop 3c Lyman's Dr. S.N. Thomas Eclectric Oil bottles. 
The Northrop 3c Lyman bottle has a rectangular body with flat' chamfered 
corners, one indented panel on a long side, on which is embossed the Northrop 3c 
Lyman name and address, a cylindrical neck and two-part cork finish, consisting of a 
rounded predominant lip and a v-shaped or rounded vestigal lower element. 
The 
hand-blown version has been made in a two-part bottle mould with separate base 
part, and the neck and sometimes the lower element on the finish were formed in the 
mould; it has been completed with a finishing tool. All four sides of both the hand 
and machine-made versions have embossed lettering (Figure 6). The over-all height 
of the complete Eclectric Oil bottles examined varied between 127 and 139 mm 
(about 5-1/16 to 5-1/2 inches) with the greatest variation being in the length of the 
neck; in hand-blown bottles the height of the neck can vary even among those from 
the same mould. In this shape the bottle contains between 2 and 2-1/2 American 
fluid ounces (56-70 ml). Base markings vary, but indicate that Northrop 6c Lyman 
purchased some of their machine-made bottles from the Consumer Glass Company, 
established in 1917. 
a 
There is no evidence that this bottle was actually used for Thomas' Eclectric 
Oil, since embossing on the glass names only the Northrop 3c Lyman company. 
However, the basic shape of the container is the same, with minor variations, as 
those associated with the product at a later date (Drawing by D. Kappler; 
1U3A1-39). 
b 
This example identifies both the company and the product, as well as specifying 
that the medicine is for internal and external uses. It has been made by hand 
(Drawing by S. Laurie-Bourque; Smith collection), 
c 
A machine-made Eclectric Oil bottle in colourless glass. The appearance of 
being more square is illusory, since the widths of the shoulders on this speciman 
and on a and b are the same, about 51 mm. Base marks on this bottle indicate 
that it was made by the Consumer Glass Co. after 1920, and the P.P.M. Act 
registration number for Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil is included in the embossing 
(drawing by D. Kappler; 1U5A1-15). 

11 
a 

12 
b 

13 
c 

14 
Figure 6. Embossing on Northrop 6c Lyman Dr. Thorns' Eciectric Oil glass bottles. 
The adoption for Thomas' Eciectric Oil of a bottle embossed on all four sides 
seems to have occurred between 1874 and 1883, that is, after Northrop 6c Lyman 
removed from Newcastle and before they incorporated. Eciectric Oil bottles with 
this embossing are datable, within fairly broad ranges, by the method of manufacture, 
the wording in the company name (see Table I), and the inclusion or absence of the 
Proprietary or Patent Medicine (P.P.M.) Act registration number 5520. 
The P.P.M. Act of 1908 required that medicine manufacturers, or agent acting 
as manufacturer, register with the Minister of Inland Revenue and provide a list of 
products to be sold in Canada. 
The 1919 amended P.P.M. Act required separate 
registration for each product (Dominion of Canada 1919: section 3 Part 1). 
A 
package, carton and bottle, of Thomas' Eciectric Oil in the Nova Scotia Museum 
includes the notation on the box's top flat: "This style package adopted Ouly 1920." 
The carton is like one depicted in 1886 (see Figure 2), except for the addition on one 
side of the P.P.M. Act number. The Consumer's Glass Company trade mark on the 
base of the bottle inside dates it to after 1920 (or 1917) (King 1977; Toulouse 1971: 
103; Rosewarne 1971: 25). It is finished for cork and embossed as usual on four sides, 
but the P.P.M. Act registration information is embossed on the side with the product 
name. 
Two Northrop 6c Lyman products, a cough syrup and a corn cure, dating to the 
early 20th century both have the P.P.M. Act registration number 40 on their labels 
(see Sullivan 1982: Figs. 9a and 11a). This is consistent with the original legislation 
under which the manufacturer could include any number of products on the one 
certificate (Statutes of Canada 1908: section 3). It is reasonable to assume that all 
products owned by Northrop 6c Lyman in 1909 carried the same number when they 
were first registered. However, the four-digit registration number 5520, by which 
Thomas' Eciectric Oil came to be known, is more likely to have been allocated in 
1919, when new numbers were being created as identifcation of products that needed 
individual registration. This argues very strongly for a date of 1920 and later for 
Thomas' Eciectric Oil bottles embossed with the registration number 5520 on the 
body, whether hand-made or otherwise. The bottle in the Nova Scotia Museum also 
suggests that Northrop 6c Lyman did not use a paper label as part of their packaging 
for Thomas' Eciectric Oil. 
a 
Except for the company name, which changed slightly over time, the wording on 
the glass surfaces was not altered from the 1870s or early 1880s until, probably, 
1920. Bottles marked in this way have been seen in hand-blown and in machine-
made versions, both types finished for cork stoppers, 
b 
Embossing that includes the P.P.M. Act registration information probably dates 
to 1920 and after. Although Northrop 6c Lyman Company would have registered 
Thomas' Eciectric Oil in ca. 1908, registration number 5520 was probably not 
assigned to this product until 1919. 
(Drawings by S. Laurie-Bourque; 2H24C3-3, 1U3A1-38). 

15 
@m IP^TgMT G&lgleXKgOKiti MR 
(E©[L[I©TO0© 
m\L 
EXTiREIAIL 
(ITO/ftM©© [Loews® 
1T®MMff©,MJ\, 
TOtKKOKOT® ©G81F 
BosnniisiaM, 
i©t[E©¥^0(g ©OIL 
a 
b 

16 
Figure 7. Northrop & Lyman's Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottle and carton. 
Although the shape of the bottle changed very little, embossing, previously on 
all four surfaces of the body, began to be limited to the indented panel only, 
identifying the Northrop & Lyman Company. The product name appears on a paper 
label similar in design to the carton. This style of bottle was probably adopted in 
response to standardization in the container industry during World War II, and was 
apparently still being used in the 1970s (Lavoie 1980: 54). (Photo by R. Chan; G.L. 
Miller Collection, RA-14159B). 

17 
Figure 8. 
Base markings from nine Northrop & Lyman's Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil 
bottles. 
Base markings on bottles can include different types of information, such as a 
manufacturer's logo, a customer's code or a mould number; some include all three. 
Mould numbers were in use by glassmakers from the late 19th century as a quality 
control on their moulds, as inventory control, and as a convenience to customers 
ordering bottles of a particular shape and size. Miller & Jorgensen (1982) have found 
that, within the Dominion Glass Company's mould numbering system, neither the 
method of manufacture nor the type of finish affected the mould number. Thus, the 
same number can be found on hand-blown or machine-made bottles and on those 
finished for cork or other type of closure, provided that the shape and size of the 
bottles are the same. Northrop <5c Lyman are known to have purchase some of their 
Eclectric Oil bottles from the Dominion Glass Company (Inventory of Moulds, 1926), 
and the marks here show that some were purchased from Consumer's Glass Company. 
Other glassmakers that Northrop & Lyman may have dealt with are not known at 
present. 
Since so many archaeologically-recovered specimens of glass containers are 
fragmentary, base marks of known bottles can be useful in identifying bottle types. 
The marks illustrated here have been taken from Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottles of the 
shape shown in Figures 5 and 7. Dating is based on the embossing on the bottles and 
the method of manufacture, which suggests that earlier Eclectric Oil bottles were 
not embossed on the bases. 
The marks have been arranged, as is now thought, 
chronologically by date of manufacture. 
Unless otherwise noted, the bottles from 
which they were taken are embossed on all four body surfaces and are finished for 
cork, 
a 
A hand-made Eclectric Oil bottle, dating to between 1883 and the very early 
20th century. The mark is very discrete and difficult to see. 
b 
Base marking from a hand-blown bottle made between the early 20th century 
and 1920. 
c 
Mould number from a machine-made bottle from the same period as b. 
d 
This mark dates to after 1920 on two counts — the P.P.M. Act registration 
number is embossed on the bottle, and the Consumer's Glass Company C in 
triangle logo was registered in either 1917 or 1920 (King 1977; Toulouse 1971: 
103; Rosewarne 1971: 25). 
e 
The bottle from which this was taken is identical to d. It could be that the 
moulds were held by different 
branch factories of the Consumer's Glass 
Company. 
f_ 
A machine-made Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottle with lug finish. The Northrop & 
Lyman company address on the body of this bottle is TORONTO, CANADA, 
g 
Embossing on the body of this machine-made bottle includes its size — 2 FL. 
OZS. — and the address noted as on f_. The Consumer's Glass Company mark on 
the base dates the bottle to between 1917 (or 1920) and 1961 (Toulouse 1971: 
103). 
h 
This bottle and the next one, L, are embossed on only one side, the product name 
being supplied by a paper label. Both bottles have a continuous thread finish, 
and are, in size, embossing, shape, glass colour and all other respects but the 
base mark, identical. A manufacturing date of World War II vintage and later is 
tentatively suggested for both, since the use of a bottle embossed with only the 
Northrop & Lyman Company name is thought to be indicative of container 
standardization that was taking place at that period. (Drawings by S. Laurie-
Bourque.) 

18 
a 
b 
c. 
d 
f 
e 
g 
h 

19 
Figure 9, a & b. Modern Eclectric Oil bottles. 
The example on the left is a four-ounce Prince of Wales oval, the design for 
which was registered in 1933 (Richards Glass Company Ltd., ca. 1937: 17). It was 
made by Dominion Glass Company in November-December, 1969, according to base 
markings (Miller <5c Jorgensen 1982). That on the right was purchased in 1981 and 
contains 100 ml of Thomas' Eclectric Oil. (Photo by R. Chan; RA-14158B.) 

20 
Table I. 
Northrop & Lyman company name and location stylings, taken from four 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottles and one that does not name the contents. The bottles 
are all of about the same size. 
By matching Northrop & Lyman directory listings 
with the embossing and manufacturing techniques, a chronology is suggested for 
dating Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottles. These dates are proposed for general guidance 
only, since the way in which the company styled itself on paper could precede by 
several years a change in the embossing on their bottles. 
The earliest Northrop & Lyman bottles are 
those that note the company's location in 
Newcastle Canada West between 1859 and 
1874. Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil bottles with 
this address have not been seen thus far, but 
the shape of the bottle from 
which this 
styling was taken is very similar to later 
Eclectric Oil bottles (see Fig. 5a). 1U3A1-39 
The company's 
move to Toronto in 
1874 
necessitated a change in address on their 
bottles. 
Two Eclectric Oil bottles embossed 
this way have finishes the bottom element of 
which was formed in the bottle mould; both 
are from military sites in Ontario with some 
occupation from the second quarter of the 
19th century onwards. 2H24C3-3 
Northrop 
& Lyman added the 
appellation 
Company 
to their 
directory 
listings, 
and 
sometimes the word Limited or Ltd. in paren-
thesis, after incorporation in 1883, but their 
letterhead until at least 1906 read Northrop 
& Lyman Company. 
1H27G11-194 
The word Ltd. on this bottle looks to have 
been added to a mould similar to c before 
ordering a new mould, e. Northrop 5c Lyman 
put the word Limited in parenthesis or smal-
ler letters in directory listings and elsewhere 
beginning in 1883, but the word does not 
appear to have been an integral part of the 
company name until the second decade of the 
20th century. 1U3A1-40 
The addition of the word Limited to the 
company's title necessitated respacing the 
words in the company name on Thomas' 
Eclectric Oil bottles. 
The container from 
which this was taken is hand-made, although 
it is more common to find this embossing on 
machine-made bottles. If dating suggested in 
Figure 6 is correct, bottles embossed with 
the P.P.M. Act registration number date to 
1920 and later and will appear only on bottles 
with the company's name and address noted 
in this way. 1U5A1-15 
LLTOM 
TJ©[^®[OT® ©GOT 
N0RTHROP Ss 
LYMAN €0 
TORONTO 0NT 
LYMAN OOOLDMOTIB 
T©^®NT(Q)p©Mir0 
1LYRMM1 ©Oi 
Y@!F5©OT©o®[OT0 
e 
d 
c 
b 
a 

21 
SUMMARY 
Research on the Thomas' Eclectric Oil sold by Foster-Milburn and on Northrop 
& Lyman's Canadian Healing Oil, as Eclectric Oil was known elsewhere, is not 
complete. 
Dr. S.N. Thomas, electric physician, of Phelps, N.Y., developed the 
formula, created the name, and devised aspects of the packaging for Thomas' 
Eclectric Oil, the Canadian rights for which were sold or leased to Northrop & Lyman 
of Newcastle, Ontario, in 1871. Foster-Milburn of Buffalo, N.Y., purchased Dr. 
Thomas' remedy and its American factory a decade or more later. Both Northrop & 
Lyman and Foster-Milburn added the product to their established line of proprietary 
products and both had a degree of success with it. 
Unlike many patent medicines, Thomas' Eclectric Oil did not have a high 
alcoholic content and does not appear to have been advertised or used as a beverage. 
It seems to have functioned as a legitimate medicine in that it was expected to 
relieve the patient's condition. 
It was applied externally for burns and scalds, 
rheumatic pain, sore throat, chapped hands, skin lesions, and aching muscles, and 
taken internally to relieve sore throats and coughs. It could also be inhaled in vapour 
form for sinus congestion. Application for these ailments in humans and in livestock 
was recommended, although it also had uses for maladies peculiar to cattle and 
poultry. 
Testimonials in which diptheria and other more serious diseases were 
averted by its use were not uncommon, and pharmacists' testimonials, if they are to 
be believed, indicate that it was commonly endorsed by members of that profession. 
The number of empty Eclectric Oil bottles excavated on archaeological sites indicate 
that it was a popularly-used remedy in Canada. 
Known bottle styles for Foster-Milburn's Thomas' Eclectric Oil include three 
sizes of a panel bottle with patent lip, embossed on three sides, and a standard 
dispensing oval. Foster-Milburn discontinued sale of the product in the U.S. in 1956. 
Northrop & Lyman used an embossed rectangular bottle with one indented panel for 
Thomas' Eclectric Oil from the 1870s until the 1970s, and standard dispensing ovals 
thereafter. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I wish to thank Peter Ambrosone of Westwood Pharmaceuticals, Buffalo, N.Y., 
for his generous response to my queries on the history of Foster-Milburn's connection 
with Dr. Thomas' Eclectric Oil. 
I am also grateful to two private collectors in 
Ottawa, who permitted handling and publication of Eclectric Oil bottles in their 
possessions, and to Deborah Trask of the Nova Scotia Museum for the particulars on 
an example of Thomas' Eclectric Oil held by that institution. 
Kevin Lunn, Parks 
Canada, Prairie Regional Office, provided details of Eclectric Oil bottles from 
Batoche, Lower Fort Garry, Fort Walsh and private collections known to him. 

22 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Canada, Dominion of 
1919. Acts of the Parliament of the Dominion of Canada passed in the Session held in 
the ninth and tenth years of the Reign of His Majesty King George V Being the 
Second Session of the Thirteenth Parliament etc. Vol. I. Public General Acts, 9-10 
George V, Chapter 66. An Act to Amend the Proprietary or Patent Medicine Act 
assented to 7th July, 1919 . 
Canada 
1908. Statutes of Canada. An Act Respecting Proprietary or Patent Medicines. 7-8 
Edward VII, 1908, pp. 457-461. Chap. 56. 
Child, Hamilton, comp. 
1867. 
Gazetteer and Business Directory of Ontario County, N.Y. for 1867-68, 
Hamilton Child, Syracuse. In the Ontario County Historical Society. 
Dominion Glass Company Papers (P.A.C.) 
1926. "An Inventory of Mould Equipment," An inventory of glassware moulds held at 
the Hamilton factory in 1926, hand-written in a ledger. 
Eaton, The T. Co. 
1894. 
Spring and Summer Catalogue No. 27, 1894, The T. Eaton Co. Limited, 
Toronto. 
—. 1917. Fall and Winter Catalogue, No. 124, The T. Eaton Co. Limited, Toronto. 
—. 1929. Fall and Winter Catalogue, No. 172, 1929-30, The T. Eaton Co., Toronto. 
Foster-Milburn Co. 
1925. Doan's 1926 Directory of the U.S., Foster-Milburn Co., Buffalo, N.Y. 
King, T.B. 
1977. 
"Notes on the History of Glassmaking" presented at Glass in Canada: Its 
History and Study, an Ontario Museum Association Seminar hosted by the Royal 
Ontario Museum, Nov. 24-26, 1977, Toronto. 
Lant, J.H., comp. 
1870. 
Ontario County Directory for 1870, Containing...., J.H. Lant, compiler, 
Canandaigua, N.Y. 
Lavoie, Marc 
1980. 
Archaeological Excavations at the Bethune-Thompson House, Williamstown, 
Ontario, The Ontario Heritage Foundation, Ministry of Culture and Recreation. 
Lockie, Laurence D. 
1968. 
Pharmacy on the Niagara Frontier, The Past and Present, Henry Stewart 
Incorporated, East Aurora, N.Y. 
Lovell, John, pub. 
1857. 
The Canada Directory for 1857-58 ... corrected by November 1857, John 
Lovell, Montreal. 

23 
Meyer Bros. & Co. 
1970. Annual Prices Current of Meyer Bros. & Co. Imported and Wholesale Druggists, 
Patent Medicines and Proprietary Articles, 1887, Stonybrook Associates, Princeton 
Junction, New Jersey. 
Miller, George L. & Catherine Sullivan 
1981. "Machine-made Glass Containers and The End of Production for Mouth-Blown 
Bottles," Research Bulletin No. 171 (December), Parks Canada, Ottawa. 
Miller, George L. & Elizabeth A. Jorgensen 
1982. "Some notes on bottle mould numbers from Dominion Glass Company and its 
Predecessors," manuscript on file, Parks Canada, Ottawa. 
Northrop & Lyman Co. 
1886. Northrop & Lyman Co.'s Family Almanac Guide to Health and Recipe Book, 
1886, Northrop & Lyman Co., Toronto. 
—. ca. 1887. Northrop & Lyman Co.'s Family Recipe Book and Guide to Health, 
Northrop 6c Lyman Co., Toronto (P.A.C.). 
—. 1902. Northrop &L Lyman Co.'s Almanac and Guide to Health, 1902, Northrop 6c 
Lyman Co., Limited, Toronto, Canada. 
—. 1904. Northrop 6c Lyman Co.'s Almanac and Guide to Health, 1904, Northrop 6c 
Lyman Co., Limited, Toronto, Canada. 
Putnam, P.A. 
1968. Bottled Before 1863, P.A. Putnam. 
Richards Glass Co. Ltd. 
ca. 1937. 
The Richards Glass Company Limited Pharmaceutical and Laboratory 
Glassware, The Richards Glass Company Limited, Toronto and Montreal. 
Rosewarne, R.V. 
1971. "Canadian Base Numbers." The First Glassfax Seminar Newsletter, Vol. V, No. 
VI (June), pp. 25-56. 
Sullivan, Catherine 
1982. "The Bottles of Northrop 6c Lyman, A Canadian Drug Firm," manuscript on 
file, Parks Canada, Ottawa; publication in Material History Bulletin, National 
Museum of Man, Ottawa, in progress. 
Timberlake, J. 
1877. Illustrated Toronto; Past and Present, Toronto. 
Toulouse, Julian Harrison 
1969. "A Primer on Mold Seams" Western Collector, Vol. 7, No. 11 (November), pp. 
526-535 and Vol. 7, No. 12 (December), pp. 578-587. 
—. 1971. Bottle Makers and Their Marks, Thomas Nelson Inc., Camden, New York. 
Urquhart, Ollie 
1976. Bottlers and Bottles, Canadian, S. 6c O. Urquhart, Toronto. 
Wilson, BUI 6c Betty WUson 
1971. 19th Century Medicine in Glass, 19th Century Hobby 6c Publishing Co., Amadas 
City, California. 

24 
Young, James Harvey 
1961. The Toadstool Millionaires: A Social History of Patent Medicines in America 
before Federal Regulation, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. 
ISSN: 0228-1228 
Published by authority of 
the Minister of the Environment 
© Minister of Supply and 
Services Canada 1984 
Canada 

