PDF generated using the open source mwlib toolkit. See http://code.pediapress.com/ for more information.
PDF generated at: Sun, 21 Jun 2009 15:07:03 UTC
Symmetry Breaking and
Algebraic Quantum
Topology
Symmetry Breaking, Goldstone Bosons
and Algebraic Quantum Topology

2
Algebraic Quantum Topology
Table of contents
Introduction
Main article 
Mathematics
Supporting articles 
History of mathematics
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical notation
Symmetry
Sphere symmetrical group o.
Symmetry generally conveys two primary
meanings. The first is an imprecise sense of
harmonious 
or 
aesthetically 
pleasing
proportionality and balance; [1] such that it
reflects beauty or perfection. The second
meaning is a precise and well-defined
concept 
of 
balance 
or 
"patterned
self-similarity" that can be demonstrated or
proved according to the rules of a formal
system: by geometry, through physics or
otherwise.
Although the meanings are distinguishable
in 
some 
contexts, 
both 
meanings 
of
"symmetry" are related and discussed in
parallel.[1] [2]
The "precise" notions of symmetry have
various 
measures 
and 
operational
definitions. For example, symmetry may be
observed:
• with respect to the passage of time;
• as a spatial relationship;
• through geometric transformations such
as scaling, reflection, and rotation;
• through other kinds of functional
transformations[3] ; and

Symmetry
3
Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man (ca.
1487) is often used as a representation of
symmetry in the human body and, by
extension, the natural universe.
• as an aspect of abstract objects, theoretic models,
language, music and even knowledge itself.[4] [5]
This article describes these notions of symmetry
from three perspectives. The first is that of
mathematics, in which symmetries are defined and
categorized 
precisely. 
The 
second 
perspective
describes symmetry as it relates to science and
technology. In this context, symmetries underlie
some of the most profound results found in modern
physics, including aspects of space and time.
Finally, a third perspective discusses symmetry in
the humanities, covering its rich and varied use in
history, architecture, art, and religion.
The opposite of symmetry is asymmetry.
Symmetry in the field of
mathematics
In formal terms, we say that an object is symmetric
with respect to a given mathematical operation, if,
when applied to the object, this operation does not
change the object or its appearance. Two objects are symmetric to each other with respect
to a given group of operations if one is obtained from the other by some of the operations
(and vice versa).
Symmetries may also be found in living organisms including humans and other animals (see
symmetry in biology below). In 2D geometry the main kinds of symmetry of interest are
with respect to the basic Euclidean plane isometries: translations, rotations, reflections,
and glide reflections.
Mathematical model for symmetry
The set of all symmetry operations considered, on all objects in a set X, can be modeled as a
group action g : G × X → X, where the image of g in G and x in X is written as g·x. If, for
some g, g·x = y then x and y are said to be symmetrical to each other. For each object x,
operations g for which g·x = x form a group, the symmetry group of the object, a
subgroup of G. If the symmetry group of x is the trivial group then x is said to be
asymmetric, otherwise symmetric. A general example is that G is a group of bijections g:
V → V acting on the set of functions x: V → W by (gx)(v)=x(g−1(v)) (or a restricted set of
such functions that is closed under the group action). Thus a group of bijections of space
induces a group action on "objects" in it. The symmetry group of x consists of all g for
which x(v)=x(g(v)) for all v. G is the symmetry group of the space itself, and of any object
that is uniform throughout space. Some subgroups of G may not be the symmetry group of
any object. For example, if the group contains for every v and w in V a g such that g(v)=w,
then only the symmetry groups of constant functions x contain that group. However, the
symmetry group of constant functions is G itself.
In a modified version for vector fields, we have (gx)(v)=h(g,x(g−1(v))) where h rotates any 
vectors and pseudovectors in x, and inverts any vectors (but not pseudovectors) according

Symmetry
4
to rotation and inversion in g, see symmetry in physics. The symmetry group of x consists of
all g for which x(v)=h(g,x(g(v))) for all v. In this case the symmetry group of a constant
function may be a proper subgroup of G: a constant vector has only rotational symmetry
with respect to rotation about an axis if that axis is in the direction of the vector, and only
inversion symmetry if it is zero.
For a common notion of symmetry in Euclidean space, G is the Euclidean group E(n), the
group of isometries, and V is the Euclidean space. The rotation group of an object is the
symmetry group if G is restricted to E+(n), the group of direct isometries. (For
generalizations, see the next subsection.) Objects can be modeled as functions x, of which a
value may represent a selection of properties such as color, density, chemical composition,
etc. Depending on the selection we consider just symmetries of sets of points (x is just a
boolean function of position v), or, at the other extreme, e.g. symmetry of right and left
hand with all their structure.
For a given symmetry group, the properties of part of the object, fully define the whole
object. Considering points equivalent which, due to the symmetry, have the same
properties, the equivalence classes are the orbits of the group action on the space itself. We
need the value of x at one point in every orbit to define the full object. A set of such
representatives forms a fundamental domain. The smallest fundamental domain does not
have a symmetry; in this sense, one can say that symmetry relies upon asymmetry.
An object with a desired symmetry can be produced by choosing for every orbit a single
function value. Starting from a given object x we can e.g.:
• take the values in a fundamental domain (i.e., add copies of the object)
• take for each orbit some kind of average or sum of the values of x at the points of the
orbit (ditto, where the copies may overlap)
If it is desired to have no more symmetry than that in the symmetry group, then the object
to be copied should be asymmetric.
As pointed out above, some groups of isometries are not the symmetry group of any object,
except in the modified model for vector fields. For example, this applies in 1D for the group
of all translations. The fundamental domain is only one point, so we can not make it
asymmetric, so any "pattern" invariant under translation is also invariant under reflection
(these are the uniform "patterns").
In the vector field version continuous translational symmetry does not imply reflectional
symmetry: the function value is constant, but if it contains nonzero vectors, there is no
reflectional symmetry. If there is also reflectional symmetry, the constant function value
contains no nonzero vectors, but it may contain nonzero pseudovectors. A corresponding
3D example is an infinite cylinder with a current perpendicular to the axis; the magnetic
field (a pseudovector) is, in the direction of the cylinder, constant, but nonzero. For vectors
(in particular the current density) we have symmetry in every plane perpendicular to the
cylinder, as well as cylindrical symmetry. This cylindrical symmetry without mirror planes
through the axis is also only possible in the vector field version of the symmetry concept. A
similar example is a cylinder rotating about its axis, where magnetic field and current
density are replaced by angular momentum and velocity, respectively.
A symmetry group is said to act transitively on a repeated feature of an object if, for every 
pair of occurrences of the feature there is a symmetry operation mapping the first to the 
second. For example, in 1D, the symmetry group of {...,1,2,5,6,9,10,13,14,...} acts

Symmetry
5
transitively on all these points, while {...,1,2,3,5,6,7,9,10,11,13,14,15,...} does not act
transitively on all points. Equivalently, the first set is only one conjugacy class with respect
to isometries, while the second has two classes.
Non-isometric symmetry
As mentioned above, G (the symmetry group of the space itself) may differ from the
Euclidean group, the group of isometries.
Examples:
• G is the group of similarity transformations, i.e. affine transformations with a matrix A
that is a scalar times an orthogonal matrix. Thus dilations are added, self-similarity is
considered a symmetry
• G is the group of affine transformations with a matrix A with determinant 1 or -1, i.e. the
transformation which preserve area; this adds e.g. oblique reflection symmetry.
• G is the group of all bijective affine transformations
• In inversive geometry, G includes circle reflections, etc.
Directional symmetry
Reflection symmetry
Reflection symmetry, mirror symmetry, mirror-image symmetry, or bilateral symmetry is
symmetry with respect to reflection.
In 1D, there is a point of symmetry. In 2D there is an axis of symmetry, in 3D a plane of
symmetry. An object or figure which is indistinguishable from its transformed image is
called mirror symmetric (see mirror image).
The axis of symmetry of a two-dimensional figure is a line such that, if a perpendicular is
constructed, any two points lying on the perpendicular at equal distances from the axis of
symmetry are identical. Another way to think about it is that if the shape were to be folded
in half over the axis, the two halves would be identical: the two halves are each other's
mirror image. Thus a square has four axes of symmetry, because there are four different
ways to fold it and have the edges all match. A circle has infinitely many axes of symmetry,
for the same reason.
If the letter T is reflected along a vertical axis, it appears the same. Note that this is
sometimes called horizontal symmetry, and sometimes vertical symmetry! One can better
use an unambiguous formulation, e.g. "T has a vertical symmetry axis" or "T has left-right
symmetry."
The triangles with this symmetry are isosceles, the quadrilaterals with this symmetry are
the kites and the isosceles trapezoids.
For each line or plane of reflection, the symmetry group is isomorphic with Cs (see point
groups in three dimensions), one of the three types of order two (involutions), hence
algebraically C2. The fundamental domain is a half-plane or half-space.
Bilateria (bilateral animals, including humans) are more or less symmetric with respect to
the sagittal plane.
In certain contexts there is rotational symmetry anyway. Then mirror-image symmetry is 
equivalent with inversion symmetry; in such contexts in modern physics the term

Symmetry
6
P-symmetry is used for both (P stands for parity).
For more general types of reflection there are corresponding more general types of
reflection symmetry. Examples:
• with respect to a non-isometric affine involution (an oblique reflection in a line, plane,
etc).
• with respect to circle inversion
Rotational symmetry
Rotational symmetry is symmetry with respect to some or all rotations in m-dimensional
Euclidean space. Rotations are direct isometries, i.e., isometries preserving orientation.
Therefore a symmetry group of rotational symmetry is a subgroup of E+(m).
Symmetry with respect to all rotations about all points implies translational symmetry with
respect to all translations, and the symmetry group is the whole E+(m). This does not apply
for objects because it makes space homogeneous, but it may apply for physical laws.
For symmetry with respect to rotations about a point we can take that point as origin.
These rotations form the special orthogonal group SO(m), the group of m×m orthogonal
matrices with determinant 1. For m=3 this is the rotation group.
In another meaning of the word, the rotation group of an object is the symmetry group
within E+(n), the group of direct isometries; in other words, the intersection of the full
symmetry group and the group of direct isometries. For chiral objects it is the same as the
full symmetry group.
Laws of physics are SO(3)-invariant if they do not distinguish different directions in space.
Because of Noether's theorem, rotational symmetry of a physical system is equivalent to the
angular momentum conservation law. See also rotational invariance.
Translational symmetry
Translational symmetry leaves an object invariant under a discrete or continuous group of
translations 
.
Glide reflection symmetry
A glide reflection symmetry (in 3D: a glide plane symmetry) means that a reflection in a line
or plane combined with a translation along the line / in the plane, results in the same
object. It implies translational symmetry with twice the translation vector.
The symmetry group is isomorphic with Z.

Symmetry
7
Rotoreflection symmetry
In 3D, rotoreflection or improper rotation in the strict sense is rotation about an axis,
combined with reflection in a plane perpendicular to that axis. As symmetry groups with
regard to a roto-reflection we can distinguish:
• the angle has no common divisor with 360°, the symmetry group is not discrete
• 2n-fold rotoreflection (angle of 180°/n) with symmetry group S2n of order 2n (not to be
confused with symmetric groups, for which the same notation is used; abstract group
C2n); a special case is n=1, inversion, because it does not depend on the axis and the
plane, it is characterized by just the point of inversion.
• Cnh (angle of 360°/n); for odd n this is generated by a single symmetry, and the abstract
group is C2n, for even n this is not a basic symmetry but a combination. See also point
groups in three dimensions.
Helical symmetry
A drill bit with helical symmetry.
Helical symmetry is the kind of
symmetry 
seen 
in 
such
everyday objects as springs,
Slinky 
toys, 
drill 
bits, 
and
augers. It can be thought of as
rotational symmetry along with
translation along the axis of rotation, the screw axis). The concept of helical symmetry can
be visualized as the tracing in three-dimensional space that results from rotating an object
at an even angular speed while simultaneously moving at another even speed along its axis
of rotation (translation). At any one point in time, these two motions combine to give a
coiling angle that helps define the properties of the tracing. When the tracing object rotates
quickly and translates slowly, the coiling angle will be close to 0°. Conversely, if the
rotation is slow and the translation speedy, the coiling angle will approach 90°.
Three main classes of helical symmetry can be distinguished based on the interplay of the
angle of coiling and translation symmetries along the axis:
• Infinite helical symmetry. If there are no distinguishing features along the length of a
helix or helix-like object, the object will have infinite symmetry much like that of a circle,
but with the additional requirement of translation along the long axis of the object to
return it to its original appearance. A helix-like object is one that has at every point the
regular angle of coiling of a helix, but which can also have a cross section of indefinitely
high complexity, provided only that precisely the same cross section exists (usually after
a rotation) at every point along the length of the object. Simple examples include evenly
coiled springs, slinkies, drill bits, and augers. Stated more precisely, an object has
infinite helical symmetries if for any small rotation of the object around its central axis
there exists a point nearby (the translation distance) on that axis at which the object will
appear exactly as it did before. It is this infinite helical symmetry that gives rise to the
curious illusion of movement along the length of an auger or screw bit that is being
rotated. It also provides the mechanically useful ability of such devices to move materials
along their length, provided that they are combined with a force such as gravity or
friction that allows the materials to resist simply rotating along with the drill or auger.

Symmetry
8
• n-fold helical symmetry. If the requirement that every cross section of the helical
object be identical is relaxed, additional lesser helical symmetries become possible. For
example, the cross section of the helical object may change, but still repeats itself in a
regular fashion along the axis of the helical object. Consequently, objects of this type will
exhibit a symmetry after a rotation by some fixed angle 
and a translation by some fixed
distance, but will not in general be invariant for any rotation angle. If the angle (rotation)
at which the symmetry occurs divides evenly into a full circle (360°), the result is the
helical equivalent of a regular polygon. This case is called n-fold helical symmetry, where
n = 360°/ 
, see e.g. double helix. This concept can be further generalized to include
cases where 
is a multiple of 360°—that is, the cycle does eventually repeat, but only
after more than one full rotation of the helical object.
• Non-repeating helical symmetry. This is the case in which the angle of rotation 
required to observe the symmetry is an irrational number such as 
 radians that never
repeats exactly no matter how many times the helix is rotated. Such symmetries are
created by using a non-repeating point group in two dimensions. DNA is an example of
this type of non-repeating helical symmetry.
Scale symmetry and fractals
Scale symmetry refers to the idea that if an object is expanded or reduced in size, the new
object has the same properties as the original. Scale symmetry is notable for the fact that it
does not exist for most physical systems, a point that was first discerned by Galileo. Simple
examples of the lack of scale symmetry in the physical world include the difference in the
strength and size of the legs of elephants versus mice, and the observation that if a candle
made of soft wax was enlarged to the size of a tall tree, it would immediately collapse under
its own weight.
A more subtle form of scale symmetry is demonstrated by fractals. As conceived by
Mandelbrot, fractals are a mathematical concept in which the structure of a complex form
looks exactly the same no matter what degree of magnification is used to examine it. A
coast is an example of a naturally occurring fractal, since it retains roughly comparable and
similar-appearing complexity at every level from the view of a satellite to a microscopic
examination of how the water laps up against individual grains of sand. The branching of
trees, which enables children to use small twigs as stand-ins for full trees in dioramas, is
another example.
This similarity to naturally occurring phenomena provides fractals with an everyday
familiarity not typically seen with mathematically generated functions. As a consequence,
they can produce strikingly beautiful results such as the Mandelbrot set. Intriguingly,
fractals have also found a place in CG, or computer-generated movie effects, where their
ability to create very complex curves with fractal symmetries results in more realistic
virtual worlds.

Symmetry
9
Symmetry combinations
Symmetry in science
Symmetry in physics
Symmetry in physics has been generalized to mean invariance—that is, lack of any visible
change—under 
any 
kind 
of 
transformation, 
for 
example 
arbitrary 
coordinate
transformations. This concept has become one of the most powerful tools of theoretical
physics, as it has become evident that practically all laws of nature originate in symmetries.
In fact, this role inspired the Nobel laureate PW Anderson to write in his widely read 1972
article More is Different that "it is only slightly overstating the case to say that physics is
the study of symmetry." See Noether's theorem (which, in greatly simplified form, states
that for every continuous mathematical symmetry, there is a corresponding conserved
quantity; a conserved current, in Noether's original language); and also, Wigner's
classification, which says that the symmetries of the laws of physics determine the
properties of the particles found in nature.
Symmetry in physical objects
Classical objects
Although an everyday object may appear exactly the same after a symmetry operation such
as a rotation or an exchange of two identical parts has been performed on it, it is readily
apparent that such a symmetry is true only as an approximation for any ordinary physical
object.
For example, if one rotates a precisely machined aluminum equilateral triangle 120 degrees
around its center, a casual observer brought in before and after the rotation will be unable
to decide whether or not such a rotation took place. However, the reality is that each
corner of a triangle will always appear unique when examined with sufficient precision. An
observer armed with sufficiently detailed measuring equipment such as optical or electron
microscopes will not be fooled; he will immediately recognize that the object has been
rotated by looking for details such as crystals or minor deformities.
Such simple thought experiments show that assertions of symmetry in everyday physical
objects are always a matter of approximate similarity rather than of precise mathematical
sameness. The most important consequence of this approximate nature of symmetries in
everyday physical objects is that such symmetries have minimal or no impacts on the
physics of such objects. Consequently, only the deeper symmetries of space and time play a
major role in classical physics—that is, the physics of large, everyday objects.

Symmetry
10
Quantum objects
Remarkably, there exists a realm of physics for which mathematical assertions of simple
symmetries in real objects cease to be approximations. That is the domain of quantum
physics, which for the most part is the physics of very small, very simple objects such as
electrons, protons, light, and atoms.
Unlike everyday objects, objects such as electrons have very limited numbers of
configurations, called states, in which they can exist. This means that when symmetry
operations such as exchanging the positions of components are applied to them, the
resulting new configurations often cannot be distinguished from the originals no matter
how diligent an observer is. Consequently, for sufficiently small and simple objects the
generic mathematical symmetry assertion F(x) = x ceases to be approximate, and instead
becomes an experimentally precise and accurate description of the situation in the real
world.
Consequences of quantum symmetry
While it makes sense that symmetries could become exact when applied to very simple
objects, the immediate intuition is that such a detail should not affect the physics of such
objects in any significant way. This is in part because it is very difficult to view the concept
of exact similarity as physically meaningful. Our mental picture of such situations is
invariably the same one we use for large objects: We picture objects or configurations that
are very, very similar, but for which if we could "look closer" we would still be able to tell
the difference.
However, the assumption that exact symmetries in very small objects should not make any
difference in their physics was discovered in the early 1900s to be spectacularly incorrect.
The situation was succinctly summarized by Richard Feynman in the direct transcripts of
his Feynman Lectures on Physics, Volume III, Section 3.4, Identical particles.
(Unfortunately, the quote was edited out of the printed version of the same lecture.)
"... if there is a physical situation in which it is impossible to tell which way it
happened, it always interferes; it never fails."
The word "interferes" in this context is a quick way of saying that such objects fall under
the rules of quantum mechanics, in which they behave more like waves that interfere than
like everyday large objects.
In short, when an object becomes so simple that a symmetry assertion of the form F(x) = x
becomes an exact statement of experimentally verifiable sameness, x ceases to follow the
rules of classical physics and must instead be modeled using the more complex—and often
far less intuitive—rules of quantum physics.
This transition also provides an important insight into why the mathematics of symmetry
are so deeply intertwined with those of quantum mechanics. When physical systems make
the transition from symmetries that are approximate to ones that are exact, the
mathematical expressions of those symmetries cease to be approximations and are
transformed into precise definitions of the underlying nature of the objects. From that point
on, the correlation of such objects to their mathematical descriptions becomes so close that
it is difficult to separate the two.

Symmetry
11
Symmetry as a unifying principle of geometry
The German geometer Felix Klein enunciated a very influential Erlangen programme in
1872, suggesting symmetry as unifying and organising principle in geometry (at a time
when that was read 'geometries'). This is a broad rather than deep principle. Initially it led
to interest in the groups attached to geometries, and the slogan transformation geometry
(an aspect of the New Math, but hardly controversial in modern mathematical practice). By
now it has been applied in numerous forms, as kind of standard attack on problems.
Symmetry in mathematics
An example of a mathematical expression exhibiting symmetry is a²c + 3ab + b²c. If a and b
are exchanged, the expression remains unchanged due to the commutativity of addition and
multiplication.
Like in geometry, for the terms there are two possibilities:
• It is itself symmetric
• It has one or more other terms symmetric with it, in accordance with the symmetry kind
See also symmetric function, duality (mathematics)
Symmetry in logic
A dyadic relation R is symmetric if and only if, whenever it's true that Rab, it's true that
Rba. Thus, “is the same age as” is symmetrical, for if Paul is the same age as Mary, then
Mary is the same age as Paul.
Symmetric binary logical connectives are "and" (∧, 
, or &), "or" (∨), "biconditional" (if
and only if) (↔), NAND ("not-and"), XOR ("not-biconditional"), and NOR ("not-or").
Generalizations of symmetry
If we have a given set of objects with some structure, then it is possible for a symmetry to
merely convert only one object into another, instead of acting upon all possible objects
simultaneously. This requires a generalization from the concept of symmetry group to that
of a groupoid. Indeed, A. Connes in his book `Non-commutative geometry' writes that
Heisenberg discovered quantum mechanics by considering the groupoid of transitions of
the hydrogen spectrum.
The notion of groupoid also leads to notions of multiple groupoids, namely sets with many
compatible groupoid structures, a structure which trivialises to abelian groups if one
restricts to groups. This leads to prospects of `higher order symmetry' which have been a
little explored, as follows.
The automorphisms of a set, or a set with some structure, form a group, which models a
homotopy 1-type. The automorphisms of a group G naturally form a crossed module $G \to
Aut(G)$, and crossed modules give an algebraic model of homotopy 2-types. At the next
stage, automorphisms of a crossed module fit into a structure known as a crossed square,
and this structure is know to give an algebraic model of homotopy 3-types. It is not known
how this procedure of generalising symmetry may be continued, although crossed n-cubes
have been defined and used in algebraic topology, and these structures are only slowly
being brought into theoretical physics. The web site n-category cafe [6] has much discussion
of n-groups. More information is on `Higher dimensional group theory' [7].

Symmetry
12
Physicists have come up with other directions of generalization, such as supersymmetry
and quantum groups, yet the different options are indistinguishable during various
circumstances.
Symmetry in biology
See symmetry (biology) and facial symmetry.
Symmetry in chemistry
Symmetry is important to chemistry because it explains observations in spectroscopy,
quantum chemistry and crystallography. It draws heavily on group theory.
Symmetry in history, religion, and culture
In any human endeavor for which an impressive visual result is part of the desired
objective, symmetries play a profound role. The innate appeal of symmetry can be found in
our reactions to happening across highly symmetrical natural objects, such as precisely
formed crystals or beautifully spiraled seashells. Our first reaction in finding such an object
often is to wonder whether we have found an object created by a fellow human, followed
quickly by surprise that the symmetries that caught our attention are derived from nature
itself. In both reactions we give away our inclination to view symmetries both as beautiful
and, in some fashion, informative of the world around us.
Symmetry in religious symbols
Symmetry in religious symbols. Row 1.
Christian, Jewish, Hindu Row 2.
Islamic, Buddhist, Shinto Row 3. Sikh,
Baha'i, Jain
The tendency of people to see purpose in symmetry
suggests at least one reason why symmetries are often
an integral part of the symbols of world religions. Just a
few of many examples include the sixfold rotational
symmetry of Judaism's Star of David, the twofold point
symmetry of Taoism's Taijitu or Yin-Yang, the bilateral
symmetry of Christianity's cross and Sikhism's Khanda,
or the fourfold point symmetry of Jain's ancient (and
peacefully intended) version of the swastika. With its
strong prohibitions against the use of representational
images, Islam, and in particular the Sunni branch of
Islam, has developed intricate and visually impressive
use of symmetries.
The ancient Taijitu image of Taoism is a particularly
fascinating use of symmetry around a central point,
combined with black-and-white inversion of color at opposite distances from that central
point. The image, which is often misunderstood in the Western world as representing good
(white) versus evil (black), is actually intended as a graphical representative of the
complementary need for two abstract concepts of "maleness" (white) and "femaleness"
(black). The symmetry of the symbol in this case is used not just to create a symbol that
catches the attention of the eye, but to make a significant statement about the philosophical
beliefs of the people and groups that use it.

Symmetry
13
Symmetry in Social Interactions
People observe the symmetrical nature, often including asymmetrical balance, of social
interactions in a variety of contexts. These include assessments of reciprocity, empathy,
apology, dialog, respect, justice, and revenge. Symmetrical interactions send the message
"we are all the same" while asymmetrical interactions send the message "I am special;
better than you." Peer relationships are based on symmetry, power relationships are based
on asymmetry. [8]
Symmetry in architecture
Another human endeavor in which the visual result plays a vital part in the overall result is
architecture. Both in ancient times, the ability of a large structure to impress or even
intimidate its viewers has often been a major part of its purpose, and the use of symmetry is
an inescapable aspect of how to accomplish such goals.
Just a few examples of ancient examples of architectures that made powerful use of
symmetry to impress those around them included the Egyptian Pyramids, the Greek
Parthenon, the first and second Temple of Jerusalem, China's Forbidden City, Cambodia's
Angkor Wat complex, and the many temples and pyramids of ancient Pre-Columbian
civilizations. More recent historical examples of architectures emphasizing symmetries
include Gothic architecture cathedrals, and American President Thomas Jefferson's
Monticello home. India's unparalleled Taj Mahal is in a category by itself, as it may
arguably be one of the most impressive and beautiful uses of symmetry in architecture that
the world has ever seen.
Leaning Tower of Pisa
An 
interesting 
example 
of 
a 
broken 
symmetry 
in
architecture is the Leaning Tower of Pisa, whose notoriety
stems in no small part not for the intended symmetry of its
design, but for the violation of that symmetry from the lean
that developed while it was still under construction.
Modern examples of architectures that make impressive or
complex use of various symmetries include Australia's
Sydney Opera House and Houston, Texas's simpler
Astrodome.
Symmetry finds its ways into architecture at every scale,
from the overall external views, through the layout of the
individual floor plans, and down to the design of individual
building elements such as intricately caved doors, stained
glass windows, tile mosaics, friezes, stairwells, stair rails,
and balustradess. For sheer complexity and sophistication
in the exploitation of symmetry as an architectural
element, Islamic buildings such as the Taj Mahal often
eclipse those of other cultures and ages, due in part to the general prohibition of Islam
against using images of people or animals.
Links related to symmetry in architecture include:
• Williams: Symmetry in Architecture [9]
• Aslaksen: Mathematics in Art and Architecture [10]

Symmetry
14
Symmetry in pottery and metal vessels
Persian vessel (4th millennium B.C.)
Since the earliest uses of pottery wheels to help shape
clay vessels, pottery has had a strong relationship to
symmetry. As a minimum, pottery created using a
wheel necessarily begins with full rotational symmetry
in its cross-section, while allowing substantial freedom
of shape in the vertical direction. Upon this inherently
symmetrical starting point cultures from ancient times
have tended to add further patterns that tend to exploit
or in many cases reduce the original full rotational
symmetry to a point where some specific visual
objective is achieved. For example, Persian pottery
dating from the fourth millennium B.C. and earlier used
symmetric 
zigzags, 
squares, 
cross-hatchings, 
and
repetitions of figures to produce more complex and
visually striking overall designs.
Cast metal vessels lacked the inherent rotational symmetry of wheel-made pottery, but
otherwise provided a similar opportunity to decorate their surfaces with patterns pleasing
to those who used them. The ancient Chinese, for example, used symmetrical patterns in
their bronze castings as early as the 17th century B.C. Bronze vessels exhibited both a
bilateral main motif and a repetitive translated border design.
Links:
• Chinavoc: The Art of Chinese Bronzes [11]
• Grant: Iranian Pottery in the Oriental Institute [12]
• The Metropolitan Museum of Art - Islamic Art [13]
Symmetry in quilts
Kitchen Kaleidoscope
Block
As quilts are made from square blocks (usually 9, 16, or 25 pieces
to a block) with each smaller piece usually consisting of fabric
triangles, the craft lends itself readily to the application of
symmetry.
Links:
• Quate: Exploring Geometry Through Quilts [14]

Symmetry
15
Symmetry in carpets and rugs
Persian rug.
A long tradition of the use of
symmetry 
in 
carpet 
and 
rug
patterns 
spans 
a 
variety 
of
cultures. American Navajo Indians
used 
bold 
diagonals 
and
rectangular motifs. Many Oriental
rugs 
have 
intricate 
reflected
centers and borders that translate
a pattern. Not surprisingly, rectangular rugs typically use quadrilateral symmetry—that is,
motifs that are reflected across both the horizontal and vertical axes.
Links:
• Mallet: Tribal Oriental Rugs [15]
• Dilucchio: Navajo Rugs [16]
Symmetry in music
Symmetry is of course not restricted to the visual arts. Its role in the history of music
touches many aspects of the creation and perception of music.
Musical form
Symmetry has been used as a formal constraint by many composers, such as the arch
(swell) form (ABCBA) used by Steve Reich, Béla Bartók, and James Tenney. In classical
music, Bach used the symmetry concepts of permutation and invariance; see (external link
"Fugue No. 21," pdf [17] or Shockwave [18]).
Pitch structures
Symmetry is also an important consideration in the formation of scales and chords,
traditional or tonal music being made up of non-symmetrical groups of pitches, such as the
diatonic scale or the major chord. Symmetrical scales or chords, such as the whole tone
scale, augmented chord, or diminished seventh chord (diminished-diminished seventh), are
said to lack direction or a sense of forward motion, are ambiguous as to the key or tonal
center, and have a less specific diatonic functionality. However, composers such as Alban
Berg, Béla Bartók, and George Perle have used axes of symmetry and/or interval cycles in
an analogous way to keys or non-tonal tonal centers.
Perle (1992) explains "C-E, D-F#, [and] Eb-G, are different instances of the same
interval...the other kind of identity. ..has to do with axes of symmetry. C-E belongs to a
family of symmetrically related dyads as follows:"
D
D#
E
F
F#
G
G#
D
C#
C
B
A#
A
G#
Thus in addition to being part of the interval-4 family, C-E is also a part of the sum-4 family
(with C equal to 0).

Symmetry
16
+
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
1
0
11
10
9
8
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Interval cycles are symmetrical and thus non-diatonic. However, a seven pitch segment of
C5 (the cycle of fifths, which are enharmonic with the cycle of fourths) will produce the
diatonic major scale. Cyclic tonal progressions in the works of Romantic composers such as
Gustav Mahler and Richard Wagner form a link with the cyclic pitch successions in the
atonal music of Modernists such as Bartók, Alexander Scriabin, Edgard Varèse, and the
Vienna school. At the same time, these progressions signal the end of tonality.
The first extended composition consistently based on symmetrical pitch relations was
probably Alban Berg's Quartet, Op. 3 (1910). (Perle, 1990)
Equivalency
Tone rows or pitch class sets which are invariant under retrograde are horizontally
symmetrical, under inversion vertically. See also Asymmetric rhythm.
Symmetry in other arts and crafts
Celtic knotwork
The concept of symmetry is applied to the design of
objects of all shapes and sizes. Other examples include
beadwork, furniture, sand paintings, knotwork, masks,
musical instruments, and many other endeavors.
Symmetry in aesthetics
The relationship of symmetry to aesthetics is complex.
Certain simple symmetries, and in particular bilateral
symmetry, seem to be deeply ingrained in the inherent perception by humans of the likely
health or fitness of other living creatures, as can be seen by the simple experiment of
distorting one side of the image of an attractive face and asking viewers to rate the
attractiveness of the resulting image. Consequently, such symmetries that mimic biology
tend to have an innate appeal that in turn drives a powerful tendency to create artifacts
with similar symmetry. One only needs to imagine the difficulty in trying to market a highly
asymmetrical car or truck to general automotive buyers to understand the power of
biologically inspired symmetries such as bilateral symmetry.
Another more subtle appeal of symmetry is that of simplicity, which in turn has an
implication of safety, security, and familiarity. A highly symmetrical room, for example, is
unavoidably also a room in which anything out of place or potentially threatening can be
identified easily and quickly. For example, people who have grown up in houses full of exact
right angles and precisely identical artifacts can find their first experience in staying in a
room with no exact right angles and no exactly identical artifacts to be highly disquieting.
Symmetry thus can be a source of comfort not only as an indicator of biological health, but
also of a safe and well-understood living environment.
Opposed to this is the tendency for excessive symmetry to be perceived as boring or
uninteresting. Humans in particular have a powerful desire to exploit new opportunities or
explore new possibilities, and an excessive degree of symmetry can convey a lack of such

Symmetry
17
opportunities.
Yet another possibility is that when symmetries become too complex or too challenging, the
human mind has a tendency to "tune them out" and perceive them in yet another fashion: as
noise that conveys no useful information.
Finally, perceptions and appreciation of symmetries are also dependent on cultural
background. The far greater use of complex geometric symmetries in many Islamic
cultures, for example, makes it more likely that people from such cultures will appreciate
such art forms (or, conversely, to rebel against them).
As in many human endeavors, the result of the confluence of many such factors is that
effective use of symmetry in art and architecture is complex, intuitive, and highly
dependent on the skills of the individuals who must weave and combine such factors within
their own creative work. Along with texture, color, proportion, and other factors, symmetry
is a powerful ingredient in any such synthesis; one only need to examine the Taj Mahal to
powerful role that symmetry plays in determining the aesthetic appeal of an object.
Modernist architecture rejects symmetry, stating only a bad architect relies on symmetry;
instead of symmetrical layout of blocks, masses and structures, Modernist architecture
relies on wings and balance of masses. This notion of getting rid of symmetry was first
encountered in International style. Some people find asymmetrical layouts of buildings and
structures revolutionizing; other find them restless, boring and unnatural.
A few examples of the more explicit use of symmetries in art can be found in the
remarkable art of M. C. Escher, the creative design of the mathematical concept of a
wallpaper group, and the many applications (both mathematical and real world) of tiling.
Symmetry in games and puzzles
• See also symmetric games.
• See sudoku.
Symmetry in literature
See palindrome.
Moral symmetry
• Tit for tat
• Reciprocity
• Golden Rule
• Empathy & Sympathy
• Reflective equilibrium

Symmetry
18
See also
• Symmetry group
• Chirality
• Fixed points of isometry groups in Euclidean space - center of symmetry
• Spontaneous symmetry breaking
• Gödel, Escher, Bach
• M. C. Escher
• Wallpaper group
• Asymmetry
• Asymmetric rhythm
• Even and odd functions
• Symmetries of polyominoes
• Symmetries of polyiamonds
• Burnside's lemma
• Symmetry (biology)
• Spacetime symmetries
• Time symmetry
• Semimetric, which is sometimes translated as symmetric in Russian texts.
• Symmetric relation
• Phase transition
Notes
[1] For example, Aristotle ascribed spherical shape to the heavenly bodies, attributing this formally defined
geometric measure of symmetry to the natural order and perfection of the cosmos.
[2] Weyl 1982
[3] For example, operations such as moving across a regularly patterned tile floor or rotating an eight-sided vase,
or complex transformations of equations or in the way music is played.
[4] See e.g., Mainzer, Klaus (2005). Symmetry And Complexity: The Spirit and Beauty of Nonlinear Science. World
Scientific. ISBN 9812561927.
[5] Symmetric objects can be material, such as a person, crystal, quilt, floor tiles, or molecule, or it can be an
abstract structure such as a mathematical equation or a series of tones (music).
[6] http:/ / golem. ph. utexas. edu/ category/
[7] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ hdaweb2. htm
[8] Emotional Competency (http:/ / www. emotionalcompetency. com/ symmetry. htm) Entry describing Symmetry
[9] http:/ / members. tripod. com/ vismath/ kim/
[10] http:/ / www. math. nus. edu. sg/ aslaksen/ teaching/ math-art-arch. shtml
[11] http:/ / www. chinavoc. com/ arts/ handicraft/ bronze. htm
[12] http:/ / www-oi. uchicago. edu/ OI/ MUS/ VOL/ NN_SUM94/ NN_Sum94. html
[13] http:/ / www. metmuseum. org/ collections/ department. asp?dep=14
[14] http:/ / its. guilford. k12. nc. us/ webquests/ quilts/ quilts. htm
[15] http:/ / www. marlamallett. com/ default. htm
[16] http:/ / navajocentral. org/ rugs. htm
[17] http:/ / jan. ucc. nau. edu/ ~tas3/ wtc/ ii21s. pdf
[18] http:/ / jan. ucc. nau. edu/ ~tas3/ wtc/ ii21. html

Symmetry
19
References
• Darvas, György (2007). Symmetry (http:/ / www. symmetry. hu/ index. html),
Basel-Berlin-Boston: Birkhäuser Verlag (http:/ / www. birkhauser. ch/
978-3-7643-7554-6), xi + 508 p.
• Hahn, Werner (1998). Symmetry As A Developmental Principle In Nature And Art (http:/ /
www. worldscibooks. com/ general/ 2847. html) World Scientific. ISBN 981-02-2363-3.
• Livio, Mario (2005). The Equation That Couldn't Be Solved: How Mathematical Genius
Discovered the Language of Symmetry. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN
0-7432-5820-7.
• Perle, George (1990). The Listening Composer, p. 112. California: University of California
Press. ISBN 0-520-06991-9.
• Perle, George (1992). Symmetry, the Twelve-Tone Scale, and Tonality. Contemporary
Music Review 6 (2), pp. 81-96.
• Petitjean, Michel (2003). Chirality and Symmetry Measures: A Transdisciplinary Review
(http:/ / www. mdpi. org/ entropy/ papers/ e5030271. pdf). Entropy 5(3), pp. 271-312.
• Petitjean, Michel (2007). A Definition of Symmetry, Symmetry: Culture and Science
18(2-3), pp. 99-119.
• Rosen, Joe, 1995. Symmetry in Science: An Introduction to the General Theory.
Springer-Verlag.
• Symmetry: Culture and Science (http:/ / symmetry. hu/ aus_journal_content_abs. html),
published by Symmetrion, Budapest. ISSN 0865-4824.
• Weyl, Hermann (1982). Symmetry. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN
0-691-02374-3.
External links
• An Analysis of the first movement of the Fourth String Quartet (1928) (http:/ / home.
earthlink. net/ ~akuster/ music/ bartok/ quartet4. htm) by Andrew Kuster
• Skaalid: Design Theory (http:/ / www. usask. ca/ education/ coursework/ skaalid/ theory/
theory. htm)
• Mathforum: Symmetry/Tesselations (http:/ / mathforum. org/ library/ topics/ sym_tess/ )
• Calotta: A World of Symmetry (http:/ / www. teachersnetwork. org/ teachnet/
westchester/ symmetry. htm)
• Dutch: Symmetry Around a Point in the Plane (http:/ / www. uwgb. edu/ dutchs/
SYMMETRY/ 2DPTGRP. HTM)
• Saw: Design Notes (http:/ / daphne. palomar. edu/ design/ conclude. html)
• Chapman: Aesthetics of Symmetry (http:/ / home. earthlink. net/ ~jdc24/ symmetry. htm)
• Abas: The Wonder Of Symmetry (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas009/ psym. htm)
• ISIS Symmetry (http:/ / www. mi. sanu. ac. rs/ ~jablans/ isis0. htm)
• Symmetry and Asymmetry at The Dictionary of the History of Ideas (http:/ / etext. lib.
virginia. edu/ cgi-local/ DHI/ dhi. cgi?id=dv4-46)
• Examples of asymmetry in musical waveforms (http:/ / www. st-and. demon. co. uk/
AudioMisc/ asymmetry/ asym. html)
• International Symmetry Association - ISA (http:/ / www. symmetry. hu/ isa_articles. html)
• Institute Symmetrion (http:/ / www. symmetry. hu/ aus_symmetrion. html)
• Professor Ian Stewart on the history of symmetry (http:/ / www2. warwick. ac. uk/
newsandevents/ audio/ more/ symmetry/ )

Symmetry
20
• Photographs of Symmetrical Cloisters (http:/ / www. hayquesufrir. com)
• Symmetry and Symmetry Measures: (http:/ / petitjeanmichel. free. fr/ itoweb. petitjean.
symmetry. html) General Definitions
Time symmetry
1. redirect T-symmetry
Spacetime symmetries
Spacetime symmetries refers to aspects of spacetime that can be described as exhibiting
some form of symmetry. The role of symmetry in physics is important, for example, in
simplifying solutions to many problems. Spacetime symmetries are used to simplify
problems and find ample application in the study of exact solutions of Einstein's field
equations of general relativity.
Physical motivation
Quite often, physical problems may be investigated and solved by noticing features of the
problem which have some form of symmetry. For example, in the Schwarzschild solution,
the role of spherical symmetry is important in deriving the Schwarzschild solution and
deducing the physical consequences of this symmetry (for example, the non-existence of
gravitational radiation in a spherically pulsating star). In cosmological problems, symmetry
finds a role to play in the cosmological principle which restricts the type of universes that
are consistent with large-scale observations (e.g. the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW)
metric). Symmetries usually require some form of preserving property, the most important
of which in general relativity include the following:
• preserving geodesics of the spacetime
• preserving the metric tensor
• preserving the curvature tensor
These and other symmetries will be discussed in more detail later. This preservation
feature can be used to motivate a useful definition of symmetries.
Mathematical definition
A rigorous definition of symmetries in general relativity has been given by Hall (2004). In
this approach, the idea is to use (smooth) vector fields whose local flow diffeomorphisms
preserve some property of the spacetime. This preserving property of the diffeomorphisms
is made precise as follows. A smooth vector field 
on a spacetime 
is said to preserve
a smooth tensor 
on 
(or 
is invariant under 
) if, for each smooth local flow
diffeomorphism 
associated with 
, the tensors 
and 
are equal on the domain
of 
. This statement is equivalent to the more usable condition that the Lie derivative of
the tensor under the vector field vanishes:

Spacetime symmetries
21
on 
. This has the consequence that, given any two points 
and 
on 
, the
coordinates of 
in a coordinate system around 
are equal to the coordinates of 
in a
coordinate system around 
. A symmetry on the spacetime is a smooth vector field
whose local flow diffeomorphisms preserve some (usually geometrical) feature of the
spacetime. The (geometrical) feature may refer to specific tensors (such as the metric, or
the energy-momentum tensor) or to other aspects of the spacetime such as it's geodesic
structure. The vector fields are sometimes referred to as collineations, symmetry vector
fields or just symmetries. The set of all symmetry vector fields on 
forms a Lie algebra
under the Lie bracket operation as can be seen from the identity:
the term on the right usually being written, with an abuse of notation, as 
.
Various examples of symmetries are briefly described below.
Killing symmetry
Killing vector fields are one of the most important types of symmetries and are defined to
be those smooth vector fields that preserve the metric tensor:
This is usually written in the expanded form as:
Killing vector fields find extensive applications (including in classical mechanics) and are
related to conservation laws.
Homothetic symmetry
A homothetic vector field is one which satisfies:
where c is a real constant. Homothetic vector fields find application in the study of
singularities in general relativity.
Affine symmetry
An affine vector field is one that satisfies:
An affine vector field preserves geodesics and preserves the affine parameter.
The above three vector field types are special cases of projective vector fields which
preserve geodesics without necessarily preserving the affine parameter.

Spacetime symmetries
22
Conformal symmetry
A conformal vector field is one which satisfies:
where 
is a smooth real-valued function on 
.
Curvature symmetry
A curvature collineation is a vector field which preserves the Riemann tensor:
where 
are the components of the Riemann tensor. The set of all smooth curvature
collineations forms a Lie algebra under the Lie bracket operation (if the smoothness
condition is dropped, the set of all curvature collineations need not form a Lie algebra). The
Lie algebra is denoted by 
and may be infinite-dimensional. Every affine vector field
is a curvature collineation.
Matter symmetry
A less well-known form of symmetry concerns vector fields that preserve the
energy-momentum tensor. These are variously referred to as matter collineations or
matter symmetries and are defined by:
where 
are the energy-momentum tensor components. The intimate relation between
geometry and physics may be highlighted here, as the vector field 
is regarded as
preserving certain physical quantities along the flow lines of 
, this being true for any two
observers. In connection with this, it may be shown that every Killing vector field is a
matter collineation (by the Einstein field equations, with or without cosmological
constant). Thus, given a solution of the EFE, a vector field that preserves the metric
necessarily 
preserves 
the 
corresponding 
energy-momentum 
tensor. 
When 
the
energy-momentum tensor represents a perfect fluid, every Killing vector field preserves the
energy density, pressure and the fluid flow vector field. When the energy-momentum tensor
represents an electromagnetic field, a Killing vector field does not necessarily preserve the
electric and magnetic fields.
Applications of symmetry vector fields
As mentioned at the start of this article, the main application of these symmetries occur in
general relativity, where solutions of Einstein's equations may be classified by imposing
some certain symmetries on the spacetime.
Classifications of spacetimes
Classifying solutions of the EFE constitutes a large part of general relativity research. 
Various approaches to classifying spacetimes, including using the Segre classification of the 
energy-momentum tensor or the Petrov classification of the Weyl tensor have been studied 
extensively by many researchers, most notably Stephani et al. (2003). They also classify 
spacetimes using symmetry vector fields (especially Killing and homothetic symmetries). 
For example, Killing vector fields may be used to classify spacetimes, as there is a limit to 
the number of global, smooth Killing vector fields that a spacetime may possess (the 
maximum being 10 for 4-dimensional spacetimes). Generally speaking, the higher the

Spacetime symmetries
23
dimension of the algebra of symmetry vector fields on a spacetime, the more symmetry the
spacetime admits. For example, the Schwarzschild solution has a Killing algebra of
dimension 4 (3 spatial rotational vector fields and a time translation), whereas the
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) metric (excluding the Einstein static subcase) has a
Killing algebra of dimension 6 (3 translations and 3 rotations). The Einstein static metric
has a Killing algebra of dimension 7 (the previous 6 plus a time translation).
The assumption of a spacetime admitting a certain symmetry vector field can place severe
restrictions on the spacetime.
See also
• Field (physics)
• Killing tensor
• Lie groups
• Noether's theorem
• Ricci decomposition
• Symmetry in physics
References
• Hall, Graham (2004). Symmetries and Curvature Structure in General Relativity (World
Scientific Lecture Notes in Physics). Singapore: World Scientific Pub. Co. ISBN
981-02-1051-5. See Section 10.1 for a definition of symmetries.
• Stephani, Hans; Kramer, Dietrich; MacCallum, Malcolm; Hoenselaers, Cornelius & Herlt,
Eduard (2003). Exact Solutions of Einstein's Field Equations. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. ISBN 0-521-46136-7.
• Schutz, Bernard (1980). Geometrical Methods of Mathematical Physics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-29887-3. See Chapter 3 for properties of the Lie
derivative and Section 3.10 for a definition of invariance.

Symmetry (biology)
24
Symmetry (biology)
1. REDIRECT Symmetry in biology
Symmetric relation
In mathematics, a binary relation R over a set X is symmetric if it holds for all a and b in X
that if a is related to b then b is related to a.
In mathematical notation, this is:
Note: symmetry is not the exact opposite of antisymmetry (aRb and bRa implies b = a).
There are relations which are both symmetric and antisymmetric (equality and its
subrelations, including, vacuously, the empty relation), there are relations which are
neither symmetric nor antisymmetric ('preys on' in biological sciences), there are relations
which are symmetric and not antisymmetric (congruence modulo n), and there are relations
which are not symmetric but are antisymmetric ("is less than or equal to").
Properties containing the symmetric relation
equivalence relation - A symmetric relation that is also transitive and reflexive.
Graph-theoretic interpretation
In an undirected graph, the relation over the set of vertices of the graph under which v and
w are related if and only if they are adjacent forms a symmetric relation. Conversely, if R is
a symmetric relation over a set X, one can interpret it as describing an undirected graph
with the elements of X as the vertices and the pairs in R as the edges. Thus, symmetric
relations and undirected graphs are combinatorially equivalent objects.

Symmetric relation
25
Examples
• "is married to" is a symmetric relation, while "is less than" is not.
• "is equal to" (equality)
• "... is odd and ... is odd too":
See also
• Symmetry in mathematics
• Asymmetric relation
• Antisymmetric relation

Commutativity
26
Commutativity
Example showing the commutativity of addition (3 + 2 = 2 +
3)
In mathematics, commutativity is the
property that changing the order of
something does not change the end
result. It is a fundamental property of
many binary operations, and many
mathematical proofs depend on it. The
commutativity of simple operations,
such as multiplication and addition of
numbers, 
was 
for 
many 
years
implicitly assumed and the property
was not named until the 19th century
when 
mathematicians 
began 
to
formalize the theory of mathematics.
Common uses
The commutative property (or commutative law) is a property associated with binary
operations and functions. Similarly, if the commutative property holds for a pair of elements
under a certain binary operation then it is said that the two elements commute under that
operation.
In group and set theory, many algebraic structures are called commutative when certain
operands satisfy the commutative property. In higher branches of math, such as analysis
and linear algebra the commutativity of well known operations (such as addition and
multiplication on real and complex numbers) is often used (or implicitly assumed) in
proofs.[1] [2] [3]
Mathematical definitions
The term "commutative" is used in several related senses.[4] [5]
1. A binary operation ∗ on a set S is said to be commutative if:
- An operation that does not satisfy the above property is called noncommutative.
2. One says that x commutes with y under ∗ if:
3. A binary function f:A×A → B is said to be commutative if:

Commutativity
27
History and etymology
The first known use of the term was in a French
Journal published in 1814
Records 
of 
the 
implicit 
use 
of 
the
commutative property go back to ancient
times. The Egyptians used the commutative
property 
of 
multiplication 
to 
simplify
computing products.[6] [7] Euclid is known
to have assumed the commutative property
of multiplication in his book Elements.[8]
Formal uses of the commutative property
arose in the late 18th and early 19th
century when mathematicians began to
work on a theory of functions. Today the
commutative property is a well known and basic property used in most branches of
mathematics. Simple versions of the commutative property are usually taught in beginning
mathematics courses.
The first use of the actual term commutative was in a memoir by François Servois in
1814,[9] [10] which used the word commutatives when describing functions that have what is
now called the commutative property. The word is a combination of the French word
commuter meaning "to substitute or switch" and the suffix -ative meaning "tending to" so
the word literally means "tending to substitute or switch." The term then appeared in
English in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society in 1844.[11]
Related properties
Graph showing the symmetry of the
addition function
Associativity
The associative property is closely related to the
commutative property. The associative property
states that the order in which operations are
performed does not affect the final result as long as
the order of terms is not changed. In contrast, the
commutative property states that the order of the
terms does not affect the final result.
Symmetry
Symmetry can be directly linked to commutativity.
When a commutative operator is written as a binary
function then the resulting function is symmetric across the line y = x. As an example, if we
let a function f represent addition (a commutative operation) so that f(x,y) = x + y then f is
a symmetric function which can be seen in the image on the right.

Commutativity
28
Examples
Commutative operations in everyday life
• Putting your shoes on resembles a commutative operation since it doesn't matter if you
put the left or right shoe on first, the end result (having both shoes on), is the same.
• When making change we take advantage of the commutativity of addition. It doesn't
matter what order we put the change in, it always adds to the same total.
Commutative operations in math
Two well-known examples of commutative binary operations are:[4]
• The addition of real numbers, which is commutative since
For example 4 + 5 = 5 + 4, since both expressions equal 9.
• The multiplication of real numbers, which is commutative since
For example, 3 × 5 = 5 × 3, since both expressions equal 15.
• Further examples of commutative binary operations include addition and multiplication
of complex numbers, addition of vectors, and intersection and union of sets.
Noncommutative operations in everyday life
Concatenation, the act of joining character strings
together, is a noncommutative operation.
• Washing and drying your clothes
resembles a noncommutative operation, if
you dry first and then wash, you get a
significantly different result than if you
wash first and then dry.
• The Rubik's Cube is noncommutative. For
example, twisting the front face clockwise,
the top face clockwise and the front face
counterclockwise (FUF') does not yield the same result as twisting the front face
clockwise, then counterclockwise and finally twisting the top clockwise (FF'U). The twists
do not commute. This is studied in group theory.
Noncommutative operations in mathematics
Some noncommutative binary operations are:[12]
• subtraction is noncommutative since 
• division is noncommutative since 
• matrix multiplication is noncommutative since

Commutativity
29
Mathematical structures and commutativity
• An abelian group is a group whose group operation is commutative.[2]
• A commutative ring is a ring whose multiplication is commutative. (Addition in a ring is
by definition always commutative.)[13]
• In a field both addition and multiplication are commutative.[14]
See also
• Anticommutativity
• Binary operation
• Commutant
• Commutative diagram
• Commutative (neurophysiology)
• Commutator
• Distributivity
• Particle statistics (for commutativity in physics)
Notes
[1] Axler, p.2
[2] Gallian, p.34
[3] p. 26,87
[4] Krowne, p.1
[5] Weisstein, Commute, p.1
[6] Lumpkin, p.11
[7] Gay and Shute, p.?
[8] O'Conner and Robertson, Real Numbers
[9] Cabillón and Miller, Commutative and Distributive
[10] O'Conner and Robertson, Servois
[11] Cabillón and Miller, Commutative and Distributive
[12] Yark, p.1
[13] Gallian p.236
[14] Gallian p.250
References
Books
• Axler, Sheldon (1997). Linear Algebra Done Right, 2e. Springer. ISBN 0-387-98258-2.
Abstract algebra theory. Covers commutativity in that context. Uses property
throughout book.
• Goodman, Frederick (2003). Algebra: Abstract and Concrete, Stressing Symmetry, 2e.
Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-067342-0.
Abstract algebra theory. Uses commutativity property throughout book.
• Gallian, Joseph (2006). Contemporary Abstract Algebra, 6e. Boston, Mass.: Houghton
Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-51471-6.
Linear algebra theory. Explains commutativity in chapter 1, uses it throughout.

Commutativity
30
Articles
• http:/ / www. ethnomath. org/ resources/ lumpkin1997. pdf Lumpkin, B. (1997). The
Mathematical Legacy Of Ancient Egypt - A Response To Robert Palter. Unpublished
manuscript.
Article describing the mathematical ability of ancient civilizations.
• Robins, R. Gay, and Charles C. D. Shute. 1987. The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus: An
Ancient Egyptian Text. London: British Museum Publications Limited. ISBN
0-7141-0944-4
Translation and interpretation of the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus.
Online resources
• Krowne, Aaron, Commutative (http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ Commutative. html)
at PlanetMath., Accessed 8 August 2007.
Definition of commutativity and examples of commutative operations
• Eric W. Weisstein, Commute (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ Commute. html) at
MathWorld., Accessed 8 August 2007.
Explanation of the term commute
• Yark (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getuser& id=2760). Examples of non-commutative
operations (http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ ExampleOfCommutative. html) at
PlanetMath., Accessed 8 August 2007
Examples proving some noncommutative operations
• O'Conner, J J and Robertson, E F. MacTutor history of real numbers (http:/ / www-history.
mcs. st-andrews. ac. uk/ HistTopics/ Real_numbers_1. html), Accessed 8 August 2007
Article giving the history of the real numbers
• Cabillón, Julio and Miller, Jeff. Earliest Known Uses Of Mathematical Terms (http:/ /
jeff560. tripod. com/ c. html), Accessed 22 November 2008
Page covering the earliest uses of mathematical terms
• O'Conner, J J and Robertson, E F. MacTutor biography of François Servois (http:/ /
www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ Biographies/ Servois. html), Accessed 8
August 2007
Biography of Francois Servois, who first used the term

Abelian group
31
Abelian group
An abelian group, also called a commutative group, is a group in which the result of
applying the group operation to two group elements does not depend on their order (the
axiom of commutativity). Abelian groups generalize the arithmetic of addition of integers.
They are named after Niels Henrik Abel.
The concept of an abelian group is one of the first concepts encountered in undergraduate
abstract algebra, with many other basic objects, such as a module and a vector space, being
its refinements. The theory of abelian groups is generally simpler than that of their
non-abelian counterparts, and finite abelian groups are very well understood. On the other
hand, the theory of infinite abelian groups is an area of current research.
Definition
An abelian group is a set, A, together with an operation "•" that combines any two elements
a and b to form another element denoted a • b. The symbol "•" is a general placeholder for
a concretely given operation. To qualify as an abelian group, the set and operation, (A, •),
must satisfy five requirements known as the abelian group axioms:
Closure
For all a, b in A, the result of the operation a • b is also in A.
Associativity
For all a, b and c in A, the equation (a • b) • c = a • (b • c) holds.
Identity element
There exists an element e in A, such that for all elements a in A, the equation e • a = a
• e = a holds.
Inverse element
For each a in A, there exists an element b in A such that a • b = b • a = e, where e is
the identity element.
Commutativity
For all a, b in A, a • b = b • a.
More compactly, an abelian group is a commutative group. A group in which the group
operation is not commutative is called a "non-abelian group" or "non-commutative group".
Facts
Notation
There are two main notational conventions for abelian groups — additive and multiplicative.
Convention
Operation
Identity
Powers
Inverse
Addition
x + y
0
nx
−x
Multiplication
x * y or xy
e or 1
xn
x −1
Generally, the multiplicative notation is the usual notation for groups, while the additive 
notation is the usual notation for modules. The additive notation may also be used to

Abelian group
32
emphasize that a particular group is abelian, whenever both abelian and non-abelian
groups are considered.
Multiplication table
To verify that a finite group is abelian, a table (matrix) - known as a Cayley table - can be
constructed in a similar fashion to a multiplication table. If the group is G = {g1 = e, g2, ...,
gn} under the operation ⋅, the (i, j)'th entry of this table contains the product gi ⋅ gj. The
group is abelian if and only if this table is symmetric about the main diagonal (i.e. if the
matrix is a symmetric matrix).
This is true since if the group is abelian, then gi ⋅ gj = gj ⋅ gi. This implies that the (i, j)'th
entry of the table equals the (j, i)'th entry - i.e. the table is symmetric about the main
diagonal.
Examples
• For the integers and the operation addition "+", denoted (Z,+), the operation + combines
any two integers to form a third integer, addition is associative, zero is the additive
identity, every integer n has an additive inverse, −n, and the addition operation is
commutative since m + n = n + m for any two integers m and n.
• Every cyclic group G is abelian, because if x, y are in G, then xy = aman = am + n = an + m
= anam = yx. Thus the integers, Z, form an abelian group under addition, as do the
integers modulo n, Z/nZ.
• Every ring is an abelian group with respect to its addition operation. In a commutative
ring the invertible elements, or units, form an abelian multiplicative group. In particular,
the real numbers are an abelian group under addition, and the nonzero real numbers are
an abelian group under multiplication.
• Every subgroup of an abelian group is normal, so each subgroup gives rise to a quotient
group. Subgroups, quotients, and direct sums of abelian groups are again abelian.
In general, matrices, even invertible matrices, do not form an abelian group under
multiplication because matrix multiplication is generally not commutative. However, some
groups of matrices are abelian groups under matrix multiplication - one example is the
group of 2x2 rotation matrices.
Historical remarks
Abelian groups were named for Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel by Camille
Jordan who was first to observe their importance in connection with the problem of
solvability by radicals, first posed by Abel.
Properties
If n is a natural number and x is an element of an abelian group G written additively, then
nx can be defined as x + x + ... + x (n summands) and (−n)x = −(nx). In this way, G
becomes a module over the ring Z of integers. In fact, the modules over Z can be identified
with the abelian groups.
Theorems about abelian groups (i.e. modules over the principal ideal domain Z) can often 
be generalized to theorems about modules over an arbitrary principal ideal domain. A

Abelian group
33
typical example is the classification of finitely generated abelian groups which is a
specialization of the structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal
domain. In the case of finitely generated abelian groups, this theorem guarantees that an
abelian group splits as a direct sum of a torsion group and a free abelian group. The former
may be written as a direct sum of finitely many groups of the form Z/pkZ for p prime, and
the latter is a direct sum of finitely many copies of Z.
If f, g : G  →  H are two group homomorphisms between abelian groups, then their sum f +
g, defined by (f + g)(x) = f(x) + g(x), is again a homomorphism. (This is not true if H is a
non-abelian group.) The set Hom(G, H) of all group homomorphisms from G to H thus turns
into an abelian group in its own right.
Somewhat akin to the dimension of vector spaces, every abelian group has a rank. It is
defined as the cardinality of the largest set of linearly independent elements of the group.
The integers and the rational numbers have rank one, as well as every subgroup of the
rationals.
Finite abelian groups
Cyclic groups of integers modulo n, Z/nZ, were among the first examples of groups. It turns
out that an arbitrary finite abelian group is isomorphic to a direct sum of finite cyclic
groups of prime power order, and these orders are uniquely determined, forming a
complete system of invariants. The automorphism group of a finite abelian group can be
described directly in terms of these invariants. The theory had been first developed in the
1879 paper of Georg Frobenius and Ludwig Stickelberger and later was both simplified and
generalized to finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain, forming an
important chapter of linear algebra.
Classification
The fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups states that every finite abelian
group G can be expressed as the direct sum of cyclic subgroups of prime-power order. This
is a special case of the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups when G
has zero rank.
The cyclic group 
of order mn is isomorphic to the direct sum of 
and 
if and only
if m and n are coprime. It follows that any finite abelian group G is isomorphic to a direct
sum of the form
in either of the following canonical ways:
• the numbers k1,...,ku are powers of primes
• k1 divides k2, which divides k3, and so on up to ku.
For example, 
can be expressed as the direct sum of two cyclic subgroups of
order 3 and 5: 
. The same can be said for any abelian
group of order 15, leading to the remarkable conclusion that all abelian groups of order 15
are isomorphic.
For another example, every abelian group of order 8 is isomorphic to either 
(the
integers 0 to 7 under addition modulo 8), 
(the odd integers 1 to 15 under
multiplication modulo 16), or 
.
See also list of small groups for finite abelian groups of order 16 or less.

Abelian group
34
Automorphisms
One can apply the fundamental theorem to count (and sometimes determine) the
automorphisms of a given finite abelian group G. To do this, one uses the fact (which will
not be proved here) that if G splits as a direct sum H 
 K of subgroups of coprime order,
then Aut(H 
 K) 
Aut(H) 
Aut(K).
Given this, the fundamental theorem shows that to compute the automorphism group of G it
suffices to compute the automorphism groups of the Sylow p-subgroups separately (that is,
all direct sums of cyclic subgroups, each with order a power of p). Fix a prime p and
suppose the exponents ei of the cyclic factors of the Sylow p-subgroup are arranged in
increasing order:
for some n > 0. One needs to find the automorphisms of
One special case is when n = 1, so that there is only one cyclic prime-power factor in the
Sylow p-subgroup P. In this case the theory of automorphisms of a finite cyclic group can be
used. Another special case is when n is arbitrary but ei = 1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Here, one is
considering P to be of the form
so elements of this subgroup can be viewed as comprising a vector space of dimension n
over the finite field of p elements 
. The automorphisms of this subgroup are therefore
given by the invertible linear transformations, so
where GL is the appropriate general linear group. This is easily shown to have order
In the most general case, where the ei and n are arbitrary, the automorphism group is more
difficult to determine. It is known, however, that if one defines
and
then one has in particular dk ≥ k, ck ≤ k, and
One can check that this yields the orders in the previous examples as special cases (see
[Hillar,Rhea]).

Abelian group
35
Infinite abelian groups
The theory of infinite abelian groups is far from complete. Two important special classes
with diametrically opposite properties are torsion groups and torsion-free groups.
Torsion groups
An abelian group is called periodic or torsion if every element has finite order.
Important areas of the theory of torsion groups are:
• Direct sums of cyclic groups, also called pure projective modules
• Bounded groups, an example of pure injective modules
• Ulm invariants
Torsion-free groups
An abelian group is called torsion-free if every non-zero element has infinite order.
Important areas of torsion-free groups are:
• Rank of an abelian group
• Basic subgroups
• Cotorsion and algebraically compact torsion-free groups such as the p-adic integers
• Slender groups
Mixed groups
An abelian group is called mixed if it is neither torsion nor torsion-free. Important topics in
the theory of mixed groups are:
• Ext functor
• Pure subgroups
• Divisible groups
In each case, the new ideas help to approximate a mixed group as a direct sum of a torsion
and a torsion-free group.
Additive groups of rings
The additive group of a ring is an abelian group, but not all abelian groups are additive
groups of rings. Some important topics in this area of study are:
• Tensor product
• Corner's results on countable torsion-free groups
• Shelah's work to remove cardinality restrictions

Abelian group
36
Relation to other mathematical topics
Many large abelian groups possess a natural topology, which turns them into topological
groups.
The collection of all abelian groups, together with the homomorphisms between them,
forms the category Ab, the prototype of an abelian category.
Nearly all well-known algebraic structures other than Boolean algebra, are undecidable.
Hence it is surprising that Tarski's student Szmielew (1955) proved that the first order
theory of abelian groups, unlike its nonabelian counterpart, is decidable. This decidability,
plus the fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups described above, highlight some of
the successes in abelian group theory, but there are still many areas of current research:
• Amongst torsion-free abelian groups of finite rank, only the finitely generated case and
the rank 1 case are well understood;
• There are many unsolved problems in the theory of infinite-rank torsion-free abelian
groups;
• While countable torsion abelian groups are well understood through simple presentations
and Ulm invariants, the cased of countable mixed groups is much less mature.
• Many mild extensions of the first order theory of abelian groups are known to be
undecidable.
• Finite abelian groups remain a topic of research in computational group theory.
Moreover, abelian groups of infinite order lead, quite surprisingly, to deep questions about
the set theory commonly assumed to underlie all of mathematics. Take the Whitehead
problem: are all Whitehead groups of infinite order also free abelian groups? In the 1970s,
Saharon Shelah proved that the Whitehead problem is:
• Undecidable in ZFC, the conventional axiomatic set theory from which nearly all of
present day mathematics can be derived. The Whitehead problem is also the first
question in ordinary mathematics proved undecidable in ZFC;
• Undecidable even if ZFC is augmented by taking the generalized continuum hypothesis
as an axiom;
• Decidable if ZFC is augmented with the axiom of constructibility (see statements true in
L).
A note on the typography
Among mathematical adjectives derived from the proper name of a mathematician, the
word "abelian" is rare in that it is spelled with a lowercase a, rather than an uppercase A,
indicating how ubiquitous the concept is in modern mathematics.[1]
See also
• Abelianization
• Class field theory
• Commutator subgroup
• Elementary abelian group
• Finitely generated abelian group
• Free abelian group
• Pontryagin duality
• Torsion-free abelian groups of rank 1

Abelian group
37
Notes
[1] Abel Prize Awarded: The Mathematicians' Nobel (http:/ / www. maa. org/ devlin/ devlin_04_04. html)
References
• Fuchs, László (1970) Infinite abelian groups, Vol. I. Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol.
36. New York-London: Academic Press. xi+290 pp. MR 0255673 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0255673)
• ------ (1973) Infinite abelian groups, Vol. II. Pure and Applied Mathematics. Vol. 36-II.
New York-London: Academic Press. ix+363 pp. MR 0349869 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0349869)
• Griffith, Phillip A. (1970). Infinite Abelian group theory. Chicago Lectures in
Mathematics. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-30870-7.
• Hillar, Christopher and Rhea, Darren (2007), Automorphisms of finite abelian groups.
Amer. Math. Monthly 114, no. 10, 917-923. (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0605185).
• Szmielew, Wanda (1955) "Elementary properties of abelian groups," Fundamenta
Mathematica 41: 203-71.
Nonabelian group
In mathematics, a nonabelian group, also sometimes called a non-commutative group,
is a group (G, * ) such that there are at least two elements a and b of G such that a * b ≠ b *
a. The term non-abelian is used to distinguish from the idea of an abelian group, where all
of the elements of the group commute.
Nonabelian groups are pervasive in mathematics and physics. One of the simplest examples
of a non-abelian group is the dihedral group of order 6. A common example from physics is
the rotation group in three dimensions.
Both discrete groups and continuous groups may be non-abelian; most of the interesting Lie
groups are nonabelian. The term nonabelian is used primarily by physicists, rather than
mathematicians, and is frequently taken to be a synonym for the collection of Lie groups.
This usage is particularly common in gauge theory.
See also
• Associative algebra
• Non-commutative geometry

Symmetry group
38
Symmetry group
A tetrahedron can be placed in 12 distinct positions by
rotation alone. These are illustrated above in the cycle
graph format, along with the 180° edge (blue arrows) and
120° vertex (reddish arrows) rotations that permute the
tetrahedron through the positions. The 12 rotations form
the rotation (symmetry) group of the figure.
The symmetry group of an object
(image, signal, etc.) is the group of all
isometries under which it is invariant
with composition as the operation. It is
a subgroup of the isometry group of the
space concerned.
If not stated otherwise, this article
considers 
symmetry 
groups 
in
Euclidean geometry, but the concept
may also be studied in wider contexts;
see below.
Introduction
The "objects" may be geometric figures,
images 
and 
patterns, 
such 
as 
a
wallpaper pattern. The definition can be
made more precise by specifying what
is meant by image or pattern, e.g., a
function of position with values in a set
of colors. For symmetry of physical
objects, one may also want to take
physical composition into account. The
group of isometries of space induces a
group action on objects in it.
The symmetry group is sometimes also
called full symmetry group in order to
emphasize 
that 
it 
includes 
the
orientation-reversing isometries (like reflections, glide reflections and improper rotations)
under which the figure is invariant. The subgroup of orientation-preserving isometries (i.e.
translations, rotations, and compositions of these) which leave the figure invariant is called
its proper symmetry group. The proper symmetry group of an object is equal to its full
symmetry group if and only if the object is chiral (and thus there are no
orientation-reversing isometries under which it is invariant).
Any symmetry group whose elements have a common fixed point, which is true for all finite
symmetry groups and also for the symmetry groups of bounded figures, can be represented
as a subgroup of orthogonal group O(n) by choosing the origin to be a fixed point. The
proper symmetry group is a subgroup of the special orthogonal group SO(n) then, and
therefore also called rotation group of the figure.
Discrete symmetry groups come in three types: (1) finite point groups, which include only 
rotations, reflections, inversion and rotoinversion - they are in fact just the finite subgroups 
of O(n), (2) infinite lattice groups, which include only translations, and (3) infinite space 
groups which combines elements of both previous types, and may also include extra

Symmetry group
39
transformations like screw axis and glide reflection. There are also continuous symmetry
groups, which contain rotations of arbitrarily small angles or translations of arbitrarily
small distances. The group of all symmetries of a sphere O(3) is an example of this, and in
general such continuous symmetry groups are studied as Lie groups. With a categorization
of subgroups of the Euclidean group corresponds a categorization of symmetry groups.
Two geometric figures are considered to be of the same symmetry type if their symmetry
groups are conjugate subgroups of the Euclidean group E(n) (the isometry group of Rn),
where two subgroups H1, H2 of a group G are conjugate, if there exists g ∈ G such that
H1=g-1H2g. For example:
• two 3D figures have mirror symmetry, but with respect to different mirror planes.
• two 3D figures have 3-fold rotational symmetry, but with respect to different axes.
• two 2D patterns have translational symmetry, each in one direction; the two translation
vectors have the same length but a different direction.
When considering isometry groups, one may restrict oneself to those where for all points
the set of images under the isometries is topologically closed. This excludes for example in
1D the group of translations by a rational number. A "figure" with this symmetry group is
non-drawable and up to arbitrarily fine detail homogeneous, without being really
homogeneous.
One dimension
The isometry groups in 1D where for all points the set of images under the isometries is
topologically closed are:
• the trivial group C1
• the groups of two elements generated by a reflection in a point; they are isomorphic with
C2
• the infinite discrete groups generated by a translation; they are isomorphic with Z
• the infinite discrete groups generated by a translation and a reflection in a point; they
are isomorphic with the generalized dihedral group of Z, Dih(Z), also denoted by D∞
(which is a semidirect product of Z and C2).
• the group generated by all translations (isomorphic with R); this group cannot be the
symmetry group of a "pattern": it would be homogeneous, hence could also be reflected.
However, a uniform 1D vector field has this symmetry group.
• the group generated by all translations and reflections in points; they are isomorphic
with the generalized dihedral group of R, Dih(R).
See also symmetry groups in one dimension.
Two dimensions
Up to conjugacy the discrete point groups in 2 dimensional space are the following classes:
• cyclic groups C1, C2, C3, C4,... where Cn consists of all rotations about a fixed point by
multiples of the angle 360°/n
• dihedral groups D1, D2, D3, D4,... where Dn (of order 2n) consists of the rotations in Cn
together with reflections in n axes that pass through the fixed point.
C1 is the trivial group containing only the identity operation, which occurs when the figure 
has no symmetry at all, for example the letter F. C2 is the symmetry group of the letter Z, 
C3 that of a triskelion, C4 of a swastika, and C5, C6 etc. are the symmetry groups of similar

Symmetry group
40
swastika-like figures with five, six etc. arms instead of four.
D1 is the 2-element group containing the identity operation and a single reflection, which
occurs when the figure has only a single axis of bilateral symmetry, for example the letter
A. D2, which is isomorphic to the Klein four-group, is the symmetry group of a
non-equilateral rectangle, and D3, D4 etc. are the symmetry groups of the regular polygons.
The actual symmetry groups in each of these cases have two degrees of freedom for the
center of rotation, and in the case of the dihedral groups, one more for the positions of the
mirrors.
The remaining isometry groups in 2D with a fixed point, where for all points the set of
images under the isometries is topologically closed are:
• the special orthogonal group SO(2) consisting of all rotations about a fixed point; it is
also called the circle group S1, the multiplicative group of complex numbers of absolute
value 1. It is the proper symmetry group of a circle and the continuous equivalent of Cn.
There is no figure which has as full symmetry group the circle group, but for a vector
field it may apply (see the 3D case below).
• the orthogonal group O(2) consisting of all rotations about a fixed point and reflections in
any axis through that fixed point. This is the symmetry group of a circle. It is also called
Dih(S1) as it is the generalized dihedral group of S1.
For non-bounded figures, the additional isometry groups can include translations; the
closed ones are:
• the 7 frieze groups
• the 17 wallpaper groups
• for each of the symmetry groups in 1D, the combination of all symmetries in that group in
one direction, and the group of all translations in the perpendicular direction
• ditto with also reflections in a line in the first direction
Three dimensions
Up to conjugacy the set of 3D point groups consists of 7 infinite series, and 7 separate ones.
In crystallography they are restricted to be compatible with the discrete translation
symmetries of a crystal lattice. This crystallographic restriction of the infinite families of
general point groups results in 32 crystallographic point groups (27 from the 7 infinite
series, and 5 of the 7 others).
See point groups in three dimensions.
The continuous symmetry groups with a fixed point include those of:
• cylindrical symmetry without a symmetry plane perpendicular to the axis, this applies for
example often for a bottle
• cylindrical symmetry with a symmetry plane perpendicular to the axis
• spherical symmetry
For objects and scalar fields the cylindrical symmetry implies vertical planes of reflection.
However, for vector fields it does not: in cylindrical coordinates with respect to some axis,
has cylindrical symmetry with respect to the axis if and only if
and 
have this symmetry, i.e., they do not depend on φ. Additionally there is
reflectional symmetry if and only if 
.
For spherical symmetry there is no such distinction, it implies planes of reflection.

Symmetry group
41
The continuous symmetry groups without a fixed point include those with a screw axis, such
as an infinite helix. See also subgroups of the Euclidean group.
Symmetry groups in general
In wider contexts, a symmetry group may be any kind of transformation group, or
automorphism group. Once we know what kind of mathematical structure we are
concerned with, we should be able to pinpoint what mappings preserve the structure.
Conversely, specifying the symmetry can define the structure, or at least clarify what we
mean by an invariant, geometric language in which to discuss it; this is one way of looking
at the Erlangen programme.
For example, automorphism groups of certain models of finite geometries are not
"symmetry groups" in the usual sense, although they preserve symmetry. They do this by
preserving families of point-sets rather than point-sets (or "objects") themselves.
Like above, the group of automorphisms of space induces a group action on objects in it.
For a given geometric figure in a given geometric space, consider the following equivalence
relation: two automorphisms of space are equivalent if and only if the two images of the
figure are the same (here "the same" does not mean something like e.g. "the same up to
translation and rotation", but it means "exactly the same"). Then the equivalence class of
the identity is the symmetry group of the figure, and every equivalence class corresponds to
one isomorphic version of the figure.
There is a bijection between every pair of equivalence classes: the inverse of a
representative of the first equivalence class, composed with a representative of the second.
In the case of a finite automorphism group of the whole space, its order is the order of the
symmetry group of the figure multiplied by the number of isomorphic versions of the figure.
Examples:
• Isometries of the Euclidean plane, the figure is a rectangle: there are infinitely many
equivalence classes; each contains 4 isometries.
• The space is a cube with Euclidean metric; the figures include cubes of the same size as
the space, with colors or patterns on the faces; the automorphisms of the space are the
48 isometries; the figure is a cube of which one face has a different color; the figure has
a symmetry group of 8 isometries, there are 6 equivalence classes of 8 isometries, for 6
isomorphic versions of the figure.
Compare Lagrange's theorem (group theory) and its proof.
See also
• crystallography
• crystal system
• Euclidean plane isometry
• fixed points of isometry groups in Euclidean space
• group action
• permutation group
• point group
• space group
• symmetric group
• symmetry

Symmetry group
42
Further Reading
• Burns, G.; Glazer, A.M. (1990). Space Groups for Scientists and Engineers (2nd ed.).
Boston: Academic Press, Inc. ISBN 0-12-145761-3.
• Clegg, W (1998). Crystal Structure Determination (Oxford Chemistry Primer). Oxford:
Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-855-901-1.
• O'Keeffe, M.; Hyde, B.G. (1996). Crystal Structures; I. Patterns and Symmetry.
Washington, DC: Mineralogical Society of America, Monograph Series. ISBN
0-939950-40-5.
External links
• Eric W. Weisstein, Symmetry Group [1] at MathWorld.
• Eric W. Weisstein, Tetrahedral Group [2] at MathWorld.
• Overview of the 32 crystallographic point groups [3] - form the first parts (apart from
skipping n=5) of the 7 infinite series and 5 of the 7 separate 3D point groups
References
[1] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ SymmetryGroup. html
[2] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ TetrahedralGroup. html
[3] http:/ / newton. ex. ac. uk/ research/ qsystems/ people/ goss/ symmetry/ Solids. html
Isometry
For the mechanical engineering and architecture usage, see isometric projection. For
isometry in differential geometry, see isometry (Riemannian geometry).
In mathematics, an isometry, isometric isomorphism or congruence mapping is a
distance-preserving isomorphism between metric spaces. Geometric figures which can be
related by an isometry are called congruent.
Isometries are often used in constructions where one space is embedded in another space.
For instance, the completion of a metric space M involves an isometry from M into M', a
quotient set of the space of Cauchy sequences on M. The original space M is thus
isometrically isomorphic to a subspace of a complete metric space, and it is usually
identified with this subspace. Other embedding constructions show that every metric space
is isometrically isomorphic to a closed subset of some normed vector space and that every
complete metric space is isometrically isomorphic to a closed subset of some Banach space.
Definitions
The notion of isometry comes in two main flavors: global isometry and a weaker notion path
isometry or arcwise isometry. Both are often called just isometry and one should determine
from context which one is intended.
Let X and Y be metric spaces with metrics dX and dY. A map ƒ : X → Y is called distance
preserving if for any a,b ∈ X one has
A distance preserving map is automatically injective. Clearly, every isometry between
metric spaces is necessarily a topological embedding.

Isometry
43
A global isometry is a bijective distance preserving map. A path isometry or arcwise
isometry is a map which preserves the lengths of curves (not necessarily bijective).
Two metric spaces X and Y are called isometric if there is an isometry from X to Y. The set
of isometries from a metric space to itself forms a group with respect to function
composition, called the isometry group.
Examples
• Any reflection, translation and rotation is a global isometry on Euclidean spaces. See also
Euclidean group.
• The map R 
R defined by 
is a path isometry but not a global isometry.
• The isometric linear maps from Cn to itself are the unitary matrices.
Linear isometries
Given two normed vector spaces V and W, a linear isometry is a linear map f : V → W that
preserves the norms:
for all v in V. Linear isometries are distance-preserving maps in the above sense. They are
global isometries if and only if they are surjective.
By the Mazur-Ulam theorem, any isometry of normed vector spaces over R is affine.
Generalizations
• Given a positive real number ε, an ε-isometry or almost isometry (also called a
Hausdorff approximation) is a map 
between metric spaces such that
1. for x,x′ ∈ X one has |dY(ƒ(x),ƒ(x′))−dX(x,x′)| < ε, and
2. for any point y ∈ Y there exists a point x ∈ X with dY(y,ƒ(x)) < ε
That is, an ε-isometry preserves distances to within ε and leaves no element of the
codomain further than ε away from the image of an element of the domain. Note that
ε-isometries are not assumed to be continuous.
• Quasi-isometry is yet another useful generalization.
Beckman-Quarles theorem
The Beckman-Quarles theorem states that for a Euclidean space E of dimension d at
least 2, any mapping f from E to itself that preserves the property of being at a unit
distance apart must be an isometry.
See also
• Isometric projection
• Congruence (geometry)
• Euclidean plane isometry
• 3D isometries which leave the origin fixed
• space group
• involution
• Isometries in physics

Isometry
44
• Isometry group
• Homeomorphism group
References
• F. S. Beckman and D. A. Quarles, Jr., On isometries of Euclidean space, Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc., 4 (1953) 810-815.
Space group
The space group of a crystal or crystallographic group is a mathematical description of
the symmetry inherent in the structure. The word 'group' in the name comes from the
mathematical notion of a group, which is used to build the set of space groups.
Crystallography
The space groups in three dimensions are made from combinations of the 32
crystallographic point groups with the 14 Bravais lattices which belong to one of 7 crystal
systems. This results in a space group being some combination of the translational
symmetry of a unit cell including lattice centering, and the point group symmetry
operations of reflection, rotation and improper rotation (also called rotoinversion).
Furthermore one must consider the screw axis and glide plane symmetry operations. These
are called compound symmetry operations and are combinations of a rotation or reflection
with a translation less than the unit cell size. The combination of all these symmetry
operations results in a total of 230 unique space groups describing all possible crystal
symmetries.
Glide planes and screw axes
Two of the symmetry operations involved in the space groups are not contained in the
corresponding point group or Bravais lattice. These are the compound symmetry operations
called the glide plane and the screw axis.
A glide plane is a reflection in a plane, followed by a translation parallel with that plane.
This is noted by a, b or c, depending on which axis the glide is along. There is also the n
glide, which is a glide along the half of a diagonal of a face, and the d glide, which is a
fourth of the way along either a face or space diagonal of the unit cell. The latter is often
called the diamond glide plane as it features in the diamond structure.
A screw axis is a rotation about an axis, followed by a translation along the direction of the
axis. These are noted by a number, n, to describe the degree of rotation, where the number
is how many operations must be applied to complete a full rotation (e.g., 3 would mean a
rotation one third of the way around the axis each time). The degree of translation is then
added as a subscript showing how far along the axis the translation is, as a portion of the
parallel lattice vector. So, 21 is a twofold rotation followed by a translation of 1/2 of the
lattice vector.

Space group
45
Notation
There are a number of methods of identifying space groups. The International Union of
Crystallography publishes a table (more correctly, a hefty tome of tables) of all space
groups, and assigns each a unique number. Other than this numbering scheme there are
two main forms of notation, the Hermann-Mauguin notation and Schönflies notation.
The Hermann-Mauguin (or international) notation is the one most commonly used in
crystallography, and consists of a set of four symbols. The first describes the centering of
the Bravais lattice (P, A, B, C, I, R or F). The next three describe the most prominent
symmetry operation visible when projected along one of the high symmetry directions of
the crystal. These symbols are the same as used in point groups, with the addition of glide
planes and screw axis, described above. By way of example, the space group of quartz is
P3121, showing that it exhibits primitive centering of the motif (i.e., once per unit cell), with
a threefold screw axis and a twofold rotation axis. Note that it does not explicitly contain
the crystal system, although this is unique to each space group (in the case of P3121, it is
trigonal).
In HM notation the first symbol (31 in this example) denotes the symmetry along the major
axis (c-axis in trigonal cases), the second (2 in this case) along axes of secondary
importance (a and b) and the third symbol the symmetry in another direction. In the
trigonal case there also exists a space group P3112. In this space group the twofold axes
are not along the a and b-axes but in a direction rotated by 30o.
Group theory
Mathematically, a space group is a symmetry group or symmetry group type of
n-dimensional structures with translational symmetry in n independent directions, such as,
for n = 3, a crystal. Only discrete symmetry groups are included in the categorization; i.e.,
infinitely fine structure or homogeneity in one or more directions is excluded. This comes
from the necessity to describe discrete sets of 'points' (i.e. atoms or ions in a crystal), as
opposed to continuous media (see Symmetry in physics for the latter case). See the articles
Bravais lattices, Crystals, and Translation (geometry) for a fuller discussion.
Two symmetry groups are of the same crystallographic space group type if they are the
same up to an affine transformation of space that preserves orientation. Thus e.g. a change
of angle between translation vectors does not affect the space group type if it does not add
or remove any symmetry. A more formal definition involves conjugacy, see Symmetry
group.
Two symmetry groups are of the same affine space group type if they are the same up to
an affine transformation, even if that inverts orientation.
This can be expressed by saying that two symmetry groups which are chiral and each
other's mirror image, are of different crystallographic space group type, but of the same
affine space group type.
In 1D and 2D space groups of the same affine space group type are also of the same
crystallographic space group type, but in 3D this need not be the case: in 2D, the mirror
image of a rotation is a reversed rotation, which is in the group anyway, and the mirror
image of a mirror is still a mirror, but the mirror image of a righthand screw operation is a
lefthand one, not the inverse of the righthand screw operation.

Space group
46
The Bieberbach theorem states that in each dimension all affine space group types are
different even as abstract groups (as opposed to e.g. Frieze groups, of which two are
isomorphic with Z).
The term "space group" is often used for space group type. It is often clear from the context
what is meant. However, when considering subgroup relationships a specific symmetry
group should not be confused with the space group type.
Various dimensions
In 1D there are two space group types: those with and without mirror image symmetry, see
symmetry groups in one dimension.
In 2D there are 17; these 2D space groups are also called wallpaper groups or plane
groups.
In 3D there are 230 crystallographic space group types, which reduces to 219 affine space
group types because of some types being different from their mirror image; these are said
to differ by "enantiomorphous character" (e.g. P3112 and P3212). Usually "space group"
refers to 3D. They are by themselves purely mathematical, but play a large role in
crystallography.
In 4 dimensions there are 4895 crystallographic space group types, or 4783 affine space
group types.[1]
The number of affine space group types in 
dimensions is given by sequence A004029 in
OEIS; the number of crystallographic space group types in 
dimensions is given by
A006227.
Double groups and time reversal
In addition to crystallographic space groups there are also magnetic space groups or
double groups. These symmetries contain an element known as time reversal. They are of
importance in magnetic structures that contain ordered unpaired spins, i.e. ferro-, ferri- or
antiferromagnetic structures as studied by neutron diffraction. The time reversal element
flips a magnetic spin while leaving all other structure the same and it can be combined with
a number of other symmetry elements. Including time reversal there are 1651 magnetic
space groups in 3D. [2]
Grouping by point group
A symmetry group consists of isometric affine transformations; each is given by an
orthogonal matrix and a translation vector (which may be the zero vector). Space groups
can be grouped by the matrices involved, i.e. ignoring the translation vectors (see also
Euclidean group). This corresponds to discrete symmetry groups with a fixed point: the
point groups. However, not all point groups are compatible with translational symmetry;
those that are compatible are called the crystallographic point groups. This is expressed in
the crystallographic restriction theorem. (In spite of these names, this is a geometric
limitation, not just a physical one.)
In 1D both space group types correspond to their own "crystallographic point group".
In 2D the 17 wallpaper groups are grouped according to 10 associated crystallographic
point groups: 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, and 6-fold rotational symmetry, each with or without reflections.
Thus a wallpaper group with glide reflection axes is associated with the same point group

Space group
47
as the wallpaper group with reflection axes parallel to these glide reflection axes.
In 3D this gives a grouping of the 230 space group types into 32 crystal classes, one for
each associated crystallographic point group. A space group with a screw axis is in the
same crystal class as one with a corresponding pure axis of rotation. Similarly a space
group with a glide plane is in the same crystal class as one with a corresponding pure
reflection.
In addition to translations, and the point operations of reflection, rotation and improper
rotation, there are combinations of reflections and rotations with translation: the screw axis
and the glide plane.
The number of crystallographic point groups in n dimensions is given by OEIS:A004028.
Further categorizing
Space groups are categorized by Bravais lattice and crystal class. However, for some
combinations there are multiple space groups, while other combinations are not possible.
The 230 space group types can be subdivided in two categories:
• 73 symmorphic space group types: a space group is symmorphic if all symmetries can be
described in terms of rotation axes and reflection planes all through the same point
(including rotoreflections), without screw axes and glide planes). Equivalently, a space
group is symmorphic if it is equivalent to a semidirect product of its point group with its
translation subgroup.
• 157 nonsymmorphic space group types.
Conway and Thurston gave another classification of the space groups, where they divided
the 230 groups into reducible and irreducible groups. The reducible groups fall into 17
classes corresponding to the 17 wallpaper groups, and the remaining 35 irreducible groups
are classified separately.
See also
• Isometries in up to three dimensions
• Table of all space groups
• Yevgraf Fyodorov - the creator of space group theory
Bibliography
• International Tables for Crystallography, Volume A, edited by Th. Hahn. Reidel
Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Boston, 1996.
• Conway, John H.; Delgado Friedrichs, Olaf; Huson, Daniel H.; Thurston, William P. On
three-dimensional space groups. [3] Beiträge Algebra Geom. 42 (2001), no. 2, 475--507.
From the summary: "An entirely new and independent enumeration of the
crystallographic space groups is given, based on obtaining the groups as fibrations over
the plane crystallographic groups, when this is possible."
[1] H. Brown, R. Bülow, J. Neubüser, H. Wondratschek and H. Zassenhaus, Crystallographic Groups of
Four-Dimensional Space. Wiley, NY, 1978, p. 52.
[2] p.428 Group Theoretical Methods and Applications to Molecules and Crystals. By Shoon Kyung Kim.1999.
Cambridge University. Press.ISBN 0521640628
[3] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math. MG/ 9911185

Space group
48
External links
• International Union of Crystallography (http:/ / www. iucr. org)
• Point Groups and Bravais Lattices (http:/ / neon. mems. cmu. edu/ degraef/ pointgroups/ )
• Bilbao Crystallographic Server (http:/ / www. cryst. ehu. es/ )
• Space Group Info (old) (http:/ / cci. lbl. gov/ sginfo/ )
• Space Group Info (new) (http:/ / cci. lbl. gov/ cctbx/ explore_symmetry. html)
• Crystal Lattice Structures: Index by Space Group (http:/ / cst-www. nrl. navy. mil/ lattice/
spcgrp/ )
• Full list of 230 crystallographic space groups (http:/ / img. chem. ucl. ac. uk/ sgp/
mainmenu. htm)
Crystal system
A crystal system is a category of space groups, which characterize symmetry of structures
in three dimensions with translational symmetry in three directions, having a discrete class
of point groups. A major application is in crystallography, to categorize crystals, but by
itself the topic is one of 3D Euclidean geometry.
Overview
There are 7 crystal systems:
• Triclinic, all cases not satisfying the requirements of any other system. There is no
necessary symmetry other than translational symmetry, although inversion is possible.
• Monoclinic, requires either 1 twofold axis of rotation or 1 mirror plane.
• Orthorhombic, requires either 3 twofold axes of rotation or 1 twofold axis of rotation and
two mirror planes.
• Tetragonal, requires 1 fourfold axis of rotation.
• Rhombohedral, also called trigonal, requires 1 threefold axis of rotation.
• Hexagonal, requires 1 sixfold axis of rotation.
• Isometric or cubic, requires 4 threefold axes of rotation.
There are 2, 13, 59, 68, 25, 27, and 36 space groups per crystal system, respectively, for a
total of 230. The following table gives a brief characterization of the various crystal
systems:
Crystal system
No. of point groups
No. of bravais lattices
No. of space groups
Triclinic
2
1
2
Monoclinic
3
2
13
Orthorhombic
3
4
59
Tetragonal
7
2
68
Rhombohedral
5
1
25
Hexagonal
7
1
27
Cubic
5
3
36
Total
32
14
230
Within a crystal system there are two ways of categorizing space groups:

Crystal system
49
• by the linear parts of symmetries, i.e. by crystal class, also called crystallographic point
group; each of the 32 crystal classes applies for one of the 7 crystal systems
• by the symmetries in the translation lattice, i.e. by Bravais lattice; each of the 14 Bravais
lattices applies for one of the 7 crystal systems.
The 73 symmorphic space groups (see space group) are largely combinations, within each
crystal system, of each applicable point group with each applicable Bravais lattice: there
are 2, 6, 12, 14, 5, 7, and 15 combinations, respectively, together 61.
Crystallographic point groups
A symmetry group consists of isometric affine transformations; each is given by an
orthogonal matrix and a translation vector (which may be the zero vector). Space groups
can be grouped by the matrices involved, i.e. ignoring the translation vectors (see also
Euclidean group). This corresponds to discrete symmetry groups with a fixed point. There
are infinitely many of these point groups in three dimensions. However, only part of these
are compatible with translational symmetry: the crystallographic point groups. This is
expressed in the crystallographic restriction theorem. (In spite of these names, this is a
geometric limitation, not just a physical one.)
The point group of a crystal, among other things, determines the symmetry of the crystal's
optical properties. For instance, one knows whether it is birefringent, or whether it shows
the Pockels effect, by simply knowing its point group.
Overview of point groups by crystal system
crystal
system
point group / crystal class
Schönflies
Hermann-Mauguin
orbifold
Type
triclinic
triclinic-pedial
C1
11
enantiomorphic
polar
triclinic-pinacoidal
Ci
1x
centrosymmetric
monoclinic
monoclinic-sphenoidal
C2
22
enantiomorphic
polar
monoclinic-domatic
Cs
1*
polar
monoclinic-prismatic
C2h
2*
centrosymmetric
orthorhombic
orthorhombic-sphenoidal
D2
222
enantiomorphic
orthorhombic-pyramidal
C2v
*22
polar
orthorhombic-bipyramidal
D2h
*222
centrosymmetric
tetragonal
tetragonal-pyramidal
C4
44
enantiomorphic
polar
tetragonal-disphenoidal
S4
2x
tetragonal-dipyramidal
C4h
4*
centrosymmetric
tetragonal-trapezoidal
D4
422
enantiomorphic
ditetragonal-pyramidal
C4v
*44
polar
tetragonal-scalenoidal
D2d
or 
2*2
ditetragonal-dipyramidal
D4h
*422
centrosymmetric

Crystal system
50
rhombohedral
(trigonal)
trigonal-pyramidal
C3
33
enantiomorphic
polar
rhombohedral
S6 (C3i)
3x
centrosymmetric
trigonal-trapezoidal
D3
or or
322
enantiomorphic
ditrigonal-pyramidal
C3v
or or
*33
polar
ditrigonal-scalahedral
D3d
or 
or 
2*3
centrosymmetric
hexagonal
hexagonal-pyramidal
C6
66
enantiomorphic
polar
trigonal-dipyramidal
C3h
3*
hexagonal-dipyramidal
C6h
6*
centrosymmetric
hexagonal-trapezoidal
D6
622
enantiomorphic
dihexagonal-pyramidal
C6v
*66
polar
ditrigonal-dipyramidal
D3h
or 
*322
dihexagonal-dipyramidal
D6h
*622
centrosymmetric
cubic
tetartohedral
T
332
enantiomorphic
diploidal
Th
3*2
centrosymmetric
gyroidal
O
432
enantiomorphic
tetrahedral
Td
*332
hexoctahedral
Oh
*432
centrosymmetric
The crystal structures of biological molecules (such as protein structures) can only occur in
the 11 enantiomorphic point groups, as biological molecules are invariably chiral. The
protein assemblies themselves may have symmetries other than those given above, because
they are not intrinsically restricted by the Crystallographic restriction theorem. For
example the Rad52 DNA binding protein has an 11-fold rotational symmetry (in human),
however, it must form crystals in one of the 11 enantiomorphic point groups given above.
Classification of lattices
The 7 Crystal systems
The 14 Bravais Lattices
triclinic (parallelepiped)
monoclinic (right prism with parallelogram
base; here seen from above)
simple
centered

Crystal system
51
orthorhombic (cuboid)
simple
base-centered
body-centered
face-centered
tetragonal (square cuboid)
simple
body-centered
rhombohedral or trigonal
(trigonal trapezohedron)
hexagonal (centered regular hexagon)
cubic
(isometric; cube)
simple
body-centered
face-centered
In geometry and crystallography, a Bravais lattice is a category of symmetry groups for
translational symmetry in three directions, or correspondingly, a category of translation
lattices.
Such symmetry groups consist of translations by vectors of the form
where n1, n2, and n3 are integers and a1, a2, and a3 are three non-coplanar vectors, called
primitive vectors.
These lattices are classified by space group of the translation lattice itself; there are 14
Bravais lattices in three dimensions; each can apply in one crystal system only. They
represent the maximum symmetry a structure with the translational symmetry concerned
can have.
All crystalline materials must, by definition fit in one of these arrangements (not including
quasicrystals).
For convenience a Bravais lattice is depicted by a unit cell which is a factor 1, 2, 3 or 4
larger than the primitive cell. Depending on the symmetry of a crystal or other pattern, the
fundamental domain is again smaller, up to a factor 48.

Crystal system
52
The Bravais lattices were studied by Moritz Ludwig Frankenheim (1801-1869), in 1842,
who found that there were 15 Bravais lattices. This was corrected to 14 by A. Bravais in
1848.
See also
• Crystal structure
• Point group
• List of the 230 crystallographic 3D space groups
External links
• Overview of the 32 groups [3]
• Mineral galleries - Symmetry [1]
• all cubic crystal classes, forms and stereographic projections (interactive java applet) [2]
References
[1] http:/ / mineral. galleries. com/ minerals/ symmetry/ symmetry. htm
[2] http:/ / www. ifg. uni-kiel. de/ kubische_Formen
Mirror image
A mirror image is a reflected duplication that appears identical but in reverse. As an
optical effect it results from reflection off of substances such as a mirror or water. It is also
a concept in geometry and can also be used in a conceptualization process for 3-D
structures.
In geometry
In two dimensions
Mirror image
In geometry, the mirror image of an object or
two-dimensional figure is the virtual image formed
by reflection in a plane mirror; it is of the same size
as the original object, yet different, unless the
object or figure has reflection symmetry (also known
as a P-symmetry).
If a point of an object has coordinates (-x, -y,z) then
the image of this point (as reflected from the mirror
in y, z plane) has coordinates (-x, y,z) - so mirror
reflection is a reversal of the coordinate axis
perpendicular to the mirror's surface. Thus, a mirror
image does not have reversed right and left (or up
and down), but rather reversed front and back.
Two-dimensional mirror images can be seen in the
reflections of mirrors or other reflecting surfaces, or on a printed surface seen inside out.

Mirror image
53
In three dimensions
The concept of mirror image can be extended to three-dimensional objects, including the
inside parts, even if they are not transparent. The term then relates to structural as well as
visual aspects. This is also called enantiomer or enantiomorph.
A mirror image appears three-dimensional if the observer moves. This is because the
relative position of objects changes as the observer's perspective changes.[1]
Looking through a mirror from different positions (but necessarily with the point of
observation restricted to the halfspace on one side of the mirror) is like looking at the 3D
mirror image of space; without further mirrors only the mirror image of the halfspace
before the mirror is relevant; if there is another mirror, the mirror image of the other
halfspace is too.
Uses
The word fire and its mirror image are
displayed on the front of this fire engine
A text is sometimes deliberately displayed in mirror
image, in order to be read through a mirror.
Emergency vehicles such as ambulances or fire
engines use mirror images in order to be read from
a driver's rear-view mirror. Some movie theaters
also use a Rear Window Captioning System to assist
individuals with hearing impairments watching the
film.
Systems of mirrors
In the case of two mirrors, in planes at an angle α,
looking through both from the sector which is the intersection of the two halfspaces, is like
looking at a version of the world rotated by an angle of 2α; the points of observations and
directions of looking for which this applies correspond to those for looking through a frame
like that of the first mirror, and a frame at the mirror image with respect to the first plane,
of the second mirror. If the mirrors have vertical edges then the left edge of the field of
view is the plane through the right edge of the first mirror and the edge of the second
mirror which is on the right when looked at directly, but on the left in the mirror image.
In the case of two parallel mirrors, looking through both once is like looking at a version of
the world which is translated by twice the distance between the mirrors, in the direction
perpendicular to them, away from the observer. Since the plane of the mirror in which one
looks directly is beyond that of the other mirror, one always looks at an oblique angle, and
the translation just mentioned has not only a component away from the observer, but also
one in a perpendicular direction. The translated view can also be described by a translation
of the observer in opposite direction. For example, with a vertical periscope, the shift of the
world is away from the observer and down, both by the length of the periscope, but it is
more practical to consider the equivalent shift of the observer: up, and backward.

Mirror image
54
See also
• relative direction
• handedness
• mirror writing
• flopped image
• flipped image
References
[1] Adams, Cecil (1985-09-27). http://www.straightdope.com/classics/a2_071b.html|"Are dogs unable to see 2-D
images (mirrors, photos, TV)?". The Straight Dope. http:/ / www. straightdope. com/ classics/ a2_071b. html.
Retrieved on 2008-01-31.
External links
• Why do mirrors reverse images left to right? Why not up and down? (http:/ / www. d7s.
com/ mirror. htm)
• The same question explained a little differently, with examples (http:/ / amoebacrunch.
blogspot. com/ 2008/ 04/ fun-with-mirror-images. html)
Asymmetry
Asymmetry is the absence of, or a violation of, a
symmetry.
In organisms
Due to how cells divide in organisms, asymmetry in
organisms is fairly usual in at least one dimension, with
biological symmetry also being common in at least one
dimension.
Louis Pasteur proposed that biological molecules are
asymmetric because the cosmic [i.e. physical] forces that preside over their formation are
themselves asymmetric. While at his time, and even now, the symmetry of physical
processes are highlighted, it is known that there are fundamental physical asymmetries,
starting with time. Further, truly fundamental left-right symmetry violation is now known in
particle physics (see Parity violation below).
Usefulness to organisms
Asymmetry and important evolutionary traits, such as the left dolphin lung being smaller
than the right to make room for the asymmetrical heart.
• Handedness is an asymmetry in skill development in people and animals. Training the
neural pathways in a skill with one hand (or paw) takes less effort than doing the same
with both hands.
Nature also provides several examples of handedness in traits that are usually symmetric.
The following are examples of animals with obvious left-right asymmetries:

Asymmetry
55
Fiddler crab, Uca pugnax
• Fiddler crabs have one big claw and one small claw.
• The narwhal's tusk is a left incisor which can grow up
to 10 feet in length and forms a left-handed helix.
• Flatfish have evolved to swim with one side upward,
and as a result have both eyes on one side of their
heads.
• Several species of owls exhibit asymmetries in the
size and positioning of their ears, which is thought to
help locate prey.
As an indicator of unfitness
• Certain disturbances during the development of the organism, resulting in birth defects.
• Injuries after cell division that cannot be biologically repaired, such as a lost limb from an
accident.
Since birth defects and injuries are likely to indicate poor health of the organism, defects
resulting in asymmetry often put an animal at a disadvantage when it comes to finding a
mate. In particular, a degree of facial symmetry is associated with physical attractiveness,
but complete symmetry is both impossible and probably unattractive.
In chemistry
Certain molecules are chiral; that is, they cannot be superposed upon their mirror image.
Some sugars are chiral: glucose (also called dextrose) and fructose (sometimes called
levulose or invert sugar) are chiral isomers of the same molecule, C6H12O6. The word invert
comes from the way that sugar syrups rotate plane-polarized light. A sucrose or glucose
solution rotates the plane of polarization of the light to the right, while a fructose syrup
rotates it strongly to the left.
In physics
Asymmetry arises in physics in a number of different realms.
Thermodynamics
Thermodynamics is asymmetrical in time: the entropy in a closed system can only increase
with time. A consequence of this is Clausius' Second Law, which states that there is no
thermodynamic process whose sole effect is to extract a quantity of heat from a colder
reservoir and deliver it to a hotter reservoir.
Particle physics
Symmetry is one of the most powerful tools in particle physics, because it has become
evident that practically all laws of nature originate in symmetries. Violations of symmetry
therefore present theoretical and experimental puzzles that lead to a deeper understanding
of nature. Asymmetries in experimental measurements also provide powerful handles that
are often relatively free from background or systematic uncertainties.

Asymmetry
56
Parity violation
Until the 1950s, it was believed that fundamental physics was left-right symmetric; i.e., that
interactions were invariant under parity. Although parity is conserved in electromagnetism,
strong interactions and gravity, it turns out to be violated in weak interactions. The
Standard Model incorporates parity violation by expressing the weak interaction as a chiral
gauge interaction. Only the left-handed components of particles and right-handed
components of antiparticles participate in weak interactions in the Standard Model. A
consequence of parity violation in particle physics is that neutrinos have only been
observed as left-handed particles (and antineutrinos as right-handed particles).
In 1956-1957 Chien-Shiung Wu, E. Ambler, R. W. Hayward, D. D. Hoppes, and R. P. Hudson
found a clear violation of parity conservation in the beta decay of cobalt-60. Simultaneously,
R. L. Garwin, Leon Lederman, and R. Weinrich modified an existing cyclotron experiment
and immediately verified parity violation.
CP violation
After the discovery of the violation of parity in 1956-57, it was believed that the combined
symmetry of parity (P) and simultaneous charge conjugation (C), called CP, was preserved.
For example, CP transforms a left-handed neutrino into a right-handed antineutrino. In
1964, however, James Cronin and Val Fitch provided clear evidence that CP symmetry was
also violated in an experiment with neutral kaons.
CP violation is one of the necessary conditions for the generation of a baryon asymmetry in
the universe.
Combining the CP symmetry with simultaneous time reversal (T) produces a combined
symmetry called CPT symmetry. CPT symmetry must be preserved in any Lorentz invariant
local quantum field theory with a Hermitian Hamiltonian. As of 2006, no violations of CPT
symmetry have been observed.
Baryon asymmetry of the universe
The baryons (i.e., the protons and neutrons and the atoms that they comprise) observed in
the universe are overwhelmingly matter as opposed to anti-matter. This asymmetry is called
the baryon asymmetry of the universe.
Isospin violation
Isospin is the symmetry transformation of the weak interactions. The concept was first
introduced by Werner Heisenberg in nuclear physics based on the observations that the
masses of the neutron and the proton are almost identical and that the strength of the
strong interaction between any pair of nucleons is the same, independent of whether they
are protons or neutrons. This symmetry arises at a more fundamental level as a symmetry
between up-type and down-type quarks. Isospin symmetry in the strong interactions can be
considered as a subset of a larger flavor symmetry group, in which the strong interactions
are invariant under interchange of different types of quarks. Including the strange quark in
this scheme gives rise to the Eight-fold Way scheme for classifying mesons and baryons.
Isospin is violated by the fact that the masses of the up and down quarks are different, as
well as by their different electric charges. Because this violation is only a small effect in
most processes that involve the strong interactions, isospin symmetry remains a useful
calculational tool, and its violation introduces corrections to the isospin-symmetric results.

Asymmetry
57
In collider experiments
Because the weak interactions violate parity, collider processes that can involve the weak
interactions typically exhibit asymmetries in the distributions of the final-state particles.
These asymmetries are typically sensitive to the difference in the interaction between
particles and antiparticles, or between left-handed and right-handed particles. They can
thus be used as a sensitive measurement of differences in interaction strength and/or to
distinguish a small asymmetric signal from a large but symmetric background.
• A forward-backward asymmetry is defined as AFB=(NF-NB)/(NF+NB), where NF is the
number of events in which some particular final-state particle is moving "forward" with
respect to some chosen direction (e.g., a final-state electron moving in the same direction
as the initial-state electron beam in electron-positron collisions), while NB is the number
of events with the final-state particle moving "backward". Forward-backward
asymmetries were used by the LEP experiments to measure the difference in the
interaction strength of the Z boson between left-handed and right-handed fermions,
which provides a precision measurement of the weak mixing angle.
• A left-right asymmetry is defined as ALR=(NL-NR)/(NL+NR), where NL is the number of
events in which some initial- or final-state particle is left-polarized, while NR is the
corresponding number of right-polarized events. Left-right asymmetries in Z boson
production and decay were measured at the Stanford Linear Collider using the event
rates obtained with left-polarized versus right-polarized initial electron beams. Left-right
asymmetries can also be defined as asymmetries in the polarization of final-state
particles whose polarizations can be measured; e.g., tau leptons.
• A charge asymmetry or particle-antiparticle asymmetry is defined in a similar way. This
type of asymmetry has been used to constrain the parton distribution functions of protons
at the Tevatron from events in which a produced W boson decays to a charged lepton.
The asymmetry between positively and negatively charged leptons as a function of the
direction of the W boson relative to the proton beam provides information on the relative
distributions of up and down quarks in the proton. Particle-antiparticle asymmetries are
also used to extract measurements of CP violation from B meson and anti-B meson
production at the BaBar and Belle experiments.
Lexical
Asymmetry is also relevant to grammar and linguistics, especially in the contexts of lexical
analysis and transformational grammar.
Enumeration example: In English, there are grammatical rules for specifying coordinate
items in an enumeration or series. Similar rules exist for programming languages and
mathematical notation. These rules vary, and some require lexical asymmetry to be
considered grammatically correct.
For example in standard written English:
   We sell domesticated cats, dogs, and goldfish.        ### in-line 
asymmetric and grammatical
   We sell domesticated animals (cats, dogs, goldfish).  ### in-line 
symmetric and grammatical
   We sell domesticated animals (cats, dogs, goldfish,). ### in-line 
symmetric and ungrammatical
   We sell domesticated animals:                         ### outline 

Asymmetry
58
symmetric and grammatical
     - cats
     - dogs
     - goldfish
See also
• Information asymmetry
• Asymmetric multiprocessing
References
• Yuh-Nung Jan and Lily Yeh Jan, 1999. Asymmetry across species. Nature Cell Biology 1,
E42 - E44 PMID 10559895
Non- abelian
Non-abelian may describe:
• Non-abelian group, in mathematics, a group that is not abelian (commutative)
• Non-abelian gauge theory, in physics, a gauge group that is non-abelian
See also:
• Abelian
Skewness

Skewness
59
Example of experimental data with
non-zero skewness (gravitropic response of
wheat coleoptiles, 1,790)
In probability theory and statistics, skewness is a
measure of the asymmetry of the probability
distribution of a real-valued random variable.
Introduction
Consider the distribution in the figure. The bars on
the right side of the distribution taper differently
than the bars on the left side. These tapering sides
are called tails, and they provide a visual means for
determining which of the two kinds of skewness a
distribution has:
1. negative skew: The left tail is longer; the mass
of the distribution is concentrated on the right of
the figure. It has relatively few low values. The
distribution is said to be left-skewed. Example
(observations): 1,1000,1001,1002,1003
2. positive skew: The right tail is longer; the mass
of the distribution is concentrated on the left of
the figure. It has relatively few high values. The
distribution is said to be right-skewed. Example
(observations): 1,2,3,4,100
In a skewed (unbalanced, lopsided) distribution, the mean is farther out in the long tail than
is the median. If there is no skewness or the distribution is symmetric like the bell-shaped
normal curve then the mean = median = mode.
Many textbooks teach a rule of thumb stating that the mean is right of the median under
right skew, and left of the median under left skew. This rule fails with surprising frequency.
It can fail in multimodal distributions, or in distributions where one tail is long but the other
is heavy. Most commonly, though, the rule fails in discrete distributions where the areas to
the left and right of the median are not equal. Such distributions not only contradict the
textbook relationship between mean, median, and skew, they also contradict the textbook
interpretation of the median. [1]

Skewness
60
Definition
Skewness, the third standardized moment, is written as 
and defined as
where 
is the third moment about the mean and 
is the standard deviation.
Equivalently, skewness can be defined as the ratio of the third cumulant 
and the third
power of the square root of the second cumulant 
:
This is analogous to the definition of kurtosis, which is expressed as the fourth cumulant
divided by the fourth power of the square root of the second cumulant.
The skewness of a random variable X is sometimes denoted Skew[X].
Sample skewness
For a sample of n values the sample skewness is
where 
is the ith value, 
is the sample mean, 
is the sample third central moment,
and 
is the sample variance.
Given samples from a population, the equation for the sample skewness 
above is a
biased estimator of the population skewness. The usual estimator of skewness is
where 
is the unique symmetric unbiased estimator of the third cumulant and 
is the
symmetric unbiased estimator of the second cumulant. Unfortunately 
is, nevertheless,
generally biased. Its expected value can even have the opposite sign from the true
skewness; compare unbiased estimation of standard deviation.
Properties
If Y is the sum of n independent random variables, all with the same distribution as X, then
it can be shown that Skew[Y] = Skew[X] / √n.
Applications
Skewness has benefits in many areas. Many simplistic models assume normal distribution
i.e. data is symmetric about the mean. The normal distribution has a skewness of zero. But
in reality, data points are not perfectly symmetric. So, an understanding of the skewness of
the dataset indicates whether deviations from the mean are going to be positive or
negative.
D'Agostino's K-squared test is a goodness-of-fit normality test based on sample skewness
and sample kurtosis.

Skewness
61
Pearson's skewness coefficients
Karl Pearson suggested simpler calculations as a measure of skewness: The Pearson mode
skewness[2] , defined by
• (mean − mode) / standard deviation,
Pearson's first skewness coefficient [3] , defined by
• 3 (mean − mode) / standard deviation,
as well as Pearson's second skewness coefficient, defined by
• 3 (mean − median) / standard deviation.
There is no guarantee that these will be the same sign as each other or as the ordinary
definition of skewness.
See also
• Skewness risk
• Kurtosis risk
• Shape parameters
• Skew normal distribution
• Lake Wobegon effect#Asymmetric distributions
• D'Agostino's K-squared test
References
[1] Texbook rule often fails (http:/ / www. amstat. org/ publications/ jse/ v13n2/ vonhippel. html)
[2] Eric W. Weisstein, Pearson Mode Skewness (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ PearsonModeSkewness. html)
at MathWorld.
[3] Eric W. Weisstein, Pearson's skewness coefficients (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/
PearsonsSkewnessCoefficients. html) at MathWorld.
External links
• An Asymmetry Coefficient for Multivariate Distributions (http:/ / petitjeanmichel. free. fr/
itoweb. petitjean. skewness. html) by Michel Petitjean

Chirality
62
Chirality
Chirality, or "handedness", (Greek, χειρ, kheir: "hand") is a property of asymmetry
important in several branches of science.
An object or a system is chiral if it cannot be superposed on its mirror image. A chiral
object and its mirror image are called enantiomorphs (Greek opposite forms) or, when
referring to molecules, enantiomers. A non-chiral object is called achiral (sometimes also
amphichiral) and can be superposed on its mirror image.
Chirality may also refer to:
• Chirality (chemistry) of some molecules
• Chirality (mathematics) of mathematical objects
• Chirality (physics) of some subatomic particles
• The chirality of certain crystalline solids. Of the 230 existing space groups 65 are chiral.
Sodium chlorate is an achiral ionic compound but crystallizes in a chiral P213 space
group. An example of an achiral organic compound forming chiral crystals is benzil.
Racemic acid is the racemic form of tartaric acid forming a mixture of two
enantiomorphic crystals each form consisting of one of the two enantiomers.
• The chirality of surfaces. Materials with bulk chirality can be cleaved exposing a chiral
surface.
• Chirality (electromagnetics) is an indication of the direction of the rotation of the electric
and magnetic fields of a circularly-polarized wave.
• Chirality (manga)
• Chirality is important in forensic science, as it can indicate whether a knot was tied by a
left- or right-handed person.
See also
• Handedness
• Rigid body
• Symmetry

Chirality (mathematics)
63
Chirality (mathematics)
In geometry, a figure is chiral (and said to have chirality) if it is not identical to its mirror
image, or more particularly if it cannot be mapped to its mirror image by rotations and
translations alone. A chiral object and its mirror image are said to be enantiomorphs. The
word chirality is derived from the Greek χειρ (cheir), the hand, the most familiar chiral
object; the word enantiomorph stems from the Greek εναντιος (enantios) 'opposite' and
μορφη (morphe) 'form'. A non-chiral figure is called achiral or amphichiral.
The helix (and by extension a spun string, a screw, a propeller, etc.) and Möbius strip are
chiral three-dimensional objects. The J, L, S and Z-shaped tetrominoes of the popular video
game Tetris also exhibit chirality, but only in a two-dimensional space.
Many other familiar objects exhibit the same chiral symmetry of the human body: gloves,
glasses, shoes, legs on a pair of pants, etc. A similar notion of chirality is considered in knot
theory, as explained below.
Some chiral three-dimensional objects, such as the helix, can be assigned a right or left
handedness, according to the right-hand rule.
Chirality and symmetry group
A figure is achiral if and only if its symmetry group contains at least one
orientation-reversing isometry. (In Euclidean geometry any isometry can be written as
with an orthogonal matrix 
and a vector 
. The determinant of 
is either
1 or -1 then. If it is -1 the isometry is orientation-reversing, otherwise it is
orientation-preserving.)
Chirality in three dimensions
In three dimensions, every figure which possesses a plane of symmetry or a center of
symmetry is achiral. (A plane of symmetry of a figure 
is a plane 
, such that 
is
invariant under the mapping 
, when 
is chosen to be the 
- 
-plane of the coordinate system. A center of symmetry of a figure 
is a point 
, such that
is invariant under the mapping 
, when 
is chosen to be the
origin of the coordinate system.) Note, however, that there are achiral figures lacking both
plane and center of symmetry. An example is the figure
which is invariant under the orientation reversing isometry 
and thus
achiral, but it has neither plane nor center of symmetry. The figure
also is achiral as the origin is a center of symmetry, but it lacks a plane of symmetry.
Note also that achiral figures can have a center axis.

Chirality (mathematics)
64
Chirality in two dimensions
In two dimensions, every figure which possesses an axis of symmetry is achiral, and it can
be shown that every bounded achiral figure must have an axis of symmetry. (An axis of
symmetry of a figure 
is a line 
, such that 
is invariant under the mapping
, when 
is chosen to be the 
-axis of the coordinate system.) Consider
the following pattern:
> > > > > > > > > >
 > > > > > > > > > >
This figure is chiral, as it is not identical to its mirror image from either axis:
 > > > > > > > > > >     or       < 
< < < < < < < < <
> > > > > > > > > >              < 
< < < < < < < < <
But if one prolongs the pattern in both directions to infinity, one receives an (unbounded)
achiral figure which has no axis of symmetry. Its symmetry group is a frieze group
generated by a single glide reflection.
Knot theory
A knot is called achiral if it can be continuously deformed into its mirror image, otherwise it
is called chiral. For example the unknot and the figure-eight knot are achiral, whereas the
trefoil knot is chiral.
See also
• Chirality (physics)
• Chirality (chemistry)
• Orientation (mathematics)
• Handedness
• Asymmetry
• Skewness
• Vertex algebra
External links
• The Mathematical Theory of Chirality [1] by Michel Petitjean
• Chiral Polyhedra [2] by Eric W. Weisstein, The Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
References
[1] http:/ / petitjeanmichel. free. fr/ itoweb. petitjean. html
[2] http:/ / demonstrations. wolfram. com/ ChiralPolyhedra/

Chirality (physics)
65
Chirality (physics)
A phenomenon is said to be chiral if it is not identical to its mirror image (see Chirality).
The spin of a particle may be used to define a handedness (aka chirality) for that particle.
A symmetry transformation between the two is called parity. The action of parity acting on
a Dirac fermion is called chiral symmetry.
An experiment on the weak decay of cobalt-60 nuclei carried out by Chien-Shiung Wu and
collaborators in 1957 demonstrated that parity is not a symmetry of the universe.
Chirality and helicity
The helicity of a particle is Right-handed if the direction of its spin is the same as the
direction of its motion. It is Left-handed if the directions of spin and motion are opposite. By
convention for rotation, a standard clock, tossed with its face directed forwards, has
Left-handed helicity. Mathematically, helicity is the sign of the projection of the spin vector
onto the momentum vector: Left is negative, Right is positive.
The chirality of a particle is more abstract. It is determined by whether the particle
transforms in a right or left-handed representation of the Poincaré group. (However, some
representations, such as Dirac spinors, have both right and left-handed components. In
cases like this, we can define projection operators that project out either the right or left
hand components and discuss the right and left-handed portions of the representation.)
For massless particles — such as the photon, the gluon, and the (hypothetical) graviton —
chirality is the same as helicity; a given massless particle appears to spin in the same
direction along its axis of motion regardless of point of view of the observer.
For particles that do have mass — such as electrons, quarks, and neutrinos — chirality and
helicity must be distinguished. In the case of these particles, it is possible for an observer to
change to a reference frame that overtakes the spinning particle, in which case the particle
will then appear to move backwards, and its helicity (which may be thought of as 'apparent
chirality') will be reversed.
A massless particle moves with the speed of light, so a real observer (who must always 
travel at less than the speed of light) cannot be in any reference frame where the particle 
appears to reverse its relative direction, meaning that all real observers see the same 
chirality. Because of this, the direction of spin of massless particles is not affected by a 
Lorentz boost (change of viewpoint) in the direction of motion of the particle, and the sign

Chirality (physics)
66
of the projection (helicity) is fixed for all reference frames: the helicity is a relativistic
invariant.
With the discovery of neutrino oscillation, which implies that neutrinos have mass, the only
observed massless particle is the photon. The gluon also is expected to be massless,
although the assumption that it is massless has not been tested. Hence, these are the only
two particles now known for which helicity could be identical to chirality, and only one that
has been confirmed by measurement. All other observed particles have mass and thus may
have different helicities in different reference frames. It is still possible that as-yet
unobserved particles, like the graviton, might be massless, and hence have invariant
helicity like the photon. It is also not known for certain that the gluon is actually massless,
it is only supposed; all that is certain from measurement is that if it is not zero then its mass
must be very small. Because of confinement, observation of gluons is complicated and
difficult; it may be that they cannot exist as a free particle and only come in bound states
called glueballs.
Chiral theories
It has been observed that only left-handed fermions interact with the weak interaction. In
most circumstances, two left-handed fermions interact more strongly than right-handed or
opposite-handed fermions. Experiments sensitive to this effect imply that the universe has a
preference for left-handed chirality, which violates a symmetry of the other forces of
nature.
Chirality for a Dirac fermion ψ is defined by the operator γ5, which has eigenvalues ±1. Any
Dirac field can therefore be projected into its left- or right-handed component by the
operation of the projection operator (1–γ5)/2 or (1+γ5)/2 acting on ψ. The coupling of the
weak interaction to fermions is proportional to such a projection operator, which is
responsible for its parity symmetry violation.
A common source of confusion is due to conflating this operator with the helicity operator.
Since the helicity of massive particles is frame-dependent, it might seem that the same
particle would interact with the weak force according to one frame of reference, but not
another. The resolution to this paradox is that the chirality operator is equivalent to helicity
for massless fields only, for which helicity is not frame-dependent. For massive particles,
chirality is not the same as helicity so there is no frame dependence of the weak
interaction: a particle that interacts with the weak force does so in every frame.
A theory that is asymmetric between chiralities is called a chiral theory, while a parity
symmetric theory is sometimes called a vector theory. Most pieces of the Standard Model of
physics are non-chiral, which may be due to problems of anomaly cancellation in chiral
theories. Quantum chromodynamics is an example of a vector theory since both chiralities
of all quarks appear in the theory, and couple the same way.
The electroweak theory developed in the mid twentieth century is an example of a chiral
theory. Originally, it assumed that neutrinos were massless, and only assumed the
existence of left-handed neutrinos (along with their complementary right-handed
antineutrinos). After the observation of neutrino oscillations, which imply that neutrinos are
massive like all other fermions, the revised theories of the electroweak interaction now
include both right- and left-handed neutrinos. However, it is still a chiral theory, as it does
not respect parity symmetry.

Chirality (physics)
67
The exact nature of the neutrino is still unsettled and so the electroweak theories that have
been proposed are different, but most accommodate the chirality of neutrinos in the same
way as was already done for all other fermions.
Chiral symmetry
Vector gauge theories with massless Dirac fermion fields 
exhibit chiral symmetry, i.e.,
rotating the left-handed and the right-handed components independently makes no
difference to the theory. We can write this as the action of rotation on the fields:
  and   
or
  and   
With N flavors, we have unitary rotations instead: SU(N)L×SU(N)R.
Massive fermions do not exhibit chiral symmetry. One also says that the mass term in the
Lagrangian, 
breaks chiral symmetry explicitly. Spontaneous chiral symmetry
breaking may also occur in some theories, most notably in quantum chromodynamics.
References and external links
• History of science: parity violation [1]
• D.A. Bromley (2000). Gauge Theory of Weak Interactions. Springer. ISBN 3-540-67672-4.
• Gordon L. Kane (1987). Modern Elementary Particle Physics. Perseus Books. ISBN
0-201-11749-5.
• To see a summary of the differences and similarities between chirality and helicity (those
covered here and more) in chart form, go to Pedagogic Aids to Quantum Field Theory [2]
and click on the link near the bottom of the page entitled "Chirality and Helicity
Summary". To see an in depth discussion of the two with examples, which also shows
how chirality and helicity approach the same thing as speed approaches that of light,
click the link entitled "Chirality and Helicity in Depth" on the same page.
See also
• Electroweak theory
• Chirality (chemistry)
• Chirality (mathematics)
• Chiral symmetry
• Handedness
• Spinors and Dirac fields
References
[1] http:/ / ccreweb. org/ documents/ parity/ parity. html
[2] http:/ / www. quantumfieldtheory. info

Even and odd functions
68
Even and odd functions
In mathematics, even functions and odd functions are functions which satisfy particular
symmetry relations, with respect to taking additive inverses. They are important in many
areas of mathematical analysis, especially the theory of power series and Fourier series.
They are named for the parity of the powers of the power functions which satisfy each
condition: the function f(x) = xn is an even function if n is an even integer, and it is an odd
function if n is an odd integer.
Even functions
ƒ(x) = x2 is an example of an even
function.
ƒ(x) = x3 is an example of an odd
function.
Let f(x) be a real-valued function of a real variable.
Then f is even if the following equation holds for all x in
the domain of f:

Even and odd functions
69
ƒ(x) = x3 + 1 is neither even nor odd.
Geometrically, the graph of an even function is symmetric with respect to the y-axis,
meaning that its graph remains unchanged after reflection about the y-axis.
Examples of even functions are |x|, x2, x4, cos(x), and cosh(x).
Odd functions
Again, let f(x) be a real-valued function of a real variable. Then f is odd if the following
equation holds for all x in the domain of f:
or
Geometrically, the graph of an odd function has rotational symmetry with respect to the
origin, meaning that its graph remains unchanged after rotation of 180 degrees about the
origin.
Examples of odd functions are x, x3, sin(x), sinh(x), and erf(x).
Some facts
Note: A function's being odd or even does not imply differentiability, or even continuity. For
example, the Dirichlet function is even, but is nowhere continuous. Properties involving
Fourier series, Taylor series, derivatives and so on may only be used when they can be
assumed to exist.
Basic properties
• The only function which is both even and odd is the constant function which is identically
zero (i.e., f(x) = 0 for all x).
• The sum of an even and odd function is neither even nor odd, unless one of the functions
is identically zero.
• The sum of two even functions is even, and any constant multiple of an even function is
even.
• The sum of two odd functions is odd, and any constant multiple of an odd function is odd.
• The product of two even functions is an even function.

Even and odd functions
70
• The product of two odd functions is an even function.
• The product of an even function and an odd function is an odd function.
• The quotient of two even functions is an even function.
• The quotient of two odd functions is an even function.
• The quotient of an even function and an odd function is an odd function.
• The derivative of an even function is odd.
• The derivative of an odd function is even.
• The composition of two even functions is even, and the composition of two odd functions
is odd.
• The composition of an even function and an odd function is even.
• The composition of any function with an even function is even (but not vice versa).
• The integral of an odd function from −A to +A is zero (where A is finite, and the function
has no vertical asymptotes between −A and A).
• The integral of an even function from −A to +A is twice the integral from 0 to +A (where
A is finite, and the function has no vertical asymptotes between −A and A).
Series
• The Maclaurin series of an even function includes only even powers.
• The Maclaurin series of an odd function includes only odd powers.
• The Fourier series of a periodic even function includes only cosine terms.
• The Fourier series of a periodic odd function includes only sine terms.
Algebraic structure
• Any linear combination of even functions is even, and the even functions form a vector
space over the reals. Similarly, any linear combination of odd functions is odd, and the
odd functions also form a vector space over the reals. In fact, the vector space of all
real-valued functions is the direct sum of the subspaces of even and odd functions. In
other words, every function f(x) can be written uniquely as the sum of an even function
and an odd function:
where
is even and
is odd.
• The even functions form a commutative algebra over the reals. However, the odd
functions do not form an algebra over the reals.

Even and odd functions
71
Harmonics
In signal processing, harmonic distortion occurs when a sine wave signal is multiplied by a
non-linear transfer function. The type of harmonics produced depend on the transfer
function:[1]
• When the transfer function is even, the resulting signal will consist of only even
harmonics of the input sine wave;
• The fundamental is also an odd harmonic, so will not be present.
• A simple example is a full-wave rectifier.
• When it is odd, the resulting signal will consist of only odd harmonics of the input sine
wave;
• The output signal will be half-wave symmetric.
• A simple example is clipping in a symmetric push-pull amplifier.
• When it is asymmetric, the resulting signal may contain either even or odd harmonics;
• A simple example is clipping in an asymmetrical class A amplifier.
References
[1] Ask the Doctors: Tube vs. Solid-State Harmonics (http:/ / www. uaudio. com/ webzine/ 2005/ october/ content/
content2. html)
See also
• Hermitian function for a generalization in complex numbers.
• Taylor series
• Fourier series

Spin group
72
Spin group
In mathematics the spin group Spin(n) is the double cover of the special orthogonal group
SO(n), such that there exists a short exact sequence of Lie groups
As a Lie group Spin(n) therefore shares its dimension, n(n − 1)/2, and its Lie algebra with
the special orthogonal group. For n > 2, Spin(n) is simply connected and so coincides with
the universal cover of SO(n).
The non-trivial element of the kernel is denoted 
, which should not be confused with the
orthogonal transform of reflection through the origin, generally denoted 
.
Spin(n) can be constructed as a subgroup of the invertible elements in the Clifford algebra
Cℓ(n).
Accidental isomorphisms
In low dimensions, there are isomorphisms among the classical Lie groups called accidental
isomorphisms. For instance, there are isomorphisms between low dimensional spin groups
and certain classical Lie groups, due to low dimensional isomorphisms between the root
systems of the different families of simple Lie algebras. Specifically, we have
Spin(1) = O(1)
Spin(2) = U(1) = SO(2)
Spin(3) = Sp(1) = SU(2)
Spin(4) = Sp(1) × Sp(1)
Spin(5) = Sp(2)
Spin(6) = SU(4)
There are certain vestiges of these isomorphisms left over for n = 7,8 (see Spin(8) for more
details). For higher n, these isomorphisms disappear entirely.
Indefinite signature
In indefinite signature, the spin group Spin(p,q) is constructed through Clifford algebras in
a similar way to standard spin groups. It is a connected double cover of SO0(p,q), the
connected component of the identity of the indefinite orthogonal group SO(p,q) (there are a
variety of conventions on the connectedness of Spin(p,q); in this article, it is taken to be
connected for p+q>2). As in definite signature, there are some accidental isomorphisms in
low dimensions:
Spin(1,1) = GL(1,R)
Spin(2,1) = SL(2,R)
Spin(3,1) = SL(2,C)
Spin(2,2) = SL(2,R) × SL(2,R)
Spin(4,1) = Sp(1,1)
Spin(3,2) = Sp(4,R)
Spin(5,1) = SL(2,H)
Spin(4,2) = SU(2,2)

Spin group
73
Spin(3,3) = SL(4,R)
Note that Spin(p,q) = Spin(q,p).
Topological considerations
Connected and simply connected Lie groups are classified by their Lie algebra. So if G is a
connected Lie group with a simple Lie algebra, with G′ the universal cover of G, there is an
inclusion
with Z(G′) the centre of G′. This inclusion and the Lie algebra 
of G determine G entirely
(note that it is not the fact that 
and 
determine G entirely; for instance SL(2,R) and
PSL(2,R) have the same Lie algebra and same fundamental group 
, but are not
isomorphic).
The definite signature Spin(n) are all simply connected for (n>2), so they are the universal
coverings for SO(n). In indefinite signature, the maximal compact connected subgroup of
Spin(p,q) is
.
This allows us to calculate the fundamental groups of Spin(p,q):
For 
, this implies that the map 
is given by 
going to 
. For p=2, q>2, this map is given by 
.
And finally, for p=q=2, 
is sent to 
and 
is sent to 
.
See also
• Pin group
• Spinor
• Spinor bundle
• Anyon
• Spin structure
• Clifford algebra
• Orientation entanglement
• Complex Spin Group
• Clifford analysis

Lagrangian mechanics
74
Lagrangian mechanics
Lagrangian mechanics is a re-formulation of classical mechanics that combines
conservation of momentum with conservation of energy. It was introduced by Italian
mathematician Lagrange in 1788. In Lagrangian mechanics, the trajectory of a system of
particles is derived by solving Lagrange's equation, given herein, for each of the system's
generalized coordinates. The fundamental lemma of the calculus of variations shows that
solving Lagrange's equation is equivalent to finding the path that minimizes the action
functional, a quantity that is the integral of the Lagrangian over time.
The use of generalized coordinates may considerably simplify a system's analysis. For
example, consider a small frictionless bead traveling in a groove. If one is tracking the bead
as a particle, calculation of the motion of the bead using Newtonian mechanics would
require solving for the time-varying constraint force required to keep the bead in the
groove. For the same problem using Lagrangian mechanics, one looks at the path of the
groove and chooses a set of independent generalized coordinates that completely
characterize the possible motion of the bead. This choice eliminates the need for the
constraint force to enter into the resultant system of equations. There are fewer equations
since one is not directly calculating the influence of the groove on the bead at a given
moment.
Lagrange's equations
The equations of motion in Lagrangian mechanics are Lagrange's equations, also known as
Euler–Lagrange equations. Below, we sketch out the derivation of Lagrange's equation.
Please note that in this context, V is used rather than U for potential energy and T replaces
K for kinetic energy. See the references for more detailed and more general derivations.
Start with D'Alembert's principle for the virtual work of applied forces, 
, and inertial
forces on a three dimensional accelerating system of n particles, i, whose motion is
consistent with its constraints:[1] :269
.
is the virtual work
is the virtual displacement of the system, consistent with the constraints
are the masses of the particles in the system
are the accelerations of the particles in the system
together as products represent the time derivatives of the system momenta,
aka. inertial forces
is an integer used to indicate (via subscript) a variable corresponding to a
particular particle
is the number of particles under consideration
Break out the two terms:
.

Lagrangian mechanics
75
Assume that the following transformation equations from m independent generalized
coordinates, 
, hold:[1] :260
,
, ...
.
(without a subscript) indicates the total number generalized coordinates
An expression for the virtual displacement (differential), 
of the system for
time-independent constraints is[1] :264
.
is an integer used to indicate (via subscript) a variable corresponding to a
generalized coordinate
The applied forces may be expressed in the generalized coordinates as generalized forces,
,[1] :265
.
Combining the equations for 
, 
, and 
yields the following result after pulling the
sum out of the dot product in the second term:[1] :269
.
Substituting in the result from the kinetic energy relations to change the inertial forces into
a function of the kinetic energy leaves[1] :270
.
In the above equation, 
is arbitrary, though it is—by definition—consistent with the
constraints. So the relation must hold term-wise:[1] :270
.
If the 
are conservative, they may be represented by a scalar potential field, 
:[1] :266 &
270
.
The previous result may be easier to see by recognizing that 
is a function of the 
,
which are in turn functions of 
, and then applying the chain rule to the derivative of 
with respect to 
.
The definition of the Lagrangian is[1] :270
.
Since the potential field is only a function of position, not velocity, Lagrange's equations
are as follows:[1] :270
.

Lagrangian mechanics
76
This is consistent with the results derived above and may be seen by differentiating the
right side of the Lagrangian with respect to 
and time, and solely with respect to 
,
adding the results and associating terms with the equations for 
and 
.
In a more general formulation, the forces could be both potential and viscous. If an
appropriate transformation can be found from the 
, Rayleigh suggests using a
dissipation function, 
, of the following form:[1] :271
.
are constants that are related to the damping coefficients in the physical
system, though not necessarily equal to them
If 
is defined this way, then[1] :271
and
.
Kinetic energy relations
The kinetic energy, 
, for the system of particles is defined by[1] :269
.
The partial derivative of 
with respect to the time derivatives of the generalized
coordinates, 
, is[1] :269
.
The previous result may be difficult to visualize. As a result of the product rule, the
derivative of a general dot product 
is 
This
general result may be seen by briefly stepping into a Cartesian coordinate system,
recognizing that the dot product is (there) a term-by-term product sum, and also
recognizing that the derivative of a sum is the sum of its derivatives. In our case, f and g
are equal to v, which is why the factor of one half disappears.
According to the chain rule and the coordinate transformation equations given above for ,
its time derivative, 
, is:[1] :264
.
Together, the definition of 
and the total differential, 
, suggest that[1] :269
.
[ Remember that : 
. Also remember that in the sum, there is only one 
. ]
Substituting this relation back into the expression for the partial derivative of 
gives[1]
:269

Lagrangian mechanics
77
.
Taking the time derivative gives[1] :270
.
Using the chain rule on the last term gives[1] :270
.
From the expression for 
, one sees that[1] :270
.
This allows simplification of the last term,[1] :270
.
The partial derivative of 
with respect to the generalized coordinates, 
, is[1] :270
.
[This last result may be obtained by doing a partial differentiation directly on the kinetic
energy definition represented by the first equation.] The last two equations may be
combined to give an expression for the inertial forces in terms of the kinetic energy:[1] :270
Old Lagrange's equations
Consider a single particle with mass m and position vector 
, moving under an applied
force, 
, which can be expressed as the gradient of a scalar potential energy function
:
Such a force is independent of third- or higher-order derivatives of 
, so Newton's second
law forms a set of 3 second-order ordinary differential equations. Therefore, the motion of
the particle can be completely described by 6 independent variables, or degrees of
freedom. An obvious set of variables is 
, the Cartesian components of 
and their time derivatives, at a given instant of time (i.e. position (x,y,z) and velocity
).
More generally, we can work with a set of generalized coordinates, 
, and their time
derivatives, the generalized velocities, 
. The position vector, 
, is related to the
generalized coordinates by some transformation equation:
For example, for a simple pendulum of length l, a logical choice for a generalized
coordinate is the angle of the pendulum from vertical, θ, for which the transformation
equation would be

Lagrangian mechanics
78
.
The term "generalized coordinates" is really a holdover from the period when Cartesian
coordinates were the default coordinate system.
Consider an arbitrary displacement 
of the particle. The work done by the applied force
is 
. Using Newton's second law, we write:
Since work is a physical scalar quantity, we should be able to rewrite this equation in terms
of the generalized coordinates and velocities. On the left hand side,
On the right hand side, carrying out a change of coordinates, we obtain:
Rearranging Slightly:
Now, by performing an "integration by parts" transformation, with respect to t:
Recognizing that 
and 
, we obtain:
Now, by changing the order of differentiation, we obtain:
Finally, we change the order of summation:
Which is equivalent to:

Lagrangian mechanics
79
where 
is the kinetic energy of the particle. Our equation for the work done
becomes
However, this must be true for any set of generalized displacements 
, so we must have
for each generalized coordinate 
. We can further simplify this by noting that V is a
function solely of r and t, and r is a function of the generalized coordinates and t.
Therefore, V is independent of the generalized velocities:
Inserting this into the preceding equation and substituting L = T - V, called the Lagrangian,
we obtain Lagrange's equations:
There is one Lagrange equation for each generalized coordinate qi. When qi = ri (i.e. the
generalized coordinates are simply the Cartesian coordinates), it is straightforward to
check that Lagrange's equations reduce to Newton's second law.
The above derivation can be generalized to a system of N particles. There will be 6N
generalized coordinates, related to the position coordinates by 3N transformation
equations. In each of the 3N Lagrange equations, T is the total kinetic energy of the system,
and V the total potential energy.
In practice, it is often easier to solve a problem using the Euler–Lagrange equations than
Newton's laws. This is because not only may more appropriate generalized coordinates qi
be chosen to exploit symmetries in the system, but constraint forces are replaced with
simpler relations.
Examples
In this section two examples are provided in which the above concepts are applied. The first
example establishes that in a simple case, the Newtonian approach and the Lagrangian
formalism agree. The second case illustrates the power of the above formalism, in a case
which is hard to solve with Newton's laws.
Falling mass
Consider a point mass m falling freely from rest. By gravity a force F = m g is exerted on
the mass (assuming g constant during the motion). Filling in the force in Newton's law, we
find 
from which the solution
follows (choosing the origin at the starting point). This result can also be derived through
the Lagrange formalism. Take x to be the coordinate, which is 0 at the starting point. The
kinetic energy is 
and the potential energy is 
, hence

Lagrangian mechanics
80
.
Now we find
which can be rewritten as 
, yielding the same result as earlier.
Pendulum on a movable support
Consider a pendulum of mass m and length l, which is attached to a support with mass M
which can move along a line in the x-direction. Let x be the coordinate along the line of the
support, and let us denote the position of the pendulum by the angle θ from the vertical.
The kinetic energy can then be shown to be
and the potential energy of the system is
The Lagrangian is therefore
Sketch of the situation with definition
of the coordinates (click to enlarge)
Now carrying out the differentiations gives for the
support coordinate x
therefore:
indicating the presence of a constant of motion. Performing the same procedure for the
variable 
yields:
;
therefore
.

Lagrangian mechanics
81
These equations may look quite complicated, but finding them with Newton's laws would
have required carefully identifying all forces, which would have been much harder and
prone to errors. By considering limit cases ( 
should give the equations of motion for
a pendulum, 
should give the equations for a pendulum in a constantly accelerating
system, etc.) the correctness of this system can be verified.
Hamilton's principle
The action, denoted by 
, is the time integral of the Lagrangian:
Let q0 and q1 be the coordinates at respective initial and final times t0 and t1. Using the
calculus of variations, it can be shown the Lagrange's equations are equivalent to
Hamilton's principle:
The system undergoes the trajectory between t0 and t1 whose action has a stationary
value.
By stationary, we mean that the action does not vary to first-order for infinitesimal
deformations of the trajectory, with the end-points (q0, t0) and (q1,t1) fixed. Hamilton's
principle can be written as:
Thus, instead of thinking about particles accelerating in response to applied forces, one
might think of them picking out the path with a stationary action.
Hamilton's principle is sometimes referred to as the principle of least action. However, this
is a misnomer: the action only needs to be stationary, and the correct trajectory could be
produced by a maximum, saddle point, or minimum in the action.
We can use this principle instead of Newton's Laws as the fundamental principle of
mechanics, this allows us to use an integral principle (Newton's Laws are based on
differential equations so they are a differential principle) as the basis for mechanics.
However it is not widely stated that Hamilton's principle is a variational principle only with
holonomic constraints, if we are dealing with nonholonomic systems then the variational
principle should be replaced with one involving d'Alembert principle of virtual work.
Working only with holonomic constraints is the price we have to pay for using an elegant
variational formulation of mechanics.
Extensions of Lagrangian mechanics
The Hamiltonian, denoted by H, is obtained by performing a Legendre transformation on
the Lagrangian, which introduces new variables, canonically conjugate to the original
variables. This doubles the number of variables, but linearizes the differential equations.
The Hamiltonian is the basis for an alternative formulation of classical mechanics known as
Hamiltonian mechanics. It is a particularly ubiquitous quantity in quantum mechanics (see
Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)).
In 1948, Feynman invented the path integral formulation extending the principle of least 
action to quantum mechanics for electrons and photons. In this formulation, particles travel 
every possible path between the initial and final states; the probability of a specific final 
state is obtained by summing over all possible trajectories leading to it. In the classical 
regime, the path integral formulation cleanly reproduces Hamilton's principle, and Fermat's

Lagrangian mechanics
82
principle in optics.
See also
• Canonical coordinates
• Functional derivative
• Generalized coordinates
• Hamiltonian mechanics
• Lagrangian analysis (applications of Lagrangian mechanics)
• Nielsen form
• Restricted three-body problem
References
[1] Torby, Bruce (1984). "Energy Methods". Advanced Dynamics for Engineers. HRW Series in Mechanical
Engineering. United States of America: CBS College Publishing. ISBN 0-03-063366-4.
• Goldstein, H. Classical Mechanics, second edition, pp.16 (Addison-Wesley, 1980)
• Moon, F. C. Applied Dynamics With Applications to Multibody and Mechatronic Systems,
pp. 103-168 (Wiley, 1998).
Further reading
• Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M. Mechanics, Pergamon Press.
• Gupta, Kiran Chandra, Classical mechanics of particles and rigid bodies (Wiley, 1988).
External links
• Tong, David, Classical Dynamics (http:/ / www. damtp. cam. ac. uk/ user/ tong/ dynamics.
html) Cambridge lecture notes
• Principle of least action interactive (http:/ / www. eftaylor. com/ software/ ActionApplets/
LeastAction. html) Excellent interactive explanation/webpage
• Aerospace dynamics lecture notes on Lagrangian mechanics (http:/ / ocw. mit. edu/ NR/
rdonlyres/ Aeronautics-and-Astronautics/ 16-61Aerospace-DynamicsSpring2003/
D453E02B-5218-4154-8531-DB35ECD76A6C/ 0/ lecture9. pdf)
• Aerospace dynamics lecture notes on Rayleigh dissipation function (http:/ / ocw. mit. edu/
NR/ rdonlyres/ Aeronautics-and-Astronautics/ 16-61Aerospace-DynamicsSpring2003/
53F21B11-4F88-4870-967A-0C05AD85B104/ 0/ lecture10. pdf)
• Introduction to Lagrangian Mechanics (http:/ / www. yaronhadad. com/ Site/
PhilosophiÃ¦_Naturalis/ Entries/ 2008/ 9/ 3_Introduction_to_Lagrangian_Mechanics. html)
• (http:/ / www. sydgram. nsw. edu. au/ CollegeSt/ extension/ lagrangian. html) Sydney
Grammar School Academic Extension notes

Hamiltonian mechanics
83
Hamiltonian mechanics
Hamiltonian mechanics is a reformulation of classical mechanics that was introduced in
1833 by Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton. It arose from Lagrangian mechanics,
a previous reformulation of classical mechanics introduced by Joseph Louis Lagrange in
1788, but can be formulated without recourse to Lagrangian mechanics using symplectic
spaces (see Mathematical formalism, below). The Hamiltonian method differs from the
Lagrangian method in that instead of expressing second-order differential constraints on an
n-dimensional coordinate space (where n is the number of degrees of freedom of the
system), it expresses first-order constraints on a 2n-dimensional phase space.[1]
As with Lagrangian mechanics, Hamilton's equations provide a new and equivalent way of
looking at classical mechanics. Generally, these equations do not provide a more convenient
way of solving a particular problem. Rather, they provide deeper insights into both the
general structure of classical mechanics and its connection to quantum mechanics as
understood through Hamiltonian mechanics, as well as its connection to other areas of
science.
Simplified overview of uses
For a closed system the sum of the kinetic and potential energy in the system is
represented by a set of differential equations known as the Hamilton equations for that
system. Hamiltonians can be used to describe such simple systems as a bouncing ball, a
pendulum or an oscillating spring in which energy changes from kinetic to potential and
back again over time. Hamiltonians can also be employed to model the energy of other
more complex dynamic systems such as planetary orbits in celestial mechanics and also in
quantum mechanics.[2]
The Hamilton equations are generally written as follows:
In the above equations, the dot denotes the ordinary derivative with respect to time of the
functions p = p(t) (called generalized momenta) and q = q(t) (called generalized
coordinates), taking values in some vector space, and 
= 
is the so-called
Hamiltonian, or (scalar valued) Hamiltonian function. Thus, a little more explicitly, one can
equivalently write
and specify the domain of values in which the parameter t ("time") varies.
For a detailed derivation of these equations from Lagrangian mechanics, see below.

Hamiltonian mechanics
84
Basic physical interpretation
The simplest interpretation of the Hamilton Equations is as follows, applying them to a
one-dimensional system consisting of one particle of mass m under time independent
boundary conditions and exhibiting conservation of energy: The Hamiltonian 
represents
the energy of the system, which is the sum of kinetic and potential energy, traditionally
denoted T & V, respectively. Here q is the x-coordinate and p is the momentum, mv. Then
Note that T is a function of p alone, while V is a function of x (or q) alone.
Now the time-derivative of the momentum p equals the Newtonian force, and so here the
first Hamilton Equation means that the force on the particle equals the rate at which it
loses potential energy with respect to changes in x, its location. (Force equals the negative
gradient of potential energy.)
The time-derivative of q here means the velocity: the second Hamilton Equation here means
that the particle’s velocity equals the derivative of its kinetic energy with respect to its
momentum. (For the derivative with respect to p of p2/2m equals p/m = mv/m = v.)
Using Hamilton's equations
1. First write out the Lagrangian L = T – V. Express T and V as though you were going to
use Lagrange's equation.
2. Calculate the momenta by differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to velocity.
3. Express the velocities in terms of the momenta by inverting the expressions in step (2).
4. Calculate the Hamiltonian using the usual definition, 
. Substitute for
the velocities using the results in step (3).
5. Apply Hamilton's equations.
Notes
Hamilton's equations are appealing in view of their beautiful simplicity and (slightly
broken) symmetry. They have been analyzed under almost every imaginable angle of view,
from basic physics up to symplectic geometry. A lot is known about solutions of these
equations, yet the exact general case solution of the equations of motion cannot be given
explicitly for a system of more than two massive point particles. The finding of conserved
quantities plays an important role in the search for solutions or information about their
nature. In models with an infinite number of degrees of freedom, this is of course even
more complicated. An interesting and promising area of research is the study of integrable
systems, where an infinite number of independent conserved quantities can be constructed.

Hamiltonian mechanics
85
Deriving Hamilton's equations
We can derive Hamilton's equations by looking at how the Lagrangian changes as you
change the time and the positions and velocities of particles
Now the generalized momenta were defined as 
and Lagrange's equations tell us
that
We can rearrange this to get
and substitute the result into the variation of the Lagrangian
We can rewrite this as
and rearrange again to get
The term on the left-hand side is just the Hamiltonian that we have defined before, so we
find that
where the second equality holds because of the definition of the partial derivatives.
Associating terms from both sides of the equation above yields Hamilton's equations
As a reformulation of Lagrangian mechanics
Starting with Lagrangian mechanics, the equations of motion are based on generalized
coordinates
and matching generalized velocities
We write the Lagrangian as
with the subscripted variables understood to represent all N variables of that type. 
Hamiltonian mechanics aims to replace the generalized velocity variables with generalized

Hamiltonian mechanics
86
momentum variables, also known as conjugate momenta. By doing so, it is possible to
handle certain systems, such as aspects of quantum mechanics, that would otherwise be
even more complicated.
For each generalized velocity, there is one corresponding conjugate momentum, defined as:
In Cartesian coordinates, the generalized momenta are precisely the physical linear
momenta. In circular polar coordinates, the generalized momentum corresponding to the
angular velocity is the physical angular momentum. For an arbitrary choice of generalized
coordinates, it may not be possible to obtain an intuitive interpretation of the conjugate
momenta.
One thing which is not too obvious in this coordinate dependent formulation is that
different generalized coordinates are really nothing more than different coordinatizations of
the same symplectic manifold.
The Hamiltonian is the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian:
If the transformation equations defining the generalized coordinates are independent of t,
and the Lagrangian is a sum of products of functions (in the generalised coordinates) which
are homogeneous of order 0, 1 or 2, then it can be shown that H is equal to the total energy
E = T + V.
Each side in the definition of 
produces a differential:
Substituting the previous definition of the conjugate momenta into this equation and
matching coefficients, we obtain the equations of motion of Hamiltonian mechanics, known
as the canonical equations of Hamilton:
Hamilton's equations are first-order differential equations, and thus easier to solve than
Lagrange's equations, which are second-order. However, the steps leading to the equations
of motion are more onerous than in Lagrangian mechanics - beginning with the generalized
coordinates and the Lagrangian, we must calculate the Hamiltonian, express each
generalized velocity in terms of the conjugate momenta, and replace the generalized
velocities in the Hamiltonian with the conjugate momenta. All in all, there is little labor
saved from solving a problem with Hamiltonian mechanics rather than Lagrangian
mechanics. Ultimately, it will produce the same solution as Lagrangian mechanics and
Newton's laws of motion.
The principal appeal of the Hamiltonian approach is that it provides the groundwork for
deeper results in the theory of classical mechanics.

Hamiltonian mechanics
87
Geometry of Hamiltonian systems
A Hamiltonian system may be understood as a fiber bundle E over time R, with the fibers
Et, t ∈ R being the position space. The Lagrangian is thus a function on the jet bundle J over
E; taking the fiberwise Legendre transform of the Lagrangian produces a function on the
dual bundle over time whose fiber at t is the cotangent space T*Et, which comes equipped
with a natural symplectic form, and this latter function is the Hamiltonian.
Generalization to quantum mechanics through Poisson
bracket
The Hamilton's equations above work well for classical mechanics, but not for quantum
mechanics, since the differential equations discussed assume that one can specify the exact
position and momentum of the particle simultaneously at any point in time. However, the
equations can be further generalized to then be extended to apply to quantum mechanics as
well as to classical mechanics, through the deformation of the Poisson algebra over p and q
to the algebra of Moyal brackets.
Specifically, the more general form of the Hamilton's equation reads
where f is some function of p and q, and H is the Hamiltonian. To find out the rules for
evaluating a Poisson bracket without resorting to differential equations, see Lie algebra; a
Poisson bracket is the name for the Lie bracket in a Poisson algebra. These Poisson
brackets can then be extended to Moyal brackets comporting to an inequivalent Lie
algebra, as proven by H Groenewold, and thereby describe quantum mechanical diffusion in
phase space (See the uncertainty principle and Weyl quantization). This more algebraic
approach not only permits ultimately extending probability distributions in phase space to
Wigner quasi-probability distributions, but, at the mere Poisson bracket classical setting,
also provides more power in helping analyze the relevant conserved quantities in a system.
Mathematical formalism
Any smooth real-valued function H on a symplectic manifold can be used to define a
Hamiltonian system. The function H is known as the Hamiltonian or the energy function.
The symplectic manifold is then called the phase space. The Hamiltonian induces a special
vector field on the symplectic manifold, known as the symplectic vector field.
The symplectic vector field, also called the Hamiltonian vector field, induces a Hamiltonian
flow on the manifold. The integral curves of the vector field are a one-parameter family of
transformations of the manifold; the parameter of the curves is commonly called the time.
The time evolution is given by symplectomorphisms. By Liouville's theorem, each
symplectomorphism preserves the volume form on the phase space. The collection of
symplectomorphisms induced by the Hamiltonian flow is commonly called the Hamiltonian
mechanics of the Hamiltonian system.
The Hamiltonian vector field also induces a special operation, the Poisson bracket. The
Poisson bracket acts on functions on the symplectic manifold, thus giving the space of
functions on the manifold the structure of a Lie algebra.
In particular, given a function f

Hamiltonian mechanics
88
If we have a probability distribution, ρ, then (since the phase space velocity ( 
) has
zero divergence, and probability is conserved) its convective derivative can be shown to be
zero and so
This is called Liouville's theorem. Every smooth function G over the symplectic manifold
generates a one-parameter family of symplectomorphisms and if { G, H } = 0, then G is
conserved and the symplectomorphisms are symmetry transformations.
A Hamiltonian may have multiple conserved quantities Gi. If the symplectic manifold has
dimension 2n and there are n functionally independent conserved quantities Gi which are in
involution (i.e., { Gi, Gj } = 0), then the Hamiltonian is Liouville integrable. The
Liouville–Arnol'd theorem says that locally, any Liouville integrable Hamiltonian can be
transformed via a symplectomorphism in a new Hamiltonian with the conserved quantities
Gi as coordinates; the new coordinates are called action-angle coordinates. The
transformed Hamiltonian depends only on the Gi, and hence the equations of motion have
the simple form
for some function F (Arnol'd et al., 1988). There is an entire field focusing on small
deviations from integrable systems governed by the KAM theorem.
The integrability of Hamiltonian vector fields is an open question. In general, Hamiltonian
systems are chaotic; concepts of measure, completeness, integrability and stability are
poorly defined. At this time, the study of dynamical systems is primarily qualitative, and not
a quantitative science.
Riemannian manifolds
An important special case consists of those Hamiltonians that are quadratic forms, that is,
Hamiltonians that can be written as
where 
is a cometric on the fiber 
, the cotangent space to the point q in the
configuration space. This Hamiltonian consists entirely of the kinetic term.
If one considers a Riemannian manifold or a pseudo-Riemannian manifold, so that one has
an invertible, non-degenerate metric, then the cometric is given simply as the inverse of the
metric. The solutions to the Hamilton–Jacobi equations for this Hamiltonian are then the
same as the geodesics on the manifold. In particular, the Hamiltonian flow in this case is
the same thing as the geodesic flow. The existence of such solutions, and the completeness
of the set of solutions, are discussed in detail in the article on geodesics. See also Geodesics
as Hamiltonian flows.

Hamiltonian mechanics
89
Sub-Riemannian manifolds
When the cometric is degenerate, then it is not invertible. In this case, one does not have a
Riemannian manifold, as one does not have a metric. However, the Hamiltonian still exists.
In the case where the cometric is degenerate at every point q of the configuration space
manifold Q, so that the rank of the cometric is less than the dimension of the manifold Q,
one has a sub-Riemannian manifold.
The Hamiltonian in this case is known as a sub-Riemannian Hamiltonian. Every such
Hamiltonian uniquely determines the cometric, and vice-versa. This implies that every
sub-Riemannian manifold is uniquely determined by its sub-Riemannian Hamiltonian, and
that the converse is true: every sub-Riemannian manifold has a unique sub-Riemannian
Hamiltonian. The existence of sub-Riemannian geodesics is given by the Chow-Rashevskii
theorem.
The continuous, real-valued Heisenberg group provides a simple example of a
sub-Riemannian manifold. For the Heisenberg group, the Hamiltonian is given by
.
is not involved in the Hamiltonian.
Poisson algebras
Hamiltonian systems can be generalized in various ways. Instead of simply looking at the
algebra of smooth functions over a symplectic manifold, Hamiltonian mechanics can be
formulated on general commutative unital real Poisson algebras. A state is a continuous
linear functional on the Poisson algebra (equipped with some suitable topology) such that
for any element A of the algebra, A² maps to a nonnegative real number.
A further generalization is given by Nambu dynamics.
Charged particle in an electromagnetic field
A good illustration of Hamiltonian mechanics is given by the Hamiltonian of a charged
particle in an electromagnetic field. In Cartesian coordinates (i.e. 
), the Lagrangian
of a non-relativistic classical particle in an electromagnetic field is (in SI Units):
where e is the electric charge of the particle (not necessarily the electron charge), 
is the
electric scalar potential, and the 
are the components of the magnetic vector potential
(these may be modified through a gauge transformation).
The generalized momenta may be derived by:
Rearranging, we may express the velocities in terms of the momenta, as:
If we substitute the definition of the momenta, and the definitions of the velocities in terms
of the momenta, into the definition of the Hamiltonian given above, and then simplify and
rearrange, we get:

Hamiltonian mechanics
90
This equation is used frequently in quantum mechanics.
Relativistic charged particle in an electromagnetic field
The Lagrangian for a relativistic charged particle is given by:
Thus the particle's canonical (total) momentum is
that is, the sum of the kinetic momentum and the potential momentum.
Solving for the velocity, we get
So the Hamiltonian is
From this we get the force equation (equivalent to the Euler–Lagrange equation)
from which one can derive
An equivalent expression for the Hamiltonian as function of the relativistic (kinetic)
momentum, 
is
This has the advantage that 
can be measured experimentally whereas 
cannot. Notice
that the Hamiltonian (total energy) can be viewed as the sum of the relativistic energy
(kinetic+rest) , 
plus the potential energy, 
Hamilton's principle applied to deformable bodies
Hamilton's principle is an important variational principle in elastodynamics. As opposed to
a system composed of rigid bodies, deformable bodies have an infinite number of degrees of
freedom and occupy continuous regions of space; consequently, the state of the system is
described by using continuous functions of space and time. The extended Hamilton
Principle for such bodies is given by

Hamiltonian mechanics
91
where 
is the kinetic energy, 
is the elastic energy, 
is the work done by external
loads on the body, and 
the initial and final times. If the system is conservative, the
work done by external forces may be derived from a scalar potential 
. In this case,
This is called Hamilton's Principle and it is invariant under coordinate transformations.
References
[1] LaValle, Steven M. (2006), http://planning.cs.uiuc.edu/node707.html|"§13.4.4 Hamiltonian mechanics",
Planning Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-86205-9.
[2] The Hamiltonian (http:/ / ocw. mit. edu/ ans7870/ 18/ 18. 013a/ textbook/ chapter16/ section03. html) MIT
OpenCourseWare website 18.013A Chapter 16.3 Accessed February 2007
• V.I. Arnol'd, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer-Verlag (1989),
[ISBN 0-387-96890-3]
• Ralph Abraham and Jerrold E. Marsden, Foundations of Mechanics, (1978)
Benjamin-Cummings, London ISBN 0-8053-0102-X
• V.I. Arnol'd, V.V. Kozlov and A.I. Neĩshtadt, "Mathematical aspects of classical and
celestial mechanics." In: Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences, Dynamical Systems III
(vol. 3), Springer-Verlag, 1988.
• A. M. Vinogradov , B. A. Kupershmidt " The structure of Hamiltonian mechanics (http:/ /
diffiety. ac. ru/ djvu/ structures. djvu)" (djvu), London Math. Soc. Lect. Notes Ser., 60
(1981), Cambridge Univ. Press, London
• Binney, James, " Classical Mechanics (http:/ / www-thphys. physics. ox. ac. uk/ users/
JamesBinney/ CMech_notes. ps)" (PostScript) lecture notes (http:/ / www-thphys. physics.
ox. ac. uk/ users/ JamesBinney/ cmech. pdf) (PDF)
• Tong, David, Classical Dynamics (http:/ / www. damtp. cam. ac. uk/ user/ tong/ dynamics.
html) (Cambridge lecture notes)
See also
• Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)
• Lagrangian mechanics
• Canonical transformation
• Classical mechanics
• Dynamical systems
• Quantum mechanics
• Maxwell's equations
• Field theory
• Hamilton–Jacobi equation

Noether's theorem
92
Noether's theorem
Noether's (first) theorem states that any differentiable symmetry of the action of a
physical system has a corresponding conservation law. The action of a physical system is an
integral of a so-called Lagrangian function, from which the system's behavior can be
determined by the principle of least action. This seminal theorem was proven by Emmy
Noether in 1915 and published in 1918.[1]
Noether's theorem has become a fundamental tool of modern theoretical physics and the
calculus of variations. Noether's theorem allows a far-reaching generalization of earlier
work on constants of motion in Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics. Noether's theorem
does not apply to systems that cannot be modeled with a Lagrangian; for example,
dissipative systems with continuous symmetries need not have a corresponding
conservation law.
For illustration, if a physical system behaves the same regardless of how it is oriented in
space, its Lagrangian is rotationally symmetric; from this symmetry, Noether's theorem
shows the angular momentum of the system must be conserved. The physical system itself
need not be symmetric; a jagged asteroid tumbling in space conserves angular momentum
despite its asymmetry – it is the laws of motion that are symmetric. As another example, if a
physical experiment has the same outcome regardless of place or time (having the same
outcome, say, in Cleveland on Tuesday and Samaria on Wednesday), then its Lagrangian is
symmetric under continuous translations in space and time; by Noether's theorem, these
symmetries account for the conservation laws of linear momentum and energy within this
system, respectively.
Noether's theorem is profoundly important, both because of the insight it gives into
conservation laws, and also as a practical calculational tool. It allows researchers to
determine the conserved quantities from the observed symmetries of a physical system.
Conversely, it allows researchers to consider whole classes of hypothetical Lagrangians to
describe a physical system. For illustration, suppose that a new field is discovered that
conserves a quantity X. Using Noether's theorem, the types of Lagrangians that conserve X
because of a continuous symmetry can be determined, and then their fitness judged by
other criteria.
There are numerous different versions of Noether's theorem, with varying degrees of
generality. The original version only applied to ordinary differential equations (particles)
and not partial differential equations (fields). The original versions also assume that the
Lagrangian only depends upon the first derivative, while later versions generalize the
theorem to Lagrangians depending on the nth derivative. There is also a quantum version of
this theorem, known as the Ward-Takahashi identity. Generalizations of Noether's theorem
to superspaces also exist.

Noether's theorem
93
Informal statement of the theorem
All fine technical points aside, Noether's theorem can be stated informally
If a system has a continuous symmetry property, then there are corresponding
quantities whose values are conserved in time.[2]
A more sophisticated version of the theorem states that:
To every differentiable symmetry generated by local actions, there corresponds a
conserved current.
The word "symmetry" in the above statement refers more precisely to the covariance of the
form that a physical law takes with respect to a one-dimensional Lie group of
transformations satisfying certain technical criteria. The conservation law of a physical
quantity is usually expressed as a continuity equation.
The formal proof of the theorem uses only the condition of invariance to derive an
expression for a current associated with a conserved physical quantity. The conserved
quantity is called the Noether charge and the flow carrying that 'charge' is called the
Noether current. The Noether current is defined up to a solenoidal vector field.
Historical context
A conservation law states that some quantity X describing a system remains constant
throughout its motion; expressed mathematically, the rate of change of X (its derivative
with respect to time) is zero:
Such quantities are said to be conserved; they are often called constants of motion,
although motion per se need not be involved, just evolution in time. For example, if the
energy of a system is conserved, its energy is constant at all times, which imposes a
constraint on the system's motion and may help to solve for it. Aside from the insight that
such constants of motion give into the nature of a system, they are a useful calculational
tool; for example, an approximate solution can be corrected by finding the nearest state
that satisfies the necessary conservation laws.
The earliest constants of motion discovered were momentum and energy, which were
proposed in the 17th century by René Descartes and Gottfried Leibniz on the basis of
collision experiments, and refined by subsequent researchers. Isaac Newton was the first to
enunciate the conservation of momentum in its modern form, and showed that it was a
consequence of Newton's third law; interestingly, conservation of momentum still holds
even in situations when Newton's third law is incorrect. Modern physics has revealed that
the conservation laws of momentum and energy are only approximately true, but their
modern refinements – the conservation of four-momentum in special relativity and the zero
divergence of the stress-energy tensor in general relativity – are rigorously true within the
limits of those theories. The conservation of angular momentum, a generalization to
rotating rigid bodies, likewise holds in modern physics. Another important conserved
quantity, discovered in studies of the celestial mechanics of astronomical bodies, was the
Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector.
In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, physicists developed more systematic methods for 
discovering conserved quantities. A major advance came in 1788 with the development of 
Lagrangian mechanics, which is related to the principle of least action. In this approach,

Noether's theorem
94
the state of the system can be described by any type of generalized coordinates q; the laws
of motion need not be expressed in a Cartesian coordinate system, as was customary in
Newtonian mechanics. The action is defined as the time integral I of a function known as
the Lagrangian L
where the dot over q signifies the rate of change of the coordinates q
Hamilton's principle states that the physical path q(t) – the one truly taken by the system –
is a path for which infinitesimal variations in that path cause no change in I, at least up to
first order. This principle results in the Euler–Lagrange equations
Thus, if one of the coordinates, say qk, does not appear in the Lagrangian, the right-hand
side of the equation is zero, and the left-hand side shows that
where the conserved momentum pk is defined as the left-hand quantity in parentheses. The
absence of the coordinate qk from the Lagrangian implies that the Lagrangian is unaffected
by changes or transformations of qk; the Lagrangian is invariant, and is said to exhibit a
kind of symmetry. This is the seed idea from which Noether's theorem was born.
Several alternative methods for finding conserved quantities were developed in the 19th
century, especially by William Rowan Hamilton. For example, he developed a theory of
canonical transformations that allowed researchers to change coordinates so that
coordinates disappeared from the Lagrangian, resulting in conserved quantities. Another
approach and perhaps the most efficient for finding conserved quantities is the
Hamilton-Jacobi equation.
Mathematical expression
The essence of Noether's theorem is the following: Imagine that the action I defined above
is invariant under small perturbations (warpings) of the time variable t and the generalized
coordinates q; (in a notation commonly used by physicists) we write
where the perturbations δt and δq are both small but variable. For generality, assume that
there might be several such symmetry transformations of the action, say, N; we may use an
index r=1, 2, 3,...,N to keep track of them. Then a generic perturbation can be written as a
linear sum of the individual types of perturbations
Using these definitions, Emmy Noether showed that the N quantities

Noether's theorem
95
are conserved, i.e., are constants of motion; this is a simple version of Noether's theorem.
Examples
For illustration, consider a Lagrangian that does not depend on time, i.e., that is invariant
(symmetric) under changes t → t + δt, without any change in the coordinates q. In this case,
N=1, T=1 and Q = 0; the corresponding conserved quantity is the total energy H[3]
Similarly, consider a Lagrangian that does not depend on a coordinate qk, i.e., that is
invariant (symmetric) under changes qk → qk + δqk. In that case, N=1, T = 0, and Qk=1; the
conserved quantity is the corresponding momentum pk
[4]
In special and general relativity, these apparently separate conservation laws are aspects of
a single conservation law, that of the stress-energy tensor,[5] that is derived in the next
section.
The conservation of the angular momentum L = r × p is slightly more complicated to
derive, but analogous to its linear momentum counterpart.[6] It is assumed that the
symmetry of the Lagrangian is rotational, i.e., that the Lagrangian does not depend on the
absolute orientation of the physical system in space. For concreteness, assume that the
Lagrangian does not change under small rotations of an angle δθ about an axis n; such a
rotation transforms the Cartesian coordinates by the equation
Since time is not being transformed, T equals zero. Taking δθ as the ε parameter and the
Cartesian coordinates r as the generalized coordinates q, the corresponding Q variables
are given by
Then Noether's theorem states that the following quantity is conserved
In other words, the component of the angular momentum L along the n axis is conserved. If
n is arbitrary, i.e., if the system is insensitive to any rotation, then every component of L is
conserved; in short, angular momentum is conserved.
Field-theory version
Although useful in its own right, the version of her theorem just given was a special case of
the general version she derived in 1915. To give the flavor of the general theorem, a
version of the Noether theorem for continuous fields in four-dimensional space-time is now
given. Since field theory problems are more common in modern physics than mechanics
problems, this field-theory version is the most commonly used version of Noether's
theorem.

Noether's theorem
96
Let there be a set of differentiable fields φk defined over all space and time; for example,
the temperature T(x, t) would be representative of such a field, being a number defined at
every place and time. The principle of least action can be applied to such fields, but the
action is now an integral over space and time
(the theorem can actually be further generalized to the case where the Lagrangian depends
on up to the nth derivative using jet bundles)
Let the action be invariant under certain transformations of the space-time coordinates xμ
and the fields φk
where the transformations can be indexed by r = 1, 2, 3, ..., N
For such systems, Noether's theorem states that there are N conserved current densities
In such cases, the conservation law is expressed in a four-dimensional way
which expresses the idea that the amount of a conserved quantity within a sphere cannot
change unless some of it flows out of the sphere. For example, electric charge is conserved;
the amount of charge within a sphere cannot change unless some of the charge leaves the
sphere.
For illustration, consider a physical system of fields that behaves the same under
translations in time and space, as considered above; in other words, the fields do not
depend on the absolute position in space and time. In that case, N=4, one for each
dimension of space and time. Since only the positions in space-time are being warped, not
the fields, the Ψ are all zero and the Xμ
ν equal the Kronecker delta δμ
ν, where we have used
μ instead of r for the index. In that case, Noether's theorem corresponds to the
conservation law for the stress-energy tensor Tμ
ν[5]
The conservation of electric charge can be derived by considering transformations of the
fields themselves.[7] In quantum mechanics, the probability amplitude ψ(x) of finding a
particle at a point x is a complex field, because it ascribes a complex number to every point
in space and time. The probability amplitude itself is physically unmeasurable; only the
probability p = |ψ|2 is directly measureable. Therefore, the system is invariant under
transformations of the ψ field and its complex conjugate field ψ* that leave |ψ|2 unchanged,
such as

Noether's theorem
97
In the limit when θ becomes infinitesimally small (δθ), it may be taken as the ε, and the Ψ
are equal to iψ and -iψ*, respectively. A specific example is the Klein-Gordon equation, the
relativistically correct version of the Schrödinger equation for spinless particles, which has
the Lagrangian density
In this case, Noether's theorem states that the conserved current equals
which, when multiplied by the charge, equals the electric current density. This
transformation was first noted by Hermann Weyl and is one of the fundamental gauge
symmetries of modern physics.
Derivations
One independent variable
Consider the simplest case, a system with one independent variable, time. Suppose the
dependent variables 
are such that the action integral
is invariant under brief infinitesimal variations in the dependent variables. In other words,
they satisfy the Euler–Lagrange equations
And suppose that the integral is invariant under a continuous symmetry. Mathematically
such a symmetry is represented as a flow, φ, which acts on the variables as follows
where 
is a real variable indicating the amount of flow and T is a real constant (which
could be zero) indicating how much the flow shifts time.
The action integral flows to
which may be regarded as a function of ε. Calculating the derivative at 
and using the
symmetry, we get
Notice that the Euler–Lagrange equations imply

Noether's theorem
98
Substituting this into the previous equation, one gets
Again using the Euler–Lagrange equations we get
Substituting this into the previous equation, one gets
From which one can see that
is a constant of the motion, i.e. a conserved quantity. Since 
, we get 
and
so the conserved quantity simplifies to
To avoid excessive complication of the formulas, this derivation assumed that the flow does
not change as time passes. The same result can be obtained in the more general case.
Field-theoretic derivation
Noether's theorem may also be derived for tensor fields φA where the index A ranges over
the various components of the various tensor fields. These field quantities are functions
defined over a four-dimensional space whose points are labeled by coordinates xμ where the
index μ ranges over time (μ=0) and three spatial dimensions (μ=1,2,3). These four
coordinates are the independent variables; and the values of the fields at each event are the
dependent variables. Under an infinitesimal transformation, the variation in the coordinates
is written
whereas the transformation of the field variables is expressed as
By this definition, the field variations δφA result from two factors: intrinsic changes in the
field themselves and changes in coordinates, since the transformed field αA depends on the
transformed coordinates ξμ. To isolate the intrinsic changes, the field variation at a single
point xμ may be defined

Noether's theorem
99
If the coordinates are changed, the boundary of the region of space-time over which the
Lagrangian is being integrated also changes; the original boundary and its transformed
version are denoted as Ω and Ω’, respectively.
Noether's theorem begins with the assumption that a specific transformation of the
coordinates and field variables does not change the action, which is defined as the integral
of the Lagrangian over the given region of spacetime. Expressed mathematically, this
assumption may be written as
where the comma subscript indicates a partial derivative with respect to the coordinate(s)
that follows the comma, e.g.
Since ξ is a dummy variable of integration, and since the change in the boundary Ω is
infinitesimal by assumption, the two integrals may be combined using the four-dimensional
version of the divergence theorem into the following form
The difference in Lagrangians can be written to first-order in the infinitesimal variations as
However, because the variations are defined at the same point as described above, the
variation and the derivative can be done in reverse order; they commute
Using the Euler-Lagrange field equations
the difference in Lagrangians can be written neatly as
Thus, the change in the action can be written as
Since this holds for any region Ω, the integrand must be zero
For any combination of the various symmetry transformations, the perturbation can be
written

Noether's theorem
100
where 
is the Lie derivative of 
in the 
direction. When 
is a scalar or
,
These equations imply that the field variation taken at one point equals
Differentiating the above divergence with respect to ε at ε=0 and changing the sign yields
the conservation law
where the conserved current equals
Manifold/fiber bundle derivation
Suppose we have an n-dimensional manifold, M and a target manifold T. Let 
be the
configuration space of smooth functions from M to T. (More generally, we can have smooth
sections of a fiber bundle over M.)
Examples of this M in physics include:
• In classical mechanics, in the Hamiltonian formulation, M is the one-dimensional
manifold R, representing time and the target space is the cotangent bundle of space of
generalized positions.
• In field theory, M is the spacetime manifold and the target space is the set of values the
fields can take at any given point. For example, if there are m real-valued scalar fields,
φ1,...,φm, then the target manifold is Rm. If the field is a real vector field, then the target
manifold is isomorphic to R³.
Now suppose there is a functional
called the action. (Note that it takes values into 
, rather than 
; this is for physical
reasons, and doesn't really matter for this proof.)
To get to the usual version of Noether's theorem, we need additional restrictions on the
action. We assume 
is the integral over M of a function
called the Lagrangian, depending on φ, its derivative and the position. In other words, for φ
in 
Suppose we are given boundary conditions, ie., a specification of the value of 
at the
boundary if M is compact, or some limit on 
as x approaches ∞. Then the subspace of 
consisting of functions 
such that all functional derivatives of 
at φ are zero, that is:
and that 
satisfies the given boundary conditions, is the subspace of on shell solutions.
(See principle of stationary action)

Noether's theorem
101
Now, suppose we have an infinitesimal transformation on 
, generated by a functional
derivation, Q such that
for all compact submanifolds N or in other words,
for all x, where we set 
.
If this holds on shell and off shell, we say Q generates an off-shell symmetry. If this only
holds on shell, we say Q generates an on-shell symmetry. Then, we say Q is a generator of a
one parameter symmetry Lie group.
Now, for any N, because of the Euler–Lagrange theorem, on shell (and only on-shell), we
have
Since this is true for any N, we have
But this is the continuity equation for the current 
defined by:[8]
which is called the Noether current associated with the symmetry. The continuity
equation tells us that if we integrate this current over a space-like slice, we get a conserved
quantity called the Noether charge (provided, of course, if M is noncompact, the currents
fall off sufficiently fast at infinity).
Comments
Noether's theorem is really a reflection of the relation between the boundary conditions
and the variational principle. Assuming no boundary terms in the action, Noether's theorem
implies that
Noether's theorem is an on shell theorem. The quantum analog of Noether's theorem are
the Ward-Takahashi identities.

Noether's theorem
102
Generalization to Lie algebras
Suppose say we have two symmetry derivations Q1 and Q2. Then, [Q1, Q2] is also a
symmetry derivation. Let's see this explicitly. Let's say
and
Then,
where f12=Q1[f2
μ]-Q2[f1
μ]. So,
This shows we can (trivially) extend Noether's theorem to larger Lie algebras.
Generalization of the proof
This applies to any local symmetry derivation Q satisfying 
, and also to more
general local functional differentiable actions, including ones where the Lagrangian
depends on higher derivatives of the fields. Let ε be any arbitrary smooth function of the
spacetime (or time) manifold such that the closure of its support is disjoint from the
boundary. ε is a test function. Then, because of the variational principle (which does not
apply to the boundary, by the way), the derivation distribution q generated by
q[ε][Φ(x)]=ε(x)Q[Φ(x)] satisfies 
for any ε, or more compactly, 
for all
x not on the boundary (but remember that q(x) is a shorthand for a derivation distribution,
not a derivation parametrized by x in general). This is the generalization of Noether's
theorem.
To see how the generalization related to the version given above, assume that the action is
the spacetime integral of a Lagrangian that only depends on 
and its first derivatives.
Also, assume
Then,
for all ε.
More generally, if the Lagrangian depends on higher derivatives, then

Noether's theorem
103
Examples
Example 1: Conservation of energy
Looking at the specific case of a Newtonian particle of mass m, coordinate x, moving under
the influence of a potential V, coordinatized by time t. The action, S, is:
Consider the generator of time translations 
. In other words, 
.
Note that x has an explicit dependence on time, whilst V does not; consequently:
so we can set
Then,
The right hand side is the energy and Noether's theorem states that 
(i.e. the principle
of conservation of energy is a consequence of invariance under time translations).
More generally, if the Lagrangian does not depend explicitly on time, the quantity
(called the Hamiltonian) is conserved.
Example 2: Conservation of center of momentum
Still considering 1-dimensional time, let
i.e. N Newtonian particles where the potential only depends pairwise upon the relative
displacement.
For 
, let's consider the generator of Galilean transformations (i.e. a change in the frame
of reference). In other words,

Noether's theorem
104
Note that
This has the form of 
so we can set
Then,
where 
is the total momentum, M is the total mass and 
is the center of mass.
Noether's theorem states:
Example 3: Conformal transformation
Both examples 1 and 2 are over a 1-dimensional manifold (time). An example involving
spacetime is a conformal transformation of a massless real scalar field with a quartic
potential in (3 + 1)-Minkowski spacetime.
For Q, consider the generator of a spacetime rescaling. In other words,
The second term on the right hand side is due to the "conformal weight" of φ. Note that
This has the form of
(where we have performed a change of dummy indices) so set
Then,

Noether's theorem
105
Noether's theorem states that 
(as one may explicitly check by substituting the
Euler-Lagrange equations into the left hand side).
(Aside: If one tries to find the Ward-Takahashi analog of this equation, one runs into a
problem because of anomalies.)
Applications
Application of Noether's theorem allows physicists to gain powerful insights into any
general theory in physics, by just analyzing the various transformations that would make
the form of the laws involved invariant. For example:
• the invariance of physical systems with respect to spatial translation (in other words, that
the laws of physics do not vary with locations in space) gives the law of conservation of
linear momentum;
• invariance with respect to rotation gives the law of conservation of angular momentum;
• invariance with respect to time translation gives the well-known law of conservation of
energy
In quantum field theory, the analog to Noether's theorem, the Ward-Takahashi identities,
yields further conservation laws, such as the conservation of electric charge from the
invariance with respect to a change in the phase factor of the complex field of the charged
particle and the associated gauge of the electric potential and vector potential.
The Noether charge is also used in calculating the entropy of stationary black holes[9] .
See also
• Charge (physics)
• Invariant (physics)
References
[1] Noether E (1918). "http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0503066v1|Invariante Variationsprobleme". Nachr. D. König.
Gesellsch. D. Wiss. Zu Göttingen, Math-phys. Klasse 1918: 235–257. http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ physics/
0503066v1.
[2] Thompson, W. J. (1994) Angular Momentum. Wiley, p.5.
[3] Lanczos, pp. 401–403.
[4] Lanczos, pp. 403–404.
[5] Goldstein, pp. 592–593.
[6] Lanczos, pp. 404–405.
[7] Goldstein, pp.593–594.
[8] Michael E. Peskin, Daniel V. Schroeder (1995).
http://books.google.com/books?id=i35LALN0GosC&pg=PA689&dq=weinberg+"symmetry+"&lr=&as_brr=0&sig=ACfU3U1lrM
Introduction to Quantum Field Theory. Basic Books. p. 18. ISBN 0201503972. http:/ / books. google. com/
books?id=i35LALN0GosC& pg=PA689& dq=weinberg+ %22symmetry+ %22& lr=& as_brr=0&
sig=ACfU3U1lrM5s2EuLprS0ug_bWDpr3dAX2Q#PPA18,M1.
[9] Calculating the entropy of stationary black holes (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ gr-qc/ 9503052)

Noether's theorem
106
Bibliography
• Lanczos C (1970). The Variational Principles of Mechanics (4th edition ed.). New York:
Dover Publications. pp. 401–405. ISBN 0-486-65067-7.
• Goldstein H (1980). Classical Mechanics (2nd edition ed.). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing. pp. 588–596. ISBN 0-201-02918-9.
External links
• English translation of Noether's paper. (http:/ / arxiv. org/ pdf/ physics/ 0503066)
• John Baez (2002) " Noether's Theorem in a Nutshell. (http:/ / math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/
noether. html)"
• Nina Byers (1998) " E. Noether's Discovery of the Deep Connection Between Symmetries
and Conservation Laws. (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ physics/ 9807044)" in Proceedings of a
Symposium on the Heritage of Emmy Noether, held on 2-4 December, 1996, at the
Bar-Ilan University, Israel.
• Hanca, J., Tulejab, S., and Hancova, M.(2004), " Symmetries and conservation laws:
Consequences of Noether's theorem, (http:/ / www. eftaylor. com/ pub/ symmetry. html)"
American Journal of Physics 72(4): 428–35.
• Montesinos, M., and Flores, E. (2006) " Symmetric energy-momentum tensor in Maxwell,
Yang-Mills, and Proca theories obtained using only Noether's theorem, (http:/ / arxiv. org/
abs/ hep-th/ 0602190)" Revista Mexicana de Fisica 52: 29-36.
• Noether's Theorem (http:/ / www. mathpages. com/ home/ kmath564/ kmath564. htm) at
MathPages.
Rigged Hilbert space
In mathematics, a rigged Hilbert space (Gelfand triple, nested Hilbert space,
equipped Hilbert space) is a construction designed to link the distribution and
square-integrable aspects of functional analysis. Such spaces were introduced to study
spectral theory in the broad sense. They can bring together the 'bound state' (eigenvector)
and 'continuous spectrum', in one place.
Motivation
Since a function such as
,
which is in an obvious sense an eigenvector of the differential operator
on the real line R, is not square-integrable for the usual Borel measure on R, this requires
some way of stepping outside the strict confines of the Hilbert space theory. This was
supplied by the apparatus of Schwartz distributions, and a generalized eigenfunction theory
was developed in the years after 1950.

Rigged Hilbert space
107
Functional analysis approach
The concept of rigged Hilbert space places this idea in abstract functional-analytic
framework. Formally, a rigged Hilbert space consists of a Hilbert space H, together with a
subspace Φ which carries a finer topology, that is one for which the natural inclusion
is continuous. It is no loss to assume that Φ is dense in H for the Hilbert norm. We consider
the inclusion of dual spaces H* in Φ*. The latter, dual to Φ in its 'test function' topology, is
realised as a space of distributions or generalised functions of some sort, and the linear
functionals on the subspace Φ of type
for v in H are faithfully represented as distributions (because we assume Φ dense).
Now by applying the Riesz representation theorem we can identify H* with H. Therefore the
definition of rigged Hilbert space is in terms of a sandwich:
The most significant examples are for which Φ is a nuclear space; this comment is an
abstract expression of the idea that Φ consists of test functions and Φ* of the corresponding
distributions.
Formal definition (Gelfand triple)
A rigged Hilbert space is a pair (H,Φ) with H a Hilbert space, Φ a dense subspace, such
that Φ is given a topological vector space structure for which the inclusion map i is
continuous. Identifying H with its dual space H*, the adjoint to i is the map
. The duality pairing between Φ and Φ* has to be compatible with the
inner product on H: 
whenever 
and 
.
The specific triple 
is often named the "Gelfand triple" (after the Ukrainian
mathematician Israel Gelfand).
Note that even though Φ is isomorphic to Φ* if Φ is a Hilbert space in its own right, this
isomorphism is not the same as the composition of the inclusion i with its adjoint i*
References
• J.-P. Antoine, Quantum Mechanics Beyond Hilbert Space (1996), appearing in
Irreversibility and Causality, Semigroups and Rigged Hilbert Spaces, Arno Bohm,
Heinz-Dietrich Doebner, Piotr Kielanowski, eds., Springer-Verlag, ISBN 3-540-64305-2.
(Provides a survey overview.)
• K. Maurin, Generalized Eigenfunction Expansions and Unitary Representations of
Topological Groups, Polish Scientific Publishers, Warsaw, 1968.
• Jean Dieudonné, Éléments d'analyse VII (1978). (See paragraphs 23.8 and 23.32)
• R. de la Madrid, "The role of the rigged Hilbert space in Quantum Mechanics," Eur. J.
Phys. 26, 287 (2005); quant-ph/0502053 [1].
• I. M. Gelfand and N. J. Vilenkin. Generalized Functions, vol. 4: Some Applications of
Harmonic Analysis. Rigged Hilbert Spaces. Academic Press, New York, 1964.

Rigged Hilbert space
108
References
[1] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ quant-ph/ 0502053
Kac–Moody algebra
In mathematics, a Kac–Moody algebra is a Lie algebra, usually infinite-dimensional, that
can be defined by generators and relations through a generalized Cartan matrix.
Kac–Moody algebras are named after Victor Kac and Robert Moody, who independently
discovered them. These algebras form a generalization of finite-dimensional semisimple Lie
algebras, and many properties related to structure of the Lie algebra, its root system,
irreducible representations, connection to flag manifolds have natural analogues in the
Kac-Moody setting. A class of Kac-Moody algebras called affine Lie algebras is of
particular importance in mathematics and theoretical physics, especially conformal field
theory and the theory of exactly solvable models. Kac discovered an elegant proof of certain
combinatorial identities, Macdonald identities, which is based on the representation theory
of affine Kac-Moody algebras. Garland and Lepowski demonstrated that Rogers-Ramanujan
identities can be derived in a similar fashion.
Definition
A Kac–Moody algebra is given by the following:
1. An n by n generalized Cartan matrix 
of rank r.
2. A vector space over the complex numbers of dimension 2n − r.
3. A set of n linearly independent elements of and a set of n linearly independent
elements 
of the dual space, such that 
. The are known as coroots, while
the 
are known as roots.
The Kac–Moody algebra is the Lie algebra 
defined by generators 
and 
and the
elements of and relations
• for 
•
, for 
•
, for 
• for 
•
•
where 
is the adjoint representation of .
A real (possibly infinite-dimensional) Lie algebra is also considered a Kac–Moody algebra if
its complexification is a Kac–Moody algebra.

Kac–Moody algebra
109
Interpretation
is a Cartan subalgebra of the Kac–Moody algebra.
If g is an element of the Kac–Moody algebra such that
where ω is an element of 
, then g is said to have weight ω. The Kac–Moody algebra can
be diagonalized into weight eigenvectors. The Cartan subalgebra h has weight zero, ei has
weight α*i and fi has weight −α*i. If the Lie bracket of two weight eigenvectors is nonzero,
then its weight is the sum of their weights. The condition for 
simply means the α*i are
simple roots.
Types of Kac–Moody algebras
Properties of a Kac–Moody algebra are controlled by the algebraic properties of its
generalized Cartan matrix C. In order to classify Kac–Moody algebras, it is enough to
consider the case of an indecomposable matrixC, that is, assume that there is no
decomposition of the set of indices I into a disjoint union of non-empty subsets I1 and I2
such that Cij = 0 for all i in I1 and j in I2. Any decomposition of the generalized Cartan
matrix leads to the direct sum decomposition of the corresponding Kac–Moody algebra:
,
where the two Kac–Moody algebras in the right hand side are associated with the
submatrices of C corresponding to the index sets I1 and I2.
An important subclass of Kac–Moody algebras corresponds to symmetrizable generalized
Cartan matrices C, which can be decomposed as DS, where D is a diagonal matrix with
positive integer entries and S is a symmetric matrix. Under the assumptions that C is
symmetrizable and indecomposable, the Kac–Moody algebras are divided into three classes:
• A positive definite matrix S gives rise to a finite-dimensional simple Lie algebra.
• A positive semidefinite matrix S gives rise to an infinite-dimensional Kac–Moody algebra
of affine type, or an affine Lie algebra.
• An indefinite matrix S gives rise to a Kac–Moody algebra of indefinite type.
• Since the diagonal entries of C and S are positive, S cannot be negative definite or
negative semidefinite.
Symmetrizable indecomposable generalized Cartan matrices of finite and affine type have
been completely classified. They correspond to Dynkin diagrams and affine Dynkin
diagrams. Very little is known about the Kac–Moody algebras of indefinite type. Among
those, the main focus has been on the (generalized) Kac–Moody algebras of hyperbolic
type, for which the matrix S is indefinite, but for each proper subset of I, the corresponding
submatrix is positive definite or positive semidefinite. Such matrices have rank at most 10
and have also been completely determined.

Kac–Moody algebra
110
References
• A. J. Wassermann, Lecture Notes on the Kac-Moody and Virasoro algebras [1]
• V. Kac Infinite dimensional Lie algebras ISBN 0521466938
• Hazewinkel, Michiel, ed. (2001), http://eom.springer.de/K/k055050.htm|"Kac–Moody
algebra", Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN
978-1556080104
• V.G. Kac, Simple irreducible graded Lie algebras of finite growth Math. USSR Izv., 2
(1968) pp. 1271–1311 Izv. Akad. Nauk USSR Ser. Mat. , 32 (1968) pp. 1923–1967
• R.V. Moody, A new class of Lie algebras J. of Algebra , 10 (1968) pp. 211–230
See also
• Weyl–Kac character formula
• Generalized Kac–Moody algebra
References
[1] http:/ / iml. univ-mrs. fr/ ~wasserm/
Operator algebra
In functional analysis, an operator algebra is an algebra of continuous linear operators on
a topological vector space with the multiplication given by the composition of mappings.
Although it is usually classified as a branch of functional analysis, it has direct applications
to representation theory, differential geometry, quantum statistical mechanics and quantum
field theory.
Such algebras can be used to study arbitrary sets of operators with little algebraic relation
simultaneously. From this point of view, operator algebras can be regarded as a
generalization of spectral theory of a single operator. In general operator algebras are
non-commutative rings.
An operator algebra is typically required to be closed in a specified operator topology inside
the algebra of the whole continuous linear operators. In particular, it is a set of operators
with both algebraic and topological closure properties. In some discipline such properties
are axiomized and algebras with certain topological structure become the subject of the
research.
Though algebras of operators are studied in various context (for example, algebras of
pseudo-differential operators acting on spaces of distributions), the term operator algebra
is usually used in reference to algebras of bounded operators on a Banach space or, even
more specially in reference to algebras of operators on a separable Hilbert space, endowed
with the operator norm topology.
In the case of operators on a Hilbert space, the adjoint map on operators gives a natural 
involution which provides an additional algebraic structure which can be imposed on the 
algebra. In this context, the best studied examples are self-adjoint operator algebras, 
meaning that they are closed under taking adjoints. These include C*-algebras and von 
Neumann algebras. C*-algebras can be easily characterized abstractly by a condition 
relating the norm, involution and multiplication. Such abstractly defined C*-algebras can be

Operator algebra
111
identified to a certain closed subalgebra of the algebra of the continuous linear operators
on a suitable Hilbert space. A similar result holds for von Neumann algebras.
Commutative self-adjoint operator algebras can be regarded as the algebra of complex
valued continuous functions on a locally compact space, or that of measurable functions on
a standard measurable space. Thus, general operator algebras are often regarded as a
noncommutative generalizations of these algebras, or the structure of the base space on
which the functions are defined. This point of view is elaborated as the philosophy of
noncommutative geometry, which tries to study various non-classical and/or pathological
objects by noncommutative operator algebras.
Examples of operator algebras which are not self-adjoint include:
• nest algebras
• many commutative subspace lattice algebras
• many limit algebras
See also
• Topologies on the set of operators on a Hilbert space
References
• Blackadar, Bruce (2005). Operator Algebras: Theory of C*-Algebras and von Neumann
Algebras. Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3540284869.
Clifford algebra
In mathematics, Clifford algebras are a type of associative algebra. They can be thought
of as one of the possible generalizations of the complex numbers and quaternions. The
theory of Clifford algebras is intimately connected with the theory of quadratic forms and
orthogonal transformations. Clifford algebras have important applications in a variety of
fields including geometry and theoretical physics. They are named for the English geometer
William Kingdon Clifford.
Introduction and basic properties
Specifically, a Clifford algebra is a unital associative algebra which contains and is
generated by a vector space V equipped with a quadratic form Q. The Clifford algebra
Cℓ(V,Q) is the "freest" algebra generated by V subject to the condition[1]
If the characteristic of the ground field K is not 2, then one can rewrite this fundamental
identity in the form
where <u, v> = ½(Q(u + v) − Q(u) − Q(v)) is the symmetric bilinear form associated to Q.
This idea of "freest" or "most general" algebra subject to this identity can be formally
expressed through the notion of a universal property (see below).
Quadratic forms and Clifford algebras in characteristic 2 form an exceptional case. In 
particular, if char K = 2 it is not true that a quadratic form is determined by its symmetric

Clifford algebra
112
bilinear form, or that every quadratic form admits an orthogonal basis. Many of the
statements in this article include the condition that the characteristic is not 2, and are false
if this condition is removed.
As quantization of exterior algebra
Clifford algebras are closely related to exterior algebras. In fact, if Q = 0 then the Clifford
algebra Cℓ(V,Q) is just the exterior algebra Λ(V). For nonzero Q there exists a canonical
linear isomorphism between Λ(V) and Cℓ(V,Q) whenever the ground field K does not have
characteristic two. That is, they are naturally isomorphic as vector spaces, but with
different multiplications (in the case of characteristic two, they are still isomorphic as
vector spaces, just not naturally). Clifford multiplication is strictly richer than the exterior
product since it makes use of the extra information provided by Q.
More precisely, Clifford algebras may be thought of as quantizations (cf. quantization
(physics), Quantum group) of the exterior algebra, in the same way that the Weyl algebra is
a quantization of the symmetric algebra.
Weyl algebras and Clifford algebras admit a further structure of a *-algebra, and can be
unified as even and odd terms of a superalgebra, as discussed in CCR and CAR algebras.
Universal property and construction
Let V be a vector space over a field K, and let Q : V → K be a quadratic form on V. In most
cases of interest the field K is either R, C or a finite field.
A Clifford algebra Cℓ(V,Q) is a unital associative algebra over K together with a linear map i
: V → Cℓ(V,Q) satisfying i(v)2 = Q(v)1 for all v ∈ V, defined by the following universal
property: Given any associative algebra A over K and any linear map j : V → A such that
j(v)2 = Q(v)1 for all v ∈ V
(where 1 denotes the multiplicative identity of A), there is a unique algebra homomorphism
f : Cℓ(V,Q) → A such that the following diagram commutes (i.e. such that f o i = j):
Working with a symmetric bilinear form <·,·> instead of Q (in characteristic not 2), the
requirement on j is
j(v)j(w) + j(w)j(v) = 2<v, w> for all v, w ∈ V.
A Clifford algebra as described above always exists and can be constructed as follows: start
with the most general algebra that contains V, namely the tensor algebra T(V), and then
enforce the fundamental identity by taking a suitable quotient. In our case we want to take
the two-sided ideal IQ in T(V) generated by all elements of the form
for all 
and define Cℓ(V,Q) as the quotient
Cℓ(V,Q) = T(V)/IQ.
It is then straightforward to show that Cℓ(V,Q) contains V and satisfies the above universal 
property, so that Cℓ is unique up to a unique isomorphism; thus one speaks of "the" Clifford

Clifford algebra
113
algebra Cℓ(V, Q). It also follows from this construction that i is injective. One usually drops
the i and considers V as a linear subspace of Cℓ(V,Q).
The universal characterization of the Clifford algebra shows that the construction of
Cℓ(V,Q) is functorial in nature. Namely, Cℓ can be considered as a functor from the
category of vector spaces with quadratic forms (whose morphisms are linear maps
preserving the quadratic form) to the category of associative algebras. The universal
property guarantees that linear maps between vector spaces (preserving the quadratic
form) extend uniquely to algebra homomorphisms between the associated Clifford algebras.
Basis and dimension
If the dimension of V is n and {e1,…,en} is a basis of V, then the set
is a basis for Cℓ(V,Q). The empty product (k = 0) is defined as the multiplicative identity
element. For each value of k there are n choose k basis elements, so the total dimension of
the Clifford algebra is
Since V comes equipped with a quadratic form, there is a set of privileged bases for V: the
orthogonal ones. An orthogonal basis is one such that
where <·,·> is the symmetric bilinear form associated to Q. The fundamental Clifford
identity implies that for an orthogonal basis
This makes manipulation of orthogonal basis vectors quite simple. Given a product
of distinct orthogonal basis vectors, one can put them into standard order by
including an overall sign corresponding to the number of flips needed to correctly order
them (i.e. the signature of the ordering permutation).
If the characteristic is not 2 then an orthogonal basis for V exists, and one can easily extend
the quadratic form on V to a quadratic form on all of Cℓ(V,Q) by requiring that distinct
elements 
are orthogonal to one another whenever the {ei}'s are orthogonal.
Additionally, one sets
.
The quadratic form on a scalar is just Q(λ) = λ2. Thus, orthogonal bases for V extend to
orthogonal bases for Cℓ(V,Q). The quadratic form defined in this way is actually
independent of the orthogonal basis chosen (a basis-independent formulation will be given
later).

Clifford algebra
114
Examples: real and complex Clifford algebras
The most important Clifford algebras are those over real and complex vector spaces
equipped with nondegenerate quadratic forms.
Every nondegenerate quadratic form on a finite-dimensional real vector space is equivalent
to the standard diagonal form:
where n = p + q is the dimension of the vector space. The pair of integers (p, q) is called
the signature of the quadratic form. The real vector space with this quadratic form is often
denoted Rp,q. The Clifford algebra on Rp,q is denoted Cℓp,q(R). The symbol Cℓn(R) means
either Cℓn,0(R) or Cℓ0,n(R) depending on whether the author prefers positive definite or
negative definite spaces.
A standard orthonormal basis {ei} for Rp,q consists of n = p + q mutually orthogonal
vectors, p of which have norm +1 and q of which have norm −1. The algebra Cℓp,q(R) will
therefore have p vectors which square to +1 and q vectors which square to −1.
Note that Cℓ0,0(R) is naturally isomorphic to R since there are no nonzero vectors. Cℓ0,1(R)
is a two-dimensional algebra generated by a single vector e1 which squares to −1, and
therefore is isomorphic to C, the field of complex numbers. The algebra Cℓ0,2(R) is a
four-dimensional algebra spanned by {1, e1, e2, e1e2}. The latter three elements square to
−1 and all anticommute, and so the algebra is isomorphic to the quaternions H. The next
algebra in the sequence is Cℓ0,3(R) is an 8-dimensional algebra isomorphic to the direct
sum H ⊕ H called split-biquaternions.
One can also study Clifford algebras on complex vector spaces. Every nondegenerate
quadratic form on a complex vector space is equivalent to the standard diagonal form
where n = dim V, so there is essentially only one Clifford algebra in each dimension. We
will denote the Clifford algebra on Cn with the standard quadratic form by Cℓn(C). One can
show that the algebra Cℓn(C) may be obtained as the complexification of the algebra
Cℓp,q(R) where n = p + q:
.
Here Q is the real quadratic form of signature (p,q). Note that the complexification does not
depend on the signature. The first few cases are not hard to compute. One finds that
Cℓ0(C) = C
Cℓ1(C) = C ⊕ C
Cℓ2(C) = M2(C)
where M2(C) denotes the algebra of 2×2 matrices over C.
It turns out that every one of the algebras Cℓp,q(R) and Cℓn(C) is isomorphic to a matrix
algebra over R, C, or H or to a direct sum of two such algebras. For a complete
classification of these algebras see classification of Clifford algebras.

Clifford algebra
115
Properties
Relation to the exterior algebra
Given a vector space V one can construct the exterior algebra Λ(V), whose definition is
independent of any quadratic form on V. It turns out that if F does not have characteristic 2
then there is a natural isomorphism between Λ(V) and Cℓ(V,Q) considered as vector spaces
(and there exists an isomorphism in characteristic two, which may not be natural). This is
an algebra isomorphism if and only if Q = 0. One can thus consider the Clifford algebra
Cℓ(V,Q) as an enrichment (or more precisely, a quantization, cf. the Introduction) of the
exterior algebra on V with a multiplication that depends on Q (one can still define the
exterior product independent of Q).
The easiest way to establish the isomorphism is to choose an orthogonal basis {ei} for V
and extend it to an orthogonal basis for Cℓ(V,Q) as described above. The map Cℓ(V,Q) →
Λ(V) is determined by
Note that this only works if the basis {ei} is orthogonal. One can show that this map is
independent of the choice of orthogonal basis and so gives a natural isomorphism.
If the characteristic of K is 0, one can also establish the isomorphism by antisymmetrizing.
Define functions fk : V × … × V → Cℓ(V,Q) by
where the sum is taken over the symmetric group on k elements. Since fk is alternating it
induces a unique linear map Λk(V) → Cℓ(V,Q). The direct sum of these maps gives a linear
map between Λ(V) and Cℓ(V,Q). This map can be shown to be a linear isomorphism, and it
is natural.
A more sophisticated way to view the relationship is to construct a filtration on Cℓ(V,Q).
Recall that the tensor algebra T(V) has a natural filtration: F0 ⊂ F1 ⊂ F2 ⊂ … where Fk
contains sums of tensors with rank ≤ k. Projecting this down to the Clifford algebra gives a
filtration on Cℓ(V,Q). The associated graded algebra
is naturally isomorphic to the exterior algebra Λ(V). Since the associated graded algebra of
a filtered algebra is always isomorphic to the filtered algebra as filtered vector spaces (by
choosing complements of Fk in Fk+1 for all k), this provides an isomorphism (although not a
natural one) in any characteristic, even two.

Clifford algebra
116
Grading
In the following, assume that the characteristic is not 2.[2]
Clifford algebras are Z2-graded algebra (also known as superalgebras). Indeed, the linear
map on V defined by 
(reflection through the origin) preserves the quadratic form Q
and so by the universal property of Clifford algebras extends to an algebra automorphism
α : Cℓ(V,Q) → Cℓ(V,Q).
Since α is an involution (i.e. it squares to the identity) one can decompose Cℓ(V,Q) into
positive and negative eigenspaces
where Cℓi(V,Q) = {x ∈ Cℓ(V,Q) | α(x) = (−1)ix}. Since α is an automorphism it follows that
where the superscripts are read modulo 2. This gives Cℓ(V,Q) the structure of a Z2-graded
algebra. The subspace Cℓ0(V,Q) forms a subalgebra of Cℓ(V,Q), called the even subalgebra.
The subspace Cℓ1(V,Q) is called the odd part of Cℓ(V,Q) (it is not a subalgebra). The
Z2-grading plays an important role in the analysis and application of Clifford algebras. The
automorphism α is called the main involution or grade involution.
Remark. In characteristic not 2 the underlying vector space of Cℓ(V,Q) inherits a Z-grading
from the canonical isomorphism with the underlying vector space of the exterior algebra
Λ(V). It is important to note, however, that this is a vector space grading only. That is,
Clifford multiplication does not respect the Z-grading, only the Z2-grading: for instance if
, then 
, but 
, not in 
. Happily, the
gradings are related in the natural way: Z2 = Z/2Z. Further, the Clifford algebra is
Z-filtered: 
. The degree of a Clifford number
usually refers to the degree in the Z-grading. Elements which are pure in the Z2-grading
are simply said to be even or odd.
The even subalgebra Cℓ0(V,Q) of a Clifford algebra is itself a Clifford algebra[3] . If V is the
orthogonal direct sum of a vector a of norm Q(a) and a subspace U, then Cℓ0(V,Q) is
isomorphic to Cℓ(U,−Q(a)Q), where −Q(a)Q is the form Q restricted to U and multiplied by
−Q(a). In particular over the reals this implies that
for q > 0, and
for p > 0.
In the negative-definite case this gives an inclusion Cℓ0,n−1(R) ⊂ Cℓ0, n(R) which extends
the sequence
R ⊂ C ⊂ H ⊂ H⊕H ⊂ …
Likewise, in the complex case, one can show that the even subalgebra of Cℓn(C) is
isomorphic to Cℓn−1(C).

Clifford algebra
117
Antiautomorphisms
In addition to the automorphism α, there are two antiautomorphisms which play an
important role in the analysis of Clifford algebras. Recall that the tensor algebra T(V) comes
with an antiautomorphism that reverses the order in all products:
Since the ideal IQ is invariant under this reversal, this operation descends to an
antiautomorphism of Cℓ(V,Q) called the transpose or reversal operation, denoted by xt. The
transpose is an antiautomorphism: 
. The transpose operation makes no use of
the Z2-grading so we define a second antiautomorphism by composing α and the transpose.
We call this operation Clifford conjugation denoted 
Of the two antiautomorphisms, the transpose is the more fundamental.[4]
Note that all of these operations are involutions. One can show that they act as ±1 on
elements which are pure in the Z-grading. In fact, all three operations depend only on the
degree modulo 4. That is, if x is pure with degree k then
where the signs are given by the following table:
k mod 4
0
1
2
3
+
−
+
−
(−1)k
+
+
−
−
(−1)k(k−1)/2
+
−
−
+
(−1)k(k+1)/2
The Clifford scalar product
When the characteristic is not 2 the quadratic form Q on V can be extended to a quadratic
form on all of Cℓ(V,Q) as explained earlier (which we also denoted by Q). A basis
independent definition is
where <a> denotes the scalar part of a (the grade 0 part in the Z-grading). One can show
that
where the vi are elements of V — this identity is not true for arbitrary elements of Cℓ(V,Q).
The associated symmetric bilinear form on Cℓ(V,Q) is given by
One can check that this reduces to the original bilinear form when restricted to V. The
bilinear form on all of Cℓ(V,Q) is nondegenerate if and only if it is nondegenerate on V.
It is not hard to verify that the transpose is the adjoint of left/right Clifford multiplication
with respect to this inner product. That is,
and

Clifford algebra
118
Structure of Clifford algebras
In this section we assume that the vector space V is finite dimensional and that the bilinear
form of Q is non-singular. A central simple algebra over K is a matrix algebra over a (finite
dimensional) division algebra with center K. For example, the central simple algebras over
the reals are matrix algebras over either the reals or the quaternions.
• If V has even dimension then Cℓ(V,Q) is a central simple algebra over K.
• If V has even dimension then Cℓ0(V,Q) is a central simple algebra over a quadratic
extension of K or a sum of two isomorphic central simple algebras over K.
• If V has odd dimension then Cℓ(V,Q) is a central simple algebra over a quadratic
extension of K or a sum of two isomorphic central simple algebras over K.
• If V has odd dimension then Cℓ0(V,Q) is a central simple algebra over K.
The structure of Clifford algebras can be worked out explicitly using the following result.
Suppose that U has even dimension and a non-singular bilinear form with discriminant d,
and suppose that V is another vector space with a quadratic form. The Clifford algebra of
U+V is isomorphic to the tensor product of the Clifford algebras of U and (−1)dim(U)/2dV,
which is the space V with its quadratic form multiplied by (−1)dim(U)/2d. Over the reals, this
implies in particular that
These formulas can be used to find the structure of all real Clifford algebras; see the
classification of Clifford algebras.
Notably, the Morita equivalence class of a Clifford algebra (its representation theory: the
equivalence class of the category of modules over it) depends only on the signature 
mod 8. This is an algebraic form of Bott periodicity.
The Clifford group Γ
In this section we assume that V is finite dimensional and the quadratic form Q is
nondegenerate.
The invertible elements of the Clifford algebra act on it by twisted conjugation: conjugation
by x maps 
.
The Clifford group Γ is defined to be the set of invertible elements x that stabilize vectors,
meaning that
for all v in V.
This formula also defines an action of the Clifford group on the vector space V that
preserves the norm Q, and so gives a homomorphism from the Clifford group to the
orthogonal group. The Clifford group contains all elements r of V of nonzero norm, and
these act on V by the corresponding reflections that take v to v − <v,r>r/Q(r) (In
characteristic 2 these are called orthogonal transvections rather than reflections.)
The Clifford group Γ is the disjoint union of two subsets Γ0 and Γ1, where Γi is the subset of
elements of degree i. The subset Γ0 is a subgroup of index 2 in Γ.

Clifford algebra
119
If V is a finite dimensional real vector space with positive definite (or negative definite)
quadratic form then the Clifford group maps onto the orthogonal group of V with respect to
the form (by the Cartan-Dieudonné theorem) and the kernel consists of the nonzero
elements of the field K. This leads to exact sequences
Over other fields or with indefinite forms, the map is not in general onto, and the failure is
captured by the spinor norm.
Spinor norm
In arbitrary characteristic, the spinor norm Q is defined on the Clifford group by
It is a homomorphism from the Clifford group to the group K* of non-zero elements of K. It
coincides with the quadratic form Q of V when V is identified with a subspace of the Clifford
algebra. Several authors define the spinor norm slightly differently, so that it differs from
the one here by a factor of −1, 2, or −2 on Γ1. The difference is not very important in
characteristic other than 2.
The nonzero elements of K have spinor norm in the group K*2 of squares of nonzero
elements of the field K. So when V is finite dimensional and non-singular we get an induced
map from the orthogonal group of V to the group K*/K*2, also called the spinor norm. The
spinor norm of the reflection of a vector r has image Q(r) in K*/K*2, and this property
uniquely defines it on the orthogonal group. This gives exact sequences:
Note that in characteristic 2 the group {±1} has just one element.
From the point of view of Galois cohomology of algebraic groups, the spinor norm is a
connecting homomorphism on cohomology. Writing μ2 for the algebraic group of square
roots of 1 (over a field of characteristic not 2 it is roughly the same as a two-element group
with trivial Galois action), the short exact sequence
yields a long exact sequence on cohomology, which begins
The 0th Galois cohomology group of an algebraic group with coefficients in K is just the
group of K-valued points: 
, and 
, which recovers
the previous sequence
where the spinor norm is the connecting homomorphism 

Clifford algebra
120
Spin and Pin groups
In this section we assume that V is finite dimensional and its bilinear form is non-singular.
(If K has characteristic 2 this implies that the dimension of V is even.)
The Pin group PinV(K) is the subgroup of the Clifford group Γ of elements of spinor norm 1,
and similarly the Spin group SpinV(K) is the subgroup of elements of Dickson invariant 0 in
PinV(K). When the characteristic is not 2, these are the elements of determinant 1. The Spin
group usually has index 2 in the Pin group.
Recall from the previous section that there is a homomorphism from the Clifford group onto
the orthogonal group. We define the special orthogonal group to be the image of Γ0. If K
does not have characteristic 2 this is just the group of elements of the orthogonal group of
determinant 1. If K does have characteristic 2, then all elements of the orthogonal group
have determinant 1, and the special orthogonal group is the set of elements of Dickson
invariant 0.
There is a homomorphism from the Pin group to the orthogonal group. The image consists
of the elements of spinor norm 1 ∈ K*/K*2. The kernel consists of the elements +1 and −1,
and has order 2 unless K has characteristic 2. Similarly there is a homomorphism from the
Spin group to the special orthogonal group of V.
In the common case when V is a positive or negative definite space over the reals, the spin
group maps onto the special orthogonal group, and is simply connected when V has
dimension at least 3. Further the kernel of this homomorphism consists of 1 and -1.So in
this case the spin group, Spin(n), is a double cover of SO(n). Please note, however, that the
simple connectedness of the spin group is not true in general: if V is Rp,q for p and q both at
least 2 then the spin group is not simply connected. In this case the algebraic group Spinp,q
is simply connected as an algebraic group, even though its group of real valued points
Spinp,q(R) is not simply connected. This is a rather subtle point, which completely confused
the authors of at least one standard book about spin groups.
Spinors
Clifford algebras Cℓp,q(C), with p+q=2n even, are matrix algebras which have a complex
representation of dimension 2n. By restricting to the group Pinp,q(R) we get a complex
representation of the Pin group of the same dimension, called the spin representation. If we
restrict this to the spin group Spinp,q(R) then it splits as the sum of two half spin
representations (or Weyl representations) of dimension 2n-1.
If p+q=2n+1 is odd then the Clifford algebra Cℓp,q(C) is a sum of two matrix algebras, each
of which has a representation of dimension 2n, and these are also both representations of
the Pin group Pinp,q(R). On restriction to the spin group Spinp,q(R) these become
isomorphic, so the spin group has a complex spinor representation of dimension 2n.
More generally, spinor groups and pin groups over any field have similar representations
whose exact structure depends on the structure of the corresponding Clifford algebras:
whenever a Clifford algebra has a factor that is a matrix algebra over some division
algebra, we get a corresponding representation of the pin and spin groups over that
division algebra. For examples over the reals see the article on spinors.

Clifford algebra
121
Real spinors
To describe the real spin representations, one must know how the spin group sits inside its
Clifford algebra. The Pin group, Pinp,q is the set of invertible elements in Clp,q which can be
written as a product of unit vectors:
Comparing with the above concrete realizations of the Clifford algebras, the Pin group
corresponds to the products of arbitrarily many reflections: it is a cover of the full
orthogonal group O(p,q). The Spin group consists of those elements of Pinp,q which are
products of an even number of unit vectors. Thus by the Cartan-Dieudonné theorem Spin is
a cover of the group of proper rotations SO(p,q).
Let α : Cℓ → Cℓ be the automorphism which is given by -Id acting on pure vectors. Then in
particular, Spinp,q is the subgroup of Pinp,q whose elements are fixed by α. Let
(These are precisely the elements of even degree in Cℓp,q.) Then the spin group lies within
Cℓ0
p,q.
The irreducible representations of Cℓp,q restrict to give representations of the pin group.
Conversely, since the pin group is generated by unit vectors, all of its irreducible
representation are induced in this manner. Thus the two representations coincide. For the
same reasons, the irreducible representations of the spin coincide with the irreducible
representations of Cℓ0
p,q
To classify the pin representations, one need only appeal to the classification of Clifford
algebras. To find the spin representations (which are representations of the even
subalgebra), one can first make use of either of the isomorphisms (see above)
Cℓ0
p,q ≈ Cℓp,q-1, for q > 0
Cℓ0
p,q ≈ Cℓq,p-1, for p > 0
and realize a spin representation in signature (p,q) as a pin representation in either
signature (p,q-1) or (q,p-1).
Applications
Differential geometry
One of the principal applications of the exterior algebra is in differential geometry where it
is used to define the bundle of differential forms on a smooth manifold. In the case of a
(pseudo-)Riemannian manifold, the tangent spaces come equipped with a natural quadratic
form induced by the metric. Thus, one can define a Clifford bundle in analogy with the
exterior bundle. This has a number of important applications in Riemannian geometry.
Perhaps more importantly is the link to a spin manifold, its associated spinor bundle and
spinc manifolds.

Clifford algebra
122
Physics
Clifford algebras have numerous important applications in physics. Physicists usually
consider a Clifford algebra to be an algebra spanned by matrices γ1,…,γn called Dirac
matrices which have the property that
where η is the matrix of a quadratic form of signature (p,q) — typically (1,3) when working
in Minkowski space. These are exactly the defining relations for the Clifford algebra
Cl1,3(C) (up to an unimportant factor of 2), which by the classification of Clifford algebras is
isomorphic to the algebra of 4 by 4 complex matrices.
The Dirac matrices were first written down by Paul Dirac when he was trying to write a
relativistic first-order wave equation for the electron, and give an explicit isomorphism from
the Clifford algebra to the algebra of complex matrices. The result was used to define the
Dirac equation and introduce the Dirac operator. The entire Clifford algebra shows up in
quantum field theory in the form of Dirac field bilinears.
Computer Vision
Recently, Clifford algebras have been applied in the problem of action recognition and
classification in computer vision. Rodriguez et al. [5] propose a Clifford embedding to
generalize traditional MACH ﬁlters to video (3D spatiotemporal volume), and vector-valued
data such as optical flow. Vector-valued data is analyzed using the Clifford Fourier
transform. Based on these vectors action filters are synthesized in the Clifford Fourier
domain and recognition of actions is performed using Clifford Correlation. The authors
demonstrate the effectiveness of the Clifford embedding by recognizing actions typically
performed in classic feature ﬁlms and sports broadcast television.
See also
• Algebra of physical space, APS
• Classification of Clifford algebras
• Clifford module
• Gamma matrices
• Exterior algebra
• Geometric algebra
• Spin group
• Spinor
• Paravector
• Cayley-Dickson algebra
• spinor bundle
• Dirac operator
• Clifford analysis
• spin structure
• quaternion
• octonion
• complex spin structure

Clifford algebra
123
Footnotes
[1] Mathematicians who work with real Clifford algebras and prefer positive definite quadratic forms (especially
those working in index theory) sometimes use a different choice of sign in the fundamental Clifford identity.
That is, they take v2 = −Q(v). One must replace Q with −Q in going from one convention to the other.
[2] Thus the group algebra K[Z/2] is semisimple and the Clifford algebra splits into eigenspaces of the main
involution.
[3] We are still assuming that the characteristic is not 2.
[4] The opposite is true when uses the alternate (−) sign convention for Clifford algebras: it is the conjugate which
is more important. In general, the meanings of conjugation and transpose are interchanged when passing from
one sign convention to the other. For example, in the convention used here the inverse of a vector is given by
while in the (−) convention it is given by 
.
[5] Rodriguez, Mikel; Shah, M (2008). "Action MACH: A Spatio-Temporal Maximum Average Correlation Height
Filter for Action Classification". Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
References
• Bourbaki, Nicolas (1988), Algebra, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN
978-3-540-19373-9, section XI.9.
• Carnahan, S. Borcherds Seminar Notes, Uncut. Week 5, "Spinors and Clifford Algebras".
• Lawson, H. Blaine; Michelsohn, Marie-Louise (1989), Spin Geometry, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-08542-5. An advanced textbook on Clifford
algebras and their applications to differential geometry.
• Lounesto, Pertti (2001), Clifford algebras and spinors, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, ISBN 978-0-521-00551-7
• Porteous, Ian R. (1995), Clifford algebras and the classical groups, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-55177-9
External links
• Planetmath entry on Clifford algebras (http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/
CliffordAlgebra2. html)
• A history of Clifford algebras (http:/ / members. fortunecity. com/ jonhays/ clifhistory.
htm) (unverified)
• John Baez on Clifford algebras (http:/ / www. math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/ octonions/
node6. html)

Von Neumann algebra
124
Von Neumann algebra
In mathematics, a von Neumann algebra or W*-algebra is a *-algebra of bounded
operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the
identity operator. They were originally introduced by John von Neumann, motivated by the
study of single operators, group representations, ergodic theory and quantum mechanics.
His double commutant theorem shows that the analytic definition is equivalent to a purely
algebraic definition as an algebra of symmetries.
Two basic examples of von Neumann algebras are as follows. The ring L∞(R) of essentially
bounded measurable functions on the real line is a commutative von Neumann algebra,
which acts by pointwise multiplication on the Hilbert space L2(R) of square integrable
functions. The algebra B(H) of all bounded operators on a Hilbert space H is a von
Neumann algebra, non-commutative if the Hilbert space has dimension at least 2.
Von Neumann algebras were first studied by von Neumann (1929); he and Francis Murray
developed the basic theory, under the original name of rings of operators, in a series of
papers written in the 1930s and 1940s (F.J. Murray & J. von Neumann 1936, 1937, 1943;
J. von Neumann 1938, 1940, 1943, 1949), reprinted in the collected works of von Neumann
(1961).
Introductory accounts of von Neumann algebras are given in the online notes of Jones
(2003) and Wassermann (1991) and the books by Dixmier (1981), Schwartz (1967),
Blackadar (2005) and Sakai (1971). The three volume work by Takesaki (1979) gives an
encyclopedic account of the theory. The book by Connes (1994) discusses more advanced
topics.
Definitions
There are three common ways to define von Neumann algebras.
The first and most common way is to define them as weakly closed * algebras of bounded
operators (on a Hilbert space) containing the identity. In this definition the weak (operator)
topology can be replaced by almost any common topology other than the norm topology (a
notable exception is the Banach space weak topology), in particular by the strong,
ultrastrong or ultraweak operator topologies. The *-algebras of bounded operators that are
closed in the norm topology are C*-algebras, so in particular any von Neumann algebra is a
C*-algebra.
The second definition is that a von Neumann algebra is a subset of the bounded operators
closed under * and equal to its double commutant, or equivalently the commutant of some
subset closed under *. The von Neumann double commutant theorem (von Neumann 1929)
says that the first two definitions are equivalent.
The first two definitions describe a von Neumann algebras concretely as a set of operators 
acting on some given Hilbert space. Sakai (1971) showed that von Neumann algebras can 
also be defined abstractly as C*-algebras that have a predual; in other words the von 
Neumann algebra, considered as a Banach space, is the dual of some other Banach space 
called the predual. The predual of a von Neumann algebra is in fact unique up to 
isomorphism. Some authors use "von Neumann algebra" for the algebras together with a 
Hilbert space action, and "W*-algebra" for the abstract concept, so a von Neumann algebra 
is a W*-algebra together with a Hilbert space and a suitable faithful unital action on the

Von Neumann algebra
125
Hilbert space. The concrete and abstract definitions of a von Neumann algebra are similar
to the concrete and abstract definitions of a C*-algebra, which can be defined either as
norm-closed * algebras of operators on a Hilbert space, or as Banach *-algebras such that
||a a*||=||a|| ||a*||.
Terminology
Some of the terminology in von Neumann algebra theory can be confusing, and the terms
often have different meanings outside the subject.
• A factor is a von Neumann algebra with trivial center, i.e. a center consisting only of
scalar operators.
• A finite von Neumann algebra is one which is the direct integral of finite factors.
Similarly, properly infinite von Neumann algebras are the direct integral of properly
infinite factors.
• A von Neumann algebra that acts on a separable Hilbert space is called separable. Note
that such algebras are rarely separable in the norm topology.
• The von Neumann algebra generated by a set of bounded operators on a Hilbert space is
the smallest von Neumann algebra containing all those operators.
• The tensor product of two von Neumann algebras acting on two Hilbert spaces is
defined to be the von Neumann algebra generated by their algebraic tensor product,
considered as operators on the Hilbert space tensor product of the Hilbert spaces.
Commutative von Neumann algebras
Main article: Abelian von Neumann algebra
The relationship between commutative von Neumann algebras and measure spaces is
analogous to that between commutative C*-algebras and locally compact Hausdorff spaces.
Every commutative von Neumann algebra is isomorphic to L∞(X) for some measure space
(X, μ) and conversely, for every σ-finite measure space X, the * algebra L∞(X) is a von
Neumann algebra.
Due to this analogy, the theory of von Neumann algebras has been called noncommutative
measure theory, while the theory of C*-algebras is sometimes called noncommutative
topology.
Projections
Operators E in a von Neumann algebra for which E = EE = E* are called projections; they
are exactly the operators which give an orthogonal projection of H onto some closed
subspace. A subspace of the Hilbert space H is said to belong to the von Neumann algebra
M if it is the image of some projection in M. Informally these are the closed subspaces that
can be described using elements of M, or that M "knows" about. The closure of the image of
any operator in M, or the kernel of any operator in M belong to M, and the closure of the
image of any subspace belonging to M under an operator of M also belongs to M. There is a
1:1 correspondence between projections of M and subspaces that belong to it.
The basic theory of projections was worked out by Murray & von Neumann (1936). Two 
subspaces belonging to M are called (Murray-von Neumann) equivalent if there is a 
partial isometry mapping the first isomorphically onto the other that is an element of the 
von Neumann algebra (informally, if M "knows" that the subspaces are isomorphic). This

Von Neumann algebra
126
induces a natural equivalence relation on projections by defining E to be equivalent to F if
the corresponding subspaces are equivalent, or in other words if there is a partial isometry
of H that maps the image of E isometrically to the image of F and is an element of the von
Neumann algebra. Another way of stating this is that E is equivalent to F if E=uu* and
F=u*u for some partial isometry u in M.
The equivalence relation ~ thus defined is additive in the following sense: Suppose E1 ~ F1
and E2 ~ F2. If E1 ⊥ E2 and F1 ⊥ F2, then E1 + E2 ~ F1 + F2. This is not true in general if one
requires unitary equivalence in the definition of ~, i.e. if we say E is equivalent to F if u*Eu
= F for some unitary u. .
The subspaces belonging to M are partially ordered by inclusion, and this induces a partial
order ≤ of projections. There is also a natural partial order on the set of equivalence classes
of projections, induced by the partial order ≤ of projections. If M is a factor, ≤ is a total
order on equivalence classes of projections, described in the section on traces below.
A projection (or subspace belonging to M) E is said to be finite if there is no projection F <
E that is equivalent to E. For example, all finite-dimensional projections (or subspaces) are
finite (since isometries between Hilbert spaces leave the dimension fixed), but the identity
operator on an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space is not finite in the von Neumann algebra
of all bounded operators on it, since it is isometrically isomorphic to a proper subset of
itself. However it is possible for infinite dimensional subspaces to be finite.
Orthogonal projections are noncommutative analogues of indicator functions in L∞(R).
L∞(R) is the ||·||∞-closure of the subspace generated by the indicator functions. Similarly, a
von Neumann algebra is generated by its projections; this is a consequence of the spectral
theorem for self-adjoint operators.
Factors
A von Neumann algebra N whose center consists only of multiples of the identity operator
is called a factor. von Neumann (1949) showed that every von Neumann algebra on a
separable Hilbert space is isomorphic to a direct integral of factors. This decomposition is
essentially unique. Thus, the problem of classifying isomorphism classes of von Neumann
algebras on separable Hilbert spaces can be reduced to that of classifying isomorphism
classes of factors.
Murray & von Neumann (1936) showed that every factor has one of 3 types as described
below. The type classification can be extended to von Neumann algebras that are not
factors, and a von Neumann algebra is of type X if it can be decomposed as a direct integral
of type X factors; for example, every commutative von Neumann algebra has type I1. Every
von Neumann algebra can be written uniquely as a sum of von Neumann algebras of types
I, II, and III.
There are several other ways to divide factors into classes that are sometimes used:
• A factor is called discrete (or occasionally tame) if it has type I, and continuous (or
occasionally wild) if it has type II or III.
• A factor is called semifinite if it has type I or II, and purely infinite if it has type III.
• A factor is called finite if the projection 1 is finite and properly infinite otherwise.
Factors of types I and II may be either finite or properly infinite, but factors of type III
are always properly infinite.

Von Neumann algebra
127
Type I factors
A factor is said to be of type I if there is a minimal projection E ≠ 0, i.e. a projection E such
that there is no other projection F with 0 < F < E. Any factor of type I is isomorphic to the
von Neumann algebra of all bounded operators on some Hilbert space; since there is one
Hilbert space for every cardinal number, isomorphism classes of factors of type I
correspond exactly to the cardinal numbers. Since many authors consider von Neumann
algebras only on separable Hilbert spaces, it is customary to call the bounded operators on
a Hilbert space of finite dimension n a factor of type In, and the bounded operators on a
separable infinite-dimensional Hilbert space, a factor of type I∞.
Type II factors
A factor is said to be of type II if there are no minimal projections but there are non-zero
finite projections. This implies that every projection E can be halved in the sense that there
are equivalent projections F and G such that E = F + G. If the identity operator in a type II
factor is finite, the factor is said to be of type II1; otherwise, it is said to be of type II∞. The
best understood factors of type II are the hyperfinite type II1 factor and the hyperfinite type
II∞ factor, found by Murray & von Neumann (1936). These are the unique hyperfinite
factors of types II1 and II∞; there are an uncountable number of other factors of these types
that are the subject of intensive study. Murray & von Neumann (1937) proved the
fundamental result that a factor of type II1 has a unique finite tracial state, and the set of
traces of projections is [0,1].
A factor of type II∞ has a semifinite trace, unique up to rescaling, and the set of traces of
projections is [0,∞]. The set of real numbers λ such that there is an automorphism rescaling
the trace by a factor of λ is called the fundamental group of the type II∞ factor.
The tensor product of a factor of type II1 and an infinite type I factor has type II∞, and
conversely any factor of type II∞ can be constructed like this. The fundamental group of a
type II1 factor is defined to be the fundamental group of its tensor product with the infinite
(separable) factor of type I. For many years it was an open problem to find a type II factor
whose fundamental group was not the group of all positive reals, but Connes then showed
that the von Neumann group algebra of a countable discrete group with Kazhdan's property
T (the trivial representation is isolated in the dual space), such as SL3(Z), has a countable
fundamental group. Subsequently Sorin Popa showed that the fundamental group can be
trivial for certain groups, including the semidirect product of Z2 by SL2(Z).
An example of a type II1 factor is the von Neumann group algebra of a countable infinite
discrete group such that every non-trivial conjugacy class is infinite. McDuff (1969) found
an uncountable family of such groups with non-isomorphic von Neumann group algebras,
thus showing the existence of uncountably many different separable type II1 factors.
Type III factors
Lastly, type III factors are factors that do not contain any nonzero finite projections at all. 
In their first paper Murray & von Neumann (1936) were unable decide whether or not they 
existed; the first examples were later found by von Neumann (1940). Since the identity 
operator is always infinite in those factors, they were sometimes called type III∞ in the past, 
but recently that notation has been superseded by the notation IIIλ, where λ is a real 
number in the interval [0,1]. More precisely, if the Connes spectrum (of its modular group) 
is 1 then the factor is of type III0, if the Connes spectrum is all integral powers of λ for

Von Neumann algebra
128
0<λ<1, then the type is IIIλ, and if the Connes spectrum is all positive reals then the type is
III1. (The Connes spectrum is a closed subgroup of the positive reals, so these are the only
possibilities.) The only trace on type III factors takes value ∞ on all non-zero positive
elements, and any two non-zero projections are equivalent. At one time type III factors were
considered to be intractable objects, but Tomita-Takesaki theory has led to a good structure
theory. In particular, any type III factor can be written in a canonical way as the crossed
product of a type II∞ factor and the real numbers.
The predual
Any von Neumann algebra M has a predual M*, which is the Banach space of all
ultraweakly continuous linear functionals on M. As the name suggests, M is (as a Banach
space) the dual of its predual. The predual is unique in the sense that any other Banach
space whose dual is M is canonically isomorphic to M*. Sakai (1971) showed that the
existence of a predual characterizes von Neumann algebras among C* algebras.
The definition of the predual given above seems to depend on the choice of Hilbert space
that M acts on, as this determines the ultraweak topology. However the predual can also be
defined without using the Hilbert space that M acts on, by defining it to be the space
generated by all positive normal linear functionals on M. (Here "normal" means that it
preserves suprema when applied to increasing nets of self adjoint operators; or equivalently
to increasing sequences of projections.)
The predual M* is a closed subspace of the dual M* (which consists of all norm-continuous
linear functionals on M) but is generally smaller. The proof that M* is (usually) not the same
as M* is nonconstructive and uses the axiom of choice in an essential way; it is very hard to
exhibit explicit elements of M* that are not in M*. For example, exotic positive linear forms
on the von Neumann algebra l∞ (Z) are given by free ultrafilters; they correspond to exotic
*-homomorphisms into C and describe the Stone-Cech compactification of Z.
Examples:
1. The predual of the von Neumann algebra L∞(R) of essentially bounded functions on R is
the Banach space L1(R) of integrable functions.
2. The predual of the von Neumann algebra B(H) of bounded operators on a Hilbert space
H is the Banach space of all trace class operators with the trace norm ||A||= Tr(|A|). The
Banach space of trace class operators is itself the dual of the C*-algebra of compact
operators (which is not a von Neumann algebra).
Weights, states, and traces
Weights and their special cases states and traces are discussed in detail in (Takesaki 1979).
• A weight ω on a von Neumann algebra is a linear map from the set of positive elements
(those of the form a*a) to [0,∞].
• A positive linear functional is a weight with ω(1) finite (or rather the extension of ω to
the whole algebra by linearity).
• A state is a weight with ω(1)=1.
• A trace is a weight with ω(aa*)=ω(a*a) for all a.
• A tracial state is a trace with ω(1)=1.

Von Neumann algebra
129
Any factor has a trace such that the trace of a non-zero projection is non-zero and the trace
of a projection is infinite if and only if the projection is infinite. Such a trace is unique up to
rescaling. For factors that are separable or finite, two projections are equivalent if and only
if they have the same trace. The type of a factor can be read off from the possible values of
this trace as follows:
• Type In: 0, x, 2x, ....,nx for some positive x (usually normalized to be 1/n or 1).
• Type I∞: 0, x, 2x, ....,∞ for some positive x (usually normalized to be 1).
• Type II1: [0,x] for some positive x (usually normalized to be 1).
• Type II∞: [0,∞].
• Type III: 0,∞
If a von Neumann algebra acts on a Hilbert space containing a norm 1 vector v, then the
functional a → (av,v) is a normal state. This construction can be reversed to give an action
on a Hilbert space from a normal state: this is the GNS construction for normal states.
Modules over a factor
Given an abstract separable factor, one can ask for a classification its modules, meaning the
separable Hilbert spaces that it acts on. The answer is given as follows: every such module
H can be given an M-dimension dimM(H) (not its dimension as a complex vector space) such
that modules are isomorphic if and only if they have the same dimension. The M-dimension
is additive, and a module is isomorphic to a subspace of another module if and only if it has
smaller or equal M-dimension.
A module is called standard if it has a cyclic separating vector. Each factor has a standard
representation, which is unique up to isomorphism. The standard representation has an
antilinear involution J such that JMJ = M′. For finite factors the standard module is given
by the GNS construction applied to the unique normal tracial state and the M-dimension is
normalized so that the standard module has M-dimension 1, while for infinite factors the
standard module is the module with M-dimension equal to ∞.
The possible M-dimensions of modules are given as follows:
• Type In (n finite): The M-dimension can be any of 0/n, 1/n, 2/n, 3/n, ..., ∞. The standard
module has M-dimension 1 (and complex dimension n2.)
• Type I∞ The M-dimension can be any of 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., ∞. The standard representation of
B(H) is H⊗H; its M-dimension is ∞.
• Type II1: The M-dimension can be anything in [0, ∞]. It is normalized so that the standard
module has M-dimension 1. The M-dimension is also called the coupling constant of the
module H.
• Type II∞: The M-dimension can be anything in [0, ∞]. There is in general no canonical
way to normalize it; the factor may have outer automorphisms multiplying the
M-dimension by constants. The standard representation is the one with M-dimension ∞.
• Type III: The M-dimension can be 0 or ∞. Any two non-zero modules are isomorphic, and
all non-zero modules are standard.

Von Neumann algebra
130
Amenable von Neumann algebras
Connes (1976) and others proved that the following conditions on a von Neumann algebra
M on a separable Hilbert space H are all equivalent:
• M is hyperfinite or AFD or approximately finite dimensional or approximately
finite: this means the algebra contains an ascending sequence of finite dimensional
subalgebras with dense union. (Warning: some authors use "hyperfinite" to mean "AFD
and finite".)
• M is amenable: this means that the derivations of M with values in a normal dual
Banach bimodule are all inner.
• M has Schwartz's property P: for any bounded operator T on H the weak operator closed
convex hull of the elements uTu* contains an element commuting with M.
• M is semidiscrete: this means the identity map from M to M is a weak pointwise limit of
completely positive maps of finite rank.
• M has property E or the Hakeda-Tomiyama extension property: this means that
there is a projection of norm 1 from bounded operators on H to M '.
• M is injective: any completely positive linear map from any self adjoint closed subspace
containing 1 of any unital C*-algebra A to M can be extended to a completely positive
map from A to M.
There is no generally accepted term for the class of algebras above; Connes has suggested
that amenable should be the standard term.
The amenable factors have been classified: there is a unique one of each of the types In, I∞,
II1, II∞, IIIλ, for 0<λ≤ 1, and the ones of type III0 correspond to certain ergodic flows. (For
type III0 calling this a classification is a little misleading, as it is known that there is no easy
way to classify the corresponding ergodic flows.) The ones of type I and II1 were classified
by Murray & von Neumann (1943), and the remaining ones were classified by Connes
(1976), except for the type III0 case which was completed by Haagerup.
All amenable factors can be constructed using the group-measure space construction of
Murray and von Neumann for a single ergodic transformation. In fact they are precisely the
factors arising as crossed products by free ergodic actions of Z or Zn on abelian von
Neumann algebras L∞(X). Type I factors occur when the measure space X is atomic and the
action transitive. When X is diffuse or non-atomic, it is equivalent to [0,1] as a measure
space. Type II factors occur when X admits an equivalent finite (II1) or infinite (II∞,)
measure, invariant under 
. Type III factors occur in the remaining cases where there is
no invariant measure, but only an invariant measure class: these factors are called Krieger
factors.
Tensor products of von Neumann algebras
The Hilbert space tensor product of two Hilbert spaces is the completion of their algebraic 
tensor product. One can define a tensor product of von Neumann algebras (a completion of 
the algebraic tensor product of the algebras considered as rings), which is again a von 
Neumann algebra, and act on the tensor product of the corresponding Hilbert spaces. The 
tensor product of two finite algebras is finite, and the tensor product of an infinite algebra 
and a non-zero algebra is infinite. The type of the tensor product of two von Neumann 
algebras (I, II, or III) is the maximum of their types. The commutation theorem for

Von Neumann algebra
131
tensor products states that
(where M′ denotes the commutant of M).
The tensor product of an infinite number of von Neumann algebras, if done naively, is
usually a ridiculously large non-separable algebra. Instead von Neumann (1938) showed
that one should choose a state on each of the von Neumann algebras, use this to define a
state on the algebraic tensor product, which can be used to product a Hilbert space and a
(reasonably small) von Neumann algebra. Araki & Woods (1968) studied the case where all
the factors are finite matrix algebras; these factors are called Araki-Woods factors or
ITPFI factors (ITPFI stands for "infinite tensor product of finite type I factors"). The type
of the infinite tensor product can vary dramatically as the states are changed; for example,
the infinite tensor product of an infinite number of type I2 factors can have any type
depending on the choice of states. In particular Powers (1967) found an uncountable family
of non-isomorphic hyperfinite type IIIλ factors for 0<λ<1, called Powers factors, by taking
an infinite tensor product of type I2 factors, each with the state given by :
All hyperfinite von Neumann algebras not of type III0 are isomorphic to Araki-Woods
factors, but there are uncountably many of type III0 that are not.
Bimodules and subfactors
A bimodule (or correspondence) is a Hilbert space H with module actions of two
commuting von Neumann algebras. Bimodules have a much richer structure than that of
modules. Any bimodule over two factors always gives a subfactor since one of the factors is
always contained in the commutant of the other. There is also a subtle relative tensor
product operation due to Connes on bimodules. The theory of subfactors, initiated by
Vaughan Jones, reconciles these two seemingly different points of view.
Bimodules are also important for the von Neumann group algebra M of a discrete group 
.
Indeed if V is any unitary representation of 
, then, regarding 
as the diagonal subgroup
of 
x 
, the corresponding induced representation on l2 ( 
,V) is naturally a bimodule
for two commuting copies of M. Important representation theoretic properties of 
can be
formulated entirely in terms of bimodules and therefore make sense for the von Neumann
algebra itself. For example Connes and Jones gave a definition of an analogue of Kazhdan's
Property T for von Neumann algebras in this way.
Non-amenable factors
von Neumann algebras of type I are always amenable, but for the other types there are an 
uncountable number of different non-amenable factors, which seem very hard to classify, or 
even distinguish from each other. Nevertheless Voiculescu has shown that the class of 
non-amenable factors coming from the group-measure space construction is disjoint from 
the class coming from group von Neumann algebras of free groups. Later Narutaka Ozawa 
proved that group von Neumann algebras of hyperbolic groups yield prime type II1 factors, 
i.e. ones that cannot be factored as tensor products of type II1 factors, a result first proved 
by Leeming Ge for free group factors using Voiculescu's free entropy. Popa's work on 
fundamental groups of non-amenable factors represents another significant advance. The

Von Neumann algebra
132
theory of factors "beyond the hyperfinite" is rapidly expanding at present, with many new
and surprising results; it has close links with rigidity phenomena in geometric group theory
and ergodic theory.
Examples
• The essentially bounded functions on a σ-finite measure space form a commutative (type
I1) von Neumann algebra acting on the L2 functions. For certain non-σ-finite measure
spaces, usually considered pathological, L∞(X) is not a von Neumann algebra; for
example, the σ-algebra of measurable sets might be the countable-cocountable algebra
on an uncountable set.
• The bounded operators on any Hilbert space form a von Neumann algebra, indeed a
factor, of type I.
• If we have any unitary representation of a group G on a Hilbert space H then the
bounded operators commuting with G form a von Neumann algebra G′, whose
projections correspond exactly to the closed subspaces of H invariant under G.
Equivalent subrepresentations correspond to equivalent projections in G′. The double
commutant G′′ of G is also a von Neumann algebra.
• The von Neumann group algebra of a discrete group G is the algebra of all bounded
operators on H = l2(G) commuting with the action of G on H through right multiplication.
One can show that this is the von Neumann algebra generated by the operators
corresponding to multiplication from the left with an element g ∈ G. It is a factor (of type
II1) if every non-trivial conjugacy class of G is infinite (for example, a non-abelian free
group), and is the hyperfinite factor of type II1 if in addition G is a union of finite
subgroups (for example, the group of all permutations of the integers fixing all but a
finite number of elements).
• The tensor product of two von Neumann algebras, or of a countable number with states,
is a von Neumann algebra as described in the section above.
• The crossed product of a von Neumann algebra by a discrete (or more generally locally
compact) group can be defined, and is a von Neumann algebra. Special cases are the
group-measure space construction of Murray and von Neumann and Krieger
factors.
• The von Neumann algebras of a measurable equivalence relation and a measurable
groupoid can be defined. These examples generalise von Neumann group algebras and
the group-measure space construction.
See also
• By forgetting about the topology on a von Neumann algebra, we can consider it a (unital)
*-algebra, or just a ring. Von Neumann algebras are semihereditary: every finitely
generated submodule of a projective module is itself projective. There have been several
attempts to axiomatize the underlying rings of von Neumann algebras, including Baer
*-rings and AW* algebras.
• The *-algebra of affiliated operators of a finite von Neumann algebra is a von Neumann
regular ring. (The von Neumann algebra itself is in general not von Neumann regular.)
• Von Neumann algebras have found applications in diverse areas of mathematics like knot 
theory, statistical mechanics, Quantum field theory, Local quantum physics, Free

Von Neumann algebra
133
probability, Noncommutative geometry, representation theory, geometry, and
probability.
References
• Araki, H.; Woods, E. J. (1968), "A classification of factors", Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. Ser.
A 4: 51–130, doi:10.2977/prims/1195195263 [1]MR0244773 [2]
• Blackadar, B. (2005), Operator algebras, Springer, ISBN 3-540-28486-9
• Connes, A. (1976),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(197607)2:104:1<73:COIFC>2.0.CO;2-V|Classification
of Injective Factors", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 104 (1): 73–115, http:/ / links.
jstor. org/ sici?sici=0003-486X%28197607%292%3A104%3A1%3C73%3ACOIFC%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-V
• Connes, A. (1994), Non-commutative geometry, Academic Press, ISBN 0-12-185860-X,
ftp:/ / ftp. alainconnes. org/ book94bigpdf. pdf.
• Dixmier, J. (1981), Von Neumann algebras, ISBN 0-444-86308-7 (A translation of
Dixmier, J. (1957), Les algèbres d'opérateurs dans l'espace hilbertien: algèbres de von
Neumann, Gauthier-Villars, the first book about von Neumann algebras.)
• Jones, V.F.R. (2003), http://math.berkeley.edu/~vfr/VonNeumann.pdf|von Neumann
algebras, http:/ / math. berkeley. edu/ ~vfr/ VonNeumann. pdf; incomplete notes from a
course.
• McDuff, Dusa (1969),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(196909)2:90:2<372:UMIF>2.0.CO;2-C|Uncountably
many II<sub>1</sub> factors", Ann of Math. 90: 372–377, doi:10.2307/1970730 [3],
http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28196909%292%3A90%3A2%3C372%3AUMIF%3E2. 0. CO%3B2-C
• Murray, F. J., "The rings of operators papers", The legacy of John von Neumann
(Hempstead, NY, 1988), Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., 50, Amer. Math. Soc., pp. 57–60,
ISBN 0-8218-4219-6 A historical account of the discovery of von Neumann algebras.
• Murray, F.J.; von Neumann, J. (1936),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(193601)2:37:1<116:OROO>2.0.CO;2-Y|On
rings of operators", Ann. Of Math. (2) 37: 116–229, doi:10.2307/1968693 [4], http:/ / links.
jstor. org/ sici?sici=0003-486X%28193601%292%3A37%3A1%3C116%3AOROO%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-Y. This paper gives their basic properties and the division into types I, II, and
III, and in particular finds factors not of type I.
• Murray, F.J.; von Neumann, J. (1937),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9947(193703)41:2<208:OROOI>2.0.CO;2-9|On rings
of operators II", Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 41: 208–248, doi:10.2307/1989620 [5], http:/ /
links. jstor. org/ sici?sici=0002-9947%28193703%2941%3A2%3C208%3AOROOI%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-9. This is a continuation of the previous paper, that studies properties of the
trace of a factor.
• Murray, F.J.; von Neumann, J. (1943),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(194310)2:44:4<716:OROOI>2.0.CO;2-O|On
rings of operators IV", Ann. Of Math. (2) 44: 716–808, doi:10.2307/1969107 [6], http:/ /
links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28194310%292%3A44%3A4%3C716%3AOROOI%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-O. This studies when factors are isomorphic, and in particular shows that all
approximately finite factors of type II1 are isomorphic.

Von Neumann algebra
134
• Powers, Robert T. (1967),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(196707)2:86:1<138:ROUHAA>2.0.CO;2-6|Representations
of Uniformly Hyperfinite Algebras and Their Associated von Neumann Rings", The Annals
of Mathematics, 2nd Ser. 86 (1): 138–171, http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28196707%292%3A86%3A1%3C138%3AROUHAA%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-6
• Sakai, S. (1971), C*-algebras and W*-algebras, Springer, ISBN 3-540-63633-1
• Schwartz, Jacob (1967), W-* Algebras, ISBN 0-677-00670-5
• Shtern, A.I. (2001), http://eom.springer.de/V/v096900.htm|"von Neumann algebra", in
Hazewinkel, Michiel, Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN
978-1556080104
• Takesaki, M. (1979), Theory of Operator Algebras I, II, III, ISBN 3-540-42248-X ISBN
3-540-42914-X ISBN 3-540-42913-1
• von Neumann, J. (1929), "Zur Algebra der Funktionaloperationen und Theorie der
normalen Operatoren", Math. Ann. 102: 370–427, doi:10.1007/BF01782352 [7]. The
original paper on von Neumann algebras.
• von Neumann, J. (1936),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(193601)2:37:1<111:OACTFR>2.0.CO;2-S|On a
Certain Topology for Rings of Operators", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 37 (1):
111–115, http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28193601%292%3A37%3A1%3C111%3AOACTFR%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-S. This defines the ultrastrong topology.
• von Neumann, J. (1938), "http://www.numdam.org/item?id=CM_1939__6__1_0|On infinite
direct products", Compos. Math. 6: 1–77, http:/ / www. numdam. org/
item?id=CM_1939__6__1_0. This discusses infinite tensor products of Hilbert spaces and
the algebras acting on them.
• von Neumann, J. (1940),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(194001)2:41:1<94:OROOI>2.0.CO;2-U|On
rings of operators III", Ann. Of Math. (2) 41: 94–161, doi:10.2307/1968823 [8], http:/ /
links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28194001%292%3A41%3A1%3C94%3AOROOI%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-U. This shows the existence of factors of type III.
• von Neumann, J. (1943),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(194310)2:44:4<709:OSAPOO>2.0.CO;2-L|On
Some Algebraical Properties of Operator Rings", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 44
(4): 709–715, http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28194310%292%3A44%3A4%3C709%3AOSAPOO%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-L. This shows that some apparently topological properties in von Neumann
algebras can be defined purely algebraically.
• von Neumann, J. (1949),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(194904)2:50:2<401:OROORT>2.0.CO;2-H|On
Rings of Operators. Reduction Theory", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 50 (2):
401–485, http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28194904%292%3A50%3A2%3C401%3AOROORT%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-H. This discusses how to write a von Neumann algebra as a sum or integral of
factors.

Von Neumann algebra
135
• von Neumann, John (1961), Taub, A.H., ed., Collected Works, Volume III: Rings of
Operators, NY: Pergamon Press. Reprints von Neumann's papers on von Neumann
algebras.
• Wassermann, A. J. (1991), http://iml.univ-mrs.fr/~wasserm/OHS.ps|Operators on Hilbert
space, http:/ / iml. univ-mrs. fr/ ~wasserm/ OHS. ps
References
[1] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2977%2Fprims%2F1195195263
[2] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0244773
[3] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1970730
[4] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1968693
[5] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1989620
[6] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1969107
[7] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF01782352
[8] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1968823
C*- algebra
C*-algebras (pronounced "C-star") are an important area of research in functional analysis,
a branch of mathematics. The prototypical example of a C*-algebra is a complex algebra A
of linear operators on a complex Hilbert space with two additional properties:
• A is a topologically closed set in the norm topology of operators.
• A is closed under the operation of taking adjoints of operators.
It is generally believed that C*-algebras were first considered primarily for their use in
quantum mechanics to model algebras of physical observables. This line of research began
in an extremely rudimentary form with Werner Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and in a
more mathematically developed form with Pascual Jordan around 1933. Subsequently John
von Neumann attempted to establish a general framework for these algebras which
culminated in a series of papers on rings of operators. These papers considered a special
class of C*-algebras which are now known as von Neumann algebras.
Around 1943, the work of Israel Gelfand, Mark Naimark and Irving Segal yielded an
abstract characterisation of C*-algebras making no reference to operators.
C*-algebras are now an important tool in the theory of unitary representations of locally
compact groups, and are also used in algebraic formulations of quantum mechanics.
Abstract characterization
We begin with the abstract characterization of C*-algebras given in the 1943 paper by
Gel'fand and Naimark.
A C*-algebra, A, is a Banach algebra over the field of complex numbers, together with a
map, * : A → A, called involution. The image of an element x of A under involution is written
x*. Involution has the following properties:
• For all x, y in A:
• For every λ in C and every x in A:

C*- algebra
136
• For all x in A
• The C*–identity holds for all x in A:
Note that the C* identity is equivalent to: for all x in A:
Thus any C*-algebra is automatically a Banach*-algebra. However, not every
Banach*-algebra is a C*-algebra.
The C*-identity is a very strong requirement. For instance, together with the spectral radius
formula, it implies the C*-norm is uniquely determined by the algebraic structure:
is not invertible 
A bounded linear map, π : A → B, between C*-algebras A and B is called a
*-homomorphism if
• For x and y in A
• For x in A
In the case of C*-algebras, any *-homomorphism π between C*-algebras is non-expansive,
i.e. bounded with norm ≤ 1. Furthermore, an injective *-homomorphism between
C*-algebras is isometric. These are consequences of the C*-identity.
A bijective *-homomorphism π is called a C*-isomorphism, in which case A and B are said
to be isomorphic.
Examples
Finite-dimensional C*-algebras
The algebra Mn(C) of n-by-n matrices over C becomes a C*-algebra if we consider matrices
as operators on the Euclidean space, Cn, and use the operator norm ||.|| on matrices. The
involution is given by the conjugate transpose. More generally, one can consider finite
direct sums of matrix algebras. In fact, all finite dimensional C*-algebras are of this form.
The self-adjoint requirement means finite-dimensional C*-algebras are semisimple, from
which fact one can deduce the following theorem of Artin–Wedderburn type:
Theorem. A finite-dimensional C*-algebra, A, is canonically isomorphic to a finite direct
sum
where min A is the set of minimal nonzero self-adjoint central projections of A.
Each C*-algebra, Ae, is isomorphic (in a noncanonical way) to the full matrix algebra
Mdim(e)(C). The finite family indexed on min A given by {dim(e)}e is called the dimension
vector of A. This vector uniquely determines the isomorphism class of a finite-dimensional
C*-algebra.

C*- algebra
137
C*-algebras of operators
The prototypical example of a C*-algebra is the algebra B(H) of bounded (equivalently
continuous) linear operators defined on a complex Hilbert space H; here x* denotes the
adjoint operator of the operator x : H → H. In fact, every C*-algebra, A, is *-isomorphic to a
norm-closed adjoint closed subalgebra of B(H) for a suitable Hilbert space, H; this is the
content of the Gelfand–Naimark theorem.
Commutative C*-algebras
Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space. The space C0(X) of complex-valued continuous
functions on X that vanish at infinity (defined in the article on local compactness) form a
commutative C*-algebra C0(X) under pointwise multiplication and addition. The involution
is pointwise conjugation. C0(X) has a multiplicative unit element if and only if X is compact.
As does any C*-algebra, C0(X) has an approximate identity. In the case of C0(X) this is
immediate: consider the directed set of compact subsets of X, and for each compact K let fK
be a function of compact support which is identically 1 on K. Such functions exist by the
Tietze extension theorem which applies to locally compact Hausdorff spaces. {fK}K is an
approximate identity.
The Gelfand representation states that every commutative C*-algebra is *-isomorphic to the
algebra C0(X), where X is the space of characters equipped with the weak* topology.
Furthermore if C0(X) is isomorphic to C0(Y) as C*-algebras, it follows that X and Y are
homeomorphic. This characterization is one of the motivations for the noncommutative
topology and noncommutative geometry programs.
C*-algebras of compact operators
Let H be a separable infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. The algebra K(H) of compact
operators on H is a norm closed subalgebra of B(H). It is also closed under involution;
hence it is a C*-algebra.
Concrete C*-algebras of compact operators admit a characterization similar to
Wedderburn's theorem for finite dimensional C*-algebras.
Theorem. If A is a C*-subalgebra of K(H), then there exists Hilbert spaces {Hi}i ∈ I such
that A is isomorphic to the following direct sum
where the (C*-)direct sum consists of elements (Ti) of the Cartesian product Π K(Hi) with
||Ti|| → 0.
Though K(H) does not have an identity element, a sequential approximate identity for K(H)
can be easily displayed. To be specific, H is isomorphic to the space of square summable
sequences l2; we may assume that
For each natural number n let Hn be the subspace of sequences of l2 which vanish for
indices
and let

C*- algebra
138
be the orthogonal projection onto Hn. The sequence {en}n is an approximate identity for
K(H).
K(H) is a two-sided closed ideal of B(H). For separable Hilbert spaces, it is the unique ideal.
The quotient of B(H) by K(H) is the Calkin algebra.
C*-enveloping algebra
Given a B*-algebra A with an approximate identity, there is a unique (up to C*-isomorphism)
C*-algebra E(A) and *-morphism π from A into E(A) which is universal, that is, every other
B*-morphism π ' : A → B factors uniquely through π. The algebra E(A) is called the
C*-enveloping algebra of the B*-algebra A.
Of particular importance is the C*-algebra of a locally compact group G. This is defined as
the enveloping C*-algebra of the group algebra of G. The C*-algebra of G provides context
for general harmonic analysis of G in the case G is non-abelian. In particular, the dual of a
locally compact group is defined to be the primitive ideal space of the group C*-algebra.
See spectrum of a C*-algebra.
A complete locally m-convex *algebra A is a topological *algebra that is an inverse limit of
Banach *-algebras. In representation theory of these algebras, the enveloping algebra of A
provides a solution of the universal problem for continuous *representations of A into
bounded Hilbert space operators. This corresponds to the construction of the enveloping
C*-algebra of a Banach *-algebra.[1]
von Neumann algebras
von Neumann algebras, known as W* algebras before the 1960s, are a special kind of
C*-algebra. They are required to be closed in the weak operator topology, which is weaker
than the norm topology. Their study is a specialized area of functional analysis.
Properties of C*-algebras
C*-algebras have a large number of properties that are technically convenient. These
properties can be established by use the continuous functional calculus or by reduction to
commutative C*-algebras. In the latter case, we can use the fact that the structure of these
is completely determined by the Gelfand isomorphism.
• The set of elements of a C*-algebra A of the form x*x forms a closed convex cone. This
cone is identical to the elements of the form x x*. Elements of this cone are called
non-negative (or sometimes positive, even though this terminology conflicts with its use
for elements of R.)
• The set of self-adjoint elements of a C*-algebra A naturally has the structure of a partially
ordered vector space; the ordering is usually denoted ≥. In this ordering, a self-adjoint
element x of A satisfies x ≥ 0 if and only if the spectrum of x is non-negative. Two
self-adjoint elements x and y of A satisfy x ≥ y if x - y ≥ 0.
• Any C*-algebra A has an approximate identity. In fact, there is a directed family {eλ}λ ∈ I
of self-adjoint elements of A such that

C*- algebra
139
In case A is separable, A has a sequential approximate identity. More generally, A will
have a sequential approximate identity if and only if A contains a strictly positive
element, i.e. a positive element h such that hAh is dense in A.
• Using approximate identities, one can show that the algebraic quotient of a C*-algebra by
a closed proper two-sided ideal, with the natural norm, is a C*-algebra.
• Similarly, a closed two-sided ideal of a C*-algebra is itself a C*-algebra.
Type for C*-algebras
A C*-algebra A is of type I if and only if for all non-degenerate representations π of A the
von Neumann algebra π(A)′′ (that is, the bicommutant of π(A)) is a type I von Neumann
algebra. In fact it is sufficient to consider only factor representations, i.e. representations π
for which π(A)′′ is a factor.
A locally compact group is said to be of type I if and only if its group C*-algebra is type I.
However, if a C*-algebra has non-type I representations, then by results of James Glimm it
also has representations of type II and type III. Thus for C*-algebras and locally compact
groups, it is only meaningful to speak of type I and non type I properties.
C*-algebras and quantum field theory
In quantum field theory, one typically describes a physical system with a C*-algebra A with
unit element; the self-adjoint elements of A (elements x with x* = x) are thought of as the
observables, the measurable quantities, of the system. A state of the system is defined as a
positive functional on A (a C-linear map φ : A → C with φ(u u*) > 0 for all u∈A) such that
φ(1) = 1. The expected value of the observable x, if the system is in state φ, is then φ(x).
See Local quantum physics.
See also
• algebra
• associative algebra
• * algebra
• Hilbert C*-module
• K-theory
References
[1] Proc. Indian Academy Sci. Vol 102 No 3 December 1992 pp 201-215
• W. Arveson, An Invitation to C*-Algebra, Springer-Verlag, 1976. ISBN 0387901760. An
excellent introduction to the subject, accessible for those with a knowledge of basic
functional analysis.
• A. Connes, Non-commutative geometry (http:/ / www. alainconnes. org/ docs/
book94bigpdf. pdf), ISBN 0-12-185860-X. This book is widely regarded as a source of new
research material, providing much supporting intuition, but it is difficult.
• J. Dixmier, Les C*-algèbres et leurs représentations, Gauthier-Villars, 1969. ISBN
0720407621. This is a somewhat dated reference, but is still considered as a high-quality
technical exposition. It is available in English from North Holland press.

C*- algebra
140
• G. Emch, Algebraic Methods in Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Field Theory,
Wiley-Interscience, 1972. ISBN 0471239003. Mathematically rigorous reference which
provides extensive physics background.
• A.I. Shtern (2001), http://eom.springer.de/c/c020020.htm|"C* algebra", in Hazewinkel,
Michiel, Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN
978-1556080104
• S. Sakai, C*-algebras and W*-algebras , Springer (1971) ISBN 3-540-63633-1
Jones polynomial
In the mathematical field of knot theory, the Jones polynomial is a knot polynomial
discovered by Vaughan Jones in 1983. Specifically, it is an invariant of an oriented knot or
link which assigns to each oriented knot or link a Laurent polynomial in the variable 
with integer coefficients.
Definition by the bracket
Suppose we have an oriented link 
, given as a knot diagram. We will define the Jones
polynomial, 
, using Kauffman's bracket polynomial, which we denote by 
. Note
that here the bracket polynomial is a Laurent polynomial in the variable 
with integer
coefficients.
First, we define the auxiliary polynomial (also known as the normalized bracket polynomial)
, where 
denotes the writhe of 
in its given diagram. The
writhe of a diagram is the number of positive crossings ( 
in the figure below) minus the
number of negative crossings ( 
). The writhe is not a knot invariant.
is a knot invariant since it is invariant under changes of the diagram of 
by the
three Reidemeister moves. Invariance under type II and III Reidemeister moves follows
from invariance of the bracket under those moves. The bracket polynomial is known to
change by multiplication by 
under a type I Reidemeister move. The definition of the
polynomial given above is designed to nullify this change, since the writhe changes
appropriately by +1 or -1 under type I moves.
Now make the substitution 
in 
to get the Jones polynomial 
. This
results in a Laurent polynomial with integer coefficients in the variable 
.
Definition by braid representation
Jones' original formulation of his polynomial came from his study of operator algebras. In
Jones' approach, it resulted from a kind of "trace" of a particular braid representation into
an algebra which originally arose while studying certain models, e.g. the Potts model, in
statistical mechanics.
Let a link L be given. A theorem of Alexander's states that it is the trace closure of a braid,
say with n strands. Now define a representation 
of the braid group on n strands, Bn, into
the Temperley-Lieb algebra TLn with coefficients in 
and 
. A
standard braid generator 
gets sent to 
, where 
are the
standard generators of the Temperley-Lieb algebra. It can be checked easily that this
defines a representation.

Jones polynomial
141
Take the braid word 
obtained previously from L and compute 
where tr is the
Markov trace. This gives 
, where < > is the bracket polynomial. This can be seen by
considering, as Kauffman did, the Temperley-Lieb algebra as a particular diagram algebra.
An advantage of this approach is that one can pick similar representations into other
algebras, such as the R-matrix representations, leading to "generalized Jones invariants".
Properties
The Jones polynomial is characterized by the fact that it takes the value 1 on any diagram of
the unknot and satisfies the following skein relation:
where 
, 
, and 
are three oriented link diagrams that are identical except in one
small region where they differ by the crossing changes or smoothing shown in the figure
below:
The definition of the Jones polynomial by the bracket makes it simple to show that for a
knot 
, the Jones polynomial of its mirror image is given by substitution of 
for 
in
. Thus, an amphicheiral knot, a knot equivalent to its mirror image, has
palindromic entries in its Jones polynomial. See the article on skein relation for an example
of a computation using these relations.
Link with Chern-Simons theory
As first shown by Edward Witten, the Jones polynomial of a given knot γ, can be obtained by
considering Chern-Simons theory on the three-sphere with gauge group SU(2), and
computing the vacuum expectation value of a Wilson loop WF(γ), associated to γ, and the
fundamental representation F of SU(2).
Open problems
• Is there a nontrivial knot with Jones polynomial equal to that of the unknot? It is known
that there are nontrivial links with Jones polynomial equal to that of the corresponding
unlinks by the work of Morwen Thistlethwaite.

Jones polynomial
142
See also
• HOMFLY polynomial
• Khovanov homology
References
• Vaughan Jones, The Jones Polynomial [1]
• Colin Adams, The Knot Book, American Mathematical Society, ISBN 0-8050-7380-9
• Louis H. Kauffman, State models and the Jones polynomial. Topology 26 (1987), no. 3,
395--407. (explains the definition by bracket polynomial and its relation to Jones'
formulation by braid representation)
• W. B. R. Lickorish, An introduction to knot theory. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 175.
Springer-Verlag, New York, (1997). ISBN 0-387-98254-X
• Morwen Thistlethwaite, Links with trivial Jones polynomial. J. Knot Theory Ramifications
10 (2001), no. 4, 641–643.
• Eliahou, Shalom; Kauffman, Louis H.;Thistlethwaite, Morwen B. Infinite families of links
with trivial Jones polynomial, Topology 42 (2003), no. 1, 155–169.
External links
• Links with trivial Jones polynomial [2] by Morwen Thistlethwaite
References
[1] http:/ / math. berkeley. edu/ ~vfr/ jones. pdf
[2] http:/ / www. math. uic. edu/ ~kauffman/ tj. pdf

Subfactor
143
Subfactor
In the theory of von Neumann algebras, a subfactor of a factor M is a subalgebra that is a
factor and contains 1. The theory of subfactors led to the discovery of the Jones polynomial
in knot theory.
Index of a subfactor
Usually M is taken to be a factor of type II1, so that it has a finite trace. In this case every
Hilbert space module H has a dimension dimM(H) which is a non-negative real number or
+∞. The index [M:N] of a subfactor N is defined to be dimN(L2(M)). Here L2(M) is the
representation of N obtained from the GNS construction of the trace of M.
The Jones index theorem
This states that if N is a subfactor of M (both of type II1) then the index [M:N] is either of
the form 4 cos(π/n)2 for n = 3,4,5,..., or is at least 4. All these values occur.
The first few values of 4 cos(π/n)2 are 1, 2, (3+√5)/2=2.618..., 3, 3.247..., ...
The basic construction
Suppose that N is a subfactor of M, and that both are finite von Neumann algebras. The
GNS construction produces a Hilbert space L2(M) acted on by M with a cyclic vector Ω. Let
eN be the projection onto the subspace NΩ. Then M and eN generate a new von Neumann
algebra <M, eN> acting on L2(M), containing M as a subfactor. The passage from the
inclusion of N in M to the inclusion of M in <M, eN> is called the basic construction.
If N and M are both factors of type II1 and N has finite index in M then <M, eN> is also of
type II1. Moreover the inclusions have the same index: [M:N] = [<M, eN> :M], and tr<M,
eN>(eN) = 1/[M:N].
The tower
Suppose that M-1⊆M0 is an inclusion of type II1 factors of finite index. By iterating the basic
construction we get a tower of inclusions
M-1⊆M0⊆M1⊆M2...
where each Mn+1=<Mn, en+1> is generated by the previous algebra and a projection. The
union of all these algebras has a tracial state tr whose restriction to each Mn is the tracial
state, and so the closure of the union is another type II1 von Neumann algebra M∞.
The algebra M∞ contains a sequence of projections e1,e2, e3,..., which satisfy the
Temperley-Lieb relations at parameter λ=1/[M:N]. Moreover, the algebra generated by the
en is a C*-algebra in which the en are self-adjoint, and such that tr(xen)=λtr(x) when x is in
the algebra generated by e1 up to en-1. Whenever these extra conditions are satisfied, the
algebra is called a Temperly-Lieb-Jones algebra at parameter λ. It can be shown to be
unique up to *-isomorphism. It exists only when λ takes on those special values 4 cos(π/n)2
for n = 3,4,5,..., or the values larger than 4.

Subfactor
144
Principal graphs
A subfactor of finite index N 
 M is said to be irreducible is either of the following
equivalent conditions are satisfied
• L2(M) is irreducible as an (N, M) bimodule;
• the relative commutant N ' 
 M is C.
In this case L2(M) defines an (N, M) bimodule X as well as its conjugate (M, N) bimodule X*.
The relative tensor product, described in Jones (1983) and often called Connes fusion
after a prior definition for general von Neumann algebras of Alain Connes, can be used to
define new bimodules over (N, M), (M, N), (M, M) and (N, N) by decomposing the following
tensor products into irreducible components:
The irreducible (M, M) and (M, N) bimodules arising in this way form the vertices of the
principal graph, a bipartite graph. The directed edges of these graphs describe the way an
irreducible bimodule decomposes when tensored with X and X* on the right. The dual
principal graph is defined in a similar way using (N, N) and (N, M) bimodules.
Since any bimodule corresponds to the commuting actions of two factors, each factor is
contained in the commutant of the other and therefore defines a subfactor. When the
bimodule is irreducible, its dimension is defined to be the square root of the index of this
subfactor. The dimension is extended additively to direct sums of irreducible bimodules. It
is multiplicative with respect to Connes fusion.
The subfactor is said to have finite depth if the principal graph and its dual are finite, i.e.
if only finitely many irreducible bimodules occur in these decompositions. In this case if M
and N are hyperfinite, Sorin Popa showed that the inclusion N 
 M is isomorphic to the
model
where the II1 factors are obtained from the GNS construction with respect to the canonical
trace.
Knot polynomials
The algebra generated by the elements en with the relations above is called the
Temperley-Lieb algebra. This is a quotient of the group algebra of the braid group, so
representations of the Temperley-Lieb algebra give representations of the braid group,
which in turn often given invariants for knots.
References
• Jones, V.F.R. (1983),
"http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/no_cache/dms/load/img/?IDDOC=175031|Index for
subfactors", Invent. Math. 72: 1–25, doi:10.1007/BF01389127 [1], http:/ / gdz. sub.
uni-goettingen. de/ no_cache/ dms/ load/ img/ ?IDDOC=175031
• Wenzl, H.G. (1988),
"http://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/no_cache/dms/load/img/?IDDOC=179061|Hecke
algebras of type A<sub>n</sub> and subfactors", Invent. Math. 92: 349–383,
doi:10.1007/BF01404457 [2], http:/ / gdz. sub. uni-goettingen. de/ no_cache/ dms/ load/
img/ ?IDDOC=179061

Subfactor
145
• V. Jones, V. S. Sunder, Introduction to subfactors, ISBN 0-521-58420-5
• Theory of Operator Algebras III by M. Takesaki ISBN 3-540-42913-1
• A. J. Wassermann, Operators on Hilbert space [3]
References
[1] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF01389127
[2] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF01404457
[3] http:/ / iml. univ-mrs. fr/ ~wasserm/ OHS. ps
Quantum logic
In quantum mechanics, quantum logic is a set of rules for reasoning about propositions
which takes the principles of quantum theory into account. This research area and its name
originated in the 1936 paper by Garrett Birkhoff and John von Neumann, who were
attempting to reconcile the apparent inconsistency of classical boolean logic with the facts
concerning the measurement of complementary variables in quantum mechanics, such as
position and momentum.
Quantum logic can be formulated either as a modified version of propositional logic or as a
non-commutative and non-associative many-valued (MV) logic[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . It has some
properties which clearly distinguish it from classical logic, most notably, the failure of the
distributive law of propositional logic:
p and (q or r) = (p and q) or (p and r),
where the symbols p, q and r are propositional variables. To illustrate why the distributive
law fails, consider a particle moving on a line and let
p = "the particle is moving to the right"
q = "the particle is in the interval [-1,1]"
r = "the particle is not in the interval [-1,1]"
then the proposition "q or r" is true, so
p and (q or r) = p
On the other hand, the propositions "p and q" and "p and r" are both false, since they assert
tighter restrictions on simultaneous values of position and momentum than is allowed by
the uncertainty principle. So,
(p and q) or (p and r) = false
Thus the distributive law fails.
Quantum logic has been proposed as the correct logic for propositional inference generally,
most notably by the philosopher Hilary Putnam, at least at one point in his career. This
thesis was an important ingredient in Putnam's paper Is Logic Empirical? in which he
analysed the epistemological status of the rules of propositional logic. Putnam attributes
the idea that anomalies associated to quantum measurements originate with anomalies in
the logic of physics itself to the physicist David Finkelstein. It should be noted, however,
that this idea had been around for some time and had been revived several years earlier by
George Mackey's work on group representations and symmetry.
The more common view regarding quantum logic, however, is that it provides a formalism 
for relating observables, system preparation filters and states. In this view, the quantum

Quantum logic
146
logic approach resembles more closely the C*-algebraic approach to quantum mechanics; in
fact with some minor technical assumptions it can be subsumed by it. The similarities of the
quantum logic formalism to a system of deductive logic may then be regarded more as a
curiosity than as a fact of fundamental philosophical importance.
Introduction
In his classic treatise Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, John von
Neumann noted that projections on a Hilbert space can be viewed as propositions about
physical observables. The set of principles for manipulating these quantum propositions
was called quantum logic by von Neumann and Birkhoff. In his book (also called
Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics) G. Mackey attempted to provide a set of
axioms for this propositional system as an orthocomplemented lattice. Mackey viewed
elements of this set as potential yes or no questions an observer might ask about the state
of a physical system, questions that would be settled by some measurement. Moreover
Mackey defined a physical observable in terms of these basic questions. Mackey's axiom
system is somewhat unsatisfactory though, since it assumes that the partially ordered set is
actually given as the orthocomplemented closed subspace lattice of a separable Hilbert
space. Piron, Ludwig and others have attempted to give axiomatizations which do not
require such explicit relations to the lattice of subspaces.
The remainder of this article assumes the reader is familiar with the spectral theory of
self-adjoint operators on a Hilbert space. However, the main ideas can be understood using
the finite-dimensional spectral theorem.
Projections as propositions
The so-called Hamiltonian formulations of classical mechanics have three ingredients:
states, observables and dynamics. In the simplest case of a single particle moving in R3, the
state space is the position-momentum space R6. We will merely note here that an
observable is some real-valued function f on the state space. Examples of observables are
position, momentum or energy of a particle. For classical systems, the value f(x), that is the
value of f for some particular system state x, is obtained by a process of measurement of f.
The propositions concerning a classical system are generated from basic statements of the
form
• Measurement of f yields a value in the interval [a, b] for some real numbers a, b.
It follows easily from this characterization of propositions in classical systems that the
corresponding logic is identical to that of some Boolean algebra of subsets of the state
space. By logic in this context we mean the rules that relate set operations and ordering
relations, such as de Morgan's laws. These are analogous to the rules relating boolean
conjunctives and material implication in classical propositional logic. For technical reasons,
we will also assume that the algebra of subsets of the state space is that of all Borel sets.
The set of propositions is ordered by the natural ordering of sets and has a
complementation operation. In terms of observables, the complement of the proposition {f
≥ a} is {f < a}.
We summarize these remarks as follows:
• The proposition system of a classical system is a lattice with a distinguished 
orthocomplementation operation: The lattice operations of meet and join are respectively

Quantum logic
147
set intersection and set union. The orthocomplementation operation is set complement.
Moreover this lattice is sequentially complete, in the sense that any sequence {Ei}i of
elements of the lattice has a least upper bound, specifically the set-theoretic union:
In the Hilbert space formulation of quantum mechanics as presented by von Neumann, a
physical observable is represented by some (possibly unbounded) densely-defined
self-adjoint operator A on a Hilbert space H. A has a spectral decomposition, which is a
projection-valued measure E defined on the Borel subsets of R. In particular, for any
bounded Borel function f, the following equation holds:
In case f is the indicator function of an interval [a, b], the operator f(A) is a self-adjoint
projection, and can be interpreted as the quantum analogue of the classical proposition
• Measurement of A yields a value in the interval [a, b].
The propositional lattice of a quantum mechanical system
This suggests the following quantum mechanical replacement for the orthocomplemented
lattice of propositions in classical mechanics. This is essentially Mackey's Axiom VII:
• The orthocomplemented lattice Q of propositions of a quantum mechanical system is the
lattice of closed subspaces of a complex Hilbert space H where orthocomplementation of
V is the orthogonal complement V⊥.
Q is also sequentially complete: any pairwise disjoint sequence{Vi}i of elements of Q has a
least upper bound. Here disjointness of W1 and W2 means W2 is a subspace of W1
⊥. The
least upper bound of {Vi}i is the closed internal direct sum.
Henceforth we identify elements of Q with self-adjoint projections on the Hilbert space H.
The structure of Q immediately points to a difference with the partial order structure of a
classical proposition system. In the classical case, given a proposition p, the equations
have exactly one solution, namely the set-theoretic complement of p. In these equations I
refers to the atomic proposition which is identically true and 0 the atomic proposition which
is identically false. In the case of the lattice of projections there are infinitely many
solutions to the above equations.
Having made these preliminary remarks, we turn everything around and attempt to define
observables within the projection lattice framework and using this definition establish the
correspondence between self-adjoint operators and observables : A Mackey observable is a
countably additive homomorphism from the orthocomplemented lattice of the Borel subsets
of R to Q. To say the mapping φ is a countably additive homomorphism means that for any
sequence {Si}i of pairwise disjoint Borel subsets of R, {φ(Si)}i are pairwise orthogonal
projections and

Quantum logic
148
Theorem. There is a bijective correspondence between Mackey observables and
densely-defined self-adjoint operators on H.
This is the content of the spectral theorem as stated in terms of spectral measures.
Statistical structure
Imagine a forensics lab which has some apparatus to measure the speed of a bullet fired
from a gun. Under carefully controlled conditions of temperature, humidity, pressure and
so on the same gun is fired repeatedly and speed measurements taken. This produces some
distribution of speeds. Though we will not get exactly the same value for each individual
measurement, for each cluster of measurements, we would expect the experiment to lead to
the same distribution of speeds. In particular, we can expect to assign probability
distributions to propositions such as {a ≤ speed ≤ b}. This leads naturally to propose that
under controlled conditions of preparation, the measurement of a classical system can be
described by a probability measure on the state space. This same statistical structure is
also present in quantum mechanics.
A quantum probability measure is a function P defined on Q with values in [0,1] such that
P(0)=0, P(I)=1 and if {Ei}i is a sequence of pairwise orthogonal elements of Q then
The following highly non-trivial theorem is due to Andrew Gleason:
Theorem. Suppose H is a separable Hilbert space of complex dimension at least 3. Then for
any quantum probability measure on Q there exists a unique trace class operator S such
that
for any self-adjoint projection E.
The operator S is necessarily non-negative (that is all eigenvalues are non-negative) and of
trace 1. Such an operator is often called a density operator.
Physicists commonly regard a density operator as being represented by a (possibly infinite)
density matrix relative to some orthonormal basis.
For more information on statistics of quantum systems, see quantum statistical mechanics.
Automorphisms
An automorphism of Q is a bijective mapping α:Q → Q which preserves the
orthocomplemented structure of Q, that is
for any sequence {Ei}i of pairwise orthogonal self-adjoint projections. Note that this
property implies monotonicity of α. If P is a quantum probability measure on Q, then E →
α(E) is also a quantum probability measure on Q. By the Gleason theorem characterizing
quantum probability measures quoted above, any automorphism α induces a mapping α* on
the density operators by the following formula:

Quantum logic
149
The mapping α* is bijective and preserves convex combinations of density operators. This
means
whenever 1 = r1 + r2 and r1, r2 are non-negative real numbers. Now we use a theorem of
Richard Kadison:
Theorem. Suppose β is a bijective map from density operators to density operators which
is convexity preserving. Then there is an operator U on the Hilbert space which is either
linear or conjugate-linear, preserves the inner product and is such that
for every density operator S. In the first case we say U is unitary, in the second case U is
anti-unitary.
Remark. This note is included for technical accuracy only, and should not
concern most readers. The result quoted above is not directly stated in Kadison's
paper, but can be reduced to it by noting first that β extends to a positive trace
preserving map on the trace class operators, then applying duality and finally
applying a result of Kadison's paper.
The operator U is not quite unique; if r is a complex scalar of modulus 1, then r U will be
unitary or anti-unitary if U is and will implement the same automorphism. In fact, this is the
only ambiguity possible.
It follows that automorphisms of Q are in bijective correspondence to unitary or anti-unitary
operators modulo multiplication by scalars of modulus 1. Moreover, we can regard
automorphisms in two equivalent ways: as operating on states (represented as density
operators) or as operating on Q.
Non-relativistic dynamics
In non-relativistic physical systems, there is no ambiguity in referring to time evolution
since there is a global time parameter. Moreover an isolated quantum system evolves in a
deterministic way: if the system is in a state S at time t then at time s > t, the system is in a
state Fs,t(S). Moreover, we assume
• The dependence is reversible: The operators Fs,t are bijective.
• The dependence is homogeneous: Fs,t = Fs − t,0.
• The dependence is convexity preserving: That is, each Fs,t(S) is convexity preserving.
• The dependence is weakly continuous: The mapping R→ R given by t → Tr(Fs,t(S) E) is
continuous for every E in Q.
By Kadison's theorem, there is a 1-parameter family of unitary or anti-unitary operators
{Ut}t such that
In fact,
Theorem. Under the above assumptions, there is a strongly continuous 1-parameter group
of unitary operators {Ut}t such that the above equation holds.
Note that it easily from uniqueness from Kadison's theorem that

Quantum logic
150
where σ(t,s) has modulus 1. Now the square of an anti-unitary is a unitary, so that all the Ut
are unitary. The remainder of the argument shows that σ(t,s) can be chosen to be 1 (by
modifying each Ut by a scalar of modulus 1.)
Pure states
A convex combinations of statistical states S1 and S2 is a state of the form S = p1 S1 +p2 S2
where p1, p2 are non-negative and p1 + p2 =1. Considering the statistical state of system as
specified by lab conditions used for its preparation, the convex combination S can be
regarded as the state formed in the following way: toss a biased coin with outcome
probabilities p1, p2 and depending on outcome choose system prepared to S1 or S2
Density operators form a convex set. The convex set of density operators has extreme
points; these are the density operators given by a projection onto a one-dimensional space.
To see that any extreme point is such a projection, note that by the spectral theorem S can
be represented by a diagonal matrix; since S is non-negative all the entries are
non-negative and since S has trace 1, the diagonal entries must add up to 1. Now if it
happens that the diagonal matrix has more than one non-zero entry it is clear that we can
express it as a convex combination of other density operators.
The extreme points of the set of density operators are called pure states. If S is the
projection on the 1-dimensional space generated by a vector ψ of norm 1 then
for any E in Q. In physics jargon, if
where ψ has norm 1, then
Thus pure states can be identified with rays in the Hilbert space H.
The measurement process
Consider a quantum mechanical system with lattice Q which is in some statistical state
given by a density operator S. This essentially means an ensemble of systems specified by a
repeatable lab preparation process. The result of a cluster of measurements intended to
determine the truth value of proposition E, is just as in the classical case, a probability
distribution of truth values T and F. Say the probabilities are p for T and q = 1 - p for F. By
the previous section p = Tr(S E) and q = Tr(S (I-E)).
Perhaps the most fundamental difference between classical and quantum systems is the
following: regardless of what process is used to determine E immediately after the
measurement the system will be in one of two statistical states:
• If the result of the measurement is T
• If the result of the measurement is F
(We leave to the reader the handling of the degenerate cases in which the denominators 
may be 0.) We now form the convex combination of these two ensembles using the relative

Quantum logic
151
frequencies p and q. We thus obtain the result that the measurement process applied to a
statistical ensemble in state S yields another ensemble in statistical state:
We see that a pure ensemble becomes a mixed ensemble after measurement. Measurement,
as described above, is a special case of quantum operations.
Limitations
Quantum logic derived from propositional logic provides a satisfactory foundation for a
theory of reversible quantum processes. Examples of such processes are the covariance
transformations relating two frames of reference, such as change of time parameter or the
transformations of special relativity. Quantum logic also provides a satisfactory
understanding of density matrices. Quantum logic can be stretched to account for some
kinds of measurement processes corresponding to answering yes-no questions about the
state of a quantum system. However, for more general kinds of measurement operations
(that is quantum operations), a more complete theory of filtering processes is necessary.
Such an approach is provided by the consistent histories formalism. On the other hand,
quantum logics derived from MV-logic extend its range of applicability to irreversible
quantum processes and/or 'open' quantum systems.
In any case, these quantum logic formalisms must be generalized in order to deal with
super-geometry (which is needed to handle Fermi-fields) and non-commutative geometry
(which is needed in string theory and quantum gravity theory). Both of these theories use a
partial algebra with an "integral" or "trace". The elements of the partial algebra are not
observables; instead the "trace" yields "greens functions" which generate scattering
amplitudes. One thus obtains a local S-matrix theory (see D. Edwards).
Since around 1978 the Flato school ( see F. Bayen ) has been developing an alternative to
the quantum logics approach called deformation quantization (see Weyl quantization ).
In 2004, Prakash Panangaden described how to capture the kinematics of quantum causal
evolution using System BV, a deep inference logic originally developed for use in structural
proof theory.[6] Alessio Guglielmi, Lutz Straßburger, and Richard Blute have also done
work in this area.[7]
Cited references
[1] http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ quant-ph/ pdf/ 0101/ 0101028v2. pdf Maria Luisa Dalla Chiara and Roberto
Giuntini. 2008. Quantum Logic., 102 pages PDF
[2] Dalla Chiara, M. L. and Giuntini, R.: 1994, Unsharp quantum logics, Foundations of Physics,, 24, 1161–1177.
[3] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ QuantumLMAlgebraicLogic. html I. C. Baianu. 2009. Quantum LMn
Algebraic Logic.
[4] Georgescu, G. and C. Vraciu. 1970, On the characterization of centered Łukasiewicz algebras., J. Algebra, 16:
486-495.
[5] Georgescu, G. 2006, N-valued Logics and Łukasiewicz-Moisil Algebras, Axiomathes, 16 (1-2): 123-
[6] http:/ / cs. bath. ac. uk/ ag/ p/ BVQuantCausEvol. pdf
[7] http:/ / alessio. guglielmi. name/ res/ cos/ crt. html#CQE

Quantum logic
152
See also
• Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics
• Multi-valued logic
• Quasi-set theory
• HPO formalism (An approach to temporal quantum logic)
• Quantum field theory
Literature
• S. Auyang, How is Quantum Field Theory Possible?, Oxford University Press, 1995.
• F.Bayen,M.Flato,C.Fronsdal,A.Lichnerowicz and D.Sternheimer, Deformation theory and
quantization I,II,Ann. Phys. (N.Y.),111 (1978) pp. 61–110,111-151.
• G. Birkhoff and J. von Neumann, The Logic of Quantum Mechanics, Annals of
Mathematics, vol 37 pp 823–843, 1936.
• D. Cohen, An Introduction to Hilbert Space and Quantum Logic, Springer-Verlag, 1989.
This is a thorough but elementary and well-illustrated introduction, suitable for advanced
undergraduates.
• D. Edwards, The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Field Theory: Fermions, Gauge
Fields, and Super-symmetry, Part I: Lattice Field Theories, International J. of Theor.
Phys., Vol. 20, No. 7 (1981).
• D. Finkelstein, Matter, Space and Logic, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science vol
V, 1969
• A. Gleason, Measures on the Closed Subspaces of a Hilbert Space, Journal of
Mathematics and Mechanics, 1957.
• R. Kadison, Isometries of Operator Algebras, Annals of Mathematics, vol 54 pp 325–338,
1951
• G. Ludwig, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 1983.
• G. Mackey, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, W. A. Benjamin, 1963
(paperback reprint by Dover 2004).
• J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University
Press, 1955. Reprinted in paperback form.
• R. Omnès, Understanding Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press, 1999. An
extraordinarily lucid discussion of some logical and philosophical issues of quantum
mechanics, with careful attention to the history of the subject. Also discusses consistent
histories.
• N. Papanikolaou, Reasoning Formally About Quantum Systems: An Overview, ACM
SIGACT News, 36(3), pp. 51–66, 2005.
• C. Piron, Foundations of Quantum Physics, W. A. Benjamin, 1976.
• H. Putnam, Is Logic Empirical?, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science vol. V, 1969
• H. Weyl, The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics, Dover Publications, 1950.
External links
• Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Quantum Logic and Probability Theory
(http:/ / plato. stanford. edu/ entries/ qt-quantlog/ )

Quantum group
153
Quantum group
In mathematics and theoretical physics, quantum groups are certain noncommutative
algebras that first appeared in the theory of quantum integrable systems, and which were
then 
formalized 
by 
Vladimir 
Drinfel'd 
and 
Michio 
Jimbo. 
There 
is 
no 
single,
all-encompassing definition of quantum group.
In Drinfeld's approach, quantum groups arise as Hopf algebras depending on an auxiliary
parameter q or h, which become universal enveloping algebras of a certain Lie algebra,
frequently semisimple or affine, when q = 1 or h = 0. Distinct but related objects, also
called quantum groups, are deformations of the algebra of functions on a semisimple
algebraic group or a compact Lie group.
Since the discovery of quantum groups, it has become fashionable to introduce the attribute
quantum into the names of many other mathematical objects, such as quantum plane[1] or
quantum Grassmannian. They may also be loosely referred to as aspects of "quantum
groups".
Intuitive meaning
The discovery of quantum groups was quite unexpected, since it was known for a long time
that compact groups and semisimple Lie algebras are "rigid" objects, in other words,
cannot be deformed. One of the ideas behind quantum groups is that if we consider in some
sense equivalent but larger structure, namely a group algebra or a universal enveloping
algebra, then it can be deformed, although the deformation will no longer remain a group
or enveloping algebra. More precisely, deformation can be accomplished within the
category of Hopf algebras that are not required to be either commutative or
cocommutative. One can think of the deformed object as an algebra of functions on a
"noncommutative space", in the spirit of Alain Connes' noncommutative geometry. This
intuition, however, came after particular classes of quantum groups had already proved
their usefulness in the study of the quantum Yang-Baxter equation and quantum inverse
scattering method developed by the Leningrad School (Ludwig Faddeev, Leon Takhtajan,
Evgenii Sklyanin, Nicolai Reshetikhin and others) and related work by the Japanese
School.[2]
Drinfel'd-Jimbo type quantum groups
One type of objects commonly called a "quantum group" appeared in the work of Vladimir
Drinfel'd and Michio Jimbo as a deformation of the universal enveloping algebra of a
semisimple Lie algebra or, more generally, a Kac-Moody algebra, in the category of Hopf
algebras. The resulting algebra has additional structure, making it into a quasitriangular
Hopf algebra.
Let 
be the Cartan matrix of the Kac-Moody algebra, and let q be a nonzero
complex number distinct from 1, then the quantum group, 
, where G is the Lie
algebra whose Cartan matrix is A, is defined as the unital associative algebra with
generators 
(where 
is an element of the weight lattice, i.e. 
for all
i), and 
and 
(for simple roots, 
), subject to the following relations:
•
,
•
,

Quantum group
154
•
,
•
,
•
,
•
, for 
,
•
, for 
,
where 
, 
, 
, 
for all positive integers 
, and
These are the q-factorial and q-number, respectively, the q-analogs of
the ordinary factorial. The last two relations above are the q-Serre relations, the
deformations of the Serre relations.
In the limit as 
, these relations approach the relations for the universal enveloping
algebra 
, where 
and 
as 
, where the element, 
, of
the Cartan subalgebra satisfies 
for all h in the Cartan subalgebra.
There are various coassociative coproducts under which the quantum groups are Hopf
algebras, for example,
•
, 
, 
,
•
, 
, 
,
•
, 
, 
, where
the set of generators has been extended, if required, to include 
for λ which is
expressible as the sum of an element of the weight lattice and half an element of the
root lattice,
along with the reverse coproducts 
, where 
is
given by 
, i.e.
•
, 
, 
, where
,
•
, 
, 
, where
,
•
, 
, 
, where
The counit on 
is the same for all these coproducts: 
, 
, 
,
and the respective antipodes for the above coproducts are given by
•
,
•
,
•
,
•
,
•
,
•

Quantum group
155
Alternatively, the quantum group 
can be regarded as an algebra over the field 
,
the field of all rational functions of an indeterminate q over 
.
Similarly, the quantum group 
can be regarded as an algebra over the field 
, the
field of all rational functions of an indeterminate q over 
(see below in the section on
quantum groups at q = 0).
Representation theory
Just as there are many different types of representations for Kac-Moody algebras and their
universal enveloping algebras, so there are many different types of representation for
quantum groups.
As is the case for all Hopf algebras, 
has an adjoint representation on itself as a
module, 
with 
the 
action 
being 
given 
by 
where
.
Case 1: q is not a root of unity
One important type of representation is a weight representation, and the corresponding
module is called a weight module. A weight module is a module with a basis of weight
vectors. A weight vector is a nonzero vector v such that 
for all 
, where 
are
complex numbers for all weights 
such that
•
,
•
, for all weights 
and 
.
A weight module is called integrable if the actions of 
and 
are locally nilpotent (i.e. for
any vector v in the module, there exists a positive integer k, possibly dependent on v, such
that 
for all i). In the case of integrable modules, the complex numbers 
associated with a weight vector satisfy 
, where 
is an element of the weight
lattice, and 
are complex numbers such that
•
•
, for all weights 
and 
,
•
for all i.
Of special interest are highest weight representations, and the corresponding highest
weight modules. A highest weight module is a module generated by a weight vector v,
subject to 
for all weights 
, and 
for all i. Similarly, a quantum group
can have a lowest weight representation and lowest weight module, i.e. a module generated
by a weight vector v, subject to 
for all weights 
, and 
for all i.
Define a vector v to have weight 
if 
for all 
in the weight lattice.
If G is a Kac-Moody algebra, then in any irreducible highest weight representation of 
, with highest weight 
, the multiplicities of the weights are equal to their multiplicities in
an irreducible representation of 
with equal highest weight. If the highest weight is
dominant and integral (a weight 
is dominant and integral if 
satisfies the condition that
is a non-negative integer for all i), then the weight spectrum of the
irreducible representation is invariant under the Weyl group for G, and the representation
is integrable.

Quantum group
156
Conversely, if a highest weight module is integrable, then its highest weight vector v
satisfies 
, where 
are complex numbers such that
•
,
•
, for all weights 
and 
,
•
for all i,
and 
is dominant and integral.
As is the case for all Hopf algebras, the tensor product of two modules is another module.
For an element x of 
, and for vectors v and w in the respective modules,
, so that 
, and in the case of coproduct
, 
and 
.
The integrable highest weight module described above is a tensor product of a
one-dimensional module (on which 
for all 
, and 
for all i) and a
highest weight module generated by a nonzero vector 
, subject to 
for all
weights 
, and 
for all i.
In the specific case where G is a finite-dimensional Lie algebra (as a special case of a
Kac-Moody algebra), then the irreducible representations with dominant integral highest
weights are also finite-dimensional.
In the case of a tensor product of highest weight modules, its decomposition into
submodules is the same as for the tensor product of the corresponding modules of the
Kac-Moody algebra (the highest weights are the same, as are their multiplicities).
Case 2: q is a root of unity
Quasitriangularity
Case 1: q is not a root of unity
Strictly, the quantum group 
is not quasitriangular, but it can be thought of as being
"nearly quasitriangular" in that there exists an infinite formal sum which plays the role of
an R-matrix. This infinite formal sum is expressible in terms of generators 
and 
, and
Cartan generators 
, where 
is formally identified with 
. The infinite formal sum is
the product of two factors, 
, and an infinite formal sum, where 
is a basis
for the dual space to the Cartan subalgebra, and 
is the dual basis, and 
is a sign (+1
or -1).
The formal infinite sum which plays the part of the R-matrix has a well-defined action on
the tensor product of two irreducible highest weight modules, and also on the tensor
product if two lowest weight modules. Specifically, if v has weight 
and w has weight 
,
then 
, and the fact that the modules are both highest
weight modules or both lowest weight modules reduces the action of the other factor on
to a finite sum.
Specifically, if V is a highest weight module, then the formal infinite sum, R, has a
well-defined, and invertible, action on 
, and this value of R (as an element of
) satisfies the Yang-Baxter equation, and therefore allows us to
determine a representation of the braid group, and to define quasi-invariants for knots,
links and braids.

Quantum group
157
Case 2: q is a root of unity
Quantum groups at q = 0
Masaki Kashiwara has researched the limiting behaviour of quantum groups as 
.
As a consequence of the defining relations for the quantum group 
, 
can be
regarded as a Hopf algebra over 
, the field of all rational functions of an
indeterminate q over 
.
For simple root 
and non-negative integer 
, define 
and 
(specifically, 
). In an integrable module 
, and for weight 
, a vector
(i.e. a vector 
in 
with weight 
) can be uniquely decomposed into the sums
•
,
where 
, 
, 
only if 
, and
only if 
. Linear mappings 
and 
can be
defined on 
by
•
,
•
.
Let 
be the integral domain of all rational functions in 
which are regular at 
(i.e. a rational function 
is an element of 
if and only if there exist polynomials 
and 
in the polynomial ring 
such that 
, and 
). A crystal
base for 
is an ordered pair 
, such that
•
is a free 
-submodule of 
such that 
;
•
is a 
-basis of the vector space 
over 
,
•
and 
, where 
and 
,
•
and 
for all i,
•
and 
for all i,
• for all 
and 
, and for all i, 
if and only if 
.
To put this into a more informal setting, the actions of 
and 
are generally singular
at 
on an integrable module 
. The linear mappings 
and 
on the module are
introduced so that the actions of 
and 
are regular at 
on the module. There
exists a 
-basis of weight vectors 
for 
, with respect to which the actions of 
and 
are regular at 
for all i. The module is then restricted to the free 
-module
generated by the basis, and the basis vectors, the 
-submodule and the actions of 
and
are evaluated at 
. Furthermore, the basis can be chosen such that at 
, for
all 
, 
and 
are represented by mutual transposes, and map basis vectors to basis
vectors or 0.
A crystal base can be represented by a directed graph with labelled edges. Each vertex of 
the graph represents an element of the 
-basis 
of 
, and a directed edge, 
labelled by i, and directed from vertex 
to vertex 
, represents that 
(and,

Quantum group
158
equivalently, that 
), where 
is the basis element represented by 
, and 
is the basis elem
represented by 
. The graph completely determines the actions of 
and 
at 
. If an integrable
module has a crystal base, then the module is irreducible if and only if the graph
representing the crystal base is connected (a graph is called "connected" if the set of
vertices cannot be partitioned into the union of nontrivial disjoint subsets 
and 
such that
there are no edges joining any vertex in 
to any vertex in 
).
For any integrable module with a crystal base, the weight spectrum for the crystal base is
the same as the weight spectrum for the module, and therefore the weight spectrum for the
crystal base is the same as the weight spectrum for the corresponding module of the
appropriate Kac-Moody algebra. The multiplicities of the weights in the crystal base are
also the same as their multiplicities in the corresponding module of the appropriate
Kac-Moody algebra.
It is a theorem of Kashiwara that every integrable highest weight module has a crystal
base. Similarly, every integrable lowest weight module has a crystal base.
Tensor products of crystal bases
Let 
be an integrable module with crystal base 
and 
be an integrable module
with 
crystal 
base 
. 
For 
crystal 
bases, 
the 
coproduct 
, 
given 
by
, is adopted. The
integrable 
module 
has 
crystal 
base 
, 
where
. 
For 
a 
basis 
vector 
, 
define
and 
. The actions of 
and 
on 
are given by
•
•
The decomposition of the product two integrable highest weight modules into irreducible
submodules is determined by the decomposition of the graph of the crystal base into its
connected components (i.e. the highest weights of the submodules are determined, and the
multiplicity of each highest weight is determined).
Compact matrix quantum groups
S.L. Woronowicz introduced compact matrix quantum groups. Compact matrix quantum
groups are abstract structures on which the "continuous functions" on the structure are
given by elements of a C*-algebra. The geometry of a compact matrix quantum group is a
special case of a noncommutative geometry.
The continuous complex-valued functions on a compact Hausdorff topological space form a
commutative C*-algebra. By the Gelfand theorem, a commutative C*-algebra is isomorphic
to the C*-algebra of continuous complex-valued functions on a compact Hausdorff
topological space, and the topological space is uniquely determined by the C*-algebra up to
homeomorphism.
For a compact topological group, G, there exists a C*-algebra homomorphism 
(where 
is the C*-algebra tensor product - the 
completion 
of 
the 
algebraic 
tensor 
product 
of 
and 
), 
such 
that

Quantum group
159
for all 
, and for all 
(where 
for all 
such that 
for all 
and all 
. Strictly, this does not make 
a Hopf alg
the other hand, a finite-dimensional representation of G can be used to generate a
*-subalgebra of 
which is also a Hopf *-algebra. Specifically, if 
is an 
-di
representation of 
, then 
for all 
, and 
for all 
. It follows that the
and 
for all 
is a Hopf *-algebra: the counit is determined by 
for all 
(where 
is
delta), the antipode is 
, and the unit is given by 
As a generalization, a compact matrix quantum group is defined as a pair 
, where 
is a C*-algebra and 
is a matrix with entries in 
such that
• The *-subalgebra, 
, of 
, which is generated by the matrix elements of 
, is dense
in 
;
• There exists a C*-algebra homomorphism 
(where 
is the
C*-algebra tensor product - the completion of the algebraic tensor product of 
and 
) such that 
for all 
( 
is called the comultiplication);
• There exists a linear antimultiplicative map 
(the coinverse) such that
for all 
and 
where 
is the
identity element of 
. Since 
is antimultiplicative, then 
for all
.
As a consequence of continuity, the comultiplication on 
is coassociative.
In general, 
is not a bialgebra, and 
is a Hopf *-algebra.
Informally, 
can be regarded as the *-algebra of continuous complex-valued functions
over the compact matrix quantum group, and 
can be regarded as a finite-dimensional
representation of the compact matrix quantum group.
A representation of the compact matrix quantum group is given by a corepresentation of
the Hopf *-algebra (a corepresentation of a counital coassiative coalgebra 
is a square
matrix 
with entries in 
(so 
) such that 
for all 
and 
for all 
). Furthermore, a representation, v, is called unitary if
the matrix for v is unitary (or equivalently, if 
for all i, j).
An example of a compact matrix quantum group is 
, where the parameter 
is a
positive real number. So 
, where 
is the C*-algebra
generated by 
and 
,subject to
and 
so that the comultiplication is determined by 
, 
, and the coinverse is determined by 
, 
,
, 
. Note that 
is a representation, but not a unitary
representation. 
is equivalent to the unitary representation 
Equivalently, 
, where 
is the C*-algebra generated by
and 
,subject to

Quantum group
160
and 
so 
that 
the 
comultiplication 
is 
determined 
by
, 
, and the coinverse is determined by
, 
, 
, 
. Note that 
is a unitary
representation. The realizations can be identified by equating 
.
When 
, then 
is equal to the concrete compact group 
.
See also
• Lie bialgebra
• Poisson–Lie group
• Affine quantum group
• Quantum affine algebras
Notes
[1] Baez, John (1992), http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/braids/node5.html|The quantum plane, http:/ / math. ucr.
edu/ home/ baez/ braids/ node5. html
[2] Schwiebert, Christian (1994), Generalized quantum inverse scattering, arΧiv:hep-th/9412237v3
References
• Podles, P.; Muller, E., Introduction to quantum groups, arΧiv:q-alg/9704002
• Kassel, Christian (1995), Quantum groups, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 155, Berlin,
New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 1321145 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1321145), ISBN 978-0-387-94370-1
• Majid, Shahn (2002), A quantum groups primer, London Mathematical Society Lecture
Note Series, 292, Cambridge University Press, MR 1904789 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1904789), ISBN 978-0-521-01041-2
• Street, Ross (2007), Quantum groups, Australian Mathematical Society Lecture Series,
19, Cambridge University Press, MR 2294803 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=2294803), ISBN 978-0-521-69524-4; 978-0-521-69524-4.
• Majid, Shahn (January 2006), "http://www.ams.org/notices/200601/what-is.pdf|What Is...a
Quantum Group?" (PDF), Notices of the American Mathematical Society 53 (1):
pp.30–31, http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200601/ what-is. pdf, retrieved on 2008-01-16

Hopf algebra
161
Hopf algebra
In mathematics, a Hopf algebra, named after Heinz Hopf, is a structure that is
simultaneously a (unital associative) algebra, a (counital coassociative) coalgebra, with
these structures compatible making it a bialgebra, and moreover is equipped with an
antiautomorphism satisfying a certain property.
Hopf algebras occur naturally in algebraic topology, where they originated and are related
to the H-space concept, in group scheme theory, in group theory (via the concept of a group
ring), and in numerous other places, making them probably the most familiar type of
bialgebra. Hopf algebras are also studied in their own right, with much work on specific
classes of examples on the one hand and classification problems on the other.
Formal definition
Formally, a Hopf algebra is a bialgebra H over a field K together with a K-linear map
(called the antipode) such that the following diagram commutes:
Here Δ is the comultiplication of the bialgebra, ∇ its multiplication, η its unit and ε its
counit. In the sumless Sweedler notation, this property can also be expressed as
As for algebras, one can replace the underlying field K with a commutative ring R in the
above definition.
The definition of Hopf algebra is self-dual (as reflected in the symmetry of the above
diagram), so if one can define a dual of H (which is always possible if H is
finite-dimensional), then it is automatically a Hopf algebra.
Properties of the antipode
S is sometimes required to have a K-linear inverse, which is automatic in the
finite-dimensional case, or if H is commutative or cocommutative (or more generally
quasitriangular).
In general, S is an antihomomorphism, so 
is a homomorphism, which is therefore an
automorphism if S was invertible (as may be required).
If 
, then the Hopf algebra is said to be involutive (and the underlying algebra with
involution is a *-algebra). If H is finite-dimensional semisimple over a field of characteristic
zero, commutative, or cocommutative, then it is involutive.
If a bialgebra B admits an antipode S, then S is unique ("a bialgebra admits at most 1 Hopf
algebra structure").

Hopf algebra
162
The antipode is an analog to the inversion map on a group that sends 
to 
.[1]
Examples
Group algebra. Suppose G is a group. The group algebra KG is a unital associative algebra
over K. It turns into a Hopf algebra if we define
• Δ : KG → KG ⊗ KG by Δ(g) = g ⊗ g for all g in G
• ε : KG → K by ε(g) = 1 for all g in G
• S : KG → KG by S(g) = g −1 for all g in G.
Functions on a finite group. Suppose now that G is a finite group. Then the set KG of all
functions from G to K with pointwise addition and multiplication is a unital associative
algebra over K, and KG ⊗ KG is naturally isomorphic to KGxG (for G infinite, KG ⊗ KG is a
proper subset of KGxG). The set KG becomes a Hopf algebra if we define
• Δ : KG → KGxG by Δ(f)(x,y) = f(xy) for all f in KG and all x,y in G
• ε : KG → K by ε(f) = f(e) for every f in KG [here e is the identity element of G]
• S : KG → KG by S(f)(x) = f(x−1) for all f in KG and all x in G.
Note that functions on a finite group can be identified with the group ring, though these are
more naturally thought of as dual – the group ring consists of finite sums of elements, and
thus pairs with functions on the group by evaluating the function on the summed elements.
Regular functions on an algebraic group. Generalizing the previous example, we can
use the same formulas to show that for a given algebraic group G over K, the set of all
regular functions on G forms a Hopf algebra.
Universal enveloping algebra. Suppose g is a Lie algebra over the field K and U is its
universal enveloping algebra. U becomes a Hopf algebra if we define
• Δ : U → U ⊗ U by Δ(x) = x ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ x for every x in g (this rule is compatible with
commutators and can therefore be uniquely extended to all of U).
• ε : U → K by ε(x) = 0 for all x in g (again, extended to U)
• S : U → U by S(x) = -x for all x in g.
Cohomology of Lie groups
The cohomology algebra of a Lie group is a Hopf algebra: the multiplication is provided by
the cup-product, and the comultiplication
by the group multiplication 
. This observation was actually a source of the
notion of Hopf algebra. Using this structure, Hopf proved a structure theorem for the
cohomology algebra of Lie groups.
Theorem (Hopf)[2] Let A be a finite-dimensional, graded commutative, graded
cocommutative Hopf algebra over a field of characteristic 0. Then A (as an algebra) is a free
exterior algebra with generators of odd degree.

Hopf algebra
163
Quantum groups and non-commutative geometry
All examples above are either commutative (i.e. the multiplication is commutative) or
co-commutative (i.e. Δ = T 
Δ where T: H ⊗ H → H ⊗ H is defined by T(x ⊗ y) = y ⊗ x).
Other interesting Hopf algebras are certain "deformations" or "quantizations" of those from
example 3 which are neither commutative nor co-commutative. These Hopf algebras are
often called quantum groups, a term that is so far only loosely defined. They are important
in noncommutative geometry, the idea being the following: a standard algebraic group is
well described by its standard Hopf algebra of regular functions; we can then think of the
deformed version of this Hopf algebra as describing a certain "non-standard" or "quantized"
algebraic group (which is not an algebraic group at all). While there does not seem to be a
direct way to define or manipulate these non-standard objects, one can still work with their
Hopf algebras, and indeed one identifies them with their Hopf algebras. Hence the name
"quantum group".
Related concepts
Graded Hopf algebras are often used in algebraic topology: they are the natural algebraic
structure on the direct sum of all homology or cohomology groups of an H-space.
Locally compact quantum groups generalize Hopf algebras and carry a topology. The
algebra of all continuous functions on a Lie group is a locally compact quantum group.
Quasi-Hopf algebras are also generalizations of Hopf algebras, where coassociativity only
holds up to a twist.
Analogy with groups
Groups can be axiomatized by the same diagrams (equivalently, operations) as a Hopf
algebra, where G is taken to be a set instead of a module. In this case:
• the field K is replaced by the 1-point set
• there is a natural counit (map to 1 point)
• there is a natural comultiplication (the diagonal map)
• the unit is the identity element of the group
• the multiplication is the multiplication in the group
• the antipode is the inverse
In this philosophy, a group can be thought of as a Hopf algebra over the "field with one
element".[3]
See also
• Quasitriangular Hopf algebra
• Algebra/set analogy
• Representation theory of Hopf algebras
• Ribbon Hopf algebra
• Superalgebra
• Supergroup
• Anyonic Lie algebra

Hopf algebra
164
Notes
[1] Quantum groups lecture notes (http:/ / www. mathematik. uni-muenchen. de/ ~pareigis/ Vorlesungen/
QuantGrp/ ln2_1. pdf)
[2] Hopf, 1941.
[3] Group = Hopf algebra « Secret Blogging Seminar (http:/ / sbseminar. wordpress. com/ 2007/ 10/ 07/
group-hopf-algebra/ ), Group objects and Hopf algebras (http:/ / www. youtube. com/ watch?v=p3kkm5dYH-w),
video of Simon Willerton.
References
• Pierre Cartier, A primer of Hopf algebras (http:/ / inc. web. ihes. fr/ prepub/ PREPRINTS/
2006/ M/ M-06-40. pdf), IHES preprint, September 2006, 81 pages
• Jurgen Fuchs, Affine Lie Algebras and Quantum Groups, (1992), Cambridge University
Press. ISBN 0-521-48412-X
• H. Hopf, Uber die Topologie der Gruppen-Mannigfaltigkeiten und ihrer
Verallgemeinerungen, Ann. of Math. 42 (1941), 22-52. Reprinted in Selecta Heinz Hopf,
pp. 119-151, Springer, Berlin (1964). MR 4784 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=4784)
• Ross Moore, Sam Williams and Ross Talent: Quantum Groups: an entrée to modern
algebra (http:/ / www-texdev. ics. mq. edu. au/ Quantum/ Quantum. ps)
Quasitriangular Hopf algebra
In mathematics, a Hopf algebra, H, is quasitriangular if there exists an invertible element,
R, of 
such that
•
for all 
, where 
is the coproduct on H, and the linear
map 
is given by 
,
•
,
•
,
where 
, 
, 
and 
, 
where
, 
, 
and
, are algebra morphisms determined by
R is called the R-matrix.
As a consequence of the properties of quasitriangularity, the R-matrix, R, is a solution of the
Yang-Baxter equation (and so a module V of H can be used to determine quasi-invariants of
braids, knots and links). Also as a consequence of the properties of quasitriangularity,
; moreover 
, 
, and
. One may further show that the antipode S must be a linear isomorphism,
and thus S^2 is an automorphism. In fact, S^2 is given by conjugating by an invertible
element: 
where 
(cf. Ribbon Hopf algebras).
It is possible to construct a quasitriangular Hopf algebra from a Hopf algebra and its dual,
using the Drinfel'd quantum double construction.

Quasitriangular Hopf algebra
165
Twisting
The property of being a quasi-triangular Hopf algebra is preserved by twisting via an
invertible element 
such that 
and
satisfying the cocycle condition
Furthermore, 
is invertible and the twisted antipode is given by
, with the twisted comultiplication, R-matrix and co-unit change
according to those defined for the quasi-triangular Quasi-Hopf algebra. Such a twist is
known as an admissible (or Drinfel'd) twist.
See also
• Quasi-triangular Quasi-Hopf algebra
• Ribbon Hopf algebra
Quantum double
Quantum double or Drinfeld double or Drinfel’d double or Drienfeld quantum
double or double is a Hopf algebra construction and an example of a quasitriangular Hopf
algebra introduced by Vladimir Drinfel'd. The Drinfel’d double is an important and complex
construction that can be applied to a Hopf algebra to obtain a larger, quasi-triangular, Hopf
algebra. However, the quantum double as a new quasi-triangular Hopf algebra is different
from the standard quantum double that is q-deformations for Lie algebras or Lie
superalgebras.[1]
The duality in the “QUE-dual” [2] of Drinfeld is very specific, and defines the quantum
double in a particular context. But the quantum double can be defined more generally, for
example in terms of the double cross-product of Majid. It is also of interest in the theory of
monoidal categories. But, because of the problem of dualizing an infinite-dimensional Hopf
algebra, it is supposed that the constructions are done for finite-dimensional Hopf algebras
(group algebras of finite groups for example). [3]
The quantum double (QD) can also be described as an example of a mathematical
construction of ribbon Hopf algebra, a particular form of a Hopf algebra, which has a lot of
mathematical structure and every piece of this structure corresponds to some physical
property in gauge theory. A way to describe the symmetry in a theory featuring interactions
of both fundamental charges and topological defects is to extend the residual gauge group
to its quantum double.

Quantum double
166
Definition
A quantum double D(A) definition can be seen in Definition 1.17 (page 57) of this link [4]
QD construction
Vladimir Gershonovich Drinfel'd in 1987 introduced the construction of the quantum double
leading later to quantum supergroups and quantized enveloping superalgebras. Drinfel’d
showed that any Hopf algebra H can be extended to a larger Hopf algebra D(H) that is
quasi-triangular. The kind of Hopf algebra that arises in the study of the Yang-Baxter
equation are the quasi-triangular Hopf algebras. [5] One difficulty in the construction of
D(H) is the large increase in the space required to encode D(H) as a matrix algebra. (See
Hopf project in “See also” below)
The quantum double construction D(H) can be used to derive the particle spectrum as well
as the braid statistics for any two-dimensional model with a discrete and finite symmetry
group H. This can be verified by considering a topological quantum error correcting code
(topological quantum computer/toric code[6] ), which can be understood as a Z2 gauge
theory[7] on a lattice. The real advantage of the quantum double formalism lies in applying
it to non-abelian models (when H is a non-abelian group). This is how quantum groups can
be used to provide a unified language for describing anyon model. The language is closely
related to topological quantum field theories. [8]
Exotic quantum double
The exotic quantum double (EQD) and its universal R-matrix for quantum Yang-Baxter
(QYBE) equation are constructed in terms of Drinfeld’s quantum double theory. But this
new quasi-triangular Hopf algebra, is distinct from standard QDs that are the
q-deformations for Lie algebras. By studying its representation theory, many-parameter
representations of the exotic quantum double are obtained. The multi-parameter R-matrices
for the quantum Yang-Baxter equation can result from the universal R-matrix of this exotic
quantum double and these representations.
The QYBE has become a focus of the attention from both theoretical physicists and
mathematicians. This is because the QYBE is a key to the complete integrability of many
physical systems appearing in the quantum inverse scattering methods, the exactly-solvable
models in statistical mechanics and low-dimensional quantum field theory.
In solving the QYBE in a general way and classifying its solutions (R-matrices) algebraically,
a mathematical structure (the quasi-triangular Hopf algebra, loosely called quantum group)
are found in connection with the QYBE. Among these developments, the Drinfeld’s quantum
double theory provides a general construction to systematically obtain solutions of the
QYBE in terms of the QDs, which are usually the q-deformations of certain algebras, and
their representations.
The standard QDs are only the quantum (universal enveloping) algebras and superalgebras 
and their parameterizations. They are the q-deformations of the universal algebras and 
possess a standard quantum double structure that both the subalgebras A and B are 
non-commutative and non-cocommutative. This symmetric structure reflects the duality of A 
and B. These standard quantum doubles approach the usual universal enveloping algebras 
in the classical limit as q → 1. EQDs possess asymmetric dual structure that one of the 
subalgebras A and B is commutative but non-cocommutative and another cocommutative

Quantum double
167
but non-commutative.
See also
• Hopf project (Virginia Tech) – quantum double encoding difficulties[9]
• Michio Jimbo
• Braided Hopf algebra
Further reading
• Foundations of Quantum Group Theory By Shahn Majid [10]
References
[1] http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ hep-th/ pdf/ 9212/ 9212066v1. pdf
[2] http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=JLv1r50oCcYC& pg=PA282& lpg=PA282& dq=QUE-dual& source=bl&
ots=nfkTCkiHZs& sig=NhxYZSWd3-TP6Nxa3_RdIRHOJM0& hl=en& ei=q2n-SbeIO96Mtge275DFCg& sa=X&
oi=book_result& ct=result& resnum=1
[3] http:/ / 74. 125. 95. 132/ search?q=cache:LmUtEK6CK2IJ:www. ma. utexas. edu/ mp_arc/ c/ 93/ 93-323. ps.
gz+ quantum+ double+ definition& cd=16& hl=en& ct=clnk& gl=us
[4] http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=qxq-klYmFZMC& pg=PA52& lpg=PA52& dq=%22quantum+
double%22+ definition& source=bl& ots=hI9ER1H9Iv& sig=qAQW1fGrMEd8CXorM14TFKMI1CI& hl=en&
ei=2tP7Sd-4KaDcML2XsM0E& sa=X& oi=book_result& ct=result& resnum=10#PPA57,M1
[5] http:/ / citeseerx. ist. psu. edu/ viewdoc/ summary?doi=10. 1. 1. 21. 9533
[6] http:/ / www. mpq. mpg. de/ Theorygroup/ CIRAC/ wiki/ images/ 3/ 31/ Poster6. pdf
[7] http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=oledr2LiDxYC& pg=PA123& lpg=PA123& dq=Z2+ gauge+ theory&
source=bl& ots=cVmtarIwji& sig=UktL9F07nrSOEEPVYmyxfhg844o& hl=en& ei=T0n_ScCOFZi6M5DEtLkE&
sa=X& oi=book_result& ct=result& resnum=9
[8] http:/ / quantum. leeds. ac. uk/ ~phyjkp/ Toric_Code_and_QD. pdf
[9] http:/ / www. gap-system. org/ ForumArchive/ Struble. 1/ Craig. 1/ Algebra_. 1/ 1. html
[10] http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=3mqkXgN2qqIC& pg=PA304& lpg=PA304& dq=quantum+ double+
definition& source=bl& ots=fAAZga0Ok0& sig=JYtBrWx_ZFFmKWEZGSm8w5w7WPo& hl=en&
ei=eu75SYapD5bEMo7NzcAE& sa=X& oi=book_result& ct=result& resnum=5#PPP1,M1
• Drinfel’d, V. G.: Quantum groups. In: Proc. Int. Congr. Math, Berkeley 1986 (famous
lecture where quantum double notion was introduced)
• Drinfel’d, V. G.: Quasi-Hopf algebras. Leningrad Math. J. 1, 1419–1457 (1989)
External links
• Quantum Double - Planetmath Article Browser (http:/ / myyn. org/ m/ article/
quantum-double/ )

Grassman algebra
168
Grassman algebra
1. REDIRECT Exterior algebra
Special unitary group
In mathematics, the special unitary group of degree n, denoted SU(n), is the group of
n×n unitary matrices with determinant 1. The group operation is that of matrix
multiplication. The special unitary group is a subgroup of the unitary group U(n), consisting
of all n×n unitary matrices, which is itself a subgroup of the general linear group GL(n, C).
The SU(n) groups find wide application in the Standard Model of particle physics, especially
SU(2) in the electroweak interaction and SU(3) in QCD.
The simplest case, SU(1), is the trivial group, having only a single element. The group SU(2)
is isomorphic to the group of quaternions of absolute value 1, and is thus diffeomorphic to
the 3-sphere. Since unit quaternions can be used to represent rotations in 3-dimensional
space (up to sign), we have a surjective homomorphism from SU(2) to the rotation group
SO(3) whose kernel is 
.
Properties
The special unitary group SU(n) is a real matrix Lie group of dimension n2 − 1.
Topologically, it is compact and simply connected. Algebraically, it is a simple Lie group
(meaning its Lie algebra is simple; see below). The center of SU(n) is isomorphic to the
cyclic group Zn. Its outer automorphism group, for n ≥ 3, is Z2, while the outer
automorphism group of SU(2) is the trivial group.
The SU(n) algebra is generated by n2 operators, which satisfy the commutator relationship
(for i,j,k,l = 1, 2, ..., n)
Additionally, the operator
satisfies
which implies that the number of independent generators of SU(n) is n2-1.[1]

Special unitary group
169
Generators
In general the infinitesimal generators of SU(n), T, are represented as traceless Hermitian
matrices. I.e:
•
and
•
Fundamental representation
In the defining or fundamental representation the generators are represented by n×n
matrices where:
•
where the f are the structure constants and are antisymmetric in all indices, whilst the
d are symmetric in all indices.
As a consequence:
•
•
We also have
•
as a normalization convention.
Adjoint representation
In the adjoint representation the generators are represented by 
× 
matrices whose elements are defined by the structure constants:
•
and 
A general matrix element of 
takes the form
where 
such that 
. We can consider the following map
, (where 
denotes the set of 2 by 2 complex matrices), defined in
the obvious way by
By considering 
 diffeomorphic to 
and 
diffeomorphic to 
we can see that 
is an injective real linear map and hence an embedding. Now considering the restriction of 
to the 3-sphere, denoted 
, we can see that this is an embedding of the 3-sphere onto a 
compact submanifold of 
. However it is also clear that 
, which as

Special unitary group
170
a manifold is diffeomorphic to 
, making 
a compact, connected Lie group.
Now considering the Lie algebra 
, a general element takes the form
where 
and 
. It is easily verified that matrices of this form have trace zero and
are antihermitian. The Lie algebra is then generated by the following matrices
which are easily seen to have the form of the general element specified above. These satisfy
the relations 
and 
. The commutator bracket is
therefore specified by
The above generators are related to the Pauli matrices by 
, 
and
.
SU(3)
The generators of SU(3), T, in the defining representation, are:
where 
, the Gell-Mann matrices, are the SU(3) analog of the Pauli matrices for SU(2):
Note that they are all traceless Hermitian matrices as required.
These obey the relations
•
where the f are the structure constants, as previously defined, and have values given
by
The d take the values:

Special unitary group
171
Lie algebra
The Lie algebra corresponding to 
is denoted by 
. Its standard mathematical
representation consists of the traceless antihermitian 
complex matrices, with the
regular commutator as Lie bracket. A factor 
is often inserted by particle physicists, so
that all matrices become hermitian. This is simply a different, more convenient,
representation of the same real Lie algebra. Note that 
is a Lie algebra over 
.
For example, the following antihermitian matrices used in quantum mechanics form a basis
for 
over 
:
(where is the imaginary unit.)
This representation is often used in quantum mechanics (see Pauli matrices and Gell-Mann
matrices), to represent the spin of fundamental particles such as electrons. They also serve
as unit vectors for the description of our 3 spatial dimensions in quantum relativity.
Note that the product of any two different generators is another generator, and that the
generators anticommute. Together with the identity matrix (times ),
these are also generators of the Lie algebra 
.
Here it depends of course on the problem whether one works finally, as in non-relativistic
quantum mechanics, with 2-spinors; or, as in the relativistic Dirac theory, one needs an
extension to 4-spinors; or in mathematics even to Clifford algebras.
Note: make clearer the fact that under matrix multiplication (which is anticommutative in
this case), we generate the Clifford algebra 
, whereas you generate the Lie algebra
with commutator brackets instead.
Back to general 
:
If we choose an (arbitrary) particular basis, then the subspace of traceless diagonal 
matrices with imaginary entries forms an 
dimensional Cartan subalgebra.
Complexify the Lie algebra, so that any traceless 
matrix is now allowed. The weight 
eigenvectors are the Cartan subalgebra itself and the matrices with only one nonzero entry 
which is off diagonal. Even though the Cartan subalgebra 
is only 
dimensional, to 
simplify calculations, it is often convenient to introduce an auxiliary element, the unit 
matrix which commutes with everything else (which should not be thought of as an element 
of the Lie algebra!) for the purpose of computing weights and that only. So, we have a basis 
where the 
th basis vector is the matrix with 
on the 
th diagonal entry and zero

Special unitary group
172
elsewhere. Weights would then be given by 
coordinates and the sum over all 
coordinates
has to be zero (because the unit matrix is only auxiliary).
So, 
has a rank of 
and its Dynkin diagram is given by 
, a chain of 
vertices.
Its root system consists of 
roots spanning a 
 Euclidean space. Here, we use
redundant coordinates instead of 
to emphasize the symmetries of the root system
(the 
coordinates have to add up to zero). In other words, we are embedding this 
dimensional vector space in an 
-dimensional one. Then, the roots consists of all the
permutations of 
. The construction given two paragraphs ago
explains why. A choice of simple roots is
,
,
…,
.
Its Cartan matrix is
.
Its Weyl group or Coxeter group is the symmetric group 
, the symmetry group of the
-simplex.
Generalized special unitary group
For a field F, the generalized special unitary group over F, SU(p,q;F), is the group of all
linear transformations of determinant 1 of a vector space of rank n = p + q over F which
leave invariant a nondegenerate, hermitian form of signature (p, q). This group is often
referred to as the special unitary group of signature p q over F. The field F can be
replaced by a commutative ring, in which case the vector space is replaced by a free
module.
Specifically, fix a hermitian matrix A of signature p q in GL(n,R), then all
satisfy
Often one will see the notation 
without reference to a ring or field, in this case the
ring or field being referred to is C and this gives one of the classical Lie groups. The
standard choice for A when F = C is
However there may be better choices for A for certain dimensions which exhibit more
behaviour under restriction to subrings of C.

Special unitary group
173
Example
A very important example of this type of group is the Picard modular group SU(2,1;Z[i])
which acts (projectively) on complex hyperbolic space of degree two, in the same way that
SL(2,Z) acts (projectively) on real hyperbolic space of dimension two. In 2003 Gábor
Francsics and Peter Lax computed a fundamental domain for the action of this group on
, see [2]. Another example is SU(1,1;C) which is isomorphic to SL(2,R).
Important subgroups
In physics the special unitary group is used to represent bosonic symmetries. In theories of
symmetry breaking it is important to be able to find the subgroups of the special unitary
group. Subgroups of SU(n) that are important in GUT physics are, for p>1, n-p>1:
For completeness there are also the orthogonal and symplectic subgroups:
Since the rank of SU(n) is n-1 and of U(1) is 1, a useful check is that the sum of the ranks of
the subgroups is less than or equal to the rank of the original group. SU(n) is a subgroup of
various other lie groups:
(see Spin group)
(see Simple Lie groups for E6, E7, and G2).
There 
are 
also 
the 
identities 
SU(4)=Spin(6), 
SU(2)=Spin(3)=USp(2) 
and
U(1)=Spin(2)=SO(2) .
One should finally mention that SU(2) is the double covering group of SO(3), a relation that
plays an important role in the theory of rotations of 2-spinors in non-relativistic quantum
mechanics.
See also
• Representation theory of SU(2)
• Projective special unitary group, PSU(n)
Notes
[1] R.R. Puri, Mathematical Methods of Quantum Optics, Springer, 2001.
[2] http:/ / www. esi. ac. at/ Preprint-shadows/ esi1273. html
References
• Halzen, Francis; Martin, Alan (1984). Quarks & Leptons: An Introductory Course in
Modern Particle Physics. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-88741-2.
• Maximal Subgroups of Compact Lie Groups (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0605784v1)

Special unitary group
174
External links
• Physics 558 - Lecture 1, Winter 2003 (http:/ / courses. washington. edu/ phys55x/ Physics
558_lec1_03. htm)
Gauge theory
In physics, gauge theory is a field theory in which the Lagrangian is invariant under a
certain continuous group of transformations.
The transformations (called gauge transformations) form a Lie group which is referred to as
the symmetry group or the gauge group of the theory. Associated with a Lie group is a Lie
Algebra of group generators. For each group generator there is a corresponding vector
field called gauge field. Gauge fields are included in the Lagrangian to ensure its invariance
under the group transformations (called gauge invariance). When such a theory is
quantized, the quanta of the gauge fields are called gauge bosons.
If the symmetry group is non-commutative, the gauge theory is referred to as non-abelian
or Yang-Mills theory.
Quantum electrodynamics is an abelian gauge theory with the symmetry group U(1) and
has one gauge field, the electromagnetic field, with the photon being the gauge boson.
The standard model is a non-abelian gauge theory with the symmetry group
U(1)×SU(2)×SU(3) and has a total of twelve gauge bosons: the photon, three weak bosons,
 
and 
; and eight gluons.
Description
Global and local symmetries
In physics, the mathematical description of any physical situation usually contains excess
degrees of freedom; the same physical situation is equally well described by many
equivalent mathematical configurations. For instance, in Newtonian dynamics, if two
configurations are related by a Galilean transformation—an inertial change of reference
frame—they represent the same physical situation. These transformations form a group of
"symmetries" of the theory, and a physical situation corresponds not to an individual
mathematical configuration but to a class of configurations related to one another by this
symmetry group. This idea can be generalized to include local as well as global symmetries,
analogous to much more abstract "changes of coordinates" in a situation where there is no
preferred "inertial" coordinate system that covers the entire physical system. A gauge
theory is a mathematical model that has symmetries of this kind, together with a set of
techniques for making physical predictions consistent with the symmetries of the model.
Example of global symmetry
When a quantity occurring in the mathematical configuration is not just a number but has 
some geometrical significance, such as a velocity or an axis of rotation, its representation 
as numbers arranged in a vector or matrix is also changed by a coordinate transformation. 
For instance, if one description of a pattern of fluid flow states that the fluid velocity in the 
neighborhood of (x=1, y=0) is 1 m/s in the positive x direction, then a description of the

Gauge theory
175
same situation in which the coordinate system has been rotated clockwise by 90 degrees
will state that the fluid velocity in the neighborhood of (x=0, y=1) is 1 m/s in the positive y
direction. The coordinate transformation has affected both the coordinate system used to
identify the location of the measurement and the basis in which its value is expressed. As
long as this transformation is performed globally (affecting the coordinate basis in the same
way at every point), the effect on values that represent the rate of change of some quantity
along some path in space and time as it passes through point P is the same as the effect on
values that are truly local to P.
Use of fiber bundles to describe local symmetries
In order to adequately describe physical situations in more complex theories, it is often
necessary to introduce a "coordinate basis" for some of the objects of the theory that do not
have this simple relationship to the coordinates used to label points in space and time. (In
mathematical terms, the theory involves a fiber bundle in which the fiber at each point of
the base space consists of possible coordinate bases for use when describing the values of
objects at that point.) In order to spell out a mathematical configuration, one must choose a
particular coordinate basis at each point (a local section of the fiber bundle) and express
the values of the objects of the theory (usually "fields" in the physicist's sense) using this
basis. Two such mathematical configurations are equivalent (describe the same physical
situation) if they are related by a transformation of this abstract coordinate basis (a change
of local section, or gauge transformation).
In most gauge theories, the set of possible transformations of the abstract gauge basis at an
individual point in space and time is a finite-dimensional Lie group. The simplest such
group is U(1), which appears in the modern formulation of quantum electrodynamics (QED)
via its use of complex numbers. QED is generally regarded as the first, and simplest,
physical gauge theory. The set of possible gauge transformations of the entire configuration
of a given gauge theory also forms a group, the gauge group of the theory. An element of
the gauge group can be parameterized by a smoothly varying function from the points of
spacetime to the (finite-dimensional) Lie group, whose value at each point represents the
action of the gauge transformation on the fiber over that point.
A gauge transformation with constant parameter at every point in space and time is
analogous to a rigid rotation of the geometric coordinate system; it represents a global
symmetry of the gauge representation. As in the case of a rigid rotation, this gauge
transformation affects expressions that represent the rate of change along a path of some
gauge-dependent quantity in the same way as those that represent a truly local quantity. A
gauge transformation whose parameter is not a constant function is referred to as a local
symmetry; its effect on expressions that involve a derivative is qualitatively different from
that on expressions that don't. (This is analogous to a non-inertial change of reference
frame, which can produce a Coriolis effect.)
Gauge fields
The "gauge covariant" version of a gauge theory accounts for this effect by introducing a 
gauge field (in mathematical language, an Ehresmann connection) and formulating all rates 
of change in terms of the covariant derivative with respect to this connection. The gauge 
field becomes an essential part of the description of a mathematical configuration. A 
configuration in which the gauge field can be eliminated by a gauge transformation has the

Gauge theory
176
property that its field strength (in mathematical language, its curvature) is zero
everywhere; a gauge theory is not limited to these configurations. In other words, the
distinguishing characteristic of a gauge theory is that the gauge field does not merely
compensate for a poor choice of coordinate system; there is generally no gauge
transformation that makes the gauge field vanish.
When analyzing the dynamics of a gauge theory, the gauge field must be treated as a
dynamical variable, similarly to other objects in the description of a physical situation. In
addition to its interaction with other objects via the covariant derivative, the gauge field
typically contributes energy in the form of a "self-energy" term. One can obtain the
equations for the gauge theory by:
• starting from a naïve ansatz without the gauge field (in which the derivatives appear in a
"bare" form);
• listing those global symmetries of the theory that can be characterized by a continuous
parameter (generally an abstract equivalent of a rotation angle);
• computing the correction terms that result from allowing the symmetry parameter to
vary from place to place; and
• reinterpreting these correction terms as couplings to one or more gauge fields, and
giving these fields appropriate self-energy terms and dynamical behavior.
This is the sense in which a gauge theory "extends" a global symmetry to a local symmetry,
and closely resembles the historical development of the gauge theory of gravity known as
general relativity.
Physical experiments
Gauge theories are used to model the results of physical experiments, essentially by:
• limiting the universe of possible configurations to those consistent with the information
used to set up the experiment, and then
• computing the probability distribution of the possible outcomes that the experiment is
designed to measure.
The mathematical descriptions of the "setup information" and the "possible measurement
outcomes" (loosely speaking, the "boundary conditions" of the experiment) are generally
not expressible without reference to a particular coordinate system, including a choice of
gauge. (If nothing else, one assumes that the experiment has been adequately isolated from
"external" influence, which is itself a gauge-dependent statement.) Mishandling gauge
dependence in boundary conditions is a frequent source of anomalies in gauge theory
calculations, and gauge theories can be broadly classified by their approaches to anomaly
avoidance.
Continuum theories
The two gauge theories mentioned above (continuum electrodynamics and general
relativity) are examples of continuum field theories. The techniques of calculation in a
continuum theory implicitly assume that:
• given a completely fixed choice of gauge, the boundary conditions of an individual
configuration can in principle be completely described;
• given a completely fixed gauge and a complete set of boundary conditions, the principle
of least action determines a unique mathematical configuration (and therefore a unique
physical situation) consistent with these bounds;

Gauge theory
177
• the likelihood of possible measurement outcomes can be determined by:
• establishing a probability distribution over all physical situations determined by
boundary conditions that are consistent with the setup information,
• establishing a probability distribution of measurement outcomes for each possible
physical situation, and
• convolving these two probability distributions to get a distribution of possible
measurement outcomes consistent with the setup information; and
• fixing the gauge introduces no anomalies in the calculation, due either to gauge
dependence in describing partial information about boundary conditions or to
incompleteness of the theory.
These assumptions are close enough to valid, across a wide range of energy scales and
experimental conditions, to allow these theories to make accurate predictions about almost
all of the phenomena encountered in daily life, from light, heat, and electricity to eclipses
and spaceflight. They fail only at the smallest and largest scales (due to omissions in the
theories themselves) and when the mathematical techniques themselves break down (most
notably in the case of turbulence and other chaotic phenomena).
Quantum field theories
Other than these "classical" continuum field theories, the most widely known gauge
theories are quantum field theories, including quantum electrodynamics and the Standard
Model of elementary particle physics. The starting point of a quantum field theory is much
like that of its continuum analog: a gauge-covariant action integral which characterizes
"allowable" physical situations according to the principle of least action. However,
continuum and quantum theories differ significantly in how they handle the excess degrees
of freedom represented by gauge transformations. Continuum theories, and most
pedagogical treatments of the simplest quantum field theories, use a gauge fixing
prescription to reduce the orbit of mathematical configurations that represent a given
physical situation to a smaller orbit related by a smaller gauge group (the global symmetry
group, or perhaps even the trivial group).
More sophisticated quantum field theories, in particular those which involve a non-abelian
gauge group, break the gauge symmetry within the techniques of perturbation theory by
introducing additional fields (the Faddeev-Popov ghosts) and counterterms motivated by
anomaly cancellation, in an approach known as BRST quantization. While these concerns
are in one sense highly technical, they are also closely related to the nature of
measurement, the limits on knowledge of a physical situation, and the interactions between
incompletely specified experimental conditions and incompletely understood physical
theory. The mathematical techniques that have been developed in order to make gauge
theories tractable have found many other applications, from solid-state physics and
crystallography to low-dimensional topology.
History
The earliest field theory having a gauge symmetry was Maxwell's formulation of 
electrodynamics in 1864. The importance of this symmetry remained unnoticed in the 
earliest formulations. Similarly unnoticed, Hilbert had derived the Einstein field equations 
by postulating the invariance of the action under a general coordinate transformation. Later 
Hermann Weyl, in an attempt to unify general relativity and electromagnetism, conjectured

Gauge theory
178
(incorrectly, as it turned out) that Eichinvarianz or invariance under the change of scale (or
"gauge") might also be a local symmetry of general relativity. After the development of
quantum mechanics, Weyl, Vladimir Fock and Fritz London modified gauge by replacing the
scale factor with a complex quantity and turned the scale transformation into a change of
phase—a U(1) gauge symmetry). This explained the electromagnetic field effect on the
wave function of a charged quantum mechanical particle. This was the first widely
recognised gauge theory, popularised by Pauli in the 1940s.[1]
In 1954, attempting to resolve some of the great confusion in elementary particle physics,
Chen Ning Yang and Robert Mills introduced non-abelian gauge theories as models to
understand the strong interaction holding together nucleons in atomic nuclei. (Ronald
Shaw, working under Abdus Salam, independently introduced the same notion in his
doctoral thesis.) Generalizing the gauge invariance of electromagnetism, they attempted to
construct a theory based on the action of the (non-abelian) SU(2) symmetry group on the
isospin doublet of protons and neutrons. This is similar to the action of the U(1) group on
the spinor fields of quantum electrodynamics. In particle physics the emphasis was on using
quantized gauge theories.
This idea later found application in the quantum field theory of the weak force, and its
unification with electromagnetism in the electroweak theory. Gauge theories became even
more attractive when it was realized that non-abelian gauge theories reproduced a feature
called asymptotic freedom. Asymptotic freedom was believed to be an important
characteristic of strong interactions. This motivated searching for a strong force gauge
theory. This theory, now known as quantum chromodynamics, is a gauge theory with the
action of the SU(3) group on the color triplet of quarks. The Standard Model unifies the
description of electromagnetism, weak interactions and strong interactions in the language
of gauge theory.
In the 1970s, Sir Michael Atiyah began studying the mathematics of solutions to the
classical Yang-Mills equations. In 1983, Atiyah's student Simon Donaldson built on this
work to show that the differentiable classification of smooth 4-manifolds is very different
from their classification up to homeomorphism. Michael Freedman used Donaldson's work
to exhibit exotic R4s, that is, exotic differentiable structures on Euclidean 4-dimensional
space. This led to an increasing interest in gauge theory for its own sake, independent of its
successes in fundamental physics. In 1994, Edward Witten and Nathan Seiberg invented
gauge-theoretic techniques based on supersymmetry which enabled the calculation of
certain topological invariants. These contributions to mathematics from gauge theory have
led to a renewed interest in this area.
See Pickering for more about the history of gauge and quantum field theories.[2]
Explanation
Many powerful theories in physics are described by Lagrangians which are invariant under 
certain symmetry transformation groups. When they are invariant under a transformation 
identically performed at every point in the space in which the physical processes occur, 
they are said to have a global symmetry. The requirement of local symmetry is much more 
strict than the requirement of global symmetry. In fact, a global symmetry is just a local 
symmetry whose group's parameters are fixed in space-time. This can be viewed as a 
generalization of the equivalence principle of general relativity in which each point in 
spacetime is allowed a choice of local reference (coordinate) frame. As in that situation,

Gauge theory
179
gauge "symmetries" reflect a redundancy in the description of a system. Historically, these
ideas were first noticed in the context of classical electromagnetism and later in general
relativity. However, the modern importance of gauge symmetries appeared in relativistic
quantum mechanics of electrons (see discussions below). Today, gauge theories are useful
in condensed matter, nuclear and high energy physics among other subfields.
Sometimes, the term 'gauge symmetry' is used in a more general sense to include any local
symmetry, like for example, diffeomorphisms. This sense of the term will not be used in this
article.
Yang-Mills theories are a particular example of gauge theories with non-abelian
symmetry groups specified by the Yang-Mills action (Other gauge theories with a
non-abelian gauge symmetry also exist, e.g., the Chern-Simons model).
There is a certain inaccuracy in the way the term symmetry is used in some physics
literature, especially in more elementary books about elementary particles and field theory.
In (quantum) physics, symmetry is a transformation between physical states that preserves
the expectation values of all observables O (in particular the Hamiltonian). S: |φ> → |ψ> =
S|φ>; |<ψ|O|ψ>|2=|<φ|O|φ>|2. The usual formulation of physics theories uses fields, which
sometimes are not physical quantities. Such are the gauge fields (fiber bundle connections
for the mathematicians), which provide a redundant but convenient description of the
physical degrees of freedom. The gauge (local) "symmetries" are a reflection of this
redundancy. The physical quantities are certain equivalence classes of gauge fields. An
analogy can be made with the construction of the real numbers. We can use sequences of
rational numbers that have the same limit. Of course, each real number is represented by
infinitely many such sequences. We can choose a particular well-defined sequence to
represent the real number. This corresponds to the procedure of 'gauge fixing' in gauge
theories. The fact that gauge fields are not physical degrees of freedom becomes very clear
when we try to quantize them. Then we are forced to work in one way or another with the
physical quantities by removing the redundancy (the gauge symmetry). Another important
illustration of the problem with the gauge “symmetries” is when we have anomalies. By
definition these are symmetries which exist in the classical system, but not in its quantum
counterpart. Anomalies are quite usual and also an experimental fact — for example, the
axial anomaly in the strong interactions (broken symmetries). However, because gauge
symmetries are not symmetries, gauge anomalies are not something that just complicates a
proposed quantum theory but something that kills it, i.e. there are no gauge "anomalies",
because such theories don't exist. This is why having the exact relation between the
number of flavours and quark colours in the Standard model is so important — otherwise
there is a gauge anomaly and the theory does not exist. For the same reason, string
theories are defined in 10 dimensions. Only then do the anomalies cancel.
Importance
The importance of gauge theories for physics stems from the tremendous success of the
mathematical formalism in providing a unified framework to describe the quantum field
theories of electromagnetism, the weak force and the strong force. This theory, known as
the Standard Model, accurately describes experimental predictions regarding three of the
four fundamental forces of nature, and is a gauge theory with the gauge group SU(3) ×
SU(2) × U(1). Modern theories like string theory, as well as some formulations of general
relativity, are, in one way or another, gauge theories.

Gauge theory
180
A simple gauge symmetry example from electrodynamics
The definition of electrical ground in an electric circuit is an example of a gauge symmetry.
When the electric potentials at all points in a circuit are raised by the same amount, the
circuit will still operate identically, as the potential differences (voltages) in the circuit are
unchanged. A common illustration of this fact is the sight of a small bird perched on a high
voltage power line without electrocution, because the bird is insulated from the ground (as
long as it doesn't complete the circuit by accidentally touching another wire or some
grounded structure).
This is called a global gauge symmetry. The absolute value of the potential is immaterial;
what matters to circuit operation is the potential differences across the components of the
circuit. The definition of the ground point is arbitrary, but once that point is set, then that
definition must be followed globally.
In contrast, if some symmetry could be defined arbitrarily from one position to the next,
that would be a local gauge symmetry. In fact, the example above (of electromagnetism) is
actually a local gauge symmetry where the particular transformation of the potential of the
electric field is just the constant one (a global symmetry is a local one but not vice versa);
there are an infinite number of transformations of the electromagnetic field's potential A
that are not constant but can be made consistent as explained below. (Although the number
of transformations is infinite, the number of classes of transformation is finite--just 1 class,
the addition of the gradient of a scalar function.)
Classical gauge theory
This section requires some familiarity with classical or quantum field theory, and the use of
Lagrangians.
Definitions in this section: gauge group, gauge field, interaction Lagrangian, gauge boson
An example: Scalar O(n) gauge theory
The following illustrates how local gauge invariance can be "motivated" heuristically
starting from global symmetry properties, and how it leads to an interaction between fields
which were originally non-interacting.
Consider a set of n non-interacting scalar fields, with equal masses m. This system is
described by an action which is the sum of the (usual) action for each scalar field φi
The Lagrangian (density) can be compactly written as
by introducing a vector of fields
The term 
is Einstein notation for the partial derivative of 
in each of the four
dimensions. It is now transparent that the Lagrangian is invariant under the transformation
whenever G is a constant matrix belonging to the n-by-n orthogonal group O(n). This is the 
global symmetry of this particular Lagrangian, and the symmetry group is often called the

Gauge theory
181
gauge group; the mathematical term is structure group, especially in the theory of
G-structures. Incidentally, Noether's theorem implies that invariance under this group of
transformations leads to the conservation of the current
where the Ta matrices are generators of the SO(n) group. There is one conserved current
for every generator.
Now, demanding that this Lagrangian should have local O(n)-invariance requires that the G
matrices (which were earlier constant) should be allowed to become functions of the
space-time coordinates x.
Unfortunately, the G matrices do not "pass through" the derivatives. When G = G(x),
This suggests defining a "derivative" D with the property
It can be checked that such a "derivative" (called a covariant derivative) is
where the gauge field A(x) is defined to have the transformation law
and g is the coupling constant - a quantity defining the strength of an interaction.
The gauge field is an element of the Lie algebra, and can therefore be expanded as
There are therefore as many gauge fields as there are generators of the Lie algebra.
Finally, we now have a locally gauge invariant Lagrangian
Pauli calls gauge transformation of the first type to the one applied to fields as 
, while the
compensating transformation in 
is said to be a gauge transformation of the second type.
Feynman diagram of scalar bosons
interacting via a gauge boson
The difference between this Lagrangian and the
original globally gauge-invariant Lagrangian is seen
to be the interaction Lagrangian
This term introduces interactions between the n scalar fields just as a consequence of the 
demand for local gauge invariance. In the quantized version of this classical field theory, 
the quanta of the gauge field A(x) are called gauge bosons. The interpretation of the

Gauge theory
182
interaction Lagrangian in quantum field theory is of scalar bosons interacting by the
exchange of these gauge bosons.
The Yang-Mills Lagrangian for the gauge field
Our picture of classical gauge theory is almost complete except for the fact that to define
the covariant derivatives D, one needs to know the value of the gauge field 
at all
space-time points. Instead of manually specifying the values of this field, it can be given as
the solution to a field equation. Further requiring that the Lagrangian which generates this
field equation is locally gauge invariant as well, one possible form for the gauge field
Lagrangian is (conventionally) written as
with
and the trace being taken over the vector space of the fields. This is called the Yang-Mills
action. Other gauge invariant actions also exist (e.g. nonlinear electrodynamics,
Born-Infeld action, Chern-Simons model, theta term etc.).
Note that in this Lagrangian there is not a field 
whose transformation counterweights
the one of 
. Invariance of this term under gauge transformations is a particular case of a
prior classical (that is geometrical) symmetry. This symmetry must be restricted in order to
perform quantization, the procedure being denominated gauge fixing, but even after
restriction, gauge transformations are possible (see Sakurai, Advanced Quantum
Mechanics, sect 1-4).
The complete Lagrangian for the O(n) gauge theory is now
A simple example: Electrodynamics
As a simple application of the formalism developed in the previous sections, consider the
case of electrodynamics, with only the electron field. The bare-bones action which
generates the electron field's Dirac equation is
The global symmetry for this system is
The gauge group here is U(1), just the phase angle of the field, with a constant θ.
"Local"ising this symmetry implies the replacement of θ by θ(x).
An appropriate covariant derivative is then
Identifying the "charge" e with the usual electric charge (this is the origin of the usage of
the term in gauge theories), and the gauge field A(x) with the four-vector potential of
electromagnetic field results in an interaction Lagrangian

Gauge theory
183
where 
is the usual four vector electric current density. The gauge principle is
therefore seen to naturally introduce the so-called minimal coupling of the electromagnetic
field to the electron field.
Adding a Lagrangian for the gauge field 
in terms of the field strength tensor exactly
as in electrodynamics, one obtains the Lagrangian which is used as the starting point in
quantum electrodynamics.
See also: Dirac equation, Maxwell's equations, Quantum electrodynamics
Mathematical formalism
Gauge theories are usually discussed in the language of differential geometry.
Mathematically, a gauge is just a choice of a (local) section of some principal bundle. A
gauge transformation is just a transformation between two such sections.
Although gauge theory is dominated by the study of connections (primarily because it's
mainly studied by high-energy physicists), the idea of a connection is not central to gauge
theory in general. In fact, a result in general gauge theory shows that affine
representations (i.e. affine modules) of the gauge transformations can be classified as
sections of a jet bundle satisfying certain properties. There are representations which
transform covariantly pointwise (called by physicists gauge transformations of the first
kind), representations which transform as a connection form (called by physicists gauge
transformations of the second kind) (this is an affine representation) and other more
general representations, such as the B field in BF theory. And of course, we can consider
more general nonlinear representations (realizations), but that is extremely complicated.
But still, nonlinear sigma models transform nonlinearly, so there are applications.
If we have a principal bundle P whose base space is space or spacetime and structure group
is a Lie group, then the sections of P form a principal homogeneous space of the group of
gauge transformations.
We can define a connection (gauge connection) on this principal bundle, yielding a
covariant derivative ∇ in each associated vector bundle. If we choose a local frame (a local
basis of sections) then we can represent this covariant derivative by the connection form A,
a Lie algebra-valued 1-form which is called the gauge potential in physics and which is
evidently not an intrinsic but a frame-dependent quantity. From this connection form we
can construct the curvature form F, a Lie algebra-valued 2-form which is an intrinsic
quantity, by
where d stands for the exterior derivative and 
stands for the wedge product. ( 
is an
element of the vector space spanned by the generators 
, and so the components of 
do
not commute with one another. Hence the wedge product 
does not vanish.)
Infinitesimal gauge transformations form a Lie algebra, which is characterized by a smooth
Lie algebra valued scalar, ε. Under such an infinitesimal gauge transformation,
where 
is the Lie bracket.

Gauge theory
184
One nice thing is that if 
, then 
where D is the covariant
derivative
Also, 
, which means F transforms covariantly.
Not all gauge transformations can be generated by infinitesimal gauge transformations in
general. An example is when the base manifold is a compact manifold without boundary
such that the homotopy class of mappings from that manifold to the Lie group is nontrivial.
See instanton for an example.
The Yang-Mills action is now given by
where * stands for the Hodge dual and the integral is defined as in differential geometry.
A quantity which is gauge-invariant i.e. invariant under gauge transformations is the
Wilson loop, which is defined over any closed path, γ, as follows:
where χ is the character of a complex representation ρ and 
represents the path-ordered
operator.
Quantization of gauge theories
Gauge theories may be quantized by specialization of methods which are applicable to any
quantum field theory. However, because of the subtleties imposed by the gauge constraints
(see section on Mathematical formalism, above) there are many technical problems to be
solved which do not arise in other field theories. At the same time, the richer structure of
gauge theories allow simplification of some computations: for example Ward identities
connect different renormalization constants.
Methods and aims
The first gauge theory to be quantized was quantum electrodynamics (QED). The first
methods developed for this involved gauge fixing and then applying canonical quantization.
The Gupta-Bleuler method was also developed to handle this problem. Non-abelian gauge
theories are now handled by a variety of means. Methods for quantization are covered in
the article on quantization.
The main point to quantization is to be able to compute quantum amplitudes for various
processes allowed by the theory. Technically, they reduce to the computations of certain
correlation functions in the vacuum state. This involves a renormalization of the theory.
When the running coupling of the theory is small enough, then all required quantities may
be computed in perturbation theory. Quantization schemes intended to simplify such
computations (such as canonical quantization) may be called perturbative quantization
schemes. At present some of these methods lead to the most precise experimental tests of
gauge theories.
However, in most gauge theories, there are many interesting questions which are 
non-perturbative. Quantization schemes suited to these problems (such as lattice gauge 
theory) may be called non-perturbative quantization schemes. Precise computations in 
such schemes often require supercomputing, and are therefore less well-developed

Gauge theory
185
currently than other schemes.
Anomalies
Some of the symmetries of the classical theory are then seen not to hold in the quantum
theory — a phenomenon called an anomaly. Among the most well known are:
• The scale anomaly, which gives rise to a running coupling constant. In QED this gives
rise to the phenomenon of the Landau pole. In Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) this
leads to asymptotic freedom.
• The chiral anomaly in either chiral or vector field theories with fermions. This has close
connection with topology through the notion of instantons. In QCD this anomaly causes
the decay of a pion to two photons.
• The gauge anomaly, which must cancel in any consistent physical theory. In the
electroweak theory this cancellation requires an equal number of quarks and leptons.
Pure gauge
A pure gauge is the set of field configurations obtained by a gauge transform on the null
field configuration. So it is a particular "gauge orbit" in the field configuration's space.
In the abelian case, where 
, the pure gauge is the set of
field configurations 
for all f(x).
Bibliography
• Becchi, C. (1997). "Introduction to Gauge Theories". arΧiv: hep-ph/9705211 [3] [hep-ph].
• Bromley, D.A. (2000). Gauge Theory of Weak Interactions. Springer. ISBN
3-540-67672-4.
• Cheng, T.-P.; Li, L.-F. (1983). Gauge Theory of Elementary Particle Physics. Oxford
University Press. ISBN 0-19-851961-3.
• Frampton, P. (2008). Gauge Field Theories (3rd ed.). Wiley-VCH.
• Gross, D. (1992). http://psroc.phys.ntu.edu.tw/cjp/v30/955.pdf|"Gauge theory - Past,
Present and Future". http:/ / psroc. phys. ntu. edu. tw/ cjp/ v30/ 955. pdf. Retrieved on
2009-04-23.
• Jackson, J.D. (2002). "From Lorenz to Coulomb and other explicit gauge transformations".
arΧiv: physics/0204034 [4] [physics.class-ph].
• Kane, G.L. (1987). Modern Elementary Particle Physics. Perseus Books. ISBN
0-201-11749-5.
• Schumm, Bruce (2004) Deep Down Things. Johns Hopkins University Press. A serious
attempt by a physicist to explain gauge theory and the Standard Model without elaborate
mathematics.
• Svetlichny, G. (1999). "Preparation for Gauge Theory". arΧiv: math-ph/9902027 [5]
[math-ph].

Gauge theory
186
See also
• Aharonov-Bohm effect
• Coulomb gauge
• Electroweak theory
• Gauge covariant derivative
• Gauge fixing
• Gauge gravitation theory
• Kaluza-Klein theory
• Lie algebra
• Lie group
• Lorenz gauge
• Quantum chromodynamics
• Quantum electrodynamics
• Quantum field theory
• Quantum gauge theory
• Standard Model
• Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
• Symmetry breaking
• Symmetry in physics
• Yang-Mills theory
• Yang-Mills existence and mass gap
References
[1] Wolfgang Pauli (1941) " Relativistic Field Theories of Elementary Particles, (http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/
RMP/ v13/ i3/ p203_1)" Rev. Mod. Phys. 13: 203-32.
[2] Pickering, A. (1984).
http://www.amazon.com/Constructing-Quarks-Sociological-History-Particle/dp/0226667995/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1?ie=UTF8&s=books
Quarks. University of Chicago Press]]. ISBN 0226667995. http:/ / www. amazon. com/
Constructing-Quarks-Sociological-History-Particle/ dp/ 0226667995/ ref=pd_bbs_sr_1?ie=UTF8& s=books&
qid=1235837296& sr=8-1.
[3] http:/ / www. arxiv. org/ abs/ hep-ph/ 9705211
[4] http:/ / www. arxiv. org/ abs/ physics/ 0204034
[5] http:/ / www. arxiv. org/ abs/ math-ph/ 9902027
External links
• Yang-Mills equations on DispersiveWiki (http:/ / tosio. math. toronto. edu/ wiki/ index.
php/ Yang-Mills_equations)

Yang–Mills theory
187
Yang–Mills theory
Yang-Mills theory is a gauge theory of quantum field theory based on the SU(N) group. It
was formulated by Yang and Mills in 1954[1] in an effort to extend the original concept of
gauge theory for an Abelian group, as was quantum electrodynamics, to the case of a
nonabelian group with the intention to get an explanation for strong interactions. This
initial idea was not a success as the quanta of the Yang-Mills field must be massless in
order to maintain gauge invariance but such massless particles should have had long range
effects that are not seen in experiments. So, the idea was put aside till the start of 1960
when the concept of breaking of symmetry in massless theories, initially due to Jeffrey
Goldstone, Yoichiro Nambu and Giovanni Jona-Lasinio, with particles acquiring mass in this
way, was put forward.
This prompted a significant restart of Yang-Mills theory studies that proved successful in
the formulation of both electroweak unification and quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The
electroweak interaction is described by SU(2)xU(1) group while QCD is a SU(3) gauge
theory. The electroweak theory was obtained combining SU(2) with U(1), being quantum
electrodynamics described by U(1), in order to produce the photon field. The Standard
Model combines strong, weak and electromagnetic interaction through the symmetry group
SU(2)xU(1)xSU(3). Strong interactions are not currently unified with the other two but
couplings have been shown to converge to a single value at higher energies in an
experiment at LEP, assuming a higher order symmetry as supersymmetry holds.
Phenomenology at lower energies in quantum chromodynamics is not completely
understood due to the difficulties of managing such a theory with a strong coupling. This is
the reason confinement has not been theoretically proven, though it is a consistent
experimental observation. Proof that QCD confines at low energy is a mathematical
problem of great relevance, and an award has been proposed by the Clay Mathematics
Institute for whoever is able to show that the Yang-Mills theory has a mass gap.
Mathematical overview
Yang-Mills theories are a special example of gauge theory with symmetry non-abelian group
given by the Lagrangian
with the generators of the Lie algebra corresponding to the F-quantities (the curvature or
field-strength form) satisfying
and the covariant derivative defined as
where 
is the vector potential, and 
is the coupling constant. For D=4, 
is a pure
number and for a SU(N) group one has
The relation
can be derived by the commutator

Yang–Mills theory
188
The field has the property of being self-interacting and equations of motion that one obtains
are said semilinear, as nonlinearities are both with and without derivatives. This means that
one can manage this theory only by perturbation theory, with small nonlinearities. The
Yang-Mills equations of motion are
with Bianchi identities
Note that the transition between "upper" ("contravariant") and "lower" ("covariant") vector
or tensor components is trivial for a indexes (e.g. 
), whereas for μ and ν it is
nontrivial, corresponding e.g. to the usual Lorentz signature, 
.
Quantization of Yang–Mills theory
The most appropriate method to quantize the Yang-Mills theory is by functional methods,
i.e. path integrals. One introduces a generating functional for n-point functions as
but this integral has no meaning as is because the potential vector can be arbitrarily chosen
due to the gauge freedom. This problem was already known for quantum electrodynamics
but here becomes more severe due to non-abelian properties of the gauge group. A way out
has been given by Ludvig Faddeev and Victor Popov with the introduction of a ghost field
(see Faddeev-Popov ghost) that has the property of being unphysical as it agrees with
Fermi-Dirac statistics but it is a complex scalar field, violating in this way the spin-statistics
theorem. So, we can write the generating functional as
that is the expression commonly used to derive Feynman's rules (see Feynman diagram).
Here we have 
for the ghost field while 
fixes the gauge's choice for the quantization.
Feynman's rules obtained from this functional are the following

Yang–Mills theory
189
These rules for Feynman diagrams are easily obtained when we realize that the generating
functional given above can be rewritten as
being
the generating functional of the free theory. Expanding in 
and computing the functional
derivatives, we are able to obtain all the n-point functions with perturbation theory. Using
LSZ reduction formula we get from the n-point functions the corresponding amplitudes for
the given processes and cross sections and decay rates are promptly obtained. The theory
is renormalizable and corrections are finite at any order of perturbation theory.
For quantum electrodynamics, being in this case abelian the gauge group (see abelian
group), the ghost field decouples. This can be easily realized when we look at the coupling
between the gauge field and the ghost field that is 
. For the Abelian case all
the structure constants 
are zero and so there is no coupling. In the non-Abelian case,
the ghost field appears as a useful way to rewrite the quantum field theory without physical
consequences on the observables of the theory as cross sections or decay rates.
One of the most important results obtained for Yang-Mills theory is asymptotic freedom.
This result can be obtained assuming the coupling constant 
as small (so small
nonlinearities), as indeed happens to high energies, and applying perturbation theory. The
relevance of this result is due to the fact that a Yang-Mills theory describes strong
interactions and asymptotic freedom permits to treat properly experimental results coming
from deep inelastic scattering.

Yang–Mills theory
190
In order to obtain the behavior at high energies of the Yang-Mills theory, and so to prove
asymptotic freedom, one does perturbation theory assuming a small coupling. This is
verified a posteriori in the ultraviolet limit. In the opposite limit, infrared limit, the situation
is quite the opposite being the coupling too large for perturbation theory to be reliable.
Indeed, most of the difficulties that current research meets is just managing the theory at
low energies that is the interesting one being inherent to the description of hadronic matter
and, more generally, to all the observed bound states of gluons and quarks and their
confinement (see hadrons). Then, the most used method to study the theory in this limit is
to try to solve it on computers (see lattice gauge theory). In this case, large computational
resources are needed to be sure the right limit of infinite volume (smaller lattice spacing) is
hit. This is the limit the results have to be compared with. Smaller spacing and larger
coupling are not independent each others and to accomplish both larger computational
resources are demanded. As for today, the situation appears somewhat satisfactory for the
hadronic spectrum and the computation of the gluon and ghost propagators but the
glueball and hybrids spectra are yet a questioned matter also in view of the experimental
observation of such exotic states. Indeed, 
resonance[2] [3] is not seen in any of such
lattice computations and contrasting interpretations have been put forward. This is
currently a hot debated matter.
Open problems
The Yang-Mills theories were generally acknowledged in the physics community after
Gerardus 't Hooft, in 1972, could prove their renormalizability. This applies even, if the
gauge bosons described by this theory are massive, as in the electroweak theory. However,
the mass is only an "acquired" one, namely, as suggested, by the famous Higgs mechanism.
Concerning the mathematics, it should be noted that presently, i.e. in 2009, the Yang-Mills
theory is a very active field of research, yielding e.g. a classification of differentiable
structures of four-dimensional manifolds by Simon Donaldson. Furthermore, the field of
Yang-Mills theories was put by the Clay Mathematics Institute into its list of "Millennium
Prize Problems". Here the prize-problem consists, especially, in a proof of the suggestion
that the lowest excitations of a pure Yang-Mills theory (i.e. without matter fields) have a
finite mass-gap with regard to the vacuum state. Another open problem, connected with
this suggestion, is a proof of the confinement property in the presence of additional
Fermion particles.
In physics the survey of Yang-Mills theories does usually not start from perturbation
analysis or analytical methods, but more recently from systematic application of numerical
methods to lattice gauge theories.

Yang–Mills theory
191
See also
• Yang-Mills existence and mass gap
• Aharonov-Bohm effect
• Bell's theorem
• Coulomb gauge
• Electroweak theory
• Field theoretical formulation of the standard model
• Gauge covariant derivative
• Kaluza-Klein theory
• Lorenz gauge
• Quantum chromodynamics
• Quantum gauge theory
• Symmetry in physics
• Weyl gauge
Bibliography
• Paul Frampton, Gauge Field Theories, Third, Enlarged and Improved Edition,
WILEY-VCH (2008).
• George Svetlichny, Preparation for Gauge Theory [4], an introduction to mathematical
aspects
• David Gross, Gauge theory - Past, Present and Future [5], Conference notes
• Cheng, T., Li, L., Gauge Theory of Elementary Particle Physics, Oxford University Press,
1983, ISBN 0198519613
References
[1] C. N. Yang, R. Mills, Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic Gauge Invariance (http:/ / link. aps. org/ doi/
10. 1103/ PhysRev. 96. 191), Phys. Rev. 96, 191 (1954)
[2] I. Caprini, G. Colangelo, H. Leutwyler, Mass and width of the lowest resonance in QCD, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
132001 (2006)
[3] F. J. Yndurain, R. Garcia-Martin, J. R. Pelaez, Experimental status of the 
isoscalar S wave at low energy:
pole and scattering length, Phys. Rev. D 76, 074034 (2007)
[4] http:/ / xxx. lanl. gov/ abs/ math-ph/ 9902027
[5] http:/ / psroc. phys. ntu. edu. tw/ cjp/ v30/ 955. pdf
External links
• Yang-Mills theory on DispersiveWiki (http:/ / tosio. math. toronto. edu/ wiki/ index. php/
Yang-Mills_equations)
• The Clay Mathematics Institute (http:/ / www. claymath. org)
• The Millennium Prize Problems (http:/ / www. claymath. org/ prizeproblems)

Yangian
192
Yangian
Yangian is an important structure in modern representation theory, a type of a quantum
group with origins in physics. Yangians first appeared in the work of Ludvig Faddeev and
his school concerning the quantum inverse scattering method in the late 1970s and early
1980s. Initially they were considered a convenient tool to generate the solutions of the
quantum Yang–Baxter equation. The name Yangian was introduced by Vladimir Drinfeld in
1985 in honor of C.N. Yang.
Description
For 
any 
finite-dimensional 
semisimple 
Lie 
algebra 
a, 
Drinfeld 
defined 
an
infinite-dimensional Hopf algebra Y(a), called the Yangian of a. This Hopf algebra is a
deformation of the universal enveloping algebra U(a[z]) of the Lie algebra of polynomial
loops of a given by explicit generators and relations. The relations can be encoded by
identities involving a rational R-matrix. Replacing it with a trigonometric R-matrix, one
arrives at affine quantum groups, defined in the same paper of Drinfeld.
In the case of the general linear Lie algebra glN, the Yangian admits a simpler description
in terms of a single ternary (or RTT) relation on the matrix generators due to Faddeev and
coauthors. The Yangian Y(glN) is defined to be the algebra generated by elements 
with
1 ≤ i, j ≤ N and p ≥ 0, subject to the relations
Defining 
, setting
and introducing the R-matrix R(z) = I + z–1 P on CN 
CN, where P is the operator
permuting the tensor factors, the above relations can be written more simply as the ternary
relation:
The Yangian becomes a Hopf algebra with comultiplication Δ, counit ε and antipode s given
by
The twisted Yangian Y–(gl2N), introduced by G. I. Olshanky, is the sub-Hopf algebra
generated by the coefficients of
where σ is the involution of gl2N given by

Yangian
193
Applications to classical representation theory
G.I. Olshansky and I.Cherednik discovered that the Yangian of glN is closely related with
the branching properties of irreducible finite-dimensional representations of general linear
algebras. In particular, the classical Gelfand–Tsetlin construction of a basis in the space of
such a representation has a natural interpretation in the language of Yangians, studied by
M.Nazarov and V.Tarasov. Olshansky, Nazarov and Molev later discovered a generalization
of this theory to other classical Lie algebras, based on the twisted Yangian.
Representation theory of Yangians
Irreducible finite-dimensional representations of Yangians were parametrized by Drinfeld in
a way similar to the highest weight theory in the representation theory of semisimple Lie
algebras. The role of the highest weight is played by a finite set of Drinfeld polynomials.
Drinfeld also discovered a generalization of the classical Schur–Weyl duality between
representations of general linear and symmetric groups that involves the Yangian of slN and
the degenerate affine Hecke algebra (graded Hecke algebra of type A, in George Lusztig's
terminology).
Representations of Yangians have been extensively studied, but the theory is still under
active development.
References
• Vyjayanthi Chari and Andrew Pressley, A Guide to Quantum Groups, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1994 ISBN 0-521-55884-0
• Vladimir Drinfeld, Hopf algebras and the quantum Yang–Baxter equation, (Russian),
Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 283 (1985), no. 5, 1060–1064
• Vladimir Drinfeld, A new realization of Yangians and of quantum affine algebras
(Russian), Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 296 (1987), no. 1, 13–17; translation in Soviet Math.
Dokl. 36 (1988), no. 2, 212–216
• Vladimir Drinfeld, Degenerate affine Hecke algebras and Yangians (Russian),
Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 20 (1986), no. 1, 69–70
• Alexander Molev, Yangians and classical Lie algebras, Mathematical Surveys and
Monographs, 143. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2007. xviii+400 pp.
ISBN 978-0-8218-4374-1

Superalgebra
194
Superalgebra
In mathematics and theoretical physics, a superalgebra is a Z2-graded algebra. That is, it
is an algebra over a commutative ring or field with a decomposition into "even" and "odd"
pieces and a multiplication operator that respects the grading.
The prefix super- comes from the theory of supersymmetry in theoretical physics.
Superalgebras and their representations, supermodules, provide an algebraic framework
for formulating supersymmetry. The study of such objects is sometimes called super linear
algebra. Superalgebras also play an important role in related field of supergeometry where
they enter into the definitions of supermanifolds and superschemes.
Formal definition
Let K be a fixed commutative ring. In most applications, K is a field such as R or C.
A superalgebra over K is a K-module A with a direct sum decomposition
together with a bilinear multiplication A × A → A such that
where the subscripts are read modulo 2.
A superring, or Z2-graded ring, is a superalgebra over the ring of integers Z.
The elements of Ai are said to be homogeneous. The parity of a homogeneous element x,
denoted by |x|, is 0 or 1 according to whether it is in A0 or A1. Elements of parity 0 are said
to be even and those of parity 1 to be odd. If x and y are both homogeneous then so is the
product xy and 
An associative superalgebra is one whose multiplication is associative and a unital
superalgebra is one with a multiplicative identity element. The identity element in a unital
superalgebra is necessarily even. Unless otherwise specified, all superalgebras in this
article are assumed to be associative and unital.
A commutative superalgebra is one which satisfies a graded version of commutativity.
Specifically, A is commutative if
for all homogeneous elements x and y of A.
Examples
• Any algebra over a commutative ring K may be regarded as a purely even superalgebra
over K; that is, by taking A1 to be trivial.
• Any Z or N-graded algebra may be regarded as superalgebra by reading the grading
modulo 2. This includes examples such as tensor algebras and polynomial rings over K.
• In particular, any exterior algebra over K is a superalgebra. The exterior algebra is the
standard example of a supercommutative algebra.
• The symmetric polynomials and alternating polynomials together form a superalgebra,
being the even and odd parts, respectively. Note that this is a different grading from the
grading by degree.
• Clifford algebras are superalgebras. They are generally noncommutative.

Superalgebra
195
• The set of all endomorphisms (both even and odd) of a super vector space forms a
superalgebra under composition.
• The set of all square supermatrices with entries in K forms a superalgebra denoted by
Mp|q(K). This algebra may be identified with the algebra of endomorphisms of a free
supermodule over K of rank p|q.
• Lie superalgebras are a graded analog of Lie algebras. Lie superalgebras are nonunital
and nonassociative; however, one may construct the analog of a universal enveloping
algebra of a Lie superalgebra which is a unital, associative superalgebra.
Further definitions and constructions
Even subalgebra
Let A be a superalgebra over a commutative ring K. The submodule A0, consisting of all
even elements, is closed under multiplication and contains the identity of A and therefore
forms a subalgebra of A, naturally called the even subalgebra. It forms an ordinary
algebra over K.
The set of all odd elements A1 is an A0-bimodule whose scalar multiplication is just
multiplication in A. The product in A equips A1 with a bilinear form
such that
for all x, y, and z in A1. This follows from the associativity of the product in A.
Grade involution
There is a canonical involutive automorphism on any superalgebra called the grade
involution. It is given on homogeneous elements by
and on arbitrary elements by
where xi are the homogeneous parts of x. If A has no 2-torsion (in particular, if 2 is
invertible) then the grade involution can be used to distinguish the even and odd parts of A:
Supercommutativity
The supercommutator on A is the binary operator given by
on homogeneous elements. This can be extended to all of A by linearity. Elements x and y of
A are said to supercommute if [x, y] = 0.
The supercenter of A is the set of all elements of A which supercommute with all elements
of A:
The supercenter of A is, in general, different than the center of A as an ungraded algebra. A
commutative superalgebra is one whose supercenter is all of A.

Superalgebra
196
Super tensor product
The graded tensor product of two superalgebras may be regarded as a superalgebra with a
multiplication rule determined by:
Generalizations and categorical definition
One can easily generalize the definition of superalgebras to include superalgebras over a
commutative superring. The definition given above is then a specialization to the case
where the base ring is purely even.
Let R be a commutative superring. A superalgebra over R is a R-supermodule A with a
R-bilinear multiplication A × A → A that respects the grading. Bilinearity here means that
for all homogeneous elements r ∈ R and x, y ∈ A.
Equivalently, one may define a superalgebra over R as a superring A together with an
superring homomorphism R → A whose image lies in the supercenter of A.
One may also define superalgebras categorically. The category of all R-supermodules forms
a monoidal category under the super tensor product with R serving as the unit object. An
associative, unital superalgebra over R can then be defined as a monoid in the category of
R-supermodules. That is, a superalgebra is an R-supermodule A with two (even) morphisms
for which the usual diagrams commute.
References
• Deligne, Pierre; John W. Morgan (1999). "Notes on Supersymmetry (following Joseph
Bernstein)". Quantum Fields and Strings: A Course for Mathematicians 1: 41–97,
American Mathematical Society. ISBN 0-8218-2012-5.
• Manin, Y. I. (1997). Gauge Field Theory and Complex Geometry ((2nd ed.) ed.). Berlin:
Springer. ISBN 3-540-61378-1.
• Varadarajan, V. S. (2004). Supersymmetry for Mathematicians: An Introduction. Courant
Lecture Notes in Mathematics 11. American Mathematical Society. ISBN 0-8218-3574-2.

Supergroup
197
Supergroup
Supergroup or super group may refer to:
• Supergroup (physics), a generalization of groups, used in the study of supersymmetry
• Supergroup (music), a term for music groups formed by artists who are already notable
or respected in their fields
• Supergroup (City of Heroes), the term for player guilds in the City of Heroes MMORPG
• SuperGroup, a VH1 reality show
• Supergroup, a geological unit
• Super-group, a team of superheroes who work together
• Supergroup, a rarely used term in mathematics for the counterpart of a subgroup
Symmetry breaking
Symmetry breaking in physics describes a phenomenon where (infinitesimally) small
fluctuations acting on a system crossing a critical point decide a system's fate, by
determining which branch of a bifurcation is taken. For an outside observer unaware of the
fluctuations (the "noise"), the choice will appear arbitrary. This process is called symmetry
"breaking", because such transitions usually bring the system from a disorderly state into
one of two more ordered, less probable states. Since disorder is more symmetric in the
sense that small variations to it don't change its overall appearance, the symmetry gets
"broken".
Symmetry breaking is supposed to play a major role in pattern formation.
In particular, we can distinguish between:
• An explicit symmetry breaking happens when the laws describing a system are
themselves not invariant under the symmetry in question.
• Spontaneous symmetry breaking describes the case where the laws are invariant but it
appears the system isn't because the background of the system, its vacuum, is
noninvariant. Such a symmetry breaking is parametrized by an order parameter. A
special case of this type of symmetry breaking is dynamical symmetry breaking.
In 1972, Nobel laureate P.W.Anderson used the idea of Symmetry breaking to show some of
the drawbacks of Reductionism in his paper titled More is different in Science[1] .
See also
• Higgs mechanism
• QCD vacuum
• Goldstone boson
References
[1] Anderson, P.W. (1972).
"http://www.cmp.caltech.edu/~motrunch/Teaching/Phy135b_Winter07/MoreIsDifferent.pdf|More is Different".
Science 177 (4047): 393–396. doi: 10.1126/science.177.4047.393 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1126/ science. 177.
4047. 393). PMID 17796623. http:/ / www. cmp. caltech. edu/ ~motrunch/ Teaching/ Phy135b_Winter07/
MoreIsDifferent. pdf.

Spontaneous symmetry breaking
198
Spontaneous symmetry breaking
In physics, spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs when a system that is symmetric
with respect to some symmetry group goes into a vacuum state that is not symmetric. When
that happens, the system no longer appears to behave in a symmetric manner. It is a
phenomenon that naturally occurs in many situations.
The symmetry group can be discrete, such as the space group of a crystal, or continuous
(e.g., a Lie group), such as the rotational symmetry of space. However if the system
contains only a single spatial dimension then only discrete symmetries may be broken in a
vacuum state of the full quantum theory, although a classical solution may break a
continuous symmetry.
A common example to help explain this phenomenon is a ball sitting on top of a hill. This
ball is in a completely symmetric state. However, its state is unstable: the slightest
perturbing force will cause the ball to roll down the hill in some particular direction. At that
point, symmetry has been broken because the direction in which the ball rolled has a
feature that distinguishes it from all other directions.
Mathematical example: the Mexican hat potential
Graph of spontaneous symmetry
breaking function in equation (2)
In the simplest example, the spontaneously broken field
is described by a scalar field theory. In physics, one
way of seeing spontaneous symmetry breaking is
through the use of Lagrangians. Lagrangians, which
essentially dictate how a system will behave, can be
split up into kinetic and potential terms
It is in this potential term (V(φ)) that the action of symmetry breaking occurs. An example
of a potential is illustrated in the graph at the right.
This potential has many possible minima (vacuum states) given by
for any real θ between 0 and 2π. The system also has an unstable vacuum state
corresponding to Φ = 0. This state has a U(1) symmetry. However, once the system falls
into a specific stable vacuum state (corresponding to a choice of θ) this symmetry will be
lost or spontaneously broken.

Spontaneous symmetry breaking
199
Higgs mechanism
In the Standard Model, spontaneous symmetry breaking is accomplished by using the Higgs
boson and is responsible for the masses of the W and Z bosons. A slightly more technical
presentation of this mechanism is given in the article on the Yukawa interaction, where it is
shown how spontaneous symmetry breaking can be used to give mass to fermions.
Broader concept
More generally, we can have spontaneous symmetry breaking in nonvacuum situations and
for systems not described by actions. The crucial concept here is the order parameter. If
there is a field (often a background field) which acquires an expectation value (not
necessarily a vacuum expectation value) which is not invariant under the symmetry in
question, we say that the system is in the ordered phase and the symmetry is spontaneously
broken. This is because other subsystems interact with the order parameter which forms a
"frame of reference" to be measured against, so to speak.
If a vacuum state obeys the initial symmetry then the system is said to be in the Wigner
mode, otherwise it is in the Goldstone mode.
Examples
• For ferromagnetic materials, the laws describing it are invariant under spatial rotations.
Here, the order parameter is the magnetization, which measures the magnetic dipole
density. Above the Curie temperature, the order parameter is zero, which is spatially
invariant and there is no symmetry breaking. Below the Curie temperature, however, the
magnetization acquires a constant (in the idealized situation where we have full
equilibrium; otherwise, translational symmetry gets broken as well) nonzero value which
points in a certain direction. The residual rotational symmetries which leaves the
orientation of this vector invariant remain unbroken but the other rotations get
spontaneously broken.
• The laws describing a solid are invariant under the full Euclidean group, but the solid
itself spontaneously breaks this group down to a space group. The displacement and the
orientation are the order parameters.
• The laws of physics are spatially invariant, but here on the surface of the Earth, we have
a background gravitational field (which plays the role of the order parameter here) which
points downwards, breaking the full rotational symmetry. This explains why up, down
and the vertical directions are all "different" but all the horizontal directions are still
isotropic.
• General relativity has a Lorenz gauge symmetry, but in FRW cosmological models, the
mean 4-velocity field defined by averaging over the velocities of the galaxies (the galaxies
act like gas particles at cosmological scales) acts as an order parameter breaking this
symmetry. Similar comments can be made about the cosmic microwave background.
• Here on Earth, Galilean invariance (in the nonrelativistic approximation) is broken by the
velocity field of the Earth/atmosphere, which acts as the order parameter here. This
explains why people thought moving bodies tend towards rest before Galileo. We tend
not to be aware of broken symmetries.
• For the electroweak model, as explained earlier, the Higgs field acts as the order 
parameter breaking the electroweak gauge symmetry to the electromagnetic gauge 
symmetry. Like the ferromagnetic example, there is a phase transition at the electroweak

Spontaneous symmetry breaking
200
temperature. The same comment about us not tending to notice broken symmetries
explains why it took so long for us to discover electroweak unification.
• For superconductors, there is a collective condensed matter field ψ which acts as the
order parameter breaking the electromagnetic gauge symmetry.
• In general relativity, diffeomorphism covariance is broken by the nonzero order
parameter, the metric tensor field.
• Take a flat plastic ruler which is identical on both sides and push both ends together.
Before buckling, the system is symmetric under the reflection about the plane of the
ruler. But after buckling, it either buckles upwards or downwards.
• Consider a uniform layer of fluid over an infinite horizontal plane. This system has all the
symmetries of the Euclidean plane. But now heat the bottom surface uniformly so that it
becomes much hotter than the upper surface. When the temperature gradient becomes
large enough, convection cells will form, breaking the Euclidean symmetry.
• Consider a bead on a circular hoop that is rotated about a vertical diameter. As the
rotational velocity is increased gradually from rest, the bead will initially stay at its initial
equilibrium point at the bottom of the hoop (intuitively stable, lowest gravitational
potential). At a certain critical rotational velocity, this point will become unstable and the
bead will jump to one of two other newly created equilibria, equidistant from the center.
Initially, the system is symmetric with respect to the diameter, yet after passing the
critical velocity, the bead must choose between the two new equilibrium points, thus
breaking symmetry. Note: This can easily be tried at home with an electric drill, a
marble, and a pot cover, (or any other combination you can think of) and is the
two-dimensional, mechanical analogue of the symmetry breaking that occurs in the Higgs
Boson field.
Nobel Prize
On October 7, 2008, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the 2008 Nobel Prize
in Physics to two Japanese citizens and a Japanese-born American for their work in
subatomic physics. American Yoichiro Nambu, 87, of the University of Chicago, won half of
the prize for the discovery of the mechanism of spontaneous broken symmetry. Japanese
physicists Makoto Kobayashi and Toshihide Maskawa shared the other half of the prize for
discovering the origin of the broken symmetry. [1] The trio shared the 10 million kronor
(1.25 million USD) purse, as well as a diploma and an invitation to the prize ceremonies in
Stockholm on December 10, 2008.
See also
•
Autocatalytic reactions and order creation
•
Goldstone boson
•
Catastrophe theory
•
Grand unified theory
•
CP-violation
•
Mermin-Wagner theorem
•
Dynamical symmetry breaking
•
Second-order phase transition
•
Explicit symmetry breaking
•
Symmetry breaking
•
Gauge gravitation theory
•
Vacuum fluctuation

Spontaneous symmetry breaking
201
Notes
[1] The Nobel Foundation. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2008/index.html|"The Nobel Prize
in Physics 2008". nobelprize.org. http:/ / nobelprize. org/ nobel_prizes/ physics/ laureates/ 2008/ index. html.
Retrieved on January 15 2008.
External links
• Spontaneous symmetry breaking (http:/ / hyperphysics. phy-astr. gsu. edu/ hbase/ forces/
unify. html#c2)
Goldstone boson
In particle and condensed matter physics, Goldstone bosons (also known as
Nambu-Goldstone bosons) are bosons that appear in models exhibiting spontaneous
breakdown of continuous symmetries (cf. spontaneously broken symmetry). They were
discovered by Nambu in the context of the BCS superconductivity mechanism,[1] and
subsequently elucidated by Goldstone,[2] and systematically generalized in the context of
quantum field theory.[3]
These spinless bosons correspond to the spontaneously broken symmetry generators, and
are characterized by the quantum numbers of these. They transform nonlinearly (shift)
under the action of these generators, and can thus be excited out of the asymmetric
vacuum by these generators. Thus, they can be thought of as the excitations of the field in
the broken symmetry "directions" — and are massless if the spontaneously broken
symmetry is not also broken explicitly. If, instead, the symmetry is not exact, i.e., if it is
explicitly broken as well as spontaneously broken, then the Nambu-Goldstone bosons are
not 
massless, 
though 
they 
typically 
remain 
relatively 
light; 
these 
are 
called
pseudo-Goldstone bosons or pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons (abbreviated PNGBs).
Goldstone's theorem
Goldstone's theorem examines a generic continuous symmetry which is spontaneously
broken, i.e., its currents are conserved, but the ground state (vacuum) is not invariant
under the action of the corresponding charges. Then, necessarily, new massless (or light, if
the symmetry iss not exact) scalar particles appear in the spectrum of possible excitations.
There is one scalar particle — called a Goldstone boson — for each generator of the
symmetry that is broken, i.e., that does not preserve the ground state.
There is an arguable loophole in the theorem. If one reads the theorem carefully, it only
states that there exist non-vacuum states with arbitrarily small energies. Take for example
a chiral N = 1 super QCD model with a nonzero squark VEV which is conformal in the IR.
The chiral symmetry is a global symmetry which is (partially) spontaneously broken. Some
of the "Goldstone bosons" associated with this SSB are charged under the unbroken gauge
group and hence, these composite bosons have a continuous mass spectrum with arbitrarily
small masses but yet there is no Goldstone boson with exactly zero mass. In other words,
the Goldstone bosons are infraparticles.
In theories with gauge symmetry, the Goldstone bosons are "eaten" by the gauge bosons.
The latter become massive and their new, longitudinal polarization is provided by the
Goldstone boson.

Goldstone boson
202
A simple example
Consider a complex scalar field φ (phi), with the constraint that φ*φ = k². One way to get a
constraint of this sort is by including a potential
and taking the limit as λ → ∞ (this is called the Abelian nonlinear σ-model). The constraint,
and the action, below, are invariant under a phase transformation, U(1), δ φ = i ε φ.
The field can be redefined to give a real scalar field (i.e., a spin-zero particle) θ without any
constraint by
where θ is the Goldstone boson (actually kθ is), and the U(1) symmetry transformation
effects a shift on θ, namely δ θ = ε, but does not preserve the ground state | 0 > , (i.e. the
above infinitesimal transformation does not annihilate it—the hallmark of invariance), as
evident in the charge of the current below.
That is, corresponding Lagrangian density is given by
and the resulting conserved U(1) current is Jμ = − k2 ∂μ θ . The resulting charge Q shifts θ
and the ground state. Thus, a ground state with <θ> = 0 will shift to a different ground
state with <θ> = − ε.
Note that the constant term m²k² in the Lagrangian density has no physical significance,
and the other term is simply the kinetic term for a massless scalar. In general the Goldstone
boson is always massless, and parameterises the curve of possible vacuum states.
Goldstone's Argument
The principle of Goldstone's argument is that the charge operator for any symmetry current
is time independent.
So acting with the charge operator on the vacuum either annihilates the vacuum, if that is
symmetric; else, if not, it produces a zero-frequency state out of it, through its shift
transformation feature illustrated. So, if the vacuum is not invariant under the symmetry,
action of the charge operator produces a state which is different from the vacuum chosen,
but which has zero frequency. This is a long wavelength oscillation of a field which is nearly
stationary: there are states with zero frequency, so that the theory cannot have a mass gap.
This argument is clarified by taking the limit carefully. If an approximate charge operator is
applied to the vacuum,
a state with approximately zero time derivative is produced,
.
Assuming a mass gap 
, the frequency of any state which is orthogonal to the vacuum is
at least 
.

Goldstone boson
203
Letting A become large leads to a contradiction.
This argument fails completely when the symmetry is gauged, because then the symmetry
generator is only performing a gauge transformation. A gauge transformed state is the
same exact state, so that acting with a symmetry generator does not get one out of the
vacuum.
Nonrelativistic theories
A version of Goldstone's theorem also applies to nonrelativistic theories (and also
relativistic theories with spontaneously broken Lorentz symmetry). It basically states that
for each spontaneously broken global symmetry, there corresponds a quasiparticle with no
energy gap (the nonrelativistic version of the mass gap). It's important to note that the
energy here is really 
and not 
. However, two different spontaneously
broken generators may now give rise to the same Nambu-Goldstone boson. For example, in
a superfluid, both the U(1) particle number symmetry and Galilean symmetry are
spontaneously broken. However, the phonon is the Goldstone boson for both.
In general, the phonon is effectively the Nambu-Goldstone boson for spontaneously broken
Galilean/Lorentz symmetry.
Goldstone fermions
Spontaneously broken global fermionic symmetries, which occur in some supersymmetric
models, lead to Goldstone fermions, or goldstinos.[4] [5] These have spin ½, instead of 0, and
carry all quantum numbers of the respective supersymmetry generators broken
spontaneously. Bosonic superpartners of these goldstinos under supersymmetries, called
sgoldstinos, might sometimes also appear. Strictly speaking, however, spontaneous
symmetry, 
and 
supersymmetry, 
breaking 
smashes 
up 
("reduces") 
multiplet 
and
supermultiplet structures, into the characteristic nonlinear realizations of broken
supersymmetry, so that different particles need not be connected by supersymmetry
transformations 
anymore; 
even 
though, 
perturbatively 
in 
the 
symmetry-breaking
parameter, they may be usefully allowed to be perceive to be.
Goldstone bosons in nature
• In fluids, the phonon is longitudinal and it is the Goldstone boson of the spontaneously
broken Galilean symmetry. In solids, the situation is more complicated; the Goldstone
bosons are the longitudinal and transverse phonons and they happen to be the Goldstone
bosons of spontaneously broken Galilean, translational and rotational symmetry with no
simple one-to-one correspondence between the Goldstone modes and the broken
symmetries.
• In magnets, the original rotational symmetry (present in the absence of an external
magnetic field) is spontaneously broken such that the magnetization points into a specific
direction. The Goldstone bosons then are the magnons, i.e. spin waves in which the local
magnetization direction oscillates.
• The pions are the pseudo-Goldstone bosons that result from the spontaneous breakdown 
of the chiral-flavor symmetries of QCD effected by quark condensation due to the strong

Goldstone boson
204
interaction. These symmetries are further explicitly broken by the masses of the quarks,
so that the pions are not massless, but their mass is significantly smaller than typical
hadron masses.
• The longitudinal polarization components of the W and Z bosons correspond to the
Goldstone bosons of the spontaneously broken part of the electroweak symmetry
SU(2)⊗U(1). Because this symmetry is gauged, the three would-be Goldstone bosons are
"eaten" by the three gauge bosons corresponding to the three broken generators; this
gives these three gauge bosons a mass, and the associated necessary third polarization
degree of freedom. This is described in the Standard Model through the Higgs
mechanism.
See also
• Pseudo-Goldstone boson
• Majoron
• Higgs mechanism
• Higgs boson
• Mermin-Wagner theorem
References
[1] Nambu, Y (1960). "Quasiparticles and Gauge Invariance in the Theory of Superconductivity". Physical Review
117: 648 – 663. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.117.648 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRev. 117. 648).
[2] Goldstone, J (1961). "Field Theories with Superconductor Solutions". Nuovo Cimento 19: 154 – 164. doi:
10.1007/BF02812722 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF02812722).
[3] Goldstone et al., J (1962). "Broken Symmetries". Physical Review 127: 965 – 970. doi:
10.1103/PhysRev.127.965 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRev. 127. 965).
[4] Volkov et al., D.V. (1973). "Is the neutrino a goldstone particle?". Physics Letters B46: 109 – 110. doi:
10.1016/0370-2693(73)90490-5 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0370-2693(73)90490-5).
[5] Salam et al., A (1974). "On Goldstone Fermion". Physics Letters B49: 465–467. doi:
10.1016/0370-2693(74)90637-6 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0370-2693(74)90637-6).

Higgs boson
205
Higgs boson
Higgs boson
Composition:
Elementary particle
Family:
Boson
Status:
 Hypothetical 
Theorized:
F. Englert, R. Brout, P. Higgs, G. S. Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, and T. W. B. Kibble
1964
Spin:
 0 
The Higgs boson is a massive scalar elementary particle predicted to exist by the Standard
Model in particle physics. At present there are no known fundamental scalar particles in
nature.
The Higgs boson is the only Standard Model particle that has not yet been observed.
Experimental detection of the Higgs boson would help explain the origin of mass in the
universe. More specifically, the Higgs boson would explain the difference between the
massless photon, which mediates electromagnetism, and the massive W and Z bosons,
which mediate the weak force. If the Higgs boson exists, it is an integral and pervasive
component of the material world.
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva, which came online on September 10,
2008 is scheduled to become fully operational by late 2009, and is expected to provide
experimental evidence either confirming or refuting the Higgs boson's existence. An
accident in September 2008 has the LHC temporarily out of commission; ongoing
experiments at Fermilab continue previous attempts at detection (although hindered by the
lower energy of the Fermilab Tevatron accelerator). It has been reported that Fermilab
physicists suggest the odds of Tevatron detecting the Higgs boson are between 50% and
96%, depending on its precise mass.[1]
Origin
The Higgs mechanism, which gives mass to vector bosons, was theorized in 1964 by
François Englert and Robert Brout ("boson scalaire");[2] in October of the same year by
Peter Higgs,[3] working from the ideas of Philip Anderson; and independently by Gerald
Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, and Tom Kibble,[4] who worked out the results by the spring of
1963.[5] The three papers written on this discovery by Guralnik, Hagen, Kibble, Higgs,
Brout, and Englert were each recognized as milestone papers during Physical Review
Letters 50th anniversary celebration.[6] Steven Weinberg and Abdus Salam were the first to
apply the Higgs mechanism to the electroweak symmetry breaking. The electroweak theory
predicts a neutral particle whose mass is not far from that of the W and Z bosons.

Higgs boson
206
Theoretical overview
A one-loop Feynman diagram of the
first-order correction to the Higgs mass.
The Higgs boson couples strongly to the
top quark so it may decay into top anti-top
quark pairs.
The Higgs boson particle is one quantum component
of the theoretical Higgs field. In empty space, the
Higgs field has an amplitude different from zero,
i.e., a non-zero vacuum expectation value. The
existence of this non-zero vacuum expectation plays
a 
fundamental 
role: 
it 
gives 
mass 
to 
every
elementary particle which should have mass,
including the Higgs boson itself. In particular, the
acquisition of a non-zero vacuum expectation value
spontaneously breaks electroweak gauge symmetry,
which scientists often refer to as the Higgs
mechanism. This is the simplest mechanism capable of giving mass to the gauge bosons
while remaining compatible with gauge theories. In essence, this field is analogous to a
pool of molasses that "sticks" to the otherwise massless fundamental particles which travel
through the field, converting them into particles with mass which form, for example, the
components of atoms.
In the Standard Model, the Higgs field consists of two neutral and two charged component
fields. Both of the charged components and one of the neutral fields are Goldstone bosons,
which act as the longitudinal third-polarization components of the massive W+, W–, and Z
bosons. The quantum of the remaining neutral component corresponds to the massive
Higgs boson. Since the Higgs field is a scalar field, the Higgs boson has no spin, hence no
intrinsic angular momentum. The Higgs boson is also its own antiparticle and is CP-even.
The Standard Model does not predict the mass of the Higgs boson. If that mass is between
115 and 180 GeV/c2, then the Standard Model can be valid at energy scales all the way up
to the Planck scale (1016 TeV). Many theorists expect new physics beyond the Standard
Model to emerge at the TeV-scale, based on unsatisfactory properties of the Standard
Model. The highest possible mass scale allowed for the Higgs boson (or some other
electroweak symmetry breaking mechanism) is 1.4 TeV; beyond this point, the Standard
Model becomes inconsistent without such a mechanism because unitarity is violated in
certain scattering processes. Many models of supersymmetry predict that the lightest Higgs
boson (of several) will have a mass only slightly above the current experimental limits, at
around 120 GeV or less.

Higgs boson
207
Experimental search
A Feynman diagram of one way the
Higgs boson may be produced at the
LHC. Here, two gluons decay into a
top/anti-top pair which then combine to
make a neutral Higgs.
As of June 2009[7], the Higgs boson has yet to be
observed 
experimentally, 
despite 
large 
efforts
invested in accelerator experiments at CERN and
Fermilab. The data gathered at the LEP collider at
CERN allowed an experimental lower bound to be set
for the mass of the Standard Model Higgs boson of
114.4 GeV/c2 at 95% confidence level. The same
experiment has produced a small number of events
that could be interpreted as resulting from Higgs
bosons with mass just above said cutoff - around 115
GeV - but the number of events was insufficient to
draw definite conclusions.[8] The LEP was shut down
in 2000 due to construction of its successor - the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). The LHC, due to begin
proper 
experimentation 
in 
2009 
after 
initial
calibration, is expected to be able to confirm or reject the existence of the Higgs boson. Full
operational mode has been delayed until late September 2009, because of problems
discovered with a number of magnets during the calibration and startup phase.
At the Fermilab Tevatron, there are ongoing experiments searching for the Higgs boson. As
of March 2009[7], combined data from CDF and D0 experiments at the Tevatron were
sufficient to exclude the Higgs boson in the range between 160 GeV/c2 and 170 GeV/c2 at
the 95% confidence level.[9] Continued data collection is aimed at raising this lower bound.
It may be possible to estimate the mass of the Higgs Boson indirectly. In the Standard
Model, the Higgs has a number of indirect effects; most notably, Higgs loops result in tiny
corrections to W and Z masses. Precision measurements of electroweak parameters, such
as the Fermi constant and masses of W/Z bosons, can be used to constrain the mass of the
Higgs. As of 2006, measurements of electroweak observables allowed the exclusion of a
Standard Model Higgs boson having a mass greater than 285 GeV/c2 at 95% CL, and
estimated its mass to be 129+74−49 GeV/c2 (approximately 138 proton masses).[10] As of
early 2009, Standard Model Higgs is excluded by electroweak measurements above 185
GeV at 95% CL. However, it should be noted that these indirect constraints make
assumptions about post-SM physics (or, more specifically, lack thereof). One may still
discover a Higgs above 185 GeV if it's accompanied by other particles between Standard
Model and GUT scale.
Some have argued that there exists potential evidence of the Higgs Boson,[11] [12] but to
date no such evidence has convinced the physics community.

Higgs boson
208
Alternatives to the Higgs mechanism for electroweak
symmetry breaking
In the years since the Higgs boson was proposed, several alternatives to the Higgs
mechanism have been proposed. All of the alternative mechanisms use strongly interacting
dynamics to produce a vacuum expectation value that breaks electroweak symmetry. A
partial list of these alternative mechanisms are:
• Technicolor[13] is a class of models that attempts to mimic the dynamics of the strong
force as a way of breaking electroweak symmetry.
• Extra dimensional Higgsless models where the role of the Higgs field is played by the
fifth component of the gauge field. [14]
• Abbott-Farhi models of composite W and Z vector bosons.[15]
• Top quark condensate
In popular culture
The Higgs boson is sometimes referred to as "the God particle," after the title of Leon
Lederman's book for lay readers.[16] The term mistakenly implies that the Higgs boson
would complete our understanding of physics. In fact, while the discovery of the Higgs
boson would be a groundbreaking stage in the story of electroweak unification, it would
leave remaining the question of unification with Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), gravity,
and the ultimate origins and early evolution of the universe. Being an atheist, Peter Higgs
dislikes the epithet "God particle".[17] The term is rarely used by particle physicists when
discussing the Higgs Boson; its prevalence is primarily due to its usage in popular media.
See also
• List of particles
• Yukawa interaction
• ZZ diboson
• Quantum triviality
Notes
[1] http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7893689.stm|"Race for 'God particle' heats up". http:/ / news. bbc.
co. uk/ 2/ hi/ science/ nature/ 7893689. stm.
[2] François Englert and Robert Brout, 1964, " Broken Symmetry and the Mass of Gauge Vector Mesons, (http:/ /
link. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ p321)" Phys. Rev. Lett. 13: 321-23.
[3] Peter Higgs, 1964, " Broken Symmetries and the Masses of Gauge Bosons, (http:/ / link. aps. org/ abstract/
PRL/ v13/ p508)"Phys. Rev. Lett. 13: 508-09.
[4] Gerald Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, and T. W. B. Kibble, 1964, " Global Conservation Laws and Massless Particles,
(http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ i20/ p585_1)" Phys. Rev. Let. 13: 585-87.
[5] Gerald Guralnik, 2001, " A Physics History of My Part in the Theory of Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking and
Gauge particles, (http:/ / chep. het. brown. edu/ stlouis-v4. pdf)" Text of talk presented at a Colloquium at
Washington University in St. Louis.
[6] Physical Review Letters - 50th Anniversary Milestone Papers (http:/ / prl. aps. org/ 50years/ milestones#1964)
[7] http:/ / en. wikipedia. org/ wiki/ Higgs_boson
[8] " Searches for Higgs Bosons (http:/ / pdg. lbl. gov/ 2006/ reviews/ higgs_s055. pdf) (pdf)]" from W.-M. Yao et al.
(2006). "http://pdg.lbl.gov|Review of Particle Physics". J Phys. G 33: 1. doi: 10.1088/0954-3899/33/1/001 (http:/ /
dx. doi. org/ 10. 1088/ 0954-3899/ 33/ 1/ 001). http:/ / pdg. lbl. gov.
[9] http://www.fnal.gov/pub/presspass/press_releases/Higgs-mass-constraints-20090313.html|"Fermilab
experiments constrain Higgs mass". http:/ / www. fnal. gov/ pub/ presspass/ press_releases/
Higgs-mass-constraints-20090313. html.

Higgs boson
209
[10] " H0 Indirect Mass Limits from Electroweak Analysis. (http:/ / pdglive. lbl. gov/ popupblockdata.
brl?nodein=S055HEW& inscript=Y& fsizein=1)"
[11] Potential Higgs Boson discovery: " Higgs Boson: Glimpses of the God particle. (http:/ / www. newscientist.
com/ channel/ fundamentals/ mg19325934. 600-higgs-boson-glimpses-of-the-god-particle. html)"
[12] " 'God particle' may have been seen, (http:/ / news. bbc. co. uk/ 2/ hi/ science/ nature/ 3546973. stm)" BBC
news.
[13] S. Dimopoulos and Leonard Susskind (1979). "Mass Without Scalars". Nucl.Phys.B 155: 237–252. doi:
10.1016/0550-3213(79)90364-X (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0550-3213(79)90364-X).
[14] C. Csaki and C. Grojean and L. Pilo and J. Terning (2004). "http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0308038|Towards a
realistic model of Higgsless electroweak symmetry breaking". Physical Review Letters 92: 101802. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.101802 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 92. 101802). http:/ / arXiv. org/
abs/ hep-ph/ 0308038.
[15] L. F. Abbott and E. Farhi (1981). "Are the Weak Interactions Strong?". Phys.Lett.B 101: 69. doi:
10.1016/0370-2693(81)90492-5 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0370-2693(81)90492-5).
[16] Leon Lederman, 1993. The God Particle: If the Universe Is the Answer, What Is the Question? New York: Dell.
[17] (http:/ / www. reuters. com/ article/ scienceNews/ idUSL0765287220080407?sp=true)
References
• " The LEP Electroweak Working Group. (http:/ / lepewwg. web. cern. ch/ LEPEWWG/ )"
• " Particle Data Group: Review of searches for Higgs bosons. (http:/ / pdg. lbl. gov/ 2005/
reviews/ contents_sports. html#hyppartetc)"
• Leon Lederman and Dick Teresi, 1993. The God Particle: If the Universe Is the Answer,
What Is the Question? Houghton Mifflin Co.. ISBN 0-395-55849-2, paperback ISBN
0-385-31211-3.
• " Fermilab Results Change Estimated Mass Of Postulated Higgs boson. (http:/ / www.
spacedaily. com/ news/ physics-04s. html)"
• " Higgs boson on the horizon. (http:/ / physicsweb. org/ article/ news/ 4/ 9/ 2/ 1)"
• " Signs of mass-giving particle get stronger. (http:/ / www. sciencenews. org/ articles/
20001104/ fob6. asp)"
• " Higgs boson: One page explanation. (http:/ / pprc. qmul. ac. uk/ ~lloyd/ epp/ higgs3.
html)" In 1993, the UK Science Minister, William Waldegrave, challenged physicists to
produce a one page answer to the question "What is the Higgs boson, and why do we
want to find it?"
• " Higgs mechanism/boson simple explanation via cartoon. (http:/ / www. pparc. ac. uk/ ps/
bbs/ bbs_mass_hm. asp)"
• " Higgs physics at the LHC. (http:/ / www. quark. lu. se/ ~atlas/ thesis/ egede/
thesis-node6. html)"
• " Quark experiment predicts heavier Higgs. (http:/ / www. newscientist. com/ news/ news.
jsp?id=ns99995095)"
• Martin, Richard, " The God Particle and the Grid. (http:/ / www. wired. com/ wired/
archive/ 12. 04/ grid_pr. html)"
• " The Higgs boson (http:/ / www. exploratorium. edu/ origins/ cern/ ideas/ higgs. html)"
by the CERN exploratorium.
• " Higgs Boson - the search for the God particle. (http:/ / www. bbc. co. uk/ radio4/ history/
inourtime/ inourtime_20041118. shtml)" BBC Radio 4: "In Our Time"

Higgs boson
210
Further reading
• G S Guralnik, C R Hagen and T W B Kibble (1964).
"http://link.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v13/p585|Global Conservation Laws and Massless
Particles". Physical Review Letters 13: 585. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.585 (http:/ / dx.
doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 13. 585). http:/ / link. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ p585.
• F Englert and R Brout (1964). "http://link.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v13/p321|Broken
Symmetry and the Mass of Gauge Vector Mesons". Physical Review Letters 13: 321. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.321 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 13. 321). http:/
/ link. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ p321.
• Peter Higgs (1964). "Broken Symmetries, Massless Particles and Gauge Fields". Physics
Letters 12: 132. doi: 10.1016/0031-9163(64)91136-9 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/
0031-9163(64)91136-9).
• Peter Higgs (1964). "http://link.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v13/p508|Broken Symmetries and
the Masses of Gauge Bosons". Physical Review Letters 13: 508. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.508 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 13. 508). http:/
/ link. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ p508.
• Peter Higgs (1966). "http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v145/i4/p1156_1|Spontaneous
Symmetry Breakdown without Massless Bosons". Physical Review 145: 1156. doi:
10.1103/PhysRev.145.1156 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRev. 145. 1156). http:/ /
prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PR/ v145/ i4/ p1156_1.
• Y Nambu; G Jona-Lasinio (1961).
"http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v122/i1/p345_1|Dynamical Model of Elementary
Particles Based on an Analogy with Superconductivity". I Phys. Rev. 122: 345–358. doi:
10.1103/PhysRev.122.345 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRev. 122. 345). http:/ /
prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PR/ v122/ i1/ p345_1.
• J Goldstone, A Salam and S Weinberg (1962).
"http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v127/i3/p965_1|Broken Symmetries". Physical Review
127: 965. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.127.965 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRev. 127.
965). http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PR/ v127/ i3/ p965_1.
• P W Anderson (1963). "http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PR/v130/i1/p439_1|Plasmons, Gauge
Invariance, and Mass". Physical Review 130: 439. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.130.439 (http:/ /
dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRev. 130. 439). http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PR/ v130/ i1/
p439_1.
• A Klein and B W Lee (1964). "http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v12/i10/p266_1|Does
Spontaneous Breakdown of Symmetry Imply Zero-Mass Particles?". Physical Review
Letters 12: 266. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.12.266 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/
PhysRevLett. 12. 266). http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v12/ i10/ p266_1.
• W Gilbert (1964). "http://link.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v12/p713|Broken Symmetries and
Massless Particles". Physical Review Letters 12: 713. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.12.713
(http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 12. 713). http:/ / link. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/
v12/ p713.

Higgs boson
211
External links
• At Fermilab, the Race Is on for the 'God Particle' (http:/ / www. nytimes. com/ 2007/ 07/
24/ science/ 24ferm. html)
• Physics World, Introducing the little Higgs (http:/ / physicsworld. com/ cws/ article/ print/
11353)
• A quasi-political Explanation of the Higgs Boson (http:/ / www. hep. ucl. ac. uk/ ~djm/
higgsa. html)
• The Atom Smashers, a blog about the making of a documentary about the search for the
Higgs boson (http:/ / www. theatomsmashers. blogspot. com/ )
• In CERN Courier, Steven Weinberg reflects on spontaneous symmetry breaking (http:/ /
cerncourier. com/ cws/ article/ cern/ 32522)
• Steven Weinberg Praises Teams for Higgs Boson Theory (http:/ / www. pas. rochester.
edu/ urpas/ news/ Hagen_030708)
• Physical Review Letters - 50th Anniversary Milestone Papers (http:/ / prl. aps. org/
50years/ milestones#1964)
• Imperial College London on PRL 50th Anniversary Milestone Papers (http:/ / www3.
imperial. ac. uk/ newsandeventspggrp/ imperialcollege/ newssummary/
news_13-6-2008-12-42-20?newsid=38514)
• The God Particle, from National Geographic Magazine (http:/ / ngm. nationalgeographic.
com/ 2008/ 03/ god-particle/ achenbach-text)
• "Tevatron experiments double-team Higgs boson", sets lower bound at 170GeV (http:/ /
www. physorg. com/ news137076565. html)
• Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble Mechanism on Scholarpedia (http:/ / www.
scholarpedia. org/ article/ Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble_mechanism)
• History of Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble Mechanism on Scholarpedia
(http:/ / www. scholarpedia. org/ article/
Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble_mechanism_(history))
• God Particle Overview (http:/ / www. godparticle. com/ )
• Fermilab 'closing in' on the God particle (http:/ / www. newscientist. com/ article/
dn16618-fermilab-closing-in-on-the-god-particle. html)
• Provides a new and simple explanation of the mass and gravity enigma (http:/ / www.
higgs-boson. org/ )

Higgs mechanism
212
Higgs mechanism
In the standard model of particle physics, the Higgs mechanism is a theoretical framework
which explains how the masses of the W and Z bosons arise as a result of electroweak
symmetry breaking.[1]
More generally, the Higgs mechanism is the way that the gauge bosons in any gauge
theory, like the standard model, get a nonzero mass. It requires an extra field, a Higgs
field, which interacts with the gauge fields, and which has a nonzero value in its lowest
energy state, a vacuum expectation value. This means that all of space is filled with the
background Higgs field, the so-called Higgs condensate. Interaction with this background
field changes the low-energy spectrum of the gauge fields and the gauge bosons become
massive.
The Higgs field has a non-trivial self-interaction, like the Mexican hat potential, which leads
to spontaneous symmetry breaking: in the lowest energy state the symmetry of the
potential (which includes the gauge symmetry) is broken by the condensate. Analysis of
small fluctuations of the fields near the minimum reveals that the gauge bosons and other
particles become massive.
In particle language, the constant Higgs field is a superfluid of charged particles, and a
charged superfluid is a superconductor. Inside a superconductor, the gauge electric and
magnetic fields both become short-ranged, or massive.
The Higgs field in the standard model is a SU(2) doublet, a complex spinor with four real
components, which is charged under the standard model U(1). After symmetry breaking,
three of the four degrees of freedom in the Higgs field mix with the W and Z bosons, while
the one remaining degree of freedom becomes the Higgs boson - a new scalar particle.
Although the evidence for the Higgs mechanism is overwhelming, accelerators have yet to
produce the Higgs boson and evaluate its physical properties, so it is not even known if the
Higgs is an elementary or a composite particle. It is hoped that the Large Hadron Collider
at CERN will find the Higgs, and allow physicists to determine its properties.
The Higgs mechanism in the standard model successfully predicts the mass of the W±, and
Z weak gauge bosons, which are naturally massless. If the Higgs mechanism wasn't there,
these particles would get much smaller masses from Higgslike QCD quark condensates
instead. A part of the Higgs field is expected to show up as a new particle, called the Higgs
boson.[2]
In the standard model of particle physics, the same Higgs mechanism which breaks the
standard model gauge group to electromagnetism is also responsible for giving all the
leptons and quarks their masses. The fermions in the standard model are chiral and
different chiralities have different charges. The chiral fermions can come together in pairs
to make massive fermions by absorbing Higgs bosons from the condensate.

Higgs mechanism
213
History and naming
The 
mechanism 
is 
also 
called 
the 
Brout–Englert–Higgs 
mechanism, 
or
Higgs–Brout–Englert–Guralnik–Hagen–Kibble 
mechanism, 
or 
Anderson–Higgs
mechanism.
It was proposed in 1964 by Robert Brout and Francois Englert,[3] independently by Peter
Higgs[4] and by Gerald Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, and Tom Kibble.[5] It was inspired by the BCS
theory of superconductivity, vacuum structure work by Yoichiro Nambu, the preceding
Ginzburg–Landau theory, and the suggestion by Philip Anderson that superconductivity
could be important for relativistic physics. It was anticipated by earlier work of Ernst
Stückelberg on massive quantum electrodynamics. It was named the Higgs mechanism by
Gerardus 't Hooft in 1971. The three papers written on this discovery by Guralnik, Hagen,
Kibble, Higgs, Brout, and Englert were each recognized as milestone papers by Physical
Review Letters 50th anniversary celebration.[6]
General discussion
The problem with spontaneous symmetry breaking models in particle physics is that,
according to Goldstone's theorem, they come with massless scalar particles. If a symmetry
is broken by a condensate, acting with a symmetry generator on the condensate gives a
second state with the same energy. So certain oscillations do not have any energy, and in
quantum field theory the particles associated with these oscillations have zero mass.
The only observed particles which could be interpreted as Goldstone bosons were the pions.
Since the symmetry is approximate, the pions are not exactly massless. Yoichiro Nambu,
writing before Jeffrey Goldstone, suggested that the pions were the bosons associated with
chiral symmetry breaking. This explained their pseudoscalar nature, the reason they couple
to nucleons through derivative couplings, and the Goldberger–Treiman relation. Aside from
the pions, no other Goldstone particle was observed.
A similar problem arises in Yang–Mills theory, also known as nonabelian gauge theory.
These theories predict massless spin 1 gauge bosons, which (apart from the photon) are
also not observed. It was Higgs' insight that when a gauge theory is combined with a
spontaneous symmetry-breaking model the (unobserved) massless bosons acquire a mass,
which are observed, solving the problem.
Higgs' original article presenting the model was rejected by Physical Review Letters when
first submitted, apparently because it did not predict any new detectable effects. So he
added a sentence at the end, mentioning that it implies the existence of one or more new,
massive scalar bosons, which do not form complete representations of the symmetry. These
are the Higgs bosons.
The Higgs mechanism was incorporated into modern particle physics by Steven Weinberg
and is an essential part of the Standard Model.
In the standard model, at temperatures high enough so that the symmetry is unbroken, all
elementary particles except the scalar Higgs boson are massless. At a critical temperature,
the Higgs field spontaneously slides from the point of maximum energy in a randomly
chosen direction. Once the symmetry is broken, the gauge boson particles, such as the W
bosons and Z boson, acquire masses. The mass can be interpreted the result of the
interactions of the particles with the "Higgs ocean".

Higgs mechanism
214
Fermions, such as the leptons and quarks in the Standard Model, acquire mass as a result
of their interaction with the Higgs field, but not in the same way as the gauge bosons.
Superconductivity
The Higgs mechanism can be considered as the superconductivity in the vacuum. It occurs
when all of space is filled with a sea of particles which are charged, or in field language,
when a charged field has a nonzero vacuum expectation value. Interaction with the
quantum fluid filling the space prevents certain forces from propagating over long
distances.
A superconductor expels all magnetic fields from its interior, a phenomenon known as the
Meissner effect. This was mysterious for a long time, because it implies that
electromagnetic forces somehow become short-range inside the superconductor. Contrast
this with the behavior of an ordinary metal. In a metal, the conductivity shields electric
fields by rearranging charges on the surface until the total field cancels in the interior. But
magnetic fields can penetrate to any distance, and if a magnetic monopole (an isolated
magnetic pole) is surrounded by a metal the field can escape without collimating into a
string. In a superconductor, however, electric charges move with no dissipation, and this
allows for permanent surface currents, not just surface charges. When magnetic fields are
introduced at the boundary of a superconductor, they produce surface currents which
exactly neutralize them. The Meissner effect is due to currents in a thin surface layer,
whose thickness, the London penetration depth, can be calculated from a simple model.
This simple model, due to Lev Landau and Vitaly Ginzburg, treats superconductivity as a
charged Bose–Einstein condensate. Suppose that a superconductor contains bosons with
charge 
. The wavefunction of the bosons can be described by introducing a quantum
field, 
, which obeys the Schrödinger equation as a field equation (in units where 
, the
Planck quantum divided by 
, is replaced by 1):
The operator 
annihilates a boson at the point 
, while its adjoint 
creates a new
boson at the same point. The wavefunction of the Bose–Einstein condensate is then the
expectation value 
of 
, which is a classical function that obeys the same equation.
The interpretation of the expectation value is that it is the phase that one should give to a
newly created boson so that it will coherently superpose with all the other bosons already
in the condensate.
When there is a charged condensate, the electromagnetic interactions are screened. To see
this, consider the effect of a gauge transformation on the field. A gauge transformation
rotates the phase of the condensate by an amount which changes from point to point, and
shifts the vector potential by a gradient.
When there is no condensate, this transformation only changes the definition of the phase
of 
at every point. But when there is a condensate, the phase of the condensate defines a
preferred choice of phase.
The condensate wavefunction can be written as

Higgs mechanism
215
where 
is real amplitude, which determines the local density of the condensate. If the
condensate were neutral, the flow would be along the gradients of 
, the direction in
which the phase of the Schrödinger field changes. If the phase 
changes slowly, the flow
is slow and has very little energy. But now 
can be made equal to zero just by making a
gauge transformation to rotate the phase of the field.
The energy of slow changes of phase can be calculated from the Schrödinger kinetic
energy,
and taking the density of the condensate 
to be constant,
Fixing the choice of gauge so that the condensate has the same phase everywhere, the
electromagnetic field energy has an extra term,
When this term is present, electromagnetic interactions become short-ranged. Every field
mode, no matter how long the wavelength, oscillates with a nonzero frequency. The lowest
frequency can be read off from the energy of a long wavelength A mode,
This is a harmonic oscillator with frequency 
. The quantity 
(= 
) is the
density of the condensate of superconducting particles.
In an actual superconductor, the charged particles are electrons, which are fermions not
bosons. So in order to have superconductivity, the electrons need to somehow bind into
Cooper pairs. The charge of the condensate 
is therefore twice the electron charge 
.
The pairing in a normal superconductor is due to lattice vibrations, and is in fact very weak;
this means that the pairs are very loosely bound. The description of a Bose–Einstein
condensate of loosely bound pairs is actually more difficult than the description of a
condensate of elementary particles, and was only worked out in 1957 by Bardeen, Cooper
and Schrieffer in the famous BCS theory.
Abelian Higgs model
In a relativistic gauge theory, the vector bosons are naively massless, like the photon,
leading to long-range forces. This is fine for electromagnetism, where the force is actually
long-range, but it means that the description of short-range weak forces by a gauge theory
requires a modification.
Gauge invariance means that certain transformations of the gauge field do not change the
energy at all. If an arbitrary gradient is added to A, the energy of the field is exactly the
same. This makes it difficult to add a mass term, because a mass term tends to push the
field toward the value zero. But the zero value of the vector potential is not a gauge
invariant idea. What is zero in one gauge is nonzero in another.
So in order to give mass to a gauge theory, the gauge invariance must be broken by a
condensate. The condensate will then define a preferred phase, and the phase of the
condensate will define the zero value of the field in a gauge invariant way. The gauge

Higgs mechanism
216
invariant definition is that a gauge field is zero when the phase change along any path from
parallel transport is equal to the phase difference in the condensate wavefunction.
The condensate value is described by a quantum field with an expectation value, just as in
the Landau–Ginzburg model. To make sure that the condensate value of the field does not
pick out a preferred direction in space-time, it must be a scalar field. In order for the phase
of the condensate to define a gauge, the field must be charged.
In order for a scalar field 
to be charged, it must be complex. Equivalently, it should
contain two fields with a symmetry which rotates them into each other, the real and
imaginary parts. The vector potential changes the phase of the quanta produced by the field
when they move from point to point. In terms of fields, it defines how much to rotate the
real and imaginary parts of the fields into each other when comparing field values at nearby
points.
The only renormalizable model where a complex scalar field Φ acquires a nonzero value is
the Mexican-hat model, where the field energy has a minimum away from zero.
This defines the following Hamiltonian:
The first term is the kinetic energy of the field. The second term is the extra potential
energy when the field varies from point to point. The third term is the potential energy
when the field has any given magnitude.
This potential energy 
has a graph which looks like a Mexican hat, which
gives the model its name. In particular, the minimum energy value is not at z=0, but on the
circle of points where the magnitude of z is 
.
Higgs potential V. For a fixed value of
the potential is presented against
the real and imaginary parts of 
.
The Mexican-hat or champagne-bottle
profile at the ground should be noted.
When 
the 
field 
(x) 
is 
not 
coupled 
to
electromagnetism, the Mexican-hat potential has flat
directions. Starting in any one of the circle of vacua and
changing the phase of the field from point to point costs
very little energy. Mathematically, if
with a constant prefactor, then the action for the field 
, i.e., the "phase" of the Higgs 
field Φ(x), has only derivative terms. This is not a surprise. Adding a constant to 
is a 
symmetry of the original theory, so different values of 
cannot have different energies.

Higgs mechanism
217
This is an example of Goldstone's theorem: spontaneously broken continuous symmetries
lead to massless particles.
The Abelian Higgs model is the Mexican-hat model coupled to electromagnetism:
The classical vacuum is again at the minimum of the potential, where the magnitude of the
complex field 
is equal to 
. But now the phase of the field is arbitrary, because gauge
transformations change it. This means that the field 
can be set to zero by a gauge
transformation, and does not represent any degrees of freedom at all.
Furthermore, choosing a gauge where the phase of the condensate is fixed, the potential
energy for fluctuations of the vector field is nonzero, just as it is in the Landau–Ginzburg
model. So in the abelian Higgs model, the gauge field acquires a mass. To calculate the
magnitude of the mass, consider a constant value of the vector potential A in the x direction
in the gauge where the condensate has constant phase. This is the same as a sinusoidally
varying condensate in the gauge where the vector potential is zero. In the gauge where A is
zero, the potential energy density in the condensate is the scalar gradient energy:
And this energy is the same as a mass term 
where 
.
Nonabelian Higgs mechanism
The Nonabelian Higgs model has the following action:
where now the nonabelian field 
is contained in D and in the tensor components 
and
(the relation between 
and those components is well-known from the Yang–Mills
theory).
It is exactly analogous to the Abelian Higgs model. Now the field 
is in a representation of
the gauge group, and the gauge covariant derivative is defined by the rate of change of the
field minus the rate of change from parallel transport using the gauge field A as a
connection.
Again, the expectation value of Φ defines a preferred gauge where the condensate is
constant, and fixing this gauge, fluctuations in the gauge field A come with a nonzero
energy cost.
Depending on the representation of the scalar field, not every gauge field acquires a mass.
A simple example is in the renormalizable version of an early electroweak model due to
Julian Schwinger. In this model, the gauge group is SO(3) (or SU(2)--- there are no spinor
representations in the model), and the gauge invariance is broken down to U(1) or SO(2) at
long distances. To make a consistent renormalizable version using the Higgs mechanism,
introduce a scalar field 
which transforms as a vector (a triplet) of SO(3). If this field has
a vacuum expectation value, it points in some direction in field space. Without loss of
generality, one can choose the z-axis in field space to be the direction that 
is pointing,
and then the vacuum expectation value of 
is 
, where A is a constant with
dimensions of mass ( 
).

Higgs mechanism
218
Rotations around the z axis form a U(1) subgroup of SO(3) which preserves the vacuum
expectation value of 
, and this is the unbroken gauge group. Rotations around the x and
y axis do not preserve the vacuum, and the components of the SO(3) gauge field which
generate these rotations become massive vector mesons. There are two massive W mesons
in the Schwinger model, with a mass set by the mass scale A, and one massless U(1) gauge
boson, similar to the photon.
The Schwinger model predicts magnetic monopoles at the electroweak unification scale,
and does not predict the Z meson. It doesn't break electroweak symmetry properly as in
nature. But historically, a model similar to this (but not using the Higgs mechanism) was
the first in which the weak force and the electromagnetic force were unified.
Standard model Higgs mechanism
The gauge group of the electroweak part of the standard model is 
. The
Higgs mechanism is by a scalar field which is a weak SU(2) doublet with weak hypercharge
-1, it has four real components or two complex components, and it transforms as a spinor
under SU(2) and gets multiplied by a phase under U(1) rotations. Note that this is not the
same as two complex spinors which mix under U(1), which would have eight real
components, rather this is the spinor representation of the group U(2)--- multiplying by a
phase mixes the real and imaginary part of the complex spinor into each other.
The group SU(2) is all unitary matrices, all the orthonormal changes of coordinates in a
complex two dimensional vector space. Rotating the coordinates so that the first basis
vector in the direction of 
makes the vacuum expection value of H the spinor 
. The
generators for rotations about the x,y,z axes are by half the Pauli matrices 
, so
that a rotation of angle 
about the z axis takes the vacuum to:
While the X and Y generators mix up the top and bottom components, the Z rotations only
multiply by a phase. This phase can be undone by a U(1) rotation of angle 
, which
multiplies by the opposite phase, since the Higgs has charge -1. Under both an SU(2)
z-rotation and a U(1) rotation by an amount 
, the vacuum is invariant. This combination
of generators:
defines the unbroken gauge group, where 
is the generator of rotations around the
z-axis in the SU(2) and Y is the generator of the U(1). This combination of generators---
perform a z rotation in the SU(2) and simultaneously perform a U(1) rotation by half the
angle--- preserves the vacuum, and defines the unbroken gauge group in the standard
model. The part of the gauge field in this direction stays massless, and this gauge field is
the actual photon.
The phase that a field acquires under this combination of generators is its electric charge,
and this is the formula for the electric charge in the standard model. In this convention, all
the Y charges in the standard model are multiples of 
. To make all the Y-charges in the
standard model integers, you can rescale the Y part of the formula by tripling all the
Y-charges if you like, and rewrite the charge formula as 
, but the
normalization with Y/2 is the universal standard.

Higgs mechanism
219
Affine Higgs Mechanism
Ernst Stueckelberg discovered a version of the Higgs mechanism by analyzing the theory of
quantum electrodynamics with a massive photon. Stueckelberg's model is a limit of the
regular Mexican hat Abelian Higgs model, where the vacuum expectation value H goes to
infinity and the charge of the Higgs field goes to zero in such a way that their product stays
fixed. The mass of the Higgs boson is proportional to H, so the Higgs boson becomes
infinitely massive and disappears. The vector meson mass is equal to the product 
, and
stays finite.
The interpretation is that when a U(1) gauge field does not require quantized charges, it is
possible to keep only the angular part of the Higgs oscillations, and discard the radial part.
The angular part of the Higgs field 
has the following gauge transformation law:
The gauge covariant derivative for the angle (which is actually gauge invariant) is:
In order to keep 
fluctuations finite and nonzero in this limit, 
should be rescaled by H,
so that its kinetic term in the action stays normalized. The action for the theta field is read
off from the Mexican hat action by substituting 
.
since 
is the gauge boson mass. By making a gauge transformation to set 
, the gauge
freedom in the action is eliminated, and the action becomes that of a massive vector field:
To have arbitrarily small charges requires that the U(1) is not the circle of unit complex
numbers under multiplication, but the real numbers R under addition, which is only
different in the global topology. Such a U(1) group is non-compact. The field 
transforms
as an affine representation of the gauge group. Among the allowed gauge groups, only
non-compact U(1) admits affine representations, and the U(1) of electromagnetism is
experimentally known to be compact, since charge quantization holds to extremely high
accuracy.
The Higgs condensate in this model has infinitesimal charge, so interactions with the Higgs
boson do not violate charge conservation. The theory of quantum electrodynamics with a
massive photon is still a renormalizable theory, one in which electric charge is still
conserved, but magnetic monopoles are not allowed. For nonabelian gauge theory, there is
no affine limit, and the Higgs oscillations cannot be too much more massive than the
vectors.

Higgs mechanism
220
References
[1] G. Bernardi, M. Carena, and T. Junk: "Higgs bosons: theory and searches", Reviews of Particle Data Group:
Hypothetical particles and Consepts, 2007, http:/ / pdg. lbl. gov/ 2008/ reviews/ higgs_s055. pdf
[2] G. Bernardi, M. Carena, and T. Junk: "Higgs bosons: theory and searches", Reviews of Particle Data Group:
Hypothetical particles and Consepts, 2007, http:/ / pdg. lbl. gov/ 2008/ reviews/ higgs_s055. pdf
[3] Broken Symmetry and the Mass of Gauge Vector Mesons (http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ i9/
p321_1)
[4] Broken Symmetries and the Masses of Gauge Bosons (http:/ / link. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ p508)
[5] Global Conservation Laws and Massless Particles (http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/ v13/ i20/ p585_1)
[6] Physical Review Letters - 50th Anniversary Milestone Papers (http:/ / prl. aps. org/ 50years/ milestones#1964)
See also
• Tachyon condensation
• Top quark condensate
• Goldstone boson
• Symmetry breaking
• QCD vacuum
External links
• A Generalized Higgs Model (http:/ / www. arXiv. org/ abs/ hep-th/ 9904080)
• Global Conservation Laws and Massless Particles (http:/ / prola. aps. org/ abstract/ PRL/
v13/ i20/ p585_1)
• In CERN Courier, Steven Weinberg reflects on spontaneous symmetry breaking (http:/ /
cerncourier. com/ cws/ article/ cern/ 32522)
• Steven Weinberg Praises Teams for Higgs Boson Theory (http:/ / www. pas. rochester.
edu/ urpas/ news/ Hagen_030708)
• Physical Review Letters – 50th Anniversary Milestone Papers (http:/ / prl. aps. org/
50years/ milestones#1964)
• Imperial College London on PRL 50th Anniversary Milestone Papers (http:/ / www3.
imperial. ac. uk/ newsandeventspggrp/ imperialcollege/ newssummary/
news_13-6-2008-12-42-20?newsid=38514)
• Physics World, Introducing the little Higgs (http:/ / physicsworld. com/ cws/ article/ print/
11353)
• Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble Mechanism on Scholarpedia (http:/ / www.
scholarpedia. org/ article/ Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble_mechanism)
• History of Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble Mechanism on Scholarpedia
(http:/ / www. scholarpedia. org/ article/
Englert-Brout-Higgs-Guralnik-Hagen-Kibble_mechanism_(history))
• God Particle Overview (http:/ / www. godparticle. com/ )

Topological order
221
Topological order
In physics, topological order [1] is a new kind of order (a new kind of organization of
particles) in a quantum state that is beyond the Landau symmetry-breaking description. It
cannot be described by local order parameters and long range correlations. However,
topological orders can be described by a new set of quantum numbers, such as ground state
degeneracy, quasiparticle fractional statistics, edge states, topological entropy, etc.
Roughly speaking, topological order is a pattern of long-range quantum entanglement in
quantum states. States with different topological orders can change into each other only
through a phase transition.
Background
Although all matter is formed by atoms, matter can have very different properties and
appear in very different forms, such as solid, liquid, superfluid, magnet, etc. According to
condensed matter physics and the principle of emergence, the different properties of
materials originate from the different ways in which the atoms are organized in the
materials. Those different organizations of the atoms (or other particles) are formally called
the orders in the materials.
Atoms can organize in many ways which lead to many different orders and many different
types of materials. With so many different orders, we need a general understanding of the
orders. Landau symmetry-breaking theory provides such a general understanding. It points
out that different orders really correspond to different symmetries in the organizations of
the constituent atoms. As a material changes from one order to another order (i.e., as the
material undergoes a phase transition), what happens is that the symmetry of the
organization of the atoms changes.
For example, atoms have a random distribution in a liquid, so a liquid remains the same as
we displace it by an arbitrary distance. We say that a liquid has a continuous translation
symmetry. After a phase transition, a liquid can turn into a crystal. In a crystal, atoms
organize into a regular array (a lattice). A lattice remains unchanged only when we displace
it by a particular distance (integer times of lattice constant), so a crystal has only discrete
translation symmetry. The phase transition between a liquid and a crystal is a transition
that reduces the continuous translation symmetry of the liquid to the discrete symmetry of
the crystal. Such change in symmetry is called symmetry breaking. The essence of the
difference between liquids and crystals is therefore that the organizations of atoms have
different symmetries in the two phases.
Landau symmetry-breaking theory is a very successful theory. For a long time, physicists
believed that Landau symmetry-breaking theory describes all possible orders in materials,
and all possible (continuous) phase transitions.
The discovery and characterization of topological order
However, over the last thirty-two years, it has become gradually apparent that Landau 
symmetry-breaking theory may not describe all possible orders. In 1980s, physicists 
discovered fraction quantum Hall (FQH) states [2] [3] and introduced chiral spin state. [4] [5] 
chiral 
spin 
state 
is 
introduced 
in 
an 
attempt 
to 
explain 
high 
temperature 
superconductivity[6] . At first, physicists still wanted to use Landau symmetry-breaking

Topological order
222
theory to describe the chiral spin state. They identified the chiral spin state as a state that
breaks the time reversal and parity symmetries, but not the spin rotation symmetry.
However, it was quickly realized that there are many different chiral spin states that have
exactly the same symmetry, so symmetry alone was not enough to characterize different
chiral spin states. This means that the chiral spin states contain a new kind of order that is
beyond the usual symmetry description [7] . The proposed, new kind of order was named
"topological order" [8] . (The name "topological order" is motivated by the low energy
effective theory of the chiral spin states which is a topological quantum field theory (TQFT)
[9] [10] [11] ). New quantum numbers, such as ground state degeneracy [12] and the
non-Abelian Berry's phase of degenerate ground states [13] . were introduced to
characterize the different topological orders in chiral spin states. Recently, it was shown
that topological orders can also be characterized by topological entropy [14] [15] .
But experiments soon indicated that chiral spin states do not describe high-temperature
superconductors, and the theory of topological order became a theory with no experimental
realization. However, the similarity between chiral spin states and quantum Hall states
allows one to use the theory of topological order to describe different quantum Hall states.
[16] Just like chiral spin states, different quantum Hall states all have the same symmetry
and are beyond the Landau symmetry-breaking description. One finds that the different
orders in different quantum Hall states can indeed be described by topological orders, so
the topological order does have experimental realizations.
Mechanism of topological order
A large class of topological orders is realized through a mechanism called string-net
condensation [17] . This class of topological orders can be classified by utilizing tensor
category (or monoidal category) theory. One finds that string-net condensation can
generate infinitely many different types of topological orders, which may indicate that there
are many different new types of materials remaining to be discovered.
The collective motions of condensed strings give rise to excitations above the string-net
condensed states. Those excitations turn out to be gauge bosons. The ends of strings are
defects which correspond to another type of excitations. Those excitations are the gauge
charges and can carry Fermi or fractional statistics. [18]
The condensations of other extended objects such as `membranes',[Hamma etal, 2005]
"brane-nets" ,[Bombin, M.A. Martin-Delgado, 2006] and fractals also lead to topologically
ordered phases [19] and "quantum glassiness" [20]
Mathematical foundation of topological order
We know that group theory is the mathematical foundation of symmetry breaking orders.
What is the mathematical foundation of topological order? The string-net condensation
suggests that tensor category (or monoidal category) theory may be the mathematical
foundation of topological order. Quantum operator algebra is a very important
mathematical tool in studying topological orders. Some also suggest that topological order
is mathematically described by extended quantum symmetry[21] .

Topological order
223
Applications
The materials described by Landau symmetry-breaking theory have had a substantial
impact on technology. For example, Ferromagnetic materials that break spin rotation
symmetry can be used as the media of digital information storage. A hard drive made of
ferromagnetic materials can store gigabytes of information. Liquid crystals that break the
rotational symmetry of molecules find wide application in display technology; nowadays one
can hardly find a household without a liquid crystal display somewhere in it. Crystals that
break translation symmetry lead to well defined electronic bands which in turn allow us to
make semiconducting devices such as transistors. Topologically ordered states are found in
a new class of materials that are even richer than those exhibiting symmetry breaking
states. This suggests their potential for exciting, novel applications.
One theorized application would be to use topologically ordered states as media for
quantum computing in a technique known as topological quantum computing. A
topologically ordered state is a state with complicated non-local quantum entanglement.
The non-locality means that the quantum entanglement in a topologically ordered state is
distributed among many different particles. As a result, the pattern of quantum
entanglements cannot be destroyed by local perturbations. This significantly reduces the
effect of decoherence. This suggests that if we use different quantum entanglements in a
topologically ordered state to encode quantum information, the information may last much
longer. [22] The quantum information encoded by the topological quantum entanglements
can also be manipulated by dragging the topological defects around each other. This
process may provide a physical apparatus for performing quantum computations. [23]
Therefore, topologically ordered states may provide natural media for both quantum
memory and quantum computation. Such realizations of quantum memory and quantum
computation may potentially be made fault tolerant. [24]
Potential impact
Why is topological order important? Landau symmetry-breaking theory is a cornerstone of
condensed matter physics. It is used to define the territory of condensed matter research.
The existence of topological order appears to indicate that nature is much richer than
Landau symmetry-breaking theory has so far indicated. The exciting time of condensed
matter physics is still ahead of us. Some suggest that topological order (or more precisely,
string-net condensation) and the local bosonic (spin) models have the potential to provide a
unified origin [25] for photons, electrons and other elementary particles in our universe. [26]
See also
• Quantum phase transitions
• Quantum critical point
• Quantum topology
• Topological defect
• Topological entropy in physics
• Topological quantum field theory
• Topological quantum number
• Topological string theory

Topological order
224
References
[1] http:/ / dao. mit. edu/ ~wen/ pub/ topo. pdf Xiao-Gang Wen, Topological Orders in Rigid States. Int. J. Mod.
Phys. B4, 239 (1990)
[2] D. C. Tsui and H. L. Stormer and A. C. Gossard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 48, 1559 (1982), "Two-Dimensional
Magnetotransport in the Extreme Quantum Limit"
[3] R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 50, 1395 (1983), "Anomalous Quantum Hall Effect: An Incompressible
Quantum Fluid with Fractionally Charged Excitations"
[4] V. Kalmeyer and R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 59, 2095 (1987), "Equivalence of the
resonating-valence-bond and fractional quantum Hall states"
[5] Xiao-Gang Wen, F. Wilczek and A. Zee, Phys. Rev., B39, 11413 (1989), "Chiral Spin States and
Superconductivity"
[6] .G. Bednorz and K.A. Mueller (1986). "Possible high TC superconductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-O system". Z. Phys.
B64 (2): 189–193. doi:10.1007/BF01303701.
[7] Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. B, 40, 7387 (1989), "Vacuum Degeneracy of Chiral Spin State in Compactified
Spaces"
[8] http:/ / dao. mit. edu/ ~wen/ pub/ topo. pdf Xiao-Gang Wen, Intl. J. Mod. Phys., B4, 239 (1990), "Topological
Orders in Rigid States"
[9] Atiyah, Michael (1988), "Topological quantum field theories", Publications Mathe'matiques de l'IHéS (68):
175–186, MR1001453, ISSN 1618-1913, http:/ / www. numdam. org/ item?id=PMIHES_1988__68__175_0
[10] Witten, Edward (1988), "Topological quantum field theory", Communications in Mathematical Physics 117
(3): 353–386, MR953828, ISSN 0010-3616, http:/ / projecteuclid. org/ euclid. cmp/ 1104161738
[11] Yetter D.N., TQFTs from homotopy 2-types, J. Knot Theory 2 (1993),113--123.
[12] Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. B, 40, 7387 (1989), "Vacuum Degeneracy of Chiral Spin State in Compactified
Spaces"
[13] http:/ / dao. mit. edu/ ~wen/ pub/ topo. pdf Xiao-Gang Wen, Intl. J. Mod. Phys., B4, 239 (1990), "Topological
Orders in Rigid States"
[14] Alexei Kitaev and John Preskill, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 110404 (2006), "Topological Entanglement Entropy"
[15] http:/ / link. aps. org/ doi/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 96. 110405 Levin M. and Wen X-G., Detecting topological
order in a ground state wave function., Phys. Rev. Letts.,96(11), 110405, (2006)
[16] http:/ / dao. mit. edu/ ~wen/ pub/ topWN. pdf Xiao-Gang Wen and Qian Niu, Phys. Rev. B41, 9377 (1990),
"Ground state degeneracy of the FQH states in presence of random potential and on high genus Riemann
surfaces"
[17] Michael Levin, Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. B, 71, 045110 (2005), "String-net condensation: A physical
mechanism for topological phases"
[18] Levin M. and Wen X-G., Fermions, strings, and gauge fields in lattice spin models., Phys. Rev. B 67, 245316,
(2003).
[19] Topological Orders and Chern-Simons Theory in strongly correlated quantum liquid.,Xiao-Gang Wen, Int. J.
Mod. Phys. B5, 1641 (1991); a review containing comments on topological orders in higher dimensions and/or
in Higgs phases; also introduced a dimension index (DI) to characterize the robustness of the ground state
degeneracy of a topologically ordered state. If DI is less or equal to 1, then topological orders cannot exist at
finite temperature.
[20] http:/ / link. aps. org/ doi/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 94. 040402 Quantum Glassiness.,Chamon C., Phys. Rev.
Lett., 94, 040402, (2005).
[21] Algebraic Topology Foundations of Supersymmetry and Symmetry Breaking in Quantum Field Theory and
Quantum Gravity: A Review., Baianu, I.C., J.F. Glazebrook and R. Brown.,SIGMA-081030,(2009), 78 pages.
[22] Eric Dennis, Alexei Kitaev, Andrew Landahl, and John Preskill, J. Math. Phys., 43, 4452 (2002), Topological
quantum memory
[23] Michael H. Freedman, Alexei Kitaev, Michael J. Larsen, and Zhenghan Wang, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 40, 31
(2003), "Topological quantum computation"
[24] A. Yu. Kitaev Ann. Phys. (N.Y.), 303, 1 (2003), Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons
[25] http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ hep-th/ pdf/ 0507/ 0507118v2. pdf
[26] http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ hep-th/ pdf/ 0507/ 0507118v2. pdf Levin M. and Wen X-G., Colloquium: Photons
and electrons as emergent phenomena, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, Nu 12:19, 9 April 2009 (UTC)871 (2005), 4 pages;
also, Quantum ether: Photons and electrons from a rotor model., arXiv:hep-th/0507118 (2007).

Topological order
225
References by categories
Fractional quantum Hall states
• D. C. Tsui and H. L. Stormer and A. C. Gossard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 48, 1559 (1982),
"Two-Dimensional Magnetotransport in the Extreme Quantum Limit"
• R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 50, 1395 (1983), "Anomalous Quantum Hall Effect: An
Incompressible Quantum Fluid with Fractionally Charged Excitations"
Chiral spin states
• V. Kalmeyer and R. B. Laughlin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 59, 2095 (1987), "Equivalence of the
resonating-valence-bond and fractional quantum Hall states"
• Xiao-Gang Wen, F. Wilczek and A. Zee, Phys. Rev., B39, 11413 (1989), "Chiral Spin
States and Superconductivity"
Early characterization of FQH states
• Off-diagonal long-range order, oblique confinement, and the fractional quantum Hall
effect, S. M. Girvin and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett., 58, 1252 (1987)
• Effective-Field-Theory Model for the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect, S. C. Zhang and T.
H. Hansson and S. Kivelson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 62, 82 (1989)
Topological order
• Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. B, 40, 7387 (1989), "Vacuum Degeneracy of Chiral Spin State
in Compactified Spaces"
• Xiao-Gang Wen, Int. J. Mod. Phys., B4, 239 (1990), "Topological Orders in Rigid States"
(http:/ / dao. mit. edu/ ~wen/ pub/ topo. pdf)
• Xiao-Gang Wen, Quantum Field Theory of Many Body Systems--From the Origin of Sound
to an Origin of Light and Electrons, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2004.
Characterization of topological order
• D. Arovas and J. R. Schrieffer and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 53, 722 (1984),
"Fractional Statistics and the Quantum Hall Effect"
• Xiao-Gang Wen and Qian Niu, Phys. Rev. B41, 9377 (1990), "Ground state degeneracy of
the FQH states in presence of random potential and on high genus Riemann surfaces"
(http:/ / dao. mit. edu/ ~wen/ pub/ topWN. pdf)
• Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. B, 43, 11025 (1991), "Gapless Boundary Excitations in the
FQH States and in the Chiral Spin States"
• Alexei Kitaev and John Preskill, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 110404 (2006), "Topological
Entanglement Entropy"
• Michael Levin and Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 110405 (2006), "Detecting
Topological Order in a Ground State Wave Function" (http:/ / link. aps. org/ doi/ 10. 1103/
PhysRevLett. 96. 110405)

Topological order
226
Effective theory of topological order
• Quantum field theory and the Jones polynomial, E. Witten, Comm. Math. Phys., 121, 351
(1989)
Mechanism of topological order
• String-net condensation: A physical mechanism for topological phases, Michael Levin,
Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. B, 71, 045110 (2005)
• Chamon, C., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 040402 (2005),4 pages.,Quantum Glassiness in Strongly
Correlated Clean Systems: An Example of Topological Overprotection (http:/ / link. aps.
org/ doi/ 10. 1103/ PhysRevLett. 94. 040402)
• Alioscia Hamma, Paolo Zanardi, Xiao Gang Wen, Phys.Rev. B72 035307 (2005), String
and Membrane condensation on 3D lattices
• H. Bombin, M.A. Martin-Delgado, cond-mat/0607736, Exact Topological Quantum Order
in D=3 and Beyond: Branyons and Brane-Net Condensates
Quantum computing
• Chetan Nayak, Steven H. Simon, Ady Stern, Michael Freedman, Sankar Das Sarma, http:/
/ www. arxiv. org/ abs/ 0707. 1889, 2007, "Non-Abelian Anyons and Topological Quantum
Computation"
• A. Yu. Kitaev Ann. Phys. (N.Y.), 303, 1 (2003), Fault-tolerant quantum computation by
anyons
• Michael H. Freedman, Alexei Kitaev, Michael J. Larsen, and Zhenghan Wang, Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc., 40, 31 (2003), "Topological quantum computation"
• Eric Dennis, Alexei Kitaev, Andrew Landahl, and John Preskill, J. Math. Phys., 43, 4452
(2002), Topological quantum memory
• Ady Stern and Bertrand I. Halperin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 016802 (2006), Proposed
Experiments to probe the Non-Abelian nu=5/2 Quantum Hall State
Emergence of elementary particles
• Xiao-Gang Wen, Phys. Rev. D68, 024501 (2003), Quantum order from string-net
condensations and origin of light and massless fermions
• Levin M. and Wen X-G., Fermions, strings, and gauge fields in lattice spin models., Phys.
Rev. B 67, 245316, (2003).
• Levin M. and Wen X-G., Colloquium: Photons and electrons as emergent phenomena,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, Nu 12:19, 9 April 2009 (UTC)871 (2005), 4 pages; also, Quantum
ether: Photons and electrons from a rotor model., arXiv:hep-th/0507118,2007.
• Zheng-Cheng Gu and Xiao-Gang Wen, gr-qc/0606100, A lattice bosonic model as a
quantum theory of gravity,
Quantum operator algebra
• Yetter D.N., TQFTs from homotopy 2-types, J. Knot Theory 2 (1993), 113--123.
• Landsman N. P. and Ramazan B., Quantization of Poisson algebras associated to Lie
algebroids, in Proc. Conf. on Groupoids in Physics, Analysis and Geometry(Boulder CO,
1999)', Editors J. Kaminker et al.,159{192 Contemp. Math. 282, Amer. Math. Soc.,
Providence RI, 2001,(also math{ph/001005.)

Topological order
227
• Non-Abelian Quantum Algebraic Topology (NAQAT) 20 Nov. (2008),87 pages, Baianu, I.C.
(http:/ / planetphysics. org/ ?op=getobj& from=lec& id=61)
• Levin A. and Olshanetsky M., Hamiltonian Algebroids and deformations of complex
structures on Riemann curves, hep-th/0301078v1.
• Xiao-Gang Wen, Yong-Shi Wu and Y. Hatsugai., Chiral operator product algebra and edge
excitations of a FQH droplet (pdf),Nucl. Phys. B422, 476 (1994): Used chiral operator
product algebra to construct the bulk wave function, characterize the topological orders
and calculate the edge states for some non-Abelian FQH states.
• Xiao-Gang Wen and Yong-Shi Wu., Chiral operator product algebra hidden in certain
FQH states (pdf),Nucl. Phys. B419, 455 (1994): Demonstrated that non-Abelian
topological orders are closely related to chiral operator product algebra (instead of
conformal field theory).
• Non-Abelian theory. (http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ NonAbelianTheory. html)
• R. Brown et al. A Non-Abelian, Categorical Ontology of Spacetimes and Quantum
Gravity., Axiomathes, Volume 17, Numbers 3-4 / December, (2007), pages
353--408.,Springer,Netherlands,ISSN 1122-1151 (Print) 1572-8390 (Online).
doi:10.1007/s10516-007-9012-1 .
• Ronald Brown, Higgins, P. J. and R. Sivera,:(2009), Nonabelian Algebraic Topology.,
vols.1 and 2, Ch.U. Press, in press. (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ nonab-t/
partI010604. pdf)
• A Bibliography for Categories and Algebraic Topology Applications in Theoretical Physics
(http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/
BibliographyForCategoryTheoryAndAlgebraicTopologyApplicationsInTheoreticalPhysics.
html)
• Quantum Algebraic Topology (QAT) (http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/
QuantumAlgebraicTopologyTopics. html)

Topological quantum field theory
228
Topological quantum field theory
A topological quantum field theory (or topological field theory or TQFT) is a quantum
field theory which computes topological invariants.
Although TQFTs were invented by physicists, they are also of mathematical interest, being
related to, among other things, knot theory and the theory of four-manifolds in algebraic
topology, and to the theory of moduli spaces in algebraic geometry. Donaldson, Jones,
Witten, and Kontsevich have all won Fields Medals for work related to topological field
theory.
In condensed matter physics, topological quantum field theories are the low energy
effective theories of topologically ordered states, such as fractional quantum Hall states,
string-net condensed states, and other strongly correlated quantum liquid states.
Overview
In a topological field theory, the correlation functions do not depend on the metric on
spacetime. This means that the theory is not sensitive to changes in the shape of spacetime;
if the spacetime warps or contracts, the correlation functions do not change. Consequently,
they are topological invariants.
Topological field theories are not very interesting on the flat Minkowski spacetime used in
particle physics. Minkowski space can be contracted to a point, so a TQFT on Minkowski
space computes only trivial topological invariants. Consequently, TQFTs are usually studied
on curved spacetimes, such as, for example, Riemann surfaces. Most of the known
topological field theories are defined on spacetimes of dimension less than five. It seems
that a few higher dimensional theories exist, but they are not very well understood.
Quantum gravity is believed to be background-independent (in some suitable sense), and
TQFTs provide examples of background independent quantum field theories. This has
prompted ongoing theoretical investigation of this class of models.
(Caveat: It is often said that TQFTs have only finitely many degrees of freedom. This is not a
fundamental property. It happens to be true in most of the examples that physicists and
mathematicians study, but it is not necessary. A topological sigma model with target
infinite-dimensional projective space, if such a thing could be defined, would have
countably infinitely many degrees of freedom.)
Specific models
The known topological field theories fall into two general classes: Schwarz-type TQFTs and
Witten-type TQFTs. Witten TQFTs are also sometimes referred to as cohomological field
theories.
Schwarz-type TQFTs
In Schwarz-type TQFTs, the correlation functions computed by the path integral are
topological invariants because the path integral measure and the quantum field observables
are explicitly independent of the metric. For instance, in the BF model, the spacetime is a
two-dimensional manifold M, the observables are constructed from a two-form F, an
auxiliary scalar B, and their derivatives. The action (which determines the path integral) is

Topological quantum field theory
229
The spacetime metric does not appear anywhere in this theory, so the theory is explicitly
topologically invariant. Another, more famous example is Chern-Simons theory, which can
be used to compute knot invariants.
Witten-type TQFTs
In Witten-type topological field theories, the topological invariance is more subtle. For
example the Lagrangian for the WZW model does depend explicitly on the metric, but one
shows by calculation that the expectation value of the partition function and a special class
of correlation functions are in fact diffeomorphism invariant.
Mathematical formulations
Atiyah-Segal axioms
Atiyah suggested a set of axioms for topological quantum field theory which was inspired by
Segal's proposed axioms for conformal field theory, (Atiyah 1988). These axioms have been
relatively useful for mathematical treatments of Schwarz-type QFTs, although it isn't clear
that they capture the whole structure of Witten-type QFTs. The basic idea is that a TQFT is
a functor from a certain category of cobordisms to the category of vector spaces.
There are in fact two different sets of axioms which could reasonably be called the Atiyah
axioms. These axioms differ basically in whether or not they study a TQFT defined on a
single fixed n-dimensional Riemannian / Lorentzian spacetime M or a TQFT defined on all
n-dimensional spacetimes at once.
[ed. What follows is still in rough draft form and should be regarded suspiciously.]
The case of a fixed spacetime
Let 
be the category whose morphisms are n-dimensional submanifolds of M and
whose objects are connected components of the boundaries of such submanifolds. Regard
two morphisms as equivalent if they are homotopic via submanifolds of M, and so form the
quotient category 
: The objects in 
are the objects of 
, and the
morphisms of 
are homotopy equivalence classes of morphisms in 
. A TQFT
on M is a symmetric monoidal functor from 
to the category of vector spaces.
Note that cobordisms can, if their boundaries match up, be sewn together to form a new
bordism. This is the composition law for morphisms in the cobordism category. Since
functors are required to preserve composition, this says that the linear map corresponding
to a sewn together morphism is just the composition of the linear map for each piece.
There is an equivalence of categories between the category of 2-dimensional topological
quantum field theories and the category of commutative Frobenius algebras.

Topological quantum field theory
230
All n-dimensional spacetimes at once
The pair of pants is a
(1+1)-dimensional bordism, which
corresponds to a product or coproduct
in a 2-dimensional TQFT.
To consider all spacetimes at once, it is necessary to
replace 
by a larger category. So let 
be
the category of bordisms, i.e. the category whose
morphisms are n-dimensional manifolds with boundary,
and whose objects are the connected components of the
boundaries of n-dimensional manifolds. (Note that any
-dimensional manifold may appear as an object
in 
.) As above, regard two morphisms in 
as equivalent if they are homotopic, and form the
quotient category 
. 
is a monoidal
category under the operation which takes two bordisms
to the bordism made from their disjoint union. A TQFT on n-dimensional manifolds is then a
functor from 
to the category of vector spaces, which takes disjoint unions of
bordisms to the tensor product f [ed. unfinished]
For 
example, 
for 
(1+1)-dimensional 
bordisms 
(2-dimensional 
bordisms 
between
1-dimensional manifolds), the map associated with a pair of pants gives a product or
coproduct, depending on how the boundary components are grouped – which is
commutative or cocommutative, while the map associated with a disk gives a counit (trace)
or unit (scalars), depending on grouping of boundary, and thus (1+1)-dimension TQFTs
correspond to Frobenius algebras.
Generalizations
For some applications, it is convenient to demand extra topological structure on the
morphisms, such as a choice of orientation.
See also
• Quantum topology
• Topological defect
• Topological entropy in physics
• Topological order
• Topological quantum number
• Topological string theory
References
• Atiyah, Michael (1988),
"http://www.numdam.org/item?id=PMIHES_1988__68__175_0|Topological quantum field
theories", Publications Mathématiques de l'IHÉS 68 (68): 175–186,
doi:10.1007/BF02698547 [1], MR1001453 [2], http:/ / www. numdam. org/
item?id=PMIHES_1988__68__175_0
• Lurie, Jacob, http://www-math.mit.edu/~lurie/papers/cobordism.pdf|On the Classification
of Topological Field Theories, http:/ / www-math. mit. edu/ ~lurie/ papers/ cobordism. pdf
• Witten, Edward (1988), "http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.cmp/1104161738|Topological 
quantum field theory", Communications in Mathematical Physics 117 (3): 353–386, 
doi:10.1007/BF01223371 [3], MR953828 [4], http:/ / projecteuclid. org/ euclid. cmp/

Topological quantum field theory
231
1104161738
References
[1] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF02698547
[2] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=1001453
[3] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF01223371
[4] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=953828

232
Quantum Geometry
Quantum geometry
In theoretical physics, quantum geometry is the set of new mathematical concepts
generalizing the concepts of geometry whose understanding is necessary to describe the
physical phenomena at very short distance scales (comparable to Planck length). At these
distances, quantum mechanics has a profound effect on physics.
Each theory of quantum gravity uses the term quantum geometry in a slightly different
fashion. String theory, a leading candidate for a quantum theory of gravity, uses the term
quantum geometry to describe exotic phenomena such as T-duality and other geometric
dualities, mirror symmetry, topology-changing transitions, minimal possible distance scale,
and other effects that challenge our usual geometrical intuition. More technically, quantum
geometry refers to the shape of the spacetime manifold as seen by D-branes which includes
the quantum corrections to the metric tensor, such as the worldsheet instantons. For
example, the quantum volume of a cycle is computed from the mass of a brane wrapped on
this cycle.
In an alternative approach to quantum gravity called loop quantum gravity (LQG), the
phrase quantum geometry usually refers to the formalism within LQG where the
observables that capture the information about the geometry are now well defined
operators on a Hilbert space. In particular, certain physical observables, such as the area,
have a discrete spectrum. It has also been shown that the loop quantum geometry is
non-commutative.
It is possible (but considered unlikely) that this strictly quantized understanding of
geometry will be consistent with the quantum picture of geometry arising from string
theory.
Another approach, which tries to reconstruct the geometry of space-time from "first
principles" is Discrete Lorentzian quantum gravity.
See also
• Noncommutative geometry
External links
• Space and Time: From Antiquity to Einstein and Beyond [1]
• Quantum Geometry and its Applications [2]
References
[1] http:/ / cgpg. gravity. psu. edu/ people/ Ashtekar/ articles/ spaceandtime. pdf
[2] http:/ / cgpg. gravity. psu. edu/ people/ Ashtekar/ articles/ qgfinal. pdf

Noncommutative geometry
233
Noncommutative geometry
Noncommutative geometry, or NCG, is a branch of mathematics concerned with the
possible spatial interpretations of algebraic structures for which the commutative law fails,
that is, for which xy does not always equal yx. For example; 3 steps of 4 units and 4 steps of
3 units length might be different in noncommutative spaces. Although one could technically
construct geometries by simply removing this condition (commutativity), the results are
typically trivial or uninteresting. The most common usage of the term, therefore, refers to
what is properly called differential noncommutative geometry, a subject which was
developed extensively by French mathematician Alain Connes. The challenge of NCG theory
is to get around the lack of commutative multiplication, which is a requirement of previous
geometric theories of algebraic structures.
History
Some of the theory developed by Alain Connes to handle noncommutative geometry at a
technical level has roots in older attempts, in particular in ergodic theory. The proposal of
George Mackey to create a virtual subgroup theory, with respect to which ergodic group
actions would become homogeneous spaces of an extended kind, has by now been
subsumed.
Motivation
In mathematics, there is a close relationship between spaces, which are geometric in
nature, and the numerical functions on them. In general, such functions will form a
commutative ring. For instance, one may take the ring C(X) of continuous complex-valued
functions on a topological space X. In many important cases (e.g., if X is a compact
Hausdorff space), we can recover X from C(X), and therefore it makes some sense to say
that X has commutative geometry.
For other cases and applications, including mathematical physics[1] and functional analysis,
non-commutative rings arise as the natural candidates for a ring of functions on some
non-commutative "space". "Non-commutative spaces", however defined, cannot be too
similar to ordinary topological spaces, as these are known to correspond to commutative
rings in many important cases. For this reason, the field is also called non-commutative
topology — some of the motivating questions of the theory are concerned with extending
known topological invariants to these new spaces.
The problem is that on the microscopic level our traditional (non-quantum mechanical)
notion of distance is no longer sufficient. For example, it is not possible to determine both
the length and height of an object at the same time. A mathematician describes this
situation by saying that the space coordinates of length and height do not commute with
each other. This is good motivation to develop new mathematical tools, such as
non-commutative geometry.

Noncommutative geometry
234
Non-commutative C*-algebras, von Neumann algebras
Non-commutative C*-algebras are often now called non-commutative spaces. This is by
analogy with the Gelfand representation, which shows that commutative C*-algebras are
dual to locally compact Hausdorff spaces. In general, one can associate to any C*-algebra S
a topological space Ŝ; see spectrum of a C*-algebra.
For the duality between σ-finite measure spaces and commutative von Neumann algebras,
noncommutative von Neumann algebras are called non-commutative measure spaces.
Non-commutative differentiable manifolds
A smooth Riemannian manifold M is a topological space with a lot of extra structure. From
its algebra of continuous functions C(M) we only recover M topologically. The algebraic
invariant that recovers the Riemannian structure is a spectral triple. It is constructed from
a smooth vector bundle E over M, e.g. the exterior algebra bundle. The Hilbert space
L²(M,E) of square integrable sections of E carries a representation of C(M) by multiplication
operators, and we consider an unbounded operator D in L²(M,E) with compact resolvent
(e.g the signature operator), such that the commutators [D,f] are bounded whenever f is
smooth. A recent deep theorem states that M as a Riemannian manifold can be recovered
from this data.
This suggests that one might define a noncommutative Riemannian manifold as a spectral
triple (A,H,D), consisting of a representation of a C*-algebra A on a Hilbert space H,
together with an unbounded operator D on H, with compact resolvent, such that [D,a] is
bounded for all a in some dense subalgebra of A. Research in spectral triples is very active,
and many examples of noncommutative manifolds have been constructed.
The theory of characteristic classes of smooth manifolds has been extended to spectral
triples, employing the tools of operator K-theory and cyclic cohomology. Several
generalizations of now classical index theorems allow for effective extraction of numerical
invariants from spectral triples.
Non-commutative affine schemes
In analogy to the duality between affine schemes and commutative rings, we can also have
noncommutative affine schemes. For example, there exist an analog of the celebrated Serre
duality for noncommutative projective schemes. [2]
Examples of non-commutative spaces
• In Weyl quantization, the symplectic phase space of classical mechanics is deformed into
a non-commutative phase space generated by the position and momentum operators.
• The standard model of particle physics is another example of a noncommutative
geometry, cf noncommutative standard model.
• The noncommutative torus, deformation of the function algebra of the ordinary torus, can
be given the structure of a spectral triple. This class of examples has been studied
intensively and still functions as a test case for more complicated situations.
• Nonncommutative algebras arising from foliations.
• Examples related to dynamical systems arising from number theory, such as the Gauss 
shift on continued fractions, give rise to noncommutative algebras that appear to have

Noncommutative geometry
235
interesting noncommutative geometries.
• Quantum tori in quantum field theory.
See also
• Commutativity
• Moyal product
• Fuzzy sphere
References
[1] The applications in particle physics are described on the entries Noncommutative standard model and
Noncommutative quantum field theory
[2] https:/ / www. ams. org/ proc/ 1997-125-03/ S0002-9939-97-03782-9/ S0002-9939-97-03782-9. pdf
External links
Elements of Non-commutative geometry by Gracia-Bondia, Varilly and Figueroa
• Introduction to Quantum Geometry (http:/ / www. matem. unam. mx/ ~micho/ papers/
qgeom. pdf) by Micho Đurđevich
• Noncommutative Geometry (http:/ / www. alainconnes. org/ docs/ book94bigpdf. pdf) by
Alain Connes
• Lectures on Noncommutative Geometry (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0506603) by Victor
Ginzburg
• Very Basic Noncommutative Geometry (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0408416) by
Masoud Khalkhali
• A walk in the noncommutative garden (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0601054) by Alain
Connes and Matilde Marcolli
• Lectures on Arithmetic Noncommutative Geometry (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math. qa/
0409520) by Matilde Marcolli
• An Introduction to Noncommutative Spaces and their Geometry (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/
hep-th/ 9701078) by Giovanni Landi
• Noncommutative Geometry for Pedestrians (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ gr-qc/ 9906059) by J.
Madore
• An informal introduction to the ideas and concepts of noncommutative geometry (http:/ /
arxiv. org/ abs/ math-ph/ 0612012) by Thierry Masson (an easier introduction that is still
rather technical)
• Noncommutative geometry on arxiv.org (http:/ / xstructure. inr. ac. ru/ x-bin/
subthemes3. py?level=2& index1=-173391& skip=0)
• Noncommutative Geometry, Quantum Fields and Motives (http:/ / www. alainconnes. org/
docs/ bookwebfinal. pdf) by Alain Connes and Matilde Marcolli
• Noncommutative Geometry Blog (http:/ / noncommutativegeometry. blogspot. com/ )
• Noncommutative Geometry Resources (http:/ / www. noncommutativegeometry. net/ )

Noncommutative quantum field theory
236
Noncommutative quantum field
theory
In physics, noncommutative quantum field theory (or quantum field theory on
noncommutative 
space-time) 
is 
a 
branch 
of 
quantum 
field 
theory 
born 
from
noncommutative geometry and Index theory in which the spatial coordinates[1] do not
commute. One (commonly studied) version of such theories has the "canonical"
commutation relation:
which means that (with any given set of axes), it is impossible to accurately measure the
position of a particle with respect to more than one axis. In fact, this leads to an uncertainty
relation for the coordinates analogous to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Various lower limits have been claimed for the noncommutative scale, (i.e. how accurately
positions can be measured) but there is currently no experimental evidence in favour of
such theory or grounds for ruling them out.
One of the novel features of noncommutative field theories is the UV/IR mixing[2]
phenomenon in which the physics at high energies affects the physics at low energies which
does not occur in quantum field theories in which the coordinates commute.
Other features include violation of Lorentz invariance due to the preferred direction of
noncommutativity. Relativistic invariance can however be retained in the sense of twisted
Poincaré invariance of the theory[3] . Causality condition is possibly modified from that of
the commutative theories.
History and motivation
The idea of extension of noncommutativity to the coordinates was first suggested by
Heisenberg as a possible solution for removing the infinite quantities of field theories
before the renormalization procedure was developed and had gained acceptance. The first
paper on the subject was published in 1947 by Hartland Snyder. The success of
renormalization theory however drained interest from the subject for some time. In 1980s
noncommutative geometry was studied and developed by mathematicians, most notably
Alain Connes. The notion of differential structure was generalized to a noncommutative
setting. This led to an operator algebraic description of noncommutative space-times and a
Yang-Mills theory on a noncommutative torus was developed.
The recent interest by the particle physics community was driven by a by Nathan Seiberg
and Edward Witten[4] . They argued in the context of string theory that the coordinate
functions of the endpoints of open strings constrained to a D-brane in the presence of a
constant Neveu-Schwartz B-field -- equivalent to a constant magnetic field on the brane --
would satisfy the noncommutative algebra presented above. The implication is that a
quantum field theory on noncommutative space-time can be interpreted as a low energy
limit of the theory of open strings.
Another paper [5] possible motivation for the noncommutativity of space-time was presented 
by Sergio Doplicher, Klaus Fredenhagen and John Roberts. Their arguments is as follows: 
According to general relativity, when the energy density grows sufficiently large, a black 
hole is formed. On the other hand according to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, a

Noncommutative quantum field theory
237
measurement of a space-time separation causes an uncertainty in momentum inversely
proportional to the separation. Thus energy of scale corresponding to the uncertainty in
momentum is localized in the system within a region corresponding to the uncertainty in
position. When the separation is small enough, the Schwarzschild radius of the system is
reached and a black hole is formed, preventing any information to escape the region. Thus
a lower limit is introduced for the measurement of length. A sufficient condition for
preventing the gravitational collapse can be expressed as a form of uncertainty relation for
the coordinates. This relation in turn can be derived from a commutation relation for the
coordinates.
See also
• Weyl quantization
• Moyal product
• Noncommutative geometry
• Quantum tori
References
[1] It is possible to have a noncommuting time coordinate but this causes many problems, such as the violation of
unitarity of the S-matrix, and most research is restricted to so-called "space-space" noncommutativity. There
have been attempts to avoid these problems by redefining the perturbation theory. String theoretical derivation
of noncommutative coordinates however excludes time-space noncommutativity.
[2] See, for example, arXiv:hep-th/9912072 and arXiv:hep-th/0002075.
[3] See arXiv:hep-th/0409096.
[4] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ hep-th/ 9908142 paper]
[5] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ hep-th/ 0303037
• R.J. Szabo, Quantum Field Theory on Noncommutative Spaces, arXiv:hep-th/0109162 (A
good review of noncommutative quantum field theories)
• M.R. Douglas, N.A. Nekrasov, Noncommutative field theory (http:/ / prola. aps. org/
abstract/ RMP/ v73/ i4/ p977_1?qid=a81527af6e5a2fa2& qseq=1& show=10) Rev. Mod.
Phys. 73, 977 - 1029 (2001)
See statistics for Noncommutative quantum field theory (http:/ / xstructure. inr. ac. ru/
x-bin/ theme3. py?level=2& index1=-173391) on arxiv.org

Noncommutative standard model
238
Noncommutative standard model
The non-commutative Standard Model is an extension of the Standard Model to include
a modified form of general relativity, developed by Alain Connes using his theory of
noncommutative geometry. This unification implies a few constraints on the parameters of
the Standard Model. One of the constraints determines the mass of the Higgs boson to be
around 170 GeV, comfortably within the range of the Large Hadron Collider. However, a
Higgs mass of 170 GeV has been excluded to a confidence level of 95% using data from
Tevatron experiments.[1]
Background
Today it is thought that there are four elementary forces: the gravitational force, the
electromagnetic force, the weak force, and the strong force. Gravity has an elegant and
experimentally precise theory: Einstein's general relativity. It is based on Riemannian
geometry and interprets the gravitational force as curvature of space-time. It has a
Lagrangian formulation with only two real parameters, the gravitational constant and the
cosmological constant.
The other three forces also have a Lagrangian theory, called the Standard Model. Its
underlying idea is that they are mediated by the exchange of spin-one particles, the
so-called gauge bosons. The one responsible for electromagnetism is the photon. The weak
force has the W and Z bosons, and the strong force is thought to result from gluon
exchange. The gauge Lagrangian is much more complicated than the gravitational one: at
present, it involves some 30 real parameters. This number may still increase. What is more,
the gauge Lagrangian must also contain a spin-zero particle, the `Higgs boson'. So far this
particle has not been observed and if it does not show up at the Large Hadron Collider in
Geneva, the consistency of the Standard Model is questionable.
Alain Connes has generalized Bernhard Riemann's geometry to noncommutative geometry.
It describes spaces with curvature and uncertainty. Historically, the first example of such a
geometry is quantum mechanics, which introduces Heisenberg's uncertainty relation by
turning the classical observables of position and momentum into noncommuting operators.
Still, noncommutative geometry is close enough to Riemannian geometry that Connes was
able to redo general relativity with it. In doing so he obtained the gauge Lagrangian as a
companion of the gravitational one, a truly geometric unification of all four forces. Connes
has thus provided a totally geometric formulation of the Standard Model where all the
parameters are geometric invariants of a noncommutative space. Hence, electron
parameters like mass are now analogous to pi!

Noncommutative standard model
239
References
[1] http:/ / www. fnal. gov/ pub/ presspass/ press_releases/ Higgs-constraints-August2008. htmlv
• [1] http:/ / www. fnal. gov/ pub/ presspass/ press_releases/ Higgs-constraints-August2008.
html
• A. Connes, Noncommutative Geometry, Academic Press (1994)
• A. Connes, Noncommutative geometry and reality, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 6194
• A. Connes, Gravity coupled with matter and the foundation of noncommutative geometry,
hep-th/9603053, Comm. Math. Phys. 155 (1996) 109
• A. Chamseddine & A. Connes, The spectral action principle, hep-th/9606001, Comm.
Math. Phys. 182 (1996) 155
• A. Chamseddine, A. Connes, M. Marcolli, Gravity and the Standard Model with neutrino
mixing, hep-th/0610241, Adv.Theor.Math.Phys.11 (2007) 991
• A. Connes, M. Marcolli, Quantum Fields and Motives, book available as .pdf from http:/ /
www. alainconnes. org/ en/
• Noncommutative standard model on arxiv.org (http:/ / xstructure. inr. ac. ru/ x-bin/
theme3. py?level=1& index1=309677)
External links
• http:/ / www. alainconnes. org/
Fuzzy sphere
Fuzzy sphere is one of the simplest and most canonical examples of non-commutative
geometry. Ordinarily, the functions defined on a sphere form a commuting algebra. A fuzzy
sphere differs from an ordinary sphere because the algebra of functions on it is not
commutative. It is generated by spherical harmonics whose spin l is at most equal to some j.
The terms in the product of two spherical harmonics that involve spherical harmonics with
spin exceeding j are simply omitted in the product. This truncation replaces an
infinite-dimensional commutative algebra by a 
-dimensional non-commutative algebra.
The simplest way to see this sphere is to realize this truncated algebra of functions as a
matrix algebra on some finite dimensional vector space. Take the three j-dimensional
matrices 
that form a basis for the j dimensional irreducible representation of
the Lie algebra SU(2). They satisfy the relations 
, where 
is the totally
anti-commuting tensor with 
, and generate via the matrix product the algebra 
of j dimensional matrices. The value of the SU(2) Casimir operator in this representation is
where I is the j-dimensional identity matrix. Thus, if we define the 'coordinates'
where r is the radius of the sphere and k is a parameter, related to r and j by
, then the above equation concerning the Casimir operator can be
rewritten as
,
which is the usual relation for the coordinates on a sphere of radius r embedded in three
dimensional space.

Fuzzy sphere
240
One can define an integral on this space, by
where F is the matrix corresponding to the function f. For example, the integral of unity,
which gives the surface of the sphere in the commutative case is here equal to
which converges to the value of the surface of the sphere if one takes j to infinity.
See also
• Fuzzy torus
Notes
• John Madore, An introduction to Noncommutative Differential Geometry and its Physical
Applications, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. 257, Cambridge
University Press 2002
References
Quantum torus
A quantum torus (plural: quantum tori) is a "space" whose noncommutative algebra of
functions is obtained by deformation of the commutative algebra of functions on a torus
(R/Z)d. It is a noncommutative analogue of the algebra of Laurent polynomials. Quantum
tori appear in extended affine Lie algebra and quantum physics. In noncommutative
geometry or quantum physics, a noncommutative torus is a special type of quantum tori.
In the 1980s and 1990s, Fields medallist Alain Connes introduced a range of new geometric
objects designed to put quantum physics on a firm mathematical foundation. One of the
most important examples was the quantum torus, an abstract, quantum version of the
traditional doughnut-shaped torus. While a classical torus is easy to visualise, it is
impossible to picture a quantum torus in the same way. This is because quantum geometry
replaces the traditional notions of shape, area, curvature and so on with a more abstract
concept of a mathematical space. Boris Zilber's work proved that if Schanuel's conjecture is
true then the quantum torus is what is known as a stable structure. Stable structures have
been studied intensively for years and are well known which gives better insight or intuition
into quantum torus abstraction. Regardless, the quantum torus is fundamental to ongoing
efforts to model the quantum universe.[1]
The Schwartz kernel of the multiplication operation on a quantum torus is the distributional 
boundary value of a classical multivariate theta function. The kernel satisfies a Schrodinger 
equation in which the role of time is played by the deformation parameter h and the role of 
the hamiltonian by a Poisson structure associated with the deformation. At least in some 
special cases, the kernel can be written as a sum of products of single variable theta 
functions. Thus, the evolution in Planck's constant of a torus is like the time evolution of a 
free particle, with the initial state (the Schwartz kernel of the operator of pointwise

Quantum torus
241
multiplication) being a delta function, like the initial state of a particle with certain position
and totally uncertain momentum.
Kernel of multiplication on a quantum torus
Multiplication (Star product, Weyl-Moyal) on quantum tori are particularly usefull in taking
care of convergence problems in predefined noncommutative tori having some deformation
parameter (deformation quantization). In particular, these kernels satisfies a Schrodinger
equation, in which the role of time is played by the deformation parameter, and the role of
the hamiltonian is played by the Poisson structure associated with the deformation. Thus,
the evolution in Plank's constant of a torus is like the time evolution of a free particle, with
the initial state being a delta function, like the initial state of a particle with certain position
and totally uncertain momentum.
Applications
Examples of applications include: operator algebras (K-theory and KK-theory of C*-algebra
and their classification); topology (successful resolution of the Novikov conjecture and the
Baum–Connes conjecture for large classes of groups); global analysis and geometry (various
new formulations of index theory problems beyond their classical realms, on singular
spaces like the space of leaves of a foliation); algebra (algebraic K-theory computations
through topological Hochschild and cyclic homology, the idempotent conjecture for group
algebras, the theory of quantum groups and Hopf algebra and their homological invariants);
number theory (Connes’ new approach to the Riemann hypothesis, relations between Hecke
algebra and quantum statistical mechanics via noncommutative geometry, emerging
relations with Arakelov theory, hidden quantum symmetries in the space of modular forms
recently discovered by Connes and Moscovici); physics, in particular high energy physics
(solid state physics of quasicrystals, new formulations of the standard model, relations with
string theory, gauge theory, and M-theory).
The quantum Gromov–Hausdorff distance defines a framework to investigate claims found
in the physics literature that classical or quantum spaces can be approximated by matrix
algebra. These approximations are related to M-theory and may serve as tools to construct
quantum field theory over quantum spaces. Quantum tori can be approximated with matrix
algebras generated by unitaries in finite dimension.
References
[1] http:/ / www. experimentalmath. info/ news/ ns-e. html
• Hormander, L., The Weyl calculus of pseudo-differential operators, Comm. Pure Appl.
Math., 32 (1979), 359–443.
• Manin, Y.I., Quantized theta functions, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl., 102 (1990), 219–228.
• Mumford, D., Tata Lectures on Theta /, Birkhauser, Boston, 1983.
• Rieffel, M. A., Non-commutative tori — a case study of noncommutative differentiate
manifolds, Contemporary Math., 105 (1990), 191–211.
• Weinstein, A., Symplectic groupoids, geometric quantization, and irrational rotation
algebras, Symplectic geometry, groupoids, and integrable systems, Seminaire
sud-Rhodanien de geometrie a Berkeley (1989), P. Dazord and A. Weinstein, eds.,
Springer-MSRI Series (1991), 281–290.

Homological mirror symmetry
242
Homological mirror symmetry
Homological mirror symmetry is a mathematical conjecture made by Maxim Kontsevich.
It seeks a systematic mathematical explanation for a phenomenon called mirror symmetry
first observed by physicists studying string theory.
History
In an address to the 1994 International Congress of Mathematicians in Zurich, Kontsevich
speculated that mirror symmetry for a pair of Calabi-Yau manifolds X and Y could be
explained as an equivalence of a triangulated category constructed from the algebraic
geometry of X and another triangulated category constructed from the symplectic geometry
of Y.
Edward Witten originally described the topological twisting of the N=(2,2) supersymmetric
field theory into what he called the A and B model topological string theories. These models
concern maps from Riemann surfaces into a fixed target - usually a Calabi-Yau manifold.
Most of the mathematical predictions of mirror symmetry are embedded in the physical
equivalence of the A-model on Y with the B-model on its mirror X. When the Riemann
surfaces have empty boundary, they represent the worldsheets of closed strings. To cover
the case of open strings, one must introduce boundary conditions to preserve the
supersymmetry. In the A-model, these boundary conditions come in the form of Lagrangian
submanifolds of Y with some additional structure (often called a brane structure). In the
B-model, the boundary conditions come in the form of holomorphic (or algebraic)
submanifolds of X with holomorphic (or algebraic) vector bundles on them. These are the
objects one uses to build the relevant categories. They are often called A and B branes
respectively. Morphisms in the categories are given by the massless spectrum of open
strings stretching between two branes.
The closed string A and B models only capture the so-called topological sector - a small
portion of the full string theory. Similarly, the branes in these models are only topological
approximations to the full dynamical objects that are D-branes. Even so, the mathematics
resulting from this small piece of string theory has been both deep and difficult.
Examples
Only in a few examples have mathematicians been able to verify the conjecture. In his
seminal address, Kontsevich commented that the conjecture could be proved in the case of
elliptic curves using theta functions. Following this route, Alexander Polishchuk and Eric
Zaslow provided a proof of a version of the conjecture for elliptic curves. Kenji Fukaya was
able to establish elements of the conjecture for abelian varieties. Later, Kontsevich and Yan
Soibelman provided a proof of the majority of the conjecture for nonsingular torus bundles
over affine manifolds using ideas from the SYZ conjecture. Recently, Paul Seidel proved the
conjecture in the case of the quartic surface.

Homological mirror symmetry
243
See also
• Topological quantum field theory
• Category theory
• Floer homology
• Fukaya category
• Derived category
References
• Kontsevich, Maxim. "Homological algebra of mirror symmetry." [1]
• Seidel, Paul. "Homological mirror symmetry for the quartic surface." [2]
• Kontsevich, Maxim, Soibelman Yan. "Homological Mirror Symmetry and torus
fibrations."[3]
References
[1] http:/ / front. math. ucdavis. edu/ alg-geom/ 9411018
[2] http:/ / front. math. ucdavis. edu/ math. SG/ 0310414
[3] http:/ / front. math. ucdavis. edu/ math. SG/ 0011041

244
Algebra
Algebra
Algebra is a branch of mathematics concerning the study of structure, relation, and
quantity. Together with geometry, analysis, combinatorics, and number theory, algebra is
one of the main branches of mathematics. Elementary algebra is often part of the
curriculum in secondary education and provides an introduction to the basic ideas of
algebra, including effects of adding and multiplying numbers, the concept of variables,
definition of polynomials, along with factorization and determining their roots.
Algebra is much broader than elementary algebra and can be generalized. In addition to
working directly with numbers, algebra covers working with symbols, variables, and set
elements. Addition and multiplication are viewed as general operations, and their precise
definitions lead to structures such as groups, rings and fields.
History
A page from Al-Khwārizmī's al-Kitāb
al-muḫtaṣar fī ḥisāb al-ğabr
wa-l-muqābala
While the word "algebra" comes from Arabic word
(al-jabr,  ,)ربجلاits origins can be traced to the ancient
Babylonians,[1] 
who 
developed 
an 
advanced
arithmetical system with which they were able to do
calculations in an algebraic fashion. With the use of this
system they were able to apply formulas and calculate
solutions for unknown values for a class of problems
typically solved today by using linear equations,
quadratic 
equations, 
and 
indeterminate 
linear
equations. By contrast, most Egyptians of this era, and
most Indian, Greek and Chinese mathematicians in the
first millennium BC, usually solved such equations by
geometric methods, such as those described in the
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, Sulba Sutras, Euclid's
Elements, and The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical
Art. The geometric work of the Greeks, typified in the
Elements, provided the framework for generalizing
formulae beyond the solution of particular problems
into more general systems of stating and solving
equations, though this would not be realized until the
medieval Muslim mathematicians.
The Hellenistic mathematicians Hero of Alexandria and Diophantus [2] as well as Indian
mathematicians such as Brahmagupta continued the traditions of Egypt and Babylon,
though Diophantus' Arithmetica and Brahmagupta's Brahmasphutasiddhanta are on a
higher level.[3] Later, Arab and Muslim mathematicians developed algebraic methods to a 
much higher degree of sophistication. Although Diophantus and the Babylonians used

Algebra
245
mostly special ad hoc methods to solve equations, Al-Khowarazmi was the first to solve
equations using general methods. He solved the linear indeterminate equations, quadratic
equations, second order indeterminate equations and equations with multiple variable.
The word "algebra" is named after the Arabic word "al-jabr ,  "ربجلاfrom the title of the book
al-Kitāb al-muḫtaṣar fī ḥisāb al-ğabr wa-l-muqābala , ,ةلباقملاو ربجلا باسح يف رصتخملا باتكلا
meaning The book of Summary Concerning Calculating by Transposition and Reduction, a
book written by the Islamic Persian mathematician, Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī
(considered the "father of algebra"), in 820. The word Al-Jabr means "reunion". The
Hellenistic mathematician Diophantus has traditionally been known as the "father of
algebra" but in more recent times there is much debate over whether al-Khwarizmi, who
founded the discipline of al-jabr, deserves that title instead.[4] Those who support
Diophantus point to the fact that the algebra found in Al-Jabr is slightly more elementary
than the algebra found in Arithmetica and that Arithmetica is syncopated while Al-Jabr is
fully rhetorical.[5] Those who support Al-Khwarizmi point to the fact that he introduced the
methods of "reduction" and "balancing" (the transposition of subtracted terms to the other
side of an equation, that is, the cancellation of like terms on opposite sides of the equation)
which the term al-jabr originally referred to,[6] and that he gave an exhaustive explanation
of solving quadratic equations,[7] supported by geometric proofs, while treating algebra as
an independent discipline in its own right.[8] His algebra was also no longer concerned
"with a series of problems to be resolved, but an exposition which starts with primitive
terms in which the combinations must give all possible prototypes for equations, which
henceforward explicitly constitute the true object of study." He also studied an equation for
its own sake and "in a generic manner, insofar as it does not simply emerge in the course of
solving a problem, but is specifically called on to define an infinite class of problems."[9]
The Persian mathematician Omar Khayyam developed algebraic geometry and found the
general geometric solution of the cubic equation. Another Persian mathematician, Sharaf
al-Dīn al-Tūsī, found algebraic and numerical solutions to various cases of cubic
equations.[10] He also developed the concept of a function.[11] The Indian mathematicians
Mahavira and Bhaskara II, the Persian mathematician Al-Karaji,[12] and the Chinese
mathematician Zhu Shijie, solved various cases of cubic, quartic, quintic and higher-order
polynomial equations using numerical methods.
Another key event in the further development of algebra was the general algebraic solution
of the cubic and quartic equations, developed in the mid-16th century. The idea of a
determinant was developed by Japanese mathematician Kowa Seki in the 17th century,
followed by Gottfried Leibniz ten years later, for the purpose of solving systems of
simultaneous linear equations using matrices. Gabriel Cramer also did some work on
matrices and determinants in the 18th century. Abstract algebra was developed in the 19th
century, initially focusing on what is now called Galois theory, and on constructibility
issues.

Algebra
246
Classification
Algebra may be divided roughly into the following categories:
• Elementary algebra, in which the properties of operations on the real number system
are recorded using symbols as "place holders" to denote constants and variables, and the
rules governing mathematical expressions and equations involving these symbols are
studied (note that this usually includes the subject matter of courses called intermediate
algebra and college algebra), also called second year and third year algebra;
• Abstract algebra, sometimes also called modern algebra, in which algebraic structures
such as groups, rings and fields are axiomatically defined and investigated.
• Linear algebra, in which the specific properties of vector spaces are studied (including
matrices);
• Universal algebra, in which properties common to all algebraic structures are studied.
• Algebraic number theory, in which the properties of numbers are studied through
algebraic systems. Number theory inspired much of the original abstraction in algebra.
• Algebraic geometry in its algebraic aspect.
• Algebraic combinatorics, in which abstract algebraic methods are used to study
combinatorial questions.
In some directions of advanced study, axiomatic algebraic systems such as groups, rings,
fields, and algebras over a field are investigated in the presence of a geometric structure (a
metric or a topology) which is compatible with the algebraic structure. The list includes a
number of areas of functional analysis:
• Normed linear spaces
• Banach spaces
• Hilbert spaces
• Banach algebras
• Normed algebras
• Topological algebras
• Topological groups
Elementary algebra
Elementary algebra is the most basic form of algebra. It is taught to students who are
presumed to have no knowledge of mathematics beyond the basic principles of arithmetic.
In arithmetic, only numbers and their arithmetical operations (such as +, −, ×, ÷) occur. In
algebra, numbers are often denoted by symbols (such as a, x, or y). This is useful because:
• It allows the general formulation of arithmetical laws (such as a + b = b + a for all a and
b), and thus is the first step to a systematic exploration of the properties of the real
number system.
• It allows the reference to "unknown" numbers, the formulation of equations and the study
of how to solve these (for instance, "Find a number x such that 3x + 1 = 10").
• It allows the formulation of functional relationships (such as "If you sell x tickets, then
your profit will be 3x − 10 dollars, or f(x) = 3x − 10, where f is the function, and x is the
number to which the function is applied.").

Algebra
247
Polynomials
A polynomial is an expression that is constructed from one or more variables and
constants, using only the operations of addition, subtraction, and multiplication (where
repeated multiplication of the same variable is standardly denoted as exponentiation with a
constant non-negative whole number exponent). For example, x2 + 2x − 3 is a polynomial in
the single variable x.
An important class of problems in algebra is factorization of polynomials, that is, expressing
a given polynomial as a product of other polynomials. The example polynomial above can be
factored as (x − 1)(x + 3). A related class of problems is finding algebraic expressions for
the roots of a polynomial in a single variable.
Abstract algebra
Abstract algebra extends the familiar concepts found in elementary algebra and
arithmetic of numbers to more general concepts.
Sets: Rather than just considering the different types of numbers, abstract algebra deals
with the more general concept of sets: a collection of all objects (called elements) selected
by property, specific for the set. All collections of the familiar types of numbers are sets.
Other examples of sets include the set of all two-by-two matrices, the set of all
second-degree polynomials (ax2 + bx + c), the set of all two dimensional vectors in the
plane, and the various finite groups such as the cyclic groups which are the group of
integers modulo n. Set theory is a branch of logic and not technically a branch of algebra.
Binary operations: The notion of addition (+) is abstracted to give a binary operation, ∗
say. The notion of binary operation is meaningless without the set on which the operation is
defined. For two elements a and b in a set S, a ∗ b is another element in the set; this
condition is called closure. Addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (×), and division (÷)
can be binary operations when defined on different sets, as is addition and multiplication of
matrices, vectors, and polynomials.
Identity elements: The numbers zero and one are abstracted to give the notion of an
identity element for an operation. Zero is the identity element for addition and one is the
identity element for multiplication. For a general binary operator ∗ the identity element e
must satisfy a ∗ e = a and e ∗ a = a. This holds for addition as a + 0 = a and 0 + a = a and
multiplication a × 1 = a and 1 × a = a. Not all set and operator combinations have an
identity element; for example, the positive natural numbers (1, 2, 3, ...) have no identity
element for addition.
Inverse elements: The negative numbers give rise to the concept of inverse elements. For
addition, the inverse of a is −a, and for multiplication the inverse is 1/a. A general inverse
element a−1 must satisfy the property that a ∗ a−1 = e and a−1 ∗ a = e.
Associativity: Addition of integers has a property called associativity. That is, the grouping
of the numbers to be added does not affect the sum. For example: (2 + 3) + 4 = 2 + (3 + 4).
In general, this becomes (a ∗ b) ∗ c = a ∗ (b ∗ c). This property is shared by most binary
operations, but not subtraction or division or octonion multiplication.
Commutativity: Addition of integers also has a property called commutativity. That is, the 
order of the numbers to be added does not affect the sum. For example: 2+3=3+2. In 
general, this becomes a ∗ b = b ∗ a. Only some binary operations have this property. It 
holds for the integers with addition and multiplication, but it does not hold for matrix

Algebra
248
multiplication or quaternion multiplication .
Groups – structures of a set with a single binary operation
Combining the above concepts gives one of the most important structures in mathematics:
a group. A group is a combination of a set S and a single binary operation ∗, defined in any
way you choose, but with the following properties:
• An identity element e exists, such that for every member a of S, e ∗ a and a ∗ e are both
identical to a.
• Every element has an inverse: for every member a of S, there exists a member a−1 such
that a ∗ a−1 and a−1 ∗ a are both identical to the identity element.
• The operation is associative: if a, b and c are members of S, then (a ∗ b) ∗ c is identical to
a ∗ (b ∗ c).
If a group is also commutative—that is, for any two members a and b of S, a ∗ b is identical
to b ∗ a—then the group is said to be Abelian.
For example, the set of integers under the operation of addition is a group. In this group,
the identity element is 0 and the inverse of any element a is its negation, −a. The
associativity requirement is met, because for any integers a, b and c, (a + b) + c = a + (b +
c)
The nonzero rational numbers form a group under multiplication. Here, the identity
element is 1, since 1 × a = a × 1 = a for any rational number a. The inverse of a is 1/a,
since a × 1/a = 1.
The integers under the multiplication operation, however, do not form a group. This is
because, in general, the multiplicative inverse of an integer is not an integer. For example,
4 is an integer, but its multiplicative inverse is ¼, which is not an integer.
The theory of groups is studied in group theory. A major result in this theory is the
classification of finite simple groups, mostly published between about 1955 and 1983,
which is thought to classify all of the finite simple groups into roughly 30 basic types.
Examples
Set:
Natural numbers
N
Integers Z
Rational numbers Q (also real R and
complex C numbers)
Integers modulo
3: Z3 = {0, 1, 2}
Operation
+
× (w/o
zero)
+
× (w/o
zero)
+
−
× (w/o
zero)
÷ (w/o
zero)
+
× (w/o
zero)
Closed
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Identity
0
1
0
1
0
N/A
1
N/A
0
1
Inverse
N/A
N/A
−a
N/A
−a
N/A
1/a
N/A
0, 2, 1,
respectively
N/A, 1,
2,
respectively
Associative
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Commutative Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Structure
monoid
monoid
Abelian
group
monoid
Abelian
group
quasigroup Abelian
group
quasigroup Abelian
group
Abelian
group
(Z2)
Semigroups, quasigroups, and monoids are structures similar to groups, but more general. 
They comprise a set and a closed binary operation, but do not necessarily satisfy the other

Algebra
249
conditions. A semigroup has an associative binary operation, but might not have an identity
element. A monoid is a semigroup which does have an identity but might not have an
inverse for every element. A quasigroup satisfies a requirement that any element can be
turned into any other by a unique pre- or post-operation; however the binary operation
might not be associative.
All groups are monoids, and all monoids are semigroups.
Rings and fields—structures of a set with two particular binary
operations, (+) and (×)
Groups just have one binary operation. To fully explain the behaviour of the different types
of numbers, structures with two operators need to be studied. The most important of these
are rings, and fields.
Distributivity generalised the distributive law for numbers, and specifies the order in
which the operators should be applied, (called the precedence). For the integers (a + b) × c
= a × c + b × c and c × (a + b) = c × a + c × b, and × is said to be distributive over +.
A ring has two binary operations (+) and (×), with × distributive over +. Under the first
operator (+) it forms an Abelian group. Under the second operator (×) it is associative, but
it does not need to have identity, or inverse, so division is not allowed. The additive (+)
identity element is written as 0 and the additive inverse of a is written as −a.
The integers are an example of a ring. The integers have additional properties which make
it an integral domain.
A field is a ring with the additional property that all the elements excluding 0 form an
Abelian group under ×. The multiplicative (×) identity is written as 1 and the multiplicative
inverse of a is written as a−1.
The rational numbers, the real numbers and the complex numbers are all examples of
fields.
Objects called algebras
The word algebra is also used for various algebraic structures:
• Algebra over a field or more generally Algebra over a ring
• Algebra over a set
• Boolean algebra
• F-algebra and F-coalgebra in category theory
• Relational algebra
• Sigma-algebra
• T-Algebras of monads.

Algebra
250
See also
• Fundamental theorem of algebra
• List of basic algebra topics
• List of mathematics articles
• Order of operations
Notes
[1] Struik, Dirk J. (1987). A Concise History of Mathematics. New York: Dover Publications.
[2] Diophantus, Father of Algebra (http:/ / library. thinkquest. org/ 25672/ diiophan. htm)
[3] History of Algebra (http:/ / www. algebra. com/ algebra/ about/ history/ )
[4] Carl B. Boyer, A History of Mathematics, Second Edition (Wiley, 1991), pages 178, 181
[5] Carl B. Boyer, A History of Mathematics, Second Edition (Wiley, 1991), page 228
[6] (Boyer 1991, "The Arabic Hegemony" p. 229) "It is not certain just what the terms al-jabr and muqabalah
mean, but the usual interpretation is similar to that implied in the translation above. The word al-jabr
presumably meant something like "restoration" or "completion" and seems to refer to the transposition of
subtracted terms to the other side of an equation; the word muqabalah is said to refer to "reduction" or
"balancing" - that is, the cancellation of like terms on opposite sides of the equation."
[7] (Boyer 1991, "The Arabic Hegemony" p. 230) "The six cases of equations given above exhaust all possibilities
for linear and quadratic equations having positive root. So systematic and exhaustive was al-Khwarizmi's
exposition that his readers must have had little difficulty in mastering the solutions."
[8] Gandz and Saloman (1936), The sources of al-Khwarizmi's algebra, Osiris i, p. 263–277: "In a sense, Khwarizmi
is more entitled to be called "the father of algebra" than Diophantus because Khwarizmi is the first to teach
algebra in an elementary form and for its own sake, Diophantus is primarily concerned with the theory of
numbers".
[9] Rashed, R.; Armstrong, Angela (1994), The Development of Arabic Mathematics, Springer, pp. 11–2, ISBN
0792325656, OCLC 29181926 (http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 29181926)
[10] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Al-Tusi_Sharaf.html|"Sharaf al-Din al-Muzaffar al-Tusi",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
[11] Victor J. Katz, Bill Barton (October 2007), "Stages in the History of Algebra with Implications for Teaching",
Educational Studies in Mathematics (Springer Netherlands) 66 (2): 185–201 [192], doi:
10.1007/s10649-006-9023-7 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10649-006-9023-7)
[12] (Boyer 1991, "The Arabic Hegemony" p. 239) "Abu'l Wefa was a capable algebraist as well as a trigonometer.
[...] His successor al-Karkhi evidently used this translation to become an Arabic disciple of Diophantus - but
without Diophantine analysis! [...] In particular, to al-Karkhi is attributed the first numerical solution of
equations of the form ax2n + bxn = c (only equations with positive roots were considered),"
References
• Donald R. Hill, Islamic Science and Engineering (Edinburgh University Press, 1994).
• Ziauddin Sardar, Jerry Ravetz, and Borin Van Loon, Introducing Mathematics (Totem
Books, 1999).
• George Gheverghese Joseph, The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of
Mathematics (Penguin Books, 2000).
• John J O'Connor and Edmund F Robertson, MacTutor History of Mathematics archive
(University of St Andrews, 2005).
• I.N. Herstein: Topics in Algebra. ISBN 0-471-02371-X
• R.B.J.T. Allenby: Rings, Fields and Groups. ISBN 0-340-54440-6
• L. Euler: Elements of Algebra (http:/ / web. mat. bham. ac. uk/ C. J. Sangwin/ euler/ ),
ISBN 978-1-89961-873-6

Algebra
251
External links
• 4000 Years of Algebra (http:/ / www. gresham. ac. uk/ event. asp?PageId=45&
EventId=620), lecture by Robin Wilson, at Gresham College, October 17, 2007 (available
for MP3 and MP4 download, as well as a text file).
• Algebra (http:/ / plato. stanford. edu/ entries/ algebra) entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy by Vaughan Pratt
Abstract Algebra
1. REDIRECT Abstract algebra
This is a redirect from a title with another method of capitalisation. It leads to the title in
accordance with the Wikipedia naming conventions for capitalisation, and can help writing,
searching, and international language issues.
Pages linking to any of these redirects may be updated to link directly to the target page.
However, do not replace these redirected links with a piped link unless the page is updated
for another reason.
For more information, see Category:Redirects from other capitalisations.
Algebraic logic
In mathematical logic, algebraic logic is the study of logic presented in an algebraic style.
Algebras as models of logics
Algebraic 
logic 
treats 
algebraic 
structures, 
often 
bounded 
lattices, 
as 
models
(interpretations) of certain logics, making logic a branch of order theory.
In algebraic logic:
• Variables are tacitly universally quantified over some universe of discourse. There are no
existentially quantified variables or open formulas;
• Terms are built up from variables using primitive and defined operations. There are no
connectives;
• Formulas, built from terms in the usual way, can be equated if they are logically
equivalent. To express a tautology, equate a formula with a truth value;
• The rules of proof are the substitution of equals for equals, and uniform replacement.
Modus ponens remains valid, but is seldom employed.
In the table below, the left column contains one or more logical or mathematical systems,
and the algebraic structure which are its models are shown on the right in the same row.
Some of these structures are either Boolean algebras or proper extensions thereof. Modal
and other nonclassical logics are typically modeled by what are called "Boolean algebras
with operators."
Algebraic formalisms going beyond first-order logic in at least some respects include:
• Combinatory logic, having the expressive power of set theory;

Algebraic logic
252
• Relation algebra, arguably the paradigmatic algebraic logic, can express Peano
arithmetic and most axiomatic set theories, including the canonical ZFC.
logical system
its models
Classical sentential logic
Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra Two-element Boolean algebra
Intuitionistic propositional logic
Heyting algebra
Łukasiewicz logic
MV-algebra
Modal logic K
Modal algebra
Lewis's S4
Interior algebra
Lewis's S5; Monadic predicate logic
Monadic Boolean algebra
First-order logic
Cylindric algebra Polyadic algebra
Predicate functor logic
Set theory
Combinatory logic Relation algebra
History
On the history of algebraic logic before World War II, see Brady (2000) and
Grattan-Guinness (2000) and their ample references. On the postwar history, see Maddux
(1991) and Quine (1976).
Algebraic logic has at least two meanings:
• The study of Boolean algebra, begun by George Boole, and of relation algebra, begun by
Augustus DeMorgan, extended by Charles Sanders Peirce, and taking definitive form in
the work of Ernst Schröder;
• Abstract algebraic logic, a branch of contemporary mathematical logic.
Perhaps surprisingly, algebraic logic is the oldest approach to formal logic, arguably
beginning with a number of memoranda Leibniz wrote in the 1680s, some of which were
published in the 19th century and translated into English by Clarence Lewis in 1918. But
nearly all of Leibniz's known work on algebraic logic was published only in 1903, after
Louis Couturat discovered it in Leibniz's Nachlass. Parkinson (1966) and Loemker (1969)
translated selections from Couturat's volume into English.
Brady (2000) discusses the rich historical connections between algebraic logic and model
theory. The founders of model theory, Ernst Schroder and Leopold Loewenheim, were
logicians in the algebraic tradition. Alfred Tarski, the founder of set theoretic model theory
as a major branch of contemporary mathematical logic, also:
• Co-discovered Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra;
• Invented cylindric algebra;
• Wrote the 1940 paper that revived relation algebra, and that can be seen as the starting
point of abstract algebraic logic.
Modern mathematical logic began in 1847, with two pamphlets whose respective authors 
were Augustus DeMorgan and George Boole. They, and later C.S. Peirce, Hugh MacColl, 
Frege, Peano, Bertrand Russell, and A. N. Whitehead all shared Leibniz's dream of 
combining symbolic logic, mathematics, and philosophy. Relation algebra is arguably the 
culmination of Leibniz's approach to logic. With the exception of some writings by Leopold 
Loewenheim and Thoralf Skolem, algebraic logic went into eclipse soon after the 1910-13 
publication of Principia Mathematica, not to revive until Tarski's 1940 reexposition of

Algebraic logic
253
relation algebra.
Leibniz had no influence on the rise of algebraic logic because his logical writings were
little studied before the Parkinson and Loemker translations. Our present understanding of
Leibniz the logician stems mainly from the work of Wolfgang Lenzen, summarized in
Lenzen (2004). [1] To see how present-day work in logic and metaphysics can draw
inspiration from, and shed light on, Leibniz's thought, see Zalta (2000). [2]
See also
• Abstract algebraic logic
• Algebraic structure
• Boolean algebra (logic)
• Boolean algebra (structure)
• Cylindric algebra
• Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra
• Mathematical logic
• Model theory
• Monadic Boolean algebra
• Predicate functor logic
• Relation algebra
• Universal algebra
References
• Brady, Geraldine, 2000. From Peirce to Skolem: A neglected chapter in the history of
logic. North-Holland/Elsevier Science BV: catalog page [3], Amsterdam, Netherlands, 625
pages.
• Burris, Stanley, 2009. The Algebra of Logic Tradition [4]. Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy.
• Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots. Princeton Univ. Press.
• Lenzen, Wolfgang, 2004, "Leibniz’s Logic [1]" in Gabbay, D., and Woods, J., eds.,
Handbook of the History of Logic, Vol. 3: The Rise of Modern Logic from Leibniz to
Frege. North-Holland: 1-84.
• Loemker, Leroy (1969 (1956)), Leibniz: Philosophical Papers and Letters, Reidel.
• Roger Maddux, 1991, "The Origin of Relation Algebras in the Development and
Axiomatization of the Calculus of Relations," Studia Logica 50: 421-55.
• Parkinson, G.H.R., 1966. Leibniz: Logical Papers. Oxford Uni. Press.
• Willard Quine, 1976, "Algebraic Logic and Predicate Functors" in The Ways of Paradox.
Harvard Univ. Press: 283-307.
• Zalta, E. N., 2000, "A (Leibnizian) Theory of Concepts [5]," Philosophiegeschichte und
logische Analyse / Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy 3: 137-183.

Algebraic logic
254
External links
• Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Propositional Consequence Relations and
Algebraic Logic [6]" -- by Ramon Jansana.
References
[1] http:/ / www. philosophie. uni-osnabrueck. de/ Publikationen%20Lenzen/ Lenzen%20Leibniz%20Logic. pdf
[2] http:/ / mally. stanford. edu/ Papers/ leibniz. pdf
[3] http:/ / www. elsevier. com/ wps/ find/ bookdescription. cws_home/ 621535/ description
[4] http:/ / plato. stanford. edu/ entries/ algebra-logic-tradition/
[5] http:/ / mally. stanford. edu/ leibniz. pdf
[6] http:/ / plato. stanford. edu/ entries/ consequence-algebraic/
Galois group
In mathematics, a Galois group is a group associated with a certain type of field extension.
The study of field extensions (and polynomials which give rise to them) via Galois groups is
called Galois theory after Évariste Galois who first invented them.
For a more elementary discussion of Galois groups in terms of permutation groups, see the
article on Galois theory.
Definition
Suppose that E is an extension of the field F (written as E /F and read E over F). Consider
the set of all automorphisms of E /F (that is, isomorphisms α from E to itself such that α(x)
= x for every x in F). This set of automorphisms with the operation of function composition
forms a group, sometimes denoted by Aut(E /F).
If E /F is a Galois extension, then Aut(E /F) is called the Galois group of (the extension)
E over F, and is usually denoted by Gal(E /F).
Examples
In the following examples F is a field, and C, R, Q are the fields of complex, real, and
rational numbers, respectively. The notation F(a) indicates the field extension obtained by
adjoining an element a to the field F.
• Gal(F/F) is the trivial group that has a single element, namely the identity automorphism.
• Gal(C/R) has two elements, the identity automorphism and the complex conjugation
automorphism.
• Aut(R/Q) is trivial. Indeed it can be shown that any Q-automorphism must preserve the
ordering of the real numbers and hence must be the identity.
• Aut(C/Q) is an infinite group.
• Gal(Q(√2)/Q) has two elements, the identity automorphism and the automorphism which
exchanges √2 and −√2.
• Consider the field K = Q(³√2). The group Aut(K/Q) contains only the identity
automorphism. This is because K is not a normal extension, since the other two cube
roots of 2 (both complex) are missing from the extension — in other words K is not a
splitting field.

Galois group
255
• Consider now L = Q(³√2, ω), where ω is a primitive third root of unity. The group
Gal(L/Q) is isomorphic to S3, the dihedral group of order 6, and L is in fact the splitting
field of x3 − 2 over Q.
Facts
The significance of an extension being Galois is that it obeys the fundamental theorem of
Galois theory: the subgroups of the Galois group correspond to the intermediate fields of
the field extension.
If E/F is a Galois extension, then Gal(E/F) can be given a topology, called the Krull topology,
that makes it into a profinite group.
See also
• Absolute Galois group
External links
• Galois Groups [1] at MathPages
References
[1] http:/ / www. mathpages. com/ home/ kmath290/ kmath290. htm
Galois theory
In mathematics, more specifically in abstract algebra, Galois theory, named after Évariste
Galois, provides a connection between field theory and group theory. Using Galois theory,
certain problems in field theory can be reduced to group theory, which is in some sense
simpler and better understood.
Originally Galois used permutation groups to describe how the various roots of a given
polynomial equation are related to each other. The modern approach to Galois theory,
developed by Richard Dedekind, Leopold Kronecker and Emil Artin, among others, involves
studying automorphisms of field extensions.
Further abstraction of Galois theory is achieved by the theory of Galois connections.
Application to classical problems
The birth of Galois theory was originally motivated by the following question, whose answer
is known as the Abel-Ruffini theorem.
 "Why is there no formula for the roots of a fifth (or higher) degree polynomial
equation in terms of the coefficients of the polynomial, using only the usual algebraic
operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) and application of radicals
(square roots, cube roots, etc)?" 
Galois theory not only provides a beautiful answer to this question, it also explains in detail 
why it is possible to solve equations of degree four or lower in the above manner, and why 
their solutions take the form that they do. Further, it gives a conceptually clear, and often 
practical, means of telling when some particular equation of higher degree can be solved in

Galois theory
256
that manner.
Galois theory also gives a clear insight into questions concerning problems in compass and
straightedge construction. It gives an elegant characterisation of the ratios of lengths that
can be constructed with this method. Using this, it becomes relatively easy to answer such
classical problems of geometry as
"Which regular polygons are constructible polygons?"
"Why is it not possible to trisect every angle?"
History
Galois theory originated in the study of symmetric functions – the coefficients of a
polynomial are (up to sign) the elementary symmetric polynomials in the roots. For
instance, 
where 
and 
are the elementary
polynomials of degree 1 and 2 in 2 variables.
This was first formalized by the 16th century French mathematician François Viète, in
Viète's formulas, for the case of positive real roots. In the opinion of the 18th century
British mathematician Charles Hutton,[1] the expression of coefficients of a polynomial in
terms of the roots (not only for positive roots) was first understood by the 17th century
French mathematician Albert Girard; Hutton writes:
...[Girard was] the first person who understood the general doctrine of the
formation of the coefficients of the powers from the sum of the roots and their
products. He was the first who discovered the rules for summing the powers of
the roots of any equation.
In this vein, the discriminant is a symmetric function in the coefficients (and hence also in
the roots) which reflects properties of the roots – it is zero if and only if the polynomial has
a multiple root, and for quadratic and cubic polynomials it is positive if and only if all roots
are real and distinct, and negative if and only if there is a pair of distinct complex conjugate
roots. See Discriminant: nature of the roots for details.
The cubic was first partly solved by the 15th/16th century Italian mathematician Scipione
del Ferro, who did not however publish his results; this method only solved one of three
classes, as the others involved taking square roots of negative numbers, and complex
numbers were not known at the time. This solution was then rediscovered independently in
1535 by Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia, who shared it with Gerolamo Cardano, asking him to
not publish it. Cardano then extended this to the other two cases, using square roots of
negatives as intermediate steps; see details at Cardano's method. After the discovery of
Ferro's work, he felt that Tartaglia's method was no longer secret, and thus he published
his complete solution in his 1545 Ars Magna. His student Lodovico Ferrari solved the
quartic polynomial, which solution Cardano included in Ars Magna.
A further step was the 1770 paper Réflexions sur la résolution algébrique des équations by
the French-Italian mathematician Joseph Louis Lagrange, in his method of Lagrange
resolvents, where he analyzed Cardano and Ferrarri's solution of cubics and quartics by
considering them in terms of permutations of the roots, which yielded an auxiliary
polynomial of lower degree, providing a unified understanding of the solutions and laying
the groundwork for group theory and Galois theory. Crucially, however, he did not consider
composition of permutations. Lagrange's method did not extend to quintic equations or
higher, because the resolvent had higher degree.

Galois theory
257
The quintic was almost proven to have no general solutions by radicals by Paolo Ruffini in
1799, whose key insight was to use permutation groups, not just a single permutation. His
solution contained a gap, which Cauchy considered minor, though this was not patched
until the work of Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel, who published a proof in
1824, thus establishing the Abel–Ruffini theorem.
While Ruffini and Abel established that the general quintic could not be solved, some
particular quintics can be solved, such as 
and the precise criterion by which a
given quintic or higher polynomial could be determined to be solvable or not was given by
Évariste Galois, who showed that whether a polynomial was solvable or not was equivalent
to whether or not the permutation group of its roots – in modern terms, its Galois group –
had a certain structure – in modern terms, whether or not it was a solvable group. This
group was always solvable for polynomials of degree four or less, but not always so for
polynomials of degree five and greater, which explains why there is no general solution in
higher degree.
The permutation group approach to Galois theory
If we are given a polynomial, it may happen that some of the roots of the polynomial are
connected by various algebraic equations. For example, it may turn out that for two of the
roots, say A and B, the equation A2 + 5B3 = 7 holds. The central idea of Galois theory is to
consider those permutations (or rearrangements) of the roots having the property that any
algebraic equation satisfied by the roots is still satisfied after the roots have been
permuted. An important proviso is that we restrict ourselves to algebraic equations whose
coefficients are rational numbers. (One might instead specify a certain field in which the
coefficients should lie, but for the simple examples below, we will restrict ourselves to the
field of rational numbers.)
These permutations together form a permutation group, also called the Galois group of the
polynomial (over the rational numbers). This can be made much clearer by way of example.
First example — a quadratic equation
Consider the quadratic equation
x2 − 4x + 1 = 0.
By using the quadratic formula, we find that the two roots are
Examples of algebraic equations satisfied by A and B include
A + B = 4,   and
AB = 1.
Obviously, in either of these equations, if we exchange A and B, we obtain another true
statement. For example, the equation A + B = 4 becomes simply B + A = 4. Furthermore, it
is true, but far less obvious, that this holds for every possible algebraic equation with
rational coefficients satisfied by the roots A and B; to prove this requires the theory of
symmetric polynomials.
We conclude that the Galois group of the polynomial x2 − 4x + 1 consists of two 
permutations: the identity permutation which leaves A and B untouched, and the

Galois theory
258
transposition permutation which exchanges A and B. It is a cyclic group of order two, and
therefore isomorphic to Z/2Z.
One might object that A and B are related by yet another algebraic equation,
which does not remain true when A and B are exchanged. However, this equation does not
concern us, because it does not have rational coefficients; in particular, 
is not
rational.
A similar discussion applies to any quadratic polynomial ax2 + bx + c, where a, b and c are
rational numbers.
• If the polynomial has only one root, for example x2 − 4x + 4 = (x−2)2, then the Galois
group is trivial; that is, it contains only the identity permutation.
• If it has two distinct rational roots, for example x2 − 3x + 2 = (x−2)(x−1), the Galois
group is again trivial.
• If it has two irrational roots (including the case where the roots are complex), then the
Galois group contains two permutations, just as in the above example.
Second example — somewhat trickier
Consider the polynomial
x4 − 10x2 + 1,
which can also be written as
(x2 − 5)2 − 24.
We wish to describe the Galois group of this polynomial, again over the field of rational
numbers. The polynomial has four roots:
There are 24 possible ways to permute these four roots, but not all of these permutations
are members of the Galois group. The members of the Galois group must preserve any
algebraic equation with rational coefficients involving A, B, C and D. One such equation is
A + D = 0.
However, since
,
the permutation
(A, B, C, D) → (A, B, D, C)
is not permitted (because it transforms the valid equation A + D = 0 into the invalid
equation A + C = 0).
Another equation that the roots satisfy is
(A + B)2 = 8.
This will exclude further permutations, such as
(A, B, C, D) → (A, C, B, D).

Galois theory
259
Continuing in this way, we find that the only permutations (satisfying both equations
simultaneously) remaining are
(A, B, C, D) → (A, B, C, D)
(A, B, C, D) → (C, D, A, B)
(A, B, C, D) → (B, A, D, C)
(A, B, C, D) → (D, C, B, A),
and the Galois group is isomorphic to the Klein four-group.
The modern approach by field theory
In the modern approach, one starts with a field extension L /K (read: L over K), and
examines the group of field automorphisms of L /K (these are mappings α: L → L with α(x) =
x for all x in K). See the article on Galois groups for further explanation and examples.
The connection between the two approaches is as follows. The coefficients of the
polynomial in question should be chosen from the base field K. The top field L should be the
field obtained by adjoining the roots of the polynomial in question to the base field. Any
permutation of the roots which respects algebraic equations as described above gives rise
to an automorphism of L /K, and vice versa.
In the first example above, we were studying the extension 
, where Q is the field
of rational numbers, and 
is the field obtained from Q by adjoining 
. In the
second example, we were studying the extension Q(A,B,C,D)/Q.
There are several advantages to the modern approach over the permutation group
approach.
• It permits a far simpler statement of the fundamental theorem of Galois theory.
• The use of base fields other than Q is crucial in many areas of mathematics. For example,
in algebraic number theory, one often does Galois theory using number fields, finite
fields or local fields as the base field.
• It allows one to more easily study infinite extensions. Again this is important in algebraic
number theory, where for example one often discusses the absolute Galois group of Q,
defined to be the Galois group of K/Q where K is an algebraic closure of Q.
• It allows for consideration of inseparable extensions. This issue does not arise in the
classical framework, since it was always implicitly assumed that arithmetic took place in
characteristic zero, but nonzero characteristic arises frequently in number theory and in
algebraic geometry.
• It removes the rather artificial reliance on chasing roots of polynomials. That is, different
polynomials may yield the same extension fields, and the modern approach recognizes
the connection between these polynomials.
Solvable groups and solution by radicals
The notion of a solvable group in group theory allows one to determine whether a 
polynomial is solvable in the radicals, depending on whether its Galois group has the 
property of solvability. In essence, each field extension L /K corresponds to a factor group 
in a composition series of the Galois group. If a factor group in the composition series is 
cyclic of order n, then if the corresponding field extension is an extension of a field 
containing a primitive root of unity, then it is a radical extension, and the elements of L can

Galois theory
260
then be expressed using the nth root of some element of K.
If all the factor groups in its composition series are cyclic, the Galois group is called
solvable, and all of the elements of the corresponding field can be found by repeatedly
taking roots, products, and sums of elements from the base field (usually Q).
One of the great triumphs of Galois Theory was the proof that for every n > 4, there exist
polynomials of degree n which are not solvable by radicals—the Abel-Ruffini theorem. This
is due to the fact that for n > 4 the symmetric group Sn contains a simple, non-cyclic,
normal subgroup.
A non-solvable quintic example
Van der Waerden cites the polynomial f(x) = x5−x−1. By the rational root theorem it has no
rational zeros. Neither does it have linear factors modulo 2 or 3.
f(x) has the factorization (x2+x+1)(x3+x2+1) modulo 2. That means its Galois group modulo
2 is cyclic of order 6.
f(x) has no quadratic factor modulo 3. Thus its Galois group modulo 3 has order 5.
A permutation group on 5 objects with operations of orders 6 and 5 must be the symmetric
group S5, which must be the Galois group of f(x). This is one of the simplest examples of a
non-solvable quintic polynomial. Serge Lang said that Artin was fond of this example.
The inverse Galois problem
All finite groups do occur as Galois groups. It is easy to construct field extensions with any
given finite group as Galois group, as long as one does not also specify the ground field.
For that, choose a field K and a finite group G. Cayley's theorem says that G is (up to
isomorphism) a subgroup of the symmetric group S on the elements of G. Choose
indeterminates {xα}, one for each element α of G, and adjoin them to K to get the field F =
K({xα}). Contained within F is the field L of symmetric rational functions in the {xα}. The
Galois group of F /L is S, by a basic result of Emil Artin. G acts on F by restriction of action
of S. If the fixed field of this action is M, then, by the fundamental theorem of Galois theory,
the Galois group of F /M is G.
It is an open problem to prove the existence of a field extension of the rational field Q with
a given finite group as Galois group. Hilbert played a part in solving the problem for all
symmetric and alternating groups. Igor Shafarevich proved that every solvable finite group
is the Galois group of some extension of Q. Various people have solved the inverse Galois
problem for selected non-abelian simple groups. Existence of solutions has been shown for
all but possibly one (Mathieu group M23) of the 26 sporadic simple groups. There is even a
polynomial with integral coefficients whose Galois group is the Monster group.

Galois theory
261
See also
• Reed–Solomon error correction
Notes
[1] (Funkhouser 1930)
References
• Emil Artin (1998). Galois Theory. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-62342-4. (Reprinting of
second revised edition of 1944, The University of Notre Dame Press).
• Jörg Bewersdorff (2006). Galois Theory for Beginners: A Historical Perspective. American
Mathematical Society. ISBN 0-8218-3817-2. .
• Harold M. Edwards (1984). Galois Theory. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-90980-X. (Galois'
original paper, with extensive background and commentary.)
• Funkhouser, H. Gray (1930). "A short account of the history of symmetric functions of
roots of equations". American Mathematical Monthly 37 (7): 357–365. doi:
10.2307/2299273 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 2299273).
• Nathan Jacobson (1985). Basic Algebra I (2nd ed). W.H. Freeman and Company. ISBN
0-7167-1480-9. (Chapter 4 gives an introduction to the field-theoretic approach to Galois
theory.)
• Janelidze, G.; Borceux, Francis (2001), Galois theories, Cambridge University Press, ISBN
978-0-521-80309-0 (This book introduces the reader to the Galois theory of Grothendieck,
and some generalisations, leading to Galois groupoids.)
• Lang, Serge (1994), Algebraic Number Theory, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN
978-0-387-94225-4
• M. M. Postnikov (2004). Foundations of Galois Theory. Dover Publications. ISBN
0-486-43518-0.
• Ian Stewart (1989). Galois Theory. Chapman and Hall. ISBN 0-412-34550-1.
• Völklein, Helmut (1996), Groups as Galois groups: an introduction, Cambridge University
Press, ISBN 978-0-521-56280-5
• van der Waerden, Bartel Leendert (1930), Algebra
• Pop, Florian (2001),
http://www.math.upenn.edu/~pop/Research/files-Res/Japan01.pdf|(Some) New Trends in
Galois Theory and Arithmetic, http:/ / www. math. upenn. edu/ ~pop/ Research/ files-Res/
Japan01. pdf
External links
Some on-line tutorials on Galois theory appear at:
• http:/ / www. math. niu. edu/ ~beachy/ aaol/ galois. html
• http:/ / nrich. maths. org/ public/ viewer. php?obj_id=1422
• http:/ / www. jmilne. org/ math/ CourseNotes/ math594f. html
Online textbooks in French, German, Italian and English can be found at:
• http:/ / www. galois-group. net/

Grothendieck's Galois theory
262
Grothendieck's Galois theory
In mathematics, Grothendieck's Galois theory is a highly abstract approach to the Galois
theory of fields, developed around 1960 to provide a way to study the fundamental group of
algebraic topology in the setting of algebraic geometry. It provides, in the classical setting
of field theory, an alternative perspective to that of Emil Artin based on linear algebra,
which became standard from about the 1930s.
The approach of Alexander Grothendieck is concerned with the category-theoretic
properties that characterise the categories of finite G-sets for a fixed profinite group G. For
example, G might be the group denoted 
, which is the inverse limit of the cyclic additive
groups Z/nZ — or equivalently the completion of the infinite cyclic group Z for the topology
of subgroups of finite index. A finite G-set is then a finite set X on which G acts through a
quotient finite cyclic group, so that it is specified by giving some permutation of X.
In the above example, a connection with classical Galois theory can be seen by regarding 
as the profinite Galois group Gal(F/F) of the algebraic closure F of any finite field F, over F.
That is, the automorphisms of F fixing F are described by the inverse limit, as we take
larger and larger finite splitting fields over F. The connection with geometry can be seen
when we look at covering spaces of the unit disk in the complex plane with the origin
removed: the finite covering realised by the zn map of the disk, thought of by means of a
complex number variable z, corresponds to the subgroup n.Z of the fundamental group of
the punctured disk.
The theory of Grothendieck, published in SGA1, shows how to reconstruct the category of
G-sets from a fibre functor Φ, which in the geometric setting takes the fibre of a covering
above a fixed base point (as a set). In fact there is an isomorphism proved of the type
G ≅ Aut(Φ),
the latter being the group of automorphisms (self-natural equivalences) of Φ. An abstract
classification of categories with a functor to the category of sets is given, by means of which
one can recognise categories of G-sets for G profinite.
To see how this applies to the case of fields, one has to study the tensor product of fields.
Later developments in topos theory make this all part of a theory of atomic toposes.
References
• Grothendieck, A.; et al. (1971). SGA1 Revêtements étales et groupe fondamental,
1960–1961'. Lecture Notes in Mathematics 224. Springer Verlag.
• Joyal, Andre; Tierney, Myles (1984). An Extension of the Galois Theory of Grothendieck.
Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society. Proquest Info & Learning. ISBN
0821823124.
• Borceux, F. and Janelidze, G., Cambridge University Press (2001). Galois theories, ISBN
0521803098 (This book introduces the reader to the Galois theory of Grothendieck, and
some generalisations, leading to Galois groupoids.)
Notes on Grothendieck's Galois Theory http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ math/ pdf/ 0009/
0009145v1. pdf

263
Algebraic Topology
Table of contents
Introduction
Main article 
Mathematics
Supporting articles 
History of mathematics
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical notation
Algebraic Topology
1. REDIRECT Algebraic topology
This is a redirect from a title with another method of capitalisation. It leads to the title in
accordance with the Wikipedia naming conventions for capitalisation, and can help writing,
searching, and international language issues.
Pages linking to any of these redirects may be updated to link directly to the target page.
However, do not replace these redirected links with a piped link unless the page is updated
for another reason.
For more information, see Category:Redirects from other capitalisations.

Open set
264
Open set
Example: The points (x, y) satisfying x2
+ y2 = r2 are colored blue. The points
(x, y) satisfying x2 + y2 < r2 are colored
red. The red points form an open set.
The union of the red and blue points is
a closed set.
In mathematics, more specifically point-set topology
and metric topology, the notion of an open set provides
a fundamental way to speak of distance in a topological
space, without explicitly defining a metric on the space.
In particular, although one cannot obtain concrete
values for the distance between two points in a
topological space, one may still be able to speak of
"nearness" in the space, thus allowing concepts such as
continuity to translate into the theory of open sets.
Intuitively (see below for a more intuitive discussion),
an open set provides one a method to distinguish two
points. For example, if about one point in a topological
space, there exists an open set not containing another
(distinct) point, the two points are referred to as
topologically distinguishable. In this manner, one may
speak of whether two subsets of a topological space are
"near" without concretely defining a metric on the
topological space. Therefore, topological spaces may be seen as a generalization of metric
spaces.
Point-set topology is the area of mathematics concerned with general topological spaces,
and the relations between them. In the category of topological spaces, morphisms are
continuous functions between topological spaces. Continuous functions are readily
observed to preserve topological structure, as they map "points close together" to "points
close together"; that is, they preserve the structure of open sets defined on the space.
In metric topology, one can concretely define a distance function between two points, and
thus metric spaces also have a topology, i.e. a certain structure of open sets defined on
them. Thus as opposed to the pure topological invariants, metric topology deals with
isometries and the like; that is, distance preserving maps. In this case, the idea of an open
set is used as an organizational tool rather than an object of study. From the topological
point of view, metric spaces are fairly well understood, although many open problems still
remain in metrizability theory.
The concept of an open set is of fundamental importance in mathematics due to the
numerous areas which exploit it. In algebraic geometry, the Zariski topology is a certain
family of open sets which in some sense, reflect the algebraic nature of varieties. In
differential topology, the open sets of a topological space are often required to have a
simple structure - that is, each point within the space is required to have a neighbourhood
homeomorphic to the open ball in Euclidean space. Although open sets are of central
importance (and are studied) in point-set topology, they are also used as an organizational
tool in other important branches of mathematics.

Open set
265
Informal discussion
Intuitively speaking, a set U is open if starting from any point x in U one can move by a
small amount in any direction and still be in the set U. In other words, the distance between
any point x in U and the edge of U is always greater than zero.
As an example, consider the open interval (0, 1) consisting of all real numbers x with 0 < x
< 1. Here, the topology is the usual topology on the real line. We can look at this in two
ways. Since any point in the interval is different from 0 and 1, the distance from that point
to the edge is always non-zero. Or equivalently, for any point in the interval we can move by
a small enough amount in any direction without touching the edge and still be inside the
set. Therefore, the interval (0, 1) is open. However, the interval (0, 1] consisting of all
numbers x with 0 < x ≤ 1 is not open in the topology induced from the real line; if one takes
x = 1 and moves an arbitrarily small amount in the positive direction, one will be outside of
(0, 1].
Definitions
The concept of open sets can be formalized with various degrees of generality, for example:
Geometric
A point set in Rn is called open when every point P of the set is an interior point.
Euclidean space
A subset U of the Euclidean n-space Rn is called open if, given any point x in U, there exists
a real number ε > 0 such that, given any point y in Rn whose Euclidean distance from x is
smaller than ε, y also belongs to U. Equivalently, U is open if every point in U has a
neighbourhood contained in U.
Metric spaces
A subset U of a metric space (M, d) is called open if, given any point x in U, there exists a
real number ε > 0 such that, given any point y in M with d(x, y) < ε, y also belongs to U.
Equivalently, U is open if every point in U has a neighbourhood contained in U.
This generalises the Euclidean space example, since Euclidean space with the Euclidean
distance is a metric space.
Topological spaces
If a nonempty set X has a collection of subsets T that is a topological space, then any
member of T is an open set.
Note that infinite intersections of open sets need not be open. For example, the intersection
of all intervals of the form (−1/n, 1/n), where n is a positive integer, is the set {0} which is
closed in the real line. Sets that can be constructed as the intersection of countably many
open sets are denoted Gδ sets.
The topological definition of open sets generalises the metric space definition: If one begins
with a metric space and defines open sets as before, then the family of all open sets is a
topology on the metric space. Every metric space is therefore, in a natural way, a
topological space. There are, however, topological spaces that are not metric spaces.

Open set
266
Properties
• The empty set is both open and closed.
• The union of any number of open sets is open.
• The intersection of a finite number of open sets is open.
Uses
Open sets have a fundamental importance in topology. The concept is required to define
and make sense of topological space and other topological structures that deal with the
notions of closeness and convergence for spaces such as metric spaces and uniform spaces.
Every subset A of a topological space X contains a (possibly empty) open set; the largest
such open set is called the interior of A. It can be constructed by taking the union of all the
open sets contained in A.
Given topological spaces X and Y, a function f from X to Y is continuous if the preimage of
every open set in Y is open in X. The map f is called open if the image of every open set in X
is open in Y.
An open set on the real line has the characteristic property that it is a countable union of
disjoint open intervals.
Note
Note that whether a given set U is open depends on the surrounding space. For instance, if
U is defined as the set of rational numbers in the interval (0, 1), then U is open in the
rational numbers, but not open in the real numbers. This is because when U is in the
rational numbers there are no irrational numbers that can be moved to—the smallest
possible displacement is from one rational number to another. Also, no matter how close an
element of U is to 0 or 1, there is always another rational number between it and 0 or 1, so
from any element of U there is always a way to make a small enough displacement that you
can get closer to 0 or 1 while staying inside U. But, when this set is in the real numbers,
there are irrational numbers between all of the rational numbers and it is possible to move
from an element of U to an irrational number (which is not an element of U). So, for any
displacement from some beginning element of U to some ending element, there is always a
smaller distance from the beginning element to an irrational number which is outside of U.
(Even though the irrational number may be between 0 and 1, it is not in U because U
contains only rational numbers.)
Some sets are both open and closed (called clopen sets); in R and other connected spaces,
only the empty set and the whole space are clopen, while the set of all rational numbers
smaller than √2 is clopen in the rationals. While others are neither open nor closed, such as
(0, 1] in R. In fact, the set (0, 1] is the union of the sets (0, 1) and {1}, an open set and a
closed set respectively. An important point is that an open set is not the opposite of "closed
set", rather a closed set is the complement of an open set.

Open set
267
See also
• Closed set
• Clopen set
• Neighbourhood
External links
• Open Set [1] on PlanetMath
References
[1] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=2925
Topology
A Möbius strip, an object with only one surface and
one edge. Such shapes are an object of study in
topology.
Topology (from the Greek τόπος, “place”,
and λόγος, “study”) is a major area of
mathematics 
concerned 
with 
spatial
properties 
that 
are 
preserved 
under
bicontinuous deformation; that is, stretching
without either tearing or gluing. It emerged
through the development of concepts from
geometry and set theory, such as those of
space, dimension, shape, transformation and
others.
Ideas that are now classified as topological
were expressed as early as 1736, and toward
the end of the 19th century a distinct
discipline developed, called in Latin the geometria situs (“geometry of place”) or analysis
situs (Greek-Latin for “picking apart of place”), and later gaining the modern name of
topology. In the middle of the 20th century, this was an important growth area within
mathematics.
The word topology is used both for the mathematical discipline and for a family of sets with
certain properties that are used to define a topological space, a basic object of topology. Of
particular importance are homeomorphisms, which can be defined as continuous functions
with a continuous inverse. For instance, the function y = x3 is a homeomorphism of the real
line.
Topology includes many subfields. The most basic and traditional division within topology is
point-set topology, which establishes the foundational aspects of topology and
investigates concepts inherent to topological spaces - basic examples being compactness
and connectedness; algebraic topology, which generally tries to measure degrees of
connectivity using algebraic constructs such as homotopy groups and homology; and
geometric 
topology, 
which 
primarily 
studies 
manifolds 
and 
their 
embeddings
(placements) in other manifolds. Some of the most active areas, such as low dimensional
topology and graph theory, do not fit neatly in this division.

Topology
268
See also: topology glossary for definitions of some of the terms used in topology and
topological space for a more technical treatment of the subject.
History
The Seven Bridges of Königsberg is a famous
problem solved by Euler.
Topology began with the investigation of
certain questions in geometry. Euler's 1736
paper on Seven Bridges of Königsberg is
regarded as one of the first topological
results.
The term "Topologie" was introduced in
German in 1847 by Johann Benedict Listing
in Vorstudien zur Topologie, Vandenhoeck
und Ruprecht, Göttingen, pp. 67, 1848, who
had 
used 
the 
word 
for 
ten 
years 
in
correspondence before its first appearance in
print. "Topology," its English form, was
introduced in 1883 in the journal Nature to
distinguish "qualitative geometry from the
ordinary geometry in which quantitative
relations chiefly are treated". The term topologist in the sense of a specialist in topology
was used in 1905 in the magazine Spectator. However, none of these uses corresponds
exactly to the modern definition of topology.
Modern topology depends strongly on the ideas of set theory, developed by Georg Cantor in
the later part of the 19th century. Cantor, in addition to setting down the basic ideas of set
theory, considered point sets in Euclidean space, as part of his study of Fourier series.
Henri Poincaré published Analysis Situs in 1895, introducing the concepts of homotopy and
homology, which are now considered part of algebraic topology.
Maurice Fréchet, unifying the work on function spaces of Cantor, Volterra, Arzelà,
Hadamard, Ascoli and others, introduced the metric space in 1906. A metric space is now
considered a special case of a general topological space. In 1914, Felix Hausdorff coined
the term "topological space" and gave the definition for what is now called a Hausdorff
space. In current usage, a topological space is a slight generalization of Hausdorff spaces,
given in 1922 by Kazimierz Kuratowski.
For further developments, see point-set topology and algebraic topology.

Topology
269
Elementary introduction
Topology, as a branch of mathematics can be formally defined as "the study of qualitative
properties of certain objects (called topological spaces) that are invariant under certain
kind of transformations (called continuous maps), especially those properties that are
invariant under a certain kind of equivalence (called homeomorphism)."
The term topology is also used to refer to a structure imposed upon a set X, a structure
which essentially 'characterizes' the set X as a topological space by taking proper care of
properties such as convergence, connectedness and continuity, upon transformation.
Topological spaces show up naturally in almost every branch of mathematics. This has
made topology one of the great unifying ideas of mathematics.
The motivating insight behind topology is that some geometric problems depend not on the
exact shape of the objects involved, but rather on the way they are put together. For
example, the square and the circle have many properties in common: they are both one
dimensional objects (from a topological point of view) and both separate the plane into two
parts, the part inside and the part outside.
One of the first papers in topology was the demonstration, by Leonhard Euler, that it was
impossible to find a route through the town of Königsberg (now Kaliningrad) that would
cross each of its seven bridges exactly once. This result did not depend on the lengths of
the bridges, nor on their distance from one another, but only on connectivity properties:
which bridges are connected to which islands or riverbanks. This problem, the Seven
Bridges of Königsberg, is now a famous problem in introductory mathematics, and led to
the branch of mathematics known as graph theory.
A continuous deformation (homeomorphism) of a
coffee cup into a doughnut (torus) and back.
Similarly, the hairy ball theorem of algebraic
topology says that "one cannot comb the hair
flat on a hairy ball without creating a
cowlick." This fact is immediately convincing
to most people, even though they might not
recognize the more formal statement of the
theorem, that there is no nonvanishing
continuous tangent vector field on the
sphere. As with the Bridges of Königsberg,
the result does not depend on the exact
shape of the sphere; it applies to pear shapes
and in fact any kind of smooth blob, as long
as it has no holes.
In order to deal with these problems that do
not rely on the exact shape of the objects,
one must be clear about just what properties
these problems do rely on. From this need
arises the notion of homeomorphism. The impossibility of crossing each bridge just once
applies to any arrangement of bridges homeomorphic to those in Königsberg, and the hairy
ball theorem applies to any space homeomorphic to a sphere.
Intuitively two spaces are homeomorphic if one can be deformed into the other without
cutting or gluing. A traditional joke is that a topologist can't distinguish a coffee mug from a
doughnut, since a sufficiently pliable doughnut could be reshaped to the form of a coffee

Topology
270
cup by creating a dimple and progressively enlarging it, while shrinking the hole into a
handle. A precise definition of homeomorphic, involving a continuous function with a
continuous inverse, is necessarily more technical.
Homeomorphism can be considered the most basic topological equivalence. Another is
homotopy equivalence. This is harder to describe without getting technical, but the
essential notion is that two objects are homotopy equivalent if they both result from
"squishing" some larger object.
Equivalence classes of the English alphabet in uppercase sans-serif font
(Myriad); left - homeomorphism, right - homotopy equivalence
An introductory exercise is to classify the uppercase letters of the English alphabet
according to homeomorphism and homotopy equivalence. The result depends partially on
the font used. The figures use a sans-serif font named Myriad. Notice that homotopy
equivalence is a rougher relationship than homeomorphism; a homotopy equivalence class
can contain several of the homeomorphism classes. The simple case of homotopy
equivalence described above can be used here to show two letters are homotopy equivalent,
e.g. O fits inside P and the tail of the P can be squished to the "hole" part.
Thus, the homeomorphism classes are: one hole two tails, two holes no tail, no holes, one
hole no tail, no holes three tails, a bar with four tails (the "bar" on the K is almost too short
to see), one hole one tail, and no holes four tails.
The homotopy classes are larger, because the tails can be squished down to a point. The
homotopy classes are: one hole, two holes, and no holes.
To be sure we have classified the letters correctly, we not only need to show that two
letters in the same class are equivalent, but that two letters in different classes are not
equivalent. In the case of homeomorphism, this can be done by suitably selecting points and
showing their removal disconnects the letters differently. For example, X and Y are not
homeomorphic because removing the center point of the X leaves four pieces; whatever
point in Y corresponds to this point, its removal can leave at most three pieces. The case of
homotopy equivalence is harder and requires a more elaborate argument showing an
algebraic invariant, such as the fundamental group, is different on the supposedly differing
classes.
Letter topology has some practical relevance in stencil typography. The font Braggadocio,
for instance, has stencils that are made of one connected piece of material.

Topology
271
Mathematical definition
Let X be any set and let T be a family of subsets of X. Then T is a topology on X if
1. Both the empty set and X are elements of T.
2. Any union of arbitrarily many elements of T is an element of T.
3. Any intersection of finitely many elements of T is an element of T.
If T is a topology on X, then the pair (X, T) is called a topological space, and the notation
XT is used to denote a set X endowed with the particular topology T.
The open sets in X are defined to be the members of T; note that in general not all subsets
of X need be in T. A subset of X is said to be closed if its complement is in T (i.e., it is
open). A subset of X may be open, closed, both, or neither.
A function or map from one topological space to another is called continuous if the inverse
image of any open set is open. If the function maps the real numbers to the real numbers
(both spaces with the Standard Topology), then this definition of continuous is equivalent to
the definition of continuous in calculus. If a continuous function is one-to-one and onto and
if the inverse of the function is also continuous, then the function is called a
homeomorphism and the domain of the function is said to be homeomorphic to the range.
Another way of saying this is that the function has a natural extension to the topology. If
two spaces are homeomorphic, they have identical topological properties, and are
considered to be topologically the same. The cube and the sphere are homeomorphic, as
are the coffee cup and the doughnut. But the circle is not homeomorphic to the doughnut.
Topology topics
Some theorems in general topology
• Every closed interval in R of finite length is compact. More is true: In Rn, a set is
compact if and only if it is closed and bounded. (See Heine-Borel theorem).
• Every continuous image of a compact space is compact.
• Tychonoff's theorem: The (arbitrary) product of compact spaces is compact.
• A compact subspace of a Hausdorff space is closed.
• Every continuous bijection from a compact space to a Hausdorff space is necessarily a
homeomorphism.
• Every sequence of points in a compact metric space has a convergent subsequence.
• Every interval in R is connected.
• Every compact m-manifold can be embedded in some Euclidean space Rn.
• The continuous image of a connected space is connected.
• A metric space is Hausdorff, also normal and paracompact.
• The metrization theorems provide necessary and sufficient conditions for a topology to
come from a metric.
• The Tietze extension theorem: In a normal space, every continuous real-valued function
defined on a closed subspace can be extended to a continuous map defined on the whole
space.
• Any open subspace of a Baire space is itself a Baire space.
• The Baire category theorem: If X is a complete metric space or a locally compact
Hausdorff space, then the interior of every union of countably many nowhere dense sets
is empty.

Topology
272
• On a paracompact Hausdorff space every open cover admits a partition of unity
subordinate to the cover.
• Every path-connected, locally path-connected and semi-locally simply connected space
has a universal cover.
General topology also has some surprising connections to other areas of mathematics. For
example:
• In number theory, Furstenberg's proof of the infinitude of primes.
Some useful notions from algebraic topology
See also list of algebraic topology topics.
• Homology and cohomology: Betti numbers, Euler characteristic, degree of a continuous
mapping.
• Operations: cup product, Massey product
• Intuitively-attractive applications: Brouwer fixed-point theorem, Hairy ball theorem,
Borsuk-Ulam theorem, Ham sandwich theorem.
• Homotopy groups (including the fundamental group).
• Chern classes, Stiefel-Whitney classes, Pontryagin classes.
Generalizations
Occasionally, one needs to use the tools of topology but a "set of points" is not available. In
pointless topology one considers instead the lattice of open sets as the basic notion of the
theory, while Grothendieck topologies are certain structures defined on arbitrary
categories which allow the definition of sheaves on those categories, and with that the
definition of quite general cohomology theories.
Topology in art and literature
• Some M. C. Escher works illustrate topological concepts, such as Möbius strips and
non-orientable spaces.
See also
• topology glossary
• List of topology topics
• List of general topology topics
• List of geometric topology topics
• List of algebraic topology topics
• Publications in topology

Topology
273
References
Further reading
• James Munkres (1999). Topology (2nd edition ed.). Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-181629-2.
• John L. Kelley (1975). General Topology. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-90125-6.
• Clifford A. Pickover (2006). The Möbius Strip: Dr. August Möbius's Marvelous Band in
Mathematics, Games, Literature, Art, Technology, and Cosmology. Thunder's Mouth
Press (Provides a popular introduction to topology and geometry). ISBN 1-56025-826-8.
• Boto von Querenburg (2006). Mengentheoretische Topologie. Heidelberg:
Springer-Lehrbuch. ISBN 3-540-67790-9 ()
• Richeson, David S. (2008) Euler's Gem: The Polyhedron Formula and the Birth of
Topology. Princeton University Press.
External links
• Elementary Topology: A First Course [1] Viro, Ivanov, Netsvetaev, Kharlamov
• An invitation to Topology [2] Planar Machines' web site
• Geometry and Topology Index [3], MacTutor History of Mathematics archive [4]
• ODP category [5]
• The Topological Zoo [6] at The Geometry Center
• Topology Atlas [7]
• Topology Course Lecture Notes [8] Aisling McCluskey and Brian McMaster, Topology
Atlas
• Topology Glossary [9]
• Moscow 1935: Topology moving towards America [10], a historical essay by Hassler
Whitney.
• "Topologically Speaking" [11], a song about topology.
• "The Use of Topology in Dance" [12], a review of Alvin Ailey's Memoria on
ExploreDance.com in which the use of topologies as a way of structuring choreography is
discussed.
References
[1] http:/ / www. pdmi. ras. ru/ ~olegviro/ topoman/ index. html
[2] http:/ / www. math. toronto. edu/ ~drorbn/ People/ Eldar/ thesis/
[3] http:/ / www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ Indexes/ Geometry_Topology. html
[4] http:/ / www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/
[5] http:/ / dmoz. org/ Science/ Math/ Topology/
[6] http:/ / www. geom. uiuc. edu/ zoo/
[7] http:/ / at. yorku. ca/ topology/
[8] http:/ / at. yorku. ca/ i/ a/ a/ b/ 23. htm
[9] http:/ / www. ornl. gov/ sci/ ortep/ topology/ defs. txt
[10] http:/ / www. ams. org/ online_bks/ hmath1/ hmath1-whitney10. pdf
[11] http:/ / www. montyharper. com/ Songs/ TS. html
[12] http:/ / www. exploredance. com/ article. htm?id=2072

Topological property
274
Topological property
In topology and related areas of mathematics a topological property or topological
invariant is a property of a topological space which is invariant under homeomorphisms.
That is, a property of spaces is a topological property if whenever a space X possesses that
property every space homeomorphic to X possesses that property. Informally, a topological
property is a property of the space that can be expressed using open sets.
A common problem in topology is to decide whether two topological spaces are
homeomorphic or not. To prove that two spaces are not homeomorphic, it is sufficient to
find a topological property which is not shared by them.
Common topological properties
Cardinal functions
• The cardinality |X| of the space X.
• The cardinality τ(X) of the topology of the space X.
• Weight w(X), the least cardinality of a basis of the topology of the space X.
• Density d(X), the least cardinality of a subset of X whose closure is X.
Separation
For a detailed treatment, see separation axiom. Some of these terms are defined differently
in older mathematical literature; see history of the separation axioms.
• T0 or Kolmogorov. A space is Kolmogorov if for every pair of distinct points x and y in
the space, there is at least either an open set containing x but not y, or an open set
containing y but not x.
• T1 or Fréchet. A space is Fréchet if for every pair of distinct points x and y in the space,
there is an open set containing x but not y. (Compare with T0; here, we are allowed to
specify which point will be contained in the open set.) Equivalently, a space is T1 if all its
singletons are closed. T1 spaces are always T0.
• Sober. A space is sober if every irreducible closed set C has a unique generic point p. In
other words, if C is not the (possibly nondisjoint) union of two smaller closed subsets,
then there is a p such that the closure of {p} equals C, and p is the only point with this
property.
• T2 or Hausdorff. A space is Hausdorff if every two distinct points have disjoint
neighbourhoods. T2 spaces are always T1.
• T2½ or Urysohn. A space is Urysohn if every two distinct points have disjoint closed
neighbourhoods. T2½ spaces are always T2.
• Regular. A space is regular if whenever C is a closed set and p is a point not in C, then C
and p have disjoint neighbourhoods.
• T3 or Regular Hausdorff. A space is regular Hausdorff if it is a regular T0 space. (A
regular space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T0, so the terminology is consistent.)
• Completely regular. A space is completely regular if whenever C is a closed set and p is
a point not in C, then C and {p} are separated by a function.
• T3½, Tychonoff, Completely regular Hausdorff or Completely T3. A Tychonoff space 
is a completely regular T0 space. (A completely regular space is Hausdorff if and only if it

Topological property
275
is T0, so the terminology is consistent.) Tychonoff spaces are always regular Hausdorff.
• Normal. A space is normal if any two disjoint closed sets have disjoint neighbourhoods.
Normal spaces admit partitions of unity.
• T4 or Normal Hausdorff. A normal space is Hausdorff if and only if it is T1. Normal
Hausdorff spaces are always Tychonoff.
• Completely normal. A space is completely normal if any two separated sets have
disjoint neighbourhoods.
• T5 or Completely normal Hausdorff. A completely normal space is Hausdorff if and
only if it is T1. Completely normal Hausdorff spaces are always normal Hausdorff.
• Perfectly normal. A space is perfectly normal if any two disjoint closed sets are
precisely separated by a function. A perfectly normal space must also be completely
normal.
• Perfectly normal Hausdorff, or perfectly T4. A space is perfectly normal Hausdorff, if
it is both perfectly normal and T1. A perfectly normal Hausdorff space must also be
completely normal Hausdorff.
• Discrete space. A space is discrete if all of its points are completely isolated, i.e. if any
subset is open.
Countability conditions
• Separable. A space is separable if it has a countable dense subset.
• Lindelöf. A space is Lindelöf if every open cover has a countable subcover.
• First-countable. A space is first-countable if every point has a countable local base.
• Second-countable. A space is second-countable if it has a countable base for its
topology. Second-countable spaces are always separable, first-countable and Lindelöf.
Connectedness
• Connected. A space is connected if it is not the union of a pair of disjoint non-empty
open sets. Equivalently, a space is connected if the only clopen sets are the empty set
and itself.
• Locally connected. A space is locally connected if every point has a local base
consisting of connected sets.
• Totally disconnected. A space is totally disconnected if it has no connected subset with
more than one point.
• Path-connected. A space X is path-connected if for every two points x, y in X, there is a
path p from x to y, i.e., a continuous map p: [0,1] → X with p(0) = x and p(1) = y.
Path-connected spaces are always connected.
• Locally path-connected. A space is locally path-connected if every point has a local
base consisting of path-connected sets. A locally path-connected space is connected if
and only if it is path-connected.
• Simply connected. A space X is simply connected if it is path-connected and every
continuous map f: S1 → X is homotopic to a constant map.
• Locally simply connected. A space X is locally simply connected if every point x in X
has a local base of neighborhoods U that is simply connected.
• Semi-locally simply connected. A space X is semi-locally simply connected if every
point has a local base of neighborhoods U such that every loop in U is contractible in X.
Semi-local simple connectivity, a strictly weaker condition than local simple connectivity,
is a necessary condition for the existence of a universal cover.

Topological property
276
• Contractible. A space X is contractible if the identity map on X is homotopic to a
constant map. Contractible spaces are always simply connected.
• Hyper-connected. A space is hyper-connected if no two non-empty open sets are
disjoint. Every hyper-connected space is connected.
• Ultra-connected. A space is ultra-connected if no two non-empty closed sets are
disjoint. Every ultra-connected space is path-connected.
• Indiscrete or trivial. A space is indiscrete if the only open sets are the empty set and
itself. Such a space is said to have the trivial topology.
Compactness
• Compact. A space is compact if every open cover has a finite subcover. Some authors
call these spaces quasicompact and reserve compact for Hausdorff spaces where every
open cover has finite subcover. Compact spaces are always Lindelöf and paracompact.
Compact Hausdorff spaces are therefore normal.
• Sequentially compact. A space is sequentially compact if every sequence has a
convergent subsequence.
• Countably compact. A space is countably compact if every countable open cover has a
finite subcover.
• Pseudocompact. A space is pseudocompact if every real-valued function on the space is
bounded.
• σ-compact. A space is σ-compact if it is the union of countably many compact subsets.
• Paracompact. A space is paracompact if every open cover has an open locally finite
refinement. Paracompact Hausdorff spaces are normal.
• Locally compact. A space is locally compact if every point has a local base consisting of
compact neighbourhoods. Slightly different definitions are also used. Locally compact
Hausdorff spaces are always Tychonoff.
• Ultraconnected compact. In an ultra-connected compact space X every open cover
must contain X itself. Non-empty ultra-connected compact spaces have a largest proper
open subset called a monolith.
Metrizability
• Metrizable. A space is metrizable if it is homeomorphic to a metric space. Metrizable
spaces are always Hausdorff and paracompact (and hence normal and Tychonoff), and
first-countable.
• Polish. A space is called Polish if it is metrizable with a separable and complete metric.
• Locally metrizable. A space is locally metrizable if every point has a metrizable
neighbourhood.
Miscellaneous
• Baire space. A space X is a Baire space if it is not meagre in itself. Equivalently, X is a
Baire space if the intersection of countably many dense open sets is dense.
• Homogeneous. A space X is homogeneous if for every x and y in X there is a
homeomorphism f : X → X such that f(x) = y. Intuitively speaking, this means that the
space looks the same at every point. All topological groups are homogeneous.
• Finitely generated or Alexandrov. A space X is Alexandrov if arbitrary intersections of 
open sets in X are open, or equivalently if arbitrary unions of closed sets are closed.

Topological property
277
These are precisely the finitely generated members of the category of topological spaces
and continuous maps.
• Zero-dimensional. A space is zero-dimensional if it has a base of clopen sets. These are
precisely the spaces with a small inductive dimension of 0.
• Almost discrete. A space is almost discrete if every open set is closed (hence clopen).
The almost discrete spaces are precisely the finitely generated zero-dimensional spaces.
• Boolean. A space is Boolean if it is zero-dimensional, compact and Hausdorff
(equivalently, totally disconnected, compact and Hausdorff). These are precisely the
spaces that are homeomorphic to the Stone spaces of Boolean algebras.
• Reidemeister torsion
References
• Stephen Willard, General Topology, (1970) Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading
Massachusetts.
Topological space
Four examples and two non-examples of topologies on the
three-point set {1,2,3}. The bottom-left example is not a topology
because the union {2,3} of {2} and {3} is missing; the
bottom-right example is not a topology because the intersection
{2} of {1,2} and {2,3} is missing.
Topological 
spaces 
are
mathematical structures that allow
the formal definition of concepts
such 
as 
convergence,
connectedness, 
and 
continuity.
They appear in virtually every
branch of modern mathematics
and are a central unifying notion.
The branch of mathematics that
studies topological spaces in their
own right is called topology.
Definition
A topological space is a set X
together with T, a collection of
subsets 
of 
X, 
satisfying 
the
following axioms:
1. The empty set and X are in T.
2. The union of any collection of
sets in T is also in T.
3. The intersection of any finite collection of sets in T is also in T.
The collection T is called a topology on X. The elements of X are usually called points,
though they can be any mathematical objects. A topological space in which the points are
functions is called a function space. The sets in T are the open sets, and their complements
in X are called closed sets. A set may be neither closed nor open, either closed or open, or
both. A set that is both closed and open is called a clopen set.

Topological space
278
Examples
1. X = {1, 2, 3, 4} and collection T = of two subsets of X form a trivial topology.
2. X = {1, 2, 3, 4} and collection T = of six subsets of X form another topology.
3. X = Z, the set of integers and collection T equal to all finite subsets of the integers plus
Z itself is not a topology, because (for example) the union over all finite sets not
containing zero is infinite but is not all of Z, and so is not in T.
Equivalent definitions
There are many other equivalent ways to define a topological space. (In other words, each
of the following defines a category equivalent to the category of topological spaces above.)
For example, using de Morgan's laws, the axioms defining open sets above become axioms
defining closed sets:
1. The empty set and X are closed.
2. The intersection of any collection of closed sets is also closed.
3. The union of any pair of closed sets is also closed.
Using these axioms, another way to define a topological space is as a set X together with a
collection T of subsets of X satisfying the following axioms:
1. The empty set and X are in T.
2. The intersection of any collection of sets in T is also in T.
3. The union of any pair of sets in T is also in T.
Under this definition, the sets in the topology T are the closed sets, and their complements
in X are the open sets.
Another way to define a topological space is by using the Kuratowski closure axioms, which
define the closed sets as the fixed points of an operator on the power set of X.
A neighbourhood of a point x is any set that contains an open set containing x. The
neighbourhood system at x consists of all neighbourhoods of x. A topology can be
determined by a set of axioms concerning all neighbourhood systems.
A net is a generalisation of the concept of sequence. A topology is completely determined if
for every net in X the set of its accumulation points is specified.
Comparison of topologies
A variety of topologies can be placed on a set to form a topological space. When every set in
a topology T1 is also in a topology T2, we say that T2 is finer than T1, and T1 is coarser than
T2. A proof which relies only on the existence of certain open sets will also hold for any
finer topology, and similarly a proof that relies only on certain sets not being open applies
to any coarser topology. The terms larger and smaller are sometimes used in place of finer
and coarser, respectively. The terms stronger and weaker are also used in the literature,
but with little agreement on the meaning, so one should always be sure of an author's
convention when reading.
The collection of all topologies on a given fixed set X forms a complete lattice: if F = {Tα : α
in A} is a collection of topologies on X, then the meet of F is the intersection of F, and the
join of F is the meet of the collection of all topologies on X which contain every member of
F.

Topological space
279
Continuous functions
A function between topological spaces is said to be continuous if the inverse image of
every open set is open. This is an attempt to capture the intuition that there are no "breaks"
or "separations" in the function. A homeomorphism is a bijection that is continuous and
whose inverse is also continuous. Two spaces are said to be homeomorphic if there exists a
homeomorphism between them. From the standpoint of topology, homeomorphic spaces are
essentially identical.
In category theory, Top, the category of topological spaces with topological spaces as
objects and continuous functions as morphisms is one of the fundamental categories in
mathematics. The attempt to classify the objects of this category (up to homeomorphism) by
invariants has motivated and generated entire areas of research, such as homotopy theory,
homology theory, and K-theory, to name just a few.
Examples of topological spaces
A given set may have many different topologies. If a set is given a different topology, it is
viewed as a different topological space. Any set can be given the discrete topology in which
every subset is open. The only convergent sequences or nets in this topology are those that
are eventually constant. Also, any set can be given the trivial topology (also called the
indiscrete topology), in which only the empty set and the whole space are open. Every
sequence and net in this topology converges to every point of the space. This example
shows that in general topological spaces, limits of sequences need not be unique. However,
often topological spaces are required to be Hausdorff spaces where limit points are unique.
There are many ways of defining a topology on R, the set of real numbers. The standard
topology on R is generated by the open intervals. The set of all open intervals forms a base
or basis for the topology, meaning that every open set is a union of some collection of sets
from the base. In particular, this means that a set is open if there exists an open interval of
non zero radius about every point in the set. More generally, the Euclidean spaces Rn can
be given a topology. In the usual topology on Rn the basic open sets are the open balls.
Similarly, C and Cn have a standard topology in which the basic open sets are open balls.
Every metric space can be given a metric topology, in which the basic open sets are open
balls defined by the metric. This is the standard topology on any normed vector space. On a
finite-dimensional vector space this topology is the same for all norms.
Many sets of operators in functional analysis are endowed with topologies that are defined
by specifying when a particular sequence of functions converges to the zero function.
Any local field has a topology native to it, and this can be extended to vector spaces over
that field.
Every manifold has a natural topology since it is locally Euclidean. Similarly, every simplex
and every simplicial complex inherits a natural topology from Rn.
The Zariski topology is defined algebraically on the spectrum of a ring or an algebraic
variety. On Rn or Cn, the closed sets of the Zariski topology are the solution sets of systems
of polynomial equations.
A linear graph has a natural topology that generalises many of the geometric aspects of
graphs with vertices and edges.

Topological space
280
Sierpiński space is the simplest non-discrete topological space. It has important relations to
the theory of computation and semantics.
There exist numerous topologies on any given finite set. Such spaces are called finite
topological spaces. Finite spaces are often used to provide examples or counterexamples to
conjectures about topological spaces in general.
Any set can be given the cofinite topology in which the open sets are the empty set and the
sets whose complement is finite. This is the smallest T1 topology on any infinite set.
Any set can be given the cocountable topology, in which a set is defined to be open if it is
either empty or its complement is countable. When the set is uncountable, this topology
serves as a counterexample in many situations.
The real line can also be given the lower limit topology. Here, the basic open sets are the
half open intervals [a, b). This topology on R is strictly finer than the Euclidean topology
defined above; a sequence converges to a point in this topology if and only if it converges
from above in the Euclidean topology. This example shows that a set may have many
distinct topologies defined on it.
If Γ is an ordinal number, then the set Γ = [0, Γ) may be endowed with the order topology
generated by the intervals (a, b), [0, b) and (a, Γ) where a and b are elements of Γ.
Topological constructions
Every subset of a topological space can be given the subspace topology in which the open
sets are the intersections of the open sets of the larger space with the subset. For any
indexed family of topological spaces, the product can be given the product topology, which
is generated by the inverse images of open sets of the factors under the projection
mappings. For example, in finite products, a basis for the product topology consists of all
products of open sets. For infinite products, there is the additional requirement that in a
basic open set, all but finitely many of its projections are the entire space.
A quotient space is defined as follows: if X is a topological space and Y is a set, and if f : X
 →  Y is a surjective function, then the quotient topology on Y is the collection of subsets of
Y that have open inverse images under f. In other words, the quotient topology is the finest
topology on Y for which f is continuous. A common example of a quotient topology is when
an equivalence relation is defined on the topological space X. The map f is then the natural
projection onto the set of equivalence classes.
The Vietoris topology on the set of all non-empty subsets of a topological space X, named
for Leopold Vietoris, is generated by the following basis: for every n-tuple U1, ..., Un of open
sets in X, we construct a basis set consisting of all subsets of the union of the Ui which have
non-empty intersection with each Ui.
Classification of topological spaces
Topological spaces can be broadly classified, up to homeomorphism, by their topological
properties. A topological property is a property of spaces that is invariant under
homeomorphisms. To prove that two spaces are not homeomorphic it is sufficient to find a
topological property which is not shared by them. Examples of such properties include
connectedness, compactness, and various separation axioms.
See the article on topological properties for more details and examples.

Topological space
281
Topological spaces with algebraic structure
For any algebraic objects we can introduce the discrete topology, under which the
algebraic operations are continuous functions. For any such structure which is not finite,
we often have a natural topology which is compatible with the algebraic operations in the
sense that the algebraic operations are still continuous. This leads to concepts such as
topological groups, topological vector spaces, topological rings and local fields.
Topological spaces with order structure
• Spectral. A space is spectral if and only if it is the prime spectrum of a ring (Hochster
theorem).
• Specialization preorder. In a space the specialization (or canonical) preorder is
defined by x ≤ y if and only if cl{x} ⊆ cl{y}.
Specializations and generalizations
The following spaces and algebras are either more specialized or more general than the
topological spaces discussed above.
• Proximity spaces provide a notion of closeness of two sets.
• Metric spaces embody a metric, a precise notion of distance between points.
• Uniform spaces axiomatize ordering the distance between distinct points.
• Cauchy spaces axiomatize the ability to test whether a net is Cauchy. Cauchy spaces
provide a general setting for studying completions.
• Convergence spaces capture some of the features of convergence of filters.
• σ-algebras build on the notion of measurable sets.
See also
• T0 space
• T1 space
• Hausdorff space (T2)
• Completely Hausdorff space
• Urysohn space
• T3 space
• Tychonoff space
• Normal Hausdorff space (T4)
• Completely normal Hausdorff space (T5)
• Perfectly normal Hausdorff space (T6)

Topological space
282
References
• Armstrong, M. A.; Basic Topology, Springer; 1st edition (May 1, 1997). ISBN
0-387-90839-0.
• Bredon, Glen E., Topology and Geometry (Graduate Texts in Mathematics), Springer; 1st
edition (October 17, 1997). ISBN 0-387-97926-3.
• Bourbaki, Nicolas; Elements of Mathematics: General Topology, Addison-Wesley (1966).
• Čech, Eduard; Point Sets, Academic Press (1969).
• Fulton, William, Algebraic Topology, (Graduate Texts in Mathematics), Springer; 1st
edition (September 5, 1997). ISBN 0-387-94327-7.
• Lipschutz, Seymour; Schaum's Outline of General Topology, McGraw-Hill; 1st edition
(June 1, 1968). ISBN 0-07-037988-2.
• Munkres, James; Topology, Prentice Hall; 2nd edition (December 28, 1999). ISBN
0-13-181629-2.
• Runde, Volker; A Taste of Topology (Universitext), Springer; 1st edition (July 6, 2005).
ISBN 0-387-25790-X.
• Steen, Lynn A. and Seebach, J. Arthur Jr.; Counterexamples in Topology, Holt, Rinehart
and Winston (1970). ISBN 0-03-079485-4.
• Willard, Stephen (2004). General Topology. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-43479-6.
External links
• Topological space [1] on PlanetMath
References
[1] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=380

Continuous function (topology)
283
Continuous function (topology)
In topology and related areas of mathematics a continuous function is a morphism
between topological spaces. Intuitively, this is a function f where a set of points near f(x)
always contain the image of a set of points near x. For a general topological space, this
means a neighbourhood of f(x) always contains the image of a neighbourhood of x.
In a metric space (for example, the real numbers) this means that the points within a given
distance of f(x) always contain the images of all the points within some other distance of x,
giving the ε-δ definition.
Definitions
Several equivalent definitions for a topological structure exist and thus there are several
equivalent ways to define a continuous function.
Open and closed set definition
The most common notion of continuity in topology defines continuous functions as those
functions for which the preimages of open sets are open. Similar to the open set
formulation is the closed set formulation, which says that preimages of closed sets are
closed.
Neighborhood definition
Definitions based on preimages are often difficult to use directly. Instead, suppose we have
a function 
, where X and Y are topological spaces [1] . We say f is continuous at
x for some 
if for any neighborhood V of f(x), there is a neighborhood U of x such that
. Although this definition appears complicated, the intuition is that no matter
how "small" V becomes, we can always find a U containing x that will map inside it. If f is
continuous at every 
, then we simply say f is continuous.
In a metric space, it is equivalent to consider the neighbourhood system of open balls
centered at x and f(x) instead of all neighborhoods. This leads to the standard δ-ε definition
of a continuous function from real analysis, which says roughly that a function is continuous
if all points close to x map to points close to f(x). This only really makes sense in a metric
space, however, which has a notion of distance.
Note, however, that if the target space is Hausdorff, it is still true that f is continuous at a if 
and only if the limit of f as x approaches a is f(a). At an isolated point, every function is

Continuous function (topology)
284
continuous.
Sequences and nets
In several contexts, the topology of a space is conveniently specified in terms of limit points.
In many instances, this is accomplished by specifying when a point is the limit of a
sequence, but for some spaces that are too large in some sense, one specifies also when a
point is the limit of more general sets of points indexed by a directed set, known as nets. A
function is continuous only if it takes limits of sequences to limits of sequences. In the
former case, preservation of limits is also sufficient; in the latter, a function may preserve
all limits of sequences yet still fail to be continuous, and preservation of nets is a necessary
and sufficient condition.
In detail, a function f : X → Y is sequentially continuous if whenever a sequence (xn) in X
converges to a limit x, the sequence (f(xn)) converges to f(x). Thus sequentially continuous
functions "preserve sequential limits". Every continuous function is sequentially continuous.
If X is a first-countable space, then the converse also holds: any function preserving
sequential limits is continuous. In particular, if X is a metric space, sequential continuity
and continuity are equivalent. For non first-countable spaces, sequential continuity might
be strictly weaker than continuity. (The spaces for which the two properties are equivalent
are called sequential spaces.) This motivates the consideration of nets instead of sequences
in general topological spaces. Continuous functions preserve limits of nets, and in fact this
property characterizes continuous functions.
Closure operator definition
Given two topological spaces (X,cl) and (X ' ,cl ') where cl and cl ' are two closure operators
then a function
is continuous if for all subsets A of X
One might therefore suspect that given two topological spaces (X,int) and (X ' ,int ') where
int and int ' are two interior operators then a function
is continuous if for all subsets A of X
or perhaps if
however, neither of these conditions is either necessary or sufficient for continuity.
Instead, we must resort to inverse images: given two topological spaces (X,int) and (X '
,int ') where int and int ' are two interior operators then a function
is continuous if for all subsets A of X '
We can also write that given two topological spaces (X,cl) and (X ' ,cl ') where cl and cl ' are
two closure operators then a function

Continuous function (topology)
285
is continuous if for all subsets A of X '
Closeness relation definition
Given two topological spaces (X,δ) and (X' ,δ') where δ and δ' are two closeness relations
then a function
is continuous if for all points x and of X and all subsets A of X,
This is another way of writing the closure operator definition.
Useful properties of continuous maps
Some facts about continuous maps between topological spaces:
• If f : X → Y and g : Y → Z are continuous, then so is the composition g o f : X → Z.
• If f : X → Y is continuous and
• X is compact, then f(X) is compact.
• X is connected, then f(X) is connected.
• X is path-connected, then f(X) is path-connected.
• The identity map idX : (X, τ2) → (X, τ1) is continuous if and only if τ1 ⊆ τ2 (see also
comparison of topologies).
Other notes
If a set is given the discrete topology, all functions with that space as a domain are
continuous. If the domain set is given the indiscrete topology and the range set is at least
T0, then the only continuous functions are the constant functions. Conversely, any function
whose range is indiscrete is continuous.
Given a set X, a partial ordering can be defined on the possible topologies on X. A
continuous function between two topological spaces stays continuous if we strengthen the
topology of the domain space or weaken the topology of the codomain space. Thus we can
consider the continuity of a given function a topological property, depending only on the
topologies of its domain and codomain spaces.
For a function f from a topological space X to a set S, one defines the final topology on S by
letting the open sets of S be those subsets A of S for which f-1(A) is open in X. If S has an
existing topology, f is continuous with respect to this topology if and only if the existing
topology is coarser than the final topology on S. Thus the final topology can be
characterized as the finest topology on S which makes f continuous. If f is surjective, this
topology is canonically identified with the quotient topology under the equivalence relation
defined by f. This construction can be generalized to an arbitrary family of functions X → S.
Dually, for a function f from a set S to a topological space, one defines the initial topology 
on S by letting the open sets of S be those subsets A of S for which f(A) is open in X. If S has 
an existing topology, f is continuous with respect to this topology if and only if the existing 
topology is finer than the initial topology on S. Thus the initial topology can be 
characterized as the coarsest topology on S which makes f continuous. If f is injective, this

Continuous function (topology)
286
topology is canonically identified with the subspace topology of S, viewed as a subset of X.
This construction can be generalized to an arbitrary family of functions S → X.
Symmetric to the concept of a continuous map is an open map, for which images of open
sets are open. In fact, if an open map f has an inverse, that inverse is continuous, and if a
continuous map g has an inverse, that inverse is open.
If a function is a bijection, then it has an inverse function. The inverse of a continuous
bijection is open, but need not be continuous. If it is, this special function is called a
homeomorphism. If a continuous bijection has as its domain a compact space and its
codomain is Hausdorff, then it is automatically a homeomorphism.
Footnotes
[1] f is a function f : X → Y between two topological spaces (X,TX) and (Y,TY). That is, the function f is defined on
the elements of the set X, not on the elements of the topology TX. However continuity of the function does
depend on the topologies used.
Fibration
In mathematics, especially algebraic topology, a fibration is a continuous mapping
satisfying the homotopy lifting property with respect to any space. Fiber bundles (over
paracompact bases) constitute important examples. In homotopy theory any mapping is 'as
good as' a fibration — i.e. any map can be decomposed as a homotopy equivalence into a
"mapping path space" followed by a fibration. (See homotopy fiber.)
A fibration with the homotopy lifting property for CW complexes (or equivalently, just cubes
In) is called a Serre fibration, in honor of the part played by the concept in the thesis of Jean-Pierre Serre. This
thesis firmly established in algebraic topology the use of spectral sequences, and clearly separated the notions of
fiber bundles and fibrations from the notion of sheaf (both concepts together having been implicit in the pioneer
treatment of Jean Leray). Because a sheaf (thought of as an étalé space) can be considered a local
homeomorphism, the notions were closely interlinked at the time.
The fibers are by definition the subspaces of E that are the inverse images of points b of B. If the base space B is
path connected, it is a consequence of the definition that the fibers of two different points b1 and b2 in B are
homotopy equivalent. Therefore one usually speaks of "the fiber" F. Fibrations do not necessarily have the local
cartesian product structure that defines the more restricted fiber bundle case, but something weaker that still
allows "sideways" movement from fiber to fiber. One of the main desirable properties of the Serre spectral
sequence is to account for the action of the fundamental group of the base B on the homology of the total space E.
The projection map from a product space is very easily seen to be a fibration. Fiber bundles have local
trivializations — such cartesian product structures exist locally on B, and this is usually enough to show that a
fiber bundle is a fibration. More precisely, if there are local trivializations over a "numerable open cover" of B , the
bundle is a fibration. Any open cover of a paracompact space — for example any metric space, has a numerable
refinement, so any bundle over such a space is a fibration. The local triviality also implies the existence of a
well-defined fiber (up to homeomorphism), at least on each connected component of B.

Fibration
287
Examples
In the following examples a fibration is denoted 
F → E → B,
where the first map is the inclusion of "the" fiber F into the total space E and the second map is the fibration onto
the basis B. This is also referred to as a fibration sequence.
• The Hopf fibration S1 → S3 → S2 was historically one of the earliest non-trivial examples of a
fibration.
• The Serre fibration SO(2) → SO(3) → S2 comes from the action of the rotation group
SO(3) on the 2-sphere S2.
• Over complex projective space, there is a fibration S1 → S2n+1 → CPn.
Properties
Euler characteristic
The Euler characteristic is multiplicative for fibrations with certain conditions.
If 
is a fibration with fiber F, with the base B path-connected, and the fibration is
orientable over a field K, then the Euler characteristic with coefficients in the field K
satisfies the product property:[1]
This includes product spaces and covering spaces as special cases, and can be proven by
the Serre spectral sequence on homology of a fibration.
For fiber bundles, this can also be understood in terms of a transfer map
– note that this is a lifting and goes "the wrong way" – whose
composition with the projection map 
is multiplication by the Euler
class of the fiber:[2] 
Fibrations in closed model categories
Fibrations of topological spaces fit into a more general framework, the so-called closed
model categories. In such categories, there are distinguished classes of morphisms, the
so-called fibrations, cofibrations and weak equivalences. Certain axioms, such as stability of
fibrations under composition and pullbacks, factorization of every morphism into the
composition of an acyclic cofibration followed by a fibration or a cofibration followed by an
acyclic fibration, where the word "acyclic" indicates that the corresponding arrow is also a
weak equivalence, and other requirements are set up to allow the abstract treatment of
homotopy theory. (In the original treatment, due to Daniel Quillen, the word "trivial" was
used instead of "acyclic.")
It can be shown that the category of topological spaces is in fact a model category, where
(abstract) fibrations are just the fibrations introduced above and weak equivalences are
homotopy equivalences. See Dwyer, Spaliński (1995).

Fibration
288
See also
• Homotopy fiber
References
[1] Spanier, Edwin Henry (1982), http://books.google.com/books?id=h-wc3TnZMCcC|Algebraic Topology,
Springer, ISBN 978 0 38794426 5, http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=h-wc3TnZMCcC, Applications of the
homology spectral sequence, p. 481 (http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=h-wc3TnZMCcC& pg=PA481)
[2] Gottlieb, Daniel Henry (1975),
"http://www.math.purdue.edu/~gottlieb/Bibliography/17FibreBundlesAndtheEulerCharacteristic.pdf|Fibre
bundles and the Euler characteristic", Journal of Differential Geometry 10 (1): 39–48, http:/ / www. math.
purdue. edu/ ~gottlieb/ Bibliography/ 17FibreBundlesAndtheEulerCharacteristic. pdf
• Dwyer, William G.; Spaliński, J. (1995),
http://hopf.math.purdue.edu/cgi-bin/generate?/Dwyer-Spalinski/theories|"Homotopy
theories and model categories", Handbook of algebraic topology, Amsterdam:
North-Holland, pp. 73–126, MR 1361887 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1361887), http:/ / hopf. math. purdue. edu/ cgi-bin/ generate?/
Dwyer-Spalinski/ theories (model category structure on topological spaces)
Homeomorphism
Topological equivalence redirects here; see also topological equivalence (dynamical
systems).
A continuous deformation between a
coffee mug and a donut illustrating
that they are homeomorphic. But there
does not need to be a continuous
deformation for two spaces to be
homeomorphic — only a continuous
mapping with a continuous inverse.
In 
the 
mathematical 
field 
of 
topology, 
a
homeomorphism or topological isomorphism (from
the Greek words ὅμοιος (homoios) = similar and μορφή
(morphē) = shape = form (Latin deformation of
morphe)) is a bicontinuous function between two
topological 
spaces. 
Homeomorphisms 
are 
the
isomorphisms in the category of topological spaces —
that is, they are the mappings which preserve all the
topological properties of a given space. Two spaces
with a homeomorphism between them are called
homeomorphic, and from a topological viewpoint they
are the same.
Roughly speaking, a topological space is a geometric
object, and the homeomorphism is a continuous
stretching and bending of the object into a new shape.
Thus, a square and a circle are homeomorphic to each
other, but a sphere and a donut are not. An
often-repeated joke is that topologists can't tell the
coffee cup from which they are drinking from the donut they are eating, since a sufficiently
pliable donut could be reshaped to the form of a coffee cup by creating a dimple and
progressively enlarging it, while shrinking the hole into a handle.
Topology is the study of those properties of objects that do not change when 
homeomorphisms are applied. As Henri Poincaré famously said, mathematics is not the

Homeomorphism
289
study of objects, but instead, the relations (isomorphisms for instance) between them.
Definition
A function f: X → Y between two topological spaces (X, TX) and (Y, TY) is called a
homeomorphism if it has the following properties:
• f is a bijection (one-to-one and onto),
• f is continuous,
• the inverse function f −1 is continuous (f is an open mapping).
A function with these three properties is sometimes called bicontinuous. If such a function
exists, we say X and Y are homeomorphic. A self-homeomorphism is a homeomorphism
of a topological space and itself. The homeomorphisms form an equivalence relation on the
class 
of 
all 
topological 
spaces. 
The 
resulting 
equivalence 
classes 
are 
called
homeomorphism classes.
Examples
A trefoil knot is homeomorphic to a
circle. While this may seem illogical, in
four dimensions they can easily be
deformed continuously. Here the knot
has been thickened to make the image
understandable.
• The unit 2-disc D2 and the unit square in R2 are
homeomorphic.
• The open interval (−1, +1) is homeomorphic to the
real numbers R.
• The product space S1 × S1 and the two-dimensional
torus are homeomorphic.
• Every uniform isomorphism and isometric
isomorphism is a homeomorphism.
• Any 2-sphere with a single point removed is
homeomorphic to the set of all points in R2 (a
2-dimensional plane).
• Let 
be a commutative ring with unity and let 
be a multiplicative subset of 
. Then
Spec 
is homeomorphic to 
.
•
and 
are not homeomorphic for 
.
• An example of a continuous bijection that is not a homeomorphism is the map that takes
the half-open interval 
and wraps it around the circle. In this case the inverse –
although it exists – fails to be continuous. The preimages of certain sets which are
actually open in the relative topology of the half-open interval are not open in the more
natural topology of the circle (they are half-open intervals).

Homeomorphism
290
Notes
The third requirement, that f −1 be continuous, is essential. Consider for instance the
function f : [0, 2π) → S1 defined by f(φ) = (cos(φ), sin(φ)). This function is bijective and
continuous, but not a homeomorphism.
Homeomorphisms are the isomorphisms in the category of topological spaces. As such, the
composition of two homeomorphisms is again a homeomorphism, and the set of all
self-homeomorphisms X → X forms a group, called the homeomorphism group of X, often
denoted Homeo(X); this group can be given a topology, such as the compact-open topology,
making it a topological group.
For some purposes, the homeomorphism group happens to be too big, but by means of the
isotopy relation, one can reduce this group to the mapping class group.
Similarly, as usual in category theory, given two spaces that are homeomorphic, the space
of homeomorphisms between, Homeo(X, Y) them is a torsor for the homeomorphism groups
Homeo(X) and Homeo(Y), and given a specific homeomorph between X and Y, all three sets
are identified.
Properties
• Two homeomorphic spaces share the same topological properties. For example, if one of
them is compact, then the other is as well; if one of them is connected, then the other is
as well; if one of them is Hausdorff, then the other is as well; their homology groups will
coincide. Note however that this does not extend to properties defined via a metric; there
are metric spaces which are homeomorphic even though one of them is complete and the
other is not.
• A homeomorphism is simultaneously an open mapping and a closed mapping, that is it
maps open sets to open sets and closed sets to closed sets.
• Every self-homeomorphism in 
can be extended to a self-homeomorphism of the whole
disk 
(Alexander's Trick).
Informal discussion
The intuitive criterion of stretching, bending, cutting and gluing back together takes a
certain amount of practice to apply correctly — it may not be obvious from the description
above that deforming a line segment to a point is impermissible, for instance. It is thus
important to realize that it is the formal definition given above that counts.
This characterization of a homeomorphism often leads to confusion with the concept of
homotopy, which is actually defined as a continuous deformation, but from one function to
another, rather than one space to another. In the case of a homeomorphism, envisioning a
continuous deformation is a mental tool for keeping track of which points on space X
correspond to which points on Y — one just follows them as X deforms. In the case of
homotopy, the continuous deformation from one map to the other is of the essence, and it is
also less restrictive, since none of the maps involved need to be one-to-one or onto.
Homotopy does lead to a relation on spaces: homotopy equivalence.
There is a name for the kind of deformation involved in visualizing a homeomorphism. It is
(except when cutting and regluing are required) an isotopy between the identity map on X
and the homeomorphism from X to Y.

Homeomorphism
291
See also
• Local homeomorphism
• Diffeomorphism
• Uniform isomorphism is an isomorphism between uniform spaces
• Isometric isomorphism is an isomorphism between metric spaces
• Dehn twist
• Homeomorphism (graph theory) (closely related to graph subdivision)
• Isotopy
• Mapping class group
External links
• Homeomorphism [1] on PlanetMath
References
[1] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=912
Compact space
In mathematics, a topological space is called compact if each of its open covers has a finite
subcover. Otherwise it is called non-compact.
Note: Some authors such as Bourbaki use the term "quasi-compact" for this instead, and
reserve the term "compact" for topological spaces that are both Hausdorff and
"quasi-compact".
The Heine–Borel theorem shows that this definition is equivalent to "closed and bounded"
for subsets of Euclidean space. So a subset of Euclidean space Rn is called compact if it is
closed and bounded. For example, in R, the closed unit interval [0, 1] is compact, but the
set of integers Z is not (it is not bounded) and neither is the half-open interval [0, 1) (it is
not closed).
The concept of a compact subset of the real numbers can be extended to compact subsets
of any topological space and indeed to the concept of a compact space. A subset is
compact if when endowed with the subspace topology it becomes a compact space.
A single compact set is sometimes referred to as a compactum; following the Latin second
declension (neuter), the corresponding plural form is compacta.

Compact space
292
History and motivation
The identity of bounded closed subsets of real numbers and sets whose open covers have
finite subcovers was discovered and proved in the late 19th century. See Heine–Borel
theorem.
The term compact was introduced by Fréchet in 1906.
It has long been recognized that a property like compactness is necessary to prove many
useful theorems. It used to be that "compact" meant "sequentially compact" (every
sequence has a convergent subsequence). This was when primarily metric spaces were
studied. The "covering compact" definition has become more prominent because it allows
us to consider general topological spaces, and many of the old results about metric spaces
can be generalized to this setting. This generalization is particularly useful in the study of
function spaces, many of which are not metric spaces.
One of the main reasons for studying compact spaces is because they are in some ways very
similar to finite sets: there are many results which are easy to show for finite sets, whose
proofs carry over with minimal change to compact spaces. It is often said that
"compactness is the next best thing to finiteness". Here is an example:
• Suppose X is a Hausdorff space, and we have a point x in X and a finite subset A of X not
containing x. Then we can separate x and A by neighbourhoods: for each a in A, let U(x)
and V(a) be disjoint neighbourhoods containing x and a, respectively. Then the
intersection of all the U(x) and the union of all the V(a) are the required neighbourhoods
of x and A.
Note that if A is infinite, the proof fails, because the intersection of arbitrarily many
neighbourhoods of x might not be a neighbourhood of x. The proof can be "rescued",
however, if A is compact: we simply take a finite subcover of the cover {V(a) : a in A} of A,
then intersect the corresponding finitely many U(x). In this way, we see that in a Hausdorff
space, any point can be separated by neighbourhoods from any compact set not containing
it. In fact, repeating the argument shows that any two disjoint compact sets in a Hausdorff
space can be separated by neighbourhoods – note that this is precisely what we get if we
replace "point" (i.e. singleton set) with "compact set" in the Hausdorff separation axiom.
Many of the arguments and results involving compact spaces follow such a pattern.
Definitions
Compactness of topological spaces
A topological space X is defined as compact if all its open covers have a finite subcover.
Formally, this means that
for every arbitrary collection 
of open subsets of 
such that 
,
there is a finite subset 
such that 
.
An often used equivalent definition is given in terms of the finite intersection property: if
any collection of closed sets satisfying the finite intersection property has nonempty
intersection, then the space is compact[1] . This definition is dual to the usual one stated in
terms of open sets.

Compact space
293
Some authors require that a compact space also be Hausdorff, and the non-Hausdorff
version is then called quasicompact.
Compactness of subsets of Rn
For any subset of Euclidean space Rn, the following four conditions are equivalent:
• Every open cover has a finite subcover. This is the topological definition.
• Every sequence in the set has a convergent subsequence, the limit point of which belongs
to the set.
• Every infinite subset of the set has at least one accumulation point in the set.
• The set is closed and bounded. This is the condition that is easiest to verify, for example a
closed interval or closed n-ball.
In other spaces, these conditions may or may not be equivalent, depending on the
properties of the space.
Note that while compactness is a property of the set itself (with its topology), closedness is
relative to a space it is in; above "closed" is used in the sense of closed in Rn. A set which is
closed in e.g. Qn is typically not closed in Rn, hence not compact.
Examples of compact spaces
• Any finite topological space, including the empty set, is compact. Slightly more generally,
any space with a finite topology (only finitely many open sets) is compact; this includes in
particular the trivial topology.
• The closed unit interval [0, 1] is compact. This follows from the Heine–Borel theorem; the
proof of which is about as hard as proving directly that [0, 1] is compact. The open
interval (0, 1) is not compact: the open cover ( 1/n, 1−1/n ) for n = 3, 4, …  does not have a
finite subcover. Similarly, the set of rational numbers in the closed interval [0, 1] is not
compact: the sets of rational numbers in the intervals 
and 
 cover
all the rationals in [0, 1] for n = 4, 5, …  but this cover does not have a finite subcover.
(Note that the sets are open in the subspace topology even though they are not open as
subsets of R.)
• The set R of all real numbers is not compact as there is a cover of open intervals that
does not have a finite subcover. For example, intervals (n − 1, n + 1), where n takes all
integer values in Z, cover R but there is no finite subcover.
• For every natural number n, the n-sphere is compact. Again from the Heine–Borel
theorem, the closed unit ball of any finite-dimensional normed vector space is compact.
This is not true for infinite dimensions; in fact, a normed vector space is
finite-dimensional if and only if its closed unit ball is compact.
• The Cantor set is compact. Since the p-adic integers are homeomorphic to the Cantor set,
they also form a compact set. Since a finite set containing p elements is compact, this
shows that the countable product of finite sets is compact, and is thus a special case of
Tychonoff's theorem.
• Consider the set 
of all functions 
from the real number line to the closed 
unit interval, and define a topology on 
so that a sequence 
in 
converges 
towards 
if and only if 
converges towards 
for all 
. There is 
only one such topology; it is called the topology of pointwise convergence. Then 
is a

Compact space
294
compact topological space, again a consequence of Tychonoff's theorem.
• Consider the set K of all functions ƒ : [0, 1] → [0, 1] satisfying the Lipschitz condition
|ƒ(x) − ƒ(y)| ≤ |x − y| for all x, y ∈ [0, 1]. Consider on K the metric induced by the uniform
distance 
. Then by Arzelà–Ascoli theorem the
space K is compact.
• Any space carrying the cofinite topology is compact.
• Any locally compact Hausdorff space can be turned into a compact space by adding a
single point to it, by means of Alexandroff one-point compactification. The one-point
compactification of R is homeomorphic to the circle 
; the one-point compactification
of R2 is homeomorphic to the sphere 
. Using the one-point compactification, one can
also easily construct compact spaces which are not Hausdorff, by starting with a
non-Hausdorff space.
• The spectrum of any continuous linear operator on a Hilbert space is a compact subset of
the complex numbers C. If the Hilbert space is infinite-dimensional, then any compact
subset of C arises in this manner, as the spectrum of some continuous linear operator on
the Hilbert space.
• The spectrum of any commutative ring or Boolean algebra is compact.
• The Hilbert cube is compact; this follows from the Tychonoff theorem.
• The right order topology or left order topology on any bounded totally ordered set is
compact. In particular, Sierpinski space is compact.
• The prime spectrum of any commutative ring with the Zariski topology is a compact
space, important in algebraic geometry. These prime spectra are almost never Hausdorff
spaces.
• R carrying the lower limit topology satisfies the property that no uncountable set is
compact.
• In the cocountable topology on R (or any uncountable set for that matter), no infinite set
is compact.
• Neither of the spaces in the previous two examples are locally compact but both are still
Lindelöf
Theorems
Some theorems related to compactness (see the Topology Glossary for the definitions):
• A continuous image of a compact space is compact.[2]
• The extreme value theorem: a continuous real-valued function on a nonempty compact
space is bounded and attains its supremum.
• A closed subset of a compact space is compact.[3]
• A compact subset of a Hausdorff space is closed.
• A nonempty compact subset of the real numbers has a greatest element and a least
element.
• A subset of Euclidean n-space is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded.
(Heine–Borel theorem)
• A metric space (or uniform space) is compact if and only if it is complete and totally
bounded.
• The product of any collection of compact spaces is compact. (Tychonoff's theorem, which
is equivalent to the axiom of choice)

Compact space
295
• A compact Hausdorff space is normal.
• Every continuous map from a compact space to a Hausdorff space is closed and proper. It
follows that every continuous bijective map from a compact space to a Hausdorff space is
a homeomorphism.
• A metric space (or more generally any first-countable uniform space) is compact if and
only if every sequence in the space has a convergent subsequence.
• A topological space is compact if and only if every net on the space has a convergent
subnet.
• A topological space is compact if and only if every filter on the space has a convergent
refinement.
• A topological space is compact if and only if every ultrafilter on the space is convergent.
• A topological space is compact if and only if every infinite subset of the space has a
complete accumulation point.
• A topological space can be embedded in a compact Hausdorff space if and only if it is a
Tychonoff space.
• Every non-compact topological space X is a dense subspace of a compact space which
has at most one point more than X. (Alexandroff one-point compactification)
• If the metric space X is compact and an open cover of X is given, then there exists a
number δ > 0 such that every subset of X of diameter < δ is contained in some member
of the cover. (Lebesgue's number lemma)
• If a topological space has a sub-base such that every cover of the space by members of
the sub-base has a finite subcover, then the space is compact. (Alexander's sub-base
theorem)
• Two compact Hausdorff spaces X1 and X2 are homeomorphic if and only if their rings of
continuous real-valued functions C(X1) and C(X2) are isomorphic. (Gelfand–Naimark
theorem)
• Let X be a simply ordered set endowed with the order topology. Then X is compact if and
only if X is a complete lattice (i.e. all subsets have suprema and infima).[4]
• Every compact metric space is separable.
Other forms of compactness
There are a number of topological properties which are equivalent to compactness in
metric spaces, but are inequivalent in general topological spaces. These include the
following.
• Sequentially compact: Every sequence has a convergent subsequence.
• Countably compact: Every countable open cover has a finite subcover. (Or,
equivalently, every infinite subset has an ω-accumulation point.)
• Pseudocompact : Every real-valued continuous function on the space is bounded.
• Weakly countably compact (or limit point compact): Every infinite subset has an
accumulation point.
While all these conditions are equivalent for metric spaces, in general we have the
following implications:
• Compact spaces are countably compact.
• Sequentially compact spaces are countably compact.
• Countably compact spaces are pseudocompact and weakly countably compact.

Compact space
296
Not every countably compact space is compact; an example is given by the first
uncountable ordinal with the order topology. Not every compact space is sequentially
compact; an example is given by 2[0,1], with the product topology (Example 5.3,
Scarborough and Stone 1966).
A metric space is called pre-compact or totally bounded if any sequence has a Cauchy
subsequence; this can be generalised to uniform spaces. For complete metric spaces this is
equivalent to compactness. See relatively compact for the topological version.
Another related notion which (by most definitions) is strictly weaker than compactness is
local compactness.
Generalizations of compactness include H-closed and the property of being an H-set in a
parent space. A space is H-closed if every open cover has a finite subfamily whose union is
dense. Whereas we say X is an H-set of Z if every cover of X with open sets of Z has a finite
subfamily whose Z closure contains X.
See also
• Exhaustion by compact sets
• Lindelöf space
• Metacompact space
• Paracompact space
Notes
[1] A space is compact if and only if the space has the finite intersection property (http:/ / planetmath. org/
?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=4181) on PlanetMath
[2] Compactness is preserved under a continuous map (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects&
amp;id=4689) on PlanetMath
[3] Closed set in a compact space is compact (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects&
amp;id=4177) on PlanetMath; Closed subsets of a compact set are compact (http:/ / planetmath. org/
?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=4691) on PlanetMath
[4] Steen, Lynn Arthur; J. Arthur Seebach, Jr. (1995). Counterexamples in Topology (Dover ed.). New York:
Springer-Verlag. pp. 67. ISBN 048668735X.
References
• Scarborough, C.T.; Stone, A.H. (1966), "Products of nearly compact spaces", Transactions
of the American Mathematical Society 124: 131–147, doi: 10.2307/1994440 (http:/ / dx.
doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 1994440)
• Steen, Lynn Arthur; Seebach, J. Arthur Jr. (1995) [1978], Counterexamples in Topology
(Dover reprint of 1978 ed.), Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 507446 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=507446), ISBN 978-0-486-68735-3
• Countably compact (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects&
amp;id=1233) on PlanetMath
This article incorporates material from Examples of compact spaces on PlanetMath, which
is licensed under the GFDL.

Hausdorff space
297
Hausdorff space
Topological spaces in
separation axiom
Kolmogorov (T0) version
T0 | T1 | T2 | T2½ | completely T2
T3 | T3½ | T4 | T5 | T6
In topology and related branches of mathematics, a Hausdorff space, separated space or
T2 space is a topological space in which distinct points have disjoint neighbourhoods. Of
the many separation axioms that can be imposed on a topological space, the "Hausdorff
condition" (T2) is the most frequently used and discussed. It implies the uniqueness of limits
of sequences, nets, and filters. Intuitively, the condition is illustrated by the pun that a
space is Hausdorff if any two points can be "housed off" from each other by open sets.
Hausdorff spaces are named for Felix Hausdorff, one of the founders of topology.
Hausdorff's original definition of a topological space (in 1914) included the Hausdorff
condition as an axiom.
Definitions
The points x and y, separated by their
respective neighbourhoods U and V.
Suppose that X is a topological space. Let x and y be
points in X. We say that x and y can be separated by
neighbourhoods if there exists a neighbourhood U of
x and a neighbourhood V of y such that U and V are
disjoint (U ∩ V = 
). X is a Hausdorff space if
any two distinct points of X can be separated by
neighborhoods. 
This 
condition 
is 
the 
third
separation axiom (after T0 and T1), which is why
Hausdorff spaces are also called T2 spaces. The
name separated space is also used.
A related, but weaker, notion is that of a preregular space. X is a preregular space if any
two topologically distinguishable points can be separated by neighbourhoods. Preregular
spaces are also called R1 spaces.
The relationship between these two conditions is as follows. A topological space is
Hausdorff if and only if it is both preregular (i.e. topologically distinguishable points are
separated) and Kolmogorov (i.e. distinct points are topologically distinguishable). A
topological space is preregular if and only if its Kolmogorov quotient is Hausdorff.

Hausdorff space
298
Equivalences
For a topological space X, the following are equivalent:
• X is a Hausdorff space.
• Every singleton set contained in X is equal to the intersection of all closed
neighbourhoods containing it.
• The diagonal Δ = {(x,x) | x ∈ X} is closed as a subset of the product space X × X.
Examples and counterexamples
Almost all spaces encountered in analysis are Hausdorff; most importantly, the real
numbers (under the standard metric topology on real numbers) are a Hausdorff space.
More generally, all metric spaces are Hausdorff. In fact, many spaces of use in analysis,
such as topological groups and topological manifolds, have the Hausdorff condition
explicitly stated in their definitions.
A simple example of a topology that is T1 but is not Hausdorff is the cofinite topology
defined by an infinite set.
Pseudometric spaces typically are not Hausdorff, but they are preregular, and their use in
analysis is usually only in the construction of Hausdorff gauge spaces. Indeed, when
analysts run across a non-Hausdorff space, it is still probably at least preregular, and then
they simply replace it with its Kolmogorov quotient, which is Hausdorff.
In contrast, non-preregular spaces are encountered much more frequently in abstract
algebra and algebraic geometry, in particular as the Zariski topology on an algebraic
variety or the spectrum of a ring. They also arise in the model theory of intuitionistic logic:
every complete Heyting algebra is the algebra of open sets of some topological space, but
this space need not be preregular, much less Hausdorff.
While convergent sequences in a Hausdorff space have a unique limit, there are
non-Hausdorff T1 spaces in which every convergent sequence has a unique limit.[1]
Properties
Subspaces and products of Hausdorff spaces are Hausdorff,[2] but quotient spaces of
Hausdorff spaces need not be Hausdorff. In fact, every topological space can be realized as
the quotient of some Hausdorff space.
Hausdorff spaces are T1, meaning that all singletons are closed. Similarly, preregular
spaces are R0.
Another nice property of Hausdorff spaces is that compact sets are always closed.[3] This
may fail for spaces which are non-Hausdorff (there are examples of T1 spaces where it
fails).
The definition of a Hausdorff space says that points can be separated by neighborhoods. It
turns out that this implies something which is seemingly stronger: in a Hausdorff space
every pair of disjoint compact sets can also be separated by neighborhoods[4] , in other
words there is a neighborhood of one set and a neighborhood of the other, such that the
two neighborhoods are disjoint. This is an example of the general rule that compact sets
often behave like points.
Compactness conditions together with preregularity often imply stronger separation 
axioms. For example, any locally compact preregular space is completely regular. Compact

Hausdorff space
299
preregular spaces are normal, meaning that they satisfy Urysohn's lemma and the Tietze
extension theorem and have partitions of unity subordinate to locally finite open covers.
The Hausdorff versions of these statements are: every locally compact Hausdorff space is
Tychonoff, and every compact Hausdorff space is normal Hausdorff.
The following results are some technical properties regarding maps (continuous and
otherwise) to and from Hausdorff spaces.
Let f : X → Y be a continuous function and suppose Y is Hausdorff. Then the graph of f,
, is a closed subset of X × Y.
Let f : X → Y be a function and let 
be its kernel regarded
as a subspace of X × X.
• If f is continuous and Y is Hausdorff then ker(f) is closed.
• If f is an open surjection and ker(f) is closed then Y is Hausdorff.
• If f is a continuous, open surjection (i.e. an open quotient map) then Y is Hausdorff if and
only if ker(f) is closed.
If f,g : X → Y are continuous maps and Y is Hausdorff then the equalizer
is closed in X. It follows that if Y is Hausdorff and f and g
agree on a dense subset of X then f = g. In other words, continuous functions into
Hausdorff spaces are determined by their values on dense subsets.
Let f : X → Y be a closed surjection such that f−1(y) is compact for all y ∈ Y. Then if X is
Hausdorff so is Y.
Let f : X → Y be a quotient map with X a compact Hausdorff space. Then the following are
equivalent
• Y is Hausdorff
• f is a closed map
• ker(f) is closed
Preregularity versus regularity
All regular spaces are preregular, as are all Hausdorff spaces. There are many results for
topological spaces that hold for both regular and Hausdorff spaces. Most of the time, these
results hold for all preregular spaces; they were listed for regular and Hausdorff spaces
separately because the idea of preregular spaces came later. On the other hand, those
results that are truly about regularity generally don't also apply to nonregular Hausdorff
spaces.
There are many situations where another condition of topological spaces (such as
paracompactness or local compactness) will imply regularity if preregularity is satisfied.
Such conditions often come in two versions: a regular version and a Hausdorff version.
Although Hausdorff spaces aren't generally regular, a Hausdorff space that is also (say)
locally compact will be regular, because any Hausdorff space is preregular. Thus from a
certain point of view, it is really preregularity, rather than regularity, that matters in these
situations. However, definitions are usually still phrased in terms of regularity, since this
condition is better known than preregularity.
See History of the separation axioms for more on this issue.

Hausdorff space
300
Variants
The terms "Hausdorff", "separated", and "preregular" can also be applied to such variants
on topological spaces as uniform spaces, Cauchy spaces, and convergence spaces. The
characteristic that unites the concept in all of these examples is that limits of nets and
filters (when they exist) are unique (for separated spaces) or unique up to topological
indistinguishability (for preregular spaces).
As it turns out, uniform spaces, and more generally Cauchy spaces, are always preregular,
so the Hausdorff condition in these cases reduces to the T0 condition. These are also the
spaces in which completeness makes sense, and Hausdorffness is a natural companion to
completeness in these cases. Specifically, a space is complete if and only if every Cauchy
net has at least one limit, while a space is Hausdorff if and only if every Cauchy net has at
most one limit (since only Cauchy nets can have limits in the first place).
See also
• Weak Hausdorff space
Notes
[1] van Douwen, Eric K. An anti-Hausdorff Fréchet space in which convergent sequences have unique limits.
Topology and its Applications 51 (1993) 147–158
[2] Hausdorff property is hereditary (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=7202) on
PlanetMath
[3] Proof of A compact set in a Hausdorff space is closed (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj&
amp;from=objects& amp;id=4203) on PlanetMath
[4] Point and a compact set in a Hausdorff space have disjoint open neighborhoods (http:/ / planetmath. org/
?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=4193) on PlanetMath
References
• Arkhangelskii, A.V., L.S. Pontryagin, General Topology I, (1990) Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
ISBN 3-540-18178-4
• Bourbaki; Elements of Mathematics: General Topology, Addison-Wesley (1966).
• Willard, Stephen (2004). General Topology. Dover Publications. ISBN 0486434796.

Tangent space
301
Tangent space
In mathematics, the tangent space of a manifold is a concept which facilitates the
generalization of vectors from affine spaces to general manifolds, since in the latter case
one cannot simply subtract two points to obtain a vector pointing from one to the other.
Informal description
A pictorial representation of the
tangent space of a single point, x, on a
sphere. A vector in this tangent space
can represent a possible velocity at x.
Moving in that direction, one's velocity
would be given by a vector in the
tangent space of a nearby point—a
different tangent space, not shown.
In differential geometry, one can attach to every point x
of a differentiable manifold a tangent space, a real
vector space which intuitively contains the possible
"directions" in which one can pass through x. The
elements of the tangent space are called tangent
vectors at x. This is a generalization of the notion of a
bound vector in a Euclidean space. All the tangent
spaces have the same dimension, equal to the
dimension of the manifold.
For example, if the given manifold is a 2-sphere, one
can picture the tangent space at a point as the plane
which touches the sphere at that point and is
perpendicular to the sphere's radius through the point.
More generally, if a given manifold is thought of as an
embedded submanifold of Euclidean space one can
picture the tangent space in this literal fashion.
In algebraic geometry, in contrast, there is an intrinsic definition of tangent space at a
point P of a variety V, that gives a vector space of dimension at least that of V. The points P
at which the dimension is exactly that of V are called the non-singular points; the others
are singular points. For example, a curve that crosses itself doesn't have a unique tangent
line at that point. The singular points of V are those where the 'test to be a manifold' fails.
See Zariski tangent space.
Once tangent spaces have been introduced, one can define vector fields, which are
abstractions of the velocity field of particles moving on a manifold. A vector field attaches
to every point of the manifold a vector from the tangent space at that point, in a smooth
manner. Such a vector field serves to define a generalized ordinary differential equation on
a manifold: a solution to such a differential equation is a differentiable curve on the
manifold whose derivative at any point is equal to the tangent vector attached to that point
by the vector field.
All the tangent spaces can be "glued together" to form a new differentiable manifold of
twice the dimension, the tangent bundle of the manifold.

Tangent space
302
Formal definitions
There are various equivalent ways of defining the tangent spaces of a manifold. While the
definition via directions of curves is quite straightforward given the above intuition, it is
also the most cumbersome to work with. More elegant and abstract approaches are
described below.
Definition as directions of curves
Suppose M is a 
manifold (k ≥ 1) and 
is a point in M. Pick a chart φ : U → Rn where U
is an open subset of M containing x. Suppose two curves γ1 : (-1,1) → M and γ2 : (-1,1) → M
with γ1(0) = γ2(0) = x are given such that φ o γ1 and φ o γ2 are both differentiable at 0.
Then γ1 and γ2 are called tangent at 0 if the ordinary derivatives of φ o γ1 and φ o γ2 at 0
coincide. This defines an equivalence relation on such curves, and the equivalence classes
are known as the tangent vectors of M at x. The equivalence class of the curve γ is written
as γ'(0). The tangent space of M at x, denoted by TxM, is defined as the set of all tangent
vectors; it does not depend on the choice of chart φ.
The tangent space 
and a tangent
vector 
, along a curve traveling
through 
Definition via derivations
Suppose M is a C∞ manifold. A real-valued function ƒ: M → R belongs to C∞(M) if ƒ o φ-1 is
infinitely often differentiable for every chart φ : U → Rn. C∞(M) is a real associative algebra
for the pointwise product and sum of functions and scalar multiplication.
Pick a point x in M. A derivation at x is a linear map D : C∞(M) → R which has the property
that for all ƒ, g in C∞(M):
modeled on the product rule of calculus. These derivations form a real vector space in a
natural manner; this is the tangent space TxM.
The relation between the tangent vectors defined earlier and derivations is as follows: if γ is
a curve with tangent vector γ'(0), then the corresponding derivation is D(ƒ) = (ƒ o γ)'(0)
(where the derivative is taken in the ordinary sense, since ƒ o γ is a function from (-1,1) to
R).
Generalizations of this definition are possible, for instance to complex manifolds and 
algebraic varieties. However, instead of examining derivations D from the full algebra of 
functions, one must instead work at the level of germs of functions. The reason is that the 
structure sheaf may not be fine for such structures. For instance, let X be an algebraic

Tangent space
303
variety with structure sheaf F. Then the Zariski tangent space at a point p∈X is the
collection of K-derivations D:Fp→K, where K is the groundfield and Fp is the stalk of F at p.
Definition via the cotangent space
Again we start with a C∞ manifold M and a point x in M. Consider the ideal I in C∞(M)
consisting of all functions ƒ such that ƒ(x) = 0. Then I and I 2 are real vector spaces, and TxM
may be defined as the dual space of the quotient space I / I 2. This latter quotient space is
also known as the cotangent space of M at x.
While this definition is the most abstract, it is also the one most easily transferred to other
settings, for instance to the varieties considered in algebraic geometry.
If D is a derivation, then D(ƒ) = 0 for every ƒ in I2, and this means that D gives rise to a
linear map I / I2 → R. Conversely, if r : I / I2 → R is a linear map, then D(ƒ) = r((ƒ - ƒ(x)) + I 2)
is a derivation. This yields the correspondence between the tangent space defined via
derivations and the tangent space defined via the cotangent space.
Properties
If M is an open subset of Rn, then M is a C∞ manifold in a natural manner (take the charts
to be the identity maps), and the tangent spaces are all naturally identified with Rn.
Tangent vectors as directional derivatives
One way to think about tangent vectors is as directional derivatives. Given a vector v in Rn
one defines the directional derivative of a smooth map ƒ: Rn→R at a point x by
This map is naturally a derivation. Moreover, it turns out that every derivation of C∞(Rn) is
of this form. So there is a one-to-one map between vectors (thought of as tangent vectors at
a point) and derivations.
Since tangent vectors to a general manifold can be defined as derivations it is natural to
think of them as directional derivatives. Specifically, if v is a tangent vector of M at a point
x (thought of as a derivation) then define the directional derivative in the direction v by
where ƒ: M → R is an element of C∞(M). If we think of v as the direction of a curve, v =
γ'(0), then we write
The derivative of a map
Main article: Pushforward (differential)
Every smooth (or differentiable) map φ : M → N between smooth (or differentiable)
manifolds induces natural linear maps between the corresponding tangent spaces:
If the tangent space is defined via curves, the map is defined as
If instead the tangent space is defined via derivations, then

Tangent space
304
The linear map dφx is called variously the derivative, total derivative, differential, or
pushforward of φ at x. It is frequently expressed using a variety of other notations:
In a sense, the derivative is the best linear approximation to φ near x. Note that when N =
R, the map dφx : TxM→R coincides with the usual notion of the differential of the function φ.
In local coordinates the derivative of ƒ is given by the Jacobian.
An important result regarding the derivative map is the following:
Theorem. If φ : M → N is a local diffeomorphism at x in M then dφx : TxM → Tφ(x)N is a
linear isomorphism. Conversely, if dφx is an isomorphism then there is an open
neighborhood U of x such that φ maps U diffeomorphically onto its image.
This is a generalization of the inverse function theorem to maps between manifolds.
References
• Michor, Peter W. (2008), Topics in Differential Geometry, Graduate Studies in
Mathematics, Vol. 93, Providence: American Mathematical Society (to appear).
• Spivak, Michael (1965), Calculus on Manifolds, HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-8053-9021-6
External links
• Tangent Planes [1] at MathWorld
• Berkeley Mathematics lecture [2] on Tangent Planes
References
[1] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ TangentPlane. html
[2] http:/ / academicearth. org/ lectures/ tangent-planes-and-linear-approximations

Riemann space
305
Riemann space
1. redirect metric space
Riemannian manifold
In Riemannian geometry, a Riemannian manifold (M,g) (with Riemannian metric g) is a
real differentiable manifold M in which each tangent space is equipped with an inner
product g in a manner which varies smoothly from point to point. The metric g is a positive
definite metric tensor. This allows one to define various notions such as angles, lengths of
curves, areas (or volumes), curvature, gradients of functions and divergence of vector
fields. In other words, a Riemannian manifold is a differentiable manifold in which the
tangent space at each point is a finite-dimensional Hilbert space. The terms are named
after German mathematician Bernhard Riemann.
Overview
The tangent bundle of a smooth manifold M assigns to each fixed point of M a vector space
called the tangent space, and each tangent space can be equipped with an inner product. If
such a collection of inner products on the tangent bundle of a manifold varies smoothly as
one traverses the manifold, then concepts that were defined only pointwise at each tangent
space can be extended to yield analogous notions over finite regions of the manifold. For
example, a smooth curve α(t): [0, 1] → M has tangent vector α′(t0) in the tangent space
TM(t0) at any point t0 ∈ (0, 1), and each such vector has length ||α′(t0)||, where ||·|| denotes
the norm induced by the inner product on TM(t0). The integral of these lengths gives the
length of the curve α:
Smoothness of α(t) for t in [0, 1] guarantees that the integral L(α) exists and the length of
this curve is defined.
In 
many 
instances, 
in 
order 
to 
pass 
from 
a 
linear-algebraic 
concept 
to 
a
differential-geometric one, the smoothness requirement is very important.
Every smooth submanifold of Rn has an induced Riemannian metric g: the inner product on
each tangent space is the restriction of the inner product on Rn. In fact, as follows from the
Nash embedding theorem, all Riemannian manifolds can be realized this way. In particular
one could define Riemannian manifold as a metric space which is isometric to a smooth
submanifold of Rn with the induced intrinsic metric, where isometry here is meant in the
sense of preserving the length of curves. This definition might theoretically not be flexible
enough, but it is quite useful to build the first geometric intuitions in Riemannian geometry.

Riemannian manifold
306
Riemannian manifolds as metric spaces
Usually a Riemannian manifold is defined as a smooth manifold with a smooth section of the
positive-definite quadratic forms on the tangent bundle. Then one has to work to show that
it can be turned to a metric space:
If γ: [a, b] → M is a continuously differentiable curve in the Riemannian manifold M, then
we define its length L(γ) in analogy with the example above by
With this definition of length, every connected Riemannian manifold M becomes a metric
space (and even a length metric space) in a natural fashion: the distance d(x, y) between
the points x and y of M is defined as
d(x,y) = inf{ L(γ) : γ is a continuously differentiable curve joining x and y}.
Even though Riemannian manifolds are usually "curved", there is still a notion of "straight
line" on them: the geodesics. These are curves which locally join their points along shortest
paths.
Assuming the manifold is compact, any two points x and y can be connected with a geodesic
whose length is d(x,y). Without compactness, this need not be true. For example, in the
punctured plane R2 \ {0}, the distance between the points (−1, 0) and (1, 0) is 2, but there
is no geodesic realizing this distance.
Properties
In Riemannian manifolds, the notions of geodesic completeness, topological completeness
and metric completeness are the same: that each implies the other is the content of the
Hopf-Rinow theorem.
Riemannian metrics
Let M be a differentiable manifold of dimension n. A Riemannian metric on M is a family
of (positive definite) inner products
such that, for all differentiable vector fields X,Y on M,
defines a differentiable function M → R. The assignment of an inner product gp to each
point p of the manifold is called a metric tensor.
In a system of local coordinates on the manifold M given by n real-valued functions x1,x2,
…, xn, the vector fields
give a basis of tangent vectors at each point of M. Relative to this coordinate system, the
components of the metric tensor are, at each point p,

Riemannian manifold
307
Equivalently, the metric tensor can be written in terms of the dual basis {dx1, …, dxn} of
the cotangent bundle as
Endowed with this metric, the differentiable manifold (M,g) is a Riemannian manifold.
Examples
• With 
identified with 
, the standard metric over an open subset
is defined by
Then g is a Riemannian metric, and
Equipped with this metric, Rn is called Euclidean space of dimension n and gij
can is
called the Euclidean metric.
• Let (M,g) be a Riemannian manifold and 
be a submanifold of M. Then the
restriction of g to vectors tangent along N defines a Riemannian metric over N.
• More generally, let f:Mn→Nn+k be an immersion. Then, if N has a Riemannian metric, f
induces a Riemannian metric on M via pullback:
This is then a metric; the positive definiteness follows of the injectivity of the
differential of an immersion.
• Let (M,gM) be a Riemannian manifold, h:Mn+k→Nk be a differentiable application and
q∈N be a regular value of h (the differential dh(p) is surjective for all p∈h-1(q)). Then
N=h-1(q)⊂M is a submanifold of M of dimension n. Thus N carries the Riemannian metric
induced by inclusion.
• In particular, consider the following application :
Then, 0 is a regular value of h and
is the unit sphere 
. The metric induced from 
on 
is called the
canonical metric of 
.
• Let 
and 
be two Riemannian manifolds and consider the cartesian product
with the product structure. Furthermore, let 
and
be the natural projections. For 
, a Riemannian
metric on 
can be introduced as follows :
The identification

Riemannian manifold
308
allows us to conclude that this defines a metric on the product space.
The torus 
possesses for example a Riemannian structure obtained
by choosing the induced Riemannian metric from 
on the circle 
and then
taking the product metric. The torus 
endowed with this metric is called the flat
torus.
• Let 
be two metrics on 
. Then,
is also a metric on M.
The pullback metric
If f:M→N is a diffeomorphism and (N,gN) a Riemannian manifold, then the pullback of gN
along f is a Riemannian metric on M. The pullback is the metric f*gN on M defined for v, w ∈
TpM by
where df(v) is the pushforward of v by f.
Existence of a metric
Every paracompact differentiable manifold admits a Riemannian metric. To prove this
result, let M be a manifold and {(Uα, φ(Uα))|α∈I} a locally finite atlas of open subsets U of
M and diffeomorphisms onto open subsets of Rn
Let τα be a differentiable partition of unity subordinate to the given atlas. Then define the
metric g on M by
where gcan is the Euclidean metric. This is readily seen to be a metric on M.
Isometries
Let 
and 
be 
two 
Riemannian 
manifolds, 
and 
be 
a
diffeomorphism. Then, f is called an isometry, if
Moreover, a differentiable mapping 
is called a local isometry at 
if
there is a neighbourhood 
, 
, such that 
is a diffeomorphism
satisfying the previous relation.
Riemannian manifolds as metric spaces
A connected Riemannian manifold carries the structure of a metric space whose distance
function is the arclength of a minimizing geodesic.
Specifically, let (M,g) be a connected Riemannian manifold. Let 
be a
parametrized curve in M, which is differentiable with velocity vector c′. The length of c is
defined as

Riemannian manifold
309
By change of variables, the arclength is independent of the chosen parametrization. In
particular, a curve 
can be parametrized by its arc length. A curve is
parametrized by arclength if and only if 
for all 
.
The distance function d : M×M → [0,∞) is defined by
where the infimum extends over all differentiable curves γ beginning at p∈M and ending at
q∈M.
This function d satisfies the properties of a distance function for a metric space. The only
property which is not completely straightforward is to show that d(p,q)=0 implies that p=q.
For this property, one can use a normal coordinate system, which also allows one to show
that the topology induced by d is the same as the original topology on M.
Diameter
The diameter of a Riemannian manifold M is defined by
The diameter is invariant under global isometries. Furthermore, the Heine-Borel property
holds for (finite-dimensional) Riemannian manifolds: M is compact if and only if it is
complete and has finite diameter.
Geodesic completeness
A Riemannian manifold M is geodesically complete' if for all 
, the exponential map
is defined for all 
, i.e. if any geodesic 
starting from p is defined for all
values of the parameter 
. The Hopf-Rinow theorem asserts that M is geodesically
complete if and only if it is complete as a metric space.
If M is complete, then M is non-extendable in the sense that it is not isometric to a proper
submanifold of any other Riemannian manifold. The converse is not true, however: there
exist non-extendable manifolds which are not complete.
See also
• Riemannian geometry
• Finsler manifold
• sub-Riemannian manifold
• pseudo-Riemannian manifold
• Metric tensor
• Hermitian manifold

Riemannian manifold
310
References
• Jost, Jürgen (2008), Riemannian Geometry and Geometric Analysis (5th ed.), Berlin, New
York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3540773405
• do Carmo, Manfredo (1992), Riemannian geometry, Basel, Boston, Berlin: Birkhäuser,
ISBN 978-0-8176-3490-2 [1]
External links
• L.A. Sidorov (2001), http://eom.springer.de/R/r082180.htm|"Riemannian metric", in
Hazewinkel, Michiel, Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN
978-1556080104
References
[1] http:/ / www. amazon. fr/ Riemannian-Geometry-Manfredo-P-Carmo/ dp/ 0817634908/ ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&
s=english-books& qid=1201537059& sr=8-1
Kähler manifold
In mathematics, a Kähler manifold is a manifold with unitary structure (a U(n)-structure)
satisfying an integrability condition. In particular, it is a Riemannian manifold,[1] a complex
manifold, and a symplectic manifold, with these three structures all mutually compatible.
This threefold structure corresponds to the presentation of the unitary group as an
intersection:
Without any integrability conditions, the analogous notion is an almost Hermitian manifold.
If the Sp-structure is integrable (but the complex structure need not be), the notion is an
almost Kähler manifold; if the complex structure is integrable (but the Sp-structure need
not be), the notion is a Hermitian manifold.
Kähler manifolds are named after the mathematician Erich Kähler and are important in
algebraic geometry: they are a differential geometric generalization of complex algebraic
varieties
Definition
A manifold with a Hermitian metric is an almost Hermitian manifold; a Kähler manifold is a
manifold with a Hermitian metric that satisfies an integrability condition, which has several
equivalent formulations.
Kähler manifolds can be characterized in many ways: they are often defined as a complex
manifold with an additional structure (or a symplectic manifold with an additional
structure, or a Riemannian manifold with an additional structure).
One can summarize the connection between the three structures via 
, where h
is the Hermitian form, g is the Riemannian metric, i is the almost complex structure, and 
is the almost symplectic structure.
A Kähler metric on a complex manifold M is a hermitian metric on the tangent bundle 
satisfying a condition that has several equivalent characterizations (the most

Kähler manifold
311
geometric being that parallel transport induced by the metric gives rise to complex-linear
mappings on the tangent spaces). In terms of local coordinates it is specified in this way: if
is the hermitian metric, then the associated Kähler form defined (up to a factor of i/2) by
is closed: that is, dω = 0. If M carries such a metric it is called a Kähler manifold.
The metric on a Kähler manifold locally satisfies
for some function K, called the Kähler potential.
A Kähler manifold, the associated Kähler form and metric are called Kähler-Einstein (or
sometimes Einstein-Kähler) iff its Ricci tensor is proportional to the metric tensor, 
,
for some constant λ. This name is a reminder of Einstein's considerations about the
cosmological constant. See the article on Einstein manifolds for more details.
Examples
1. Complex Euclidean space Cn with the standard Hermitian metric is a Kähler manifold.
2. A torus Cn/Λ (Λ a full lattice) inherits a flat metric from the Euclidean metric on Cn, and
is therefore a compact Kähler manifold.
3. Every Riemannian metric on a Riemann surface is Kähler, since the condition for ω to be
closed is trivial in 2 (real) dimensions.
4. Complex projective space CPn admits a homogeneous Kähler metric, the Fubini-Study
metric. An Hermitian form in (the vector space) Cn + 1 defines a unitary subgroup
U(n + 1) in GL(n + 1,C); a Fubini-Study metric is determined up to homothety (overall
scaling) by invariance under such a U(n + 1) action. By elementary linear algebra, any
two Fubini-Study metrics are isometric under a projective automorphism of CPn, so it is
common to speak of "the" Fubini-Study metric.
5. The induced metric on a complex submanifold of a Kähler manifold is Kähler. In
particular, any Stein manifold (embedded in Cn) or algebraic variety (embedded in CPn)
is of Kähler type. This is fundamental to their analytic theory.
6. The unit complex ball Bn admits a Kähler metric called the Bergman metric which has
constant holomorphic sectional curvature.
7. Every K3 surface is Kähler (by a theorem of Y.-T. Siu).
An important subclass of Kähler manifolds are Calabi–Yau manifolds.

Kähler manifold
312
See also
• Almost complex manifold
• Hyper-Kähler manifold
• Kähler–Einstein metric
• Quaternion-Kähler manifold
• Complex Poisson manifold
Notes
[1] Gizem Karaali" Kahler-Ricci Flow On Kahler Manifolds (http:/ / pages. pomona. edu/ ~gk014747/ research/
ricciflow. pdf)"
References
• André Weil, Introduction à l'étude des variétés kählériennes (1958)
• Alan Huckleberry and Tilman Wurzbacher, eds. Infinite Dimensional Kähler Manifolds
(2001), Birkhauser Verlag, Basel ISBN 3-7643-6602-8.
• Andrei Moroianu, Lectures on Kähler Geometry (2007), London Mathematical Society
Student Texts 69, Cambridge ISBN 978-0-521-68897-0.
Calabi–Yau manifold
A section of the quintic Calabi-Yau
three-fold (3D projection)
In mathematics, Calabi–Yau manifolds are sometimes
defined as compact Kähler manifolds whose canonical
bundle is trivial, though many other similar but
inequivalent definitions are sometimes used. They were
named "Calabi–Yau spaces" by Candelas et al. (1985)
after E. Calabi (1954, 1957) who first studied them, and
S. T. Yau (1978) who proved the Calabi conjecture that
they have Ricci flat metrics. In superstring theory the
extra 
dimensions 
of 
spacetime 
are 
sometimes
conjectured to take the form of a 6-dimensional
Calabi–Yau manifold, which led to the idea of mirror
symmetry.
Definitions
There are many different inequivalent definitions of a Calabi-Yau manifold used by different
authors. This section summarizes some of the more common definitions and the relations
between them.
A Calabi–Yau n-fold or Calabi–Yau manifold of dimension n is sometimes defined as a
compact n-dimensional Kähler manifold M satisfying one of the following equivalent
conditions:
• The canonical bundle of M is trivial.
• M has a holomorphic n-form that vanishes nowhere.
• The structure group of M can be reduced from U(n) to SU(n).
• The first integral Chern class c1(M) of M vanishes.

Calabi–Yau manifold
313
• M has a Kähler metric with global holonomy contained in SU(n).
For a compact n-dimensional Kähler manifold M the following conditions are equivalent to
each other, but are weaker than the conditions above, and are sometimes used as the
definition of a Calabi-Yau manifold:
• M has vanishing first real Chern class.
• M has a Kähler metric with vanishing Ricci curvature.
• M has a Kähler metric with local holonomy contained in SU(n).
• A positive power of the canonical bundle of M is trivial.
• M has a finite cover that has trivial canonical bundle.
• M has a finite cover that is a product of a torus and a simply connected manifold with
trivial canonical bundle.
In particular if a compact Kähler manifold is simply connected then all the weak definition
above is equivalent to the stronger definition. Enriques surfaces give examples of complex
manifolds that have Ricci-flat metrics, but their canonical bundles are not trivial so they are
Calabi-Yau manifolds according to the second but not the first definition above. Their
double covers are Calabi-Yau manifolds for both defintions (in fact K3 surfaces).
By far the hardest part of proving the equivalences between the various properties above is
proving the existence of Ricci-flat metrics. This follows from Yau's proof of the Calabi
conjecture, which implies that a compact Kähler manifold with a vanishing first real Chern
class has a Kähler metric in the same class with vanishing Ricci curvature. (The class of a
Kähler metric is the cohomology class of its associated 2-form.) Calabi showed such a
metric is unique.
There are many other inequivalent definitions of Calabi-Yau manifolds that are sometimes
used, which differ in the following ways (among others):
• The first Chern class may vanish as an integral class or as a real class.
• Most definitions assert that Calabi-Yau manifolds are compact, but some allow them to be
non-compact. In the generalization to non-compact manifolds, the difference
must vanish asymptotically. Here, 
is the Kähler form associated with
the Kähler metric, 
 (Tian 1990, 1991).
• Some definitions put restrictions on the fundamental group of a Calabi-Yau manifold,
such as demanding that it be finite or trivial. Any Calabi-Yau manifold has a finite cover
that is the product of a torus and a simply-connected Calabi-Yau manifold.
• Some definitions require that the holonomy be exactly equal to SU(n) rather than a
subgroup of it, which implies that the Hodge numbers hi,0 vanish for 0 < i < dim(M).
Abelian surfaces have a (Ricci) flat metric with holonomy strictly smaller than SU(2) (in
fact 0) so are not Calabi-Yau manifolds according such definitions.
• Most definitions assume that a Calabi-Yau manifold has a Riemannian metric, but some
treat them as complex manifolds without a metric.
• Most definitions assume the manifold is non-singular, but some allow mild singularities.
While the Chern class fails to be well-defined for singular Calabi–Yau's, the canonical
bundle and canonical class may still be defined if all the singularities are Gorenstein, and
so may be used to extend the definition of a smooth Calabi–Yau manifold to a possibly
singular Calabi–Yau variety.

Calabi–Yau manifold
314
Examples
In one complex dimension, the only compact examples are tori, which form a one-parameter
family. The Ricci-flat metric on a torus is actually a flat metric, so that the holonomy is the
trivial group SU(1). A one-dimensional Calabi–Yau manifold is a complex elliptic curve, and
in particular, algebraic.
In two complex dimensions, the K3 surfaces furnish the only compact simply connected
Calabi–Yau manifolds. Non simply-connected examples are given by abelian surfaces.
Enriques surfaces and hyperelliptic surfaces have first Chern class that vanishes as an
element of the real cohomology group, but not as an element of the integral cohomology
group, so Yau's theorem about the existence of a Ricci-flat metric still applies to them but
they are sometimes not considered to be Calabi–Yau manifolds. Abelian surfaces are
sometimes excluded from the classification of being Calabi–Yau, as their holonomy (again
the trivial group) is a proper subgroup of SU(2), instead of being isomorphic to SU(2).
In three complex dimensions, classification of the possible Calabi–Yau manifolds is an open
problem, although Yau suspects that there is a finite number of families (albeit a much
bigger number than his estimate from 20 years ago). One example of a three-dimensional
Calabi-Yau manifold is a non-singular quintic threefold in CP4, which is the algebraic
variety consisting of all of the zeros of a homogeneous quintic polynomial in the
homogeneous coordinates of the CP4. Some discrete quotients of the quintic by various Z5
actions are also Calabi–Yau and have received a lot of attention in the literature. One of
these is related to the original quintic by mirror symmetry.
For every positive integer n, the zero set of a non-singular homogeneous degree n+2
polynomial in the homogeneous coordinates of the complex projective space CPn+1 is a
compact Calabi–Yau n-fold. The case n=1 describes an elliptic curve, while for n=2 one
obtains a K3 surface.
All hyper-Kähler manifolds are Calabi-Yau.
Applications in superstring theory
Calabi–Yau manifolds are important in superstring theory. In the most conventional
superstring models, ten conjectural dimensions in string theory are supposed to come as
four of which we are aware, carrying some kind of fibration with fiber dimension six.
Compactification on Calabi–Yau n-folds are important because they leave some of the
original 
supersymmetry 
unbroken. 
More 
precisely, 
in 
the 
absence 
of 
fluxes,
compactification on a Calabi–Yau 3-fold (real dimension 6) leaves one quarter of the original
supersymmetry unbroken if the holonomy is the full SU(3).
More generally, a flux-free compactification on an n-manifold with holonomy SU(n) leaves
21−n of the original supersymmetry unbroken, corresponding to 26−n supercharges in a
compactification of type II supergravity or 25−n supercharges in a compactification of type
I. When fluxes are included the supersymmetry condition instead implies that the
compactification manifold be a generalized Calabi–Yau, a notion introduced by Hitchin
(2003). These models are known as flux compactifications.
Essentially, Calabi–Yau manifolds are shapes that satisfy the requirement of space for the 
six "unseen" spatial dimensions of string theory, which may be smaller than our currently 
observable lengths as they have not yet been detected. A popular alternative known as 
large extra dimensions, which often occurs in braneworld models, is that the Calabi–Yau is

Calabi–Yau manifold
315
large but we are confined to a small subset on which it intersects a D-brane.
F-theory compactifications on various Calabi-Yau four-folds provide physicists with the a
method to find a large number of classical solution in the so-called string theory landscape.
References
• Besse, Arthur L. (1987), Einstein manifolds, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer
Grenzgebiete (3), 10, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-15279-8, OCLC
13793300 [1]
• Chan,Yat-Ming (2004)"Desingularization Of Calabi Yau 3-Folds With A Conical
Singularity [2]"
• Calabi, Eugenio (1954), "The space of Kähler metrics", Proc. Internat. Congress Math.
Amsterdam, pp. 206–207
• Calabi, Eugenio (1957), "On Kähler manifolds with vanishing canonical class", Algebraic
geometry and topology. A symposium in honor of S. Lefschetz, Princeton University
Press, pp. 78–89, MR0085583 [3]
• Greene,Brian "String Theory On Calabi-Yau Manifolds [4]"
• Candelas; Horowitz; Strominger; Witten (1985),
"http://www-lib.kek.jp/cgi-bin/img_index?8504007|Vacuum configurations for
superstrings", Nuclear Physics B 258: 46–74, doi:10.1016/0550-3213(85)90602-9 [5],
http:/ / www-lib. kek. jp/ cgi-bin/ img_index?8504007
• Gross, M.; Huybrechts, D.; Joyce, Dominic (2003), Calabi-Yau manifolds and related
geometries, Universitext, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR1963559 [6], ISBN
978-3-540-44059-8, OCLC 50695398 [7]
• Hitchin, Nigel (2003), "http://arxiv.org/abs/math.DG/0209099|Generalized Calabi-Yau
manifolds", The Quarterly Journal of Mathematics 54 (3): 281–308,
doi:10.1093/qmath/hag025 [8], MR2013140 [9], ISSN 0033-5606 [10], http:/ / arxiv. org/
abs/ math. DG/ 0209099
• Hübsch, Tristan (1994), http://www.worldscibooks.com/physics/1410.html|Calabi-Yau
Manifolds: a Bestiary for Physicists, Singapore, New York: World Scientific, ISBN
981-02-1927-X, OCLC 34989218 [11], http:/ / www. worldscibooks. com/ physics/ 1410.
html
• Im,Mee Seong (2008)"Singularities-in-Calabi-Yau-varieties.pdf Singularities in Calabi-Yau
varieties [12]"
• Joyce, Dominic (2000), Compact Manifolds with Special Holonomy, Oxford University
Press, ISBN 978-0-19-850601-0, OCLC 43864470 [13]
• Tian, Gang; Yau, Shing-Tung (1990), "Complete Kähler manifolds with zero Ricci
curvature, I", Amer. Math. Soc. 3 (3): 579–609, doi:10.2307/1990928 [14]
• Tian, Gang; Yau, Shing-Tung (1991), "Complete Kähler manifolds with zero Ricci
curvature, II", Invent. Math. 106 (1): 27–60, doi:10.1007/BF01243902 [15]
• Yau, Shing Tung (1978), "On the Ricci curvature of a compact Kähler manifold and the
complex Monge-Ampère equation. I", Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics
31 (3): 339–411, doi:10.1002/cpa.3160310304 [16], MR480350 [17], ISSN 0010-3640 [18]

Calabi–Yau manifold
316
External links
• Calabi-Yau Homepage [19] is an interactive reference which describes many examples and
classes of Calabi–Yau manifolds and also the physical theories in which they appear.
• Spinning Calabi–Yau Space video. [20]
• Calabi–Yau Space [21] by Andrew J. Hanson with additional contributions by Jeff Bryant,
Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
• Eric W. Weisstein, Calabi-Yau Space [22] at MathWorld.
• Yau, S. T., http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Calabi-Yau_manifold|Calabi-Yau manifold,
Scholarpedia, http:/ / www. scholarpedia. org/ article/ Calabi-Yau_manifold
References
[1] http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 13793300
[2] http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ math/ pdf/ 0410/ 0410260v1. pdf
[3] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0085583
[4] http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ hep-th/ pdf/ 9702/ 9702155v1. pdf
[5] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016%2F0550-3213%2885%2990602-9
[6] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=1963559
[7] http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 50695398
[8] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1093%2Fqmath%2Fhag025
[9] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=2013140
[10] http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0033-5606
[11] http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 34989218
[12] http:/ / silver. ima. umn. edu/ 2007-2008/ SP7. 14-25. 08/ activities/ Im-Mee%20Seong/
[13] http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 43864470
[14] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1990928
[15] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF01243902
[16] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1002%2Fcpa. 3160310304
[17] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=480350
[18] http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0010-3640
[19] http:/ / www. th. physik. uni-bonn. de/ th/ Supplements/ cy. html
[20] http:/ / members. wri. com/ jeffb/ visualization/ stringtheory2. shtml
[21] http:/ / demonstrations. wolfram. com/ CalabiYauSpace/
[22] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ Calabi-YauSpace. html

Pseudo- Riemannian manifold
317
Pseudo- Riemannian manifold
In 
differential 
geometry, 
a 
pseudo-Riemannian 
manifold 
(also 
called 
a
semi-Riemannian manifold) is a generalization of a Riemannian manifold. It is one of
many mathematical objects named after Bernhard Riemann. The key difference between a
Riemannian manifold and a pseudo-Riemannian manifold is that on a pseudo-Riemannian
manifold the metric tensor need not be positive-definite. Instead a weaker condition of
nondegeneracy is imposed.
Introduction
Manifolds
Main articles: Manifold, differentiable manifolds
In differential geometry a differentiable manifold is a space which is locally similar to a
Euclidean space. In an 
-dimensional Euclidean space any point can be specified by 
real
numbers. These are called the coordinates of the point.
An 
-dimensional differentiable manifold is a generalisation of 
-dimensional Euclidean
space. In a manifold it may only be possible to define coordinates locally. This is achieved
by defining coordinate patches: subsets of the manifold which can be mapped into 
-dimensional Euclidean space.
See Manifold, differentiable manifold, coordinate patch for more details.
Tangent spaces and metric tensors
Main articles: Tangent space, metric tensor
Associated with each point 
in an 
-dimensional differentiable manifold 
is a tangent
space (denoted 
). This is an 
-dimensional vector space whose elements can be
thought of as equivalence classes of curves passing through the point 
.
A metric tensor is a non-degenerate, smooth, symmetric, bilinear map which assigns a real
number to pairs of tangent vectors at each tangent space of the manifold. Denoting the
metric tensor by 
we can express this as 
.
The map is symmetric and bilinear so if 
are tangent vectors at a point 
in
the manifold 
then we have
•
•
for some real number 
.
That 
is non-degenerate means there are no non-zero 
such that 
for all 
.
Metric signatures
For an 
-dimensional manifold the metric tensor (in a fixed coordinate system) has 
 
eigenvalues. If the metric is non-degenerate then none of these eigenvalues are zero. The 
signature of the metric denotes the number of positive and negative eigenvalues, this 
quantity is independent of the chosen coordinate system by Sylvester's rigidity theorem and 
locally non-decreasing. If the metric has 
positive eigenvalues and 
negative eigenvalues

Pseudo- Riemannian manifold
318
then the metric signature is 
. For a non-degenerate metric 
.
Definition
A pseudo-Riemannian manifold 
is a differentiable manifold 
equipped with a
non-degenerate, smooth, symmetric metric tensor 
which, unlike a Riemannian metric,
need not be positive-definite, but must be non-degenerate. Such a metric is called a
pseudo-Riemannian metric and its values can be positive, negative or zero.
The signature of a pseudo-Riemannian metric is 
where both 
and 
are
non-negative.
Lorentzian manifold
A Lorentzian manifold is an important special case of a pseudo-Riemannian manifold in
which the signature of the metric is 
(or sometimes 
, see sign
convention). Such metrics are called Lorentzian metrics. They are named after the
physicist Hendrik Lorentz.
Applications in physics
After Riemannian manifolds, Lorentzian manifolds form the most important subclass of
pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. They are important because of their physical applications to
the theory of general relativity.
A principal assumption of general relativity is that spacetime can be modeled as a
4-dimensional Lorentzian manifold of signature 
(or equivalently (1,3)). Unlike
Riemannian manifolds with positive-definite metrics, a signature of 
or 
allows
tangent vectors to be classified into timelike, null or spacelike (see Causal structure).
Properties of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds
Just as Euclidean space 
can be thought of as the model Riemannian manifold,
Minkowski space 
with the flat Minkowski metric is the model Lorentzian manifold.
Likewise, the model space for a pseudo-Riemannian manifold of signature 
is 
with
the metric: 
Some 
basic 
theorems 
of 
Riemannian 
geometry 
can 
be 
generalized 
to 
the
pseudo-Riemannian case. In particular, the fundamental theorem of Riemannian geometry
is true of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds as well. This allows one to speak of the Levi-Civita
connection on a pseudo-Riemannian manifold along with the associated curvature tensor.
On the other hand, there are many theorems in Riemannian geometry which do not hold in
the generalized case. For example, it is not true that every smooth manifold admits a
pseudo-Riemannian metric of a given signature; there are certain topological obstructions.
Furthermore, 
a 
submanifold 
of 
a 
pseudo-Riemannian 
manifold 
need 
not 
be 
a
pseudo-Riemannian manifold.

Pseudo- Riemannian manifold
319
See also
• Riemannian manifold
• Causal structure
• Metric (mathematics)
• Metric signature
Hypersurface
For differential geometry usage, see glossary of differential geometry and topology.
In geometry, a hypersurface is a generalization of the concept of hyperplane. Suppose an
enveloping manifold M has n dimensions; then any submanifold of M of n − 1 dimensions is
a hypersurface. Equivalently, the codimension of a hypersurface is one.
In algebraic geometry, a hypersurface in projective space of dimension n is an algebraic set
that is purely of dimension n − 1. It is then defined by a single equation F = 0, a
homogeneous polynomial in the homogeneous coordinates. (It may have singularities, so
not in fact be a submanifold in the strict sense.)
See also
• hypersphere
• hyperspace
CR manifold
In mathematics, a CR manifold is a differentiable manifold together with a geometric
structure modeled on that of a real hypersurface in a complex vector space, or more
generally modeled on an edge of a wedge.
Formally, a CR manifold is a differentiable manifold M together with a preferred complex
distribution L, or in other words a subbundle of the complexified tangent bundle CTM = TM
⊗ C such that
•
(L is formally integrable)
•
(L is almost Lagrangian).
The bundle L is called a CR structure on the manifold M.
Introduction and Motivation
The notion of a CR structure attempts to describe intrinsically the property of being a
hypersurface in complex space by studying the properties of holomorphic vector fields
which are tangent to the hypersurface.
Suppose for instance that M is the hypersurface of C2 given by the equation
where z and w are the usual complex coordinates on C2. The holomorphic tangent bundle of
C2 consists of all linear combinations of the vectors

CR manifold
320
The distribution L on M consists of all combinations of these vectors which are tangent to
M. In detail, the tangent vectors must annihilate the defining equation for M, so L consists
of complex scalar multiples of
Note that L gives a CR structure on M, for [L,L] = 0 (since L is one-dimensional) and
since ∂/∂z and ∂/∂w are linearly independent of their complex conjugates.
More generally, suppose that M is a real hypersurface in Cn, with defining equation F(z1, ...,
zn) = 0. Then the CR structure L consists of those linear combinations of the basic
holomorphic vectors on Cn:
which annihilate the defining function. In this case, 
for the same reason as
before. Moreover, [L,L] ⊂ L since the commutator of vector fields annihilating F is again a
vector field annihilating F.
Embedded and abstract CR manifolds
There is a sharp contrast between the theories of embedded CR manifolds (hypersurface
and edges of wedges in complex space) and abstract CR manifolds (those given by the
Lagrangian distribution L). Many of the formal geometrical features are similar. These
include:
• A notion of convexity (supplied by the Levi form)
• A differential operator, analogous to the Dolbeault operator, and an associated
cohomology (the tangential Cauchy-Riemann complex).
Embedded CR manifolds possess some additional structure, though: a Neumann and
Dirichlet problem for the Cauchy-Riemann equations.
This article first treats the geometry of embedded CR manifolds, shows how to defined
these structures intrinsically, and then generalizes these to the abstract setting.
Embedded CR manifolds
Preliminaries
Embedded CR manifolds are, first and foremost, submanifolds of Cn. Define a pair of
subbundles of the complexified tangent bundle C ⊗ TC'n by:
• T(1,0)Cn consists of the complex vectors annihilating the antiholomorphic functions. In the
holomorphic coordinates:
• T(0,1)Cn consists of the complex vectors annihilating the holomorphic functions. In
coordinates:

CR manifold
321
Also relevant are the characteristic annihilators from the Dolbeault complex:
• Ω(1,0)Cn = (T(0,1)Cn)⊥. In coordinates,
• Ω(0,1)Cn = (T(1,0)Cn)⊥. In coordinates,
The exterior products of these are denoted by the self-evident notation Ω(p,q), and the
Dolbeault operator and its complex conjugate map between these spaces via
Furthermore, there is a decomposition of the usual exterior derivative via 
.
Real submanifolds of complex space
Let M ⊂ Cn be a real submanifold, defined locally as the locus of a system of smooth
real-valued functions
F1 = 0, F2 = 0, ..., Fk = 0.
Suppose that this system has maximal rank, in the sense that the differentials satisfy the
following independence condition:
Note that this condition is strictly stronger than needed to apply the implicit function
theorem: in particular, M is a manifold of real dimension 2n - k. We say that M is an
embedded CR manifold of CR codimension k. In most applications, k = 1, in which case
the manifold is said to be of hypersurface type.
Let L ⊂ T(1,0)Cn|M be the subbundle of vectors annihilating all of the defining functions F1,
..., Fk. Note that, by the usual considerations for integrable distributions on hypersurfaces,
L is involutive. Moreover, the independence condition implies that L is a bundle of constant
rank n - k.
Henceforth, suppose that k = 1 (so that the CR manifold is of hypersurface type), unless
otherwise noted.
The Levi form
Let M be a CR manifold of hypersurface type with single defining function F = 0. The Levi
form of M is the Hermitian 2-form
This determines a metric on L. M is said to be strictly pseudoconvex if h is positive
definite (or pseudoconvex in case h is positive semidefinite). Many of the analytic existence
and uniqueness results in the theory of CR manifolds depend on the strict pseudoconvexity
of the Levi form.
This nomenclature comes from the study of pseudoconvex domains: M is the boundary of a
(strictly) pseudoconvex domain in Cn if and only if it is (strictly) pseudoconvex as a CR
manifold. (See plurisubharmonic functions and Stein manifold.)

CR manifold
322
Abstract CR structures
An abstract CR structure on a manifold M of dimension n consists of a subbundle L of the
complexified tangent bundle which is formally integrable, in the sene that [L,L] ⊂ L, which
is linearly independent of its complex conjugate. The CR codimension of the CR structure
is k = n - 2 dim L. In case k = 1, the CR structure is said to be of hypersurface type. Most
examples of abstract CR structures are of hypersurface type, unless otherwise made
explicit.
The Levi form and pseudoconvexity
Suppose that M is a CR manifold of hypersurface type. The Levi form is the vector valued
form, defined on L, with values in the line bundle
given by
h defines a sesquilinear form on L since it does not depend on how v and w are extended to
sections of L, by the integrability condition. This form extends to a hermitian form on the
bundle 
by the same expression. The extended form is also sometimes referred to as
the Levi form.
The Levi form can alternatively be characterized in terms of duality. Consider the line
subbundle of the complex cotangent bundle annihilating V
For each local section α∈Γ(H0M), let
The form hα is a complex-valued hermitian form associated to α.
Generalizations of the Levi form exist when the manifold is not of hypersurface type, in
which case the form no longer assumes values in a line bundle, but rather in a vector
bundle. One may then speak, not of a Levi form, but of a collection of Levi forms for the
structure.
Characteristic ideals
The tangential Cauchy–Riemann complex
Examples
The canonical example of a CR manifold is the real 
sphere as a submanifold of 
. The bundle 
described above is given by
where 
is the bundle of holomorphic vectors. The real form of this is given by
, the bundle given at a point 
concretely in terms of the complex
structure, 
, on 
by
and the almost complex structure on 
is just the restriction of 
.

CR manifold
323
References
• Boggess, Albert (1991). CR Manifolds and the Tangential Cauchy Riemann Complex. CRC
Press.
• Hill, D. and Nacinovich, M. (1995). "Duality and distribution cohomology of CR manifolds
[1]". Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa 22 (2): 315–339.
• Chern S. S. and Moser, J.K. (1974). "Real hypersurfaces in complex manifolds". Acta
Math. 133: 219–271. doi:10.1007/BF02392146 [2].
• Harvey, F.R. and Lawson, H.B., Jr. (1978). "On boundaries of complex analytic varieties".
Ann. Math.: 223–290.
References
[1] http:/ / www. numdam. org/ numdam-bin/ fitem?id=ASNSP_1995_4_22_2_315_0
[2] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF02392146
Symplectic manifold
In mathematics, a symplectic manifold is a smooth manifold, M, equipped with a closed,
nondegenerate, 2-form, ω, called the symplectic form. The study of symplectic manifolds is
called symplectic geometry or symplectic topology. Symplectic manifolds arise naturally in
abstract formulations of classical mechanics and analytical mechanics as the cotangent
bundles of manifolds, e.g., in the Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics, which
provides one of the major motivations for the field: The set of all possible configurations of
a system is modelled as a manifold, and this manifold's cotangent bundle describes the
phase space of the system.
Any real-valued differentiable function, H, on a symplectic manifold can serve as an energy
function or Hamiltonian. Associated to any Hamiltonian is a Hamiltonian vector field; the
integral curves of the Hamiltonian vector field are solutions to the Hamilton–Jacobi
equations. The Hamiltonian vector field defines a flow on the symplectic manifold, called a
Hamiltonian flow or symplectomorphism. By Liouville's theorem, Hamiltonian flows
preserve the volume form on the phase space.
Definition
A symplectic form on a manifold, M, is a nondegenerate closed two-form, ω. Explicitly,
nondegeneracy of the form means that, relative to any given basis, Xi, of the tangent space of M
at a point, the matrix
is nonsingular (meaning that its determinant is non-zero). Note that Ω, being a skew-symmetric non-singular
matrix, must have an even number of rows and columns. Thus the dimension of M is necessarily an even number
2n. In intrinsic terms, ω is nondegenerate if and only if its n-th exterior power is non-zero:
Furthermore, ω is required to be closed, meaning that 
where d is the exterior derivative.

Symplectic manifold
324
Linear symplectic manifold 
There is a standard 'local' model, namely R2n with
and 
for i = 1, ..., n,
for all j, k = 1, ..., n with j ≠ k − n and j ≠ k + n.
This is an example of a linear symplectic space. See symplectic vector space. A proposition known as Darboux's
theorem says that locally any symplectic manifold resembles this simple one.
Volume form 
Directly from the definition, one can show that every symplectic manifold, M is of even dimension 2n and ωn is a
nowhere vanishing form, the symplectic volume form. It follows that every symplectic manifold is canonically
oriented and comes with a canonical measure, the Liouville measure (often normalized to be ωn / n!).
A version of Liouville's theorem asserts that the Liouville measure is invariant under the Hamiltonian flows.
Contact manifolds 
Closely related to symplectic manifolds are the odd-dimensional manifolds known as contact manifolds. Any
2n+1-dimensional contact manifold, (M, α), gives rise to a 2n+2-dimensional symplectic manifold, (M × R, d(et
α)).
Lagrangian and other submanifolds 
There are several natural geometric notions of submanifold of a symplectic manifold. There are symplectic
submanifolds (potentially of any even dimension), where the symplectic form is required to induce a symplectic
form on the submanifold. On isotropic submanifolds, the symplectic form restricts to zero, i.e. each tangent
space is an isotropic subspace of the ambient manifold's tangent space. Similarly, if each tangent subspace to a
submanifold is coisotropic (the dual of an isotropic subspace), the submanifold is called coisotropic.
The most important case of the above is that of Lagrangian submanifolds, which are isotropic submanifolds of
maximal dimension, namely half the dimension of the ambient manifold. Lagrangian submanifolds arise naturally
in many physical and geometric situations. One major example is that the graph of a symplectomorphism in the
product symplectic manifold (M × M, ω × −ω) is Lagrangian. Their intersections display rigidity properties not
possessed by smooth manifolds; the Arnold conjecture gives the sum of the submanifold's Betti numbers as a lower
bound for the number of self intersections of a smooth Lagrangian submanifold, rather than the Euler
characteristic in the smooth case.
Special cases and generalizations 
• A symplectic manifold endowed with a metric that is compatible with the symplectic form is an almost Kähler
manifold in the sense that the tangent bundle has an almost complex structure, but this need not be integrable.
Symplectic manifolds are special cases of a Poisson manifold. The definition of a symplectic manifold requires
that the symplectic form be non-degenerate everywhere, but if this condition is violated, the manifold may still
be a Poisson manifold.
• A multisymplectic manifold of degree k is a manifold equipped with a closed nondegenerate k-form. See F.
Cantrijn, L. A. Ibort and M. de León, J. Austral. Math. Soc. Ser. A 66 (1999), no. 3, 303-330.
• A polysymplectic manifold is a Legendre bundle provided with a polysymplectic tangent-valued 
-form; it is utilized in Hamiltonian field theory. See: G. Giachetta, L. Mangiarotti and G. Sardanashvily, 
Covariant Hamiltonian equations for field theory, Journal of Physics A32 (1999) 6629-6642; arXiv:

Symplectic manifold
325
hep-th/9904062 [1]
.
See also 
• Poisson bracket
• Symplectic topology
• Symplectic vector space
• Almost complex manifold
• Almost symplectic manifold
• Symplectic group
• Symplectic matrix
• Tautological one-form
• Wirtinger inequality (2-forms)
References 
• Ü. Lumiste (2001), http://eom.springer.de/s/s091860.htm|"Symplectic Structure", in Hazewinkel, Michiel,
Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 978-1556080104
• Dusa McDuff and D. Salamon: Introduction to Symplectic Topology (1998) Oxford Mathematical Monographs,
ISBN 0-19-850451-9.
• Ralph Abraham and Jerrold E. Marsden, Foundations of Mechanics, (1978) Benjamin-Cummings, London ISBN
0-8053-0102-X See section 3.2.
• Alan Weinstein, "Symplectic manifolds and their Lagrangian submanifolds", Adv. Math. 6 (1971), 329–346. 
• Examples of symplectic manifolds [2] 
on PlanetMath
References
[1] http:/ / xxx. lanl. gov/ abs/ hep-th/ 9904062
[2] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=3672

Betti number
326
Betti number
In algebraic topology, the Betti numbers can be used to distinguish topological spaces.
Intuitively, the first Betti number counts the maximum number of cuts that can be made
without dividing the space into two pieces.
Each Betti number is a natural number or infinity. For the most reasonable
finite-dimensional spaces (such as compact manifolds, finite simplicial complexes or CW
complexes), the sequence of Betti numbers is 0 from some points onwards (Betti numbers
vanish about the dimension of a space), and they are all finite.
The term "Betti numbers" was coined by Henri Poincaré after Enrico Betti.
Definition
For a non-negative integer 
, the 
-th Betti number 
of the space 
is defined as
the rank of the abelian group 
, the 
-th homology group of 
. Equivalently, one
can define it as the vector space dimension of 
, since the homology group in this
case is a vector space over 
. The universal coefficient theorem, in a very simple case,
shows that these definitions are the same.
More generally, given a field 
one can define 
, the 
-th Betti number with
coefficients in 
, as the vector space dimension of 
.
Example: the first Betti number in graph theory
In topological graph theory the first Betti number of a graph G with n vertices, m edges and
k connected components equals
m − n + k.
This may be proved straightforwardly by mathematical induction on the number of edges. A
new edge either increments the number of 1-cycles or decrements the number of connected
components.
See cyclomatic complexity for an application of the first Betti number in software
engineering.
Properties
The (rational) Betti numbers 
do not take into account any torsion in the homology
groups, but they are very useful basic topological invariants. In the most intuitive terms,
they allow one to count the number of holes of different dimensions. For a circle, the first
Betti number is 1. For a general pretzel, the first Betti number is twice the number of holes.
In the case of a finite simplicial complex the homology groups 
are
finitely-generated, and so has a finite rank. Also the group is 0 when 
exceeds the top
dimension of a simplex of 
.
For a finite CW-complex K we have
where 
denotes Euler characteristic of K and any field F.
For any two spaces X and Y we have

Betti number
327
where 
denotes the Poincaré polynomial of X, (more generally, the Poincaré series, for
infinite-dimensional spaces), i.e. the generating function of the Betti numbers of X:
see Künneth theorem.
If X is n-dimensional manifold, there is symmetry interchanging k and n − k, for any k:
under conditions (a closed and oriented manifold); see Poincaré duality.
The dependence on the field F is only through its characteristic. If the homology groups are
torsion-free, the Betti numbers are independent of F. The connection of p-torsion and the
Betti number for characteristic p, for p a prime number, is given in detail by the universal
coefficient theorem (based on Tor functors, but in a simple case).
Examples
1. The Betti number sequence for a circle is 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, ...;
the Poincaré polynomial is 
.
2. The Betti number sequence for a two-torus is 1, 2, 1, 0, 0, 0, ...;
the Poincaré polynomial is 
.
3. The Betti number sequence for a three-torus is 1, 3, 3, 1, 0, 0, 0, ... .
the Poincaré polynomial is 
.
Similarly, for an n-torus, the Poincaré polynomial is 
(by the Künneth theorem), so
the Betti numbers are the binomial coefficients.
It is possible for spaces that are infinite-dimensional in an essential way to have an infinite
sequence of non-zero Betti numbers. An example is the infinite-dimensional complex
projective space, with sequence 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, ... that is periodic, with period length 2. In this
case the Poincaré function is not a polynomial but rather an infinite series 
, which, being a geometric series, can be expressed as the rational function
.
More generally, any sequence that is periodic can be expressed as a sum of geometric
series, 
generalizing 
the 
above 
(e.g., 
has 
generating 
function
), and more generally linear recursive sequences are exactly the
sequences generated by rational functions; thus the Poincaré series is expressible as a
rational function if and only if the sequence of Betti numbers is a linear recursive sequence.
Relationship with dimensions of spaces of differential
forms
In geometric situations when 
is a closed manifold, the importance of the Betti numbers
may arise from a different direction, namely that they predict the dimensions of vector
spaces of closed differential forms modulo exact differential forms. The connection with the
definition given above is via three basic results, de Rham's theorem and Poincaré duality
(when those apply), and the universal coefficient theorem of homology theory.

Betti number
328
There is an alternate reading, namely that the Betti numbers give the dimensions of spaces
of harmonic forms. This requires also the use of some of the results of Hodge theory, about
the Hodge Laplacian.
In this setting, Morse theory gives a set of inequalities for alternating sums of Betti
numbers in terms of a corresponding alternating sum of the number of critical points 
of
a Morse function of a given index:
Witten gave an explanation of these inequalities by using the Morse function to modify the
exterior derivative in the de Rham complex.
References
• F.W. Warner, Foundations of differentiable manifolds and Lie groups, Springer (1983).
• J.Roe, Elliptic Operators, Topology, and Asymptotic Methods, Second Edition (Research
Notes in Mathematics Series 395), Chapman and Hall (1998).
Euler characteristic
In mathematics, and more specifically in algebraic topology and polyhedral combinatorics,
the Euler characteristic (or Euler-Poincaré characteristic) is a topological invariant, a
number that describes a topological space's shape or structure regardless of the way it is
bent. It is commonly denoted by 
(Greek letter chi).
The Euler characteristic was originally defined for polyhedra and used to prove various
theorems about them, including the classification of the Platonic solids. Leonhard Euler, for
whom the concept is named, was responsible for much of this early work. In modern
mathematics, the Euler characteristic arises from homology and connects to many other
invariants.
Polyhedra
The Euler characteristic 
was classically defined for the surfaces of polyhedra,
according to the formula
where V, E, and F are respectively the numbers of vertices (corners), edges and faces in the
given polyhedron. Any convex polyhedron's surface has Euler characteristic
This result is known as Euler's formula. A proof is given below.
Name
Image
Vertices
V
Edges
E
Faces
F
Euler characteristic:
V − E + F
Tetrahedron
4
6
4
2
Hexahedron or cube
8
12
6
2

Euler characteristic
329
Octahedron
6
12
8
2
Dodecahedron
20
30
12
2
Icosahedron
12
30
20
2
The surfaces of nonconvex polyhedra can have various Euler characteristics:
Name
Image
Vertices
V
Edges
E
Faces
F
Euler characteristic:
V − E + F
Tetrahemihexahedron
6
12
7
1
Octahemioctahedron
12
24
12
0
Cubohemioctahedron
12
24
10
−2
Great icosahedron
12
30
20
2
Planar graphs
The Euler characteristic can be defined for planar graphs by the same 
formula
as for polyhedral surfaces, where F is the number of faces in the graph, including the
exterior face.
The Euler characteristic of any planar graph is 2. For via stereographic projection the plane
maps to the two-dimensional sphere, such that the graph maps to a polygonal
decomposition of the sphere, which has Euler characteristic 2. This viewpoint is implicit in
Cauchy's proof of Euler's formula given below.
Proof of Euler's formula
First steps of the proof in the case of a
cube
The first rigorous proof of Euler's formula, given by a
20-year-old Cauchy, is as follows.
Remove one face of the polyhedral surface. By pulling
the edges of the missing face away from each other,
deform all the rest into a planar graph of points and
curves, as illustrated by the first of the three graphs for
the special case of the cube. (The assumption that the polyhedral surface is homeomorphic 
to the sphere at the beginning is what makes this possible.) After this deformation, the

Euler characteristic
330
regular faces are generally not regular anymore. The number of vertices and edges has
remained the same, but the number of faces has been reduced by 1. As such, proving
Euler's formula for the polyhedron reduces to proving V − E + F =1 for this deformed,
planar object.
If there is a face with more than three sides, draw a diagonal—that is, a curve through the
face connecting two vertices that aren't connected yet. This adds one edge and one face
and does not change the number of vertices, so it does not change the quantity V − E + F.
Continue adding edges in this manner until all of the faces are triangular.
Apply repeatedly either of the following two transformations:
1. Remove a triangle with only one edge adjacent to the exterior, as illustrated by the
second graph. This decreases the number of edges and faces by one each and does not
change the number of vertices, so it preserves V − E + F.
2. Remove a triangle with two edges shared by the exterior of the network, as illustrated
by the third graph. Each triangle removal removes a vertex, two edges and one face, so it
preserves V − E + F.
Repeat these two steps, one after the other, until only one triangle remains.
At this point the lone triangle has V = 3, E = 3, and F = 1, so that V − E + F = 1. Since
each of the two above transformation steps preserved this quantity, we have shown V − E +
F = 1 for the deformed, planar object thus demonstrating V − E + F = 2 for the polyhedron.
This proves the theorem.
For additional proofs, see Nineteen Proofs of Euler's Formula [1] by David Eppstein.
Multiple proofs, including their flaws and limitations, are used as examples in Proofs and
Refutations by Imre Lakatos.[2]
Topological definition
The polyhedral surfaces discussed above are, in modern language, two-dimensional finite
CW-complexes. (When only triangular faces are used, they are two-dimensional finite
simplicial complexes.) In general, for any finite CW-complex, the Euler characteristic can
be defined as the alternating sum
where 
denotes the number of cells of dimension 
in the complex.
More generally still, for any topological space, we can define the nth Betti number 
as
the rank of the n-th singular homology group. The Euler characteristic can then be
defined as the alternating sum
This quantity is well-defined if the Betti numbers are all finite and if they are zero beyond a
certain index 
. This definition subsumes the previous ones.

Euler characteristic
331
Properties
Homotopy invariance
Since the homology is a topological invariant (in fact, a homotopy invariant — two
topological spaces that are homotopy equivalent have isomorphic homology groups), so is
the Euler characteristic.
For example, any convex polyhedron is homeomorphic to the three-dimensional ball, so its
surface is homeomorphic (hence homotopy equivalent) to the two-dimensional sphere,
which has Euler characteristic 2. This explains why convex polyhedra have Euler
characteristic 2.
Inclusion-exclusion principle
If M and N are any two topological spaces, then the Euler characteristic of their disjoint
union is the sum of their Euler characteristics, since homology is additive under disjoint
union:
More generally, if M and N are subspaces of a larger space X, then so are their union and
intersection. 
In 
some 
cases, 
the 
Euler 
characteristic 
obeys 
a 
version 
of 
the
inclusion-exclusion principle:
This is true in the following cases:
• if M and N are an excisive couple. In particular, if the interiors of M and N inside the
union still cover the union.[3]
• if X is a locally compact space, and one uses Euler characteristics with compact supports,
no assumptions on M or N are needed.
• if X is a stratified space all of whose strata are even dimensional, the inclusion-exclusion
principle holds if M and N are unions of strata. This applies in particular if M and N are
subvarieties of a complex algebraic variety.[4]
In general, the inclusion-exclusion principle is false. A counterexample is given by taking X
to be the real line, M a subset consisting of one point and N the complement of M.
Product property
Also, the Euler characteristic of any product space M × N is
These addition and multiplication properties are also enjoyed by cardinality of sets. In this
way, the Euler characteristic can be viewed as a generalisation of cardinality; see [5].
Covering spaces
Similarly, for an k-sheeted covering space 
one has
More generally, for a ramified covering space, the Euler characteristic of the cover can be
computed from the above, with a correction factor for the ramification points, which yields
the Riemann–Hurwitz formula.

Euler characteristic
332
Fibration property
The product property holds much more generally, for fibrations with certain conditions.
If 
is a fibration with fiber F, with the base B path-connected, and the fibration is
orientable over a field K, then the Euler characteristic with coefficients in the field K
satisfies the product property:[6]
This includes product spaces and covering spaces as special cases, and can be proven by
the Serre spectral sequence on homology of a fibration.
For fiber bundles, this can also be understood in terms of a transfer map
– note that this is a lifting and goes "the wrong way" – whose
composition with the projection map 
is multiplication by the Euler
class of the fiber:[7] 
Other properties
As a corollary of Poincaré duality, the Euler characteristic of any closed odd-dimensional
manifold is zero. This applies more generally to any compact stratified space all of whose
strata are odd-dimensional.
Relations to other invariants
The Euler characteristic of a closed orientable surface can be calculated from its genus g
(the number of tori in a connected sum decomposition of the surface; intuitively, the
number of "handles") as
The Euler characteristic of a closed non-orientable surface can be calculated from its
non-orientable genus k (the number of real projective planes in a connected sum
decomposition of the surface) as
For closed smooth manifolds, the Euler characteristic coincides with the Euler number,
i.e., the Euler class of its tangent bundle evaluated on the fundamental class of a manifold.
The Euler class, in turn, relates to all other characteristic classes of vector bundles.
For closed Riemannian manifolds, the Euler characteristic can also be found by integrating
the curvature; see the Gauss-Bonnet theorem for the two-dimensional case and the
generalized Gauss-Bonnet theorem for the general case.
A discrete analog of the Gauss-Bonnet theorem is Descartes' theorem that the "total defect"
of a polyhedron, measured in full circles, is the Euler characteristic of the polyhedron; see
defect (geometry).
Hadwiger's theorem characterizes the Euler characteristic as the unique (up to scalar
multiplication) translation-invariant, finitely additive, not-necessarily-nonnegative set
function defined on finite unions of compact convex sets in Rn that is "homogeneous of
degree 0".

Euler characteristic
333
Examples
The Euler characteristic can be calculated easily for general surfaces by finding a
polygonization of the surface (that is, a description as a CW-complex) and using the above
definitions.
Name
Image
Euler characteristic
Interval
1
Circle
0
Disk
1
Sphere
2
Torus
(Product of two circles)
0
Double torus
-2
Triple torus
-4
Real projective plane
1
Möbius strip
0

Euler characteristic
334
Klein bottle
0
Two spheres (not connected)
(Disjoint union of two spheres)
 
2 + 2 = 4
Any contractible space (that is, one homotopy equivalent to a point) has trivial homology,
meaning that the 0th Betti number is 1 and the others 0. Therefore its Euler characteristic
is 1. This case includes Euclidean space 
of any dimension, as well as the solid unit ball
in any Euclidean space — the one-dimensional interval, the two-dimensional disk, the
three-dimensional ball, etc.
The n-dimensional sphere has Betti number 1 in dimensions 0 and n, and all other Betti
numbers 0. Hence its Euler characteristic is 
— that is, either 0 or 2.
The n-dimensional real projective space is the quotient of the n-sphere by the antipodal
map. It follows that its Euler characteristic is exactly half that of the corresponding sphere
— either 0 or 1.
The n-dimensional torus is the product space of n circles. Its Euler characteristic is 0, by
the product property.
An application: Why does a football/soccer ball have 12
pentagons?
An application of the Euler characteristic is the answer to the question: How many
pentagons and hexagons does it take to make a football/soccer ball? Assume we use 
hexagons and 
pentagons; then we have 
faces. Every pentagon (hexagon)
has 5 vertices (6 vertices), and each one is shared between 3 faces, hence we have
vertices. Similarly, every pentagon (hexagon) has 5 edges (6 edges), and
each one is shared between 2 faces, hence we have 
edges. The Euler
characteristic is therefore
Since the sphere 
has Euler characteristic 2, it must be that 
. The result is that
we always need 12 pentagons on a football/soccer ball; the number of hexagons is in
principle unconstrained (but for a real football/soccer ball one obviously chooses a number
that makes the ball as spherical as possible). One can also apply this result to Fullerenes.

Euler characteristic
335
Generalizations
For every combinatorial cell complex, one defines the Euler characteristic as the number of
0-cells, minus the number of 1-cells, plus the number of 2-cells, etc., if this alternating sum
is finite. In particular, the Euler characteristic of a finite set is simply its cardinality, and
the Euler characteristic of a graph is the number of vertices minus the number of edges.
More generally, one can define the Euler characteristic of any chain complex to be the
alternating sum of the ranks of the homology groups of the chain complex.
A version used in algebraic geometry is as follows. For any sheaf 
on a projective scheme
X, one defines its Euler characteristic
where 
is the dimension of the i-th sheaf cohomology group of 
.
Another generalization of the concept of Euler characteristic on manifolds comes from
orbifolds. While every manifold has an integer Euler characteristic, an orbifold can have a
fractional Euler characteristic. For example, the teardrop orbifold has Euler characteristic
1 + 1/p, where p is a prime number corresponding to the cone angle 2π / p.
The concept of Euler characteristic of a bounded finite poset is another generalization,
important in combinatorics. A poset is "bounded" if it has smallest and largest elements;
call them 0 and 1. The Euler characteristic of such a poset is defined as the integer μ(0,1),
where μ is the Möbius function in that poset's incidence algebra.
This can be further generalized by defining a Q-valued Euler characteristic for certain finite
categories, a notion compatible with the Euler characteristics of graphs, orbifolds and
posets mentioned above. In this setting, the Euler characteristic of a finite group or monoid
G is 1/|G|, and the Euler characteristic of a finite groupoid is the sum of 1/|Gi|, where we
picked one representative group Gi for each connected component of the groupoid.[8]
See also
• List of uniform polyhedra
• List of topics named after Leonhard Euler
Notes
[1] http:/ / www. ics. uci. edu/ ~eppstein/ junkyard/ euler/
[2] Imre Lakatos: Proofs and Refutations, Cambridge Technology Press, 1976
[3] Edwin Spanier: Algebraic Topology, Springer 1966, p. 205.
[4] William Fulton: Introduction to toric varieties, 1993, Princeton University Press, p. 141.
[5] http:/ / math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/ counting/
[6] Spanier, Edwin Henry (1982), http://books.google.com/books?id=h-wc3TnZMCcC|Algebraic Topology,
Springer, ISBN 978 0 38794426 5, http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=h-wc3TnZMCcC, Applications of the
homology spectral sequence, p. 481 (http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=h-wc3TnZMCcC& pg=PA481)
[7] Gottlieb, Daniel Henry (1975),
"http://www.math.purdue.edu/~gottlieb/Bibliography/17FibreBundlesAndtheEulerCharacteristic.pdf|Fibre
bundles and the Euler characteristic", Journal of Differential Geometry 10 (1): 39–48, http:/ / www. math.
purdue. edu/ ~gottlieb/ Bibliography/ 17FibreBundlesAndtheEulerCharacteristic. pdf
[8] Tom Leinster, " The Euler characteristic of a category (http:/ / www. math. uiuc. edu/ documenta/ vol-13/ 02.
pdf)", Documenta Mathematica, 13 (2008), pp.21-49

Euler characteristic
336
Further Reading
• Richeson, David S. (2008) Euler's Gem: The Polyhedron Formula and the Birth of
Topology. Princeton University Press.
• H. Graham Flegg: From Geometry to Topology. Dover 2001, p. 40
External links
• Eric W. Weisstein, Euler characteristic (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/
EulerCharacteristic. html) at MathWorld.
• Eric W. Weisstein, Polyhedral formula (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/
PolyhedralFormula. html) at MathWorld.
• Euler characteristic (http:/ / eom. springer. de/ E/ e036400. htm) in the Encyclopaedia of
Mathematics
Presheaf (category theory)
In category theory, a branch of mathematics, a 
-valued presheaf 
on a category 
is a
functor 
. Often presheaf is defined to be a Set-valued presheaf. If 
is the
poset of open sets in a topological space, interpreted as a category, then one recovers the
usual notion of presheaf on a topological space.
A morphism of presheaves is defined to be a natural transformation of functors. This makes
the collection of all presheaves into a category, often written 
. A functor into 
is
sometimes called a profunctor.
Properties
• A category 
embeds fully and faithfully into the category 
of set-valued presheaves
via the Yoneda embedding 
which to every object 
of 
associates the hom-set
.
• The presheaf category 
is (up to equivalence of categories) the free colimit completion
of the category 
.
 This category theory-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it
[1].
References
[1] http:/ / en. wikipedia. org/ w/ index. php?stub& title=Presheaf_%28category_theory%29& action=edit

Sheaf (mathematics)
337
Sheaf (mathematics)
In mathematics, a sheaf is a tool for systematically tracking locally defined data attached to
the open sets of a topological space. The data can be restricted to smaller open sets, and
the data assigned to an open set is equivalent to all collections of compatible data assigned
to collections of smaller open sets covering the original one. For example, such data can
consist of the rings of continuous or smooth real-valued functions defined on each open set.
Sheaves are by design quite general and abstract objects, and their correct definition is
rather technical. They exist in several varieties such as sheaves of sets or sheaves of rings,
depending on the type of data assigned to open sets.
There are also maps (or morphisms) from one sheaf to another; sheaves (of a specific type,
such as sheaves of abelian groups) with their morphisms on a fixed topological space form a
category. On the other hand, to each continuous map there is associated both a direct
image functor, taking sheaves and their morphisms on the domain to sheaves and
morphisms on the codomain, and an inverse image functor operating in the opposite
direction. These functors, and certain variants of theirs, are essential parts of sheaf theory.
Due to their general nature and versatility, sheaves have several applications in topology
and especially in algebraic and differential geometry. First, several geometric structures
such as that of a differentiable manifold or a scheme can be expressed in terms of a sheaf of
rings on the space. In such contexts several geometric constructions such as vector bundles
or divisors are naturally specified in terms of sheaves. Second, sheaves provide the
framework for a very general cohomology theory, which encompasses also the "usual"
topological cohomology theories such as singular cohomology. Especially in algebraic
geometry and the theory of complex manifolds, sheaf cohomology provides a powerful link
between topological and geometric properties of spaces. Sheaves also provide the basis for
the theory of D-modules, which provide applications to the theory of differential equations.
In addition, generalisations of sheaves to more general settings than topological spaces
have provided applications to mathematical logic and number theory.
Introduction
In topology, differential geometry and algebraic geometry, several structures defined on a
topological space (which can additionally be, e.g., a differentiable manifold) can be
naturally localised or restricted to open subsets of the space: typical examples include
continuous real or complex-valued functions, n times differentiable (real or complex-valued)
functions, bounded real-valued functions, vector fields, and sections of any vector bundle on
the space.
Presheaves formalise the situation common to the examples above: a presheaf (of sets) on a 
topological space is a structure which associates to each open set U of the space a set F(U) 
of "sections" on U, and to each open set V included in another open set U a map F(U) → 
F(V) giving restrictions of sections over U to V. Each of the examples above defines a 
presheaf with restrictions of functions, vector fields and sections of a vector bundle having 
the obvious meaning. Moreover, in each of these examples the sets of sections have 
additional algebraic structure: pointwise operations make them abelian groups, and in the 
examples of real and complex-valued functions the sets of sections have even a ring 
structure. In addition, in each example the restriction maps are homomorphisms of the 
corresponding algebraic structure. This observation leads to the natural definition of

Sheaf (mathematics)
338
presheaves with additional algebraic structure such as presheaves of groups, of abelian
groups, of rings: section sets are required to have the specified algebraic structure, and the
restrictions are required to be homomorphisms. Thus for example continuous real-valued
functions on a topological space form a presheaf of rings on the space.
Given a presheaf, a natural question to ask is to what extent its sections over an open set U
are specified by their restrictions to smaller open sets Vi of an open cover of U. A presheaf
is separated if its sections are "locally determined": whenever two sections over U coincide
when restricted to each of Vi, the two sections are identical. All examples of presheaves
discussed above are separated, since in each case the sections are specified by their values
at the points of the underlying space. Finally, a separated presheaf is a sheaf if compatible
sections can be glued together, i.e., whenever there is a section of the presheaf over each
of the covering sets Vi, chosen so that they match on the overlaps of the covering sets,
these sections correspond to a (unique) section on U, of which they are restrictions. It is
easy to verify that all examples above except the presheaf of bounded functions are in fact
sheaves: in all cases the criterion of being a section of the presheaf is local in a sense that it
is enough to verify it in an arbitrary neighbourhood of each point.
On the other hand, it is clear that a function can be bounded on each set of an (infinite)
open cover of a space without being bounded on all of the space; thus bounded functions
provide an example of a presheaf that in general fails to be a sheaf. Another example of a
presheaf that fails to be a sheaf is the constant presheaf that associates the same fixed set
(or abelian group, or a ring,...) to each open set: it follows from the gluing property of
sheaves that sections on a disjoint union of two open sets is the Cartesian product of the
sections over the two open sets. The correct way to define the constant sheaf FA (associated
to for instance a set A) on a topological space is to require sections on an open set U to be
continuous maps from U to A equipped with the discrete topology; then in particular FA(U)
= A for connected U.
Maps between presheaves and sheaves (called morphisms) consist of maps between the
sets of sections over each open set of the underlying space, compatible with restrictions of
sections. If the presheaves or sheaves considered are provided with additional algebraic
structure, these maps are assumed to be homomorphisms.
Presheaves and sheaves are typically denoted by capital letters, F being particularly
common, presumably for the French word for sheaves, faisceau. Use of script letters such
as 
is also common.
Formal definitions
The first step in defining a sheaf is to define a presheaf, which captures the idea of
associating data and restriction maps to the open sets of a topological space. The second
step is to require the normalization and gluing axioms. A presheaf which satisfies these
axioms is a sheaf.
Presheaves
Let X be a topological space, and let C be a category. Usually C is the category of sets, the
category of groups, the category of abelian groups, or the category of commutative rings. A
presheaf F on X with values in C is given by the following data:
• For each open set U of X, an object F(U) in C

Sheaf (mathematics)
339
• For each inclusion of open sets V ⊆ U, a morphism resV,U : F(U) → F(V) in the category C.
The morphisms resV,U are called restriction morphisms. The restriction morphisms are
required to satisfy two properties.
• For every open set U of X, the restriction morphism resU,U : F(U) → F(U) is the identity
morphism on F(U).
• If we have three open sets W ⊆ V ⊆ U, then resW,V o resV,U = resW,U
Informally, the second axiom says it doesn't matter whether we restrict to W in one step or
restrict first to V, then to W.
There is a compact way to express the notion of a presheaf in terms of category theory.
First we define the category of open sets on X to be the category O(X) whose objects are the
open sets of X and whose morphisms are inclusions. Then a C-valued presheaf on X is the
same as a contravariant functor from O(X) to C. This definition can be generalized to the
case when the source category is not of the form O(X) for any X; see presheaf (category
theory).
If F is a C-valued presheaf on X, and U is an open subset of X, then F(U) is called the
sections of F over U. If C is a concrete category, then each element of F(U) is called a
section. A section over X is called a global section. A common notation (used also below)
for the restriction resV,U(s) of a section is s|V. This terminology and notation is by analogy
with sections of fiber bundles or sections of the étale space of a sheaf; see below. F(U) is
also often denoted Γ(U,F), especially in contexts such as sheaf cohomology where U tends
to be fixed and F tends to be variable.
Sheaves
The definition is first given for a sheaf with values in a concrete category (one in which the
object can be interpreted as sets with possibly additional structure). This definition is more
intuitive than the general one, and applies to the most common examples such as sheaves
of sets, abelian groups and rings.
A sheaf with values in a concrete category C is a presheaf with values in C that satisfies the
following three axioms:
1. (Normalisation) F(∅) is the terminal object of C;
2. (Local identity) If (Ui) is an open covering of an open set U, and if s,t ∈ F(U) are such
that s|Ui = t|Ui for each set Ui of the covering, then s = t; and
3. (Gluing) If (Ui) is an open covering of an open set U, and if for each i there is a section si
of F over Ui such that for each pair Ui,Uj of the covering sets the restrictions of si and sj
agree on the overlaps: si|Ui∩Uj = sj|Ui∩Uj, then there is a section s ∈ F(U) such that s|Ui =
si for each i.
The section s whose existence is guaranteed by axiom 3 is called the gluing,
concatenation, or collation of the sections si. By axiom 2 it is unique. Sections si
satisfying the condition of axiom 3 are often called compatible; thus axioms 2 and 3
together state that compatible sections can be uniquely glued together.
The general definition of a sheaf with values in category C, not necessarily concrete but
assumed to have products, can be expressed in a compact manner by means of an exact
sequence: consider in C the diagram
,

Sheaf (mathematics)
340
where the first map is the product of the restriction maps
resVα,U:F(U)→F(Vα)
and the pair of arrows the products of the two sets of restrictions
resVα∩Vβ,Vα:F(Vα)→F(Vα∩Vβ)
and
resVα∩Vβ,Vβ:F(Vβ)→F(Vα∩Vβ).
A presheaf F is a sheaf precisely when for each open covering of an open set U by a family
Vα of open subsets of U, the first arrow in the diagram above is an equalizer. For a
separated presheaf, the first arrow need only be injective. [1]
It can be shown that to specify a sheaf, it is enough to specify its restriction to the open sets
of a basis for the topology of the underlying space. Moreover, it can also be shown that it is
enough to verify the sheaf axioms above relative to the open sets of a covering. Thus a
sheaf can often be defined by giving its values on the open sets of a basis, and verifying the
sheaf axioms relative to the basis.
Morphisms
Heuristically speaking, a morphism of sheaves is analogous to a function between them.
However, because sheaves contain data relative to every open set of a topological space, a
morphism of sheaves is defined as a collection of functions, one for each open set, which
satisfy a compatibility condition.
Let F and G be two sheaves on X with values in the category C. A morphism φ : G → F
consists of a morphism φ(U) : G(U) → F(U) for each open set U of X, subject to the condition
that this morphism is compatible with restrictions. In other words, for every open subset U
of an open set V, the following diagram
is commutative.
Recall that we could also express a sheaf as a special kind of functor. In this language, a
morphism of sheaves is a natural transformation of the corresponding functors. With this
notion of morphism, there is a category of C-valued sheaves on X for any C. The objects are
the C-valued sheaves, and the morphisms are morphisms of sheaves. An isomorphism of
sheaves is an isomorphism in this category.
It can be proved that an isomorphism of sheaves is an isomorphism on each open set U. In
other words, φ is an isomorphism if and only if for each U, φ(U) is an isomorphism. The
same is true of monomorphisms, but not of epimorphisms. See sheaf cohomology.
Notice that we did not use the gluing axiom in defining a morphism of sheaves.
Consequently, the above definition makes sense for presheaves as well. The category of
C-valued presheaves is then a functor category, the category of contravariant functors from
O(X) to C.

Sheaf (mathematics)
341
Examples
Because sheaves encode exactly the data needed to pass between local and global
situations, there are many examples of sheaves occurring throughout mathematics. Here
are some additional examples of sheaves:
• Any continuous map of topological spaces determines a sheaf of sets. Let f : Y → X be a
continuous map. We define a sheaf 
on X by setting 
equal to the
sections U → Y, that is, 
is the set of all functions s : U → Y such that fs = idU.
Restriction is given by restriction of functions. This sheaf is called the sheaf of sections
of f, and it is especially important when f is the projection of a fiber bundle onto its base
space. Notice that if the image of f does not contain U, then 
is empty. For a
concrete example, take 
, 
, and 
. 
is the set
of branches of the logarithm on 
.
• Fix a point x in X and an object S in a category C. The skyscraper sheaf over x with
stalk S is the sheaf Sx defined as follows: If U is an open set containing x, then Sx(U) = S.
If U does not contain x, then Sx(U) is the terminal object of C. The restriction maps are
either the identity on S, if both open sets contain x, or the unique map from S to the
terminal object of C.
Sheaves on manifolds
In the following examples M is an n-dimensional Ck-manifold. The table lists the values of
certain sheaves over open subsets U of M and their restriction maps.
Sheaf
Sections over an
open set U
Restriction maps
Remarks
Sheaf of j-times
continuously
differentiable functions
, j ≤ k
Cj-functions U → R
Restriction of functions.
This is a sheaf of rings with
addition and multiplication given
by pointwise addition and
multiplication. When j = k, this
sheaf is called the structure
sheaf and is denoted 
.
Sheaf of nonzero
k-times continuously
differentiable functions
Nowhere zero
Ck-functions U → R
Restriction of functions.
A sheaf of groups under
pointwise multiplication.
Cotangent sheaves Ωp
M
Differential forms of
degree p on U
Restriction of differential
forms.
Ω1
M and Ωn
M are commonly
denoted ΩM and ωM, respectively.
Sheaf of distributions
Distributions on U
The dual map to extension
of smooth compactly
supported functions by
zero.
Here M is assumed to be smooth.
Sheaf of differential
operators 
Finite-order
differential operators
on U
Restriction of differential
operators.
Here M is assumed to be smooth.

Sheaf (mathematics)
342
Presheaves which are not sheaves
Here are two examples of presheaves which are not sheaves:
• Let X be the two-point topological space {x, y} with the discrete topology. Define a
presheaf F as follows: F(∅) = ∅, F({x}) = R, F({y}) = R, F({x, y}) = R × R × R. The
restriction map F({x, y}) → F({x}) is the projection of R × R × R onto its first coordinate,
and the restriction map F({x, y}) → F({y}) is the projection of R × R × R onto its second
coordinate. F is a presheaf which is not separated: A global section is determined by
three numbers, but the values of that section over {x} and {y} determine only two of
those numbers. So while we can glue any two sections over {x} and {y}, we cannot glue
them uniquely.
• Let X be the real line, and let F(U) be the set of bounded continuous functions on U. This
is not a sheaf because it is not always possible to glue. For example, let Ui be the set of
all x such that |x| < i. The identity function f(x) = x is bounded on each Ui. Consequently
we get a section si on Ui. However, these sections do not glue, because the function f is
not bounded on the real line. Consequently F is a presheaf, but not a sheaf. In fact, F is
separated because it is a sub-presheaf of the sheaf of continuous functions.
Turning a presheaf into a sheaf
It is frequently useful to take the data contained in a presheaf and to express it as a sheaf.
It turns out that there is a best possible way to do this. It takes a presheaf F and produces a
new sheaf aF called the sheaving, sheafification or sheaf associated to the presheaf F.
a is called the sheaving functor, sheafification functor, or associated sheaf functor.
There is a natural morphism of presheaves i : F → aF which has the universal property that
for any sheaf G and any morphism of presheaves f : F → G, there is a unique morphism of
sheaves 
such that 
. In fact a is the adjoint functor to the inclusion
functor from the category of sheaves to the category of presheaves, and i is the unit of the
adjunction.
Images of sheaves
Image functors for sheaves
direct image f∗
inverse image f∗
direct image with compact support f!
exceptional inverse image Rf!
The definition of a morphism on sheaves makes sense only for sheaves on the same space X.
This is because the data contained in a sheaf is indexed by the open sets of the space. If we
have two sheaves on different spaces, then their data is indexed differently. There is no way
to go directly from one set of data to the other.
However, it is possible to move a sheaf from one space to another using a continuous
function. Let f : X → Y be a continuous function from a topological space X to a topological
space Y. If we have a sheaf on X, we can move it to Y, and vice versa. There are four ways in
which sheaves can be moved.

Sheaf (mathematics)
343
• A sheaf 
on X can be moved to Y using the direct image functor 
or the direct image
with proper support functor 
.
• A sheaf 
on Y can be moved to X using the inverse image functor 
or the twisted
inverse image functor 
.
The twisted inverse image functor 
is, in general, only defined as a functor between
derived categories. These functors come in adjoint pairs: 
and 
are left and right
adjoints of each other, and 
and 
are left and right adjoints of each other. The functors
are intertwined with each other by Grothendieck duality and Verdier duality.
There is a different inverse image functor for sheaves of modules over sheaves of rings.
This functor is usually denoted 
and it is distinct from 
. See inverse image functor.
Stalks of a sheaf
The stalk 
of a sheaf 
captures the properties of a sheaf "around" a point x ∈ X. Here,
"around" means that, conceptually speaking, one looks at smaller and smaller neighborhood
of the point. Of course, no single neighborhood will be small enough, so we will have to take
a limit of some sort.
The stalk is defined by
,
the direct limit being over all open subsets of X containing the given point x. In other
words, an element of the stalk is given by a section over some open neighborhood of x, and
two such sections are considered equivalent if their restrictions agree on a smaller
neighborhood.
The natural morphism F(U) → Fx takes a section s in F(U) to its germ. This generalises the
usual definition of a germ.
A different way of defining the stalk is
,
where i is the inclusion of the one-point space {x} into X. The equivalence follows from the
definition of the inverse image.
In many situations, knowing the stalks of a sheaf is enough to control the sheaf itself. For
example, whether or not a morphism of sheaves is a monomorphism, epimorphism, or
isomorphism can be tested on the stalks. They also find use in constructions such as
Godement resolutions.
Ringed spaces and locally ringed spaces
A pair 
consisting of a topological space X and a sheaf of rings on X is called a
ringed space. Many types of spaces can be defined as certain types of ringed spaces. The
sheaf 
is called the structure sheaf of the space. A very common situation is when all
the stalks of the structure sheaf are local rings, in which case the pair is called a locally
ringed space. Here are examples of definitions made in this way:
• An n-dimensional Ck manifold M is a locally ringed space whose structure sheaf is an 
-algebra and is locally isomorphic to the sheaf of Ck real-valued functions on Rn.
• A complex analytic space is a locally ringed space whose structure sheaf is a 
-algebra 
and is locally isomorphic to the vanishing locus of a finite set of holomorphic functions

Sheaf (mathematics)
344
together with the restriction (to the vanishing locus) of the sheaf of holomorphic
functions on Cn for some n.
• A scheme is a locally ringed space which is locally isomorphic to the spectrum of a ring.
• A semialgebraic space is a locally ringed space which is locally isomorphic to a
semialgebraic set in Euclidean space together with its sheaf of semialgebraic functions.
Sheaves of modules
Let 
be a ringed space. A sheaf of modules is a sheaf 
such that on every open
set U of X, 
is an 
-module and for every inclusion of open sets V ⊆ U, the
restriction map 
is a homomorphism of 
-modules.
Most important geometric objects are sheaves of modules. For example, there is a
one-to-one correspondence between vector bundles and locally free sheaves of 
-modules. Sheaves of solutions to differential equations are D-modules, that is, modules
over the sheaf of differential operators.
A particularly important case are abelian sheaves, which are modules over the constant
sheaf 
. Every sheaf of modules is an abelian sheaf.
The étale space of a sheaf
In the examples above it was noted that some sheaves occur naturally as sheaves of
sections. In fact, all sheaves of sets can be represented as sheaves of sections of a
topological space called the étale space. If F is a sheaf over X, then the étale space of F is
a topological space E together with a local homeomorphism π: E → X; the sheaf of sections
of π is F. E is usually a very strange space, and even if the sheaf F arises from a natural
topological situation, E may not have any clear topological interpretation. For example, if F
is the sheaf of sections of a continuous function f : Y → X, then E = Y if and only if f is a
covering map.
The étale space E is constructed from the stalks of F over X. As a set, it is their disjoint
union and π is the obvious map which takes the value x on the stalk of F over x ∈ X. The
topology of E is defined as follows. For each element s of F(U) and each x in U, we get a
germ of s at x. These germs determine points of E. For any U and s ∈ F(U), the union of
these points (for all x ∈ U) is declared to be open in E. Notice that each stalk has the
discrete topology. Two morphisms between sheaves determine a continuous map of the
corresponding étale spaces which is compatible with the projection maps (in the sense that
every germ is mapped to a germ over the same point). This makes the construction into a
functor.
This gives an example of an étale space over X. An étale space is a topological space E
together with a continuous map π: E → X which is a local homeomorphism such that each
fiber of π has the discrete topology. The construction above determines an equivalence of
categories between the category of sheaves of sets on X and the category of étale spaces
over X. The construction of an étale space can also be applied to a presheaf, in which case
the sheaf of sections of the étale space recovers the sheaf associated to the given presheaf.
The map π is an example of what is sometimes called an étale map. "Étale" here means the 
same thing as "local homeomorphism". However, the terminology "étale map" is more 
common in contexts where the right analogue of a local homeomorphism of manifolds is not 
characterized by the property of being a local homeomorphism. This is the case in algebraic

Sheaf (mathematics)
345
geometry. For more information see the article étale morphism.
This construction makes all sheaves into representable functors on certain categories of
topological spaces. As above, let F be a sheaf on X, let E be its étale space, and let π: E → X
be the natural projection. Consider the category Top/X of topological spaces over X, that is,
the category of topological spaces together with fixed continuous maps to X. Every object of
this space is a continuous map f : Y → X, and a morphism from Y → X to Z → X is a
continuous map Y → Z which commutes with the two maps to X. There is a functor Γ from
Top/X to the category of sets which takes an object f : Y → X to (f−1F)(Y). For example, if i :
U → X is the inclusion of an open subset, then Γ(i) = (i−1F)(U) agrees with the usual F(U),
and if i : {x} → X is the inclusion of a point, then Γ({x}) = (i−1F)({x}) is the stalk of F at x.
There is a natural isomorphism
which shows that E represents the functor Γ.
The definition of sheaves by étale spaces is older than the definition given earlier in the
article. It is still common in some areas of mathematics such as mathematical analysis.
Sheaf cohomology
It was noted above that the functor 
preserves isomorphisms and monomorphisms,
but not epimorphisms. If F is a sheaf of abelian groups, or more generally a sheaf with
values in an abelian category, then 
is actually a left exact functor. This means that
it is possible to construct derived functors of 
. These derived functors are called
the cohomology groups (or modules) of F and are written 
. Grothendieck proved
in his Tohoku paper that every category of sheaves of abelian groups contains enough
injective objects, so these derived functors always exist.
However, computing sheaf cohomology using injective resolutions is nearly impossible. In
practice, it is much more common to find a different and more tractable resolution of F. A
general construction is provided by Godement resolutions, and particular resolutions may
be constructed using soft sheaves, fine sheaves, and flabby sheaves (also known as flasque
sheaves from the French flasque meaning flabby). As a consequence, it can become
possible to compare sheaf cohomology with other cohomology theories. For example, the de
Rham complex is a resolution of the constant sheaf 
on any smooth manifold, so the sheaf
cohomology of 
is equal to its de Rham cohomology. In fact, comparing sheaf cohomology
to de Rham cohomology and singular cohomology provides a proof of de Rham's theorem
that the two cohomology theories are isomorphic.
A different approach is by Čech cohomology. Čech cohomology was the first cohomology
theory developed for sheaves and it is well-suited to concrete calculations. It relates
sections on open subsets of the space to cohomology classes on the space. In most cases,
Čech cohomology computes the same cohomology groups as the derived functor
cohomology. However, for some pathological spaces, Čech cohomology will give the correct
but incorrect higher cohomology groups. To get around this, Jean-Louis Verdier
developed hypercoverings. Hypercoverings not only give the correct higher cohomology
groups but also allow the open subsets mentioned above to be replaced by certain
morphisms from another space. This flexibility is necessary in some applications, such as
the construction of Pierre Deligne's mixed Hodge structures.

Sheaf (mathematics)
346
A much cleaner approach to the computation of some cohomology groups is the
Borel–Bott–Weil theorem, which identifies the cohomology groups of some line bundles on
flag manifolds with irreducible representations of Lie groups. This theorem can be used, for
example, to easily compute the cohomology groups of all line bundles on projective space.
In many cases there is a duality theory for sheaves which generalizes Poincaré duality. See
Grothendieck duality and Verdier duality.
Sites and topoi
André Weil's Weil conjectures stated that there was a cohomology theory for algebraic
varieties over finite fields which would give an analogue of the Riemann hypothesis. The
only natural topology on such a variety, however, is the Zariski topology, but sheaf
cohomology in the Zariski topology is badly behaved because there are very few open sets.
Alexandre Grothendieck solved this problem by introducing Grothendieck topologies, which
axiomatize the notion of covering. Grothendieck's insight was that the definition of a sheaf
depends only on the open sets of a topological space, not on the individual points. Once he
had axiomatized the notion of covering, open sets could be replaced by other objects. A
presheaf takes each one of these objects to data, just as before, and a sheaf is a presheaf
that satisfies the gluing axiom with respect to our new notion of covering. This allowed
Grothendieck to define étale cohomology and l-adic cohomology, which eventually were
used to prove the Weil conjectures.
A category with a Grothendieck topology is called a site. A category of sheaves on a site is
called a topos or a Grothendieck topos. The notion of a topos was later abstracted by
William Lawvere and Miles Tierney to define an elementary topos, which has connections to
mathematical logic.
History
The first origins of sheaf theory are hard to pin down — they may be co-extensive with the
idea of analytic continuation. It took about 15 years for a recognisable, free-standing theory
of sheaves to emerge from the foundational work on cohomology.
• 1936 Eduard Čech introduces the nerve construction, for associating a simplicial complex
to an open covering.
• 1938 Hassler Whitney gives a 'modern' definition of cohomology, summarizing the work
since J. W. Alexander and Kolmogorov first defined cochains.
• 1943 Norman Steenrod publishes on homology with local coefficients.
• 1945 Jean Leray publishes work carried out as a prisoner of war, motivated by proving
fixed point theorems for application to PDE theory; it is the start of sheaf theory and
spectral sequences.
• 1947 Henri Cartan reproves the de Rham theorem by sheaf methods, in correspondence
with André Weil (see De Rham-Weil theorem). Leray gives a sheaf definition in his
courses via closed sets (the later carapaces).
• 1948 The Cartan seminar writes up sheaf theory for the first time.
• 1950 The "second edition" sheaf theory from the Cartan seminar: the sheaf space (espace
étalé) definition is used, with stalkwise structure. Supports are introduced, and
cohomology with supports. Continuous mappings give rise to spectral sequences. At the
same time Kiyoshi Oka introduces an idea (adjacent to that) of a sheaf of ideals, in
several complex variables.

Sheaf (mathematics)
347
• 1951 The Cartan seminar proves the Theorems A and B based on Oka's work.
• 1953 The finiteness theorem for coherent sheaves in the analytic theory is proved by
Cartan and Jean-Pierre Serre, as is Serre duality.
• 1954 Serre's paper Faisceaux algébriques cohérents (published in 1955) introduces
sheaves into algebraic geometry. These ideas are immediately exploited by Hirzebruch,
who writes a major 1956 book on topological methods.
• 1955 Alexander Grothendieck in lectures in Kansas defines abelian category and
presheaf, and by using injective resolutions allows direct use of sheaf cohomology on all
topological spaces, as derived functors.
• 1956 Oscar Zariski's report Algebraic sheaf theory
• 1957 Grothendieck's Tohoku paper rewrites homological algebra; he proves
Grothendieck duality (i.e., Serre duality for possibly singular algebraic varieties).
• 1957 onwards: Grothendieck extends sheaf theory in line with the needs of algebraic
geometry, introducing: schemes and general sheaves on them, local cohomology, derived
categories (with Verdier), and Grothendieck topologies. There emerges also his
influential schematic idea of 'six operations' in homological algebra.
• 1958 Godement's book on sheaf theory is published. At around this time Mikio Sato
proposes his hyperfunctions, which will turn out to have sheaf-theoretic nature.
At this point sheaves had become a mainstream part of mathematics, with use by no means
restricted to algebraic topology. It was later discovered that the logic in categories of
sheaves is intuitionistic logic (this observation is now often referred to as Kripke-Joyal
semantics, but probably should be attributed to a number of authors). This shows that some
of the facets of sheaf theory can also be traced back as far as Leibniz.
See also
• Coherent sheaf
• Gerbe
• Holomorphic sheaf
• Stack (descent theory)
References
[1] The empty subset of a topological space is covered by the empty family of open sets; as the product of an
empty family is a terminal object, the alternative definition includes also the normalisation axiom.
• Bredon, Glen E. (1997), Sheaf theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 170 (2nd ed.),
Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 1481706 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1481706), ISBN 978-0-387-94905-5 (oriented towards
conventional topological applications)
• Godement, Roger (1973), Topologie algébrique et théorie des faisceaux, Paris: Hermann,
MR 0345092 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0345092)
• Grothendieck, Alexander (1957), "Sur quelques points d'algèbre homologique", The
Tohoku Mathematical Journal. Second Series 9: 119–221, MR 0102537 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0102537), ISSN 0040-8735 (http:/ / worldcat. org/
issn/ 0040-8735)
• Hirzebruch, Friedrich (1995), Topological methods in algebraic geometry, Classics in 
Mathematics, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 1335917 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ 
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1335917), ISBN 978-3-540-58663-0 (updated edition of a classic

Sheaf (mathematics)
348
using enough sheaf theory to show its power)
• Kashiwara, Masaki; Schapira, Pierre (1994), Sheaves on manifolds, Grundlehren der
Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences],
292, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 1299726 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1299726), ISBN 978-3-540-51861-7(advanced techniques such
as the derived category and vanishing cycles on the most reasonable spaces)
• Mac Lane, Saunders; Moerdijk, Ieke (1994), Sheaves in geometry and logic, Universitext,
Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 1300636 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1300636), ISBN 978-0-387-97710-2 (category theory and
toposes emphasised)
• Martin, W. T.; Chern, S. S.; Zariski, Oscar (1956), "Scientific report on the Second
Summer Institute, several complex variables", Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society 62: 79–141, doi: 10.1090/S0002-9904-1956-10013-X (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10.
1090/ S0002-9904-1956-10013-X), MR 0077995 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0077995), ISSN 0002-9904 (http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/
0002-9904)
• Serre, Jean-Pierre (1955),
"http://www.jstor.org/view/0003486x/di961745/96p00036/0?currentResult=0003486x+di961745+96p
algébriques cohérents" (– Scholar search (http:/ / scholar. google. co. uk/ scholar?hl=en&
lr=& q=intitle:Faisceaux+ algÃ©briques+ cohÃ©rents& as_publication=[[Annals+ of+
Mathematics|Annals+ of+ Mathematics. + Second+ Series]]& as_ylo=1955&
as_yhi=1955& btnG=Search)), Annals of Mathematics. Second Series 61: 197–278, doi:
10.2307/1969915 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 1969915), MR 0068874 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0068874), ISSN 0003-486X (http:/ / worldcat. org/
issn/ 0003-486X), http:/ / www. jstor. org/ view/ 0003486x/ di961745/ 96p00036/
0?currentResult=0003486x%2bdi961745%2b96p00036%2b0%2cFFFFFFFFFFFFEFAFBFFD07&
searchUrl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww. jstor.
org%2Fsearch%2FBasicResults%3Fhp%3D25%26si%3D1%26gw%3Djtx%26jtxsi%3D1%26jcpsi%3D1%
• Swan, R. G. (1964), The Theory of Sheaves, University of Chicago Press (concise lecture
notes)
• Tennison, B. R. (1975), Sheaf theory, Cambridge University Press, MR 0404390 (http:/ /
www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0404390) (pedagogic treatment)
External links
• Sheaf (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=5648) on
PlanetMath

Postnikov system
349
Postnikov system
In homotopy theory, a branch of algebraic topology, a Postnikov system (or Postnikov
tower) is a way of constructing a topological space from its homotopy groups. Postnikov
systems were introduced, and named after, Mikhail Postnikov.
The Postnikov system of a path-connected space X is a tower of spaces …→ Xn →…→ X1→ X0
with the following properties:
• each map Xn→Xn−1 is a fibration;
• πk(Xn) = πk(X) for k ≤ n;
• πk(Xn) = 0 for k > n.
Every path-connected space has such a Postnikov system, and it is unique up to homotopy.
The space X can be reconstructed from the Postnikov system as its inverse limit: X = limn
Xn. By the long exact sequence for the fibration Xn→Xn−1, the fiber (call it Kn) has a single
homotopy group in degree n; it is thus an Eilenberg-Mac Lane space of type K(πn(X), n). The
Postnikov system can be thought of as a way of constructing X out of Eilenberg-Mac Lane
spaces.
References
• Postnikov, Mikhail (1951), "Determination of the homology groups of a space by means of
the homotopy invariants", Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.) 76: 359–362
• Hatcher, Allen (2002), http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/ATpage.html|Algebraic
topology, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79540-1, http:/ / www. math.
cornell. edu/ ~hatcher/ AT/ ATpage. html

Grothendieck topology
350
Grothendieck topology
In category theory, a branch of mathematics, a Grothendieck topology is a structure on a
category C which makes the objects of C act like the open sets of a topological space. A
category together with a choice of Grothendieck topology is called a site.
Grothendieck topologies axiomatize the notion of an open cover. Using the notion of
covering provided by a Grothendieck topology, it becomes possible to define sheaves on a
category and their cohomology. This was first done in algebraic geometry and algebraic
number theory by Alexander Grothendieck to define the étale cohomology of a scheme. It
has been used to define other cohomology theories since then, such as l-adic cohomology,
flat cohomology, and crystalline cohomology. While Grothendieck topologies are most often
used to define cohomology theories, they have found other applications as well, such as to
John Tate's theory of rigid analytic geometry.
There is a natural way to associate a site to an ordinary topological space, and
Grothendieck's theory is loosely regarded as a generalization of classical topology. Under
meager point-set hypotheses, namely sobriety, this is completely accurate—it is possible to
recover a sober space from its associated site. However simple examples such as the
indiscrete topological space show that not all topological spaces can be expressed using
Grothendieck topologies. Conversely, there are Grothendieck topologies which do not come
from topological spaces.
Introduction
André Weil's famous Weil conjectures proposed that certain properties of equations with
integral coefficients should be understood as geometric properties of the algebraic variety
that they defined. His conjectures postulated that there should be a cohomology theory of
algebraic varieties which gave number-theoretic information about their defining equations.
This cohomology theory was known as the "Weil cohomology", but using the tools he had
available, Weil was unable to construct it.
In the early 1960s, Alexander Grothendieck introduced étale maps into algebraic geometry
as algebraic analogues of local analytic isomorphisms in analytic geometry. He used étale
coverings to define an algebraic analogue of the fundamental group of a topological space.
Soon Jean-Pierre Serre noticed that some properties of étale coverings mimicked those of
open immersions, and that consequently it was possible to make constructions which
imitated the cohomology functor H1. Grothendieck saw that it would be possible to use
Serre's idea to define a cohomology theory which he suspected would be the Weil
cohomology. To define this cohomology theory, Grothendieck needed to replace the usual,
topological notion of an open covering with one that would use étale coverings instead.
Grothendieck also saw how to phrase the definition of covering abstractly; this is where the
definition of a Grothendieck topology comes from.

Grothendieck topology
351
Definition
Motivation
The classical definition of a sheaf begins with a topological space X. A sheaf associates
information to the open sets of X. This information can be phrased abstractly by letting O(X)
be the category whose objects are the open subsets U of X and whose morphisms are the
inclusion maps U → V of open sets U and V of X. We will call such maps open immersions,
just as in the context of schemes. Then a presheaf on X is a contravariant functor from O(X)
to the category of sets, and a sheaf is a presheaf which satisfies the gluing axiom. The
gluing axiom is phrased in terms of pointwise covering, i.e., {Ui} covers U if and only if 
i
Ui = U. Because the value of a presheaf on an open set determines the value on any smaller
set by restriction, it is equivalent to work with the collection of all open subsets V contained
in some Ui. A Grothendieck topology encodes the information about collections of open
subsets of U and which collections cover U without any reference to the space itself.
Sieves
In a Grothendieck topology, the notion of a collection of open subsets of U stable under
inclusion is replaced by the notion of a sieve. If c is any given object in C, a sieve on c is a
subfunctor of the functor Hom(−, c); (this is the Yoneda embedding applied to c). In the
case of O(X), a sieve S on an open set U corresponds to a collection of open subsets of U
"selected" by S. More precisely, consider that for any open subset V of U, S(V) will be a
subset of Hom(V, U), which has only one element, the open immersion V → U. Then V will
be considered "selected" by S if and only if S(V) is nonempty.
If S is a sieve on X, and f: Y → X is a morphism, then left composition by f gives a sieve on Y
called the pullback of S along f, denoted by f 
S. It is defined as the fibered product
S ×Hom(−, X) Hom(−, Y) together with its natural embedding in Hom(−, Y). More concretely,
for each object Z of C, f 
S(Z) = { g: Z → Y | fg 
S(Z) }, and f 
S inherits its action on
morphisms by being a subfunctor of Hom(−, Y). In the classical example, the pullback of a
collection {Vi} of subsets of U along an inclusion W → U is the collection {Vi∩W}.
Covering Sieves
A classical topology on a set X is a collection of distinguished subsets, called open sets. This
selection is subject to certain conditions: the axioms of a topological space. By comparison,
a Grothendieck topology J on a category C is a collection, for each object c of C, of
distinguished sieves on c, called covering sieves of c and denoted by J(c). This selection
will be subject to certain axioms, stated below. Continuing the previous example, a sieve S
on an open set U in O(X) will be a covering sieve if and only if the union of all the open sets
V for which S(V) is nonempty equals U; in other words, if and only if S gives us a collection
of open sets which cover U in the classical sense.

Grothendieck topology
352
Axioms
The conditions we impose on a Grothendieck topology are:
• (T 1) (Base change) If S is a covering sieve on X, and f: Y → X is a morphism, then the
pullback f S is a covering sieve on Y.
• (T 2) (Local character) Let S be a covering sieve on X, and let T be any sieve on X.
Suppose that for each object Y of C and each arrow f: Y → X in S(Y), the pullback sieve f 
T is a covering sieve on Y. Then T is a covering sieve on X.
• (T 3) (Identity) Hom(−, X) is a covering sieve on X for any object X in C.
The base change axiom corresponds to the idea that if { 
} covers U, then {Ui ∩ V}
should cover U ∩ V. The local character axiom corresponds to the idea that if {Ui} covers U
and {Vij}j 
Ji covers Ui for each i, then the collection {Vij} for all i and j should cover U.
Lastly, the identity axiom corresponds to the idea that any set is covered by all its possible
subsets.
Alternative Axioms
In fact, it is possible to put these axioms in another form where their geometric character is
more apparent, assuming that the underlying category C contains certain fibered products.
In this case, instead of specifying sieves, we can specify that certain collections of maps
with a common codomain should cover their codomain. These collections are called
covering families. If the collection of all covering families satisfies certain axioms, then we
say that they form a Grothendieck pretopology. These axioms are:
• (PT 0) (Existence of fibered products) For all objects X of C, and for all morphisms X0 → X
which appear in some covering family of X, and for all morphisms Y → X, the fibered
product X0 ×X Y exists.
• (PT 1) (Stability under base change) For all objects X of C, all morphisms Y → X, and all
covering families {Xα → X}, the family {Xα ×X Y → Y} is a covering family.
• (PT 2) (Local character) If {Xα → X} is a covering family, and if for all α, {Xβα → Xα} is a
covering family, then the family of composites {Xβα → Xα → X} is a covering family.
• (PT 3) (Isomorphisms) If f: Y → X is an isomorphism, then {f} is a covering family.
For any pretopology, the collection of all sieves that contain a covering family from the
pretopology is always a Grothendieck topology.
For categories with fibered products, there is a converse. Given a collection of arrows {Xα
→ X}, we construct a sieve S by letting S(Y) be the set of all morphisms Y → X that factor
through some arrow Xα → X. This is called the sieve generated by {Xα → X}. Now choose a
topology. Say that {Xα → X} is a covering family if and only if the sieve that it generates is a
covering sieve for the given topology. It is easy to check that this defines a pretopology.
(PT 3) is sometimes replaced by a weaker axiom:
• (PT 3') (Identity) If 1X : X → X is the identity arrow, then {1X} is a covering family.
(PT 3) implies (PT 3'), but not conversely. However, suppose that we have a collection of
covering families that satisfies (PT 0) through (PT 2) and (PT 3'), but not (PT 3). These
families generate a pretopology. The topology generated by the original collection of
covering families is then the same as the topology generated by the pretopology, because
the sieve generated by an isomorphism Y → X is Hom(−, X). Consequently, if we restrict our
attention to topologies, (PT 3) and (PT 3') are equivalent.

Grothendieck topology
353
Sites and sheaves
Let C be a category and let J be a Grothendieck topology on C. The pair (C, J) is called a
site.
A presheaf on a category is a contravariant functor from C to the category of all sets. Note
that for this definition C is not required to have a topology. A sheaf on a site, however,
should allow gluing, just like sheaves in classical topology. Consequently, we define a sheaf
on a site to be a presheaf F such that for all objects X and all covering sieves S on X, the
natural map Hom(Hom(−, X), F) → Hom(S, F) induced by the inclusion of S into Hom(−, X)
is a bijection. Halfway in between a presheaf and a sheaf is the notion of a separated
presheaf, where the natural map above is required to be only an injection, not a bijection,
for all sieves S.
Using the Yoneda lemma, it is possible to show that a presheaf on the category O(X) is a
sheaf on the topology defined above if and only if it is a sheaf in the classical sense.
Sheaves on a pretopology have a particularly simple description: For each covering family
{Xα → X}, the diagram
must be an equalizer. For a separated presheaf, the first arrow need only be injective.
Similarly, one can define presheaves and sheaves of abelian groups, rings, modules, and so
on. One can require either that a presheaf F is a contravariant functor to the category of
abelian groups (or rings, or modules, etc.), or that F be an abelian group (ring, module,
etc.) object in the category of all contravariant functors from C to the category of sets.
These two definitions are equivalent.
Examples
The discrete and indiscrete topologies
Let C be any category. To define the discrete topology, we declare all sieves to be
covering sieves. If C has all fibered products, this is equivalent to declaring all families to
be covering families. To define the indiscrete topology, we declare only the sieves of the
form Hom(−, X) to be covering sieves. The indiscrete topology is also known as the biggest
or chaotic topology, and it is generated by the pretopology which has only isomorphisms
for covering families. A sheaf on the indiscrete site is the same thing as a presheaf.
The canonical topology
Let C be any category. The Yoneda embedding gives a functor Hom(−, X) for each object X
of C. The canonical topology is the biggest topology such that every representable
presheaf Hom(−, X) is a sheaf. A covering sieve or covering family for this site is said to be
strictly universally epimorphic. A topology which is less fine than the canonical topology,
that is, for which every covering sieve is strictly universally epimorphic, is called
subcanonical. Subcanonical sites are exactly the sites for which every presheaf of the form
Hom(−, X) is a sheaf. Most sites encountered in practice are subcanonical.

Grothendieck topology
354
Small site associated to a topological space
We repeat the example which we began with above. Let X be a topological space. We
defined O(X) to be the category whose objects are the open sets of X and whose morphisms
are inclusions of open sets. The covering sieves on an object U of O(X) were those sieves S
satisfying the following condition:
• If W is the union of all the sets V such that S(V) is non-empty, then W = U.
This topology can also naturally be expressed as a pretopology. We say that a family of
inclusions {Vα 
 U} is a covering family if and only if the union 
Vα equals U. This site is
called the small site associated to a topological space X.
Big site associated to a topological space
Let Spc be the category of all topological spaces. Given any family of functions {uα : Vα →
X}, we say that it is a surjective family or that the morphisms uα are jointly surjective if
 uα(Vα) equals X. We define a pretopology on Spc by taking the covering families to be
surjective families all of whose members are open immersions. Let S be a sieve on Spc. S is
a covering sieve for this topology if and only if:
• For all Y and every morphism f : Y → X in S(Y), there exists a V and a g : V → X such that g
is an open immersion, g is in S(V), and f factors through g.
• If W is the union of all the sets f(Y), where f : Y → X is in S(Y), then W = X.
Fix a topological space X. Consider the comma category Spc/X of topological spaces with a
fixed continuous map to X. The topology on Spc induces a topology on Spc/X. The covering
sieves and covering families are almost exactly the same; the only difference is that now all
the maps involved commute with the fixed maps to X. This is the big site associated to a
topological space X . Notice that Spc is the big site associated to the one point space. This
site was first considered by Jean Giraud.
The big and small sites of a manifold
Let M be a manifold. M has a category of open sets O(M) because it is a topological space,
and it gets a topology as in the above example. For two open sets U and V of M, the fiber
product U ×M V is the open set U ∩ V, which is still in O(M). This means that the topology
on O(M) is defined by a pretopology, the same pretopology as before.
Let Mfd be the category of all manifolds and continuous maps. (Or smooth manifolds and
smooth maps, or real analytic manifolds and analytic maps, etc.) Mfd is a subcategory of
Spc, and open immersions are continuous (or smooth, or analytic, etc.), so Mfd inherits a
topology from Spc. This lets us construct the big site of the manifold M as the site Mfd/M.
We can also define this topology using the same pretopology we used above. Notice that to
satisfy (PT 0), we need to check that for any continuous map of manifolds X → Y and any
open subset U of Y, the fibered product U ×Y X is in Mfd/M. This is just the statement that
the preimage of an open set is open. Notice, however, that not all fibered products exist in
Mfd because the preimage of a smooth map at a critical value need not be a manifold.

Grothendieck topology
355
Topologies and schemes
Fix a scheme X. There is more than one natural site associated to X. All of the following
sites are subcanonical, and they are ordered from coarsest to finest.
The big and small Zariski sites
All schemes are topological spaces. We get the small Zariski site of X by considering X as
a topological space and looking at the site O(X). To define the big Zariski site, let Zar be the
category whose objects are schemes and whose morphisms are morphisms of schemes. We
define a pretopology on Zar by taking the covering families to be surjective families of
scheme-theoretic open immersions. This defines a topology whose covering sieves S are
characterized by the following two properties:
• For all Y and every morphism f : Y → X in S(Y), there exists a V and a g : V → X such that g
is an open immersion, g is in S(V), and f factors through g.
• If W is the union of all the sets f(Y), where f : Y → X is in S(Y), then W = X.
Despite their outward similarities, the topology on Zar is not the restriction of the topology
on Spc! This is because there are morphisms of schemes which are topologically open
immersions but which are not scheme-theoretic open immersions. For example, let A be a
non-reduced ring and let N be its ideal of nilpotents. The quotient map A → A/N induces a
map Spec A/N → Spec A which is the identity on underlying topological spaces. To be a
scheme-theoretic open immersion it must also induce an isomorphism on structure sheaves,
which this map does not do. In fact, this map is a closed immersion.
We call Zar/X the big Zariski site of X .
The big and small Nisnevich sites
A family of morphisms {uα : Xα → X} is a Nisnevich cover if the family is jointly surjective
and each uα is an étale morphism with the following additional property: For every point x ∈
X, there exists an α and a point u ∈ Xα such that the induced map of residue fields k(x) →
k(u) is an isomorphism. (We call such an étale morphism with this property a Nisnevich
morphism.) We define a pretopology on the category of schemes and morphisms of schemes
by declaring covering families to be exactly the Nisnevich covers. This generates a topology
called the Nisnevich topology. We write Nis for the category of schemes with the
Nisnevich topology.
The small Nisnevich site of X is the category O(XNis) whose objects are schemes U with a
fixed Nisnevich morphism U → X. The morphisms are morphisms of schemes compatible
with the fixed maps to X. The big Nisnevich site of X is the category Nis/X, that is, the
category of schemes with a fixed map to X, considered with the Nisnevich topology.
Nisnevich called this topology the completely decomposed topology. He introduced it in
order to provide a cohomological interpretation of the class set of an affine group scheme
(originally defined in adelic terms) and used it to partially prove the Grothendieck-Serre
conjecture on rationally trivial torsors. This topology has also found important applications
in algebraic K-theory, A¹ homotopy theory and the theory of motives.

Grothendieck topology
356
The big and small étale sites
We say that a family of morphisms {uα : Xα → X} is an étale cover if the family is jointly
surjective and each uα is an étale morphism. We define a pretopology on the category of
schemes and morphisms of schemes by declaring covering families to be exactly the étale
covers. This generates a topology called the étale topology. We write Ét for the category
of schemes with the étale topology.
The small étale site of X is the category O(Xét) whose objects are schemes U with a fixed
étale morphism U → X. The morphisms are morphisms of schemes compatible with the fixed
maps to X. The big étale site of X is the category Ét/X, that is, the category of schemes
with a fixed map to X, considered with the étale topology.
We can define the étale topology using less data. First, we notice that the étale topology is
finer than the Zariski topology. Consequently, to define an étale cover of a scheme X, it
suffices to first cover X by open affine subschemes, that is, to take a Zariski cover, and then
to define an étale cover of an affine scheme. We define an étale cover of an affine scheme X
to be a surjective family {uα : Xα → X} such that the set of all α is finite, each Xα is affine,
and each uα is étale. Then an étale cover of X is a family {uα : Xα → X} which becomes an
étale cover after base changing to any open affine subscheme of X.
Flat sites
Bibliography
• Demazure, Michel; Alexandre Grothendieck, eds. (1970) (in French). Séminaire de
Géométrie Algébrique du Bois Marie - 1962-64 - Schémas en groupes - (SGA 3) - vol. 1
(Lecture notes in mathematics 151). Berlin; New York: Springer-Verlag. pp. xv+564.
• Artin, Michael; Alexandre Grothendieck, Jean-Louis Verdier, eds. (1972) (in French).
Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois Marie - 1963-64 - Théorie des topos et
cohomologie étale des schémas - (SGA 4) - vol. 1 (Lecture notes in mathematics 269).
Berlin; New York: Springer-Verlag. xix+525.
• Nisnevich, Yevsey A. (1989). "The completely decomposed topology on schemes and
associated descent spectral sequences in algebraic K-theory". J. F. Jardine and V. P.
Snaith Algebraic K-theory: connections with geometry and topology. Proceedings of the
NATO Advanced Study Institute held in Lake Louise, Alberta, December 7--11, 1987.
NATO Advanced Science Institutes Series C: Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 279:
241-342, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers Group.

Groupoid
357
Groupoid
''
In abstract algebra, a branch of mathematics, especially in category theory and homotopy
theory, a groupoid generalises the notion of group and of category in several equivalent
ways. A groupoid can be seen as a:
• Group with a partial function replacing the binary operation;
• Category in which every morphism is an isomorphism. A category of this sort can be
viewed as augmented with a unary operation, called inverse by analogy with group
theory.
Special cases include:
• Setoids, that is: sets which come with an equivalence relation;
• G-sets, sets equipped with an action of a group G.
Groupoids are often used to reason about geometrical objects such as manifolds. Heinrich
Brandt introduced groupoids in 1926.
Definitions
Algebraic
A groupoid is a set G with a unary operation 
and a partial function
* is not a binary operation because it is not necessarily defined for all
possible pairs of G-elements. The precise conditions under which * is defined are not
articulated here and vary by situation.
and -1 have the following axiomatic properties. Let a, b, and c be elements of G. Then:
• Associativity: If a * b and b * c are defined, then (a * b) * c and a * (b * c) are defined and
equal. Conversely, if either of these last two expressions is defined, then so is the other
(and again they are equal).
• Inverse: a-1 * a and a * a-1 are always defined.
• Identity: If a * b is defined, then a * b * b-1 = a, and a-1 * a * b = b. (The previous two
axioms already show that these expressions are defined and unambiguous.)
In short:
• (a * b) * c = a * (b * c);
• (a * b) * b-1 = a;
• a-1 * (a * b) = b.
From these axioms, two easy and convenient theorems follow:
• (a-1)-1 = a;
• If a * b is defined, then (a * b)-1 = b-1 * a-1.

Groupoid
358
Category theoretic
A groupoid is a small category in which every morphism is an isomorphism, and hence
invertible. More precisely, a groupoid G is:
• A set G0 of objects;
• For each pair of objects x and y in G0, there exists a (possibly empty) set G(x,y) of
morphisms (or arrows) from x to y. We write f : x → y to indicate that f is an element of
G(x,y).
The objects and morphisms have the properties:
• For every object x, there exists the element 
of G(x,x);
• For each triple of objects x, y, and z, there exists the function 
 G(x,y) 
G(y,z)
→ G(x,z). We write gf for 
, where f 
G(x,y), and g 
G(y,z);
• There exists the function 
 G(x,y) → G(y,x).
Moreover, if f : x → y, g : y → z, and h : z → w, then:
•
and 
;
• (hg)f = h(gf);
•
and 
.
Comparing the definitions
The algebraic and category-theoretic definitions are equivalent, as follows. Given a
groupoid in the category-theoretic sense, let G be the disjoint union of all of the sets G(x,y).
Then 
and 
become partially defined operations on G, and 
will in fact be
defined everywhere; so we define * to be 
and 
to be 
. Thus we have a groupoid
in the algebraic sense. Explicit reference to G0 (and hence to 
) can be dropped.
Conversely, given a groupoid G in the algebraic sense, with typical element f, let G0 be the
set of all elements of the form f*f-1. In other words, the objects are identified with the
identity morphisms, so that 
is just x. Let G(x,y) be the set of all elements f such that yfx
is defined. Then -1 and * break up into several functions on the various G(x,y), which may be
called 
and 
, respectively.
Sets in the definitions above may be replaced with classes, as is generally the case in
category theory.
Groupoid Category
The category whose objects are groupoids and whose morphisms are groupoid
homomorphisms is called the groupoid category, or the category of groupoids.
Examples
Linear algebra
Given a field K, the corresponding general linear groupoid GL*(K) consists of all
invertible matrices whose entries range over K. Matrix multiplication interprets
composition. If G = GL*(K), then the set of natural numbers is a proper subset of G0, since
for each natural number n, there is a corresponding identity matrix of dimension n. G(m,n)
is empty unless m=n, in which case it is the set of all nxn invertible matrices.

Groupoid
359
Topology
Given a topological space X, let G0 be the set X. The morphisms from the point p to the
point q are equivalence classes of continuous paths from p to q, with two paths being
equivalent if they are homotopic. Two such morphisms are composed by first following the
first path, then the second; the homotopy equivalence guarantees that this composition is
associative. This groupoid is called the fundamental groupoid of X, denoted 
(X).
An important extension of this idea is to consider the fundamental groupoid 
(X,A) where
A is a set of "base points" and a subset of X. Here, one considers only paths whose
endpoints belong to A. 
(X,A) is a sub-groupoid of 
(X). The set A may be chosen
according to the geometry of the situation at hand.
Equivalence relation
If X is a set with an equivalence relation denoted by infix 
, then a groupoid
"representing" this equivalence relation can be formed as follows:
• The objects of the groupoid are the elements of X;
• For any two elements x and y in X, there is a single morphism from x to y if and only if
x~y.
Group action
If the group G acts on the set X, then we can form a groupoid representing this group
action as follows:
• The objects are the elements of X;
• For any two elements x and y in X, there is a morphism from x to y corresponding to
every element g of G such that gx = y;
• Composition of morphisms interprets the binary operation of G.
Another way to describe G-sets is the functor category 
, where 
is the groupoid
(category) with one element and isomorphic to the group G. Indeed, every functor F of this
category defines a set X=F 
and for every g in G (i.e. for every morphism in 
)
induces a bijection Fg : X→X. The categorical structure of the functor F assures us that F
defines a G-action on the set X. The (unique) representable functor F : 
→ 
is the
Cayley representation of G. In fact, this functor is isomorphic to 
and so sends
to the set 
which is by definition the "set" G and the morphism g of 
(i.e. the element g of G) to the permutation Fg of the set G. We deduce from the Yoneda
embedding that the group G is isomorphic to the group {Fg | g∈G}, a subgroup of the group
of permutations of G.
Fifteen puzzle
The symmetries of the Fifteen puzzle form a groupoid (not a group, as not all moves can be
composed). This groupoid acts on configurations.
Relation to groups
Group-like structures
Totality
Associativity
Identity
Inverses
Group
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Groupoid
360
Monoid
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Semigroup
Yes
Yes
No
No
Loop
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Quasigroup
Yes
No
No
Yes
Magma
Yes
No
No
No
Groupoid
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Category
No
Yes
Yes
No
If a groupoid has only one object, then the set of its morphisms forms a group. Using the
algebraic definition, such a groupoid is literally just a group. Many concepts of group
theory generalize to groupoids, with the notion of functor replacing that of group
homomorphism.
If x is an object of the groupoid G, then the set of all morphisms from x to x forms a group
G(x). If there is a morphism f from x to y, then the groups G(x) and G(y) are isomorphic,
with an isomorphism given by the mapping g → fgf −1.
Every connected groupoid (that is, one in which any two objects are connected by at least
one morphism) is isomorphic to a groupoid of the following form. Pick a group G and a set
(or class) X. Let the objects of the groupoid be the elements of X. For elements x and y of X,
let the set of morphisms from x to y be G. Composition of morphisms is the group operation
of G. If the groupoid is not connected, then it is isomorphic to a disjoint union of groupoids
of the above type (possibly with different groups G for each connected component). Thus
any groupoid may be given (up to isomorphism) by a set of ordered pairs (X,G).
Note that the isomorphism described above is not unique, and there is no natural choice.
Choosing such an isomorphism for a connected groupoid essentially amounts to picking one
object x0, a group isomorphism h from G(x0) to G, and for each x other than x0, a morphism
in G from x0 to x.
In category-theoretic terms, each connected component of a groupoid is equivalent (but not
isomorphic) to a groupoid with a single object, that is, a single group. Thus any groupoid is
equivalent to a multiset of unrelated groups. In other words, for equivalence instead of
isomorphism, one need not specify the sets X, only the groups G.
Consider the examples in the previous section. The general linear groupoid is both
equivalent and isomorphic to the disjoint union of the various general linear groups GLn(F).
On the other hand:
• The fundamental groupoid of X is equivalent to the collection of the fundamental groups
of each path-connected component of X, but an isomorphism requires specifying the set
of points in each component;
• The set X with the equivalence relation 
is equivalent (as a groupoid) to one copy of the
trivial group for each equivalence class, but an isomorphism requires specifying what
each equivalence class is:
• The set X equipped with an action of the group G is equivalent (as a groupoid) to one
copy of G for each orbit of the action, but an isomorphism requires specifying what set
each orbit is.
The collapse of a groupoid into a mere collection of groups loses some information, even 
from a category-theoretic point of view, because it is not natural. Thus when groupoids 
arise in terms of other structures, as in the above examples, it can be helpful to maintain

Groupoid
361
the full groupoid. Otherwise, one must choose a way to view each G(x) in terms of a single
group, and this choice can be arbitrary. In our example from topology, you would have to
make a coherent choice of paths (or equivalence classes of paths) from each point p to each
point q in the same path-connected component.
As a more illuminating example, the classification of groupoids with one endomorphism
does not reduce to purely group theoretic considerations. This is analogous to the fact that
the classification of vector spaces with one endomorphism is nontrivial.
Morphisms of groupoids come in more kinds than those of groups: we have, for example,
fibrations, covering morphisms, universal morphisms, and quotient morphisms. Thus a
subgroup H of a group G yields an action of G on the set of cosets of H in G and hence a
covering morphism p from, say, K to G, where K is a groupoid with vertex groups
isomorphic to H. In this way, presentations of the group G can be "lifted" to presentations
of the groupoid K, and this is a useful way of obtaining information about presentations of
the subgroup H. For further information, see the books by Higgins and by Brown in the
References.
Another useful fact is that the category of groupoids, unlike that of groups, is cartesian
closed.
Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids
When studying geometrical objects, the arising groupoids often carry some differentiable
structure, turning them into Lie groupoids. These can be studied in terms of Lie algebroids,
in analogy to the relation between Lie groups and Lie algebras.
References
• F. Borceux, G. Janelidze, 2001, Galois theories. [1] Cambridge Univ. Press. Shows how
generalisations of Galois theory lead to Galois groupoids.
• Brown, Ronald, 1987, "From groups to groupoids: a brief survey, [2]" Bull. London Math.
Soc. 19: 113-34. Reviews the history of groupoids up to 1987, starting with the work of
Brandt on quadratic forms. The downloadable version updates the many references.
• --------, 2006. Topology and groupoids. [3] Booksurge. Revised and extended edition of a
book previously published in 1968 and 1988.
• --------, Higher dimensional group theory [7] Explains how the groupoid concept has to led
to higher dimensional homotopy groupoids, having applications in homotopy theory and
in group cohomology. Many references.
• Cannas da Silva, A., and A. Weinstein, Geometric Models for Noncommutative Algebras.
[4] Especially Part VI.
• Golubitsky, M., Ian Stewart, 2006, "Nonlinear dynamics of networks: the groupoid
formalism [5]", Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 43: 305-64
• Higgins, P. J., 1971. Categories and groupoids. [6] Van Nostrand Notes in Mathematics.
Now downloadable. Applications of groupoids in group theory, for example to a
generalisation of Grushko's theorem, and in topology. Good introduction to category
theory.
• Higgins, P. J., "The fundamental groupoid of a graph of groups", J. London Math. Soc. (2)
13 (1976) 145--149.
• Higgins, P. J. and Taylor, J., "The fundamental groupoid and the homotopy crossed 
complex of an orbit space", in Category theory (Gummersbach, 1981), Lecture Notes in

Groupoid
362
Math., Volume 962. Springer, Berlin (1982), 115--122.
• Mackenzie, K. C. H., 2005. General theory of Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids. [7]
Cambridge Univ. Press.
• Weinstein, Alan, "Groupoids: unifying internal and external symmetry. [8]" Also available
in Postscript. [9]
References
[1] http:/ / www. cup. cam. ac. uk/ catalogue/ catalogue. asp?isbn=9780521803090
[2] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ groupoidsurvey. pdf
[3] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ topgpds. html
[4] http:/ / www. math. ist. utl. pt/ ~acannas/ Books/ models_final. pdf
[5] http:/ / www. ams. org/ bull/ 2006-43-03/ S0273-0979-06-01108-6/ S0273-0979-06-01108-6. pdf
[6] http:/ / 138. 73. 27. 39/ tac/ reprints/ articles/ 7/ tr7abs. html
[7] http:/ / www. shef. ac. uk/ ~pm1kchm/ gt. html
[8] http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 199607/ weinstein. pdf
[9] http:/ / math. berkeley. edu/ ~alanw/ Groupoids. ps
Lie groupoid
In mathematics, a Lie groupoid is a groupoid where the set 
of objects and the set
of morphisms are both manifolds, the source and target operations
are submersions, and all the category operations (source and target, composition, and
identity-assigning map) are smooth.
A Lie groupoid can thus be thought of as a "many-object generalization" of a Lie group, just
as a groupoid is a many-object generalization of a group. Just as every Lie group has a Lie
algebra, every Lie groupoid has a Lie algebroid.
Examples
• Any Lie group gives a Lie groupoid with one object, and conversely. So, the theory of Lie
groupoids includes the theory of Lie groups.
• Given any manifold 
, there is a Lie groupoid called the pair groupoid, with 
as the
manifold of objects, and precisely one morphism from any object to any other. In this Lie
groupoid the manifold of morphisms is thus 
.
• Given a Lie group 
acting on a manifold 
, there is a Lie groupoid called the
translation groupoid with one morphism for each triple 
with 
.
• Any foliation gives a Lie groupoid.
• Any principal bundle 
with structure group G gives a groupoid, namely
over M, where G acts on the pairs componentwise. Composition is defined via
compatible representatives as in the pair groupoid.

Lie groupoid
363
Morita Morphisms and Smooth Stacks
Beside isomorphism of groupoids there is a more coarse notation of equivalence, the so
called Morita equivalence. A quite general example is the Morita-morphism of the Čech
groupoid which goes as follows. Let M be a smooth manifold and 
an open cover of
M. Define 
the disjoint union with the obvious submersion 
. In
order to encode the structure of the manifold M define the set of morphisms 
where 
. The source and target map are defined as the embeddings
and 
. And multiplication is the obvious one if we read the 
as subsets of M (compatible points in 
and 
actually are the same in M and also lie
in 
).
This Čech groupoid is in fact the pullback groupoid of 
, i.e. the trivial groupoid
over M, under p. That is what makes it Morita-morphism.
In order to get the notion of an equivalence relation we need to make the construction
symmetric and show that it is also transitive. In this sense we say that 2 groupoids
and 
are Morita equivalent iff there exists a third groupoid 
together with 2 Morita morphisms from G to K and H to K. Transitivity is an interesting
construction in the category of groupoid principal bundles and left to the reader.
It arises the question of what is preserved under the Morita equivalence. There are 2
obvious things, one the coarse quotient/ orbit space of the groupoid 
and
secondly the stabilizer groups 
for corresponding points 
and 
.
The further question of what is the structure of the coarse quotient space leads to the
notion of a smooth stack. We can expect the coarse quotient to be a smooth manifold if for
example the stabilizer groups are trivial (as in the example of the Čech groupoid). But if the
stabilizer groups change we cannot expect a smooth manifold any longer. The solution is to
revert the problem and to define:
A smooth stack is a Morita-equivalence class of Lie groupoids. The natural geometric
objects living on the stack are the geometric objects on Lie groupoids invariant under
Morita-equivalence. As an example consider the Lie groupoid cohomology.
Examples
• The notion of smooth stack is quite general, obviously all smooth manifolds are smooth
stacks.
• But also orbifolds are smooth stacks, namely (equivalence classes of) étale groupoids.
• Orbit spaces of foliations are another class of examples
External links
Alan Weinstein, Groupoids: unifying internal and external symmetry, AMS Notices, 43
(1996), 744-752. Also available as arXiv:math/9602220 [1]
Kirill Mackenzie, Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids in Differential Geometry, Cambridge U.
Press, 1987.
Kirill Mackenzie, General Theory of Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids, Cambridge U. Press,
2005

Lie groupoid
364
References
[1] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 9602220
Lie algebroid
In mathematics, Lie algebroids serve the same role in the theory of Lie groupoids that Lie
algebras serve in the theory of Lie groups: reducing global problems to infinitesimal ones.
Just as a Lie groupoid can be thought of as a "Lie group with many objects", a Lie algebroid
is like a "Lie algebra with many objects".
More precisely, a Lie algebroid is a triple 
consisting of a vector bundle 
over
a manifold 
, together with a Lie bracket 
on its module of sections 
and a
morphism of vector bundles 
called the anchor. Here 
is the tangent
bundle of 
. The anchor and the bracket are to satisfy the Leibniz rule:
where 
and 
is the derivative of 
along the vector field
. It follows that
for all 
.
Examples
• Every Lie algebra is a Lie algebroid over the one point manifold.
• The tangent bundle 
of a manifold 
is a Lie algebroid for the Lie bracket of vector
fields and the identity of 
as an anchor.
• Every integrable subbundle of the tangent bundle — that is, one whose sections are
closed under the Lie bracket — also defines a Lie algebroid.
• Every bundle of Lie algebras over a smooth manifold defines a Lie algebroid where the
Lie bracket is defined pointwise and the anchor map is equal to zero.
• To every Lie groupoid is associated a Lie algebroid, generalizing how a Lie algebra is
associated to a Lie group (see also below). For example, the Lie algebroid 
comes
from the pair groupoid whose objects are 
, with one isomorphism between each pair
of objects. Unfortunately, going back from a Lie algebroid to a Lie groupoid is not always
possible[1] , but every Lie algebroid gives a stacky Lie groupoid[2] [3] .
• Given the action of a Lie algebra g on a manifold M, the set of g -invariant vector fields
on M is a Lie algebroid over the space of orbits of the action.
• Atiyah algebroid. Given a vector bundle 
over a smooth manifold 
consider its
derivations, i.e. smooth 
-linear maps 
for which exists a vector field
X such that they fulfill the Leibniz rule 
for all smooth functions f
and all sections v into the vector bundle. The association 
is clearly linear and
thus comes from a map of vector bundles 
(if you find the bundle whose
sections give the derivations). The Atiyah algebroid is further characterized by fitting into
the following short exact sequence: 
To see that the
Atiyah algebroid exists for every vector bundle note that it is the Lie algebroid associated
to the Lie groupoid coming from the frame bundle of the vector bundle V.

Lie algebroid
365
Lie algebroid associated to a Lie groupoid
To describe the construction let us fix some notation. G is the space of morphisms of the Lie
groupoid, M the space of objects, 
the units and 
the target map.
the t-fiber tangent space. The Lie algebroid is now the vector
bundle 
. This inherits a bracket from G, because we can identify the M-sections
into A with left-invariant vector fields on G. Further these sections act on the smooth
functions of M by identifying these with left-invariant functions on G.
As a more explicit example consider the Lie algebroid associated to the pair groupoid
. 
The 
target 
map 
is 
and 
the 
units
. 
The 
t-fibers 
are 
and 
therefore
. 
So 
the 
Lie 
algebroid 
is 
the 
vector 
bundle
. The extension of sections X into A to left-invariant vector
fields on G is simply 
and the extension of a smooth function f from M to
a left-invariant function on G is 
. Therefore the bracket on A is just the Lie
bracket of tangent vector fields and the anchor map is just the identity.
Of course you could do an analog construction with the source map and right-invariant
vector fields/ functions. However you get an isomorphic Lie algebroid, with the explicit
isomorphism 
, where 
is the inverse map.
References
[1] Marius Crainic, Rui L. Fernandes: Integrability of Lie brackets, available as arXiv:math/0105033 (http:/ / arxiv.
org/ abs/ math/ 0105033)
[2] Hsian-Hua Tseng and Chenchang Zhu, Integrating Lie algebroids via stacks, available as arXiv:math/0405003
(http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0405003)
[3] Chenchang Zhu, Lie II theorem for Lie algebroids via stacky Lie groupoids, available as arXiv:math/0701024
(http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0701024)
External links
• Alan Weinstein, Groupoids: unifying internal and external
symmetry, AMS Notices, 43 (1996), 744-752. Also available as arXiv:math/9602220 (http:/ /
arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 9602220)
• Kirill Mackenzie, Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids in Differential Geometry, Cambridge
U. Press, 1987.
• Kirill Mackenzie, General Theory of Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids, Cambridge U.
Press, 2005
• Charles-Michel Marle, Differential calculus on a Lie algebroid and Poisson manifolds
(2002). Also available in arXiv:0804.2451 (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ 0804. 2451v1)

Algebroid
366
Algebroid
In mathematics, algebroid may mean
• algebroid branch, a formal power series branch of an algebraic curve
• algebroid multifunction
• Lie algebroid in the theory of Lie groupoids
• algebroid cohomology
Fundamental group
In mathematics, more specifically algebraic topology, the fundamental group or
Poincaré group is a group associated to any given pointed topological space that provides
a way of determining when two paths, starting and ending at a fixed base point, can be
continuously deformed into each other. Intuitively, it records information about the basic
shape, or holes, of the topological space. The fundamental group is the first and simplest of
the homotopy groups.
Fundamental groups can be studied using the theory of covering spaces, since a
fundamental group coincides with the group of deck transformations of the associated
universal covering space. Its abelianisation can be identified with the first homology group
of the space. When the topological space is homeomorphic to a simplicial complex, its
fundamental group can be described explicitly in terms of generators and relations.
Historically, the concept of fundamental group first emerged in the theory of Riemann
surfaces, in the work of Bernhard Riemann, Henri Poincaré and Felix Klein, where it
describes the monodromy properties of complex functions, as well as providing a complete
topological classification of closed surfaces.
Intuition and definition
Before giving a precise definition of the fundamental group, we try to describe the general
idea in non-mathematical terms. Take some space, and some point in it, and consider all the
loops both starting and ending at this point — paths which start at this point, wander
around as much as they like and eventually return to the starting point. Two loops can be
combined together in an obvious way: travel along the first loop, then along the second. The
set of all the loops with this method of combining them is the fundamental group, except
that for technical reasons it is necessary to consider two loops to be the same if one can be
deformed into the other without breaking.
For the precise definition, let X be a topological space, and let x0 be a point of X. We are
interested in the set of continuous functions f : [0,1] → X with the property that f(0) = x0 =
f(1). These functions are called loops with base point x0. Any two such loops, say f and g,
are considered equivalent if there is a continuous function h : [0,1] × [0,1] → X with the
property that, for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, h(t,0) = f(t), h(t,1) = g(t) and h(0,t) = x0 = h(1,t). Such an h
is called a homotopy from f to g, and the corresponding equivalence classes are called
homotopy classes.
The product f ∗ g of two loops f and g is defined by setting (f ∗ g)(t) := f(2t) if 0 ≤ t ≤ 1/2 
and (f ∗ g)(t) := g(2t − 1) if 1/2 ≤ t ≤ 1. Thus the loop f ∗ g first follows the loop f with

Fundamental group
367
"twice the speed" and then follows g with twice the speed. The product of two homotopy
classes of loops [f] and [g] is then defined as [f ∗ g], and it can be shown that this product
does not depend on the choice of representatives.
With the above product, the set of all homotopy classes of loops with base point x0 forms
the fundamental group of X at the point x0 and is denoted
or simply π(X,x0). The identity element is the constant map at the basepoint, and the
inverse of a loop f is the loop g defined by g(t) = f(1 − t). That is, g follows f backwards.
Although the fundamental group in general depends on the choice of base point, it turns out
that, up to isomorphism, this choice makes no difference so long as the space X is
path-connected. For path-connected spaces, therefore, we can write π1(X) instead of
π1(X,x0) without ambiguity whenever we care about the isomorphism class only.
Examples
In many spaces, such as Rn, or any convex subset of Rn, there is only one homotopy class of
loops, and the fundamental group is therefore trivial, i.e. ({0},+). A path-connected space
with a trivial fundamental group is said to be simply connected.
A more interesting example is provided by the circle. It turns out that each homotopy class
consists of all loops which wind around the circle a given number of times (which can be
positive or negative, depending on the direction of winding). The product of a loop which
winds around m times and another that winds around n times is a loop which winds around
m + n times. So the fundamental group of the circle is isomorphic to 
, the additive
group of integers. This fact can be used to give proofs of the Brouwer fixed point theorem
and the Borsuk–Ulam theorem in dimension 2.
Since the fundamental group is a homotopy invariant, the theory of the winding number for
the complex plane minus one point is the same as for the circle.
Unlike the homology groups and higher homotopy groups associated to a topological space,
the fundamental group need not be abelian. For example, the fundamental group of the
figure eight is the free group on two letters. More generally, the fundamental group of any
graph G is a free group. Here the rank of the free group is equal to 1 − χ(G): one minus the
Euler characteristic of G, when G is connected. A somewhat more sophisticated example of
a space with a non-abelian fundamental group is the complement of a trefoil knot in R3.
Functoriality
If f : X → Y is a continuous map, x0∈X and y0∈Y with f(x0) = y0, then every loop in X with
base point x0 can be composed with f to yield a loop in Y with base point y0. This operation
is compatible with the homotopy equivalence relation and with composition of loops. The
resulting group homomorphism, called the induced homomorphism, is written as π(f) or,
more commonly,
We thus obtain a functor from the category of topological spaces with base point to the
category of groups.
It turns out that this functor cannot distinguish maps which are homotopic relative the base 
point: if f and g : X → Y are continuous maps with f(x0) = g(x0) = y0, and f and g are

Fundamental group
368
homotopic relative to {x0}, then f* = g*. As a consequence, two homotopy equivalent
path-connected spaces have isomorphic fundamental groups:
The fundamental group functor takes products to products and coproducts to coproducts.
That is, if X and Y are path connected, then
and
(In the latter formula, 
denotes the wedge sum of topological spaces, and * the free
product of groups.) Both formulas generalize to arbitrary products. Furthermore the latter
formula is a special case of the Seifert–van Kampen theorem which states that the
fundamental group functor takes pushouts along inclusions to pushouts.
Fibrations
A generalization of a product of spaces is given by a fibration,
Here the total space E is a sort of "twisted product" of the base space B and the fiber F. In
general the fundamental groups of B, E and F are terms in a long exact sequence involving
higher homotopy groups. When all the spaces are connected, this has the following
consequences for the fundamental groups:
• π1(B) and π1(E) are isomorphic if F is simply connected
• πn+1(B) and πn(F) are isomorphic if E is contractible
The latter is often applied to the situation E = path space of B, F = loop space of B or
B = classifying space BG of a topological group G, B = universal G-bundle EG.
Relationship to first homology group
The fundamental groups of a topological space X are related to its first singular homology
group, because a loop is also a singular 1-cycle. Mapping the homotopy class of each loop at
a base point x0 to the homology class of the loop gives a homomorphism from the
fundamental group π(X,x0) to the homology group H1(X). If X is path-connected, then this
homomorphism is surjective and its kernel is the commutator subgroup of π(X,x0), and
H1(X) is therefore isomorphic to the abelianization of π(X,x0). This is a special case of the
Hurewicz theorem of algebraic topology.
Universal covering space
If X is a topological space that is path connected, locally path connected and locally simply
connected, then it has a simply connected universal covering space on which the
fundamental group π(X,x0) acts freely by deck transformations with quotient space X. This
space can be constructed analogously to the fundamental group by taking pairs (x,γ), where
x is a point in X and γ is a homotopy class of paths from x0 to x and the action of π(X,x0) is
by concatenation of paths. It is uniquely determined as a covering space.

Fundamental group
369
Examples
Let G be a connected, simply connected compact Lie group, for example the special unitary
group SUn, and let Γ be a finite subgroup of G. Then the homogeneous space X=G/Γ has
fundamental group Γ, which acts by right multiplication on the universal covering space G.
Among the many variants of this construction, one of the most important is given by locally
symmetric spaces X=Γ\G/K, where
• G is a non-compact simply connected, connected Lie group (often semisimple),
• K is a maximal compact subgroup of G
• Γ is a discrete countable torsion-free subgroup of G.
In this case the fundamental group is Γ and the universal covering space G/K is actually
contractible (by the Cartan decomposition for Lie groups).
As an example take G=SL2(R), K=SO2 and Γ any torsion-free congruence subgroup of the
modular group SL2(Z).
An even simpler example is given by G=R (so that K is trivial) and Γ =Z: in this case X=R/Z
=S1.
From the explicit realization, it also follows that the universal covering space of a path
connected topological group H is again a path connected topological group G. Moreover the
covering map is a continuous open homomorphism of G onto H with kernel Γ, a closed
discrete normal subgroup of G:
Since G is a connected group with a continuous action by conjugation on a discrete group
Γ, it must act trivially, so that Γ has to be a subgroup of the center of G. In particular π1(H)
= Γ is an Abelian group; this can also easily be seen directly without using covering spaces.
The group G is called the universal covering group of H.
As the universal covering group suggests, there is an analogy between the fundamental
group of a topological group and the center of a group; this is elaborated at Lattice of
covering groups.
Edge-path group of a simplicial complex
If X is a connected simplicial complex, an edge-path in X is defined to be a chain of vertices
connected by edges in X. Two edge-paths are said to be edge-equivalent if one can be
obtained from the other by successively switching between an edge and the two opposite
edges of a triangle in X. If v is a fixed vertex in X, an edge-loop at v is an edge-path starting
and ending at v. The edge-path group E(X,v) is defined to be the set of edge-equivalence
classes of edge-loops at v, with product and inverse defined by concatenation and reversal
of edge-loops.
The edge-path group is naturally isomorphic to π1(|X|,v), the fundamental group of the
geometric realisation |X| of X. Since it depends only on the 2-skeleton X2 of X (i.e. the
vertices, edges and triangles of X), the groups π1(|X|,v) and π1(|X2|,v) are isomorphic.
The edge-path group can be described explicitly in terms of generators and relations. If T is 
a maximal spanning tree in the 1-skeleton of X, then E(X,v) is canonically isomorphic to the 
group with generators the oriented edges of X not occurring in T and relations the 
edge-equivalences corresponding to triangles in X containing one or more edge not in T. A 
similar 
result 
holds 
if 
T 
is 
replaced 
by 
any 
simply 
connected—in 
particular

Fundamental group
370
contractible—subcomplex of X. This often gives a practical way of computing fundamental
groups and can be used to show that every finitely presented group arises as the
fundamental group of a finite simplicial complex. It is also one of the classical methods used
for topological surfaces, which are classified by their fundamental groups.
The universal covering space of a finite connected simplicial complex X can also be
described directly as a simplicial complex using edge-paths. Its vertices are pairs (w,γ)
where w is a vertex of X and γ is an edge-equivalence class of paths from v to w. The
k-simplices containing (w,γ) correspond naturally to the k-simplices containing w. Each new
vertex u of the k-simplex gives an edge wu and hence, by concatenation, a new path γu from
v to u. The points (w,γ) and (u, γu) are the vertices of the "transported" simplex in the
universal covering space. The edge-path group acts naturally by concatenation, preserving
the simplicial structure, and the quotient space is just X.
It is well-known that this method can also be used to compute the fundamental group of an
arbitrary topological space. This was doubtless known to Čech and Leray and explicitly
appeared as a remark in a paper by Weil (1960); various other authors such as L. Calabi,
W-T. Wu and N. Berikashvili have also published proofs. In the simplest case of a compact
space X with a finite open covering in which all non-empty finite intersections of open sets
in the covering are contractible, the fundamental group can be identified with the
edge-path group of the simplicial complex corresponding to the nerve of the covering.
Realizability
Every group can be realized as the fundamental group of a connected CW-complex of
dimension 2 (or higher). As noted above, though, only free groups can occur as fundamental
groups of 1-dimensional CW-complexes (that is, graphs).
Every finitely presented group can be realized as the fundamental group of a compact,
connected, smooth manifold of dimension 4 (or higher). But there are severe restrictions on
which groups occur as fundamental groups of low-dimensional manifolds. For example, no
free abelian group of rank 4 or higher can be realized as the fundamental group of a
manifold of dimension 3 or less.
Related concepts
The fundamental group measures the 1-dimensional hole structure of a space. For studying
"higher-dimensional holes", the homotopy groups are used. The elements of the n-th
homotopy group of X are homotopy classes of (basepoint-preserving) maps from Sn to X.
The set of loops at a particular base point can be studied without regarding homotopic
loops as equivalent. This larger object is the loop space.
For topological groups, a different group multiplication may be assigned to the set of loops
in the space, with pointwise multiplication rather than concatenation. The resulting group
is the loop group.

Fundamental group
371
Fundamental groupoid
Rather than singling out one point and considering the loops based at that point up to
homotopy, one can also consider all paths in the space up to homotopy (fixing the initial and
final point). This yields not a group but a groupoid, the fundamental groupoid of the
space.
See also
• Homotopy group, generalization of fundamental group
There are also similar notions of fundamental group for algebraic varieties (the étale
fundamental group) and for orbifolds (the orbifold fundamental group).
References
• Joseph J. Rotman, An Introduction to Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, ISBN
0-387-96678-1
• Isadore Singer and John A. Thorpe, Lecture Notes on Elementary Geometry and
Topology, Springer-Verlag (1967) ISBN 0-387-90202-3
• Allen Hatcher, Algebraic Topology [1], Cambridge University Press (2002) ISBN
0-521-79540-0
• Peter Hilton and Shaun Wylie, Homology Theory, Cambridge University Press (1967)
[warning: these authors use contrahomology for cohomology]
• Richard Maunder, Algebraic Topology, Dover (1996) ISBN 0486691314
• Deane Montgomery and Leo Zippin, Topological Transformation Groups, Interscience
Publishers (1955)
• James Munkres, Topology, Prentice Hall (2000) ISBN 0131816292
• Herbert Seifert and William Threlfall, A Textbook of Topology (translated from German
by Wofgang Heil), Academic Press (1980), ISBN 0126348502
• Edwin Spanier, Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag (1966) ISBN 0-387-94426-5
• André Weil, On discrete subgroups of Lie groups, Ann. of Math. 72 (1960), 369-384.
• Fundamental group [2] on PlanetMath
• Fundamental groupoid [3] on PlanetMath
External links
• Dylan G.L. Allegretti, Simplicial Sets and van Kampen's Theorem [4] (An elementary
discussion of the fundamental groupoid of a topological space and the fundamental
groupoid of a simplicial set).
• Animations to introduce to the fundamental group by Nicolas Delanoue [5]
References
[1] http:/ / www. math. cornell. edu/ ~hatcher/ AT/ ATpage. html
[2] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=849
[3] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=3941
[4] http:/ / www. math. uchicago. edu/ ~may/ VIGRE/ VIGREREU2008. html
[5] http:/ / www. istia. univ-angers. fr/ ~delanoue/ topo_alg/

Homotopy
372
Homotopy
The two bold paths shown above are homotopic
relative to their endpoints. Thin lines mark
isocontours of one possible homotopy.
In topology, two continuous functions from one
topological 
space 
to 
another 
are 
called
homotopic (Greek homos = identical and topos
= place) if one can be "continuously deformed"
into the other, such a deformation being called a
homotopy between the two functions. An
outstanding use of homotopy is the definition of
homotopy 
groups 
and 
cohomotopy 
groups,
important invariants in algebraic topology.
In practice, there are technical difficulties in
using homotopies with certain pathological
spaces. Consequently most algebraic topologists
work with compactly generated spaces, CW
complexes, or spectra.
Formal definition
A homotopy of a coffee cup into a doughnut (torus).
Formally, 
a 
homotopy 
between 
two
continuous functions f and g from a
topological space X to a topological space Y
is defined to be a continuous function H: X
× [0,1] → Y from the product of the space X
with the unit interval [0,1] to Y such that,
for all points x in X, H(x,0)=f(x) and
H(x,1)=g(x).
If we think of the second parameter of H as
"time", then H describes a "continuous
deformation" of f into g: at time 0 we have
the function f, at time 1 we have the
function g.
An alternative notation is to say that a
homotopy 
between 
two 
continuous
functions f , g : X → Y is a family of
continuous functions ht: X → Y for t ∈ [0,1]
such that h0= f and h1= g and the map t → ht is continuous from [0,1] to the space of all
continuous functions X → Y. The two versions coincide by setting ht(x) = H(x,t).
Properties
Continuous functions f and g (both from topological space X to Y) are said to be homotopic 
if and only if there is a homotopy H taking f to g as described above. Being homotopic is an 
equivalence relation on the set of all continuous functions from X to Y. This homotopy 
relation is compatible with function composition in the following sense: if f1, g1: X → Y are 
homotopic, and f2, g2: Y → Z are homotopic, then their compositions f2 o f1 and g2 o g1: X →

Homotopy
373
Z are homotopic as well.
Homotopy equivalence and null-homotopy
Given two spaces X and Y, we say they are homotopy equivalent or of the same
homotopy type if there exist continuous maps f: X → Y and g: Y → X such that g o f is
homotopic to the identity map idX and f o g is homotopic to idY.
The maps f and g are called homotopy equivalences in this case. Clearly, every
homeomorphism is a homotopy equivalence, but the converse is not true: for example, a
solid disk is not homeomorphic to a single point, although the disk and the point are
homotopy equivalent.
Intuitively, two spaces X and Y are homotopy equivalent if they can be transformed into one
another by bending, shrinking and expanding operations. For example, a solid disk or solid
ball is homotopy equivalent to a point, and R2 − {(0,0)} is homotopy equivalent to the unit
circle S1. Spaces that are homotopy equivalent to a point are called contractible.
A function f is said to be null-homotopic if it is homotopic to a constant function. (The
homotopy from f to a constant function is then sometimes called a null-homotopy.) For
example, a map from the circle S1 is null-homotopic precisely when it can be extended to a
map of the disc D2.
It follows from these definitions that a space X is contractible if and only if the identity map
from X to itself—which is always a homotopy equivalence—is null-homotopic.
Homotopy invariance
Homotopy equivalence is important because in algebraic topology many concepts are
homotopy invariant, that is, they respect the relation of homotopy equivalence. For
example, if X and Y are homotopy equivalent spaces, then:
• if X is path-connected, then so is Y
• if X is simply connected, then so is Y
• the (singular) homology and cohomology groups of X and Y are isomorphic
• if X and Y are path-connected, then the fundamental groups of X and Y are isomorphic,
and so are the higher homotopy groups. Without the path-connectedness assumption, one
has π1(X, x0) isomorphic to π1(Y, f(x0)) where f: X → Y is a homotopy equivalence and x0 a
given point in X.
An example of an algebraic invariant of topological spaces which is not homotopy-invariant
is compactly supported homology (which is, roughly speaking, the homology of the
compactification, and compactification is not homotopy-invariant).
Relative homotopy
In order to define the fundamental group, one needs the notion of homotopy relative to a
subspace. These are homotopies which keep the elements of the subspace fixed. Formally:
if f and g are continuous maps from X to Y and K is a subset of X, then we say that f and g
are homotopic relative to K if there exists a homotopy H: X × [0,1] → Y between f and g
such that H(k,t) = f(k) = g(k) for all k∈K and t∈[0,1]. Also, if g is a retract from X to K and f
is the identity map, this is known as a strong deformation retract of X to K. When K is a
point, the term pointed homotopy is used.

Homotopy
374
Homotopy groups
Since the relation of two functions f , g : X → Y being homotopic relative to a subspace is an
equivalence relation, we can look at the equivalence classes of maps between a fixed X and
Y. If we fix X = [0,1]n, the unit interval [0,1] crossed with itself n times, and we take our
subspace to be its boundary ∂([0,1]n ) then the equivalence classes form a group, denoted
πn(Y , y0 ), where y0 is the image of the subspace ∂([0,1]n ).
We can define the action of one equivalence class on another, and so we get a group. These
groups are called the homotopy groups. In the case n = 1, it is also called the fundamental
group.
Homotopy category
The idea of homotopy can be turned into a formal category of category theory. The
homotopy category is the category whose objects are topological spaces, and whose
morphisms are homotopy equivalence classes of continuous maps. Two topological spaces X
and Y are isomorphic in this category if and only if they are homotopy-equivalent. Then a
functor on the category of topological spaces is homotopy invariant if it can be expressed as
a functor on the homotopy category.
For example, homology groups are a functorial homotopy invariant: this means that if f and
g from X to Y are homotopic, then the group homomorphisms induced by f and g on the
level of homology groups are the same: Hn(f) = Hn(g) : Hn(X) → Hn(Y) for all n. Likewise, if
X and Y are in addition path-connected, then the group homomorphisms induced by f and g
on the level of homotopy groups are also the same: πn(f) = πn(g) : πn(X) → πn(Y).
Timelike homotopy
On a Lorentzian manifold, certain curves are distinguished as timelike. A timelike homotopy
between two timelike curves is a homotopy such that each intermediate curve is timelike.
No closed timelike curve (CTC) on a Lorentzian manifold is timelike homotopic to a point
(that is, null timelike homotopic); such a manifold is therefore said to be multiply connected
by timelike curves. A manifold such as the 3-sphere can be simply connected (by any type of
curve), and yet be multiply timelike connected.
Homotopy lifting property
If we have a homotopy 
and a cover 
and we are given a map
such that 
( 
is called a lift of 
), then we can lift all of 
to a
map 
such that 
. The homotopy lifting property is used to
characterize fibrations.
Homotopy extension property
Another useful property involving homotopy is the homotopy extension property, which
characterizes the extension of a homotopy between two functions from a subset of some set
to the set itself. It is useful when dealing with cofibrations.

Homotopy
375
Isotopy
In case the two given continuous functions f and g from the topological space X to the
topological space Y are homeomorphisms, one can ask whether they can be connected
'through homeomorphisms'. This gives rise to the concept of isotopy, which is a homotopy,
H, in the notation used before, such that for each fixed t, H(x,t) gives a homeomorphism.
Requiring that two homeomorphisms be isotopic really is a stronger requirement than that
they be homotopic. For example, the map of the unit disc in R2 defined by f(x,y) = (−x, −y)
is equivalent to a 180-degree rotation around the origin, and so the identity map and f are
isotopic because they can be connected by rotations. However, the map on the interval
[−1,1] in R defined by f(x) = −x is not isotopic to the identity. Loosely speaking, any
homotopy from f to the identity would have to exchange the endpoints, which would mean
that they would have to 'pass through' each other. Moreover, f has changed the orientation
of the interval, hence it cannot be isotopic to the identity. However, the maps are
homotopic; one homotopy from f to the identity is H: [−1,1] × [0,1] → [−1,1] given by
H(x,y) = 2yx-x.
In geometric topology—for example in knot theory—the idea of isotopy is used to construct
equivalence relations. For example, when should two knots be considered the same? We
take two knots, K1 and K2, in three-dimensional space. A knot is an embedding of a
one-dimensional space, the "loop of string", into this space, and an embedding is simply a
homeomorphism. The intuitive idea of deforming one to the other should correspond to a
path of embeddings: a continuous function starting at t=0 with the K1 embedding, ending at
t=1 with the K2 embedding, with all intermedate values being embeddings; this
corresponds to the definition of isotopy. An ambient isotopy, studied in this context, is an
isotopy of the larger space, considered in light of its action on the embedded submanifold.
Applications
Based on the concept of the homotopy, computation methods for algebraic and differential
equations are developped. The methods for algebraic equations include the homotopy
continuation method and the continuation method. The methods for differential equations
include the homotopy analysis method.
See also
• Mapping class group
• Homeotopy
• Regular homotopy
• Poincaré conjecture
• Homotopy analysis method

Crossed module
376
Crossed module
In mathematics, and especially in homotopy theory, a crossed module consists of groups G
and H, where G acts on H (which we will write on the left), and a homomorphism of groups
that is equivariant with respect to the conjugation action of G on itself:
and also satisfies the so-called Peiffer identity:
Examples
Let N be a normal subgroup of a group G. Then, the inclusion
is a crossed module with the conjugation action of G on N.
For any group G, modules over the group ring are crossed G-modules with d = 0.
For any group H, the homomorphism from H to Aut(H) sending any element of H to the
corresponding inner automorphism can be given the structure of a crossed module. Thus
we have a kind of `automorphism structure' of a group, rather than just a group of
automorphisms.
Given any central extension of groups
the onto homomorphism
together with the action of G on H defines a crossed module. Thus, central extensions can
be seen as special crossed modules. Conversely, a crossed module with surjective boundary
defines a central extension.
If (X,A,x) is a pointed pair of topological spaces, then the homotopy boundary
from the second relative homotopy group to the fundamental group, may be given the
structure of crossed module. It is a remarkable fact that this functor
satisfies a form of the van Kampen theorem, in that it preserves certain colimits. See the
article on crossed objects in algebraic topology below. The proof involves the concept of
homotopy double groupoid of a pointed pair of spaces.
The result on the crossed module of a pair can also be phrased as: if
is a pointed fibration of spaces, then the induced map of fundamental groups
may be given the structure of crossed module. This example is useful in algebraic K-theory.
There are higher dimensional versions of this fact using n-cubes of spaces.

Crossed module
377
These examples suggest that crossed modules may be thought of as "2-dimensional
groups". In fact, this idea can be made precise using category theory. It can be shown that
a crossed module is essentially the same as a categorical group or 2-group: that is, a group
object in the category of categories, or equivalently a category object in the category of
groups. While this may sound intimidating, it simply means that the concept of crossed
module is one version of the result of blending the concepts of "group" and "category". This
equivalence is important in understanding and using even higher dimensional versions of
groups.
Classifying space
Any crossed module
has a classifying space BM with the property that its homotopy groups are Coker d , in
dimension 1, Ker d in dimension 2, and 0 above 2. It is possible to describe conveniently the
homotopy classes of maps from a CW-complex to BM. This allows one to prove that
(pointed, weak) homotopy 2-types are completely described by crossed modules.
External links
• J. Baez and A. Lauda, Higher-dimensional algebra V: 2-groups [1]
• R. Brown, Groupoids and crossed objects in algebraic topology [2]
• R. Brown, Higher dimensional group theory [7]
• M. Forrester-Barker, Group objects and internal categories [3]
• Behrang Noohi, Notes on 2-groupoids, 2-groups and crossed-modules [4]
References
[1] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math. QA/ 0307200
[2] http:/ / intlpress. com/ HHA/ v1/ n1/ a1/
[3] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math. CT/ 02212065
[4] http:/ / arxiv. org/ pdf/ math. CT/ 0512106

Homology (mathematics)
378
Homology (mathematics)
In mathematics (especially algebraic topology and abstract algebra), homology (in Greek
ὁμός homos "identical") is a certain general procedure to associate a sequence of abelian
groups or modules with a given mathematical object such as a topological space or a group.
See homology theory for more background, or singular homology for a concrete version for
topological spaces, or group cohomology for a concrete version for groups.
For a topological space, the homology groups are generally much easier to compute than
the homotopy groups, and consequently one usually will have an easier time working with
homology to aid in the classification of spaces.
Construction of homology groups
The procedure works as follows. Given an object such as a topological space 
, one first
defines a chain complex 
encoding information about 
. A chain complex is a
sequence of abelian groups or modules 
connected by homomorphisms
which we call boundary operators. That is,
where denotes the trivial group and 
for 
. We also require the composition of
any two consecutive boundary operators to be zero. That is, for all 
,
,
i.e., the constant map to the group identity in 
. This means 
.
Now since each 
is abelian, 
is a normal subgroup of 
. And we want to
mod out by this subgroup, i.e., consider everything in 
equivalent and partition
using this equivalence relation. We define the n-th homology group of X to be the
factor group (or quotient module)
We also use the notation 
and 
, so
Computing these two groups is usually rather difficult since they are very large groups. On
the other hand, we do have tools which make the task easier.
The simplicial homology groups 
of a simplicial complex 
are defined using the
simplicial chain complex 
, with 
the free abelian group generated by the 
-simplices of 
. The singular homology groups 
are defined for any topological
space 
, and agree with the simplicial homology groups for a simplicial complex.
A chain complex is said to be exact if the image of the (n + 1)-th map is always equal to the
kernel of the nth map. The homology groups of 
therefore measure "how far" the chain
complex associated to 
is from being exact.
Cohomology groups are formally similar: one starts with a cochain complex, which is the
same as a chain complex but whose arrows, now denoted 
point in the direction of
increasing 
n 
rather 
than 
decreasing 
n; 
then 
the 
groups 
and
follow from the same description and
, as before.

Homology (mathematics)
379
Examples
The motivating example comes from algebraic topology: the simplicial homology of a
simplicial complex 
. Here 
is the free abelian group or module whose generators are
the n-dimensional oriented simplexes of 
. The mappings are called the boundary
mappings and send the simplex with vertices
to the sum
(which is considered if 
).
If we take the modules to be over a field, then the dimension of the n-th homology of 
turns out to be the number of "holes" in 
at dimension n.
Using this example as a model, one can define a singular homology for any topological
space 
. We define a chain complex for 
by taking 
to be the free abelian group (or
free module) whose generators are all continuous maps from n-dimensional simplices into
. The homomorphisms 
arise from the boundary maps of simplices.
In abstract algebra, one uses homology to define derived functors, for example the Tor
functors. Here one starts with some covariant additive functor 
and some module 
. The
chain complex for 
is defined as follows: first find a free module 
and a surjective
homomorphism 
. Then one finds a free module 
and a surjective
homomorphism 
. Continuing in this fashion, a sequence of free modules
and homomorphisms 
can be defined. By applying the functor 
to this sequence, one
obtains a chain complex; the homology 
of this complex depends only on 
and 
and
is, by definition, the n-th derived functor of 
, applied to 
.
Homology functors
Chain complexes form a category: A morphism from the chain complex 
to
the chain complex 
is a sequence of homomorphisms 
such
that 
for all n. The n-th homology Hn can be viewed as a covariant
functor from the category of chain complexes to the category of abelian groups (or
modules).
If the chain complex depends on the object X in a covariant manner (meaning that any
morphism X → Y induces a morphism from the chain complex of X to the chain complex of
Y), then the Hn are covariant functors from the category that X belongs to into the category
of abelian groups (or modules).
The only difference between homology and cohomology is that in cohomology the chain
complexes depend in a contravariant manner on X, and that therefore the homology groups
(which are called cohomology groups in this context and denoted by Hn) form contravariant
functors from the category that X belongs to into the category of abelian groups or
modules.

Homology (mathematics)
380
Properties
If 
is a chain complex such that all but finitely many 
are zero, and the
others are finitely generated abelian groups (or finite dimensional vector spaces), then we
can define the Euler characteristic
(using the rank in the case of abelian groups and the Hamel dimension in the case of vector
spaces). It turns out that the Euler characteristic can also be computed on the level of
homology:
and, especially in algebraic topology, this provides two ways to compute the important
invariant 
for the object 
which gave rise to the chain complex.
Every short exact sequence
of chain complexes gives rise to a long exact sequence of homology groups
All maps in this long exact sequence are induced by the maps between the chain complexes,
except for the maps 
The latter are called connecting homomorphisms
and are provided by the snake lemma.
History
The homology group was developed by Emmy Noether[1] [2] and, independently, by Leopold
Vietoris and Walther Mayer, in the period 1925–28.[3] Prior to this, topological classes in
combinatorial topology were not formally considered as abelian groups. The spread of
homology groups marked the change of terminology and viewpoint from "combinatorial
topology" to "algebraic topology".[4]
See also
• Simplicial homology
• Singular homology
• Cellular homology
• Homology theory
• Homological algebra

Homology (mathematics)
381
Notes
[1] Hilton 1988, p. 284
[2] For example L'émergence de la notion de group d'homologie, Nicolas Basbois (PDF) (http:/ / math1. unice. fr/
~abbrugia/ SPF/ publi/ expo13. pdf), in French, note 41, explicitly names Noether as inventing the homology
group.
[3] Hirzebruch, Friedrich, "Emmy Noether and Topology" in Teicher 1999, p. 61–63.
[4] Bourbaki and Algebraic Topology by John McCleary (PDF) (http:/ / math. vassar. edu/ faculty/ McCleary/
BourbakiAlgTop. pdf) gives documentation (translated into English from French originals).
References
• Cartan, Henri Paul and Eilenberg, Samuel (1956) Homological Algebra Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, OCLC 529171 (http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 529171)
• Eilenberg, Samuel and Moore, J. C. (1965) Foundations of relative homological algebra
(Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society number 55) American Mathematical
Society, Providence, R.I., OCLC 1361982 (http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 1361982)
• Hatcher, A., (2002) Algebraic Topology (http:/ / www. math. cornell. edu/ ~hatcher/ AT/
ATchapters. html) Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-79540-0. Detailed discussion
of homology theories for simplicial complexes and manifolds, singular homology, etc.
• Hilton, Peter (1988), "http://www.jstor.org/stable/2689545?origin=JSTOR-pdf|A Brief,
Subjective History of Homology and Homotopy Theory in This Century", Mathematics
Magazine 60 (5): 282–291, http:/ / www. jstor. org/ stable/ 2689545?origin=JSTOR-pdf
• Teicher, M. (ed.) (1999), The Heritage of Emmy Noether, Israel Mathematical Conference
Proceedings, Bar-Ilan University/American Mathematical Society/Oxford University
Press, OCLC 223099225 (http:/ / www. worldcat. org/ oclc/ 223099225), ISBN
978-0198510451
• Homology (Topological space) (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj&
amp;from=objects& amp;id=3720) on PlanetMath

Cohomology
382
Cohomology
In mathematics, specifically in algebraic topology, cohomology is a general term for a
sequence of abelian groups defined from a cochain complex. That is, cohomology is defined
as the abstract study of cochains, cocycles, and coboundaries. Cohomology can be viewed
as a method of assigning algebraic invariants to a topological space that has a more refined
algebraic structure than does homology. Cohomology arises from the algebraic dualization
of the construction of homology. In less abstract language, cochains in the fundamental
sense should assign 'quantities' to the chains of homology theory.
From its beginning in topology, this idea became a dominant method in the mathematics of
the second half of the twentieth century; from the initial idea of homology as a topologically
invariant relation on chains, the range of applications of homology and cohomology theories
has spread out over geometry and abstract algebra. The terminology tends to mask the fact
that in many applications cohomology, a contravariant theory, is more natural than
homology. At a basic level this has to do with functions and pullbacks in geometric
situations: given spaces X and Y, and some kind of function F on Y, for any mapping ƒ: X → Y
composition with ƒ gives rise to a function F o ƒ on X. Cohomology groups often also have a
natural product, the cup product, which gives them a ring structure.
Definition
For a topological space X, the cohomology group Hn(X;G), with coefficents in G, is defined
to be the quotient Ker(δ)/Im(δ) at Cn(X;G) in the cochain complex
Elements in Ker(δ) are cocycles and elements in Im(δ) are coboundaries.
History
Although cohomology is fundamental to modern algebraic topology, its importance was not
seen for some 40 years after the development of homology. The concept of dual cell
structure, which Henri Poincaré used in his proof of his Poincaré duality theorem,
contained the germ of the idea of cohomology, but this was not seen until later.
There were various precursors to cohomology. In the mid-1920s, J.W. Alexander and
Solomon Lefschetz founded the intersection theory of cycles on manifolds. On an
n-dimensional manifold M, a p-cycle and a q-cycle with nonempty intersection will, if in
general position, have intersection a (p+q−n)-cycle. This enables us to define a
multiplication of homology classes
Hp(M) × Hq(M) → Hp+q-n(M).
Alexander had by 1930 defined a first cochain notion, based on a p-cochain on a space X
having relevance to the small neighborhoods of the diagonal in Xp+1.
In 1931, Georges de Rham related homology and exterior differential forms, proving De
Rham's theorem. This result is now understood to be more naturally interpreted in terms of
cohomology.
In 1934, Lev Pontryagin proved the Pontryagin duality theorem; a result on topological
groups. This (in rather special cases) provided an interpretation of Poincaré duality and
Alexander duality in terms of group characters.

Cohomology
383
At a 1935 conference in Moscow, Andrey Kolmogorov and Alexander both introduced
cohomology and tried to construct a cohomology product structure.
In 1936 Norman Steenrod published a paper constructing Čech cohomology by dualizing
Čech homology.
From 1936 to 1938, Hassler Whitney and Eduard Čech developed the cup product (making
cohomology into a graded ring) and cap product, and realized that Poincaré duality can be
stated in terms of the cap product. Their theory was still limited to finite cell complexes.
In 1944, Samuel Eilenberg overcame the technical limitations, and gave the modern
definition of singular homology and cohomology.
In 1945, Eilenberg and Steenrod stated the axioms defining a homology or cohomology
theory. In their 1952 book, Foundations of Algebraic Topology, they proved that the
existing homology and cohomology theories did indeed satisfy their axioms.[1]
In 1948 Edwin Spanier, building on work of Alexander and Kolmogorov, developed
Alexander-Spanier cohomology.
Cohomology theories
Eilenberg-Steenrod theories
A cohomology theory is a family of contravariant functors from the category of pairs of
topological spaces and continuous functions (or some subcategory thereof such as the
category of CW complexes) to the category of Abelian groups and group homomorphisms
that satisfies the Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms.
Some cohomology theories in this sense are:
• simplicial cohomology
• singular cohomology
• de Rham cohomology
• Čech cohomology
• sheaf cohomology.
Extraordinary cohomology theories
When one axiom (dimension axiom) is relaxed, one obtains the idea of extraordinary
cohomology theory or generalized cohomology theory; this allows theories based on
K-theory and cobordism theory. There are others, coming from stable homotopy theory. In
this context, singular homology is referred to as ordinary homology.
An extraordinary cohomology theory is "determined by its values on a point", in the sense
that if one has a space given by contractible spaces (homotopy equivalent to a point), glued
together along contractible spaces, as in a simplicial complex, then the cohomology of the
space is determined by the cohomology of a point and the combinatorics of the patching,
and effectively computable. Formally, this is computed by the excision theorem, or
equivalently the Mayer–Vietoris sequence. Thus the cohomology of a point is a fundamental
calculation for any extraordinary cohomology theory, though the cohomology of particular
spaces is also of interest.

Cohomology
384
Other cohomology theories
Theories in a broader sense of cohomology include:[2]
• Group cohomology
• Galois cohomology
• Lie algebra cohomology
• Harrison cohomology
• Γ cohomology
• Schur cohomology
• André-Quillen cohomology
• Hochschild cohomology
• Cyclic cohomology
• Topological André-Quillen cohomology
• Topological Hochschild cohomology
• Topological Cyclic cohomology
• Coherent cohomology
• Local cohomology
• Étale cohomology
• Crystalline cohomology
• Flat cohomology
• Motivic cohomology
• Deligne cohomology
• Perverse cohomology
• Intersection cohomology
• Non-abelian cohomology
• Gel'fand-Fuks cohomology
• Spencer cohomology
• Bonar-Claven cohomology
• Quantum cohomology
See also
• List of cohomology theories
Notes
[1] Spanier, E. H. (2000) "Book reviews: Foundations of Algebraic Topology" Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society 37(1): pp. 114-115
[2] http:/ / www. geocities. com/ jefferywinkler2/ ktheory3. html
References
• Hatcher, A. (2001) "Algebraic Topology", Cambridge U press, England: Cambridge, p.
198, ISBN 978-0-521-79160
• Hazewinkel, M. (ed.) (1988) Encyclopaedia of Mathematics: An Updated and Annotated
Translation of the Soviet "Mathematical Encyclopaedia" Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel,
Dordrecht, Netherlands, p. 68, ISBN 1-55608-010-7
• E. Cline, B. Parshall, L. Scott and W. van der Kallen, (1977) "Rational and generic
cohomology" Inventiones Mathematicae 39(2): pp. 143–163

Cohomology
385
• Asadollahi, Javad and Salarian, Shokrollah (2007) "Cohomology theories for complexes"
Journal of Pure & Applied Algebra 210(3): pp. 771-787
Homology theory
In mathematics, homology theory is the axiomatic study of the intuitive geometric idea of
homology of cycles on topological spaces. It can be broadly defined as the study of
homology theories on topological spaces.
Simple explanation
At the intuitive level homology is taken to be an equivalence relation, such that chains C
and D are homologous on the space X if the chain C − D is a boundary of a chain of one
dimension higher. The simplest case is in graph theory, with C and D vertices and homology
with a meaning coming from the oriented edge E from P to Q having boundary Q — P. A
collection of edges from D to C, each one joining up to the one before, is a homology. In
general, a k-chain is thought of as a formal combination
where the 
are integers and the 
are k-dimensional simplices on X. The boundary
concept here is that taken over from the boundary of a simplex; it allows a high-dimensional
concept which for k = 1 is the kind of telescopic cancellation seen in the graph theory case.
This explanation is in the style of 1900, and proved somewhat naive, technically speaking.
Example of a torus surface
For example if X is a 2-torus T, a one-dimensional cycle on T is in intuitive terms a linear
combination of curves drawn on T, which closes up on itself (cycle condition, equivalent to
having no net boundary). If C and D are cycles each wrapping once round T in the same
way, we can find explicitly an oriented area on T with boundary C − D. One can prove that
the homology classes of 1-cycles with integer coefficients form a free abelian group with
two generators, one generator for each of the two different ways round the 'doughnut'.
The nineteenth century
This level of understanding was common property in the mathematics of the nineteenth
century, starting with the idea of Riemann surface. At the end of the century, the work of
Poincaré had provided a much more general, though still intuitively-based, setting.
For example, it is considered that the general Stokes' theorem was first stated in 1899 by
Poincaré: it involves necessarily both an integrand (we would now say, a differential form),
and a region of integration (a p-chain), with two kinds of boundary operators, one of which
in modern terms is the exterior derivative, and the other a geometric boundary operator on
chains that includes orientation and can be used for homology theory. The two boundaries
appear as adjoint operators, with respect to integration.

Homology theory
386
Twentieth century beginnings
Rather loose, geometric arguments with homology were only gradually replaced at the
beginning of the twentieth century by rigorous techniques. To begin with, the style of the
era was to use combinatorial topology (the fore-runner of today's algebraic topology). That
assumes that the spaces treated are simplicial complexes, while the most interesting spaces
are usually manifolds, so that artificial triangulations have to be introduced to apply the
tools. Pioneers such as Solomon Lefschetz and Marston Morse still preferred a geometric
approach. The combinatorial stance did allow Brouwer to prove foundational results such
as the simplicial approximation theorem, at the base of the idea that homology is a functor
(as it would later be put). Brouwer was able to prove the Jordan curve theorem, basic for
complex analysis, and the invariance of domain, using the new tools; and remove the
suspicion attached to topological arguments as handwaving.
Towards algebraic topology
The transition to algebraic topology is usually attributed to the influence of Emmy Noether,
who insisted that homology classes lay in quotient groups — a point of view now so
fundamental that it is taken as a definition.[1] In fact Noether in the period from 1920
onwards was with her students elaborating the theory of modules for any ring, giving rise
when the two ideas were combined to the concept of homology with coefficients in a ring.
Before that, coefficients (that is, the sense in which chains are linear combinations of the
basic geometric chains traced on the space) had usually been integers, real or complex
numbers, or sometimes residue classes mod 2. In the new setting, there would be no reason
not to take residues mod 3, for example: to be a cycle is then a more complex geometric
condition, exemplified in graph theory terms by having the number of incoming edges at
every vertex a multiple of 3. But in algebraic terms, the definitions present no new problem.
The universal coefficient theorem explains that homology with integer coefficients
determines all other homology theories, by use of the tensor product; it is not anodyne, in
that (as we would now put it) the tensor product has derived functors that enter into a
general formulation.
Cohomology, and singular homology
The 1930s were the decade of the development of cohomology theory, as several research
directions grew together and the De Rham cohomology that was implicit in Poincaré's work
cited earlier became the subject of definite theorems. Cohomology and homology are dual
theories, in a sense that required detailed working out; at the same time it was realised that
homology, that was, simplicial homology, was far from being at the end of its story. The
definition of singular homology avoided the need for the apparatus of triangulations, at a
cost of moving to infinitely-generated modules.
Axiomatics and extraordinary theories
The development of algebraic topology from 1940 to 1960 was very rapid, and the role of 
homology theory was often as 'baseline' theory, easy to compute and in terms of which 
topologists sought to calculate with other functors. The axiomatisation of homology theory 
by Eilenberg and Steenrod (the Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms) revealed that what various 
candidate homology theories had in common was, roughly speaking, some exact sequences

Homology theory
387
and in particular the Mayer–Vietoris sequence, and the dimension axiom that calculated the
homology of the point. The dimension axiom was relaxed to admit the (co)homology derived
from topological K-theory, and cobordism theory, in a vast extension to the extraordinary
(co)homology theories that became standard in homotopy theory. These can be easily
characterised for the category of CW complexes.
• List of cohomology theories
Current state of homology theory
For more general (i.e. less well-behaved) spaces, recourse to ideas from sheaf theory
brought some extension of homology theories, particularly the Borel-Moore homology for
locally compact spaces.
The basic chain complex apparatus of homology theory has long since become a separate
piece of technique in homological algebra, and has been applied independently, for example
to group cohomology. Therefore there is no longer one homology theory, but many
homology and cohomology theories in mathematics.
Notes
[1] Hilton 1988, p. 284
References
• Hilton, Peter (1988), "http://www.jstor.org/stable/2689545?origin=JSTOR-pdf|A Brief,
Subjective History of Homology and Homotopy Theory in This Century", Mathematics
Magazine 60 (5): 282-291, <http:/ / www. jstor. org/ stable/ 2689545?origin=JSTOR-pdf&
gt;

Chain complex
388
Chain complex
In mathematics, chain complex and cochain complex are constructs originally used in
the field of algebraic topology. They are algebraic means of representing the relationships
between the cycles and boundaries in various dimensions of some "space". Here the "space"
could be a topological space or an algebraic construction such as a simplicial complex.
More generally, homological algebra includes the study of chain complexes in the abstract,
without any reference to an underlying space. In this case, chain complexes are studied
axiomatically as algebraic structures.
Applications of chain complexes usually define and apply their homology groups
(cohomology groups for cochain complexes); in more abstract settings various equivalence
relations are applied to complexes (for example starting with the chain homotopy idea).
Chain complexes are easily defined in abelian categories, also.
Formal definition
A chain complex 
is a sequence of abelian groups or modules ... A-2, A-1, A0, A1, A2,
... connected by homomorphisms (called boundary operators) dn : An→An−1, such that the
composition of any two consecutive maps is zero: dn ∘ dn+1 = 0 for all n. They are usually
written out as:
A variant on the concept of chain complex is that of cochain complex. A cochain complex
is a sequence of abelian groups or modules A-2, A-1, A0, A1, A2, ... connected by
homomorphisms dn : An→An+1, such that the composition of any two consecutive maps is
zero: dn+1 ∘ dn = 0 for all n:
The idea is basically the same. In either case, the index i in Ai is referred to as the degree.
A bounded chain complex is one in which almost all the Ai are 0; i.e., a finite complex
extended to the left and right by 0's. An example is the complex defining the homology
theory of a (finite) simplicial complex. A chain complex is bounded above if all degrees
above some fixed degree N are 0, and is bounded below if all degrees below some fixed
degree are 0. Clearly, a complex is bounded above and below iff the complex is bounded.
Fundamental terminology
Leaving out the indices, the basic relation on d can be thought of as
d2 = 0.
The elements of the individual groups of a chain complex are called chains (or cochains in
the case of a cochain complex.) The image of d is the group of boundaries, or in a cochain
complex, coboundaries. The kernel of d (i.e., the subgroup sent to 0 by d) is the group of
cycles, or in the case of a cochain complex, cocycles. From the basic relation, the
(co)boundaries lie inside the (co)cycles. This phenomenon is studied in a systematic way
using (co)homology groups.

Chain complex
389
Examples
Singular homology
Suppose we are given a topological space X.
Define Cn(X) for natural n to be the free abelian group formally generated by singular
n-simplices in X, and define the boundary map
where the hat denotes the omission of a vertex. That is, the boundary of a singular simplex
is alternating sum of restrictions to its faces. It can be shown ∂² = 0, so 
is a chain
complex; the singular homology 
is the homology of this complex; that is,
de Rham cohomology
The differential k-forms on any smooth manifold M form an abelian group (in fact an
R-vector space) called Ωk(M) under addition. The exterior derivative dk maps Ωk(M) to
Ωk+1(M), and d 2 = 0 follows essentially from symmetry of second derivatives, so the vector
spaces of k-forms along with the exterior derivative are a cochain complex:
The homology of this complex is the de Rham cohomology
{locally constant functions on M with values in F} 
#{connected pieces of M}
Chain maps
A chain map f between two chain complexes 
and 
is a collection of
module homomorphisms 
for each n that intertwines with the differentials on
the two chain complexes: 
. Such a map sends cycles to cycles and
boundaries 
to 
boundaries, 
and 
thus 
descends 
to 
a 
map 
on 
homology:
.
A continuous map of topological spaces induces chain maps in both the singular and de
Rham chain complexes described above (and in general for the chain complex defining any
homology theory of topological spaces) and thus a continuous map induces a map on
homology. Because the map induced on a composition of maps is the composition of the
induced maps, these homology theories are functors from the category of topological
spaces with continuous maps to the category of abelian groups with group homomorphisms.
Chain homotopy
Chain homotopies give an important equivalence relation between chain maps. Chain
homotopic chain maps induce the same maps on homology groups. A particular case is that
homotopic maps between two spaces X and Y induce the same maps from homology of X to
homology of Y. Chain homotopies have a geometric interpretation; it is described, for
example, in the book of Bott and Tu. See Homotopy category of chain complexes for further
information.

Chain complex
390
See also
• Homology
• Differential graded algebra
References
• Bott, Raoul; Tu, Loring W. (1982), Differential Forms in Algebraic Topology, Berlin, New
York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-0-387-90613-3
Crystalline cohomology
In mathematics, crystalline cohomology is a Weil cohomology theory for schemes
invented by Grothendieck (in his letter to Tate (Grothendieck 1966) and his lecture
(Grothendieck 1968)) and developed by Pierre Berthelot (1974). Its values are modules over
rings of Witt vectors over the base field.
Crystalline cohomology is closely related to the (algebraic) de Rham cohomology
introduced by Grothendieck (1963). Roughly speaking, crystalline cohomology of a variety X
in characteristic p is the de Rham cohomology of a smooth lift of X to characteristic 0, while
de Rham cohomology of X is the crystalline cohomology reduced mod p (after taking into
account higher Tors).
The idea of crystalline cohomology, roughly, is to replace the Zariski open sets of a scheme
by infinitesimal thickenings of Zariski open sets with divided power structures. The
motivation for this is that it can then be calculated by taking a local lifting of a scheme from
characteristic p to characteristic 0 and employing an appropriate version of algebraic de
Rham cohomology.
Applications
For schemes in characteristic p, crystalline cohomology theory can handle questions about
p-torsion in cohomology groups better than p-adic étale cohomology. This makes it a
natural backdrop for much of the work on p-adic L-functions.
Crystalline cohomology, from the point of view of number theory, fills a gap in the l-adic
cohomology information, which occurs exactly where there are 'equal characteristic
primes'. Traditionally the preserve of ramification theory, crystalline cohomology converts
this situation into Dieudonné module theory, giving an important handle on arithmetic
problems. Conjectures with wide scope on making this into formal statements were
enunciated by Jean-Marc Fontaine, the resolution of which is called p-adic Hodge theory.

Crystalline cohomology
391
de Rham cohomology
De Rham cohomology solves the problem of finding an algebraic definition of the
cohomology groups (singular cohomology)
Hi(X,C)
for X a smooth complex variety. These groups are the cohomology of the complex of smooth
differential forms on X (with complex number coefficients), as these form a resolution of the
constant sheaf C.
The algebraic de Rham cohomology is defined to be the hypercohomology of the complex of
algebraic forms (Kähler differentials) on X. The smooth i-forms form an acyclic sheaf, so the
hypercohomology of the complex of smooth forms is the same as its cohomology, and the
same is true for algebraic sheaves of i-forms over affine varieties, but algebraic sheaves of
i-forms over non-affine varieties can have non-vanishing higher cohomology groups, so the
hypercohomology can differ from the cohomology of the complex.
For smooth complex varieties Grothendieck (1963) showed that the algebraic de Rham
cohomology is isomorphic to the usual smooth de Rham cohomology and therefore (by de
Rham's theorem) to the cohomology with complex coefficients. This definition of algebraic
de Rham cohomology is available for algebraic varieties over any field k.
Coefficients
If X is a variety over an algebraically closed field of characteristic p > 0, then the l-adic
cohomology groups for l any prime number other than p give satisfactory cohomology
groups of X, with coefficients in the ring Zl of l-adic integers. It is not possible in general to
find similar cohomology groups with coefficients in the p-adic numbers (or the rationals, or
the integers).
The classic reason (due to Serre) is that if X is a supersingular elliptic curve, then its ring of
endomorphisms generates a quaternion algebra over Q that is non-split at p and infinity. If
X has a cohomology group over the p-adic integers with the expected dimension 2, the ring
of endomorphisms would have a 2-dimensional representation; and this is not possible as it
is non-split at p. (A quite subtle point is that if X is a supersingular elliptic curve over the
prime field, with p elements, then its crystalline cohomology is a free rank 2 module over
the p-adic integers. The argument given does not apply in this case, because some of the
endomorphisms of supersingular elliptic curves are only defined over a quadratic extension
of the field of order p.)
Grothendieck's crystalline cohomology theory gets around this obstruction because it takes
values in the ring of Witt vectors over the ground field. So if the ground field is the
algebraic closure of the field of order p, its values are modules over the p-adic completion
of the maximal unramified extension of the p-adic integers, a much larger ring containing
n-th roots of unity for all n not divisible by p, rather than over the p-adic integers.

Crystalline cohomology
392
Motivation
One idea for defining a Weil cohomology theory of a variety X over a field k of characteristic
p is to 'lift' it to a variety X* over the ring of Witt vectors of k (that gives back X on
reduction mod p), then take the de Rham cohomology of this lift. The problem is that it is
not at all obvious that this cohomology is independent of the choice of lifting.
The idea of crystalline cohomology in characteristic 0 is to find a direct definition of a
cohomology theory as the cohomology of constant sheaves on a suitable site
Inf(X)
over X, called the infinitesimal site and then show it is the same as the de Rham
cohomology of any lift.
The site Inf(X) is a category whose objects can be thought of as some sort of generalization
of the conventional open sets of X. In characteristic 0 its objects are infinitesimal
thickenings U→T of Zariski open subsets U of X. This means that U is the closed subscheme
of a scheme T defined by a nilpotent sheaf of ideals on T; for example, Spec(k)→
Spec(k[x]/(x2)).
Grothendieck showed that for smooth schemes X over C, the cohomology of the sheaf OX on
Inf(X) is the same as the usual (smooth or algebraic) de Rham cohomology.
Crystalline cohomology
In characteristic p the most obvious analogue of the crystalline site defined above in
characteristic 0 does not work. The reason is roughly that in order to prove exactness of the
de Rham complex, one needs some sort of Poincaré lemma, whose proof in turn uses
integration, and integration requires various divided powers, which exist in characteristic 0
but not always in characteristic p. Grothendieck solved this problem by defining objects of
the crystalline site of X to be roughly infinitesimal thickenings of Zariski open subsets of X,
together with a divided power structure structure giving the needed divided powers.
We will work over the ring Wn = W/pnW of Witt vectors of length n over a perfect field k of
characteristic p>0. For example, k could be the finite field of order p, and Wn is then the
ring Z/pnZ. (More generally one can work over a base scheme S which has a fixed sheaf of
ideals I with a divided power structure.) If X is a scheme over k, then the crystalline site
of X relative to Wn, denoted Cris(X/Wn), has as its objects pairs U→T consisting of a closed
immersion of a Zariski open subset U of X into some Wn-scheme T defined by a sheaf of
ideals J, together with a divided power structure on J compatible with the one on Wn.
Crystalline cohomology of a scheme X over k is defined to be the inverse limit
where
is the cohomology of the crystalline site of X/Wn with values in the sheaf of rings O = OX/Wn.
A key point of the theory is that the crystalline cohomology of a smooth scheme X over k
can often be calculated in terms of the algebraic de Rham cohomology of a proper and
smooth lifting of X to a scheme Z over W. There is a canonical isomorphism

Crystalline cohomology
393
of the crystalline cohomology of X with the de Rham cohomology of Z over the formal
scheme of W (an inverse limit of the hypercohomology of the complexes of differential
forms). Conversely the de Rham cohomology of X can be recovered as the reduction mod p
of its crystalline cohomology (after taking higher Tors into account).
Crystals
If X is a scheme over S then the sheaf OX/S is defined by OX/S(T) = coordinate ring of T,
where we write T as an abbreviation for an object U→T of Cris(X/S).
A crystal on the site Cris(X/S) is a sheaf F of OX/S modules that is rigid in the following
sense:
for any map f between objects T, T′ of Cris(X/S), the natural map from f*F(T) to F(T′)
is an isomorphism.
This is similar to the definition of a quasicoherent sheaf of modules in the Zariski topology.
An example of a crystal is the sheaf OX/S.
The term crystal attached to the theory, explained in Grothendieck's letter to Tate (1966),
was a metaphor inspired by certain properties of algebraic differential equations. These
had played a role in p-adic cohomology theories (precursors of the crystalline theory,
introduced in various forms by Dwork, Monsky, Washnitzer, Lubkin and Katz) particularly
in Dwork's work. Such differential equations can be formulated easily enough by means of
the algebraic Koszul connections, but in the p-adic theory the analogue of analytic
continuation is more mysterious (since p-adic discs tend to be disjoint rather than overlap).
By decree, a crystal would have the 'rigidity' and the 'propagation' notable in the case of
the analytic continuation of complex analytic functions. (Cf. also the rigid analytic spaces
introduced by Tate, in the 1960s, when these matters were actively being debated.)
See also
• Motivic cohomology
• De Rham cohomology
References
• Berthelot, Pierre Cohomologie cristalline des schémas de caractéristique p>0. Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 407. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1974. 604 pp.
• Berthelot, Pierre; Ogus, Arthur Notes on crystalline cohomology. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N.J.; University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, 1978. vi+243 pp. ISBN
0-691-08218-9
• Grothendieck, Alexander (1966),
"http://www.numdam.org/item?id=PMIHES_1966__29__95_0|On the de Rham
cohomology of algebraic varieties", Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques. Publications
Mathématiques 29 (29): 95–103, doi:10.1007/BF02684807 [1], MR0199194 [2], ISSN
0073-8301 [3], http:/ / www. numdam. org/ item?id=PMIHES_1966__29__95_0 (letter to
Atiyah, Oct. 14 1963)
• Grothendieck, A. Letter to J. Tate [4] (May, 1966).
• A. Grothendieck, Crystals and the de Rham cohomology of schemes, p. 306-358 in Dix 
exposés sur la cohomologie des schémas, by J. Giraud, A. Grothendieck, S.L. Kleiman, M. 
Raynaud, Amsterdam, North Holland, 1968. Advanced studies in pure mathematics

Crystalline cohomology
394
volume 3.
• Illusie, Luc Report on crystalline cohomology. Algebraic geometry (Proc. Sympos. Pure
Math., Vol. 29, Humboldt State Univ., Arcata, Calif., 1974), pp. 459--478. Amer. Math.
Soc., Providence, R.I., 1975.
• Illusie, Luc (1976),
http://www.numdam.org/numdam-bin/fitem?id=SB_1974-1975__17__53_0|"Cohomologie
cristalline (d'après P. Berthelot)", Séminaire Bourbaki (1974/1975: Exposés Nos.
453-470), Exp. No. 456, Lecture Notes in Math., 514, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag,
pp. 53–60, MR0444668 [5], http:/ / www. numdam. org/ numdam-bin/
fitem?id=SB_1974-1975__17__53_0
• Illusie, Luc (1994), "Crystalline cohomology", Motives (Seattle, WA, 1991), Proc. Sympos.
Pure Math., 55, Providence, RI: Amer. Math. Soc., pp. 43–70, MR1265522 [6]
References
[1] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007%2FBF02684807
[2] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0199194
[3] http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0073-8301
[4] http:/ / www. math. jussieu. fr/ ~leila/ grothendieckcircle/ crystals. pdf
[5] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0444668
[6] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=1265522
Homological algebra
Homological algebra is the branch of mathematics which studies homology in a general
algebraic setting. It is a relatively young discipline, whose origins can be traced to
investigations in combinatorial topology (a precursor to algebraic topology) and abstract
algebra (theory of modules and syzygies) at the end of the 19th century, chiefly by Henri
Poincaré and David Hilbert.
The development of homological algebra was closely intertwined with the emergence of
category theory. By and large, homological algebra is the study of homological functors and
the intricate algebraic structures that they entail. The hidden fabric of mathematics is
woven of chain complexes, which manifest themselves through their homology and
cohomology. Homological algebra affords the means to extract information contained in
these complexes and present it in the form of homological invariants of rings, modules,
topological spaces, and other 'tangible' mathematical objects. A powerful tool for doing this
is provided by spectral sequences.
From its very origins, homological algebra has played an enormous role in algebraic
topology. Its sphere of influence has gradually expanded and presently includes
commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, algebraic number theory, representation theory,
mathematical physics, operator algebras, complex analysis, and the theory of partial
differential equations. K-theory is an independent discipline which draws upon methods of
homological algebra, as does the noncommutative geometry of Alain Connes.

Homological algebra
395
Chain complexes and homology
The chain complex is the central notion of homological algebra. It is a sequence 
of abelian groups and group homomorphisms, with the property that the composition of any
two consecutive maps is zero:
The elements of Cn are called n-chains and the homomorphisms dn are called the
boundary maps or differentials. The chain groups Cn may be endowed with extra
structure; for example, they may be vector spaces or modules over a fixed ring R. The
differentials must preserve the extra structure if it exists; for example, they must be linear
maps or homomorphisms of R-modules. For notational convenience, restrict attention to
abelian groups (more correctly, to the category Ab of abelian groups); a celebrated
theorem by Barry Mitchell implies the results will generalize to any abelian category. Every
chain complex defines two further sequences of abelian groups, the cycles Zn = Ker dn and
the boundaries Bn = Im dn+1, where Ker d and Im d denote the kernel and the image of d.
Since the composition of two consecutive boundary maps is zero, these groups are
embedded into each other as
Subgroups of abelian groups are automatically normal; therefore we can define the nth
homology group Hn(C) as the factor group of the n-cycles by the n-boundaries,
A chain complex is called acyclic or an exact sequence if all its homology groups are zero.
Chain complexes arise in abundance in algebra and algebraic topology. For example, if X is
a topological space then the singular chains Cn(X) are formal linear combinations of
continuous maps from the standard n-simplex into X; if K is a simplicial complex then the
simplicial chains Cn(K) are formal linear combinations of the n-simplices of X; if A = F/R is a
presentation of an abelian group A by generators and relations, where F is a free abelian
group spanned by the generators and R is the subgroup of relations, then letting C1(A) = R,
C0(A) = F, and Cn(A) = 0 for all other n defines a sequence of abelian groups. In all these
cases, there are natural differentials dn making Cn into a chain complex, whose homology
reflects the structure of the topological space X, the simplicial complex K, or the abelian
group A. In the case of topological spaces, we arrive at the notion of singular homology,
which plays a fundamental role in investigating the properties of such spaces, for example,
manifolds.
On a philosophical level, homological algebra teaches us that certain chain complexes
associated with algebraic or geometric objects (topological spaces, simplicial complexes,
R-modules) contain a lot of valuable algebraic information about them, with the homology
being only the most readily available part. On a technical level, homological algebra
provides the tools for manipulating complexes and extracting this information. Here are
two general illustrations.
• Two objects X and Y are connected by a map f between them. Homological algebra
studies the relation, induced by the map f, between chain complexes associated to X and
Y and their homology. This is generalized to the case of several objects and maps
connecting them. Phrased in the language of category theory, homological algebra
studies the functorial properties of various constructions of chain complexes and of the
homology of these complexes.

Homological algebra
396
• An object X admits multiple descriptions (for example, as a topological space and as a
simplicial complex) or the complex 
is constructed using some 'presentation' of X,
which involves non-canonical choices. It is important to know the effect of change in the
description of X on chain complexes associated to X. Typically, the complex and its
homology 
are functorial with respect to the presentation; and the homology
(although not the complex itself) is actually independent of the presentation chosen, thus
it is an invariant of X.
Functoriality
A continuous map of topological spaces gives rise to a homomorphism between their nth
homology groups for all n. This basic fact of algebraic topology finds a natural explanation
through certain properties of chain complexes. Since it is very common to study several
topological spaces simultaneously, in homological algebra one is led to simultaneous
consideration of multiple chain complexes.
A morphism between two chain complexes, 
, is a family of homomorphisms
of abelian groups Fn:Cn → Dn that commute with the differentials, in the sense that Fn -1 • 
dn
C = dn
D • Fn for all n. A morphism of chain complexes induces a morphism 
of their
homology groups, consisting of the homomorphisms Hn(F): Hn(C) → Hn(D) for all n. A
morphism F is called a quasi-isomorphism if it induces an isomorphism on the nth
homology for all n.
Many constructions of chain complexes arising in algebra and geometry, including singular
homology, have the following functoriality property: if two objects X and Y are connected by
a map f, then the associated chain complexes are connected by a morphism F = C(f) from
to 
and moreover, the composition g • f of maps f: X → Y and g: Y → Z induces
the morphism C(g • f) from 
to 
that coincides with the composition C(g) • C(f).
It follows that the homology groups 
are functorial as well, so that morphisms
between algebraic or topological objects give rise to compatible maps between their
homology.
The following definition arises from a typical situation in algebra and topology. A triple
consisting of three chain complexes 
and two morphisms between them,
is called an exact triple, or a short exact sequence of
complexes, and written as
if for any n, the sequence
is a short exact sequence of abelian groups. By definition, this means that fn is an injection,
gn is a surjection, and Im fn =  Ker gn. One of the most basic theorems of homological
algebra, sometimes known as the zig-zag lemma, states that, in this case, there is a long
exact sequence in homology
where the homology groups of L, M, and N cyclically follow each other, and δn are certain
homomorphisms determined by f and g, called the connecting homomorphisms.
Topological manifestations of this theorem include the Mayer–Vietoris sequence and the
long exact sequence for relative homology.

Homological algebra
397
Foundational aspects
Cohomology theories have been defined for many different objects such as topological
spaces, sheaves, groups, rings, Lie algebras, and C*-algebras. The study of modern
algebraic geometry would be almost unthinkable without sheaf cohomology.
Central to homological algebra is the notion of exact sequence; these can be used to
perform actual calculations. A classical tool of homological algebra is that of derived
functor; the most basic examples are functors Ext and Tor.
With a diverse set of applications in mind, it was natural to try to put the whole subject on a
uniform basis. There were several attempts before the subject settled down. An
approximate history can be stated as follows:
• Cartan-Eilenberg: In their 1956 book "Homological Algebra", these authors used
projective and injective module resolutions.
• 'Tohoku': The approach in a celebrated paper by Alexander Grothendieck which appeared
in the Second Series of the Tohoku Mathematical Journal in 1957, using the abelian
category concept (to include sheaves of abelian groups).
• The derived category of Grothendieck and Verdier. Derived categories date back to
Verdier's 1967 thesis. They are examples of triangulated categories used in a number of
modern theories.
These move from computability to generality.
The computational sledgehammer par excellence is the spectral sequence; these are
essential in the Cartan-Eilenberg and Tohoku approaches where they are needed, for
instance, to compute the derived functors of a composition of two functors. Spectral
sequences are less essential in the derived category approach, but still play a role
whenever concrete computations are necessary.
There have been attempts at 'non-commutative' theories which extend first cohomology as
torsors (important in Galois cohomology).
See also
• Homotopical algebra
References
• Henri Cartan, Samuel Eilenberg, Homological algebra. With an appendix by David A.
Buchsbaum. Reprint of the 1956 original. Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1999. xvi+390 pp. ISBN 0-691-04991-2
• Alexander Grothendieck, Sur quelques points d'algèbre homologique. Tôhoku Math. J. (2)
9, 1957, 119--221
• Saunders Mac Lane, Homology. Reprint of the 1975 edition. Classics in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1995. x+422 pp. ISBN 3-540-58662-8
• Peter Hilton; Stammbach, U. A course in homological algebra. Second edition. Graduate
Texts in Mathematics, 4. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997. xii+364 pp. ISBN
0-387-94823-6
• Gelfand, Sergei I.; Yuri Manin, Methods of homological algebra. Translated from Russian
1988 edition. Second edition. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 2003. xx+372 pp. ISBN 3-540-43583-2

Homological algebra
398
• Gelfand, Sergei I.; Yuri Manin, Homological algebra. Translated from the 1989 Russian
original by the authors. Reprint of the original English edition from the series
Encyclopaedia of Mathematical Sciences (Algebra, V, Encyclopaedia Math. Sci., 38,
Springer, Berlin, 1994). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. iv+222 pp. ISBN 3-540-65378-3
• Weibel, Charles A. (1994), An introduction to homological algebra, Cambridge Studies in
Advanced Mathematics, 38, Cambridge University Press, MR1269324 [1], ISBN
978-0-521-55987-4, OCLC 36131259 [2]
References
[1] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=1269324
[2] http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 36131259
Algebraic K- theory
In mathematics, algebraic K-theory is an advanced part of homological algebra concerned
with defining and applying a sequence
Kn(R)
of functors from rings to abelian groups, for all integers n. For historical reasons, the lower
K-groups K0 and K1 are thought of in somewhat different terms from the higher algebraic
K-groups Kn for n ≥ 2. Indeed, the lower groups are more accessible, and have more
applications, than the higher groups. The theory of the higher K-groups is noticeably
deeper, and certainly much harder to compute (even when R is the ring of integers).
The group K0(R) generalises the construction of the ideal class group of a ring, using
projective modules. Its development in the 1960s and 1970s was linked to attempts to solve
a conjecture of Serre on projective modules that now is the Quillen-Suslin theorem;
numerous other connections with classical algebraic problems were found in this era.
Similarly, K1(R) is a modification of the group of units in a ring, using elementary matrix
theory. The group K1(R) is important in topology, especially when R is a group ring,
because its quotient the Whitehead group contains the Whitehead torsion used to study
problems in simple homotopy theory and surgery theory; the group K0(R) also contains
other invariants such as the finiteness invariant. Since the 1980s, algebraic K-theory has
increasingly had applications to algebraic geometry. For example, motivic cohomology is
closely related to algebraic K-theory.
History
Alexander Grothendieck invented K-theory in the mid-1950s as a framework to state his
far-reaching generalization of the Riemann-Roch theorem. Within a few years, its
topological counterpart was considered by Atiyah and Hirzebruch and is now known as
topological K-theory.
Applications of K-groups were found from 1960 onwards in surgery theory for manifolds, in
particular; and numerous other connections with classical algebraic problems were brought
out.
A little later a branch of the theory for operator algebras was fruitfully developed, resulting 
in operator K-theory and KK-theory. It also became clear that K-theory could play a role in 
algebraic cycle theory in algebraic geometry (Gersten's conjecture): here the higher

Algebraic K- theory
399
K-groups become connected with the higher codimension phenomena, which are exactly
those that are harder to access. The problem was that the definitions were lacking (or, too
many and not obviously consistent). A definition of K2 for fields by John Milnor, for example,
gave an attractive theory that was too limited in scope, constructed as a quotient of the
multiplicative group of the field tensored with itself, with some explicit relations imposed;
and closely connected with central extensions.
Eventually the foundational difficulties were resolved (leaving a deep and difficult theory)
by Daniel Quillen, who gave several definitions of higher algebraic K-theory, via the
+-construction and the Q-construction.
Lower K-groups
The lower K-groups were discovered first, and given various ad hoc descriptions, which
remain useful. Throughout, let A be a ring.
K0
The 0th K-group is related to dimension and the Picard group.
The (covariant) functor K0 goes from the category of rings to the category of groups, taking
A to the Grothendieck group of the set of isomorphism classes of its finitely generated
projective modules, regarded as a monoid under direct sum.
(Projective) modules over a field k are vector spaces and K0(k) is isomorphic to 
, by
dimension. For A a Dedekind ring,
where Pic(A) is the Picard group of A, and similarly the reduced K-theory is given by
K1
Hyman Bass provided this definition, which generalizes the group of units of a field: K1(A)
is the abelianization of the infinite general linear group:
Here
is the direct limit of the GLn, which embeds in GLn+1 as the upper left block matrix, and the
commutator subgroup agrees with the group generated by elementary matrices
, by Whitehead's lemma. Indeed, the group 
was first
defined and studied by Whitehead,[1] and is called the Whitehead group of the ring[2] A.
As 
, 
one 
can 
also 
define 
the 
special 
Whitehead 
group
.

Algebraic K- theory
400
Commutative rings and fields
For A a commutative ring, one can define a determinant 
to the group of
units of A, which vanishes on 
and thus descends to a map 
. This
map splits via the map 
(unit in the upper left corner), and hence is
onto, and has the special Whitehead group as kernel, yielding the split short exact
sequence:
which is a quotient of the usual split short exact sequence defining the special linear group,
namely
Thus, since the groups in question are abelian, 
splits as the direct sum of the group
of units and the special Whitehead group: 
.
When A is a Dedekind domain (e.g. a field, or the ring of algebraic integers in an algebraic
number field), SK1(A) vanishes, and the determinant map is an isomorphism. In particular,
.
For a non-commutative ring, the determinant cannot be defined, but the map
generalizes the determinant.
K2
John Milnor found the right definition of K2: it is the center of the Steinberg group 
of
A.
It can also be defined as the kernel of the map
or as the Schur multiplier of the group of elementary matrices.
For a field k one has
Milnor K-theory
The above expression for K2 of a field k led Milnor to the following definition of "higher"
K-groups by
,
thus as graded parts of a quotient of the tensor algebra of the multiplicative group k× by
the two-sided ideal, generated by the
for a ≠ 0,1. For n = 0,1,2 these coincide with those above, but for n≧3 they differ in
general. For example, we have 
for n≧3.

Algebraic K- theory
401
Higher K-theory
The master, definitive definitions of K-theory were given by Daniel Quillen, after an
extended period in which uncertainty had reigned.
The +-construction
One possible definition of higher algebraic K-theory of rings was given by Quillen
Kn(R) = πn(BGL(R)+),
a very compressed piece of abstract mathematics. Here πk is a homotopy group, GL(R) is
the direct limit of the general linear groups over R for the size of the matrix tending to
infinity, B is the classifying space construction of homotopy theory, and the + is Quillen's
plus construction.
This definition only holds for n>0 so one often defines the higher algebraic K-theory via
Since BGL(R)+ is path connected and K0(R) discrete, this definition doesn't differ in higher
degrees and also holds for n=0.
The Q-construction
The Q-construction gives the same results as the +-construction, but it applies in more
general situations. Moreover, the definition is more direct in the sense that the K-groups,
defined via the Q-construction are functorial by definition. This fact is not automatic in the
+-construction.
Suppose P is an exact category; associated to P a new category QP is defined, objects of
which are those of P and morphisms from M′ to M″ are isomorphism classes of exact
diagrams
where the first arrow is an admissible epimorphism and the second arrow is an admissible
monomorphism.
The i-th K-group of P is then defined as
with a fixed zero-object 0, where BQ is the classifying space of Q, which is defined to be the
geometric realisation of the nerve of Q.
This definition coincides with the above definitions of K0, K1 and K2.
The K-groups 
of the ring A are then the K-groups 
where 
is the category
of finitely generated projective A-modules. More generally, for a scheme X, the higher
K-groups of X are by definition the K-groups of (the exact category of) locally free coherent
sheaves on X.
The following variant of this is also used: instead of finitely generated projective (=locally
free) modules, take finitely generated modules. The resulting K-groups are usually called
G-groups, or higher G-theory. When A is a noetherian regular ring, then G- and K-theory
coincide. Indeed, the global dimension of regular local rings is finite, i.e. any finitely
generated module has a finite projective resolution, so the canonical map K0 → G0 is
surjective. It is also injective, as can be shown. This isomorphism extends to the higher
K-groups, too.

Algebraic K- theory
402
Examples
While the Quillen algebraic K-theory has provided deep insight into various aspects of
algebraic geometry and topology, the K-groups have proved particularly difficult to
compute except in a few isolated but interesting cases.
Algebraic K-groups of finite fields
The first and one of the most important calculations of the higher algebraic K-groups of a
ring were made by Quillen himself for the case of finite fields:
Theorem. Let F be a finite field with q elements. Then
, 
for 
, and
for 
where 
denotes the cyclic group with r elements.
Algebraic K-groups of rings of integers
Quillen proved that if A is the ring of algebraic integers in an algebraic number field F (a
finite extension of the rationals), then the algebraic K-groups of A are finitely generated.
Borel used this to calculate Ki(A) and Ki(F) modulo torsion. For example, for the integers Z,
Borel proved that (modulo torsion)
for positive i unless 
with k positive
and (modulo torsion)
for positive k.
The torsion subgroups of K2i+1(Z), and the orders of the finite groups K4k+2(Z) have
recently been determined, but whether the latter groups are cyclic, and whether the groups
K4k(Z) vanish depends upon Vandiver's conjecture about the class groups of cyclotomic
integers.
Applications
Algebraic 
-groups are used in conjectures on special values of L-functions and the
formulation of an non-commutative main conjecture of Iwasawa theory and in construction
of higher regulators.
References
[1] J.H.C. Whitehead, Simple homotopy types Amer. J. Math. , 72 (1950) pp. 1–57
[2] Not to be confused with the Whitehead group of a group.
• Milnor, John Willard (1969 1970), "Algebraic K-theory and quadratic forms", Inventiones
Mathematicae 9: 318–344, doi: 10.1007/BF01425486 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/
BF01425486), MR 0260844 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0260844),
ISSN 0020-9910 (http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0020-9910)
• Milnor, John Willard (1971), Introduction to algebraic K-theory, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, MR 0349811 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0349811)
(lower K-groups)
• Quillen, Daniel (1975), "Higher algebraic K-theory", Proceedings of the International 
Congress of Mathematicians (Vancouver, B. C., 1974), Vol. 1, Montreal, Quebec: Canad.

Algebraic K- theory
403
Math. Congress, pp. 171–176, MR 0422392 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0422392) (Quillen's Q-construction)
• Quillen, Daniel (1974), "Higher K-theory for categories with exact sequences", New
developments in topology (Proc. Sympos. Algebraic Topology, Oxford, 1972), London
Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 11, Cambridge University Press, pp. 95–103, MR 0335604
(http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0335604) (relation of Q-construction to
+-construction)
• Seiler, Wolfgang (1988), "λ-Rings and Adams Operations in Algebraic K-Theory", in
Rapoport, M.; Schneider, P.; Schappacher, N., Beilinson's Conjectures on Special Values
of L-Functions, Boston, MA: Academic Press, ISBN 978-0-12-581120-0
• Weibel, Charles (2005),
http://www.math.uiuc.edu/K-theory/0691/KZsurvey.pdf|"Algebraic K-theory of rings of
integers in local and global fields", Handbook of K-theory, Berlin, New York:
Springer-Verlag, pp. 139–190, MR 2181823 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=2181823), http:/ / www. math. uiuc. edu/ K-theory/ 0691/
KZsurvey. pdf (survey article)
External links
• C. Weibel " The K-book: An introduction to algebraic K-theory (http:/ / www. math.
rutgers. edu/ ~weibel/ Kbook. html)"
Topological K- theory
In mathematics, topological K-theory is a branch of algebraic topology. It was founded to
study vector bundles on general topological spaces, by means of ideas now recognised as
(general) K-theory that were introduced by Alexander Grothendieck. The early work on
topological K-theory is due to Michael Atiyah and Friedrich Hirzebruch.
Definitions
Topological K-theory is a generalised cohomology theory of compact Hausdorff space
category by classifying vector bundles over a space to stable equivalences (vector bundles
are said to be stable equivalences if and only if isomorphic vector bundles are generated by
Whitney sum of the vector bundles with a trivial vector bundle[1] ). Let X be a compact
Hausdorff space and 
or 
. Then 
is the Grothendieck group of the
commutative monoid whose elements are the isomorphism classes of finite dimensional 
-vector bundles on X with the operation
for vector bundles E, F. Usually, 
is denoted 
in real case and 
in the
complex case.
More explicitly, stable equivalence, the equivalence relation on bundles E and F on X of
defining the same element in K(X), occurs when there is a trivial bundle G, so that
.
Under the tensor product of vector bundles K(X) then becomes a commutative ring.
The rank of a vector bundle carries over to the K-group define the homomorphism

Topological K- theory
404
where 
is the 0-group de Čech cohomology which is equal to group of locally
constant functions with values in 
.
If X has a distinguished basepoint x0, then the reduced K-group (cf. reduced homology)
satisfies
and is defined as either the kernel of 
(where 
is basepoint
inclusion) or the cokernel of 
(where 
is the constant map).
When X is a connected space, 
.
The definition of functor K extends to category pairs of compact spaces (an object is a pair
, 
is compact and 
is closed, a morphism between 
and 
is a
continuous map 
such that 
)
The reduced K-group is given by 
.
The definition
gives the sequence of K-groups for 
, where S denotes the reduced suspension.
Properties
•
is a contravariant functor.
• The classifying space of 
is 
(BO, in real case; BU in complex case), i.e.
• The classifying space of 
is 
( 
with discrete topology), i.e.
• There is a natural ring homomorphism 
, the Chern character, such
that 
is an isomorphism.
• Topological K-theory can be generalized vastly to a functor on C*-algebras, see operator
K-theory and KK-theory.
Bott periodicity
The phenomenon of periodicity named for Raoul Bott (see Bott periodicity theorem) can be
formulated this way:
•
and 
where 
is the class of the
tautological bundle on the 
, i.e. the Riemann sphere as complex projective line.
•
•
In real K-theory there is a similar periodicity, but modulo 8.

Topological K- theory
405
Notes
[1] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ StableEquivalence. html
References
• M. Karoubi, K-theory, an introduction (http:/ / www. institut. math. jussieu. fr/ ~karoubi/
KBook. html), 1978 - Berlin; New York: Springer-Verlag
• M.F. Atiyah, D.W. Anderson K-Theory 1967 - New York, WA Benjamin
Stack (descent theory)
In mathematics a stack is a concept used to formalise some of the main constructions of
descent theory.
Descent theory is concerned with generalisations of situations where geometrical objects
(such as vector bundles on topological spaces) can be "glued together" when they are
isomorphic (in a compatible way) when restricted to intersections of the sets in an open
covering of a space. In more general set-up the restrictions are replaced with general
pull-backs, and fibred categories form the right framework to discuss the possibility of such
"glueing". The intuitive meaning of a stack is that it is a fibred category such that "all
possible glueings work". The specification of glueings requires a definition of coverings
with regard to which the glueings can be considered. It turns out that the general language
for describing these coverings is that of a Grothendieck topology- Thus a stack is formally
given as a fibred category over another base category, where the base has a Grothendieck
topology and where the fibred category satisfies a few axioms that ensure existence and
uniqueness of certain glueings with respect to the Grothendieck topology.
Archetypical examples include the stack of vector bundles on topological spaces, the stack
of quasi-coherent sheaves on schemes (with respect to the fpqc-topology and weaker
topologies) and the stack of affine schemes on a base scheme (again with respect to the
fpqc topology or a weaker one).
Stacks are the underlying structure of algebraic stacks, which are a way to generalise
schemes and algebraic spaces and which are particularly useful in studying moduli spaces.
The concept of stacks has its origin in the definition of effective descent data in
Grothendieck (1959). The theory was further developed by Grothendieck and Giraud (1964)
and Giraud (1971); the name stack (champ in the original French) together with the
eventual definition appears to have been introduced in the latter work.
References
• Giraud, Jean (1964). "Méthode de la descente". Mémoires de la Société Mathématique de
France 2: viii+150.
• Giraud, Jean (1971), Cohomologie non abélienne, Springer, ISBN 3-540-05307-7
• Grothendieck, Alexander (1959). "Technique de descente et théorèmes d'existence en
géométrie algébrique. I. Généralités. Descente par morphismes fidèlement plats".
Séminaire Bourbaki 5 (Exposé 190): viii+150.

Stack (descent theory)
406
External links
• Stacks [1] and descent [2] on nLab.
 This category theory-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it
[3].
References
[1] http:/ / www. ncatlab. org/ nlab/ show/ stack
[2] http:/ / www. ncatlab. org/ nlab/ show/ descent
[3] http:/ / en. wikipedia. org/ w/ index. php?stub& title=Stack_%28descent_theory%29& action=edit
Esquisse d'un Programme
"Esquisse d'un Programme" is a famous proposal for long-term mathematical research
made by the German-born, French mathematician Alexander Grothendieck [1] . He pursued
the sequence of logically linked ideas in his important project proposal from 1984 until
1988, but his proposed research continues to date to be of major interest in several
branches of advanced mathematics. Grothendieck's vision provides inspiration today for
several developments in mathematics such as the extension and generalization of Galois
theory, which is currently being extended based on his original proposal.
Brief history
Submitted in 1984, the Esquisse d'un Programme[2] was a successful proposal submitted by
Alexander Grothendieck for a position at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
which Grothendieck held from 1984 till 1988.[3] This proposal was however not formally
published until 1997, because the author "could not be found, much less his permission
requested".[4] The dessins d'enfants, or "children's drawings" and "anabelian algebraic
geometry" — non-Abelian algebraic topology and noncommutative geometry — that are
contained in this long-term program, continue even today to inspire extensive mathematical
studies.
Abstract of Grothendieck's programme
("Sommaire")
• 1. The Proposal and enterpise ("Envoi").
• 2. "Teichmüller's Lego-game and the Galois group of Q over Q" ("Un jeu de
“Lego-Teichmüller” et le groupe de Galois de Q sur Q").
• 3. Number fields associated with "dessin d'enfants". ("Corps de nombres associés à un
dessin d’enfant").
• 4. Regular polyhedra over finite fields ("Polyèdres réguliers sur les corps finis").
• 5. General topology or a 'Moderated Topology' ("Haro sur la topologie dite 'générale', et
réflexions heuristiques vers une topologie dite 'modérée").
• 6. Differentiable theories and moderated theories ("Théories différentiables" (à la Nash)
et “théories modérées").
• 7. Pursuing Stacks ("À la Poursuite des Champs"}[5] .
• 8. Two-dimensional geometry ("Digressions de géométrie bidimensionnelle"[6] .

Esquisse d'un Programme
407
• 9. Summary of proposed studies ("Bilan d’une activité enseignante").
• 10. Epilogue.
• Notes
Suggested further reading for the interested mathematical reader is provided in the
References section.
"The Long March across the Theory of Galois"
“This manuscript, consisting of some nearly 800 hand-written double pages, dating from
1981, was left behind with Grothendieck's other unpublished manuscripts when he
disappeared in 1991. Typed in Tex, it comes out to about 400 pages. It goes together with a
further 1,000 pages or so of additional notes and sections which have not yet been read or
typed. Many of the major themes were summarised in the 1983 manuscript Esquisse d'un
Programme.”
The Table of Contents for this important work by Alexander Grothendieck was originally
compiled in French by the author and is reproduced here after the English Translation of
the major parts of the Long March.
Table of Contents for the Long March across Galois Theory
1. Multi-Galois Toposes (topoi)
2. Applications to topos coverings
3. Pro-multi-Galois Variants Complements
4. Introducing the arithmetic context; an `anabelian' (non-Abelian) fundamental
conjecture...
10. Local analysis of Galois theory for reformulation of the conjecture (the necessary
`purgatorium'...)
11. A taxonomic reflexion
12. Tangential structure at (sections of second type extensions)
13. Adjusting the hypotheses
14.Conditions on the groupoid systems originating from geometric considerations (in the
nonabelian case, the groupoid system can be expressed in terms of outer groups)
Returning to the arithmetic case: the Galois-type formulation, p. 53
15. A cohomological digression, p.58
16. Returning to the topological case: critical orbits
17. Returning to the concept of cyclic group
18. Application to the finite subgroups of (the discrete case, para.18)
19.Tour of Teichmüller (spaces)
20. Digression: the description of 2-isotopic categories of algebraic curves p.116
21. Teichmüller spaces p.126
22. Returning to the surfaces of (finite) groups of operators ('formulating the equations' of
the problem)
24. "Special" Teichmüller Groups
25. The case of "two groups of operators"

Esquisse d'un Programme
408
26. Profinite Teichmüller Groups, connection with the modular Teichmüller topos,
conjecture
29. Critique of the previous approach
31. Digression: a finite group over a profinite cyclic group
32 Returning to the arithmetic aspects: a remarkable reconstruction of all of the étale topos
of a complete algebraic curve starting from an open nonabelian space...
Extensions of Galois's theory for groups: Galois groupoids, categories
and functors
Galois has developed a powerful, fundamental algebraic theory in mathematics that
provides very efficient computations for certain algebraic problems by utilizing the
algebraic concept of groups, which is now known as the theory of Galois groups; such
computations were not possible before, and also in many cases are much more effective
than the 'direct' calculations without using groups[7] . To begin with, Alexander
Grothendieck stated in his proposal: "Thus, the group of Galois is realized as the
automorphism group of a concrete, pro-finite group which respects certain structures that
are essential to this group." This fundamental, Galois group theory in mathematics has been
considerably expanded, at first to groupoids- as proposed in Alexander Grothendieck's
Esquisse d' un Programme (EdP)- and now already partially carried out for groupoids; the
latter are now further developed beyond groupoids to categories by several groups of
mathematicians. Here, we shall focus only on the well-established and fully validated
extensions of Galois' theory. Thus, EdP also proposed and anticipated, along previous
Alexander Grothendieck's IHÉS seminars (SGA1 to SGA4) held in the 1960s, the
development of even more powerful extensions of the original Galois's theory for groups by
utilizing categories, functors and natural transformations, as well as further expansion of
the manifold of ideas presented in Alexander Grothendieck's Descent Theory. The notion of
motive has also been pursued actively [8] . This was developed into the motivic Galois
group, Grothendieck topology and Grothendieck category [9] . Such developments were
recently extended in algebraic topology via representable functors [10] and the fundamental
groupoid functor [11].
See also
• Alexander Grothendieck
• Grothendieck's Galois theory
• Grothendieck group
• Grothendieck category [12]
• Grothendieck inequality or Grothendieck constant
• Grothendieck–Katz p-curvature conjecture
• Grothendieck's relative point of view
• Grothendieck–Riemann–Roch theorem
• Grothendieck's Séminaire de géométrie algébrique
• Grothendieck space
• Grothendieck spectral sequence
• Grothendieck topology
• Grothendieck universe
• Tarski–Grothendieck set theory

Esquisse d'un Programme
409
• IHES
• IHES at Forty by Allyn Jackson [13]
Notes
[1] Scharlau, Winifred (September 2008), written at Oberwolfach, Germany, "Who is Alexander Grothendieck",
Notices of the American Mathematical Society (Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society) 55(8):
930–941, ISSN 1088-9477, OCLC 34550461, http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200808/ tx080800930p. pdf
[2] Alexander Grothendieck, 1984. "Esquisse d'un Programme", (1984 manuscript), finally published in Schneps
and Lochak (1997, I), pp.5-48; English transl., ibid., pp. 243-283. MR 99c:14034
[3] Rehmeyer, Julie (May 9, 2008), "Sensitivity to the Harmony of Things", Science News
[4] Schneps and Lochak (1997, I) p.1
[5] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ pstacks. htm
[6] Cartier, Pierre (2001), "A mad day's work: from Grothendieck to Connes and Kontsevich The evolution of
concepts of space and symmetry", Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 38(4): 389–408,
<http://www.ams.org/bull/2001-38-04/S0273-0979-01-00913-2/S0273-0979-01-00913-2.pdf>. An English
translation of Cartier (1998)
[7] Cartier, Pierre (1998), "La Folle Journée, de Grothendieck à Connes et Kontsevich — Évolution des Notions
d'Espace et de Symétrie", Les Relations entre les Mathématiques et la Physique Théorique — Festschrift for the
40th anniversary of the IHÉS, Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, pp. 11–19
[8] http:/ / en. wikipedia. org/ wiki/ Motive_(algebraic_geometry)
[9] http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ GrothendieckCategory. html
[10] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ RepresentableFunctor. html
[11] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ QuantumFundamentalGroupoid3. html
[12] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ GrothendieckCategory. html
[13] http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 199903/ ihes-changes. pdf
References
Related works by Alexander Grothendieck
• Alexander Grothendieck. 1971, Revêtements Étales et Groupe Fondamental (SGA1),
chapter VI: Catégories fibrées et descente, Lecture Notes in Math. 224, Springer-Verlag:
Berlin.
• Alexander Grothendieck. 1957, Sur quelque point d-algébre homologique. , Tohoku Math.
J., 9: 119-121.
• Alexander Grothendieck and Jean Dieudonné.: 1960, Éléments de géométrie algébrique.,
Publ. Inst. des Hautes Études Scientifiques, (IHÉS), 4.
• Alexander Grothendieck et al.,1971. Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie,
Vol. 1-7, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
• Alexander Grothendieck. 1962. Séminaires en Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie, Vol.
2 - Cohomologie Locale des Faisceaux Cohèrents et Théorèmes de Lefschetz Locaux et
Globaux. , pp.287. (with an additional contributed exposé by Mme. Michele Raynaud).
(Typewritten manuscript available in French; see also a brief summary in English
References Cited:
• Jean-Pierre Serre. 1964. Cohomologie Galoisienne, Springer-Verlag: Berlin.
• J. L. Verdier. 1965. Algèbre homologiques et Catégories derivées. North Holland Publ.
Cie).
• Alexander Grothendieck. 1957, Sur quelques points d'algèbre homologique, Tohoku
Mathematics Journal, 9, 119-221.

Esquisse d'un Programme
410
• Alexander Grothendieck et al. Séminaires en Géometrie Algèbrique- 4, Tome 1, Exposé 1
(or the Appendix to Exposée 1, by `N. Bourbaki' for more detail and a large number of
results. AG4 is freely available in French; also available is an extensive Abstract in
English.
• Alexander Grothendieck, 1984. "Esquisse d'un Programme" (http:/ / people. math.
jussieu. fr/ ~leila/ grothendieckcircle/ EsquisseFr. pdf), (1984 manuscript), finally
published in "Geometric Galois Actions", L. Schneps, P. Lochak, eds., London Math. Soc.
Lecture Notes 242,Cambridge University Press, 1997, pp.5-48; English transl., ibid., pp.
243-283. MR 99c:14034 .
• Alexander Grothendieck, "La longue marche in à travers la théorie de Galois." = "The
Long March Towards/Across the Theory of Galois", 1981 manuscript, University of
Montpellier preprint series 1996, edited by J. Malgoire.
Other related publications
• Schneps, Leila (1994), The Grothendieck Theory of Dessins d'Enfants, London
Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, Cambridge University Press.
• Schneps, Leila; Lochak, Pierre, eds. (1997), Geometric Galois Actions I: Around
Grothendieck's Esquisse D'un Programme, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note
Series, 242, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-59642-8
• Schneps, Leila; Lochak, Pierre, eds. (1997), Geometric Galois Actions II: The Inverse
Galois Problem, Moduli Spaces and Mapping Class Groups, London Mathematical Society
Lecture Note Series, 243, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0521596411
• Harbater, David; Schneps, Leila (2000), "Fundamental groups of moduli and the
Grothendieck–Teichmüller group", Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 352: 3117–3148, doi:
10.1090/S0002-9947-00-02347-3 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/ S0002-9947-00-02347-3).
External links
• Fundamental Groupoid Functors (http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/
QuantumFundamentalGroupoid3. html), Planet Physics.

411
Important Theorems in Algebraic
Topology
Hairy ball theorem
A failed attempt to comb a hairy ball
flat, leaving an uncombable tuft at
each pole.
A hairy doughnut, on the other hand, is
quite easily combable.
The hairy ball theorem of algebraic topology states
that there is no nonvanishing continuous tangent vector
field on the sphere. If f is a continuous function that
assigns a vector in R3 to every point p on a sphere such
that f(p) is always tangent to the sphere at p, then there
is at least one p such that f(p) = 0. The theorem was
first stated by Henri Poincaré in the late 19th century.
This is famously stated as "you can't comb a hairy ball
flat without creating a cowlick", or sometimes, "you
can't comb the hair on a coconut". It was first proved in
1912 by Brouwer[1] .
In fact from a more advanced point of view it can be
shown that the sum at the zeros of such a vector field of
a certain 'index' must be 2, the Euler characteristic of
the 2-sphere; and that therefore there must be at least
some zero. This is a consequence of the Poincaré–Hopf
theorem. 
In 
the 
case 
of 
the 
torus, 
the 
Euler
characteristic is 0; and it is possible to 'comb a hairy
doughnut flat'. In this regard, it follows that for any
compact regular 2-dimensional manifold with non-zero
Euler characteristic, any continuous tangent vector
field has at least one zero.

Hairy ball theorem
412
Cyclone consequences
From atmospheric circulation
A curious meteorological application of this theorem
involves considering the wind as a vector defined at
every point continuously over the surface of a planet
with an atmosphere. As an idealisation, take wind to be
a two-dimensional vector: suppose that relative to the
planetary diameter of the Earth, its vertical (i.e.,
non-tangential) motion is negligible.
One scenario, in which there is absolutely no wind (air
movement), corresponds to a field of zero-vectors. This
scenario is uninteresting from the point of view of this
theorem, and physically unrealistic (there will always
be wind). In the case where there is at least some wind,
the Hairy Ball Theorem dictates that there must be at least one point on a planet at all
times with no wind at all and therefore a tuft. This corresponds to the above statement that
there will always be p such that f(p) = 0.
In a physical sense, this zero-wind point will be the eye of a cyclone or anticyclone. (Like
the swirled hairs on the tennis ball, the wind will spiral around this zero-wind point - under
our assumptions it cannot flow into or out of the point.) In brief, then, the Hairy Ball
Theorem dictates that, given at least some wind on Earth, there must at all times be a
cyclone somewhere. Note that the eye can be arbitrarily large or small and the magnitude
of the wind surrounding it is irrelevant.
This is not strictly true as the air above the earth has multiple layers, but for each layer
there must be a point with zero horizontal windspeed.
Application to computer graphics
A common problem in computer graphics is to generate a non-zero vector that is orthogonal
to a given one. There is no continuous function that can do this. If the given vector is
considered to be the radius vector of a sphere, then it follows that that is a corollary of the
hairy ball theorem. To see this, note that finding a non-zero vector orthogonal to the given
one is equivalent to finding a non-zero vector that is tangent to the surface of the sphere
produced by the given vector. However, the hairy ball theorem says there exists no
continuous function that can do this for every point on the sphere (ie. every given vector).
Lefschetz connection
There is a closely-related argument from algebraic topology, using the Lefschetz fixed point
theorem. Since the Betti numbers of a 2-sphere are 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, ... the Lefschetz number
(total trace on homology) of the identity mapping is 2. By integrating a vector field we get
(at least a small part of) a one-parameter group of diffeomorphisms on the sphere; and all
of the mappings in it are homotopic to the identity. Therefore they all have Lefschetz
number 2, also. Hence they have fixed points (since the Lefschetz number is nonzero).
Some more work would be needed to show that this implies there must actually be a zero of
the vector field. It does suggest the correct statement of the more general Poincaré-Hopf
index theorem.

Hairy ball theorem
413
Corollary
A consequence of the hairy ball theorem is that any continuous function that maps a sphere
into itself has either a fixed point or a point that maps onto its own antipodal point. This can
be seen by transforming the function into a tangential vector field as follows.
Let s be the function mapping the sphere to itself, and let v be the tangential vector
function to be constructed. For each point p, construct the stereographic projection of s(p)
with p as the point of tangency. Then v(p) is the displacement vector of this projected point
relative to p. According to the hairy ball theorem, there is a p such that v(p) = 0, so that
s(p) = p.
This argument breaks down only if there exists a point p for which s(p) is the antipodal
point of p, since such a point is the only one that cannot be stereographically projected onto
the tangent plane of p.
Higher dimensions
The connection with the Euler characteristic χ suggests the correct generalisation: the
2n-sphere has no non-vanishing vector field for n ≥ 1. The difference in even and odd
dimension is that the Betti numbers of the m-sphere are 0 except in dimensions 0 and m.
Therefore their alternating sum χ is 2 for m even, and 0 for m odd.
References
• Murray Eisenberg, Robert Guy, A Proof of the Hairy Ball Theorem, The American
Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 86, No. 7 (Aug. - Sep., 1979), pp. 571-574
[1] http:/ / dz-srv1. sub. uni-goettingen. de/ sub/ digbib/ loader?ht=VIEW& did=D28661
See also
• Vector fields on spheres
• Tokamak

Universal coefficient theorem
414
Universal coefficient theorem
In mathematics, the universal coefficient theorem in algebraic topology establishes the
relationship in homology theory between the integral homology of a topological space X,
and its homology with coefficients in any abelian group A. It shows that the integral
homology groups
Hi(X,Z)
do in a certain, definite sense determine the groups
Hi(X,A).
Here H∗ might be the simplicial homology or more general singular homology theory: the
result itself is a pure piece of homological algebra about chain complexes of free abelian
groups. The form of the result is that other coefficients A may be used, at the cost of using a
Tor functor.
For example it is common to take A to be Z/2Z, so that coefficients are modulo 2. This
becomes straightforward in the absence of 2-torsion in the homology. Quite generally, the
result indicates the relationship that holds between the Betti numbers bi of X and the Betti
numbers bi,F with coefficients in a field F. These can differ, but only when the characteristic
of F is a prime number p for which there is some p-torsion in the homology.
The statement of the universal coefficient theorem runs as follows. Consider
where Hi means Hi(X,Z). Then there is an injective group homomorphism ι from it to
Hi(X,A). The theorem describes the cokernel of ι as
Tor(Hi − 1,A).
This Tor group can therefore be described as the obstruction to ι being an isomorphism,
which could be thought of as the 'expected' result.
This can be summarized saying there is a natural short exact sequence
Furthermore, this is a split sequence (but the splitting is not natural).
There is also a universal coefficient theorem for cohomology involving the Ext functor,
stating that there is a natural short exact sequence
As in the homological case, the sequence splits, though not naturally.
References
• Allen Hatcher, Algebraic Topology , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. ISBN
0-521-79540-0. A modern, geometrically flavored introduction to algebraic topology. The
book is available free in PDF and PostScript formats on the author's homepage [1].

Borsuk- Ulam theorem
415
Borsuk- Ulam theorem
1. redirect Borsuk–Ulam theorem
Brouwer fixed point theorem
In 1886, Henri Poincaré proved a result that is
equivalent to Brouwer's fixed point theorem.
The three-dimensional case of the exact
statement was proved in 1904 by Piers Bohl,
and the general case in 1910 by Jacques
Hadamard. Luitzen Brouwer proposed a new
proof in 1912.
In 
mathematics, 
Brouwer's 
fixed 
point
theorem is a theorem in topology. It is one of
many fixed point theorems, which state that for
any continuous function f with certain properties
there is a point x0 such that f(x0) = x0. The
simplest form of Brouwer's theorem is for
continuous functions f from a disk D to itself. A
more general form is for continuous functions
from a convex compact subset K of Euclidean
space to itself.
Among hundreds of fixed point theorems[1] ,
Brouwer's is particularly well known, due in part
to the fact that it is used across numerous fields
of mathematics. In its original field, this result is
one of the key theorems characterizing the
topology of Euclidean spaces, along with the
Jordan curve theorem, the hairy ball theorem or
the Borsuk–Ulam theorem.[2] . This gives it a
place among the fundamental theorems of
topology[3] . The theorem is also used for
proving deep results about differential equations
and is covered in introductory course on
differential geometry. It appears in unlikely
fields such as game theory, where John Nash
used it to prove the existence of a winning
strategy for the game Hex.
The theorem was first studied in view of work on differential equations by the French
mathematicians 
around 
Poincaré 
and 
Picard. 
Proving 
results 
such 
as 
the
Poincaré–Bendixson theorem requires the use of topological methods. This work at the end
of the 19th century opened into several successive versions of the theorem. The general
case was first proved in 1910 by Hadamard, and then in 1912 by Luitzen Egbertus Jan
Brouwer.

Brouwer fixed point theorem
416
Statement
The theorem has several formulations, depending on the context in which it is used. The
simplest is sometimes given as follows:
In the plane
Every continuous function f from a closed disk to itself has at least one fixed
point.[4] .
This can be generalized to an arbitrary finite dimension:
In Euclidean space
Every continuous function from a closed ball of a Euclidean space to itself has a
fixed point.[5]
A slightly more general version is as follows:[6]
Convex compact set
Every continuous function f from a convex compact subset K of a Euclidean space
to K itself has a fixed point.[7]
An even more general form is better known under a different name:
Schauder fixed point theorem
Every continuous function from a convex compact subset K of a Banach space to
K itself has a fixed point.[8]
Notes
The function f in this theorem is not required to be bijective or even surjective. Since any
closed ball in Euclidean n-space is homeomorphic to the closed unit ball D n, the theorem
also has equivalent formulations that only state it for D n.
Because the properties involved (continuity, being a fixed point) are invariant under
homeomorphisms, the theorem is equivalent to forms in which the domain is required to be
a closed unit ball D n. For the same reason it holds for every set that is homeomorphic to a
closed ball (and therefore also closed, bounded, connected, without holes, etc.).
The statement of the theorem is false if formulated for the open unit disk, the set of points
with distance strictly less than 1 from the origin. Consider for example the function
which maps every point of the open unit disk in R2 to another point of the open unit disk
slightly to the right of the given one.
Illustrations
The theorem has several "real world" illustrations. For example: take two sheets of graph
paper of equal size with coordinate systems on them, lay one flat on the table and crumple
up (without ripping or tearing) the other one and place it any fashion on top of the first so
that the crumpled paper does not reach outside the flat one. There will then be at least one
point of the crumpled sheet that lies exactly on top of its corresponding point (i.e. the point
with the same coordinates) of the flat sheet. This is a consequence of the n = 2 case of
Brouwer's theorem applied to the continuous map that assigns to the coordinates of every
point of the crumpled sheet the coordinates of the point of the flat sheet immediately
beneath it.

Brouwer fixed point theorem
417
In three dimensions the consequence of the Brouwer fixed point theorem is that no matter
how much you stir or shake a cocktail in a glass some point in the liquid will remain in the
exact same place in the glass as before you took any action, assuming that the final position
of each point is a continuous function of its original position, and that the liquid after
stirring or shaking is contained within the space originally taken up by it.
Another consequence of the case n = 3 is given by an informational display of a map in, for
example, an airport terminal. The function that sends points of the terminal to their image
on the map is continuous and therefore has a fixed point, usually indicated by a cross or
arrow with the text You are here. A similar display outside the terminal would violate the
condition that the function is "to itself" and fail to have a fixed point. For this example, the
existence of a fixed point is also a consequence of the Banach fixed point theorem, since the
function mapping points in space to the display is a contraction mapping.
Intuitive approach
Explanations attributed to Brouwer
The theorem is supposed to have originated from Brouwer's observation of a cup of
coffee.[9] If one stirs to dissolve a lump of sugar, it appears there is always a point without
motion. He drew the conclusion that at any moment, there is a point on the surface that is
not moving.[10] The fixed point is not necessarily the point that seems to be motionless,
since the centre of the turbulence moves a little bit. The result is not intuitive, since the
original fixed point may become mobile when another fixed point appears.
Brouwer is said to have added: "I can formulate this splendid result different, I take a
horizontal sheet, and another identical one which I crumple, flatten and place on the other.
Then a point of the crumpled sheet is in the same place as on the other sheet."[10] Brouwer
"flattens" his sheet as with a flat iron, without removing the folds and wrinkles.
One-dimensional case
In one dimension, the result is intuitive and easy to
prove. The continuous function f is defined on a
closed interval [a, b] and takes values in the same
interval. Saying that this function has a fixed point
amounts to saying that its graph (black in the figure
on the right) intersects that of the function defined
on the same interval [a, b] which maps x to x
(green).
Intuitively, any continuous line from the left edge of
the square to the right edge must necessarily
intersect the green diagonal.
It is not hard to give a formal proof. It suffices to
consider the function g which maps x to f(x) - x. It is
≥ 0 on a and ≤ 0 on b. By the intermediate value theorem, g has a zero in [a, b]; this zero is
a fixed point.
Brouwer is said to have expressed this as follows: "Instead of examining a surface, we will 
prove the theorem about a piece of string. Let us begin with the string in an unfolded state,

Brouwer fixed point theorem
418
then refold it. Let us flatten the refolded string. Again a point of the string has not changed
its position with respect to its original position on the unfolded string."[10]
Two-dimensional case
In other words, one can assume that K is a closed unit ball. The norm can moreover be
chosen arbitrarily. Choosing the maximum norm (the maximum of the absolute values of the
coordinates) shows that without loss of generality K can be assumed to be the set
[-1, 1]×[-1, 1].
Denoting by g the function that maps x to h(x) - x, the goal is to prove that the zero vector is
in the image of g on [-1, 1]×[-1, 1]. If gk, for k equal to 1 or 2, are the two coordinate
functions of g, this amounts to proving the existence of a point x0 such that g1 and g2 both
have a zero at x0.
The function g1 goes from [-1, 1]×[-1, 1] to [-1, 1]. It can be interpreted as a map of a region
which indicates the altitude of every point (see first figure on the right). In the area
{-1}×[-1, 1], this altitude is ≥0 (red in the figure), while on {1}×[-1, 1] it is ≤0 (blue). This
suggests that the contour line 0 is a line (green in the figure) from a point in [-1, 1]×{1} to
a point in [-1, 1]×{-1}. The same reasoning applied to g2 suggests that the contour line 0 is
this time a line from somewhere in {-1}×[-1, 1] to somewhere in {1}×[-1, 1] (see yellow
line in the second figure).
Intuitively, it seems obvious that these two contour lines (green and yellow) must
necessarily intersect, and the point of intersection is a fixed point of foφ. Verifying this
intuition is not as easy as it appears. The green zone is not necessarily a connected line, not
even necessarily a line, even though it always contains one. For example it can be a strip.

Brouwer fixed point theorem
419
Finite-dimensional case
The intuitive approach of the previous section generalizes to
any finite dimension. To understand how, it is sufficient to
look at dimension 3.
The goal is again to prove that the function g, which now has
three coordinates, has a zero. The first coordinate is ≥ 0 on
the left face of the cube and ≤ 0 on the right face. There is
every reason to think that the set of zeros contains a sheet,
shown in blue in the figure on the right. This sheet cuts the
cube into two connected components, one containing part of
the right face and one containing part of the left face.
Assuming that the y axis is in front-back direction, the same
reasoning suggests the existence of a sheet, shown in green in the figure, which also cuts
the cube into at least two connected components. The intersection of the two sheets
probably contains a line, depicted in yellow, going from the upper face to the lower face.
Now the third component of g describes a face shown in red. It appears that this sheet must
intersect the yellow line. The point of intersection is the desired fixed point.
History
The Brouwer fixed point theorem was one of the early achievements of algebraic topology,
and is the basis of more general fixed point theorems which are important in functional
analysis. The case n = 3 first was proved by Piers Bohl in 1904 (published in Journal für die
reine und angewandte Mathematik). It was later proved by L. E. J. Brouwer in 1909.
Jacques Hadamard proved the general case in 1910, and Brouwer found a different proof in
1912. Since these early proofs were all non-constructive indirect proofs, they ran contrary
to Brouwer's intuitionist ideals. Methods to construct (approximations to) fixed points
guaranteed by Brouwer's theorem are now known, however; see for example (Karamadian
1977) and (Istrăţescu 1981).

Brouwer fixed point theorem
420
Prehistory
For flows in an unbounded area, or in
an area with a "hole", the theorem is
not applicable.
The theorem applies to any
disk-shaped area, where it guarantees
the existence of a fixed point.
To understand the prehistory of Brouwer's fixed point
theorem one needs to pass through differential
equations. At the end of the 19th century, the old
problem[11] of the stability of the solar system returned
into the focus of the mathematical community.[12] Its
solution required new methods. As noted by Henri
Poincaré, who worked on the three-body problem, there
is no hope to find an exact solution: "Nothing is more
proper to give us an idea of the hardness of the
three-body problem, and generally of all problems of
Dynamics where there is no uniform integral and the
Bohlin series diverge."[13] He also noted that the search
for an approximate solution is no more efficient: "the
more we seek to obtain precise approximations, the
more the result will diverge towards an increasing
imprecision."[14] .
He studied a question analogous to that of the surface
movement in cup of coffee. What can we say, in
general, about the trajectories on a surface animated by
a constant flow?[15] Poincaré discovered that the
answer can be found in what we now call the
topological properties in the area containing the
trajectory. If this area is compact, i.e. bothclosed and
bounded, then the trajectory either becomes stationary,
or it approaches a limit cycle.[16] Poincaré went further;
if the area is of the same kind as a disk, as is the case
for the cup of coffee, there must necessarily be a fixed
point. This fixed point is invariant under all functions
which associate to each point of the original surface its
position after a short time interval t. If the area is a
circular band, or if it is not closed[17] , then this is not
necessarily the case.
To understand differential equations better, a new
branch of mathematics was born. Poincaré called it
analysis situs. The French Encyclopædia Universalis defines it as the branch which "treats
the properties of an object that are invariant if it is deformed in any continuous way,
without tearing"[18] . In 1886, Poincaré proved a result that is equivalent to Brouwer's fixed
point theorem[19] , although the connection with the subject of this article was not yet
apparent[20] . A little later, he developed one of the fundamental tools for better
understanding the analysis situs, now known as the fundamental group or sometimes the
Poincaré group.[21] . This method can be used for a very compact proof of the theorem
under discussion.
Poincaré's method was analogous to that of Emile Picard, a contemporary mathematician 
who generalized the Cauchy–Lipschitz theorem.[22] . Picard's approach is based on a result

Brouwer fixed point theorem
421
that would later be formalised by another fixed point theorem, named after Banach. Instead
of the topological properties of the domain, this theorem uses the fact that the function in
question is a contraction.
First proofs
Hadamard played the role of a
midwife, helping Brouwer to formalize
his ideas.
At the dawn of the 20th century, the interest in analysis
situs did not stay unnoticed. However, the necessity of
a theorem equivalent to the one discussed in this article
was 
not 
yet 
evident. 
Piers 
Bohl, 
a 
Latvian
mathematician, applied topological methods to the
study of differential equations.[23] . In 1904 he proved
the three-dimensional case of our theorem, but his
publication was not noticed.[24] .
It was Brouwer, finally, who gave the theorem its first
patent of nobility. His goals were different from those
of Poincaré. This mathematician was inspired by the
foundations of mathematics, especially mathematical
logic and topology. His initial interest lay in an attempt
to solve Hilberts fifth problem.[25] In 1909, during a
voyage to Paris, he met Poincaré, Hadamard and Borel.
The ensuing discussions convinced Brouwer of the
importance of a better understanding of Euclidean
spaces, and were the origin of a fruitful exchange of
letters with Hadamard. For the next four years, he
concentrated on the proof of certain great theorems on
this question. In 1912 he proved the hairy ball theorem
for the two-dimensional sphere, as well as the fact that
every continuous map from the two-dimensional ball to itself has a fixed point.[26] . These
two results in themselves were not really new. As Hadamard observed, Poincaré had shown
a theorem equivalent to the hairy ball theorem[27] . The revolutionary aspect of Brouwer's
approach was his systematic use of recently developed tools such as homotopy, the
underlying concept of the Poincaré group. In the following year, Hadamard generalised the
theorem under discussion to an arbitrary finite dimension, but he employed different
methods. H. Freudenthal comments on the respective roles as follows: "Compared to
Brouwer's revolutionary methods, those of Hadamard were very traditional, but
Hadamard's participation in the birth of Brouwer's ideas resembles that of a midwife more
than that of a mere spectator."[28] .
Brouwer's approach yielded its fruits, and in 1912 he also found a proof that was valid for
any finite dimension.[29] , as well as other key theorems such as the invariance of
dimension[30] . In the context of this work, Brouwer also generalized the Jordan curve
theorem to arbitrary dimension and established the properties connected with the degree
of a continuous mapping.[31] . This branch of mathematics, originally envisioned by
Poincaré and developed by Brouwer, changed its name. In the 1930s, analysis situs became
algebraic topology.[32] .

Brouwer fixed point theorem
422
Brouwer's celebrity is not exclusively due to his topological work. He was also the
originator and zealous defender of a way of formalising mathematics that is known as
intuitionism, which at the time made a stand against set theory.[33] . While Brouwer
preferred constructive proofs, ironically, the original proofs of his great topological
theorems were not constructive[34] , and it took until 1967 for constructive proofs to be
found.[35]
Reception
John Nash used the theorem in game theory to
prove the existence of a winning strategy.
The theorem proved its worth in more than one
way. During the 20th century numerous fixed
point theorems were developed, and even a
branch 
of 
mathematics 
called 
fixed 
point
theory.[36] Brouwer's theorem is probably the
most 
important.[37] 
It 
is 
also 
among 
the
foundational 
theorems 
on 
the 
topology 
of
topological manifolds and is often used to prove
other important results such as the Jordan curve
theorem.[38]
Besides the fixed point theorems for more or less
contracting functions, there are many that are
derived directly or indirectly from the result
under discussion. A continuous map from a
closed ball of Euclidean space to its boundary cannot be the identity on the boundary.
Similarly, the Borsuk–Ulam theorem says that a continuous map from the n-dimensional
sphere to Rn has a pair of antipodal points that are mapped to the same point. In the
finite-dimensional case, the Lefschetz fixed point theorem provided from 1926 a method for
counting fixed points. In 1930, Brouwer's fixed point theorem was generalized to Banach
spaces.[39] . This generalization is known as Schauder's fixed point theorem, a result
generalized further by S. Kakutani to multivalued functions.[40] One also meets the theorem
and its variants outside topology. It can be used to prove the Hartman-Grobman theorem,
which describes the qualitative behaviour of certain differential equations near certain
equilibria. Similarly, Brouwer's theorem is used for the proof of the théorème de la variété
centrale. The theorem can also be found in existence proofs for the solutions of certain
partial differential equations.[41]
Other areas are also touched. In game theory, John Nash used the theorem to prove that in
the game of Hex there is a winning strategy for white.[42] . In economy, P. Bich explains
that certain generalizations of the theorem show that its use is helpful for certain classical
problems in game theory and generally for equilibria (Hotelling's law), financial equilibria
and incomplete markets.[43]

Brouwer fixed point theorem
423
Proof outlines
A full proof of the theorem would be too long to reproduce here, but the following outlines a
proof omitting the most difficult part. The proof uses the observation that the boundary of D
n is S n − 1, the (n − 1)-sphere.
Illustration of the retraction F
The argument proceeds by contradiction, supposing
that a continuous function f : D n → D n has no fixed
point, and then attempting to derive an inconsistency,
which proves that the function must in fact have a fixed
point. For each x in D n, there is only one straight line
that passes through f(x) and x, because it must be the
case that f(x) and x are distinct by hypothesis (recall
that f having no fixed points means that f(x) ≠ x).
Following this line from f(x) through x leads to a point
on S n − 1, denoted by F(x). This defines a continuous
function F : D n → S n − 1, which is a special type of
continuous function known as a retraction: every point
of the codomain (in this case S n − 1) is a fixed point of
the function.
Intuitively it seems unlikely that there could be a retraction of D n onto S n − 1, and in the
case n = 1 it is obviously impossible because S 0 (i.e., the endpoints of the closed interval D
1) is not even connected. The case n = 2 is less obvious, but can be proven by using basic
arguments involving the fundamental groups of the respective spaces: the retraction would
induce an injective group homomorphism from the fundamental group of S 1 to that of D 2,
but the first group is isomorphic to Z while the latter group is trivial, so this is impossible.
The case n = 2 can also be proven by contradiction based on a theorem about
non-vanishing vector fields.
For n > 2, however, proving the impossibility of the retraction is more difficult. One way is
to make use of homology groups: it can be shown that the homology Hn − 1(D n) is trivial,
while Hn − 1(S n − 1) is infinite cyclic. This shows that the retraction is impossible, because
again the retraction would induce an injective group homomorphism from the latter to the
former group.
There is also a more elementary combinatorial proof, whose main step consists in
establishing Sperner's lemma in n dimensions.
There is also a quick proof, by Morris Hirsch, based on the impossibility of a differentiable
retraction. The indirect proof starts by noting that the map f can be approximated by a
smooth map retaining the property of not fixing a point; this can be done by using the
Weierstrass approximation theorem, for example. One then defines a retraction as above
which must now be differentiable. Such a retraction must have a non-singular value, by
Sard's theorem, which is also non-singular for the restriction to the boundary (which is just
the identity). Thus the inverse image would be a 1-manifold with boundary. The boundary
would have to contain at least two end points, both of which would have to lie on the
boundary of the original ball—which is impossible in a retraction.
A quite different proof given by David Gale is based on the game of Hex. The basic theorem 
about Hex is that no game can end in a draw. This is equivalent to the Brouwer fixed point 
theorem for dimension 2. By considering n-dimensional versions of Hex, one can prove in

Brouwer fixed point theorem
424
general that Brouwer's theorem is equivalent to the determinacy theorem for Hex. [44]
Generalizations
The Brouwer fixed point theorem forms the starting point of a number of more general
fixed point theorems.
The straightforward generalization to infinite dimensions, i.e. using the unit ball of an
arbitrary Hilbert space instead of Euclidean space, is not true. The main problem here is
that the unit balls of infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces are not compact. For example, in
the Hilbert space ℓ2 of square-summable real (or complex) sequences, consider the map f :
ℓ2 → ℓ2 which sends a sequence (xn) from the closed unit ball of ℓ2 to the sequence (yn)
defined by
It is not difficult to check that this map is continuous, has its image in the unit sphere of ℓ 2,
but does not have a fixed point.
The generalizations of the Brouwer fixed point theorem to infinite dimensional spaces
therefore all include a compactness assumption of some sort, and in addition also often an
assumption of convexity. See fixed point theorems in infinite-dimensional spaces for a
discussion of these theorems.
The Kakutani fixed point theorem generalizes the Brouwer fixed point theorem in a
different direction: it stays in Rn, but considers upper semi-continuous correspondences
(functions that assign to each point of the set a subset of the set). It also requires
compactness and convexity of the set.
By using forcing to collapse cardinals, the Brouwer fixed point theorem can be generalized
to arbitrary cardinality: if L is a compact, connected order topology, then any continuous
function from Ln to itself has a fixed point. Note that if we require L to be separable, this is
precisely the Brouwer fixed point theorem.
The Lefschetz fixed-point theorem applies to (almost) arbitrary compact topological spaces,
and gives a condition in terms of singular homology that guarantees the existence of fixed
points; this condition is trivially satisfied for any map in the case of D n.
See also
• Sperner's lemma
• Borsuk-Ulam theorem
• Tucker's lemma
• Topological combinatorics
Notes
[1] E.g. F & V Bayart Théorèmes du point fixe (http:/ / www. bibmath. net/ dico/ index. php3?action=affiche&
quoi=. / p/ pointfixe. html) on Bibm@th.net
[2] See page 15 of: D. Leborgne Calcul différentiel et géométrie Puf (1982) ISBN 2130374956
[3] More exactly, according to Encyclopédie Universalis: Il en a démontré l'un des plus beaux théorèmes, le
théorème du point fixe, dont les applications et généralisations, de la théorie des jeux aux équations
différentielles, se sont révélées fondamentales. Luizen Brouwer (http:/ / www. universalis. fr/ encyclopedie/
T705705/ BROUWER_L. htm) by G. Sabbagh
[4] D. Violette Applications du lemme de Sperner pour les triangles (http:/ / newton. mat. ulaval. ca/ amq/
bulletins/ dec06/ sperner. pdf) Bulletin AMQ, V. XLVI N° 4, (2006) p 17.

Brouwer fixed point theorem
425
[5] Page 15 of: D. Leborgne Calcul différentiel et géométrie Puf (1982) ISBN 2130374956.
[6] This version follows directly from the previous one because every convex compact subset of a Euclidean space
is homeomorphic to a closed ball. For details see convex set.
[7] V. & F. Bayart Point fixe, et théorèmes du point fixe (http:/ / www. bibmath. net/ dico/ index.
php3?action=affiche& quoi=. / p/ pointfixe. html) on Bibmath.net.
[8] C. Minazzo K. Rider Théorèmes du Point Fixe et Applications aux Equations Différentielles (http:/ / math1.
unice. fr/ ~eaubry/ Enseignement/ M1/ memoire. pdf) Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis.
[9] The interest of this anecdote rests in its intuitive and didactic character, but its accuracy is dubious. As the
history section shows, the origin of the theorem is not Brouwer's work. More than 20 years earlier Henri
Poincaré had proved an equivalent results, and 5 years before Brouwer P. Bohl had proved the
three-dimensional case.
[10] Cette citation provient d'une émission de télévision : Archimède (http:/ / archives. arte. tv/ hebdo/ archimed/
19990921/ ftext/ sujet5. html), Arte, 21 septembre 1999
[11] See F. Brechenmacher L'identité algébrique d'une pratique portée par la discussion sur l'équation à l'aide de
laquelle on détermine les inégalités séculaires des planètes (http:/ / arxiv. org/ ftp/ arxiv/ papers/ 0704/ 0704.
2931. pdf) CNRS Fédération de Recherche Mathématique du Nord-Pas-de-Calais
[12] Henri Poincaré won the King of Sweden's mathematical competition in 1889 for his work on the related
three-body problem: J. Tits Célébrations nationales 2004 (http:/ / www. culture. gouv. fr/ culture/ actualites/
celebrations2004/ poincare. htm) Site du Ministère Culture et Communication
[13] H. Poincaré Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste T Gauthier-Villars, Vol 3 p 389 (1892) new
edition Paris: Blanchard, 1987.
[14] Quotation from H. Poincaré taken from: P. A. Miquel La catégorie de désordre (http:/ / www. arches. ro/
revue/ no03/ no3art03. htm), on the website of l'Association roumaine des chercheurs francophones en sciences
humaines
[15] This question was studied in: H. Poincaré Sur les courbes définies par les équations différentielles J. de Math.
V 2 (1886)
[16] This follows from the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem.
[17] Multiplication by 1⁄2 on ]0, 1[2 has no fixed point.
[18] "concerne les propriétés invariantes d’une figure lorsqu’on la déforme de manière continue quelconque, sans
déchirure (par exemple, dans le cas de la déformation de la sphère, les propriétés corrélatives des objets tracés
sur sa surface". From C. Houzel M. Paty Poincaré, Henri (1854-1912) (http:/ / www. scientiaestudia. org. br/
associac/ paty/ pdf/ Paty,M_1997g-PoincareEU. pdf) Encyclopædia Universalis Albin Michel, Paris, 1999, p.
696-706
[19] Poincaré's theorem is stated in: V. I. Istratescu Fixed Point Theory an Introduction Kluwer Academic
Publishers (réédition de 2001) p 113 ISBN 1402003013
[20] M.I. Voitsekhovskii Brouwer theorem (http:/ / eom. springer. de/ b/ b017670. htm) Encyclopaedia of
Mathematics ISBN 1402006098
[21] J. Dieudonné, A History of Algebraic and differential Topology, 1900-1960, pages 17-24
[22] See for example: E Picard Sur l'application des méthodes d'approximations successives à l'étude de certaines
équations différentielles ordinaires (http:/ / portail. mathdoc. fr/ JMPA/ PDF/ JMPA_1893_4_9_A4_0. pdf) Journal
de Mathématiques p 217 (1893)
[23] J. J. O'Connor E. F. Robertson Piers Bohl (http:/ / www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ Biographies/
Bohl. html)
[24] A. D. Myskis I. M. Rabinovic The first proof of a fixed-point theorem for a continuous mapping of a sphere
into itself, given by the Latvian mathematician P G Bohl (Russian) Uspekhi matematicheskikh nauk (NS) Vol 10
(N° 3) (65) (1955) pp 188-192
[25] J. J. O'Connor E. F. Robertson Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer (http:/ / www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/
~history/ Biographies/ Brouwer. html)
[26] H. Freudenthal The cradle of modern topology, according to Brouwer's inedita Hist. Math. 2 p 495 (1975)
[27] Freudenthal explains: "... cette dernière propriété, bien que sous des hypothèses plus grossières, ait été
démontré par H. Poincaré" H. Freudenthal The cradle of modern topology, according to Brouwer's inedita Hist.
Math. 2 p 495 (1975)
[28] H. Freudenthal The cradle of modern topology, according to Brouwer's inedita Hist. Math. 2 p 501 (1975)
[29] L. Brouwer Über Abbildungen von Mannigfaltigkeiten Mathematische Annalen 38(71) pp 97 115 (1912)
[30] If an open subset of a [[manifold] is homeomorphic to an open subset of a Euclidean space of dimension n,
and if p is a positive integer other than n, then the open set is never homeomorphic to an open subset of a
Euclidean space of dimension p.
[31] J. J. O'Connor E. F. Robertson Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer (http:/ / www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/
~history/ Biographies/ Brouwer. html).

Brouwer fixed point theorem
426
[32] The term algebraic topology first appeared 1931 under the pen of David van Dantzig: J. Miller Topological
algebra (http:/ / jeff560. tripod. com/ t. html) on the site Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of
Mathematics (2007)
[33] Later it would be shown that the formalism that was combatted by Brouwer can also serve to formalise
intuitionism. For further details see intuitionistic logic.
[34] For a long explanation, see: J.P. Dubucs L.J.E. Brouwer : Topologie et constructivisme (http:/ / www. persee.
fr/ web/ revues/ home/ prescript/ article/ rhs_0151-4105_1988_num_41_2_4094) Revue d’histoire des sciences
V. 41 N°41-2 pp 133-155 (1988)
[35] H. Scarf found the first algorithmic proof: M.I. Voitsekhovskii Brouwer theorem (http:/ / eom. springer. de/ b/
b017670. htm) Encyclopaedia of Mathematics ISBN 1402006098.
[36] V. I. Istratescu Fixed Point Theory. An Introduction Kluwer Academic Publishers (new edition 2001) ISBN
1402003013.
[37] "... Brouwer's fixed point theorem, perhaps the most important fixed point theorem." p xiii V. I. Istratescu
Fixed Point Theory an Introduction Kluwer Academic Publishers (new edition 2001) ISBN 1402003013.
[38] E.g.: S. Greenwood J. Cao Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem and the Jordan Curve Theorem (http:/ / www.
math. auckland. ac. nz/ class750/ section5. pdf) University of Auckland, New Zealand.
[39] J. Schauder Der Fixpunktsatz in Funktionalraumen Studia. Math. 2 (1930) pp 171-180
[40] S. Kakutani A generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem Duke Math. Journal 8 (1941) pp 457-459
[41] These examples are taken from: F. Boyer Théorèmes de point fixe et applications (http:/ / www. cmi.
univ-mrs. fr/ ~fboyer/ ter_fboyer2. pdf) CMI Université Paul Cézanne (2008-2009)
[42] For context and references see the article Hex (board game).
[43] P. Bich Une extension discontinue du théorème du point fixe de Schauder, et quelques applications en
économie (http:/ / www. ann. jussieu. fr/ ~plc/ code2007/ bich. pdf) Institut Henri Poincaré, Paris (2007)
[44] David Gale (1979). "The Game of Hex and Brouwer Fixed-Point Theorem". The American Mathematical
Monthly 86: 818–827. doi: 10.2307/2320146 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 2320146).
References
• Sobolev, V. I. (2001), http://eom.springer.de/B/b017670.htm|"Brouwer theorem", in
Hazewinkel, Michiel, Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN
978-1556080104
• Gale, D. (1979). "The Game of Hex and Brouwer Fixed-Point Theorem". The American
Mathematical Monthly 86: 818–827. doi: 10.2307/2320146 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/
2320146).
• Morris W. Hirsch, "Differential Topology", Springer, 1980 (see p. 72-73 for Hirsch's proof
utilizing non-existence of a differentiable retraction)
• S. Karamadian (ed.), Fixed points. Algorithms and applications, Academic Press, 1977
• V.I. Istrăţescu, Fixed point theory, Reidel, 1981
External links
• Brouwer's Fixed Point Theorem for Triangles (http:/ / www. cut-the-knot. org/
do_you_know/ poincare. shtml#brouwertheorem) at cut-the-knot
• Brouwer theorem (http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ BrouwerFixedPointTheorem.
html), from PlanetMath with attached proof.
• Reconstructing Brouwer (http:/ / www. mathpages. com/ home/ kmath262/ kmath262.
htm) at MathPages

Cellular approximation theorem
427
Cellular approximation theorem
In algebraic topology, in the cellular approximation theorem, a map between
CW-complexes can always be taken to be of a specific type. Concretely, if X and Y are
CW-complexes, and f : X → Y is a continuous map, then f is said to be cellular, if f takes the
n-skeleton of X to the n-skeleton of Y for all n, i.e. if 
for all n. The content of
the cellular approximation theorem is then that any continuous map f : X → Y between
CW-complexes X and Y is homotopic to a cellular map, and if f is already cellular on a
subcomplex A of X, then we can furthermore choose the homotopy to be stationary on A.
From an algebraic topological viewpoint, any map between CW-complexes can thus be
taken to be cellular.
Idea of proof
The proof can be given by induction after n, with the statement that f is cellular on the
skeleton 
. For the base case 
, notice that every path-component of Y must
contain a 0-cell. The image under f of a 0-cell of X can thus be connected to a 0-cell of Y by
a path, but this gives a homotopy from f to a map, which is cellular on the 0-skeleton of X.
Assume inductively that f is cellular on the (n − 1)-skeleton of X, and let en be an n-cell of X.
The closure of en is compact in X, being the image of the characteristic map of the cell, and
hence the image of the closure of 
under f is also compact in Y. Then it is a general result
of CW-complexes that any compact subspace of a CW-complex meets (that is, intersects
non-trivially) only finitely many cells of the complex. Thus f(en) meets at most finitely many
cells of Y, so we can take 
to be a cell of highest dimension meeting f(en). If 
,
the map f is already cellular on en, since in this case only cells of the n-skeleton of Y meets
f(en), so we may assume that k > n. It is then a technical, non-trivial result (see Hatcher)
that the restriction of f to 
can be homotoped relative to 
to a map missing a
point p ∈ ek. Since Yk − {p} deformation retracts onto the subspace 
, we can
further homotope the restriction of f to 
to a map, say, g, with the property that
misses the cell 
of Y, still relative to 
. Since 
met only finitely many
cells of Y to begin with, we can repeat this process finitely many times to make 
miss
all cells of Y of dimension larger than n.
We repeat this process for every n-cell of X, fixing cells of the subcomplex A on which f is
already cellular, and we thus obtain a homotopy (relative to the (n − 1)-skeleton of X and
the n-cells of A) of the restriction of f to Xn to a map cellular on all cells of X of dimension at
most n. Using then the homotopy extension property to extend this to a homotopy on all of
X, and patching these homotopies together, will finish the proof. For details, consult
Hatcher.
Applications
Some homotopy groups
The cellular approximation theorem can be used to immediately calculate some homotopy 
groups. In particular, if 
, then 
: Give 
and 
their canonical 
CW-structure, with one 0-cell each, and with one n-cell for 
and one k-cell for 
. Any 
base-point preserving map f: 
→ 
is by the cellular approximation theorem homotopic

Cellular approximation theorem
428
to a constant map, whence 
.
Cellular approximation for pairs
Let f:(X,A)→(Y,B) be a map of CW-pairs, that is, f is a map from X to Y, and the image of
under f sits inside B. Then f is homotopic to a cellular map (X,A)→(Y,B). To see this,
restrict f to A and use cellular approximation to obtain a homotopy of f to a cellular map on
A. Use the homotopy extension property to extend this homotopy to all of X, and apply
cellular approximation again to obtain a map cellular on X, but without violating the cellular
property on A.
As a consequence, we have that a CW-pair (X,A) is n-connected, if all cells of 
have
dimension strictly greater than n: If 
, then any map 
→(X,A) is homotopic to
a cellular map of pairs, and since the n-skeleton of X sits inside A, any such map is
homotopic to a map whose image is in A, and hence it is 0 in the relative homotopy group
.
We have in particular that 
is n-connected, so it follows from the long exact
sequence of homotopy groups for the pair 
that we have isomorphisms 
→
for all 
and a surjection 
→ 
.
References
• Hatcher, Allen (2005), http://www.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/ATpage.html|Algebraic
topology, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79540-1, http:/ / www. math.
cornell. edu/ ~hatcher/ AT/ ATpage. html
Eilenberg–Zilber theorem
In mathematics, specifically in algebraic topology, the Eilenberg–Zilber theorem is an
important result in establishing the link between the homology groups of a product space
and those of the spaces 
and 
. The theorem first appeared in a 1953 paper in
the American Journal of Mathematics.
Statement of the theorem
The theorem can be formulated as follows. Suppose 
and 
are topological spaces, Then
we have the three chain complexes 
, 
, and 
. (The argument
applies equally to the simplicial or singular chain complexes.) We also have the tensor
product complex 
, whose differential is, by definition,
for 
and 
, 
the differentials on 
, 
.
Then the theorem says that we have a chain maps
such that 
is the identity and 
is chain-homotopic to the identity. Moreover, the
maps are natural in 
and 
. Consequently the two complexes must have the same
homology:

Eilenberg–Zilber theorem
429
Consequences
The Eilenberg–Zilber theorem is a key ingredient in establishing the Künneth theorem,
which expresses the homology groups 
in terms of 
and 
. In light
of the Eilenberg–Zilber theorem, the content of the Künneth theorem consists in analysing
how the homology of the tensor product complex relates to the homologies of the factors;
the answer is somewhat subtle.
References
• Eilenberg, Samuel; Zilber, J. A. (1953), "On Products of Complexes", Amer. Jour. Math.
75 (1): 200–204, doi:10.2307/2372629 [1], MR52767 [2].
• Hatcher, Allen (2002), Algebraic Topology, Cambridge University Press, ISBN
0-521-79540-0.
References
[1] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F2372629
[2] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=52767
Hurewicz theorem
In mathematics, the Hurewicz theorem is a basic result of algebraic topology, connecting
homotopy 
theory 
with 
homology 
theory 
via 
a 
map 
known 
as 
the 
Hurewicz
homomorphism. The theorem is named after Witold Hurewicz, and generalizes earlier
results from Henri Poincaré.
Statement of the theorems
The Hurewicz theorems are a key link between homotopy groups and homology groups.
Absolute version
For any space X and positive integer k there exists a group homomorphism
called the Hurewicz homomorphism from the k-th homotopy group to the k-th homology
group (with integer coefficients), which for k = 1 is equivalent to the canonical
abelianization map
The Hurewicz theorem states that if X is (n−1)-connected, the Hurewicz map is an
isomorphism for all k ≤ n. In particular, this theorem says that the abelianization of the first
homotopy group (the fundamental group) is isomorphic to the first homology group:
The first homology group therefore vanishes if X is path-connected and π1(X) is a perfect
group.
In addition, the Hurewicz homomorphism is an epimorphism from 
whenever X is (n-1) connected, for 
.

Hurewicz theorem
430
The group homomorphism is given in the following way. Choose canonical generators
. Then a homotopy class of maps 
is taken to 
.
Relative version
For any pair of spaces (X,A) and integer k > 1 there exists a homomorphism
from relative homotopy groups to relative homology groups. The Relative Hurewicz
Theorem states that if each of X, A are connected and the pair (X,A) is (n−1)-connected
then Hk(X,A) = 0 for k < n and Hn(X,A) is obtained from πn(X,A) by factoring out the action
of π1(A). This is proved in, for example, Whitehead (1978) by induction, proving in turn the
absolute version and the Homotopy Addition Lemma.
This relative Hurewicz theorem is reformulated by Brown & Higgins (1981) as a statement
about the morphism
This statement is a special case of a homotopical excision theorem, involving induced
modules for n>2 (crossed modules if n=2), which itself is deduced from a higher homotopy
van Kampen theorem for relative homotopy groups, whose proof requires development of
techniques of a cubical higher homotopy groupoid of a filtered space.
Triadic version
For any triad of spaces (X;A,B) (i.e. space X and subspaces A,B) and integer k > 2 there
exists a homomorphism
from 
triad 
homotopy 
groups 
to 
triad 
homology 
groups. 
Note 
that
Hk(X;A,B) ≅ Hk(X∪(C(A∪B)). The Triadic Hurewicz Theorem states that if X, A, B, and C =
A∩B are connected, the pairs (A,C), (B,C) are respectively (p−1)-, (q−1)-connected, and the
triad (X;A,B) is p+q−2 connected, then Hk(X;A,B) = 0 for k < p+q−2 and Hp+q−1(X;A) is
obtained from πp+q−1(X;A,B) by factoring out the action of π1(A∩B) and the generalised
Whitehead products. The proof of this theorem uses a higher homotopy van Kampen type
theorem for triadic homotopy groups, which requires a notion of the fundamental
catn-group of an n-cube of spaces.
References
• Brown, R. (1989), "Triadic Van Kampen theorems and Hurewicz theorems",
Contemporary Mathematics 96: 39–57, ISSN 0040-9383 [1]
• Brown, Ronald; Higgins, P. J. (1981), "Colimit theorems for relative homotopy groups",
Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 22: 11–41, doi:10.1016/0022-4049(81)90080-3 [2],
ISSN 0022-4049 [3]
• Brown, R.; Loday, J.-L. (1987), "Homotopical excision, and Hurewicz theorems, for
n-cubes of spaces", Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society. Third Series 54:
176–192, doi:10.1112/plms/s3-54.1.176 [4], ISSN 0024-6115 [5]
• Brown, R.; Loday, J.-L. (1987), "Van Kampen theorems for diagrams of spaces", Topology
26: 311–334, doi:10.1016/0040-9383(87)90004-8 [6], ISSN 0040-9383 [1]
• Rotman, Joseph J. (1988), An Introduction to Algebraic Topology, Graduate Texts in
Mathematics, 119, Springer-Verlag (published 1998-07-22), ISBN 978-0-387-96678-6

Hurewicz theorem
431
• Whitehead, George W. (1978), Elements of Homotopy Theory, Graduate Texts in
Mathematics, 61, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-0-387-90336-1
References
[1] http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0040-9383
[2] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016%2F0022-4049%2881%2990080-3
[3] http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0022-4049
[4] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1112%2Fplms%2Fs3-54. 1. 176
[5] http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0024-6115
[6] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016%2F0040-9383%2887%2990004-8
Künneth theorem
In mathematics, especially in homological algebra and algebraic topology, a Künneth
theorem is a statement relating the homology of two objects to the homology of their
product. The classical statement of the Künneth theorem relates the singular homology of
two topological spaces X and Y and their product space X × Y. In the simplest possible case
the relationship is that of a tensor product, but for applications it is very often necessary to
apply certain tools of homological algebra to express the answer.
A Künneth theorem or Künneth formula is true in many different homology and cohomology
theories, and the name has become generic. These many results are named for the German
mathematician Otto Hermann Künneth (1892–1975).
Singular homology with coefficients in a field
Let X and Y be two topological spaces, and let F be a field. In this situation, the Künneth
theorem for singular homology states that for any integer k,
Furthermore, the isomorphism is natural isomorphism. The map from the sum to the
homology group of the product is called the cross product. More precisely, there is a cross
product operation showing how an i-cycle on X and a j-cycle on Y can be combined to create
an (i + j)-cycle on X × Y; so that there is an explicit linear mapping defined from the direct
sum to Hk(X × Y).
A consequence of this result is that the Betti numbers, the dimensions of the homology with
Q coefficients, of X × Y can be determined from those of X and Y. If pZ(t) is the generating
function of the sequence of Betti numbers bk(Z) of a space Z, then
Here when there are finitely many Betti numbers of X and Y, each of which is a natural
number rather than ∞, this reads as an identity on Poincaré polynomials. In the general
case these are formal power series with possibly infinite coefficients, and have to be
interpreted accordingly. Furthermore, the above statement holds not only for the Betti
numbers but also for the generating functions of the dimensions of the homology over any
field. (If the integer homology is not torsion-free then these numbers may be different.)

Künneth theorem
432
Singular homology with coefficients in a PID
The above formula is simple because vector spaces over a field have very restricted
behavior. As the coefficient ring becomes more general, the relationship becomes more
complicated. The next simplest case is the case when the coefficient ring is a principal ideal
domain. This case is particularly important because the integers are a PID.
In this case the equation above is no longer true. Instead a correction factor appears to
account for the possibility of torsion phenomena. For example, if 
and
, then the tensor product of these homology groups will be zero. But the
second homology of X × Y will always contain a correction factor to account for the
vanishing of this product. This correction factor is expressed in terms of the Tor functor,
the first derived functor of the tensor product.
When X and Y are CW complexes and R is a PID, then the correct statement of the Künneth
theorem is that there are natural short exact sequences
Furthermore these sequences split, but not canonically.
The Künneth spectral sequence
For general R, the homology of X and Y is related to the homology of their product by a
spectral sequence. In the cases described above, this spectral sequence collapses to give an
isomorphism or a short exact sequence. The Künneth spectral sequence is
The Künneth formula in the derived category
A much cleaner statement of the Künneth formula becomes possible in the derived
category. 
In 
this 
case, 
the 
formula 
becomes 
a 
natural 
isomorphism 
between
quasi-isomorphism classes of singular chain complexes:
Here 
denotes the derived tensor product.
Künneth theorems in other homology and cohomology
theories
The above statements are also true for singular cohomology and sheaf cohomology. For
sheaf cohomology on an algebraic variety, Grothendieck found six spectral sequences
relating the possible hyperhomology groups of two chain complexes of sheaves and the
hyperhomology groups of their tensor product. (See EGA III2, Théorème 6.7.3) Künneth
theorems are also true for K-theory, cobordism, and l-adic cohomology.

Künneth theorem
433
References
• Grothendieck, Alexandre; Jean Dieudonné (1963).
"http://www.numdam.org:80/numdam-bin/feuilleter?id=PMIHES_1963__17_|Éléments de
géométrie algébrique (rédigés avec la collaboration de Jean Dieudonné) : III. Étude
cohomologique des faisceaux cohérents, Seconde partie". Publications Mathématiques de
l'IHÉS 17: 5–91. http:/ / www. numdam. org:80/ numdam-bin/
feuilleter?id=PMIHES_1963__17_.
External links
• Hazewinkel, Michiel, ed. (2001), http://eom.springer.de/k/k056010.htm|"Künneth
formula", Encyclopaedia of Mathematics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN
978-1556080104
Poincaré duality theorem
In mathematics, the Poincaré duality theorem, named after Henri Poincaré, is a basic
result on the structure of the homology and cohomology groups of manifolds. It states that
if M is an n-dimensional compact oriented manifold, then the kth cohomology group of M is
isomorphic to the (n − k)th homology group of M, for all integers k. It further states that if
mod 2 homology and cohomology is used, then the assumption of orientability can be
dropped.
History
A form of Poincaré duality was first stated, without proof, by Henri Poincaré in 1893. It was
stated in terms of Betti numbers: The kth and (n − k) th Betti numbers of a closed (i.e.
compact and without boundary) orientable n-manifold are equal. The cohomology concept
was at that time about 40 years from being clarified. In his 1895 paper Analysis Situs,
Poincaré tried to prove the theorem using topological intersection theory, which he had
invented. Criticism of his work by Poul Heegaard led him to realize that his proof was
seriously flawed. In the first two complements to Analysis Situs, Poincaré gave a new proof
in terms of dual triangulations.
Poincaré duality did not take on its modern form until the advent of cohomology in the
1930s, when Eduard Čech and Hassler Whitney invented the cup and cap products and
formulated Poincaré duality in these new terms.
Dual cell structures
Poincaré duality was classically thought of in terms of dual triangulations, which are
generalizations of dual polyhedra. Given a triangulation X of an n-dimensional manifold M,
one replaces each k-simplex with an (n − k) -cell to produce a new decomposition Y of M. If
each (n − k) -cell is indeed a simplex then one says that Y is the dual triangulation of X, and
the chain groups are related by isomorphisms
Considering the tetrahedron as a triangulation of the 2-sphere, the dual triangulation of the 
tetrahedron is another tetrahedron. This construction does not necessarily yield another

Poincaré duality theorem
434
triangulation, as the examples of the octahedron and icosahedron demonstrate. Poincaré
used a (not entirely correct) method involving barycentric subdivision to show that we may
always obtain a dual triangulation for compact oriented manifolds.
In more precise terms, one may describe the dual of a triangulation X as a triangulation Y
such that given a k-simplex α in X, there is one (n − k) -simplex in Y whose intersection
number with α is 1, and such that the intersection number of α with any other (n − k)
-simplex of Y is 0.
The boundary operator in a chain complex can be viewed as a matrix. Let M be a closed
n-manifold, X a triangulation of M, and Y the dual triangulation of X. Then one can show
that the boundary operator
is the transpose of the boundary operator
Using the fact that the homology groups of a manifold are independent of the triangulation
used to compute them, one can easily show that the kth and (n − k) th Betti numbers of M
are equal.
Modern formulation
The modern statement of the Poincaré duality theorem is in terms of homology and
cohomology: if M is a closed oriented n-manifold, and k is an integer, then there is a
canonically defined isomorphism from the k-th homology group Hk(M) to the (n − k)th
cohomology group Hn − k(M). (Here, homology and cohomology is taken with coefficients in
the ring of integers, but the isomorphism holds for any coefficient ring.) Specifically, one
maps an element of Hk(M) to its cap product with a fundamental class of M, which will exist
for oriented M.
For non-compact oriented manifolds, one has to replace cohomology by cohomology with
compact support.
Homology and cohomology groups are defined to be zero for negative degrees, so Poincaré
duality in particular implies that the homology and cohomology groups of orientable closed
n-manifolds are zero for degrees bigger than n.
Naturality
Note that Hk is a contravariant functor while Hn − k is covariant. The family of isomorphisms
DM : Hk(M) → Hn − k(M)
is natural in the following sense: if
f : M → N
is a continuous map between two oriented n-manifolds which is compatible with
orientation, i.e. which maps the fundamental class of M to the fundamental class of N, then
DN = f∗ DM f∗,
where f∗ and f∗ are the maps induced by f in homology and cohomology, respectively.

Poincaré duality theorem
435
Bilinear pairings formulation
Assuming M is compact boundaryless and orientable, let 
denote the torsion
subgroup of 
and let 
be the free part. Then there are bilinear
maps which are duality pairings
and
is the quotient of the rationals by the integers (taken as an additive quotient group).
The first form is typically called the intersection product and the 2nd the torsion linking
form. Assuming the manifold M is smooth, the intersection product is computed by
perturbing the homology classes to be transverse and computing their oriented intersection
number. For the torsion linking form, one computes the pairing of x and y by realizing nx as
the boundary of some class z. The form is the fraction with numerator the transverse
intersection number of z with y and denominator n.
The statement that the pairings are duality pairings means that the adjoint maps
and
are isomorphisms of groups.
Thus, Poincaré duality says that 
and 
are isomorphic, although there is no
natural map giving the isomorphism, and similarly 
and 
are also
isomorphic.
This approach to Poincaré duality was used by Przytycki and Yasuhara to give an
elementary homotopy and diffeomorphism classification of 3-dimensional lens spaces. [1]
Generalizations and related results
The Poincaré-Lefschetz duality theorem is a generalisation for manifolds with boundary. In
the non-orientable case, taking into account the sheaf of local orientations, one can give a
statement that is independent of orientability.
Blanchfield duality is a version of Poincaré duality which provides an isomorphism between
the homology of an abelian covering space of a manifold and the corresponding cohomology
with compact supports. It is used to get basic structural results about the Alexander module
and can be used to define the signatures of a knot.
With the development of homology theory to include K-theory and other extraordinary
theories from about 1955, it was realised that the homology H* could be replaced by other
theories, once the products on manifolds were constructed; and there are now textbook
treatments in generality.
Verdier duality is the appropriate generalization to (possibly singular) geometric objects,
such as analytic spaces or schemes, while intersection homology was developed R.
MacPherson and M. Goresky for stratified spaces, such as real or complex algebraic
varieties, precisely so as to generalise Poincaré duality to such stratified spaces.
There are many other forms of geometric duality in algebraic topology, including Lefschetz
duality, Alexander duality, Hodge duality, and S-duality (homotopy theory).

Poincaré duality theorem
436
See also
• Bruhat decomposition
• Fundamental class
• Weyl group
References
[1] Przytycki, Yasuhara. Symmetry of Links and Classification of Lens Spaces. Geom. Ded. Vol 98. No. 1. (2003)
Bibliography
• R.C. Blanchfield, Intersection theory of manifolds with operators with applications to
knot theory, Annals of Math, 65 (1957), 340--356.
• Griffiths, Phillip; Harris, Joseph (1994), Principles of algebraic geometry, Wiley Classics
Library, New York: Wiley, MR 1288523 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1288523), ISBN 978-0-471-05059-9
Tychonoff's theorem
In mathematics, Tychonoff's theorem states that the product of any collection of compact
topological spaces is compact. The theorem is named after Andrey Nikolayevich Tychonoff,
who proved it first in 1930 for powers of the closed unit interval and in 1935 stated the full
theorem along with the remark that its proof was the same as for the special case. The
earliest known published proof is contained in a 1937 paper of Eduard Čech.
Several texts identify Tychonoff's theorem as the single most important result in general
topology [e.g. Willard, p. 120]; others allow it to share this honor with Urysohn's lemma.
Definition
The theorem crucially depends upon the precise definitions of compactness and of the
product topology; in fact, Tychonoff's 1935 paper defines the product topology for the first
time. Conversely, part of its importance is to give confidence that these particular
definitions are the correct (i.e., most useful) ones.
Indeed, the Heine-Borel definition of compactness — that every covering of a space by open
sets admits a finite subcovering — is relatively recent. More popular in the 19th and early
20th centuries was the Bolzano-Weierstrass criterion that every sequence admits a
convergent subsequence, now called sequential compactness. These conditions are
equivalent for metrizable spaces, but neither implies the other on the class of all topological
spaces.
It is almost trivial to prove that the product of two sequentially compact spaces is
sequentially compact -- one passes to a subsequence for the first component and then a
subsubsequence 
for 
the 
second 
component. 
An 
only 
slightly 
more 
elaborate
"diagonalization" argument establishes the sequential compactness of a countable product
of sequentially compact spaces. However, the product of an uncountable number of copies
of the closed unit interval fails to be sequentially compact.

Tychonoff's theorem
437
This is a critical failure: if X is a completely regular Hausdorff space, there is a natural
embedding from X into [0,1]C(X,[0,1]), where C(X,[0,1]) is the set of continuous maps from X
to [0,1]. The compactness of [0,1]C(X,[0,1]) thus shows that every completely regular
Hausdorff space embeds in a compact Hausdorff space (or, can be "compactified".) This
construction is none other than the Stone–Čech compactification. Conversely, all subspaces
of compact Hausdorff spaces are completely regular Hausdorff, so this characterizes the
completely regular Hausdorff spaces as those which can be compactified. Such spaces are
now called Tychonoff spaces.
Applications
Tychonoff's theorem is also used in the proof of the Theorem of Banach-Alaoglu and in that
of Ascoli's Theorem. As a rule of thumb, any sort of construction that takes as input a fairly
general object (often of an algebraic, or topological-algebraic nature) and outputs a
compact space is likely to use Tychonoff: e.g., the Gelfand space of maximal ideals of a
commutative C* algebra, the Stone space of maximal ideals of a Boolean algebra, the
Berkovich spectrum of a commutative Banach ring.
Proofs of Tychonoff's theorem
1) Tychonoff's 1930 proof used the concept of a complete accumulation point.
2) The theorem is a quick corollary of the Alexander subbase theorem.
More modern proofs have been motivated by the following considerations: the approach to
compactness via convergence of subsequences leads to a simple and transparent proof in
the case of countable index sets. However, the approach to convergence in a topological
space using sequences is sufficient when the space satisfies the first axiom of countability
(as metrizable spaces do), but generally not otherwise. However, the product of
uncountably many metrizable spaces, each with at least two points, fails to be first
countable. So it is natural to hope that a suitable notion of convergence in arbitrary spaces
will lead to a compactness criterion generalizing sequential compactness in metrizable
spcaces that will be as easily applied to deduce the compactness of products. This has
turned out to be the case.
3) The theory of convergence via filters, due to Henri Cartan and developed by Bourbaki in
1937, leads to the following criterion: assuming the ultrafilter lemma, a space is compact if
and only if each ultrafilter on the space converges. With this in hand, the proof becomes
easy: the (filter generated by the) image of an ultrafilter on the product space under any
projection map is an ultrafilter on the factor space, which therefore converges, to at least
one x_i. One then shows that the original ultrafilter converges to x= (x_i).
Munkres gives in his textbook a reworking of the Cartan-Bourbaki proof which does not
explicitly use any filter-theoretic language or preliminaries.
4) Similarly, the Moore-Smith theory of convergence via nets, as supplemented by Kelley's
notion of a universal net, leads to the criterion that a space is compact if and only if each
universal net on the space converges. This criterion leads to a proof (Kelley, 1950) of
Tychonoff's theorem which is word for word identical to the Cartan/Bourbaki proof using
filters, save for the repeated substitution of "universal net" for "ultrafilter base".
5) A proof using nets but not universal nets was given in 1992 by Paul Chernoff.

Tychonoff's theorem
438
Tychonoff's theorem and the axiom of choice
All of the above proofs use the axiom of choice (AC) in some way. For instance, the second
proof uses that every filter is contained in an ultrafilter (i.e., a maximal filter), and this is
seen by invoking Zorn's Lemma. Zorn's Lemma is also used to prove Kelley's theorem, that
every net has a universal subnet. In fact these uses of AC are essential: in 1950 Kelley
proved that Tychonoff's theorem implies the axiom of choice. Note that one formulation of
AC is that the Cartesian product of a family of nonempty sets is nonempty; but since the
empty set is most certainly compact, the proof cannot proceed along such straightforward
lines. Thus Tychonoff's theorem joins several other basic theorems (e.g. that every nonzero
vector space has a basis) in being equivalent to AC.
On the other hand, the statement that every filter is contained in an ultrafilter does not
imply AC. Indeed, it is not hard to see that it is equivalent to the Boolean prime ideal
theorem (BPIT), a well-known intermediate point between the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory (ZF) and the ZF theory augmented by the axiom of choice (ZFC). A first glance at
the second proof of Tychnoff may suggest that the proof uses no more than (BPIT), in
contradiction to the above. However, the spaces in which every convergent filter has a
unique limit are precisely the Hausdorff spaces. In general we must select, for each
element of the index set, an element of the nonempty set of limits of the projected
ultrafilter base, and of course this uses AC. However, it also shows that the compactness of
the product of compact Hausdorff spaces can be proved using (BPIT), and in fact the
converse also holds. Studying the strength of Tychonoff's theorem for various restricted
classes of spaces is an active area in set-theoretic topology.
The analogue of Tychonoff's theorem in pointless topology does not require any form of the
axiom of choice.
References
• Chernoff, Paul N, A simple proof of Tychonoff's theorem via nets, American Mathematical
Monthly 99, 932–934, 1992.
• Johnstone, Peter T., Stone spaces, Cambridge studies in advanced mathematics 3,
Cambridge University Press, 1982.
• Johnstone, Peter T., Tychonoff's theorem without the axiom of choice, Fundamenta
Mathematica 113, 21–35, 1981.
• Kelley, John L., Convergence in topology, Duke Mathematics Journal 17, 277–283, 1950.
• Kelley, John L., The Tychonoff product theorem implies the axiom of choice, Fundamenta
Mathematica 37, 75–76, 1950.
• Munkres, James, Topology, 2nd edition, Prentice Hall, 2000.
• Tychonoff, Andrey N., Über die topologische Erweiterung von Räumen. Mathematische
Annalen 102, 544–561, 1930.
• Willard, Stephen, General Topology, Dover Publications, 2004.

Tietze extension theorem
439
Tietze extension theorem
In topology, the Tietze extension theorem states that, if X is a normal topological space
and
is a continuous map from a closed subset A of X into the real numbers carrying the
standard topology, then there exists a continuous map
with F(a) = f(a) for all a in A. F is called a continuous extension of f.
The theorem generalizes Urysohn's lemma and is widely applicable, since all metric spaces
and all compact Hausdorff spaces are normal. It can be generalized by replacing R with RJ
for some indexing set J, any retract of RJ, or any normal absolute retract whatsoever.
The theorem is due to Heinrich Franz Friedrich Tietze.
References
• Tietze extension theorem [1] on PlanetMath
• Proof of Tietze extension theorem [2] on PlanetMath
References
[1] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=4215
[2] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=5566

Universal coefficient theorem
440
Universal coefficient theorem
In mathematics, the universal coefficient theorem in algebraic topology establishes the
relationship in homology theory between the integral homology of a topological space X,
and its homology with coefficients in any abelian group A. It shows that the integral
homology groups
Hi(X,Z)
do in a certain, definite sense determine the groups
Hi(X,A).
Here H∗ might be the simplicial homology or more general singular homology theory: the
result itself is a pure piece of homological algebra about chain complexes of free abelian
groups. The form of the result is that other coefficients A may be used, at the cost of using a
Tor functor.
For example it is common to take A to be Z/2Z, so that coefficients are modulo 2. This
becomes straightforward in the absence of 2-torsion in the homology. Quite generally, the
result indicates the relationship that holds between the Betti numbers bi of X and the Betti
numbers bi,F with coefficients in a field F. These can differ, but only when the characteristic
of F is a prime number p for which there is some p-torsion in the homology.
The statement of the universal coefficient theorem runs as follows. Consider
where Hi means Hi(X,Z). Then there is an injective group homomorphism ι from it to
Hi(X,A). The theorem describes the cokernel of ι as
Tor(Hi − 1,A).
This Tor group can therefore be described as the obstruction to ι being an isomorphism,
which could be thought of as the 'expected' result.
This can be summarized saying there is a natural short exact sequence
Furthermore, this is a split sequence (but the splitting is not natural).
There is also a universal coefficient theorem for cohomology involving the Ext functor,
stating that there is a natural short exact sequence
As in the homological case, the sequence splits, though not naturally.
References
• Allen Hatcher, Algebraic Topology , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. ISBN
0-521-79540-0. A modern, geometrically flavored introduction to algebraic topology. The
book is available free in PDF and PostScript formats on the author's homepage [1].

Seifert–van Kampen theorem
441
Seifert–van Kampen theorem
In mathematics, the Seifert–van Kampen theorem of algebraic topology, sometimes just
called van Kampen's theorem, expresses the structure of the fundamental group of a
topological space X, in terms of the fundamental groups of two open, path-connected
subspaces U and V that cover X. It can therefore be used for computations of the
fundamental group of spaces that are constructed out of simpler ones.
The underlying idea is that paths in X can be partitioned: into journeys through the
intersection W of U and V, through U but outside V, and through V outside U. In order to
move segments of paths around, by homotopy to form loops returning to a base point w in
W, we should assume U, V and W are path-connected; and that W isn't empty. We assume
also that U and V are open subspaces with union X.
Under these conditions, 
, 
, and 
, together with the inclusion
homomorphisms (induced by the inclusion map):
and
are sufficient data to determine 
. The maps 
and 
extend to an epimorphism
where 
is the free product of 
and 
. The kernel of the
map 
are the loops in 
that, when viewed in 
, are homotopic to the trivial one at 
.
The group 
is therefore isomorphic to 
modulo such elements.
In particular, when 
is simply connected (so that its fundamental group is the trivial
group), 
the 
theorem 
says 
that 
is 
isomorphic 
to 
the 
free 
product
.
Equivalent formulations
In the language of combinatorial group theory, π1(X,w) is the free product with
amalgamation of those of U and V, with respect to the homomorphisms I and J (which might
not be injective): given group presentations
π1(U,w) = <u1,...,uk | α1,...,αl>
π1(V,w) = <v1,...,vm | β1,...,βn>
π1(W,w) = <w1,...,wp | γ1,...,γq>
the amalgamation can be written in terms of generators and relations as π1(X,w) = <u, v |
α, β, γ, I(wr)·J(wr)-1> where each letter u, v, w, α, β, γ stands for the respective set of
generators or relators, and the final relator means that the images of each generator wr
under the inclusions I, J are equivalent in the fundamental group of X.
In category theory, the fundamental group of X is a colimit of the diagram of those of U, V
and W. More precisely, π1(X,w) is the pushout of the diagram.

Seifert–van Kampen theorem
442
Van Kampen's theorem for fundamental groups
Van Kampen's theorem for fundamental groups[1] :
Let X be a topological space which is the union of the interiors of two path connected
subspaces 
, 
. Suppose 
is path connected. Let also 
and
, 
be induced by the inclusions for k= 1,
2. 
Then 
X 
is 
path 
connected 
and 
the 
natural 
morphism
is an isomorphism, that is, the fundamental group
of X is the free product of the fundamental groups of 
and 
with amalgamation of
.
Usually the morphisms induced by inclusion in this theorem are not themselves injective,
and the more precise version of the statement is in terms of pushouts of groups. The notion
of pushout in the category of groupoids allows for a version of the theorem for the non path
connected case, using the fundamental groupoid 
on a set A of base points,[2] . This
groupoid consists of homotopy classes relative to the end points of paths in X joining points
of 
. In particular, if X is a contractible space, and A consists of two distinct points of
X, then 
is easily seen to be isomorphic to the groupoid often written 
with two
vertices and exactly one morphism between any two vertices. This groupoid plays a role in
the theory of groupoids analogous to that of the group of integers in the theory of groups[3]
.
Theorem: Let the topological space X be covered by the interiors of two subspaces 
and let A be a set which meets each path component of 
and 
. Then A
meets each path component of X and the diagram P of morphisms induced by inclusion
--with 
, 
, 
, , 
, 
,
and 
-- is a pushout diagram in the category of groupoids.[4]
The interpretation of this theorem as a calculational tool for fundamental groups needs
some development of `combinatorial groupoid theory',[5] [6] . This theorem implies the
calculation of the fundamental group of the circle as the group of integers, since the group
of integers is obtained from the groupoid 
by identifying, in the category of groupoids, its
two vertices.
There is a version of the last theorem when X is covered by the union of the interiors of a
family 
of subsets[7] [8] . The conclusion is that if A meets each path
component of all 1,2,3-fold intersections of the sets 
, then A meets all path components
of X and the diagram 
of morphisms
induced by inclusions is a coequaliser in the category of groupoids.

Seifert–van Kampen theorem
443
Examples
One can use Van Kampen's theorem to calculate fundamental groups for topological spaces
that can be decomposed into simpler spaces. For example, consider the sphere 
. Pick
open sets 
and 
where n and s denote the north and south poles
respectively. Then we have the property that A, B and A ⋂ B are open path connected sets.
Thus we can see that there is a commutative diagram including A ⋂ B into A and B and then
another inclusion from A and B into 
and that there is a corresponding diagram of
homomorphisms between the fundamental groups of each subspace. Applying Van
Kampen's theorem gives the result 
. However A and B are
both homeomorphic to 
which is simply connected, so both A and B have trivial
fundamental groups. It is clear from this that the fundamental group of 
is trivial.
A more complicated example is the calculation of the fundamental group of a genus n
orientable surface S, otherwise known as the genus n surface group. One can construct S
using its standard fundamental polygon. For the first open set A, pick a disk within the
center of the polygon. Pick B to be the complement in S of the center point of A. Then the
intersection of A and B is an annulus, which is known to be homotopy equivalent to (and so
has the same fundamental group as) a circle. Then 
, which is the
integers, and 
. Thus the inclusion of 
into 
sends any
generator to the trivial element. However, the inclusion of 
into 
is not
trivial. In order to understand this, first one must calculate 
. This is easily done as
one can deformation retract B (which is S with one point deleted) onto the edges labeled by
A1B1A1
-1B1
-1A2B2A2
-1B2
-1... AnBnAn
-1Bn
-1. This space is known to be the wedge sum of 2n
circles (also called a bouquet of circles), which further is known to have fundamental group
isomorphic to the free group with 2n generators, which in this case can be represented by
the edges themselves: 
. We now have enough information to apply
Van Kampen's theorem. The generators are the loops 
(A is simply
connected, so it contributes no generators) and there is exactly one relation:
A1B1A1
-1B1
-1A2B2A2
-1B2
-1... AnBnAn
-1Bn
-1 = 1. Using generators and relations, this group is
denoted
Generalizations
This theorem has been extended to the non-connected case by using the fundamental
groupoid π1(X,A) on a set A of base points, which consists of homotopy classes of paths in X
joining points of X which lie in A. The connectivity conditions for the theorem then become
that A meets each path-component of U,V,W. The pushout is now in the category of
groupoids. This extended theorem allows the determination of the fundamental group of the
circle, and many other useful cases. For example, if the intersection W has two path
components, it is convenient to let A consist of one point in each of these components. A
theorem for arbitrary covers, with the restriction that A meets all three fold intersections of
the sets of the cover, is given in the paper by Brown and Razak cited below. Applications of
the fundamental groupoid on a set of base points to the Jordan curve theorem, Covering
space, and orbit space are given in Ronald Brown's book cited below.
In the case of orbit spaces, it is convenient to take A to include all the fixed points of the
action. An example here is the conjugation action on the circle.

Seifert–van Kampen theorem
444
The version that allows more than two overlapping sets but with A a singleton is also given
in Allen Hatcher's book below, theorem 1.20.
In fact, we can extend van Kampen's theorem significantly further by considering the
fundamental groupoid 
, an element of the category of small categories whose objects
are points of X and whose arrows are paths between points modulo homotopy equivalence.
In this case, to determine the fundamental groupoid of a space, we need only know the
fundamental groupoids of the open sets covering X as follows: create a new category in
which the objects are fundamental groupoids of the open sets, with an arrow between
groupoids if the domain space is a subspace of the codomain. Then van Kampen's theorem
is the assertion that the fundamental groupoid of X is the colimit of the diagram. For
details, see Peter May's book, chapter 2.
References to higher dimensional versions of the theorem which yield some information on
homotopy types are given in an article on higher dimensional group theories and
groupoids[9] .
See also
• Higher dimensional algebra
• Higher category theory
• Alexander Grothendieck
• Van Kampen
• Ronald Brown (mathematician)
References
• Allen Hatcher, Algebraic topology. [1] (2002) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
xii+544 pp. ISBN 052179160X and ISBN 0521795400
• Peter May, A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology. [10] (1999) University of Chicago
Press, ISBN 0-226-51183-9 (Section 2.7 provides a category-theoretic presentation of the
theorem as a colimit in the category of groupoids).
• Higher dimensional algebra
• Ronald Brown, Philip J. Higgins and Rafael Sivera. 2008. Higher dimensional, higher
homotopy, generalized van Kampen Theorem., in Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Higher
homotopy groupoids of filtered spaces. Part III. 516 pp, (Preprint). [11][12]
• Ronald Brown, Topology and groupoids [3] (2006) Booksurge LLC ISBN 1-4196-2722-8
• R. Brown and A. Razak, ``A van Kampen theorem for unions of non-connected spaces,
Archiv. Math. 42 (1984) 85-88.
• P.J. Higgins, Categories and groupoids [6] (1971) Van Nostrand Reinhold
• Ronald Brown, Higher dimensional group theory [13] (2007) (Gives a broad view of higher
dimensional van Kampen theorems involving multiple groupoids).
• E. R. van Kampen. On the connection between the fundamental groups of some related
spaces. American Journal of Mathematics, vol. 55 (1933), pp. 261–267.
• Ronald Brown, Higgins, P. J. and R. Sivera. 2007, vol. 1 Non-Abelian Algebraic Topology
[14], (vol. 2 in preparation); downloadable PDF: [15]
• Van Kampen's theorem [16] on PlanetMath
• Van Kampen's theorem result [17] on PlanetMath
• Ronald Brown R, K. Hardie, H. Kamps, T. Porter T.: The homotopy double groupoid of a
Hausdorff space., Theory Appl. Categories, 10:71–-93 (2002).

Seifert–van Kampen theorem
445
• Dylan G.L. Allegretti, Simplicial Sets and van Kampen's Theorem [4] (Discusses
generalized versions of van Kampen's theorem applied to topological spaces and
simplicial sets).
Notes
[1] R. Brown, Groupoids and Van Kampen's theorem, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 17 (1967) 385-401. http:/ /
planetmath. org/ ?method=src& from=objects& name=VanKampensTheorem& op=getobj
[2] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?method=src& from=objects& name=VanKampensTheorem& op=getobj R. Brown,
Groupoids and Van Kampen's theorem, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 17 (1967) 385-401.
[3] Ronald Brown. "Higher dimensional group theory". 2007. http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ hdaweb2.
htm
[4] R. Brown. Topology and Groupoids., Booksurge PLC (2006). http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ topgpds.
html
[5] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?method=src& from=objects& name=VanKampensTheorem& op=getobj P.J. Higgins,
Categories and Groupoids, van Nostrand, 1971, Reprints of Theory and Applications of Categories, No. 7
(2005),pp 1-195.
[6] R. Brown, Topology and Groupoids., Booksurge PLC (2006).
[7] Ronald Brown, Philip J. Higgins and Rafael Sivera. 2008. Higher dimensional, higher homotopy, generalized
van Kampen Theorem., in Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Higher homotopy groupoids of filtered spaces., Part
III. 459 pp, (Preprint).
[8] Higher dimensional, generalized van Kampen theorems (HD-GVKT) http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/
HDGvKTVanKampenTheorems. html
[9] Ronald Brown. "Higher dimensional group theory" . 2007. http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ hdaweb2.
htm
[10] http:/ / www. math. uchicago. edu/ ~may/ CONCISE/ ConciseRevised. pdf
[11] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ pdffiles/ rbrsbookb-e040609. pdf
[12] Ronald Brown, Philip J. Higgins and Rafael Sivera. 2009. Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Higher homotopy
groupoids of filtered spaces., 516 pp, Preprint. http:/ / planetphysics. org/ ?op=getobj& from=books& id=249
[13] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ hdaweb2. html
[14] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ nonab-a-t. html
[15] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ nonab-t/ partI010604. pdf
[16] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=3947
[17] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=5576

Whitehead theorem
446
Whitehead theorem
In homotopy theory (a branch of mathematics), the Whitehead theorem states that if a
continuous mapping f between topological spaces X and Y induces isomorphisms on all
homotopy groups, then f is a homotopy equivalence provided X and Y are connected CW
complexes. This result was proved by J. H. C. Whitehead in two landmark papers from
1949, and provides a justification for working with the CW complex concept that he
introduced there.
Stating it more accurately, we suppose given CW complexes X and Y, with respective base
points x and y. Given a continuous mapping
such that f(x) = y, we consider for n ≥ 0 the induced homomorphisms
where πn denotes for n ≥ 1 the n-th homotopy group. For n = 0 this means the mapping of
the path-connected components; if we assume both X and Y are connected we can ignore
this as containing no information. We say that f is a weak homotopy equivalence if the
homomorphisms f* are all bijective. The Whitehead theorem then states that a weak homotopy equivalence,
for connected CW complexes, is an actual homotopy equivalence.
A word of caution: it is not enough to assume πn(X) is isomorphic to πn(Y) for each n ≥ 1 in order to
conclude that X and Y are homotopy equivalent. One really needs a map f : X → Y inducing
such isomorphisms in homotopy. For instance, take X= S2 × RP3 and Y= RP2 × S3. Then X
and Y have the same fundamental group, namely Z2, and the same universal cover, namely
S2 × S3; thus, they have isomorphic homotopy groups. On the other hand their homology
groups are different (as can be seen from the Künneth formula); thus, X and Y are not
homotopy equivalent.
The Whitehead theorem does not hold for general topological spaces or even for all
subspaces of Rn. For example, the Warsaw circle, a subset of the plane, has all homotopy
groups zero, but the map from the Warsaw circle to a single point is not a homotopy
equivalence. The study of possible generalizations of Whitehead's theorem to more general
spaces is part of the subject of shape theory.
Generalization to model categories
In any model category, a weak equivalence between cofibrant-fibrant objects is a homotopy
equivalence.
References
• J. H. C. Whitehead, Combinatorial homotopy. I., Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 55 (1949),
213–245
• J. H. C. Whitehead, Combinatorial homotopy. II., Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 55 (1949),
453–496
• A. Hatcher, Algebraic topology [1], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
xii+544 pp. ISBN 0-521-79160-X and ISBN 0-521-79540-0 (see Theorem 4.5)

List of important publications in mathematics
447
List of important publications in
mathematics
This is a list of important publications in mathematics, organized by field.
Some reasons why a particular publication might be regarded as important:
• Topic creator – A publication that created a new topic
• Breakthrough – A publication that changed scientific knowledge significantly
• Introduction – A publication that is a good introduction or survey of a topic
• Influence – A publication which has significantly influenced the world
• Latest and greatest – The current most advanced result in a topic
Algebra
Theory of equations
Hisab al-Jabr w’al-muqabala, Kitab al-Jabr wa-l-Muqabala
• Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī (820)
Description: The first book on the systematic algebraic solutions of linear and quadratic
equations. The book is considered to be the foundation of modern algebra and Islamic
mathematics. The word "algebra" itself is derived from the al-Jabr in the title of the book.
Ars Magna
• Gerolamo Cardano (1545)
Description: Provided the first published methods for solving cubic and quartic equations
(due to Scipione del Ferro, Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia, and Lodovico Ferrari), and exhibited
the first published calculations involving non-real complex numbers. [1]
Vollständige Anleitung zur Algebra
• Leonhard Euler (1770)
Description: Also known as Elements of Algebra, Euler's textbook on elementary algebra is
one of the first to set out algebra in the modern form we would recognize today. The first
volume deals with determinate equations, while the second part deals with Diophantine
equations. The last section contains a proof of Fermat's Last Theorem for the case n = 3,
making some valid assumptions regarding Q(√−3) that Euler did not prove.[2]

List of important publications in mathematics
448
Demonstratio nova theorematis omnem functionem algebraicam rationalem
integram unius variabilis in factores reales primi vel secundi gradus resolvi posse
• Carl Friedrich Gauss (1799)
Description: Gauss' doctoral dissertation[3] , which contained a widely accepted (at the
time) but incomplete proof[4] of the fundamental theorem of algebra.
Abstract algebra
Group theory
Réflexions sur la résolution algébrique des équations
• Joseph Louis Lagrange (1770)
Description: Made the prescient observation that the roots of the Lagrange resolvent of a
polynomial equation are tied to permutations of the roots of the original equation, laying a
more general foundation for what had previously been an ad hoc analysis and helping
motivate the later development of the theory of permutation groups, group theory, and
Galois theory. The Lagrange resolvent also introduced the discrete Fourier transform of
order 3.
Articles Publiés par Galois dans les Annales de Mathématiques
• Journal de Mathematiques pures et Appliquées, II (1846)
Description: Posthumous publication of the mathematical manuscripts of Évariste Galois
by Joseph Liouville. Included are Galois' papers Mémoire sur les conditions de résolubilité
des équations par radicaux and Des équations primitives qui sont solubles par radicaux.
Traité des substitutions et des équations algébriques
• Camille Jordan (1870)
Description: The first book on group theory, giving a then-comprehensive study of
permutation groups and Galois theory. In this book, Jordan introduced the notion of a
simple group and epimorphism (which he called l'isomorphisme mériédrique)[5] , proved
part of the Jordan-Hölder theorem, and discussed matrix groups over finite fields as well as
the Jordan normal form. [6]
Theorie der Transformationsgruppen
• Sophus Lie, Friedrich Engel (1888-1893).
Publication data: 3 volumes, B.G. Teubner, Verlagsgesellschaft, mbH, Leipzig, 1888-1893.
Volume 1 [7], Volume 2 [8], Volume 3 [8].
Description: The first comprehensive work on transformation groups, serving as the
foundation for the modern theory of Lie groups.

List of important publications in mathematics
449
Solvability of groups of odd order
• Walter Feit and John Thompson (1960)
Description: Gave a complete proof of the solvability of finite groups of odd order,
establishing the long-standing Burnside conjecture that all finite non-abelian simple groups
are of even order. Many of the original techniques used in this paper were used in the
eventual classification of finite simple groups.
Homological algebra
Homological Algebra
• Henri Cartan and Samuel Eilenberg (1956)
Description: Provided the first fully-worked out treatment of abstract homological algebra,
unifying previously disparate presentations of homology and cohomology for associative
algebras, Lie algebras, and groups into a single theory.
Sur Quelques Points d'Algèbre Homologique
• Alexander Grothendieck (1957)
Description: Revolutionized homological algebra by introducing abelian categories and
providing a general framework for Cartan and Eilenberg’s notion of derived functors.
Algebraic geometry
Theorie der Abelschen Functionen
• Bernhard Riemann (1857)
Publication data: Journal für die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik
Description: Developed the concept of Riemann surfaces and their topological properties
beyond Riemann's 1851 thesis work, proved an index theorem for the genus (the original
formulation of the Riemann-Hurwitz formula), proved the Riemann inequality for the
dimension of the space of meromorphic functions with prescribed poles (the original
formulation of the Riemann-Roch theorem), discussed birational transformations of a given
curve and the dimension of the corresponding moduli space of inequivalent curves of a
given genus, and solved more general inversion problems than those investigated by Abel
and Jacobi. André Weil once wrote that this paper "is one of the greatest pieces of
mathematics that has ever been written; there is not a single word in it that is not of
consequence." [9]
Faisceaux Algébriques Cohérents
• Jean-Pierre Serre
Publication data: Annals of Mathematics, 1955
Description: FAC, as it is usually called, first introduced the use of sheaves into algebraic 
geometry. Serre introduced Čech cohomology of sheaves in this paper, and, despite its 
technical deficiencies, revolutionized algebraic geometry. For example, the long exact 
sequence in sheaf cohomology allows one to show that some surjective maps of sheaves 
induce surjective maps on sections; specifically, these are the maps whose kernel (as a 
sheaf) has a vanishing first cohomology group. Before FAC, this was next to impossible.

List of important publications in mathematics
450
While Grothendieck's derived functor cohomology has replaced Čech cohomology for
technical reasons, actual calculations, such as of the cohomology of projective space, are
usually carried out by Čech techniques, and for this reason Serre's paper remains
important even today.
Géométrie Algébrique et Géométrie Analytique
• Jean-Pierre Serre (1956)
Description: In mathematics, algebraic geometry and analytic geometry are closely related
subjects, where analytic geometry is the theory of complex manifolds and the more general
analytic spaces defined locally by the vanishing of analytic functions of several complex
variables. A (mathematical) theory of the relationship between the two was put in place
during the early part of the 1950s, as part of the business of laying the foundations of
algebraic geometry to include, for example, techniques from Hodge theory. (NB While
analytic geometry as use of Cartesian coordinates is also in a sense included in the scope of
algebraic geometry, that is not the topic being discussed in this article.) The major paper
consolidating the theory was Géometrie Algébrique et Géométrie Analytique by Serre, now
usually referred to as GAGA. A GAGA-style result would now mean any theorem of
comparison, allowing passage between a category of objects from algebraic geometry, and
their morphisms, and a well-defined subcategory of analytic geometry objects and
holomorphic mappings.
Le théorème de Riemann-Roch, d'après A. Grothendieck
• Armand Borel, Jean-Pierre Serre (1958)
Description: Borel and Serre's exposition of Grothendieck's version of the Riemann Roch
theorem, published after Grothendieck made it clear that he was not interested in writing
up his own result. Grothendieck reinterpreted both sides of the formula that Hirzebruch
proved in 1953 in the framework of morphisms between varieties, resulting in a sweeping
generalization.[10] In his proof, Grothendieck broke new ground with his concept of
Grothendieck groups, which led to the development of K-theory.[11]
Éléments de géométrie algébrique
• Alexander Grothendieck (1960-1967)
Description: Written with the assistance of Jean Dieudonné, this is Grothendieck's
exposition of his reworking of the foundations of algebraic geometry. It has become the
most important foundational work in modern algebraic geometry. The approach expounded
in EGA, as these books are known, transformed the field and led to monumental advances.
Séminaire de géométrie algébrique
• Alexander Grothendieck et al.
Description: These seminar notes on Grothendieck's reworking of the foundations of 
algebraic geometry report on work done at IHÉS starting in the 1960s. SGA 1 dates from 
the seminars of 1960-1961, and the last in the series, SGA 7, dates from 1967–1969. In 
contrast to EGA, which is intended to set foundations, SGA describes ongoing research as it 
unfolded in Grothendieck’s seminar; as a result, it is quite difficult to read, since many of 
the more elementary and foundational results were relegated to EGA. One of the major

List of important publications in mathematics
451
results building on the results in SGA is Pierre Deligne's proof of the last of the open Weil
conjectures in the early 1970s. Other authors who worked on one or several volumes of
SGA include Michel Raynaud, Michael Artin, Jean-Pierre Serre, Jean-Louis Verdier, Pierre
Deligne, and Nicholas Katz.
Number theory
De fractionibus continuis dissertatio
• Leonhard Euler (1744)
Description: First presented in 1737, this paper [12] provided the first then-comprehensive
account of the properties of continued fractions. It also contains the first proof that the
number e is irrational.[13]
Recherches d'Arithmétique
• Joseph Louis Lagrange (1775)
Description: Developed a general theory of binary quadratic forms to handle the general
problem of when an integer is representable by the form 
. This included a
reduction theory for binary quadratic forms, where he proved that every form is equivalent
to a certain canonically chosen reduced form.[14] [15]
Disquisitiones Arithmeticae
• Carl Friedrich Gauss (1801)
Description: The Disquisitiones Arithmeticae is a profound and masterful book on number
theory written by German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss and first published in 1801
when Gauss was 24. In this book Gauss brings together results in number theory obtained
by mathematicians such as Fermat, Euler, Lagrange and Legendre and adds many
important new results of his own. Among his contributions was the first complete proof
known of the Fundamental theorem of arithmetic, the first two published proofs of the law
of quadratic reciprocity, a deep investigation of binary quadratic forms going beyond
Lagrange's work in Recherches d'Arithmétique, a first appearance of Gauss sums,
cyclotomy, and the theory of constructible polygons with a particular application to the
constructibility of the regular 17-gon. Of note, in section V, article 303 of Disquisitiones,
Gauss summarized his calculations of class numbers of imaginary quadratic number fields,
and in fact found all imaginary quadratic number fields of class numbers 1, 2, and 3
(confirmed in 1986) as he had conjectured.[16] In section V, article 358, Gauss proved what
can be interpreted as the first non-trivial case of the Riemann Hypothesis for curves over
finite fields (the Hasse-Weil theorem).[17]

List of important publications in mathematics
452
Beweis des Satzes, daß jede unbegrenzte arithmetische Progression,
deren erstes Glied und Differenz ganze Zahlen ohne
gemeinschaftlichen Factor sind, unendlich viele Primzahlen enthä lt
• Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (1837)
Description: Pioneering paper in analytic number theory, which introduced Dirichlet
characters and their L-functions to establish Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic
progressions.[18] In subsequent publications, Dirichlet used these tools to determine,
among other things, the class number for quadratic forms.
Über die Anzahl der Primzahlen unter einer gegebenen Grösse
• Bernhard Riemann (1859)
Description: Über die Anzahl der Primzahlen unter einer gegebenen Grösse (or On the
Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude) is a seminal 8-page paper by Bernhard
Riemann published in the November 1859 edition of the Monthly Reports of the Berlin
Academy. Although it is the only paper he ever published on number theory, it contains
ideas which influenced dozens of researchers during the late 19th century and up to the
present day. The paper consists primarily of definitions, heuristic arguments, sketches of
proofs, and the application of powerful analytic methods; all of these have become essential
concepts and tools of modern analytic number theory. It also contains the famous Riemann
Hypothesis, one of the most important open problems in mathematics.
Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie
• P.G.L. Dirichlet and Richard Dedekind
Description: Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie (Lectures on Number Theory) is a textbook
of number theory written by German mathematicians P.G.L. Dirichlet and Richard
Dedekind, and published in 1863. The Vorlesungen can be seen as a watershed between the
classical number theory of Fermat, Jacobi and Gauss, and the modern number theory of
Dedekind, Riemann and Hilbert. Dirichlet does not explicitly recognise the concept of the
group that is central to modern algebra, but many of his proofs show an implicit
understanding of group theory
Zahlbericht
• David Hilbert (1897)
Description: Unified and made accessible many of the developments in algebraic number
theory made during the nineteenth century. Although criticized by André Weil (who stated
"more than half of his famous Zahlbericht is little more than an account of Kummer’s
number-theoretical work, with inessential improvements")[19] and Emmy Noether[20] , it
was highly influential for many years following its publication.

List of important publications in mathematics
453
Fourier Analysis in Number Fields and Hecke's Zeta-Functions
• John Tate (1950)
Description: Generally referred to simply as Tate's Thesis, Tate's Princeton Ph.D. thesis,
under Emil Artin, is a reworking of Erich Hecke's theory of zeta- and L-functions in terms of
Fourier analysis on the adeles. The introduction of these methods into number theory made
it possible to formulate extensions of Hecke's results to more general L-functions such as
those arising from automorphic forms.
Automorphic Forms on GL(2)
• Hervé Jacquet and Robert Langlands (1970)
Description: This publication offers evidence towards Langlands' conjectures by reworking
and expanding the classical theory of modular forms and their L-functions through the
introduction of representation theory.
La conjecture de Weil. I.
• Pierre Deligne (1974)
Description: Proved the Riemann hypothesis for varieties over finite fields, settling the last
of the open Weil conjectures.
Endlichkeitssätze für abelsche Varietäten über Zahlkörpern
• Gerd Faltings (1983)
Description: Faltings proves a collection of important results in this paper, the most
famous of which is the first proof of the Mordell conjecture (a conjecture dating back to
1922). Other theorems proved in this paper include an instance of the Tate conjecture
(relating the homomorphisms between two abelian varieties over a number field to the
homomorphisms between their Tate modules) and some finiteness results concerning
abelian varieties over number fields with certain properties.
Modular Elliptic Curves and Fermat's Last Theorem
• Andrew Wiles (1995)
Description: This article proceeds to prove a special case of the Shimura-Taniyama
conjecture through the study of the deformation theory of Galois representations. This in
turn implies the famed Fermat's Last Theorem. The proof's method of identification of a
deformation ring with a Hecke algebra (now referred to as an R=T theorem) to prove
modularity lifting theorems has been an influential development in algebraic number
theory.

List of important publications in mathematics
454
The geometry and cohomology of some simple Shimura varieties
• Michael Harris and Richard Taylor (2001)
Description: Harris and Taylor provide the first proof of the local Langlands conjecture for
GL(n). As part of the proof, this monograph also makes an in depth study of the geometry
and cohomology of certain Shimura varieties at primes of bad reduction.
Analysis
Introductio in analysin infinitorum
• Leonhard Euler (1748)
Description: The eminent historian of mathematics Carl Boyer once called Euler's
Introductio in analysin infinitorum the greatest modern textbook in mathematics.[21]
Published in two volumes[22] [23] , this book more than any other work succeeded in
establishing analysis as a major branch of mathematics, with a focus and approach distinct
from that used in geometry and algebra.[24] Notably, Euler identified functions rather than
curves to be the central focus in his book.[25] Logarithmic, exponential, trigonometric, and
transcendental functions were covered, as were expansions into partial fractions,
evaluations of ζ(2k) for k a positive integer between 1 and 13, infinite series-infinite
product formulas[21] , continued fractions, and partitions of integers.[26] In this work, Euler
proved that every rational number can be written as a finite continued fraction, that the
continued fraction of an irrational number is infinite, and derived continued fraction
expansions for e and √e.[22] This work also contains a statement of Euler's formula and a
statement of the pentagonal number theorem, which he had discovered earlier and would
publish a proof for in 1751.
Calculus
Yuktibhasa
• Jyeshtadeva (1501)
Description: Written in India in 1501, this was the world's first calculus text. "This work
laid the foundation for a complete system of fluxions" (Charles Whish, 1835) and served as
a summary of the Kerala School's achievements in calculus, trigonometry and mathematical
analysis, most of which were earlier discovered by the 14th century mathematician
Madhava. It's possible that this text influenced the later development of calculus in Europe.
Some of its important developments in calculus include: the fundamental ideas of
differentiation and integration, the derivative, differential equations, term by term
integration, numerical integration by means of infinite series, the relationship between the
area of a curve and its integral, and the mean value theorem.

List of important publications in mathematics
455
Nova methodus pro maximis et minimis, itemque tangentibus, quae nec fractas nec
irrationales quantitates moratur, et singulare pro illi calculi genus
• Gottfried Leibniz (1684)
Description: Leibniz's first publication on differential calculus, containing the now familiar
notation for differentials as well as rules for computing the derivatives of powers, products
and quotients.
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
• Isaac Newton
Description: The Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Latin: "mathematical
principles of natural philosophy", often Principia or Principia Mathematica for short) is a
three-volume work by Isaac Newton published on July 5, 1687. Perhaps the most influential
scientific book ever published, it contains the statement of Newton's laws of motion forming
the foundation of classical mechanics as well as his law of universal gravitation, and derives
Kepler's laws for the motion of the planets (which were first obtained empirically). Here
was born the practice, now so standard we identify it with science, of explaining nature by
postulating mathematical axioms and demonstrating that their conclusion are observable
phenomena. In formulating his physical theories, Newton freely used his unpublished work
on calculus. When he submitted Principia for publication, however, Newton chose to recast
the majority of his proofs as geometric arguments.[27]
Institutiones calculi differentialis cum eius usu in analysi finitorum ac doctrina
serierum
• Leonhard Euler (1755)
Description: Published in two books[28] , Euler's textbook on differential calculus
presented the subject in terms of the function concept, which he had introduced in his 1748
Introductio in analysin infinitorum. This work opens with a study of the calculus of finite
differences and makes a thorough investigation of how differentiation behaves under
substitutions. [1] Also included is a systematic study of Bernoulli polynomials and the
Bernoulli numbers (naming them as such), a demonstration of how the Bernoulli numbers
are related to the coefficients in the Euler–Maclaurin formula and the values of ζ(2n) [29] , a
further study of Euler's constant (including its connection to the gamma function), and an
application of partial fractions to differentiation. [30]
Über die Darstellbarkeit einer Function durch eine trigonometrische Reihe
• Bernhard Riemann (1867)
Description: Written in 1853, Riemann's work on trigonometric series was published
posthumously. In it, he extended Cauchy’s definition of the integral to that of the Riemann
integral, allowing some functions with dense subsets of discontinuities on an interval to be
integrated (which he demonstrated by an example)[31] . He also stated the Riemann series
theorem[31] , proved the Riemann-Lebesgue lemma for the case of bounded Riemann
integrable functions[32] , and developed the Riemann localization principle[33] .

List of important publications in mathematics
456
Intégrale, longueur, aire
• Henri Lebesgue (1901)
Description: Lebesgue's doctoral dissertation, summarizing and extending his research to
date regarding his development of measure theory and the Lebesgue integral.
Complex analysis
Grundlagen für eine allgemeine Theorie der Functionen einer veränderlichen
complexen Grösse
• Bernhard Riemann (1851)
Description: Riemann's doctoral dissertation introduced the notion of a Riemann surface,
conformal mapping, simple connectivity, the Riemann sphere, the Laurent series expansion
for functions having poles and branch points, and the Riemann mapping theorem.
Functional analysis
Théorie des opérations linéaires
• Stefan Banach (1932; originally published 1931 in Polish under the title Teorja operacyj.)
Description: The first mathematical monograph on the subject of linear metric spaces,
bringing the abstract study of functional analysis to the wider mathematical community.
The book introduced the ideas of a normed space and the notion of a so-called B-space, a
complete normed space. The B-spaces are now called Banach spaces and are one of the
basic objects of study in all areas of modern mathematical analysis. Banach also gave
proofs of versions of the open mapping theorem, closed graph theorem, and Hahn-Banach
theorem.
Fourier analysis
Mémoire sur la propagation de la chaleur dans les corps solides
• Joseph Fourier (1807)[34]
Description: Introduced Fourier analysis, specifically Fourier series. Key contribution was
to not simply use trigonometric series, but to model all functions by trigonometric series.
“
Multiplying both sides by 
, and then integrating from 
to 
yields:
”
When Fourier submitted his paper in 1807, the committee (which included Lagrange,
Laplace, Malus and Legendre, among others) concluded: ...the manner in which the author
arrives at these equations is not exempt of difficulties and [...] his analysis to integrate them
still leaves something to be desired on the score of generality and even rigour. Making
Fourier series rigorous, which in detail took over a century, lead directly to a number of
developments in analysis, notably the rigorous statement of the integral via the Dirichlet
integral and later the Lebesgue integral.

List of important publications in mathematics
457
Sur la convergence des séries trigonométriques qui servent à représenter une
fonction arbitraire entre des limites données
• Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (1829, expanded German edition in 1837)
Description: In his habilitation thesis on Fourier series, Riemann characterized this work
of Dirichlet as the "the first profound paper about the subject"[35] . This paper gave the first
rigorous proof of the convergence of Fourier series under fairly general conditions
(piecewise continuity and monotonicity) by considering partial sums, which Dirichlet
transformed into a particular Dirichlet integral involving what is now called the Dirichlet
kernel. This paper introduced the nowhere continuous Dirichlet function and an early
version of the Riemann-Lebesgue lemma.[36]
On convergence and growth of partial sums of Fourier series
• Lennart Carleson (1966)
Description: Settled Lusin's conjecture that the Fourier expansion of any 
function
converges almost everywhere.
Geometry
Baudhayana Sulba Sutra
• Baudhayana
Description: Written around the 8th century BC, this is one of the oldest geometrical texts.
It laid the foundations of Indian mathematics and was influential in South Asia and its
surrounding regions, and perhaps even Greece. Among the important geometrical
discoveries included in this text are: the earliest list of Pythagorean triples discovered
algebraically, the earliest statement of the Pythagorean theorem, geometric solutions of
linear equations, several approximations of π, the first use of irrational numbers, and an
accurate computation of the square root of 2, correct to a remarkable five decimal places.
Though this was primarily a geometrical text, it also contained some important algebraic
developments, including the earliest use of quadratic equations of the forms ax2 = c and ax2
+ bx = c, and integral solutions of simultaneous Diophantine equations with up to four
unknowns.
Euclid's Elements
• Euclid
Publication data: c. 300 BC
Online version: Interactive Java version [37]
Description: This is often regarded as not only the most important work in geometry but
one of the most important works in mathematics. It contains many important results in
geometry, number theory and the first algorithm as well. More than any specific result in
the publication, it seems that the major achievement of this publication is the
popularization of logic and mathematical proof as a method of solving problems.

List of important publications in mathematics
458
The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art
• Unknown author
Description: This was a Chinese mathematics book, mostly geometric, composed during
the Han Dynasty, perhaps as early as 200 BC. It remained the most important textbook in
China and East Asia for over a thousand years, similar to the position of Euclid's Elements
in Europe. Among its contents: Linear problems solved using the principle known later in
the West as the rule of false position. Problems with several unknowns, solved by a
principle similar to Gaussian elimination. Problems involving the principle known in the
West as the Pythagorean theorem. The earliest solution of a matrix using a method
equivalent to the modern method.
The Conics
• Apollonius of Perga
Description: The Conics was written by Apollonius of Perga, a Greek mathematician. His
innovative methodology and terminology, especially in the field of conics, influenced many
later scholars including Ptolemy, Francesco Maurolico, Isaac Newton, and René Descartes.
It was Apollonius who gave the ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola the names by which
we know them.
La Géométrie
• René Descartes
Description: La Géométrie was published in 1637 and written by René Descartes. The
book was influential in developing the Cartesian coordinate system and specifically
discussed the representation of points of a plane, via real numbers; and the representation
of curves, via equations.
Grundlagen der Geometrie
• David Hilbert
Publication data: Hilbert, David (1899). Grundlagen der Geometrie. Teubner-Verlag
Leipzig.
Description: Hilbert's axiomatization of geometry, whose primary influence was in its
pioneering approach to metamathematical questions including the use of models to prove
axiom independence and the importance of establishing the consistency and completeness
of an axiomatic system.
Regular Polytopes
• H.S.M. Coxeter
Description: Regular Polytopes is a comprehensive survey of the geometry of regular
polytopes, the generalisation of regular polygons and regular polyhedra to higher
dimensions. Originating with an essay entitled Dimensional Analogy written in 1923, the
first edition of the book took Coxeter 24 years to complete. Originally written in 1947, the
book was updated and republished in 1963 and 1973.

List of important publications in mathematics
459
Differential geometry
Recherches sur la courbure des surfaces
• Leonard Euler (1760)
Publication data: Mémoires de l'académie des sciences de Berlin 16 (1760) pp. 119–143;
published 1767. (Full text [38] and an English translation available from the Dartmouth
Euler archive.)
Description: Established the theory of surfaces, and introduced the idea of principal
curvatures, laying the foundation for subsequent developments in the differential geometry
of surfaces.
Disquisitiones generales circa superficies curvas
• Carl Friedrich Gauss (1827)
Publication data: "Disquisitiones generales circa superficies curvas" [39], Commentationes
Societatis Regiae Scientiarum Gottingesis Recentiores Vol. VI (1827), pp. 99–146; "General
Investigations of Curved Surfaces [40]" (published 1965) Raven Press, New York, translated
by A.M.Hiltebeitel and J.C.Morehead.
Description: Groundbreaking work in differential geometry, introducing the notion of
Gaussian curvature and Gauss' celebrated Theorema Egregium.
Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde Liegen
• Bernhard Riemann (1854)
Publication data: "Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde Liegen" [41],
Abhandlungen der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Vol. 13,
1867.
Description: Riemann's famous Habiltationsvortrag, in which he introduced the notions of
a manifold, Riemannian metric, and curvature tensor.
Leçons sur la théorie génerale des surfaces
• Gaston Darboux
Publication data: Darboux, Gaston (1887,1889,1896). Leçons sur la théorie génerale des
surfaces: Volume I [42], Volume II [43], Volume III [44], Volume IV [44]. Gauthier-Villars.
Description: A treatise covering virtually every aspect of the 19th century differential
geometry of surfaces.
Topology
Analysis situs
• Henri Poincaré (1895, 1899-1905)
Description: Poincaré's Analysis situs and his Compléments à l'Analysis Situs laid the
general foundations for algebraic topology. In these papers, Poincaré introduced the
notions of homology and the fundamental group, provided an early formulation of Poincaré
duality, gave the Euler-Poincaré characteristic for chain complexes, and mentioned several
important conjectures including the Poincaré conjecture.

List of important publications in mathematics
460
Grundzüge der Mengenlehre
• Felix Hausdorff (1914)
• Reprinted and commented in: Gesammelte Werke Bd. 2 / Herausgegeben von E.
Brieskorn, S.D.Chatterji et al.. – Berlin, 2002
Description: This book founded (general) topology by giving the axioms for a (Hausdorff)
topological space.
L’anneau d’homologie d’une représentation, Structure de l’anneau
d’homologie d’une représentation
• Jean Leray (1946)
Description: These two Comptes Rendus notes of Leray from 1946 introduced the novel
concepts of sheafs, sheaf cohomology, and spectral sequences, which he had developed
during his years of captivity as a prisoner of war. Leray's announcements and applications
(published in other Comptes Rendus notes from 1946) drew immediate attention from other
mathematicians. Subsequent clarification, development, and generalization by Henri
Cartan, Jean-Louis Koszul, Armand Borel, Jean-Pierre Serre, and Leray himself allowed
these concepts to be understood and applied to many other areas of mathematics.[45]
Dieudonné would later write that these notions created by Leray "undoubtedly rank at the
same level in the history of mathematics as the methods invented by Poincaré and
Brouwer". [11]
Quelques propriétés globales des variétés differentiables
• René Thom (1954)
Description: In this paper, Thom proved the Thom transversality theorem, introduced the
notions of oriented and unoriented cobordism, and demonstrated that cobordism groups
could be computed as the homotopy groups of certain Thom spaces. Thom completely
characterized the unoriented cobordism ring and achieved strong results for several
problems, including Steenrod's problem on the realization of cycles.[11] [46]
Category theory
General theory of natural equivalences
• Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane (1945)
Description: The first paper on category theory. Mac Lane later wrote in Categories for
the Working Mathematician that he and Eilenberg introduced categories so that they could
introduce functors, and they introduced functors so that they could introduce natural
equivalences. Prior to this paper, "natural" was used in an informal and imprecise way to
designate constructions that could be made without making any choices. Afterwards,
"natural" had a precise meaning which occurred in a wide variety of contexts and had
powerful and important consequences.

List of important publications in mathematics
461
Categories for the Working Mathematician
• Saunders Mac Lane (1971, second edition 1998)
Description: Saunders Mac Lane, one of the founders of category theory, wrote this
exposition to bring categories to the masses. Mac Lane does not get lost in pointless
abstraction, but instead brings to the fore the important concepts that make category
theory useful, such as adjoint functors and universal properties. His text is more
comprehensive than most mathematicians will ever need, and consequently is also an
excellent reference.
Set theory
Über eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriffes aller reellen algebraischen
Zahlen
• Georg Cantor (1874)
Description: Contains the first proof that the set of all real numbers is uncountable; also
contains a proof that the set of algebraic numbers is denumerable.
Grundzüge der Mengenlehre
• Felix Hausdorff
Description: First published in 1914, this was the first comprehensive introduction to set
theory. Besides the systematic treatment of known results in set theory, the book also
contains chapters on measure theory and topology, which were then still considered parts
of set theory. Here Hausdorff presents and develops highly original material which was
later to become the basis for those areas.
The consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized
continuum-hypothesis with the axioms of set theory
• Kurt Gödel (1938)
Description: Gödel proves the results of the title. Also, in the process, introduces the class
L of constructible sets, a major influence in the development of axiomatic set theory.
The Independence of the Continuum Hypothesis
• Paul J. Cohen (1963, 1964)
Description: Cohen's breakthrough work proved the independence of the continuum
hypothesis and axiom of choice with respect to Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. In proving this
Cohen introduced the concept of forcing which led to many other major results in axiomatic
set theory.

List of important publications in mathematics
462
Logic
Begriffsschrift
• Gottlob Frege (1879)
Description: Published in 1879, the title Begriffsschrift is usually translated as concept
writing or concept notation; the full title of the book identifies it as "a formula language,
modelled on that of arithmetic, of pure thought". Frege's motivation for developing his
formal logical system was similar to Leibniz's desire for a calculus ratiocinator. Frege
defines a logical calculus to support his research in the foundations of mathematics.
Begriffsschrift is both the name of the book and the calculus defined therein. It was
arguably the most significant publication in logic since Aristotle.
Formulario mathematico
• Giuseppe Peano (1895)
Description: First published in 1895, the Formulario mathematico was the first
mathematical book written entirely in a formalized language. It contained a description of
mathematical logic and many important theorems in other branches of mathematics. Many
of the notations introduced in the book are now in common use.
Principia Mathematica
• Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead (1910-1913)
Description: The Principia Mathematica is a three-volume work on the foundations of
mathematics, written by Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead and published in
1910-1913. It is an attempt to derive all mathematical truths from a well-defined set of
axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic. The questions remained whether a
contradiction could be derived from the Principia's axioms, and whether there exists a
mathematical statement which could neither be proven nor disproven in the system. These
questions were settled, in a rather surprising way, by Gödel's incompleteness theorem in
1931.
Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme, I
• Kurt Gödel (1931)
Online version: Online version [47]
Description: In mathematical logic, Gödel's incompleteness theorems are two
celebrated theorems proved by Kurt Gödel in 1931. The first incompleteness theorem
states:
For any formal system such that (1) it is 
-consistent (omega-consistent), (2) it
has a recursively definable set of axioms and rules of derivation, and (3) every
recursive relation of natural numbers is definable in it, there exists a formula of
the system such that, according to the intended interpretation of the system, it
expresses a truth about natural numbers and yet it is not a theorem of the system.

List of important publications in mathematics
463
Combinatorics
On sets of integers containing no k elements in arithmetic
progression
• Endre Szemerédi (1975)
Description: Settled a conjecture of Paul Erdős and Paul Turán that if a sequence of
natural numbers has positive upper density then it contains arbitrarily long arithmetic
progressions. 
Szemerédi's 
solution 
has 
been 
described 
as 
a 
"masterpiece 
of
combinatorics"[48] and it introduced new ideas and tools to the field including the
Szemerédi regularity lemma.
Graph theory
Solutio problematis ad geometriam situs pertinentis
• Leonhard Euler (1741)
• Euler's original publication [49] (in Latin)
Description: Euler's solution of the Königsberg bridge problem in Solutio problematis ad
geometriam situs pertinentis (The solution of a problem relating to the geometry of
position) is considered to be the first theorem of graph theory.
On the evolution of random graphs
• Paul Erdös and Alfréd Rényi (1960)
Description: Provides a detailed discussion of sparse random graphs, including
distribution of components, occurrence of small subgraphs, and phase transitions.[50]
Network Flows and General Matchings
• Ford, L., & Fulkerson, D.
• Flows in Networks. Prentice-Hall, 1962.
Description: Ford and Fulkerson paper on Network Flows. The algorithm along with many
ideas on flow-based models can be found in their book.
Complexity theory
See List of important publications in computer science.
Probability theory
See list of important publications in statistics.
Game theory
Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele
• John von Neumann (1928)
Description: Went well beyond Émile Borel's initial investigations into strategic
two-person game theory by proving the minimax theorem for two-person, zero-sum games.

List of important publications in mathematics
464
Theory of Games and Economic Behavior
• Oskar Morgenstern, John von Neumann (1944)
Description: This book led to the investigation of modern game theory as a prominent
branch of mathematics. This profound work contained the method for finding optimal
solutions for two-person zero-sum games.
Equilibrium Points in N-person Games
• John Forbes Nash
• Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 36 (1950), 48–49. MR0031701 [51]
• "Equilibrium Points in N-person Games" [52]
Description:Nash equilibrium
On Numbers and Games
• John Horton Conway
Description: The book is in two, {0,1|}, parts. The zeroth part is about numbers, the first
part about games - both the values of games and also some real games that can be played
such as Nim, Hackenbush, Col and Snort amongst the many described.
Winning Ways for your Mathematical Plays
• Elwyn Berlekamp, John Conway and Richard K. Guy
Description: A compendium of information on mathematical games. It was first published
in 1982 in two volumes, one focusing on Combinatorial game theory and surreal numbers,
and the other concentrating on a number of specific games.
Fractals
How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-Similarity and
Fractional Dimension
• Benoît Mandelbrot
Description: A discussion of self-similar curves that have fractional dimensions between 1
and 2. These curves are examples of fractals, although Mandelbrot does not use this term in
the paper, as he did not coin it until 1975. Shows Mandelbrot's early thinking on fractals,
and is an example of the linking of mathematical objects with natural forms that was a
theme of much of his later work.

List of important publications in mathematics
465
Numerical analysis
Numerical linear algebra
The Algebraic Eigenvalue Problem
• James H. Wilkinson (1965)
Description:
Optimization
Method of Fluxions
• Isaac Newton
Description: Method of Fluxions was a book written by Isaac Newton. The book was
completed in 1671, and published in 1736. Within this book, Newton describes a method
(the Newton-Raphson method) for finding the real zeroes of a function.
Essai d'une nouvelle méthode pour déterminer les maxima et les minima des
formules intégrales indéfinies
• Joseph Louis Lagrange (1761)
Description: Major early work on the calculus of variations, building upon some of
Lagrange's prior investigations as well as those of Euler. Contains investigations of minimal
surface determination as well as the initial appearance of Lagrange multipliers.
The New Variational Method
• Leonid Kantorovich
• This work was published in 1930's in the erstwhile Soviet Republic.
Description: Kantorovich wrote the first paper on production planning, which used Linear
Programs as the model. He proposed the simplex algorithm as a systematic procedure to
solve these Linear Programs. He received the Nobel prize for this work in 1975.
Decomposition Principle for Linear Programs
• George Dantzig and P. Wolfe
• Operations Research 8:101–111, 1960.
Description: Dantzig's is considered the father of Linear Programming in the western
world. He independently invented the simplex algorithm. Dantzig and Wolfe worked on
decomposition algorithms for large scale linear programs in factory and production
planning.

List of important publications in mathematics
466
How good is the simplex algorithm?
• Victor Klee and George J. Minty
• In: O. Shisha (ed.) Inequalities III, Academic Press (1972) 159–175.
Description: Klee and Minty gave an example showing that the simplex method can take
exponentially many steps to solve a linear program if it chooses the greedy ascent rule.
Linear Programming and Polynomial time algorithms
• L. Khachiyan
• Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR 244 (1979) pp. 1093–1096 (Russian).
Description: Khachiyan's work on Ellipsoid method. This was the first polynomial time
algorithm for Linear programming.
New polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming
• Karmarkar, N.
• Combinatorica 4, 373–395, 1984.
Description: Karmarkars path-breaking work on Interior-Point algorithms for Linear
Programming.
Interior Point Polynomial Algorithms in Convex Programming
• Yurii Nesterov and A. Nemirovski
• Philadelphia : Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1994. (SIAM Studies in
Applied Mathematics).
Description: 
Nesterov 
and 
Nemirovski's 
work 
on 
self-concordant 
barriers 
and
interior-point methods for general convex programming. All their series of papers (both
individual and combined) is compiled more coherently in the following "bible" of convex
optimization.
Early manuscripts
These are publications that are not necessarily relevant to a mathematician nowadays, but
are nonetheless important publications in the history of mathematics.
Rhind Mathematical Papyrus
• Ahmes (scribe)
Description: It is one of the oldest mathematical texts, dating to the Second Intermediate
Period of ancient Egypt. It was copied by the scribe Ahmes (properly Ahmose) from an older
Middle Kingdom papyrus. It laid the foundations of Egyptian mathematics and in turn, later
influenced Greek and Hellenistic mathematics. Besides describing how to obtain an
approximation of π only missing the mark by less than one per cent, it is describes one of
the earliest attempts at squaring the circle and in the process provides persuasive evidence
against the theory that the Egyptians deliberately built their pyramids to enshrine the value
of π in the proportions. Even though it would be a strong overstatement to suggest that the
papyrus represents even rudimentary attempts at analytical geometry, Ahmes did make use
of a kind of an analogue of the cotangent.

List of important publications in mathematics
467
Archimedes Palimpsest
• Archimedes of Syracuse
Description: Although the only mathematical tools at its author's disposal were what we
might now consider secondary-school geometry, he used those methods with rare
brilliance, explicitly using infinitesimals to solve problems that would now be treated by
integral calculus. Among those problems were that of the center of gravity of a solid
hemisphere, that of the center of gravity of a frustum of a circular paraboloid, and that of
the area of a region bounded by a parabola and one of its secant lines. For explicit details of
the method used, see Archimedes' use of infinitesimals.
The Sand Reckoner
• Archimedes of Syracuse
Online version: Online version [53]
Description: The first known (European) system of number-naming that can be expanded
beyond the needs of everyday life.
Textbooks
Synopsis of Pure Mathematics
• G. S. Carr
Description: Contains over 6000 theorems of mathematics, assembled by George
Shoobridge Carr for the purpose of training students in the art of mathematics, studied
extensively by Ramanujan. (first half here) [54] It was one of the few books that attempts to
summarize the entirety of known mathematics.
Arithmetick: or, The Grounde of Arts
• Robert Recorde
Description: Written in 1542, it was the first really popular arithmetic book written in the
English Language.
Cocker's Arithmetick
• Edward Cocker (authorship disputed)
Description: Textbook of arithmetic published in 1678 by John Hawkins, who claimed to
have edited manuscripts left by Edward Cocker, who had died in 1676. This influential
mathematics textbook used to teach arithmetic in schools in the United Kingdom for over
150 years.

List of important publications in mathematics
468
The Schoolmaster's Assistant, Being a Compendium of Arithmetic
both Practical and Theoretical
• Thomas Dilworth
Description: An early and popular English arithmetic textbook published in America in the
eighteenth century. The book reached from the introductory topics to the advanced in five
sections.
Course of Pure Mathematics
• G. H. Hardy
Online version: Online version [55]
Description: A classic textbook in introductory mathematical analysis, written by G. H.
Hardy. It was first published in 1908, and went through many editions. It was intended to
help reform mathematics teaching in the UK, and more specifically in the University of
Cambridge, and in schools preparing pupils to study mathematics at Cambridge. As such, it
was aimed directly at "scholarship level" students — the top 10% to 20% by ability. The
book contains a large number of difficult problems. The content covers introductory
calculus and the theory of infinite series.
Moderne Algebra
• B. L. van der Waerden
Description: The first introductory textbook (graduate level) expounding the abstract
approach to algebra developed by Emil Artin and Emmy Noether. First published in German
in 1931 by Springer Verlag. A later English translation was published in 1949 by Frederick
Ungar Publishing Company.
Algebra
• Saunders Mac Lane and Garrett Birkhoff
Description: A definitive introductory text for abstract algebra using a category theoretic
approach. Both a rigorous introduction from first principles, and a reasonably
comprehensive survey of the field.
Algebraic Geometry
• Robin Hartshorne
Description: The first comprehensive introductory (graduate level) text in algebraic
geometry that used the language of schemes and cohomology. Published in 1977, it lacks
aspects of the scheme language which are nowadays considered central, like the functor of
points.

List of important publications in mathematics
469
Naive Set Theory
• Paul Halmos
Description: An undergraduate introduction to not-very-naive set theory which has lasted
for decades. It is still considered by many to be the best introduction to set theory for
beginners. While the title states that it is naive, which is usually taken to mean without
axioms, the book does introduce all the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory and gives
correct and rigorous definitions for basic objects. Where it differs from a "true" axiomatic
set theory book is its character: There are no long-winded discussions of axiomatic
minutiae, and there is next to nothing about advanced topics like large cardinals. Instead it
tried, and succeeds, in being intelligible to someone who has never thought about set
theory before.
Cardinal and Ordinal Numbers
• Waclaw Sierpinski
Description:The nec plus ultra reference for basic facts about cardinal and ordinal
numbers. If you have a question about the cardinality of sets occurring in everyday
mathematics, the first place to look is this book, first published in the early 1950s but based
on the author's lectures on the subject over the preceding 40 years.
Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs
• Kenneth Kunen
Description: This book is not really for beginners, but graduate students with some
minimal experience in set theory and formal logic will find it a valuable self-teaching tool,
particularly in regard to forcing. It is far easier to read than a true reference work such as
Jech, Set Theory. It may be the best textbook from which to learn forcing, though it has the
disadvantage that the exposition of forcing relies somewhat on the earlier presentation of
Martin's axiom.
Topologie
• Pavel Sergeevich Alexandrov
• Heinz Hopf
Description: First published round 1935, this text was a pioneering "reference" text book
in topology, already incorporating many modern concepts from set-theoretic topology,
homological algebra and homotopy theory.
General Topology
• John L. Kelley
Description:First published in the mid-1950s,for many years the only introductory
graduate level textbook in the U.S.A. teaching the basics of point set, as opposed to
algebraic, topology. Prior to this the material, essential for advanced study in many fields,
was only available in bits and pieces from texts on other topics or journal articles.

List of important publications in mathematics
470
Topology from the Differentiable Viewpoint
• John Milnor
Description: This short book introduces the main concepts of differential topology in
Milnor's lucid and concise style. While the book does not cover very much, its topics are
explained beautifully in a way that illuminates all their details.
Number Theory, An approach through history from Hammurapi to
Legendre
• André Weil
Description: An historical study of number theory, written by one of the 20th century's
greatest researchers in the field. The book covers some thirty six centuries of arithmetical
work but the bulk of it is devoted to a detailed study and exposition of the work of Fermat,
Euler, Lagrange, and Legendre. The author wishes to take the reader into the workshop of
his subjects to share their successes and failures. A rare opportunity to see the historical
development of a subject through the mind of one of its greatest practitioners.
An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers
• G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright
Description: This book was first published in 1938, and is still in print, with the latest
edition being the 6th (2008). It is likely that almost every serious student and researcher
into number theory has consulted this book, and probably has it on their bookshelf. It was
not intended to be a textbook, and is rather an introduction to a wide range of differing
areas of number theory which would now almost certainly be covered in separate volumes.
The writing style has long been regarded as exemplary, and the approach gives insight into
a variety of areas without requiring much more than a good grounding in algebra, calculus
and complex numbers.
Popular writing
Gödel, Escher, Bach
• Douglas Hofstadter
Description: Gödel, Escher, Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid is a Pulitzer Prize-winning
book, first published in 1979 by Basic Books. It is a book about how the creative
achievements of logician Kurt Gödel, artist M. C. Escher and composer Johann Sebastian
Bach interweave. As the author states: "I realized that to me, Gödel and Escher and Bach
were only shadows cast in different directions by some central solid essence. I tried to
reconstruct the central object, and came up with this book."
The World of Mathematics
• James R. Newman
Description: The World of Mathematics was specially designed to make mathematics more 
accessible to the inexperienced. It comprises nontechnical essays on every aspect of the 
vast subject, including articles by and about scores of eminent mathematicians, as well as 
literary figures, economists, biologists, and many other eminent thinkers. Includes the work 
of Archimedes, Galileo, Descartes, Newton, Gregor Mendel, Edmund Halley, Jonathan

List of important publications in mathematics
471
Swift, John Maynard Keynes, Henri Poincaré, Lewis Carroll, George Boole, Bertrand
Russell, Alfred North Whitehead, John von Neumann, and many others. In addition, an
informative commentary by distinguished scholar James R. Newman precedes each essay or
group of essays, explaining their relevance and context in the history and development of
mathematics. Originally published in 1956, it does not include many of the exciting
discoveries of the later years of the 20th century but it has no equal as a general historical
survey of important topics and applications.
See also
References
[1] O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (1998),
http://www-gap.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Biographies/Cardan.html|Girolamo Cardano, http:/ / www-gap. dcs.
st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ Biographies/ Cardan. html
[2] Weil, André (1984). Number Theory: An approach through history From Hammurapi to Legendre. Birkhäuser.
p. 239-242. ISBN 0817631410.
[3] Gauss, J.C.F. (1799). http://www.thelatinlibrary.com/gauss.html|"Demonstratio nova theorematis omnem
functionem algebraicam rationalem integram unius variabilis in factores reales primi vel secundi gradus resolvi
posse". http:/ / www. thelatinlibrary. com/ gauss. html.
[4] O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (1996),
http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/HistTopics/Fund_theorem_of_algebra.html|The fundamental
theorem of algebra, http:/ / www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ HistTopics/ Fund_theorem_of_algebra.
html
[5] ed. by A. N. Kolmogorov... (2001). Mathematics of the 19th Century: Mathematical Logic, Algebra, Number
Theory, and Probability Theory. Birkhäuser Verlag. p. 39, 63, 66-68. ISBN 3764364416.
[6] O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (2001),
http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Biographies/Jordan.html|Marie Ennemond Camille Jordan, http:/ /
www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ Biographies/ Jordan. html
[7] http:/ / www. archive. org/ details/ theotransformation01liesrich
[8] http:/ / www. archive. org/ details/ theotransformation02liesrich
[9] Krieger, Martin H. (March 2007). "http://www.ams.org/notices/200503/fea-weil.pdf|A 1940 Letter of André
Weil on Analogy in Mathematics" (PDF). Notices of the American Mathematical Society 52 (3): p. 338. http:/ /
www. ams. org/ notices/ 200503/ fea-weil. pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
[10] Jackson, Allyn (October 2004). "http://www.ams.org/notices/200409/fea-grothendieck-part1.pdf|Comme
Appelé du Néant — As If Summoned from the Void: The Life of Alexandre Grothendieck" (PDF). Notices of the
American Mathematical Society 51 (9): pp. 1045–1046. http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200409/
fea-grothendieck-part1. pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
[11] Dieudonné, Jean (1989). A history of algebraic and differential topology 1900-1960. Birkhäuser. p. 598-600.
ISBN 081763388X.
[12] Euler, L. (1744). http://www.math.dartmouth.edu/~euler/docs/originals/E071.pdf|"De fractionibus continuis
dissertatio" (PDF). http:/ / www. math. dartmouth. edu/ ~euler/ docs/ originals/ E071. pdf.
[13] Sandifer, Ed (February 2006). "http://www.maa.org/editorial/euler/How Euler Did It 28 e is
irrational.pdf|How Euler Did It: Who proved e is irrational?" (PDF). MAA Online. http:/ / www. maa. org/
editorial/ euler/ How%20Euler%20Did%20It%2028%20e%20is%20irrational. pdf.
[14] Goldfeld, Dorian (July 1985).
"http://www.ams.org/bull/1985-13-01/S0273-0979-1985-15352-2/S0273-0979-1985-15352-2.pdf|Gauss' Class
Number Problem For Imaginary Quadratic Fields" (PDF). Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 13 (1):
page 24. doi: 10.1090/S0273-0979-1985-15352-2 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/ S0273-0979-1985-15352-2).
http:/ / www. ams. org/ bull/ 1985-13-01/ S0273-0979-1985-15352-2/ S0273-0979-1985-15352-2. pdf.
[15] Weil, André (1984). Number Theory: An approach through history From Hammurapi to Legendre. Birkhäuser.
p. 316-322. ISBN 0817631410.
[16] Ireland, K.; Rosen, M. (1993), A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory, New York, New York:
Springer-Verlag, pp. 358–361, ISBN 038797329X
[17] Silverman, J.; Tate, J. (1992), Rational Points on Elliptic Curves, New York, New York: Springer-Verlag,
pp. 110, ISBN 0387978259

List of important publications in mathematics
472
[18] Elstrodt, Jürgen (2007). http://www.uni-math.gwdg.de/tschinkel/gauss-dirichlet/elstrodt-new.pdf|"The Life
and Work of Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (1805–1859)" (PDF). 21-22. http:/ / www. uni-math. gwdg. de/ tschinkel/
gauss-dirichlet/ elstrodt-new. pdf.
[19] Lemmermeyer, Franz; Schappacher, Norbert. http://www.fen.bilkent.edu.tr/~franz/publ/hil.pdf|"Introduction
to the English Edition of Hilbert’s Zahlbericht" (PDF). p. 3. http:/ / www. fen. bilkent. edu. tr/ ~franz/ publ/ hil.
pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
[20] Lemmermeyer, Franz; Schappacher, Norbert. http://www.fen.bilkent.edu.tr/~franz/publ/hil.pdf|"Introduction
to the English Edition of Hilbert’s Zahlbericht" (PDF). p. 5. http:/ / www. fen. bilkent. edu. tr/ ~franz/ publ/ hil.
pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
[21] Alexanderson, Gerald L. (October 2007).
"http://www.ams.org/bull/2007-44-04/S0273-0979-07-01183-4/S0273-0979-07-01183-4.pdf|Euler’s Introductio
In Analysin Infinitorum" (PDF). Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 44 (4): pp. 635–639. doi:
10.1090/S0273-0979-07-01183-4 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/ S0273-0979-07-01183-4). http:/ / www. ams.
org/ bull/ 2007-44-04/ S0273-0979-07-01183-4/ S0273-0979-07-01183-4. pdf.
[22] Euler, L.. http://math.dartmouth.edu/~euler/pages/E101.html|"E101 -- Introductio in analysin infinitorum,
volume 1". http:/ / math. dartmouth. edu/ ~euler/ pages/ E101. html. Retrieved on 2008-03-16.
[23] Euler, L.. http://math.dartmouth.edu/~euler/pages/E102.html|"E102 -- Introductio in analysin infinitorum,
volume 2". http:/ / math. dartmouth. edu/ ~euler/ pages/ E102. html. Retrieved on 2008-03-16.
[24] Calinger, Ronald (1982). Classics of Mathematics. Oak Park, Illinois: Moore Publishing Company, Inc..
pp. 396–397. ISBN 0935610138.
[25] O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (1995),
http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/HistTopics/Functions.html|The function concept, http:/ /
www-groups. dcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ HistTopics/ Functions. html
[26] Andrews, George E. (October 2007).
"http://www.ams.org/bull/2007-44-04/S0273-0979-07-01180-9/S0273-0979-07-01180-9.pdf|Euler’s “De Partitio
Numerorum”" (PDF). Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 44 (4): pp. 561–573. doi:
10.1090/S0273-0979-07-01180-9 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/ S0273-0979-07-01180-9). http:/ / www. ams.
org/ bull/ 2007-44-04/ S0273-0979-07-01180-9/ S0273-0979-07-01180-9. pdf.
[27] Gray, Jeremy (2000). http://www.maa.org/reviews/readnewton.html|"MAA Book Review: Reading the
Principia: The Debate on Newton's Mathematical Methods for Natural Philosophy from 1687 to 1736 by Niccolò
Guicciardini". http:/ / www. maa. org/ reviews/ readnewton. html.
[28] Euler, L.. http://www.math.dartmouth.edu/~euler/pages/E212.html|"E212 -- Institutiones calculi differentialis
cum eius usu in analysi finitorum ac doctrina serierum". http:/ / www. math. dartmouth. edu/ ~euler/ pages/
E212. html. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
[29] Sandifer, Ed (September 2005). "http://www.maa.org/editorial/euler/How Euler Did It 23 Bernoulli
numbers.pdf|How Euler Did It: Bernoulli Numbers" (PDF). MAA Online. http:/ / www. maa. org/ editorial/ euler/
How%20Euler%20Did%20It%2023%20Bernoulli%20numbers. pdf.
[30] Sandifer, Ed (June 2007). "http://www.maa.org/editorial/euler/How Euler Did It 44 partial fractions.pdf|How
Euler Did It: Partial Fractions" (PDF). MAA Online. http:/ / www. maa. org/ editorial/ euler/
How%20Euler%20Did%20It%2044%20partial%20fractions. pdf.
[31] Bressoud, David (2007). A Radical Approach to Real Analysis. Mathematical Association of America.
p. 248-255. ISBN 0883857472.
[32] Kline, Morris (1990). Mathematical Thought From Ancient to Modern Times. Oxford University Press.
p. 1046-1047. ISBN 0195061373.
[33] Benedetto, John (1997). Harmonic Analysis and Applications. CRC Press. p. 170-171. ISBN 0849378796.
[34] Mémoire sur la propagation de la chaleur dans les corps solides, présenté le 21 décembre 1807 à l'Institut
national - Nouveau Bulletin des sciences par la Société philomatique de Paris, I, Paris: Bernard, March 1808,
pp. 112–116 Reprinted in http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k33707/f220n7.capture|"Mémoire sur la
propagation de la chaleur dans les corps solides",
http://mathdoc.emath.fr/cgi-bin/oetoc?id=OE_FOURIER__2|Joseph Fourier - Œuvres complètes, tome 2,
pp. 215–221, http:/ / gallica. bnf. fr/ ark:/ 12148/ bpt6k33707/ f220n7. capture
[35] Koch, Helmut (1998). Mathematics in Berlin: Gustav Peter Lejeune Dirichlet. Birkhäuser. p. 33-40. ISBN
3764359439.
[36] Elstrodt, Jürgen (2007). http://www.uni-math.gwdg.de/tschinkel/gauss-dirichlet/elstrodt-new.pdf|"The Life
and Work of Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (1805–1859)" (PDF). 19-20. http:/ / www. uni-math. gwdg. de/ tschinkel/
gauss-dirichlet/ elstrodt-new. pdf.
[37] http:/ / aleph0. clarku. edu/ ~djoyce/ java/ elements/ elements. html
[38] http:/ / math. dartmouth. edu/ ~euler/ pages/ E333. html
[39] http:/ / www-gdz. sub. uni-goettingen. de/ cgi-bin/ digbib. cgi?PPN35283028X_0006_2NS

List of important publications in mathematics
473
[40] http:/ / quod. lib. umich. edu/ cgi/ t/ text/ text-idx?c=umhistmath;idno=ABR1255
[41] http:/ / www. maths. tcd. ie/ pub/ HistMath/ People/ Riemann/ Geom/
[42] http:/ / www. hti. umich. edu/ cgi/ t/ text/ text-idx?c=umhistmath;idno=ABV4153. 0001. 001
[43] http:/ / www. hti. umich. edu/ cgi/ t/ text/ text-idx?c=umhistmath;idno=ABV4153. 0002. 001
[44] http:/ / www. hti. umich. edu/ cgi/ t/ text/ text-idx?c=umhistmath;idno=ABV4153. 0003. 001
[45] Miller, Haynes (2000). http://www-math.mit.edu/~hrm/papers/ss.ps|"Leray in Oflag XVIIA: The origins of
sheaf theory, sheaf cohomology, and spectral sequences" (PS). http:/ / www-math. mit. edu/ ~hrm/ papers/ ss.
ps.
[46] Sullivan, Dennis (April 2004).
"http://www.ams.org/bull/2004-41-03/S0273-0979-04-01026-2/S0273-0979-04-01026-2.pdf|René Thom's Work
On Geometric Homology And Bordism" (PDF). Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 41 (3): pages
341–350. doi: 10.1090/S0273-0979-04-01026-2 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/ S0273-0979-04-01026-2). http:/ /
www. ams. org/ bull/ 2004-41-03/ S0273-0979-04-01026-2/ S0273-0979-04-01026-2. pdf.
[47] http:/ / www. springerlink. com/ content/ p03501kn35215860/
[48] "http://www.ams.org/notices/200804/tx080400486p.pdf|2008 Steele Prizes; Seminal Contribution to
Research: Endre Szemerédi" (PDF). Notices of the American Mathematical Society 55 (4): p. 488. April 2008.
http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200804/ tx080400486p. pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-19.
[49] http:/ / math. dartmouth. edu/ ~euler/ docs/ originals/ E053. pdf
[50] Bollobás, Béla (2002). Modern Graph Theory. Springer. p. 252. ISBN 978-0387984889.
[51] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0031701
[52] http:/ / www. pnas. org/ cgi/ reprint/ 36/ 1/ 48
[53] http:/ / web. fccj. org/ ~ethall/ archmede/ sandreck. htm
[54] http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=FTgAAAAAQAAJ& pg=PA1& dq=george+ shoobridge+ carr#PPR7,M1
[55] http:/ / www. hti. umich. edu/ cgi/ t/ text/ text-idx?c=umhistmath;idno=ACM1516. 0001. 001

474
Higher Dimensional Algebra
Higher- dimensional algebra
This article is about higher-dimensional algebra and supercategories in generalized
category theory, super-category theory, and also its extensions in metamathematics[1] .
In 
higher-dimensional 
algebra, 
a 
double 
groupoid 
is 
a 
generalisation 
of 
a
one-dimensional groupoid to two dimensions[2] , and the latter groupoid can be considered
as a special case of a category with all invertible arrows, or morphisms.
Double groupoids are often used to capture information about geometrical objects such as
higher-dimensional manifolds (or n-dimensional manifolds)[3] . In general, an n-dimensional
manifold is a space that locally looks like an n-dimensional Euclidean space, but whose
global structure may be non-Euclidean. A first step towards defining higher dimensional
algebras is the concept of 2-category, followed by the more `geometric' concept of double
category [4][5] [6] .
A higher level concept is that of a category of categories, or super-category which
generalises to higher dimensions the notion of category -regarded as any structure which is
an interpretation of Lawvere's axioms of the elementary theory of abstract categories
(ETAC)[7] [8] [9] [10] . Thus, a supercategory and also a super-category, can be regarded as
natural extensions of the concepts of meta-category,[11] multicategory, and multi-graph,
k-partite graph, or colored graph (see a color figure, and also its definition in graph theory).
Double groupoids were first introduced by Ronald Brown in 1976, in ref.[12] and were
further developed towards applications in nonabelian algebraic topology[13] [14] [15] [16] .
Supercategories were first introduced in 1970,[17] and were subsequently developed for
applications in Theoretical Physics (especially Quantum Field Theory and Topological
quantum field theory) and Mathematical Biology or Mathematical Biophysics.[18]
References
[1] Roger Bishop Jones. 2008. The Category of Categories http:/ / www. rbjones. com/ rbjpub/ pp/ doc/ t018. pdf
[2] Brown, R.; Spencer, C.B. (1976). "Double groupoids and crossed modules,". Cahiers Top. Geom. Diff. 17:
343–362.
[3] Brown, R.; Spencer, C.B. (1976).
"http://www.bangor.ac.uk/~mas010/pdffiles/brown-spencerCTGDC_1976__17_4_343_0.pdf|Double groupoids
and crossed modules". Cah. Top. Géom. Diff 17: 343–362. http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ pdffiles/
brown-spencerCTGDC_1976__17_4_343_0. pdf.
[4] http:/ / www. math. uchicago. edu/ ~fiore/ 1/ fiorefolding. pdf
[5] Brown, R.; Loday, J.-L. (1987). "Homotopical excision, and Hurewicz theorems, for n-cubes of spaces".
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 3 (54): 176–192. doi: 10.1006/aima.1998.1724 (http:/ / dx. doi.
org/ 10. 1006/ aima. 1998. 1724).
[6] Batanin, M.A. (1998). "Monoidal Globular Categories As a Natural Environment for the Theory of Weak
n-Categories". Advances in Mathematics 136 (1): 39–103. doi: 10.1006/aima.1998.1724 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10.
1006/ aima. 1998. 1724).
[7] Lawvere, F. W., 1964, ``An Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences U.S.A., 52, 1506-1511. http:/ / myyn. org/ m/ article/ william-francis-lawvere/

Higher- dimensional algebra
475
[8] Lawvere, F. W.: 1966, The Category of Categories as a Foundation for Mathematics., in Proc. Conf. Categorical
Algebra- La Jolla., Eilenberg, S. et al., eds. Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Heidelberg and New York., pp. 1-20. http:/ /
myyn. org/ m/ article/ william-francis-lawvere/
[9] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ ?op=getobj& from=objects& id=420
[10] Lawvere, F. W., 1969b, ``Adjointness in Foundations, Dialectica, 23, 281-295. http:/ / myyn. org/ m/ article/
william-francis-lawvere/
[11] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ AxiomsOfMetacategoriesAndSupercategories. html
[12] Brown, R.; Spencer, C.B. (1976).
"http://www.bangor.ac.uk/~mas010/pdffiles/brown-spencerCTGDC_1976__17_4_343_0.pdf|Double groupoids
and crossed modules". Cah. Top. Géom. Diff 17: 343–362. http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ pdffiles/
brown-spencerCTGDC_1976__17_4_343_0. pdf.
[13] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ NAAT. html
[14] Non-Abelian Algebraic Topology book (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ nonab-a-t. html)
[15] Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Higher homotopy groupoids of filtered spaces (http:/ / planetphysics. org/
?op=getobj& from=books& id=249)
[16] Brown, R.; et al. (2009) (in press).
http://www.bangor.ac.uk/~mas010/pdffiles/rbrsbookb-e040609.pdf|Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Higher
homotopy groupoids of filtered spaces. http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ pdffiles/ rbrsbookb-e040609.
pdf.
[17] Supercategory theory @ PlanetMath (http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ Supercategories3. html)
[18] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ MathematicalBiologyAndTheoreticalBiophysics. html
Further reading
• Brown, R.; Higgins, P.J.; Sivera, R. (2008).
http://www.bangor.ac.uk/~mas010/nonab-a-t.html|Non-Abelian Algebraic Topology. 1.
http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ nonab-a-t. html. ( Downloadable PDF (http:/ /
www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ nonab-t/ partI010604. pdf))
• Brown, R.; Spencer, C.B. (1976). "Double groupoids and crossed modules,". Cahiers Top.
Geom. Diff. 17: 343–362.
• Brown, R.; Mosa, G.H. (1999). "Double categories, thin structures and connections".
Theory and Applications of Categories 5: 163–175.
• Brown, R. (2002). Categorical Structures for Descent and Galois Theory. Fields Institute.
• Brown, R. (1987). "http://www.bangor.ac.uk/r.brown/groupoidsurvey.pdf|From groups to
groupoids: a brief survey". Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society 19: 113–134. doi:
10.1112/blms/19.2.113 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1112/ blms/ 19. 2. 113). http:/ / www.
bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ groupoidsurvey. pdf. This give some of the history of groupoids,
namely the origins in work of Brandt on quadratic forms, and an indication of later work
up to 1987, with 160 references.
• Brown, R.. http://www.bangor.ac.uk/r.brown/hdaweb2.htm|"Higher dimensional group
theory". http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ hdaweb2. htm.. A web article with lots of
references explaining how the groupoid concept has to led to notions of higher
dimensional groupoids, not available in group theory, with applications in homotopy
theory and in group cohomology.
• Brown, R.; Higgins, P.J. (1981). "On the algebra of cubes". Journal of Pure and Applied
Algebra 21: 233–260. doi: 10.1016/0022-4049(81)90018-9 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/
0022-4049(81)90018-9).
• Mackenzie, K.C.H. (2005). http://www.shef.ac.uk/~pm1kchm/gt.html|General theory of
Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids. Cambridge University Press. http:/ / www. shef. ac. uk/
~pm1kchm/ gt. html.
• R., Brown (2006). http://www.bangor.ac.uk/r.brown/topgpds.html|Topology and 
groupoids. Booksurge. http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ topgpds. html. Revised and

Higher- dimensional algebra
476
extended edition of a book previously published in 1968 and 1988. E-version available at
PlanetPhysics.org (http:/ / planetphysics. org/ ?op=getobj& from=lec& id=177) and
Bangor.ac.uk (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ topgpds. html)
• Borceux, F.; Janelidze, G. (2001).
http://www.cup.cam.ac.uk/catalogue/catalogue.asp?isbn=9780521803090|Galois
theories. Cambridge University Press. http:/ / www. cup. cam. ac. uk/ catalogue/
catalogue. asp?isbn=9780521803090. Shows how generalisations of Galois theory lead to
Galois groupoids.
• Baez, J.; Dolan, J. (1998). "Higher-Dimensional Algebra III. n-Categories and the Algebra
of Opetopes". Advances in Mathematics 135: 145-206. doi: 10.1006/aima.1997.1695
(http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1006/ aima. 1997. 1695).
• Baianu, I.C. (1970). "Organismic Supercategories: II. On Multistable Systems". Bulletin of
Mathematical Biophysics 32: 539-561. doi: 10.1007/BF02476770 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10.
1007/ BF02476770).
• Baianu, I.C.; Marinescu, M. (1974). "On A Functorial Construction of (M,R)-Systems.".
Revue Roumaine de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées 19: 388–391.
• Baianu, I.C. (1987). http://cogprints.org/3687/|"Computer Models and Automata Theory
in Biology and Medicine". in M. Witten.
http://www.amazon.ca/Mathematical-Models-Medicine-Diseases-Epidemics/dp/0080346928|Mathemati
Models in Medicine. 7. Pergamon Press. pp. 1513–1577. CERN Preprint No.
EXT-2004-072.. http:/ / cogprints. org/ 3687/ .
• http://planetphysics.org/encyclopedia/HigherDimensionalHomotopy.html|"Higher
dimensional Homotopy @ PlanetPhysics". http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/
HigherDimensionalHomotopy. html.
See also
• Higher category theory
• Category theory
• Algebraic topology
• Seifert–van Kampen theorem
• Abstract algebra
• Categorical algebra
• Esquisse d'un Programme
• Grothendieck's Galois theory
• Metatheory
• Metalogic
• Metamathematics
• Colored graphs
• Multicategory
• Enriched category

Higher category theory
477
Higher category theory
Higher category theory is the part of category theory at a higher order, which means that
some equalities are replaced by explicit arrows in order to be able to explicitly study the
structure behind those equalities.
Strict higher categories
N-categories are defined inductively using the enriched category theory: 0-categories are
sets and (n+1)-categories are categories enriched over the monoidal category of
n-categories (with the monoidal structure given by finite products).[1] This construction is
well defined, as shown in the article on n-categories. This concept introduces higher
arrows, higher compositions and higher identities, which must well behave together. For
example, the category of small categories is in fact a 2-category, with natural
transformations as second degree arrows. However this concept is too strict for some
purposes (for example, homotopy theory), where "weak" structures arise in the form of
higher categories.[2]
Weak higher categories
In weak n-categories, the associativity and identity conditions are not strict anymore (that
is, they are not given by equalities) but they are satisfied up to an isomorphism of the next
level. An example in topology is the composition of paths which is associative only up to
homotopy. These isomorphisms must well behave between them and expressing this is the
difficulty in the definition of weak n-categories. Weak 2-categories, also called bicategories
were the first to be defined explicitly. A particularity of these is that a bicategory with one
object is exactly a monoidal category, which makes say that bicategories are "monoidal
categories with many objects". Weak 3-categories, also called tricategories, are harder to
define explicitly, and so on. Several definitions have been given, and telling when they are
equivalent, and in what sense, has become a new object of study in category theory.
References
[1] Leinster, pp 18-19
[2] Baez, p 6
• John C. Baez; James Dolan (1998). http://arxiv.org/abs/math/9802029|Categorification.
http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 9802029.
• Tom Leinster (2004). http://www.maths.gla.ac.uk/~tl/book.html|Higher Operads, Higher
Categories. Cambridge University Press. http:/ / www. maths. gla. ac. uk/ ~tl/ book. html.

Higher category theory
478
See also
• Network Science
• Polytely
• Higher-dimensional algebra
External links
• John Baez Tale of n-Categories (http:/ / math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/ week73. html)
Enriched category
In category theory and its applications to mathematics, an enriched category is a category
whose hom-sets are replaced by objects from some other category, in a well-behaved
manner.
Definition
We define here what it means for C to be an enriched category over a monoidal category
.
We require the following structures:
• Let Ob(C) be a set (or proper class, if you prefer). An element of Ob(C) is called an object
of C.
• For each pair (A,B) of objects of C, let Hom(A,B) be an object of M, called the hom-object
of A and B.
• For each object A of C, let idA be a morphism in M from 
to Hom(A,A), called the
identity morphism of A.
• For each triple (A,B,C) of objects of C, let
be a morphism in M called the composition morphism of A, B, and C.
We require the following axioms:
• Associativity: Given objects A, B, C, and D of C, we can go from Hom(C,D) ⊗ Hom(B,C) ⊗
Hom(A,B) to Hom(A,D) in two ways, depending on which composition we do first. These
must give the same result.
• Left identity: Given objects A and B of C, we can go from I ⊗ Hom(A,B) to just Hom(A,B)
in two ways, either by using idA on I and then using composition, or by simply using the
fact that I is an identity for ⊗ in M. These must give the same result.
• Right identity: Given objects A and B of C, we can go from Hom(A,B) ⊗ I to just Hom(A,B)
in two ways, either by using idB on I and then using composition, or by simply using the
fact that I is an identity for ⊗ in M. These must give the same result.
Then C (consisting of all the structures listed above) is a category enriched over M.

Enriched category
479
Examples
The most straightforward example is to take M to be a category of sets, with the Cartesian
product for the monoidal operation. Then C is nothing but an ordinary category. If M is the
category of small sets, then C is a locally small category, because the hom-sets will all be
small. Similarly, if M is the category of finite sets, then C is a locally finite category.
If M is the category 2 with Ob(2) = {0,1}, a single nonidentity morphism (from 0 to 1), and
ordinary multiplication of numbers as the monoidal operation, then C can be interpreted as
a preordered set. Specifically, A ≤ B iff Hom(A,B) = 1.
If M is a category of pointed sets with smash product for the monoidal operation, then C is
a category with zero morphisms. Specifically, the zero morphism from A to B is the special
point in the pointed set Hom(A,B).
If M is a category of abelian groups with tensor product as the monoidal operation, then C
is a preadditive category.
A property
If there is a monoidal functor from a monoidal category M to a monoidal category N, then
any category enriched over M can be reinterpreted as a category enriched over N. Every
monoidal category M has a monoidal functor M(I, –) to the category of sets, so any enriched
category has an underlying ordinary category. In many examples (such as those above) this
functor is faithful, so a category enriched over M can be described as an ordinary category
with certain additional structure or properties.
Enriched functors
An enriched functor is the appropriate generalization of the notion of a functor to
enriched categories. Enriched functors are then maps between enriched categories which
respect the enriched structure.
If C and D are M-categories (that is, categories enriched over monoidal category M), an
M-enriched functor T: C → D is a map which assigns to each object of C an object of D and
for each pair of objects a and b in C provides a morphism in M Tab: C(a,b) → D(T(a),T(b))
between the hom-objects of C and D (which are objects in M), satisfying enriched versions
of the axioms of a functor, viz preservation of identity and composition.
Because the hom-objects need not be sets in an enriched category, one cannot speak of a
particular morphism. There is no longer any notion of an identity morphism, nor of a
particular composition of two morphisms. Instead, morphisms from the unit to a hom-object
should be thought of as selecting an identity and morphisms from the monoidal product
should be thought of as composition. The usual functorial axioms are replaced with
corresponding commutative diagrams involving these morphisms.
In detail, one has that the diagram

Enriched category
480
commutes, which amounts to the equation
where I is the unit object of M. This is analogous to the rule F(ida) = idF(a) for ordinary
functors. Additionally, one demands that the diagram
commute, which is analogous to the rule F(fg)=F(f)F(g) for ordinary functors.
References
• Kelly,G.M. "Basic Concepts of Enriched Category Theory" [1], London Mathematical
Society Lecture Note Series No.64 (C.U.P., 1982)
References
[1] http:/ / www. tac. mta. ca/ tac/ reprints/ articles/ 10/ tr10. pdf
Graph coloring
A proper vertex coloring of the
Petersen graph with 3 colors, the
minimum number possible.
In graph theory, graph coloring is a special case of
graph 
labeling; 
it 
is 
an 
assignment 
of 
labels
traditionally called "colors" to elements of a graph
subject to certain constraints. In its simplest form, it is
a way of coloring the vertices of a graph such that no
two adjacent vertices share the same color; this is
called a vertex coloring. Similarly, an edge coloring
assigns a color to each edge so that no two adjacent
edges share the same color, and a face coloring of a
planar graph assigns a color to each face or region so
that no two faces that share a boundary have the same
color.
Vertex coloring is the starting point of the subject, and
other coloring problems can be transformed into a
vertex version. For example, an edge coloring of a graph is just a vertex coloring of its line
graph, and a face coloring of a planar graph is just a vertex coloring of its planar dual.
However, non-vertex coloring problems are often stated and studied as is. That is partly for
perspective, and partly because some problems are best studied in non-vertex form, as for
instance is edge coloring.
The convention of using colors originates from coloring the countries of a map, where each 
face is literally colored. This was generalized to coloring the faces of a graph embedded in

Graph coloring
481
the plane. By planar duality it became coloring the vertices, and in this form it generalizes
to all graphs. In mathematical and computer representations it is typical to use the first few
positive or nonnegative integers as the "colors". In general one can use any finite set as the
"color set". The nature of the coloring problem depends on the number of colors but not on
what they are.
Graph coloring enjoys many practical applications as well as theoretical challenges. Beside
the classical types of problems, different limitations can also be set on the graph, or on the
way a color is assigned, or even on the color itself. It has even reached popularity with the
general public in the form of the popular number puzzle Sudoku. Graph coloring is still a
very active field of research.
Note: Many terms used in this article are defined in the glossary of graph theory.
History
The first results about graph coloring deal almost exclusively with planar graphs in the
form of the coloring of maps. While trying to color a map of the counties of England,
Francis Guthrie postulated the four color conjecture, noting that four colors were sufficient
to color the map so that no regions sharing a common border received the same color.
Guthrie’s brother passed on the question to his mathematics teacher Augustus de Morgan
at University College, who mentioned it in a letter to William Hamilton in 1852. Arthur
Cayley raised the problem at a meeting of the London Mathematical Society in 1879. The
same year, Alfred Kempe published a paper that claimed to establish the result, and for a
decade the four color problem was considered solved. For his accomplishment Kempe was
elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and later President of the London Mathematical
Society.[1]
In 1890, Heawood pointed out that Kempe’s argument was wrong. However, in that paper
he proved the five color theorem, saying that every planar map can be colored with no more
than five colors, using ideas of Kempe. In the following century, a vast amount of work and
theories were developed to reduce the number of colors to four, until the four color
theorem was finally proved in 1976 by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken. Perhaps
surprisingly, the proof went back to the ideas of Heawood and Kempe and largely
disregarded the intervening developments.[2] The proof of the four color theorem is also
noteworthy for being the first major computer-aided proof.
In 1912, George David Birkhoff introduced the chromatic polynomial to study the coloring
problems, which was generalised to the Tutte polynomial by Tutte, important structures in
algebraic graph theory. Kempe had already drawn attention to the general, non-planar case
in 1879[3] , and many results on generalisations of planar graph coloring to surfaces of
higher order followed in the early 20th century.
In 1960, Claude Berge formulated another conjecture about graph coloring, the strong
perfect graph conjecture, originally motivated by an information-theoretic concept called
the zero-error capacity of a graph introduced by Shannon. The conjecture remained
unresolved for 40 years, until it was established as the celebrated strong perfect graph
theorem in 2002 by Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour, Thomas 2002.
Graph coloring has been studied as an algorithmic problem since the early 1970s. The 
chromatic number problem is one of Karp’s 21 NP-complete problems from 1972, around 
the time of various exponential-time algorithms based on backtracking and Zykov’s 
deletion--contraction recurrence from 1949[4] . One of the major applications of graph

Graph coloring
482
coloring, register allocation in compilers was introduced in 1981.
Definition and terminology
Vertex coloring
When used without any qualification, a coloring of a graph is almost always a proper
vertex coloring, namely a labelling of the graph’s vertices with colors such that no two
vertices sharing the same edge (graph theory) have the same color. Since a vertex with a
loop (graph theory) could never be properly colored, it is understood that graphs in this
context are loopless.
The terminology of using colors for vertex labels goes back to map coloring. Labels like red
and blue are only used when the number of colors is small, and normally it is understood
that the labels are drawn from the integers 
… 
.
A coloring using at most k colors is called a (proper) k-coloring. The smallest number of
colors needed to color a graph G is called its chromatic number, χ(G). A graph that can be
assigned a (proper) k-coloring is k-colorable, and it is k-chromatic if its chromatic
number is exactly k. A subset of vertices assigned to the same color is called a color class,
every such class forms an independent set. Thus, a k-coloring is the same as a partition of
the vertex set into k independent sets, and the terms 
-partite and 
-colorable have the
same meaning.
Chromatic polynomial
This graph can be 3-colored in 12
different ways.
The chromatic polynomial counts the number of ways
a graph can be colored using no more than a given
number of colors. For example, using three colors, the
graph in the image to the right can be colored in 12
ways. With only two colors, it cannot be colored at all.
With four colors, it can be colored in 24 + 4⋅12 = 72
ways: using all four colors, there are 4! = 24 valid
colorings (every assignment of four colors to any
4-vertex graph is a proper coloring); and for every
choice of three of the four colors, there are 12 valid
3-colorings. So, for the graph in the example, a table of
the number of valid colorings would start like this:
Available colors
1
2
3
4
…
Number of colorings
0
0
12
72
…

Graph coloring
483
All nonisomorphic graphs on
3 vertices and their chromatic
polynomials. The empty graph
(red) admits a 1-coloring,
the others admit no such
colorings. The green graph
admits 12 colorings with 3
colors.
The chromatic polynomial includes at least as much information about the colorability of 
as does the chromatic number. Indeed, χ is the smallest positive integer that is not a root of
the chromatic polynomial,
Chromatic polynomials for certain graphs
Triangle 
Complete graph 
Tree with 
vertices
Cycle 
Petersen graph

Graph coloring
484
Edge coloring
An edge coloring of a graph, is a proper coloring of the edges, meaning an assignment of
colors to edges so that no vertex is incident to two edges of the same color. An edge
coloring with k colors is called a k-edge-coloring and is equivalent to the problem of
partitioning the edge set into k matchings. The smallest number of colors needed for an
edge coloring of a graph G is the chromatic index, or edge chromatic number, χ′(G). A
Tait coloring is a 3-edge coloring of a cubic graph. The four color theorem is equivalent to
the assertion that every planar cubic bridgeless graph admits a Tait coloring.
Properties
Bounds on the chromatic number
Assigning distinct colors to distinct vertices always yields a proper coloring, so
≤ 
≤ 
.
The only graphs that can be 1-colored are edgeless graphs, and the complete graph 
of n
vertices requires 
colors. In an optimal coloring there must be at least one of the
graph‘s 
edges between every pair of color classes, so
≤ 
.
If G contains a clique of size k, then at least k colors are needed to color that clique; in
other words, the chromatic number is at least the clique number:
≥ 
.
For interval graphs this bound is tight.
The 2-colorable graphs are exactly the bipartite graphs, including trees and forests. By the
four color theorem, every planar graph can be 4-colored.
A greedy coloring shows that every graph can be colored with one more color than the
maximum vertex degree,
≤ 
.
Complete graphs have 
and 
, and odd cycles have 
and
, so for these graphs this bound is best possible. In all other cases, the bound can
be slightly improved; Brooks’ theorem[5] states that
Brooks’ theorem: 
≤ 
for a connected, simple graph 
, unless 
is a
complete graph or an odd cycle
Graphs with high chromatic number
Graphs with large cliques have high chromatic number, but the opposite is not true. The
Grötzsch graph is an example of a 4-chromatic graph without a triangle, and the example
can be generalised to the Mycielskians.
Mycielski’s Theorem: There exist triangle-free graphs with arbitrarily high
chromatic number.
From Brooks’s theorem, graphs with high chromatic number must have high maximum
degree. Another local property that leads to high chromatic number is the presence of a
large clique. But colorability is not an entirely local phenomenon: A graph with high girth
looks locally like a tree, because all cycles are long, but its chromatic number need not be
2:

Graph coloring
485
Theorem (Erdös): There exist graphs of arbitrarily high girth and chromatic number.
Bounds on the chromatic index
An edge coloring of 
is a vertex coloring of its line graph 
, and vice versa. Thus,
There is a strong relationship between edge colorability and the graph’s maximum degree
. Since all edges incident to the same vertex need their own color, we have
≥ 
Moreover,
König’s theorem: 
if 
is bipartite.
In general, the the relationship is even stronger than what Brooks’s theorem gives for
vertex coloring:
Vizing’s Theorem: A graph of maximal degree 
has edge-chromatic number 
or
.
Other properties
For planar graphs, vertex colorings are essentially dual to nowhere-zero flows.
About infinite graphs, much less is known. The following is one of the few results about
infinite graph coloring:
If all finite subgraphs of an infinite graph G are k-colorable, then so is G. (de Bruijn
and Erdős 1951)
Open problems
The chromatic number of the plane, where two points are adjacent if they have unit
distance, is unknown, although it is one of 4, 5, 6, or 7. Other open problems concerning
the chromatic number of graphs include the Hadwiger conjecture stating that every graph
with chromatic number k has a complete graph on k vertices as a minor, and the
Erdős–Faber–Lovász conjecture bounding the chromatic number of unions of complete
graphs that have at exactly one vertex in common to each pair.
When Birkhoff and Lewis introduced the chromatic polynomial in their attack on the
four-color theorem, they conjectured that for planar graphs 
, the polymomial 
has no zeros in the region 
. Although it is known that such a chromatic polynomial
has no zeros in the region 
and that 
, their conjecture is still unresolved.
It also remains an unsolved problem to characterize graphs which have the same chromatic
polynomial and to determine which polynomials are chromatic.
Algorithms
Graph coloring

Graph coloring
486
Decision
Name
Graph coloring, vertex coloring, 
-coloring
Input
Graph 
with 
vertices. Integer 
Output
Does 
admit a proper vertex coloring with 
colors?
Running time
Complexity
NP-complete
Reduction from
3-Satisfiability
Garey–Johnson
GT4
Optimisation
Name
Chromatic number
Input
Graph 
with 
vertices.
Output
Complexity
NP-hard
Approximability
Inapproximability
unless P=NP
Counting problem
Name
Chromatic polymomial
Input
Graph 
with 
vertices. Integer 
Output
The number 
of proper 
-colorings of 
Running time
Complexity
#P-complete
Approximability
FPRAS for restricted cases
Inapproximability
No PTAS unless P=NP
Efficient algorithms
Determining if a graph can be colored with 
colors is equivalent to determining whether
or not the graph is bipartite, and thus polynomial time-computable. More generally, the
chromatic number and a corresponding coloring of perfect graphs can be computed in
polynomial time using semidefinite programming. Closed formulas for chromatic polynomial
are known for many classes of graphs, such as forest, chordal graphs, cycles, wheels, and
ladders, so these can be evaluated in polynomial time.

Graph coloring
487
Brute-force search
Brute-force search for a 
-coloring considers every of the 
assignments of colors to
vertices and checks for each if it is legal. To compute the chromatic number and the
chromatic polynomial, this procedure is used for every 
, for a total running time of
, impractical for all but the smallest input graphs.
Contraction
The contraction 
of graph 
is the graph obtained by identifying the vertices 
and
, removing any edges between them, and replacing them with a single vertex 
where
any edges that were incident on 
or 
are redirected to 
. This operation plays a major
role in the analysis of graph coloring.
The chromatic number satisfies the recurrence relation:
due to Zykov,[6] where 
and 
are nonadjacent vertices, 
is the graph with the
edge 
added. Several algorithms are based on evaluating this recurrence, the resulting
computation tree is sometimes called a Zykov tree. The running time is based on the
heuristic for choosing the vertices 
and 
.
The chromatic polynomial satisfies following recurrence relation
where 
and 
are adjacent vertices and 
is the graph with the edge 
removed.
represents the number of possible proper colorings of the graph, when the
vertices may have same or different colors. The number of proper colorings therefore come
from the sum of two graphs. If the vertices 
and 
have different colors, then we can as
well consider a graph, where 
and 
are adjacent. If 
and 
have the same colors, we
may as well consider a graph, where 
and 
are contracted. Tutte’s curiosity about which
other graph properties satisfied this recurrence led him to discover a bivariate
generalization of the chromatic polynomial, the Tutte polynomial.
The expressions give rise to a recursive procedure, called the deletion–contraction
algorithm, which forms the basis of many algorithms for graph coloring. The running time
satisfies the same recurrence relation as the Fibonacci numbers, so in the worst case, the
algorithm runs in time within a polynomial factor of 
 [7] .
The analysis can be improved to within a polynomial factor of the number 
of spanning
trees of the input graph [8] . In practice, branch and bound strategies and graph
isomorphism rejection are employed to avoid some recursive calls, the running time
depends on the heuristic used to pick the vertex pair.

Graph coloring
488
Greedy coloring
Two greedy colorings of the same
graph using different vertex orders.
The right example generalises to
2-colorable graphs with 
vertices,
where the greedy algorithm expends
colors.
The greedy algorithm considers the vertices in a
specific order 
,…, 
and assigns to 
the smallest
available color not used by 
’s neighbours among 
,…, 
, adding a fresh color if needed. The quality of
the resulting coloring depends on the chosen ordering.
There exists an ordering that leads to a greedy coloring
with the optimal number of 
colors. On the other
hand, greedy colorings can be arbitrarily bad; for
example, the crown graph on 
vertices can be
2-colored, but has an ordering that leads to a greedy
coloring with 
colors.
If the vertices are ordered according to their degrees, the resulting greedy coloring uses at
most 
colors, at most one more than the graph’s maximum degree.
This heuristic is sometimes called the Welsh–Powell algorithm[9] . Another heuristic
establishes the ordering dynamically while the algorithm proceeds, choosing next the
vertex adjacent to the largest number of different colors [10] . Many other graph coloring
heuristics are similarly based on greedy coloring for a specific static or dynamic strategy of
ordering the vertices, these algorithms are sometimes called sequential coloring
algorithms.
Computational complexity
Graph coloring is computationally hard. It is NP-complete to decide if a given graph admits
a 
-coloring for given 
except for the cases 
and 
. Especially, it is NP-hard to
compute the chromatic number. Graph coloring remains NP-complete even on planar
graphs of degree at most 4 [11] .
The best known approximation algorithm computes a coloring of size at most within a
factor 
of the chromatic number.[12] For all 
it is NP-hard to
approximate the chromatic number within 
 [13]
It is NP-hard to color a 3-colorable graph with 4 colors [14] and a 
-colorable graph with
colors for sufficiently large constant 
 [15] .
Computing the coefficients of the chromatic polynomial is #P-hard. In fact, even computing
the value of 
is #P-hard at any rational point 
except for 
and 
 [16] .
There is no FPRAS for evaluating the chromatic polynomial at any rational point 
≥ 1.5
except for 
unless NP=RP [17] .
For edge coloring, the proof of Vizing’s result gives an algorithm that uses at most 
colors. However, deciding between the two candidate values for the edge chromatic
number is NP-complete. [18] In terms of approximation algorithms, Vizing’s algorithm shows
that the edge chromatic number can be approximated within 
, and the hardness result
shows that no 
-algorithm exists for any 
unless P=NP. These are among the
oldest results in the literature of approximation algorithms, even though neither paper
makes explicit use of that notion[19] .

Graph coloring
489
Parallel and distributed algorithms
In the field of distributed algorithms, graph coloring is closely related to the problem of
symmetry breaking. In a symmetric graph, a deterministic distributed algorithm cannot find
a proper vertex coloring. Some auxiliary information is needed in order to break symmetry.
A standard assumption is that initially each node has a unique identifier, for example, from
the set {1, 2, ..., n} where n is the number of nodes in the graph. Put otherwise, we assume
that we are given an n-coloring. The challenge is to reduce the number of colors from n to,
e.g., 
.
A straightforward distributed version of the greedy algorithm for 
-coloring requires
communication rounds in the worst case − information may need to be propagated
from one side of the network to another side. However, much faster algorithms exist, at
least if the maximum degree 
is small.
The simplest interesting case is an n-cycle. Richard Cole and Uzi Vishkin[20] show that there
is a distributed algorithm that reduces the number of colors from n to 
in one
synchronous communication step. By iterating the same procedure, it is possible to obtain a
3-coloring of an n-cycle in O(log* n) communication steps (assuming that we have unique
node identifiers).
The function log*, iterated logarithm, is an extremely slowly growing function, "almost
constant". Hence the result by Cole and Vishkin raised the question of whether there is a
constant-time distribute algorithm for 3-coloring an n-cycle. Linial[21] showed that this is
not possible: any deterministic distributed algorithm requires 
(log* n) communication
steps to reduce an n-coloring to a 3-coloring in an n-cycle.
The technique by Cole and Vishkin can be applied in arbitrary bounded-degree graphs as
well; the running time is poly( 
) + O(log* n).[22]
Applications
Scheduling
Vertex coloring models to a number of scheduling problems.[23] In the cleanest form, a
given set of jobs need to be assigned to time slots, each job requires one such slot. Jobs can
be scheduled in any order, but pairs of jobs may be in conflict in the sense that they may
not be assigned to the same time slot, for example because they both rely on a shared
resource. The corresponding graph contains a vertex for every job and an edge for every
conflicting pair of jobs. The chromatic number of the graph is exactly the minimum
makespan, the optimal time to finish all jobs without conflicts.
Details of the scheduling problem define the structure of the graph. For example, when
assigning aircrafts to flights, the resulting conflict graph is an interval graph, so the
coloring problem can be solved efficiently. In bandwidth allocation to radio stations, the
resulting conflict graph is a unit disk graph, so the coloring problem is 3-approximable.

Graph coloring
490
Register allocation
A compiler is a computer program that translates one computer language into another. To
improve the execution time of the resulting code, one of the techniques of compiler
optimization is register allocation, where the most frequently used values of the compiled
program are kept in the fast processor registers. Ideally, values are assigned to registers so
that they can all reside in the registers when they are used.
The textbook approach to this problem is to model it as a graph coloring problem.[24] The
compiler constructs an interference graph, where vertices are symbolic registers and an
edge connects two nodes if they are needed at the same time. If the graph can be colored
with k colors then the variables can be stored in k registers.
Other applications
The problem of coloring a graph has found a number of applications, including pattern
matching.
The recreational puzzle Sudoku can be seen as completing a 9-coloring on given specific
graph with 81 vertices.
Other colorings
Ramsey theory
An important class of improper coloring problems is studied in Ramsey theory, where the
graph’s edges are assigned to colors, and there is no restriction on the colors of incident
edges. A simple example is the friendship theorem says that in any coloring of the edges of
the complete graph of six vertices there will be a monochromatic triangle; often
illustrated by saying that any group of six people either has three mutual strangers or three
mutual acquaintances. Ramsey theory is concerned with generalisations of this idea to seek
regularity amid disorder, finding general conditions for the existence of monochromatic
subgraphs with given structure.

Graph coloring
491
Other colorings
List coloring
Each vertex chooses from a list of colors
List edge-coloring
Each edge chooses from a list of colors
Total coloring
Vertices and edges are colored
Harmonious coloring
Every pair of colors appears on at most
one edge
Complete coloring
Every pair of colors appears on at least
one edge
Exact coloring
Every pair of colors appears on exactly
one edge
Acyclic coloring
Every 2-chromatic subgraph is acyclic
T-coloring
Distance between two colors of adjacent vertices must not
belong to fixed set T
Rank coloring
If two vertices have the same color i, then every path
between them contain a vertex with color greater than i
Interval edge-coloring
A color of edges meeting in a common vertex must be
contiguous
Circular coloring
Motivated by task systems in which production proceeds
in a cyclic way
Path coloring
Models a routing problem in graphs
Fractional coloring
Vertices may have multiple colors, and on each edge the
sum of the color parts of each vertex is not greater than
one
Oriented coloring
Takes into account orientation of edges of the graph
Strong coloring
Every color appears in every partition of
equal size exactly once
Strong edge coloring
Edges are colored such that each color
class induces a matching (equivalent to
coloring the square of the line graph)
Equitable coloring
The sizes of color classes differ by at
most one
Sum-coloring
The criterion of minimalization is the
sum of colors
Cocoloring
An improper vertex coloring where every color class
induces an independent set or a clique
Subcoloring
An improper vertex coloring where every color class
induces a union of cliques
Weak coloring
An improper vertex coloring where every non-isolated
node has at least one neighbor with a different color
Coloring can also be considered for signed graphs and gain graphs.

Graph coloring
492
See also
• Uniquely colorable graph
• Critical graph
• Graph homomorphism
• Mathematics of Sudoku
Notes
[1] M. Kubale, History of graph coloring, in Kubale (2004)
[2] van Lint, Wilson & 2001 (Chap. 33)
[3] Jensen, Toft & 1995 (p. 2)
[4] Zykov (1949)
[5] Brooks (1941)
[6] Zykov (1949)
[7] Wilf (1986)
[8] Sekine, Imai & Tani (1995)
[9] Welsh & Powell (1967)
[10] Brèlaz (1979)
[11] Garey, Johnson & Stockmeyer (1974)
[12] Halldórsson (1993)
[13] Zuckerman (2007)
[14] Guruswami & Khanna (2000)
[15] Khot (2001)
[16] Jaeger, Vertigan & Welsh (1990)
[17] Goldberg & Jerrum (2008)
[18] Holyer (1981)
[19] Crescenzi & Kann (1998)
[20] Cole & Vishkin (1986), see also Cormen, Leiserson & Rivest (1990, Section 30.5)
[21] Linial (1992)
[22] Goldberg, Plotkin & Shannon (1988)
[23] Marx (2004)
[24] Chaitin (1982)
References
• Brèlaz, D. (1979), "New methods to color the vertices of a graph", Communications of the
ACM 22: 251–256, doi: 10.1145/359094.359101 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 359094.
359101)
• Brooks, R. L. (1941), "On colouring the nodes of a network", Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc.
37: 194–197, doi: 10.1017/S030500410002168X (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1017/
S030500410002168X)
• de Bruijn, N. G.; Erdős, P. (1951), "http://www.math-inst.hu/~p_erdos/1951-01.pdf|A
colour problem for infinite graphs and a problem in the theory of relations", Nederl.
Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 54: 371–373, http:/ / www. math-inst. hu/ ~p_erdos/
1951-01. pdf (= Indag. Math. 13)
• Chaitin, G. J. (1982), "Register allocation & spilling via graph colouring", Proc. 1982
SIGPLAN Symp. Compiler constr., pp. 98–105
• Cole, R.; Vishkin, U. (1986), "Deterministic coin tossing with applications to optimal
parallel list ranking", Information and Control 70 (1): 32–53, doi:
10.1016/S0019-9958(86)80023-7 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0019-9958(86)80023-7)
• Cormen, T. H.; Leiserson, C. E.; Rivest, R. L. (1990), Introduction to Algorithms (1st ed.),
The MIT Press

Graph coloring
493
• Garey, M. R.; Johnson, D. S. (1979), Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory
of NP-Completeness, W.H. Freeman, ISBN 0-7167-1045-5
• Garey, M. R.; Johnson, D. S.; Stockmeyer, L. (1974),
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=803884|"Some simplified NP-complete problems",
Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 47–63,
http:/ / portal. acm. org/ citation. cfm?id=803884
• Goldberg, L. A.; Jerrum, M. (July 2008), "Inapproximability of the Tutte polynomial",
Information and Computation 206 (7): 908–929, doi: 10.1016/j.ic.2008.04.003 (http:/ / dx.
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ j. ic. 2008. 04. 003)
• Goldberg, A. V.; Plotkin, S. A.; Shannon, G. E. (1988), "Parallel symmetry-breaking in
sparse graphs", SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 1 (4): 434–446, doi:
10.1137/0401044 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1137/ 0401044)
• Guruswami, V.; Khanna, S. (2000), "On the hardness of 4-coloring a 3-colorable graph",
Proceedings of the 15th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity,
pp. 188–197, doi: 10.1109/CCC.2000.856749 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CCC. 2000.
856749)
• Halldórsson, M. M. (1993), "A still better performance guarantee for approximate graph
coloring", Inform. Process. Lett. 45: 19–23, doi: 10.1016/0020-0190(93)90246-6 (http:/ /
dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0020-0190(93)90246-6)
• Holyer, I. (1981), "The NP-completeness of edge-coloring", SIAM Journal on Computing
10: 718–720, doi: 10.1137/0210055 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1137/ 0210055)
• Crescenzi, P.; Kann, V. (December 1998), "How to find the best approximation results —
a follow-up to Garey and Johnson", ACM SIGACT News 29: 90, doi:
10.1145/306198.306210 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 306198. 306210)
• Jaeger, F.; Vertigan, D. L.; Welsh, D. J. A. (1990), "On the computational complexity of the
Jones and Tutte polynomials", Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 108: 35–53, doi:
10.1017/S0305004100068936 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S0305004100068936)
• Jensen, T. R.; Toft, B. (1995), Graph Coloring Problems, Wiley-Interscience, New York,
ISBN 0-471-02865-7
• Khot, S. (2001), "Improved inapproximability results for MaxClique, chromatic number
and approximate graph coloring", Proc. 42nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science, pp. 600–609, doi: 10.1109/SFCS.2001.959936 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/
10. 1109/ SFCS. 2001. 959936)
• Kubale, M. (2004), Graph Colorings, American Mathematical Society, ISBN
0-8218-3458-4
• Linial, N. (1992), "Locality in distributed graph algorithms", SIAM Journal on Computing
21 (1): 193–201, doi: 10.1137/0221015 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1137/ 0221015)
• van Lint, J. H.; Wilson, R. M. (2001), A Course in Combinatorics (2nd ed.), Cambridge
University Press, ISBN 0-521-80340-3.
• Marx, Dániel (2004),
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.95.4268&rep=rep1&type=pdf|"Graph
colouring problems and their applications in scheduling", Periodica Polytechnica,
Electrical Engineering, 48, pp. 11–16, http:/ / citeseerx. ist. psu. edu/ viewdoc/
download?doi=10. 1. 1. 95. 4268& rep=rep1& type=pdf
• Sekine, K.; Imai, H.; Tani, S. (1995), "Computing the Tutte polynomial of a graph of 
moderate size", Proc. 6th International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation 
(ISAAC 1995), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1004, Springer, pp. 224–233, doi:

Graph coloring
494
10.1007/BFb0015427 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BFb0015427)
• Welsh, D. J. A.; Powell, M. B. (1967), "An upper bound for the chromatic number of a
graph and its application to timetabling problems", The Computer Journal 10 (1): 85–86,
doi: 10.1093/comjnl/10.1.85 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1093/ comjnl/ 10. 1. 85)
• West, D. B. (1996), Introduction to Graph Theory, Prentice-Hall, ISBN 0-13-227828-6
• Wilf, H. S. (1986), Algorithms and Complexity, Prentice–Hall
• Zuckerman, D. (2007), "Linear degree extractors and the inapproximability of Max Clique
and Chromatic Number", Theory of Computing 3: 103–128, doi:
10.4086/toc.2007.v003a006 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 4086/ toc. 2007. v003a006)
• A. A. Zykov (1949), "http://mi.mathnet.ru/eng/msb5974|О некоторых свойствах линейных
комплексов (On some properties of linear complexes)" (in Russian), Math. Sbornik. 24(66)
(2): 163–188, http:/ / mi. mathnet. ru/ eng/ msb5974
External links
• Graph Coloring Page (http:/ / www. cs. ualberta. ca/ ~joe/ Coloring/ index. html) by
Joseph Culberson (graph coloring programs)
• (http:/ / vispo. com/ software''CoLoRaTiOn'') by Jim Andrews and Mike Fellows is a graph
coloring puzzle
• GF-Graph Coloring Program (http:/ / gf8. piranho. de)
• Links to Graph Coloring source codes (http:/ / www. adaptivebox. net/ research/
bookmark/ gcpcodes_link. html)
• Code for efficiently computing Tutte, Chromatic and Flow Polynomials by Gary Haggard,
David J. Pearce and Gordon Royle: (http:/ / www. mcs. vuw. ac. nz/ ~djp/ tutte/ )

Graph theory
495
Graph theory
A drawing of a graph
In mathematics and computer science,
graph theory is the study of graphs:
mathematical structures used to model
pairwise relations between objects from a
certain collection. A "graph" in this context
refers to a collection of vertices or 'nodes'
and a collection of edges that connect pairs
of vertices. A graph may be undirected,
meaning 
that 
there 
is 
no 
distinction
between the two vertices associated with
each edge, or its edges may be directed
from one vertex to another; see graph
(mathematics) for more detailed definitions
and for other variations in the types of graphs that are commonly considered. The graphs
studied in graph theory should not be confused with "graphs of functions" and other kinds
of graphs.
Please refer to Glossary of graph theory for some basic definitions in graph theory.
History
The Königsberg Bridge problem
The paper written by Leonhard Euler on the Seven
Bridges of Königsberg and published in 1736 is
regarded as the first paper in the history of graph
theory.[1] This paper, as well as the one written by
Vandermonde on the knight problem, carried on
with the analysis situs initiated by Leibniz. Euler's
formula relating the number of edges, vertices, and
faces of a convex polyhedron was studied and
generalized by Cauchy[2] and L'Huillier,[3] and is at
the origin of topology.
More than one century after Euler's paper on the
bridges of Königsberg and while Listing introduced
topology, Cayley was led by the study of particular analytical forms arising from differential
calculus to study a particular class of graphs, the trees. This study had many implications in
theoretical chemistry. The involved techniques mainly concerned the enumeration of
graphs having particular properties. Enumerative graph theory then rose from the results
of Cayley and the fundamental results published by Pólya between 1935 and 1937 and the
generalization of these by De Bruijn in 1959. Cayley linked his results on trees with the
contemporary studies of chemical composition.[4] The fusion of the ideas coming from
mathematics with those coming from chemistry is at the origin of a part of the standard
terminology of graph theory. In particular, the term "graph" was introduced by Sylvester in
a paper published in 1878 in Nature.[5]

Graph theory
496
One of the most famous and productive problems of graph theory is the four color problem:
"Is it true that any map drawn in the plane may have its regions colored with four colors, in
such a way that any two regions having a common border have different colors?" This
problem was first posed by Francis Guthrie in 1852 and its first written record is in a letter
of De Morgan addressed to Hamilton the same year. Many incorrect proofs have been
proposed, including those by Cayley, Kempe, and others. The study and the generalization
of this problem by Tait, Heawood, Ramsey and Hadwiger led to the study of the colorings of
the graphs embedded on surfaces with arbitrary genus. Tait's reformulation generated a
new class of problems, the factorization problems, particularly studied by Petersen and
Kőnig. The works of Ramsey on colorations and more specially the results obtained by
Turán in 1941 was at the origin of another branch of graph theory, extremal graph theory.
The four color problem remained unsolved for more than a century. A proof produced in
1976 by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken,[6] [7] which involved checking the properties
of 1,936 configurations by computer, was not fully accepted at the time due to its
complexity. A simpler proof considering only 633 configurations was given twenty years
later by Robertson, Seymour, Sanders and Thomas.[8]
The autonomous development of topology from 1860 and 1930 fertilized graph theory back
through the works of Jordan, Kuratowski and Whitney. Another important factor of common
development of graph theory and topology came from the use of the techniques of modern
algebra. The first example of such a use comes from the work of the physicist Gustav
Kirchhoff, who published in 1845 his Kirchhoff's circuit laws for calculating the voltage and
current in electric circuits.
The introduction of probabilistic methods in graph theory, especially in the study of Erdős
and Rényi of the asymptotic probability of graph connectivity, gave rise to yet another
branch, known as random graph theory, which has been a fruitful source of graph-theoretic
results.
Drawing graphs
Graphs are represented graphically by drawing a dot for every vertex, and drawing an arc
between two vertices if they are connected by an edge. If the graph is directed, the
direction is indicated by drawing an arrow.
A graph drawing should not be confused with the graph itself (the abstract, non-graphical
structure) as there are several ways to structure the graph drawing. All that matters is
which vertices are connected to which others by how many edges and not the exact layout.
In practice it is often difficult to decide if two drawings represent the same graph.
Depending on the problem domain some layouts may be better suited and easier to
understand than others.
Graph-theoretic data structures
There are different ways to store graphs in a computer system. The data structure used 
depends on both the graph structure and the algorithm used for manipulating the graph. 
Theoretically one can distinguish between list and matrix structures but in concrete 
applications the best structure is often a combination of both. List structures are often 
preferred for sparse graphs as they have smaller memory requirements. Matrix structures 
on the other hand provide faster access for some applications but can consume huge

Graph theory
497
amounts of memory .
List structures
Incidence list
The edges are represented by an array containing pairs (ordered if directed) of
vertices (that the edge connects) and possibly weight and other data. Vertices
connected by an edge are said to be adjacent.
Adjacency list
Much like the incidence list, each vertex has a list of which vertices it is adjacent to.
This causes redundancy in an undirected graph: for example, if vertices A and B are
adjacent, A's adjacency list contains B, while B's list contains A. Adjacency queries are
faster, at the cost of extra storage space.
Matrix structures
Incidence matrix
The graph is represented by a matrix of size |V| (number of vertices) by |E| (number of
edges) where the entry [vertex, edge] contains the edge's endpoint data (simplest
case: 1 - connected, 0 - not connected).
Adjacency matrix
This is the n by n matrix A, where n is the number of vertices in the graph. If there is
an edge from some vertex x to some vertex y, then the element 
is 1 (or in general
the number of xy edges), otherwise it is 0. In computing, this matrix makes it easy to
find subgraphs, and to reverse a directed graph.
Laplacian matrix or Kirchhoff matrix or Admittance matrix
This is defined as D − A, where D is the diagonal degree matrix. It explicitly contains
both adjacency information and degree information.
Distance matrix
A symmetric n by n matrix D whose element 
is the length of a shortest path
between x and y; if there is no such path 
= infinity. It can be derived from powers
of A: 
Problems in graph theory
Enumeration
There is a large literature on graphical enumeration: the problem of counting graphs
meeting specified conditions. Some of this work is found in Harary and Palmer (1973).
Subgraphs, induced subgraphs, and minors
A common problem, called the subgraph isomorphism problem, is finding a fixed graph as a
subgraph in a given graph. One reason to be interested in such a question is that many
graph properties are hereditary for subgraphs, which means that a graph has the property
if and only if all subgraphs have it too. Unfortunately, finding maximal subgraphs of a
certain kind is often an NP-complete problem.
• Finding the largest complete graph is called the clique problem (NP-complete).

Graph theory
498
A similar problem is finding induced subgraphs in a given graph. Again, some important
graph properties are hereditary with respect to induced subgraphs, which means that a
graph has a property if and only if all induced subgraphs also have it. Finding maximal
induced subgraphs of a certain kind is also often NP-complete. For example,
• Finding the largest edgeless induced subgraph, or independent set, called the
independent set problem (NP-complete).
Still another such problem, the minor containment problem, is to find a fixed graph as a
minor of a given graph. A minor or subcontraction of a graph is any graph obtained by
taking a subgraph and contracting some (or no) edges. Many graph properties are
hereditary for minors, which means that a graph has a property if and only if all minors
have it too. A famous example:
• A graph is planar if it contains as a minor neither the complete bipartite graph 
(See
the Three-cottage problem) nor the complete graph 
.
Another class of problems has to do with the extent to which various species and
generalizations of graphs are determined by their point-deleted subgraphs, for example:
• The reconstruction conjecture
Graph coloring
Many problems have to do with various ways of coloring graphs, for example:
• The four-color theorem
• The strong perfect graph theorem
• The Erdős–Faber–Lovász conjecture (unsolved)
• The total coloring conjecture (unsolved)
• The list coloring conjecture (unsolved)
• The Hadwiger conjecture (graph theory) (unsolved)
Route problems
• Hamiltonian path and cycle problems
• Minimum spanning tree
• Route inspection problem (also called the "Chinese Postman Problem")
• Seven Bridges of Königsberg
• Shortest path problem
• Steiner tree
• Three-cottage problem
• Traveling salesman problem (NP-complete)

Graph theory
499
Network flow
There are numerous problems arising especially from applications that have to do with
various notions of flows in networks, for example:
• Max flow min cut theorem
Visibility graph problems
• Museum guard problem
Covering problems
Covering problems are specific instances of subgraph-finding problems, and they tend to be
closely related to the clique problem or the independent set problem.
• Set cover problem
• Vertex cover problem
Applications
Applications of graph theory are primarily, but not exclusively, concerned with labeled
graphs and various specializations of these.
Structures that can be represented as graphs are ubiquitous, and many problems of
practical interest can be represented by graphs. The link structure of a website could be
represented by a directed graph: the vertices are the web pages available at the website
and a directed edge from page A to page B exists if and only if A contains a link to B. A
similar approach can be taken to problems in travel, biology, computer chip design, and
many other fields. The development of algorithms to handle graphs is therefore of major
interest in computer science. There, the transformation of graphs is often formalized and
represented by graph rewrite systems. They are either directly used or properties of the
rewrite systems(e.g. confluence) are studied.
A graph structure can be extended by assigning a weight to each edge of the graph. Graphs
with weights, or weighted graphs, are used to represent structures in which pairwise
connections have some numerical values. For example if a graph represents a road
network, the weights could represent the length of each road. A digraph with weighted
edges in the context of graph theory is called a network.
Networks have many uses in the practical side of graph theory, network analysis (for
example, to model and analyze traffic networks). Within network analysis, the definition of
the term "network" varies, and may often refer to a simple graph.
Many applications of graph theory exist in the form of network analysis. These split broadly
into three categories. Firstly, analysis to determine structural properties of a network, such
as the distribution of vertex degrees and the diameter of the graph. A vast number of graph
measures exist, and the production of useful ones for various domains remains an active
area of research. Secondly, analysis to find a measurable quantity within the network, for
example, for a transportation network, the level of vehicular flow within any portion of it.
Thirdly, analysis of dynamical properties of networks.
Graph theory is also used to study molecules in chemistry and physics. In condensed matter 
physics, the three dimensional structure of complicated simulated atomic structures can be 
studied quantitatively by gathering statistics on graph-theoretic properties related to the

Graph theory
500
topology of the atoms. For example, Franzblau's shortest-path (SP) rings. In chemistry a
graph makes a natural model for a molecule, where vertices represent atoms and edges
bonds. This approach is especially used in computer processing of molecular structures,
ranging from chemical editors to database searching.
Graph theory is also widely used in sociology as a way, for example, to measure actors'
prestige or to explore diffusion mechanisms, notably through the use of social network
analysis software.
See also
• Gallery of named graphs
• Glossary of graph theory
• List of graph theory topics
• Publications in graph theory
Related topics
• Graph property
• Algebraic graph theory
• Conceptual graph
• Data structure
• Disjoint-set data structure
• Entitative graph
• Existential graph
• Graph data structure
• Graph algebras
• Graph coloring
• Graph drawing
• Graph equation
• Graph rewriting
• Logical graph
• Loop
• Null graph
• Quantum graph
• Spectral graph theory
• Strongly regular graphs
• Tree data structure
Algorithms
• Bellman-Ford algorithm
• Dijkstra's algorithm
• Ford-Fulkerson algorithm
• Kruskal's algorithm
• Nearest neighbour algorithm
• Prim's algorithm
• Depth-first search
• Breadth-first search

Graph theory
501
Subareas
• Algebraic graph theory
• Geometric graph theory
• Extremal graph theory
• Probabilistic graph theory
• Topological graph theory
Related areas of mathematics
• Combinatorics
• Group theory
• Knot theory
• Ramsey theory
Generalizations
• Hypergraph
• Abstract simplicial complex
Prominent graph theorists
• Berge, Claude
• Bollobás, Béla
• Chung, Fan
• Dirac, Gabriel Andrew
• Erdős, Paul
• Euler, Leonhard
• Faudree, Ralph
• Graham, Ronald
• Harary, Frank
• Heawood, Percy John
• Kőnig, Dénes
• Lovász, László
• Nešetřil, Jaroslav
• Rényi, Alfréd
• Ringel, Gerhard
• Robertson, Neil
• Seymour, Paul
• Szemerédi, Endre
• Thomassen, Carsten
• Turán, Pál
• Tutte, W. T.
• Tyshkevich, Regina

Graph theory
502
Notes
[1] Biggs, N.; Lloyd, E. and Wilson, R. (1986). Graph Theory, 1736-1936. Oxford University Press.
[2] Cauchy, A.L. (1813). "Recherche sur les polyèdres - premier mémoire". Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique 9
(Cahier 16): 66–86.
[3] L'Huillier, S.-A.-J. (1861). "Mémoire sur la polyèdrométrie". Annales de Mathématiques 3: 169–189.
[4] Cayley, A. (1875). "Ueber die Analytischen Figuren, welche in der Mathematik Bäume genannt werden und
ihre Anwendung auf die Theorie chemischer Verbindungen". Berichte der deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft
8: 1056–1059. doi: 10.1002/cber.18750080252 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1002/ cber. 18750080252).
[5] Sylvester, J.J. (1878). "Chemistry and Algebra". Nature 17: 284. doi: 10.1038/017284a0 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/
10. 1038/ 017284a0).
[6] Appel, K. and Haken, W. (1977). "Every planar map is four colorable. Part I. Discharging". Illinois J. Math. 21:
429–490.
[7] Appel, K. and Haken, W. (1977). "Every planar map is four colorable. Part II. Reducibility". Illinois J. Math. 21:
491–567.
[8] Robertson, N.; Sanders, D.; Seymour, P. and Thomas, R. (1997). "The four color theorem". Journal of
Combinatorial Theory Series B 70: 2–44. doi: 10.1006/jctb.1997.1750 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1006/ jctb. 1997.
1750).
References
• Gibbons, Alan (1985), Algorithmic Graph Theory, Cambridge University Press.
• Berge, Claude (1958), Théorie des graphes et ses applications, Collection Universitaire
de Mathématiques, II, Paris: Dunod. English edition, Wiley 1961; Methuen & Co, New
York 1962; Russian, Moscow 1961; Spanish, Mexico 1962; Roumanian, Bucharest 1969;
Chinese, Shanghai 1963; Second printing of the 1962 first English edition, Dover, New
York 2001.
• Chartrand, Gary (1985), Introductory Graph Theory, Dover, ISBN 0-486-24775-9.
• Biggs, N.; Lloyd, E.; Wilson, R. (1986), Graph Theory, 1736-1936, Oxford University
Press.
• Harary, Frank (1969), Graph Theory, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
• Harary, Frank; Palmer, Edgar M. (1973), Graphical Enumeration, New York, NY:
Academic Press.
External links
Online textbooks
• Graph Theory with Applications (http:/ / www. ecp6. jussieu. fr/ pageperso/ bondy/ books/
gtwa/ gtwa. html) (1976) by Bondy and Murty
• Encyclopaedia Britannica, Graph Theory (http:/ / www. britannica. com/ eb/
article-9037754/ graph-theory)
• Phase Transitions in Combinatorial Optimization Problems, Section 3: Introduction to
Graphs (http:/ / arxiv. org/ pdf/ cond-mat/ 0602129) (2006) by Hartmann and Weigt
• An Introduction to Graph Algorithms (http:/ / www. cs. auckland. ac. nz/ ~ute/ 220ft/
graphalg/ graphalg. html) 1999 by Waltraut Ute Lorch based on Dr Michael Dinneen's
lecture notes
• Digraphs: Theory Algorithms and Applications (http:/ / www. cs. rhul. ac. uk/ books/
dbook/ ) 2007 by Jorgen Bang-Jensen and Gregory Gutin
• Graph Theory, by Reinhard Diestel (http:/ / www. math. uni-hamburg. de/ home/ diestel/
books/ graph. theory/ GraphTheoryIII. pdf)

Graph theory
503
Other resources
• More people and publications at: Graph Theory Resources (http:/ / www. math. gatech.
edu/ ~sanders/ graphtheory/ )
• Graph theory tutorial (http:/ / www. utm. edu/ departments/ math/ graph/ )
• Image gallery: graphs (http:/ / web. archive. org/ web/ 20060206155001/ http:/ / www.
nd. edu/ ~networks/ gallery. htm)
• GraphViz open source software to produce graph images from a description of the graph
• (http:/ / graphexploration. cond. org/ ) GUESS Graph Exploration System( Open Source
GPL )
• JGraphT (http:/ / www. jgrapht. org) an open source Java graph theory library
• Annas (http:/ / annas. googlecode. com) an Open source Java graph and algorithm library
• Boost Graph Library (BGL) (http:/ / www. boost. org/ libs/ graph/ doc/ index. html) an
open source C++ graph theory library
• QuickGraph (http:/ / quickgraph. codeplex. com/ ) an open source C# graph theory
library based on the design of the BGL (http:/ / www. boost. org/ libs/ graph/ doc/ index.
html)
• Ruby Graph Library (RGL) (http:/ / rubyforge. org/ projects/ rgl/ ) an open source Ruby
graph theory library based on the design of the BGL (http:/ / www. boost. org/ libs/ graph/
doc/ index. html)
• LEMON (http:/ / lemon. cs. elte. hu) another open source C++ graph theory library
• NetworkX (http:/ / networkx. lanl. gov/ ) an open source Python graph theory library
• Eric W. Weisstein, Graph Theory (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ GraphTheory. html)
at MathWorld.
• (http:/ / orgnet. com/ SocialLifeOfRouters. pdf) Graph theory applied to computer/social
networks
• Concise, annotated list of graph theory resources for researchers (http:/ / www.
babelgraph. org/ links. html)
• GTAD (Graph Toolkit for Algorithms and Drawings) (http:/ / gtad. sourceforge. net/ ) C++
graph library
• GraphsJ (http:/ / www. or. deis. unibo. it/ staff_pages/ martello/ GraphsJ/ GraphsJ. html)
An open source and extendable didactic Java software for running graph algorithms
• igraph (http:/ / igraph. sourceforge. net/ ) an open source social-network/graph-theory
library written in C with bindings to Python, R, and Ruby.

Multicategory
504
Multicategory
In mathematics (especially category theory), a multicategory is a generalization of the
concept of category that allows morphisms of multiple arity. If morphisms in a category are
viewed as analogous to functions, then morphisms in a multicategory are analogous to
functions of several variables.
Definition
A multicategory consists of
• a collection (often a proper class) of objects;
• for every finite sequence (X1, X2, ..., Xn) of objects (for n := 0, 1, 2, ...) and object Y, a set
of morphisms from X1, X2, ..., and Xn to Y; and
• for every object X, a special identity morphism (with n := 1) from X to X.
Additionally, there are composition operations: Given a sequence of sequences (X1,1, X1,2,
..., X1,n1; X2,1, X2,2, ..., X2,n2; ...; Xm,1, Xm,2, ..., Xm,n'm) of objects, a sequence (Y1, Y2, ...,
Ym) of objects, and an object Z: if
• f1 is a morphism from X1,1, X1,2, ..., and X1,n to Y1;
• f2 is a morphism from X2,1, X2,2, ..., and X2,n to Y2;
• ...;
• fm is a morphism from Xm,1, Xm,2, ..., and Xm,n to Ym; and
• g is a morphism from Y1, Y2, ..., and Ym to Z:
then there is a composite morphism g(f1, f2, ..., fm) from X1,1, X1,2, ..., X1,n1, X2,1, X2,2, ...,
X2,n2, ..., Xm,1, Xm,2, ..., and Xm,n'm to Z. This must satisfy certain axioms:
• If m is 1, Z is Y, and g is the identity morphism for Y, then g(f) must equal f;
• if n1 is 1, n2 is 1, ..., nm is 1, X1 is Y1, X2 is Y2, ..., Xm is Ym, f1 is the identity morphism for
Y1, f2 is the identity morphism for Y2, ..., and fm is the identity morphism for Ym, then g(f1,
f2, ..., fm) must equal g; and
• an associativity condition (involving a further level of composition) that takes a long time
to write down.
Examples
There is a multicategory whose objects are (small) sets, where a morphism from the sets
X1, X2, ..., and Xn to the set Y is an n-ary function, that is a function from the Cartesian
product X1 × X2 × ... × Xn to Y.
There is a multicategory whose objects are vector spaces (over the rational numbers, say),
where a morphism from the vector spaces X1, X2, ..., and Xn to the vector space Y is a
multilinear operator, that is a linear transformation from the tensor product X1 ⊗ X2 ⊗ ... ⊗
Xn to Y.
More generally, given any monoidal category C, there is a multicategory whose objects are
objects of C, where a morphism from the C-objects X1, X2, ..., and Xn to the C-object Y is a
C-morphism from the monoidal product of X1, X2, ..., and Xn to Y.
An operad is a multicategory with one unique object; except in degenerate cases, such a
multicategory does not come from a monoidal category. (The term "operad" is often
reserved for symmetric multicategories; terminology varies. [1])

Multicategory
505
References
• Tom Leinster (2004). http://www.maths.gla.ac.uk/~tl/book.html|Higher Operads, Higher
Categories. Cambridge University Press. http:/ / www. maths. gla. ac. uk/ ~tl/ book. html.
References
[1] http:/ / golem. ph. utexas. edu/ category/ 2006/ 09/ this_weeks_finds_in_mathematic. html#c004579
Metatheory
A metatheory or meta-theory is a theory whose subject matter is some other theory. In
other words it is a theory about a theory. Statements made in the metatheory about the
theory are called metatheorems.
According to the systemic TOGA meta-theory [1] , a meta-theory may refer to the specific
point of view on a theory and to its subjective meta-properties, but not to its application
domain. In the above sense, a theory T of the domain D is a meta-theory if D is a theory or
a set of theories. A general theory is not a meta-theory because its domain D are not
theories.
The following is an example of a meta-theoretical statement:[2]
“
Any physical theory is always provisional, in the sense that it is only a hypothesis; you can never prove
it. No matter how many times the results of experiments agree with some theory, you can never be
sure that the next time the result will not contradict the theory. On the other hand, you can disprove a
theory by finding even a single observation that disagrees with the predictions of the theory.
”
Meta-theory belongs to the philosophical specialty of epistemology and metamathematics,
as well as being an object of concern to the area in which the individual theory is
conceived. An emerging domain of meta-theories is systemics.
Taxonomy
Examining groups of related theories, a first finding may be to identify classes of theories,
thus specifying a taxonomy of theories. A proof engendered by a metatheory is called a
metatheorem.
History
The concept burst upon the scene of twentieth-century philosophy as a result of the work of
the German mathematician David Hilbert, who in 1905 published a proposal for proof of the
consistency of mathematics, creating the field of metamathematics. His hopes for the
success of this proof were dashed by the work of Kurt Gödel who in 1931 proved this to be
unattainable by his incompleteness theorems. Nevertheless, his program of unsolved
mathematical problems, out of which grew this metamathematical proposal, continued to
influence the direction of mathematics for the rest of the twentieth century.
The study of metatheory became widespread during the rest of that century by its
application in other fields, notably scientific linguistics and its concept of metalanguage.

Metatheory
506
References
[1] * Meta-Knowledge Unified Framework (http:/ / hid. casaccia. enea. it/ Meta-know-1. htm) - the TOGA
meta-theory
[2] Stephen Hawking in A Brief History of Time
See also
• meta-
• meta-knowledge
• Metalogic
• Metamathematics
External links
• Meta-theoretical Issues (2003), Lyle Flint (http:/ / www. bsu. edu/ classes/ flint/
comm360/ metatheo. html)
Metalogic
Metalogic is the study of the metatheory of logic. While logic is the study of the manner in
which logical systems can be used to decide the correctness of arguments, metalogic
studies the properties of the logical systems themselves.[1] According to Geoffrey Hunter,
while logic concerns itself with the "truths of logic," metalogic concerns itself with the
theory of "sentences used to express truths of logic."[2]
The basic objects of study in metalogic are formal languages, formal systems, and their
interpretations. The study of interpretation of formal systems is the branch of mathematical
logic known as model theory, while the study of deductive apparatus is the branch known
as proof theory.
History
Metalogical questions have been asked since the time of Aristotle. However, it was only
with the rise of formal languages in the late 19th and early 20th century that investigations
into the foundations of logic began to flourish. In 1904, David Hilbert observed that in
investigating the foundations of mathematics that logical notions are presupposed, and
therefore a simultaneous account of metalogical and metamathematical principles was
required. Today, metalogic and metamathematics are largely synonymous with each other,
and both have been substantially subsumed by mathematical logic in academia.
Important distinctions in metalogic
Metalanguage-Object language
In metalogic, formal languages are sometimes called object languages. The language used
to make statements about an object language is called a metalanguage. This distinction is a
key difference between logic and metalogic. While logic deals with proofs in a formal
system, expressed in some formal language, metalogic deals with proofs about a formal
system which are expressed in a metalanguage about some object language.

Metalogic
507
Syntax-semantics
In metalogic, 'syntax' has to do with formal languages or formal systems without regard to
any interpretation of them, whereas, 'semantics' has to do with interpretations of formal
languages. The term 'syntactic' has a slightly wider scope than 'proof-theoretic', since it
may be applied to properties of formal languages without any deductive systems, as well as
to formal systems. 'Semantic' is synonymous with 'model-theoretic'.
Use-mention
In metalogic, the words 'use' and 'mention', in both their noun and verb forms, take on a
technical sense in order to identify an important distinction.[2] The use–mention distinction
(sometimes referred to as the words-as-words distinction) is the distinction between using a
word (or phrase) and mentioning it. Usually it is indicated that an expression is being
mentioned rather than used by enclosing it in quotation marks, printing it in italics, or
setting the expression by itself on a line. The enclosing in quotes of an expression gives us
the name of an expression, for example:
'Metalogic' is the name of this article.
This article is about metalogic.
Type-token
The type-token distinction is a distinction in metalogic, that separates an abstract concept
from the objects which are particular instances of the concept. For example, the particular
bicycle in your garage is a token of the type of thing known as "The bicycle." Whereas, the
bicycle in your garage is in a particular place at a particular time, that is not true of "the
bicycle" as used in the sentence: "The bicycle has become more popular recently." This
distinction is used to clarify the meaning of symbols of formal languages.
Overview
Formal language
A formal language is an organized set of symbols the essential feature of which is that it
can be precisely defined in terms of just the shapes and locations of those symbols. Such a
language can be defined, then, without any reference to any meanings of any of its
expressions; it can exist before any interpretation is assigned to it -- that is, before it has
any meaning. First order logic is expressed in some formal language. A formal grammar
determines which symbols and sets of symbols are formulas in a formal language.
A formal language can be defined formally as a set A of strings (finite sequences) on a fixed
alphabet α. Some authors, including Carnap, define the language as the ordered pair <α,
A>.[3] Carnap also requires that each element of α must occur in at least one string in A.

Metalogic
508
Formal grammar
A formal grammar (also called formation rules) is a precise description of a the well-formed
formulas of a formal language. It is synonymous with the set of strings over the alphabet of
the formal language which constitute well formed formulas. However, it does not describe
their semantics (i.e. what they mean).
Formal systems
A formal system (also called a logical calculus, or a logical system) consists of a formal
language together with a deductive apparatus (also called a deductive system). The
deductive apparatus may consist of a set of transformation rules (also called inference
rules) or a set of axioms, or have both. A formal system is used to derive one expression
from one or more other expressions.
A formal system can be formally defined as an ordered triple <α, 
, 
d>, where 
d is
the relation of direct derivability. This relation is understood in a comprehensive sense such
that the primitive sentences of the formal system are taken as directly derivable from the
empty set of sentences. Direct derivability is a relation between a sentence and a finite,
possibly empty set of sentences. Axioms are laid down in such a way that every first place
member of 
d is a member of 
and every second place member is a finite subset of 
.
It is also possible to define a formal system using only the relation 
d. In this way we can
omit 
, and α in the definitions of interpreted formal language, and interpreted formal
system. However, this method can be more difficult to understand and work with.[3]
Formal proofs
A formal proof is a sequences of well-formed formulas of a formal language, the last one of
which is a theorem of a formal system. The theorem is a syntactic consequence of all the
well formed formulae preceding it in the proof. For a well formed formula to qualify as part
of a proof, it must be the result of applying a rule of the deductive apparatus of some formal
system to the previous well formed formulae in the proof sequence.
Interpretations
An interpretation of a formal system is the assignment of meanings, to the symbols, and
truth-values to the sentences of the formal system. The study of interpretations is called
Formal semantics. Giving an interpretation is synonymous with constructing a model.
Results in metalogic
Results in metalogic consist of such things as formal proofs demonstrating the consistency,
completeness, and decidability of particular formal systems.
Major results in metalogic include:
• Proof of the uncountability of the set of all subsets of the set of natural numbers (Cantor's
theorem 1891)
• Löwenheim-Skolem theorem (Leopold Löwenheim 1915 and Thoralf Skolem 1919)
• Proof of the consistency of truth-functional propositional logic (Emil Post 1920)
• Proof of the semantic completeness of truth-functional propositional logic (Paul Bernays
1918)[4] ,(Emil Post 1920)[2]

Metalogic
509
• Proof of the syntactic completeness of truth-functional propositional logic (Emil Post
1920)[2]
• Proof of the decidability of truth-functional propositional logic (Emil Post 1920)[2]
• Proof of the consistency of first order monadic predicate logic (Leopold Löwenheim 1915)
• Proof of the semantic completeness of first order monadic predicate logic (Leopold
Löwenheim 1915)
• Proof of the decidability of first order monadic predicate logic (Leopold Löwenheim 1915)
• Proof of the semantic completeness of first order predicate logic (Gödel's completeness
theorem 1930)
• Proof of the consistency of first order predicate logic (David Hilbert and Wilhelm
Ackermann 1928)
• Proof of the semantic completeness of first order predicate logic (Kurt Gödel 1930)
• Proof of the undecidability of first order predicate logic (Alonzo Church 1936)
• Gödel's first incompleteness theorem 1931
• Gödel's second incompleteness theorem 1931
See also
• Metamathematics
• Formal semantics
References
[1] Harry J. Gensler, Introduction to Logic, Routledge, 2001, p. 253.
[2] Hunter, Geoffrey, Metalogic: An Introduction to the Metatheory of Standard First-Order Logic, University of
California Pres, 1971
[3] Rudolf Carnap (1958) Introduction to Symbolic Logic and its Applications, p. 102.
[4] Hao Wang, Reflections on Kurt Gödel

Metamathematics
510
Metamathematics
Metamathematics is the study of mathematics itself using mathematical methods. This
study produces metatheories, which are mathematical theories about other mathematical
theories. Metamathematical metatheorems about mathematics itself were originally
differentiated from ordinary mathematical theorems in the 19th century, to focus on what
was then called the foundational crisis of mathematics. Richard's paradox (Richard 1905)
concerning certain 'definitions' of real numbers in the English language is an example of
the sort of contradictions which can easily occur if one fails to distinguish between
mathematics and metamathematics.
The term "metamathematics" is sometimes used as a synonym for certain elementary parts
of formal logic, including propositional logic and predicate logic.
History
Metamathematics was intimately connected to mathematical logic, so that the early
histories of the two fields, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, largely overlap.
More recently, mathematical logic has often included the study of new pure mathematics,
such as set theory, recursion theory, and pure model theory, which is not directly related to
metamathematics.
Serious metamathematical reflection began with the work of Gottlob Frege, especially his
Begriffsschrift.
David Hilbert was the first to invoke the term "metamathematics" with regularity (see
Hilbert's program). In his hands, it meant something akin to contemporary proof theory, in
which finitary methods are used to study various axiomatized mathematical theorems.
Other prominent figures in the field include Bertrand Russell, Thoralf Skolem, Emil Post,
Alonzo Church, Stephen Kleene, Willard Quine, Paul Benacerraf, Hilary Putnam, Gregory
Chaitin, and most important, Alfred Tarski and Kurt Gödel. In particular, Gödel's proof that,
given any finite number of axioms for Peano arithmetic, there will be true statements about
that arithmetic that cannot be proved from those axioms, a result known as the
incompleteness theorem, is arguably the greatest achievement of metamathematics and the
philosophy of mathematics to date.
Milestones
• Principia Mathematica (Whitehead and Russell 1925)
• Gödel's completeness theorem, 1930
• Gödel's incompleteness theorem, 1931
• Tarski's definition of model-theoretic satisfaction, now called the T-schema
• The proof of the impossibility of the Entscheidungsproblem, obtained independently in
1936–1937 by Church and Turing.

Metamathematics
511
See also
• meta-
• model theory
• proof theory
References
• W. J. Blok and Don Pigozzi, "Alfred Tarski's Work on General Metamathematics", The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, v. 53, No. 1 (Mar., 1988), pp. 36–50.
• I. J. Good. "A Note on Richard's Paradox". Mind, New Series, Vol. 75, No. 299 (Jul., 1966),
p. 431. [http://www.jstor.org/stable/2251836 JStor]]
• Douglas Hofstadter, 1980. Gödel, Escher, Bach. Vintage Books. Aimed at laypeople.
• Stephen Cole Kleene, 1952. Introduction to Metamathematics. North Holland. Aimed at
mathematicians.
• Jules Richard, Les Principes des Mathématiques et le Problème des Ensembles, Revue
Générale des Sciences Pures et Appliquées (1905); translated in Heijenoort J. van (ed.),
Source Book in Mathematical Logic 1879-1931 (Cambridge, Mass., 1964).
• Alfred Whitehead, and Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, 3 vols, Cambridge
University Press, 1910, 1912, and 1913. Second edition, 1925 (Vol. 1), 1927 (Vols 2, 3).
Abridged as Principia Mathematica to *56, Cambridge University Press, 1962.
Categories

512
Category theories
Category theory
A category with objects X, Y, Z and
morphisms f, g
In mathematics, category theory deals in an
abstract way with mathematical structures and
relationships between them: it abstracts from sets
and functions to objects linked in diagrams by
morphisms or arrows.
One of the simplest examples of a category (which is
a very important concept in topology) is that of
groupoid, defined as a category whose arrows or
morphisms are all invertible. Categories now appear
in most branches of mathematics and also in some
areas of theoretical computer science where they
correspond to types and mathematical physics
where they can be used to describe vector spaces.
Category theory provides both with a unifying
notion and terminology. Categories were first
introduced by Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane in 1942–45, in connection with
algebraic topology.
Category theory has several faces known not just to specialists, but to other
mathematicians. A term dating from the 1940s, "general abstract nonsense", refers to its
high level of abstraction, compared to more classical branches of mathematics.
Homological algebra is category theory in its aspect of organising and suggesting
manipulations in abstract algebra. Diagram chasing is a visual method of arguing with
abstract "arrows" joined in diagrams. Note that arrows between categories are called
functors, subject to specific defining commutativity conditions; moreover, categorical
diagrams and sequences can be defined as functors (viz. Mitchell, 1965). An arrow between
two functors is a natural transformation when it is subject to certain naturality or
commutativity conditions. Both functors and natural transformations are key concepts in
category theory, or the " real engines" of category theory. To paraphrase a famous sentence
of the mathematicians who founded category theory: 'Categories were introduced to define
functors, and functors were introduced to define natural transformations'. Topos theory is a
form of abstract sheaf theory, with geometric origins, and leads to ideas such as pointless
topology. A topos can also be considered as a specific type of category with two additional
topos axioms.

Category theory
513
Background
The study of categories is an attempt to axiomatically capture what is commonly found in
various 
classes 
of 
related 
mathematical 
structures 
by 
relating 
them 
to 
the
structure-preserving functions between them. A systematic study of category theory then
allows us to prove general results about any of these types of mathematical structures from
the axioms of a category.
Consider the following example. The class Grp of groups consists of all objects having a
"group structure". More precisely, Grp consists of all sets G endowed with a binary
operation satisfying a certain set of axioms. One can proceed to prove theorems about
groups by making logical deductions from the set of axioms. For example, it is immediately
proved from the axioms that the identity element of a group is unique.
Instead of focusing merely on the individual objects (e.g., groups) possessing a given
structure, category theory emphasizes the morphisms – the structure-preserving mappings
– between these objects; it turns out that by studying these morphisms, we are able to learn
more about the structure of the objects. In the case of groups, the morphisms are the group
homomorphisms. A group homomorphism between two groups "preserves the group
structure" in a precise sense – it is a "process" taking one group to another, in a way that
carries along information about the structure of the first group into the second group. The
study of group homomorphisms then provides a tool for studying general properties of
groups and consequences of the group axioms.
A similar type of investigation occurs in many mathematical theories, such as the study of
continuous maps (morphisms) between topological spaces in topology (the associated
category is called Top), and the study of smooth functions (morphisms) in manifold theory.
If one axiomatizes relations instead of functions, one obtains the theory of allegories.
Functors
Abstracting again, a category is itself a type of mathematical structure, so we can look for
"processes" which preserve this structure in some sense; such a process is called a functor.
A functor associates to every object of one category an object of another category, and to
every morphism in the first category a morphism in the second.
In fact, what we have done is define a category of categories and functors – the objects are
categories, and the morphisms (between categories) are functors.
By studying categories and functors, we are not just studying a class of mathematical
structures and the morphisms between them; we are studying the relationships between
various classes of mathematical structures. This is a fundamental idea, which first surfaced
in algebraic topology. Difficult topological questions can be translated into algebraic
questions which are often easier to solve. Basic constructions, such as the fundamental
group or fundamental groupoid [1] of a topological space, can be expressed as fundamental
functors [1] to the category of groupoids in this way, and the concept is pervasive in algebra
and its applications.

Category theory
514
Natural transformation
Abstracting yet again, constructions are often "naturally related" – a vague notion, at first
sight. This leads to the clarifying concept of natural transformation, a way to "map" one
functor to another. Many important constructions in mathematics can be studied in this
context. "Naturality" is a principle, like general covariance in physics, that cuts deeper than
is initially apparent.
Historical notes
In 1942–45, Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane were the first to introduce
categories, functors, and natural transformations as part of their work in topology,
especially algebraic topology. Their work was an important part of the transition from
intuitive and geometric homology to axiomatic homology theory. Eilenberg and Mac Lane
later wrote that their goal was to understand natural transformations; in order to do that,
functors had to be defined, which required categories.
Stanislaw Ulam, and some writing on his behalf, have claimed that related ideas were
current in the late 1930s in Poland. Eilenberg was Polish, and studied mathematics in
Poland in the 1930s. Category theory is also, in some sense, a continuation of the work of
Emmy Noether (one of Mac Lane's teachers) in formalizing abstract processes; Noether
realized that in order to understand a type of mathematical structure, one needs to
understand the processes preserving that structure. In order to achieve this understanding,
Eilenberg and Mac Lane proposed an axiomatic formalization of the relation between
structures and the processes preserving them.
The subsequent development of category theory was powered first by the computational
needs of homological algebra, and later by the axiomatic needs of algebraic geometry, the
field most resistant to being grounded in either axiomatic set theory or the
Russell-Whitehead view of united foundations. General category theory, an extension of
universal algebra having many new features allowing for semantic flexibility and
higher-order logic, came later; it is now applied throughout mathematics.
Certain categories called topoi (singular topos) can even serve as an alternative to
axiomatic set theory as a foundation of mathematics. These foundational applications of
category theory have been worked out in fair detail as a basis for, and justification of,
constructive mathematics. More recent efforts to introduce undergraduates to categories as
a foundation for mathematics include Lawvere and Rosebrugh (2003) and Lawvere and
Schanuel (1997).
Categorical logic is now a well-defined field based on type theory for intuitionistic logics,
with applications in functional programming and domain theory, where a cartesian closed
category is taken as a non-syntactic description of a lambda calculus. At the very least,
category theoretic language clarifies what exactly these related areas have in common (in
some abstract sense).

Category theory
515
Categories, objects and morphisms
A category C consists of the following three mathematical entities:
• A class ob(C), whose elements are called objects;
• A class hom(C), whose elements are called morphisms or maps or arrows. Each
morphism f has a unique source object a and target object b. We write f: a → b, and we
say "f is a morphism from a to b". We write hom(a, b) (or Hom(a, b), or homC(a, b), or
Mor(a, b), or C(a, b)) to denote the hom-class of all morphisms from a to b.
• A binary operation 
, called composition of morphisms, such that for any three objects
a, b, and c, we have hom(a, b) × hom(b, c) → hom(a, c). The composition of f: a → b and g:
b → c is written as 
or gf (some authors write fg), governed by two axioms:
• Associativity: If f : a → b, g : b → c and h : c → d then 
, and
• Identity: For every object x, there exists a morphism 1x : x → x called the identity
morphism for x, such that for every morphism f : a → b, we have 
.
From these axioms, it can be proved that there is exactly one identity morphism for every
object. Some authors deviate from the definition just given by identifying each object with
its identity morphism.
Relations among morphisms (such as fg = h) are often depicted using commutative
diagrams, with "points" (corners) representing objects and "arrows" representing
morphisms.
Properties of morphisms
Some morphisms have important properties. A morphism f : a → b is:
• a monomorphism (or monic) if fog1 = fog2 implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : x → a.
• an epimorphism (or epic) if g1of = g2of implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : b → x.
• an isomorphism if there exists a morphism g : b → a with fog = 1b and gof = 1a.[2]
• an endomorphism if a = b. end(a) denotes the class of endomorphisms of a.
• an automorphism if f is both an endomorphism and an isomorphism. aut(a) denotes the
class of automorphisms of a.
Functors
Functors are structure-preserving maps between categories. They can be thought of as
morphisms in the category of all (small) categories.
A (covariant) functor F from a category C to a category D, written F:C → D, consists of:
• for each object x in C, an object F(x) in D; and
• for each morphism f : x → y in C, a morphism F(f) : F(x) → F(y),
such that the following two properties hold:
• For every object x in C, F(1x) = 1F(x);
• For all morphisms f : x → y and g : y → z, 
A contravariant functor F: C → D, is like a covariant functor, except that it "turns
morphisms around" ("reverses all the arrows"). More specifically, every morphism f : x → y
in C must be assigned to a morphism F(f) : F(y) → F(x) in D. In other words, a contravariant
functor is a covariant functor from the opposite category Cop to D.

Category theory
516
Natural transformations and isomorphisms
A natural transformation is a relation between two functors. Functors often describe
"natural 
constructions" 
and 
natural 
transformations 
then 
describe 
"natural
homomorphisms" between two such constructions. Sometimes two quite different
constructions yield "the same" result; this is expressed by a natural isomorphism between
the two functors.
If F and G are (covariant) functors between the categories C and D, then a natural
transformation from F to G associates to every object x in C a morphism ηx : F(x) → G(x) in
D such that for every morphism f : x → y in C, we have ηy o F(f) = G(f) o ηx; this means that
the following diagram is commutative:
The two functors F and G are called naturally isomorphic if there exists a natural
transformation from F to G such that ηx is an isomorphism for every object x in C.
Universal constructions, limits, and colimits
Using the language of category theory, many areas of mathematical study can be cast into
appropriate categories, such as the categories of all sets, groups, topologies, and so on.
These categories surely have some objects that are "special" in a certain way, such as the
empty set or the product of two topologies, yet in the definition of a category, objects are
considered to be atomic, i.e., we do not know whether an object A is a set, a topology, or
any other abstract concept – hence, the challenge is to define special objects without
referring to the internal structure of those objects. But how can we define the empty set
without referring to elements, or the product topology without referring to open sets?
The solution is to characterize these objects in terms of their relations to other objects, as
given by the morphisms of the respective categories. Thus, the task is to find universal
properties that uniquely determine the objects of interest. Indeed, it turns out that
numerous important constructions can be described in a purely categorical way. The
central concept which is needed for this purpose is called categorical limit, and can be
dualized to yield the notion of a colimit.
Equivalent categories
It is a natural question to ask: under which conditions can two categories be considered to 
be "essentially the same", in the sense that theorems about one category can readily be 
transformed into theorems about the other category? The major tool one employs to 
describe such a situation is called equivalence of categories, which is given by appropriate 
functors between two categories. Categorical equivalence has found numerous applications

Category theory
517
in mathematics.
Further concepts and results
The definitions of categories and functors provide only the very basics of categorical
algebra; additional important topics are listed below. Although there are strong
interrelations between all of these topics, the given order can be considered as a guideline
for further reading.
• The functor category DC has as objects the functors from C to D and as morphisms the
natural transformations of such functors. The Yoneda lemma is one of the most famous
basic results of category theory; it describes representable functors in functor categories.
• Duality: Every statement, theorem, or definition in category theory has a dual which is
essentially obtained by "reversing all the arrows". If one statement is true in a category C
then its dual will be true in the dual category Cop. This duality, which is transparent at
the level of category theory, is often obscured in applications and can lead to surprising
relationships.
• Adjoint functors: A functor can be left (or right) adjoint to another functor that maps in
the opposite direction. Such a pair of adjoint functors typically arises from a construction
defined by a universal property; this can be seen as a more abstract and powerful view
on universal properties.
Higher-dimensional categories
Many of the above concepts, especially equivalence of categories, adjoint functor pairs, and
functor categories, can be situated into the context of higher-dimensional categories.
Briefly, if we consider a morphism between two objects as a "process taking us from one
object to another", then higher-dimensional categories allow us to profitably generalize this
by considering "higher-dimensional processes".
For example, a (strict) 2-category is a category together with "morphisms between
morphisms", i.e., processes which allow us to transform one morphism into another. We can
then "compose" these "bimorphisms" both horizontally and vertically, and we require a
2-dimensional "exchange law" to hold, relating the two composition laws. In this context,
the standard example is Cat, the 2-category of all (small) categories, and in this example,
bimorphisms of morphisms are simply natural transformations of morphisms in the usual
sense. Another basic example is to consider a 2-category with a single object; these are
essentially monoidal categories. Bicategories are a weaker notion of 2-dimensional
categories in which the composition of morphisms is not strictly associative, but only
associative "up to" an isomorphism.
This process can be extended for all natural numbers n, and these are called n-categories.
There is even a notion of ω-category corresponding to the ordinal number ω.
Higher-dimensional 
categories 
are 
part 
of 
the 
broader 
mathematical 
field 
of
higher-dimensional algebra,a concept introduced by Ronald Brown. For a conversational
introduction to these ideas, see John Baez, 'A Tale of n-categories' (1996). [3]

Category theory
518
See also
• List of category theory topics
• Important publications in category theory
• Glossary of category theory
• Domain theory
• Enriched category theory
• Higher category theory
• Timeline of category theory and related mathematics
• Higher-dimensional algebra
Notes
[1] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ FundamentalGroupoidFunctor. html
[2] Note that a morphism that is both epic and monic is not necessarily an isomorphism! For example, in the
category consisting of two objects A and B, the identity morphisms, and a single morphism f from A to B, f is
both epic and monic but is not an isomorphism.
[3] http:/ / math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/ week73. html
References
Freely available online:
• Adámek, Jiří, Herrlich, Horst, & Strecker, George E. (1990) Abstract and concrete
categories (http:/ / katmat. math. uni-bremen. de/ acc/ acc. htm). John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 0-471-60922-6.
• Freyd, Peter J. (1964) Abelian Categories. (http:/ / www. tac. mta. ca/ tac/ reprints/
articles/ 3/ tr3abs. html) New York: Harper and Row.
• Michael Barr and Charles Wells (1999) Category Theory Lecture Notes. (http:/ / folli.
loria. fr/ cds/ 1999/ library/ pdf/ barrwells. pdf) Based on their book Category Theory for
Computing Science.
• ——— (2002) Toposes, triples and theories. (http:/ / www. cwru. edu/ artsci/ math/ wells/
pub/ ttt. html) Revised and corrected translation of Grundlehren der mathematischen
Wissenschaften (Springer-Verlag, 1983).
• Leinster, Tom (2004) Higher operads, higher categories (http:/ / www. maths. gla. ac. uk/
~tl/ book. html) (London Math. Society Lecture Note Series 298). Cambridge Univ. Press.
• Schalk, A. and Simmons, H. (2005) An introduction to Category Theory in four easy
movements. (http:/ / www. cs. man. ac. uk/ ~hsimmons/ BOOKS/ CatTheory. pdf) Notes
for a course offered as part of the MSc. in Mathematical Logic, Manchester University.
• Turi, Daniele (1996–2001) Category Theory Lecture Notes. (http:/ / www. dcs. ed. ac. uk/
home/ dt/ CT/ categories. pdf) Based on Mac Lane (1998).
• Goldblatt, R (1984) Topoi: the Categorial Analyis of Logic (http:/ / dlxs2. library. cornell.
edu/ cgi/ t/ text/ text-idx?c=math;cc=math;view=toc;subview=short;idno=Gold010) A
clear introduction to categories, with particular emphasis on the recent applications to
logic.
• A. Martini, H. Ehrig, and D. Nunes (1996) Elements of Basic Category Theory (http:/ /
citeseer. ist. psu. edu/ martini96element. html) (Technical Report 96-5, Technical
University Berlin)
Other:

Category theory
519
• Awodey, Steven (2006). Category Theory (Oxford Logic Guides 49). Oxford University
Press.
• Borceux, Francis (1994). Handbook of categorical algebra (Encyclopedia of Mathematics
and its Applications 50-52). Cambridge Univ. Press.
• Freyd, Peter J. & Scedrov, Andre (http:/ / www. cis. upenn. edu/ ~scedrov/ ), (1990).
Categories, allegories (North Holland Mathematical Library 39). North Holland.
• Hatcher, William S. (1982). The Logical Foundations of Mathematics, 2nd ed. Pergamon.
Chpt. 8 is an idiosyncratic introduction to category theory, presented as a first order
theory.
• Lawvere, William, & Rosebrugh, Robert (2003). Sets for mathematics. Cambridge
University Press.
• Lawvere, William, & Schanuel, Steve (1997). Conceptual mathematics: a first
introduction to categories. Cambridge University Press.
• Mac Lane, Saunders (1998). Categories for the Working Mathematician. 2nd ed.
(Graduate Texts in Mathematics 5). Springer-Verlag.
• ——— and Garrett Birkhoff (1967). Algebra. 1999 reprint of the 2nd ed., Chelsea. ISBN
0-8218-1646-2. An introduction to the subject making judicious use of category theoretic
concepts, especially commutative diagrams.
• May, Peter (1999). A Concise Course in Algebraic Topology. University of Chicago Press,
ISBN 0-226-51183-9.
• Pedicchio, Maria Cristina & Tholen, Walter (2004). Categorical foundations
(Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications 97). Cambridge University Press.
• Taylor, Paul (1999). Practical Foundations of Mathematics. Cambridge University Press.
An introduction to the connection between category theory and constructive
mathematics.
• Pierce, Benjamin (1991). Basic Category Theory for Computer Scientists. MIT Press.
External links
• Chris Hillman, Categorical primer (http:/ / citeseer. ist. psu. edu/ cache/ papers/ cs/
23543/ http:zSzzSzwww-aix. gsi. dezSz~appelzSzskriptezSzotherzSzcategories. pdf/
hillman01categorical. pdf), formal introduction to Category Theory.
• J. Adamek, H. Herrlich, G. Stecker, Abstract and Concrete Categories-The Joy of Cats
(http:/ / katmat. math. uni-bremen. de/ acc/ acc. pdf)
• Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: " Category Theory (http:/ / plato. stanford. edu/
entries/ category-theory/ )" -- by Jean-Pierre Marquis. Extensive bibliography.
• Homepage of the Categories mailing list, (http:/ / www. mta. ca/ ~cat-dist/ categories.
html) with extensive resource list.
• Baez, John, 1996," The Tale of n-categories. (http:/ / math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/ week73.
html)" An informal introduction to higher order categories.
• The catsters (http:/ / www. youtube. com/ user/ TheCatsters)" a Youtube channel about
category theory.
• Category Theory (http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects&
amp;id=5622) on PlanetMath
• Categories, Logic and the Foundations of Physics (http:/ / categorieslogicphysics. wikidot.
com/ ), Webpage dedicated to the use of Categories and Logic in the Foundations of
Physics.

Category theory
520
• Interactive Web page (http:/ / www. j-paine. org/ cgi-bin/ webcats/ webcats. php) which
generates examples of categorical constructions in the category of finite sets. Written by
Jocelyn Paine (http:/ / www. j-paine. org/ )
Algebraic category
In mathematics, specifically universal algebra, a variety of algebras is the class of all
algebraic structures of a given signature satisfying a given set of identities. Equivalently, a
variety is a class of algebraic structures of the same signature which is closed under the
taking of homomorphic images, subalgebras and (direct) products. In the context of
category theory, a variety of algebras is usually called a finitary algebraic category.
A covariety is the class of all coalgebraic structures of a given signature.
A variety of algebras should not be confused with an algebraic variety. Intuitively, a variety
of algebras is an equationally defined collection of algebras, while an algebraic variety is
an equationally defined collection of elements from a single algebra. The two are
named alike by analogy, but they are formally quite distinct and their theories have little in
common.
Birkhoff's theorem
Garrett Birkhoff proved equivalent the two definitions of variety given above, a result of
fundamental importance to universal algebra and known as Birkhoff's theorem or as the
HSP theorem. H, S, and P stand, respectively, for the closure operations of
homomorphism, subalgebra, and product.
An equational class for some signature Σ is the collection of all models, in the sense of
model theory, that satisfy some set E of equations, asserting equality between terms. A
model satisfies these equations if they are true in the model for any valuation of the
variables. The equations in E are then said to be identities of the model. Examples of such
identities are the commutative law, characterizing commutative algebras, and the
absorption law, characterizing lattices.
It is simple to see that the class of algebras satisfying some set of equations will be closed
under the HSP operations. Proving the converse —classes of algebras closed under the HSP
operations must be equational— is much harder.
Examples
The class of all semigroups forms a variety of algebras of signature (2). A sufficient defining
equation is the associative law:
It satisfies the HSP closure requirement, since any homomorphic image, any subset closed
under multiplication and any direct product of semigroups is also a semigroup.
The class of groups forms a class of algebras of signature (2,1,0), the three operations 
being respectively multiplication, inversion and identity. Any subset of a group closed under 
multiplication, under inversion and under identity (ie. containing the identity) forms a 
subgroup. Likewise, the collection of groups is closed under homomorphic image and under 
direct product. Applying Birkhoff's theorem, this is sufficient to tell us that the groups form

Algebraic category
521
a variety, and so it should be defined by a collection of identities. In fact, the familiar
axioms of associativity, inverse and identity form one suitable set of identities:
A subvariety is a subclass of a variety, closed under the operations H, S, P. Notice that
although every group is a semigroup, the class of groups does not form a subvariety of the
variety of semigroups. This is because not every subsemigroup of a group is a group.
The class of abelian groups, considered again with signature (2,1,0), also has the HSP
closure properties. It forms a subvariety of the variety of groups, and can be defined
equationally by the three group axioms above together with the commutativity law:
Variety of finite algebras
Since varieties are closed under arbitrary cartesian products, all non-trivial varieties
contain infinite algebras. It follows that the theory of varieties is of limited use in the study
of finite algebras, where one must often apply techniques particular to the finite case. With
this in mind, attempts have been made to develop a finitary analogue of the theory of
varieties.
A variety of finite algebras, sometimes called a pseudovariety, is usually defined to be a
class of finite algebras of a given signature, closed under the taking of homomorphic
images, subalgebras and finitary direct products. There is no general finitary counterpart to
Birkhoff's theorem, but in many cases the introduction of a more complex notion of
equations allows similar results to be derived.
Pseudovarieties are of particular importance in the study of finite semigroups and hence in
formal language theory. Eilenberg's theorem, often referred to as the variety theorem
describes a natural correspondence between varieties of regular languages and
pseudovarieties of finite semigroups.
Category theory
If A is a finitary algebraic category, then the forgetful functor
is monadic. Even more, it is strictly monadic, in that the comparison functor
is an isomorphism (and not just an equivalence).[1] Here, 
is the Eilenberg-Moore
category on 
. In general, one says a category is an algebraic category if it is monadic
over 
. This is a more general notion than "finitary algebraic category" (the notion of
"variety" used in universal algebra) because it admits such categories as CABA (complete
atomic Boolean algebras) and CSLat (complete semilattices) whose signatures include
infinitary operations. In those two cases the signature is large, meaning that it forms not a
set but a proper class, because its operations are of unbounded arity. The algebraic
category of sigma algebras also has infinitary operations, but their arity is countable
whence its signature is small (forms a set).

Algebraic category
522
See also
• Quasivariety
Notes
[1] Saunders Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, Springer. (See p. 152)
References
Two monographs available free online:
• Burris, Stanley N., and H.P. Sankappanavar, H. P., 1981. A Course in Universal Algebra.
(http:/ / www. thoralf. uwaterloo. ca/ htdocs/ ualg. html) Springer-Verlag. ISBN
3-540-90578-2.
• Jipsen, Peter, and Henry Rose, 1992. Varieties of Lattices (http:/ / www1. chapman. edu/
~jipsen/ JipsenRoseVoL. html), Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1533. Springer Verlag.
ISBN 0-387-56314-8.
Categorical logic
Categorical logic is a branch of category theory within mathematics, adjacent to
mathematical logic but in fact more notable for its connections to theoretical computer
science. In broad terms, categorical logic represents both syntax and semantics by a
category, and an interpretation by a functor. The categorical framework provides a rich
conceptual background for logical and type-theoretic constructions. The subject has been
recognisable in these terms since around 1970.
Categorical logic originated with Bill Lawvere's Functorial Semantics of Algebraic Theories
(1963), and Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets (1964). Lawvere recognised the
Grothendieck topos, introduced in algebraic topology as a generalised space, as a
generalisation of the category of sets (Quantifiers and Sheaves (1970)). With Myles Tierney,
Lawvere then developed the notion of elementary topos, thus establishing the fruitful field
of topos theory, which provides a unified categorical treatment of the syntax and semantics
of higher-order predicate logic. The resulting logic is formally intuitionistic. Andre Joyal is
credited, in the term Kripke–Joyal semantics, with the observation that the sheaf models for
predicate logic, provided by topos theory, generalise Kripke semantics. Joyal and others
applied these models to study higher-order concepts such as the real numbers in the
intuitionistic setting.
An analogous development was the link between the typed lambda calculus and
cartesian-closed categories (Lawvere, Lambek, Scott), which provided a setting for the
development of domain theory. Less expressive theories, from the mathematical logic
viewpoint, have their own category theory counterparts. For example the concept of an
algebraic theory leads to Gabriel–Ulmer duality. The view of categories as a generalisation
unifying syntax and semantics has been productive in the study of logics and type theories
for applications in computer science.
The founders of elementary topos theory were Lawvere and Tierney. Lawvere's writings, 
sometimes couched in a philosophical jargon, isolated some of the basic concepts as adjoint 
functors (which he explained as 'objective' in a Hegelian sense, not without some

Categorical logic
523
justification). A subobject classifier is a strong property to ask of a category, since with
cartesian closure and finite limits it gives a topos (axiom bashing shows how strong the
assumption is). Lawvere's further work in the 1960s gave a theory of attributes, which in a
sense is a subobject theory more in sympathy with type theory. Major influences
subsequently have been Martin-Löf type theory from the direction of logic, type
polymorphism and the calculus of constructions from functional programming, linear logic
from proof theory, game semantics and the projected synthetic domain theory. The abstract
categorical idea of fibration has been much applied.
To go back historically, the major irony here is that in large-scale terms, intuitionistic logic
had reappeared in mathematics, in a central place in the Bourbaki–Grothendieck program,
a generation after the messy Hilbert–Brouwer controversy had ended, with Hilbert the
apparent winner. Bourbaki, or more accurately Jean Dieudonné, having laid claim to the
legacy of Hilbert and the Göttingen school including Emmy Noether, had revived
intuitionistic logic's credibility (although Dieudonné himself found Intuitionistic Logic
ludicrous), as the logic of an arbitrary topos, where classical logic was that of 'the' topos of
sets. This was one consequence, certainly unanticipated, of Grothendieck's relative point of
view; and not lost on Pierre Cartier, one of the broadest of the core group of French
mathematicians around Bourbaki and IHES. Cartier was to give a Séminaire Bourbaki
exposition of intuitionistic logic.
In an even broader perspective, one might take category theory to be to the mathematics of
the second half of the twentieth century, what measure theory was to the first half. It was
Kolmogorov who applied measure theory to probability theory, the first convincing (if not
the only) axiomatic approach. Kolmogorov was also a pioneer writer in the early 1920s on
the formulation of intuitionistic logic, in a style entirely supported by the later categorical
logic approach (again, one of the formulations, not the only one; the realizability concept of
Stephen Kleene is also a serious contender here). Another route to categorical logic would
therefore have been through Kolmogorov, and this is one way to explain the protean
Curry–Howard isomorphism.
External links
• Categorical Logic [1] lecture notes by Steve Awodey [2]
See also
• Background and genesis of topos theory
References
• Lawvere, F.W., Functorial Semantics of Algebraic Theories. In Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science 50, No. 5 (November 1963), 869-872.
• Lawvere, F.W., Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets. In Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science 52, No. 6 (December 1964), 1506-1511.
• Lawvere, F.W., Quantifiers and Sheaves. In Proceedings of the International Congress on
Mathematics (Nice 1970), Gauthier-Villars (1971) 329-334.
• Barr, M. and Wells, C. (1990), Category Theory for Computing Science. Hemel
Hempstead, UK.

Categorical logic
524
• Lambek, J. and Scott, P.J. (1986), Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
• Lawvere, F.W., and Rosebrugh, R. (2003), Sets for Mathematics. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
• Lawvere, F.W. (2000), and Schanuel, S.H., Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction
to Categories. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1997. Reprinted with
corrections, 2000.
References
[1] http:/ / www. andrew. cmu. edu/ user/ awodey/ catlog/
[2] http:/ / www. andrew. cmu. edu/ user/ awodey/
Category (mathematics)
In mathematics, a category is a fundamental and abstract way to describe mathematical
entities and their relationships. A category is composed of a collection of abstract "objects"
of any kind, linked together by a collection of abstract "arrows" of any kind that have a few
basic properties (the ability to compose the arrows associatively and the existence of an
identity arrow for each object). Two categories are the same if they have the same
collection of objects, the same collection of arrows, and the same associative method of
composing any two arrows. Two categories may also be considered "equivalent" for
purposes of category theory, even if they are not precisely the same. Many well-known
categories are conventionally identified by a short capitalized word or abbreviation in bold
or italics such as Set (category of sets) or Ring (category of rings).
The notion of a category is the central idea within a branch of mathematics called category
theory, which seeks to generalize all of mathematics in terms of such abstract objects and
arrows, independent of the particular details of what the objects and arrows represent.
Virtually every branch of modern mathematics can be described in terms of categories, and
doing so often reveals deep insights and similarities between seemingly-different areas of
mathematics. For more extensive motivational background and historical notes, see
category theory and the list of category theory topics.
Definition
A category C consists of
• a class ob(C) of objects:
• a class hom(C) of morphisms, or arrows, or maps, between the objects. Each morphism
f has a unique source object a and target object b where a and b are in ob(C). We write f:
a → b, and we say "f is a morphism from a to b". We write hom(a, b) (or homC(a, b) when
there may be confusion about which category hom(a, b) refers to) to denote the
hom-class of all morphisms from a to b. (Some authors write Mor(a, b) or simply C(a, b)
instead.)
• for every three objects a, b and c, a binary operation hom(a, b) × hom(b, c) → hom(a, c)
called composition of morphisms; the composition of f : a → b and g : b → c is written as g
o f or gf. (Some authors write fg or f;g.)
such that the following axioms hold:

Category (mathematics)
525
• (associativity) if f : a → b, g : b → c and h : c → d then h o (g o f) = (h o g) o f, and
• (identity) for every object x, there exists a morphism 1x : x → x called the identity
morphism for x, such that for every morphism f : a → b, we have 1b o f = f = f o 1a.
From these axioms, one can prove that there is exactly one identity morphism for every
object. Some authors use a slight variation of the definition in which each object is
identified with the corresponding identity morphism.
A small category is a category in which both ob(C) and hom(C) are actually sets and not
proper classes. A category that is not small is said to be large. A locally small category is
a category such that for all objects a and b, the hom-class hom(a, b) is a set, called a
homset. Many important categories in mathematics (such as the category of sets),
although not small, are at least locally small.
Examples
The category Set consists of all sets together with all functions between sets, where
composition is the usual function composition. Set is a large category.
A directed graph.
Any directed graph generates a small category: the objects are
the vertices of the graph, and the morphisms are the paths in the
graph where composition of morphisms is concatenation of paths.
Such a category is called the free category generated by the
graph. This example demonstrates that morphisms need not be
functions.
A discrete category is a category whose only morphisms are the
identity morphisms. If I is a set, the discrete category on I is the
small category that has the elements of I as objects and only the
identity morphisms as morphisms. The composition law is forced, because there is at most
one morphism from any object to another. Discrete categories are the simplest kind of
category.
Any monoid forms a small category with a single object x. (Here, x is any fixed set.) The
morphisms from x to x are precisely the elements of the monoid, and the categorical
composition of morphisms is given by the monoid operation. One may view categories as
generalizations of monoids; several definitions and theorems about monoids may be
generalized for categories.
Any group can be seen as a category with a single object in which every morphism is
invertible (for every morphism f there is a morphism g that is both left and right inverse to f
under composition) by viewing the group as acting on itself by left multiplication.
Any preordered set (P, ≤) forms a small category, where the objects are the members of P,
the morphisms are arrows pointing from x to y when x ≤ y. Between any two objects there
can be at most one morphism. The existence of identity morphisms and the composability of
the morphisms are guaranteed by the reflexivity and the transitivity of the preorder. By the
same argument, any partially ordered set and any equivalence relation can be seen as a
small category. Any ordinal number can be seen as a category when viewed as a ordered
set.
The category Rel consists of all sets, with binary relations as morphisms. Abstracting from
relations instead of functions yields allegories instead of categories.
The category Cat consists of all small categories with functors.

Category (mathematics)
526
Concrete categories
The following are examples of concrete categories, obtained by adding some type of
structure onto Set, and requiring that morphisms are functions that respect this added
structure; the morphism composition is ordinary function composition.
Category
Objects
Morphisms
Ord
preordered sets
monotonic functions
Mag
magmas
magma homomorphisms
Grp
groups
group homomorphisms
Ab
abelian groups
group homomorphisms
Ring
rings
ring homomorphisms
R-Mod
R-Modules, where R is a Ring
module homomorphisms
VectK
vector spaces over the field K
K-linear maps
Top
topological spaces
continuous functions
Met
metric spaces
short maps
Uni
uniform spaces
uniformly continuous functions
Manp
smooth manifolds
p-times continuously differentiable maps
Fiber bundles with bundle maps between them form a concrete category.
Construction of new categories
Dual category
Any category C can itself be considered as a new category in a different way: the objects
are the same as those in the original category but the arrows are those of the original
category reversed. This is called the dual or opposite category and is denoted Cop.
Product categories
If C and D are categories, one can form the product category C × D: the objects are pairs
consisting of one object from C and one from D, and the morphisms are also pairs,
consisting of one morphism in C and one in D. Such pairs can be composed componentwise.
Types of morphisms
A morphism f : a → b is called
• a monomorphism (or monic) if fg1 = fg2 implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : x → a.
• an epimorphism (or epic) if g1f = g2f implies g1 = g2 for all morphisms g1, g2 : b → x.
• a bimorphism if it is both a monomorphism and an epimorphism.
• a retraction if it has a right inverse, i.e. if there exists a morphism g : b → a with fg = 1b.
• a section if it has a left inverse, i.e. if there exists a morphism g : b → a with gf = 1a.
• an isomorphism if it has an inverse, i.e. if there exists a morphism g : b → a with fg = 1b
and gf = 1a.
• an endomorphism if a = b. The class of endomorphisms of a is denoted end(a).
• an automorphism if f is both an endomorphism and an isomorphism. The class of
automorphisms of a is denoted aut(a).

Category (mathematics)
527
Every retraction is an epimorphism. Every section is a monomorphism. The following three
statements are equivalent:
• f is a monomorphism and a retraction;
• f is an epimorphism and a section;
• f is an isomorphism.
Relations among morphisms (such as fg = h) can most conveniently be represented with
commutative diagrams, where the objects are represented as points and the morphisms as
arrows.
Types of categories
• In many categories, e.g. Ab or VectK, the hom-sets hom(a, b) are not just sets but
actually abelian groups, and the composition of morphisms is compatible with these
group structures; i.e. is bilinear. Such a category is called preadditive. If, furthermore,
the category has all finite products and coproducts, it is called an additive category. If all
morphisms have a kernel and a cokernel, and all epimorphisms are cokernels and all
monomorphisms are kernels, then we speak of an abelian category. A typical example of
an abelian category is the category of abelian groups.
• A category is called complete if all limits exist in it. The categories of sets, abelian groups
and topological spaces are complete.
• A category is called cartesian closed if it has finite direct products and a morphism
defined on a finite product can always be represented by a morphism defined on just one
of the factors. Examples include Set and CPO, the category of complete partial orders
with Scott-continuous functions.
• A topos is a certain type of cartesian closed category in which all of mathematics can be
formulated (just like classically all of mathematics is formulated in the category of sets).
A topos can also be used to represent a logical theory.
• A groupoid is a category in which every morphism is an isomorphism. Groupoids are
generalizations of groups, group actions and equivalence relations.
See also
• Enriched category
• Higher category theory
• Table of mathematical symbols
References
• Adámek, Jiří; Herrlich, Horst; Strecker, George E. (1990),
http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc/acc.pdf|Abstract and Concrete Categories, John
Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-471-60922-6, http:/ / katmat. math. uni-bremen. de/ acc/ acc. pdf
(now free on-line edition, GNU FDL).
• Asperti, Andrea; Longo, Giuseppe (1991), Categories, Types and Structures, MIT Press,
ftp:/ / ftp. di. ens. fr/ pub/ users/ longo/ CategTypesStructures/ book. pdf.
• Barr, Michael; Wells, Charles (2002), 
http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/ttt.html|Toposes, Triples and Theories, http:/ 
/ www. cwru. edu/ artsci/ math/ wells/ pub/ ttt. html (revised and corrected free online 
version of Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften (278) Springer-Verlag,

Category (mathematics)
528
1983).
• Borceux, Francis (1994), "Handbook of Categorical Algebra", Encyclopedia of
Mathematics and its Applications, 50–52, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
• Lawvere, William; Schanuel, Steve (1997), Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction
to Categories, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
• Mac Lane, Saunders (1998), Categories for the Working Mathematician, Graduate Texts
in Mathematics 5 (2nd ed.), Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-98403-8.
• Marquis, Jean-Pierre (2006), http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/category-theory/|"Category
Theory", in Zalta, Edward N., http://plato.stanford.edu|Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, http:/ / plato. stanford. edu/ entries/ category-theory/ .
External links
• Chris Hillman, Categorical primer [1], formal introduction to Category Theory.
• Homepage of the Categories mailing list [2], with extensive list of resources
• Category Theory section of Alexandre Stefanov's list of free online mathematics
resources [3]
References
[1] http:/ / citeseer. ist. psu. edu/ cache/ papers/ cs/ 23543/ http:zSzzSzwww-aix. gsi.
dezSz~appelzSzskriptezSzotherzSzcategories. pdf/ hillman01categorical. pdf
[2] http:/ / www. mta. ca/ ~cat-dist/ categories. html
[3] http:/ / us. geocities. com/ alex_stef/ mylist. html
Abelian category
In mathematics, an abelian category is a category in which morphisms and objects can be
added and in which kernels and cokernels exist and have desirable properties. The
motivating prototype example of an abelian category is the category of abelian groups, Ab.
The theory originated in a tentative attempt to unify several cohomology theories by
Alexander Grothendieck. Abelian categories are very stable categories, for example they
are regular and they satisfy the snake lemma. The class of Abelian categories is closed
under several categorical constructions, for example, the category of chain complexes of an
Abelian category, or the category of functors from a small category to an Abelian category
are Abelian as well. These stability properties make them inevitable in homological algebra
and beyond; the theory has major applications in algebraic geometry, cohomology and pure
category theory.

Abelian category
529
Definitions
A category is abelian if
• it has a zero object,
• it has all pullbacks and pushouts, and
• all monomorphisms and epimorphisms are normal.
By a theorem of Peter Freyd, this definition is equivalent to the following "piecemeal"
definition:
• A category is preadditive if it is enriched over the monoidal category Ab of abelian
groups. This means that all hom-sets are abelian groups and the composition of
morphisms is bilinear.
• A preadditive category is additive if every finite set of objects has a biproduct. This
means that we can form finite direct sums and direct products.
• An additive category is preabelian if every morphism has both a kernel and a cokernel.
• Finally, a preabelian category is abelian if every monomorphism and every epimorphism
is normal. This means that every monomorphism is a kernel of some morphism, and every
epimorphism is a cokernel of some morphism.
Note that the enriched structure on hom-sets is a consequence of the three axioms of the
first definition. This highlights the foundational relevance of the category of Abelian groups
in the theory and its canonical nature.
The concept of exact sequence arises naturally in this setting, and it turns out that exact
functors, i.e. the functors preserving exact sequences in various senses, are the relevant
functors between Abelian categories. This exactness concept has been axiomatized in the
theory of exact categories, forming a very special case of regular categories.
Examples
• As mentioned above, the category of all abelian groups is an abelian category. The
category of all finitely generated abelian groups is also an abelian category, as is the
category of all finite abelian groups.
• If R is a ring, then the category of all left (or right) modules over R is an abelian category.
In fact, it can be shown that any small abelian category is equivalent to a full subcategory
of such a category of modules (Mitchell's embedding theorem).
• If R is a left-noetherian ring, then the category of finitely generated left modules over R is
abelian. In particular, the category of finitely generated modules over a noetherian
commutative ring is abelian; in this way, abelian categories show up in commutative
algebra.
• As special cases of the two previous examples: the category of vector spaces over a fixed
field k is abelian, as is the category of finite-dimensional vector spaces over k.
• If X is a topological space, then the category of all (real or complex) vector bundles on X
is not usually an abelian category, as there can be monomorphisms that are not kernels.
• If X is a topological space, then the category of all sheaves of abelian groups on X is an
abelian category. More generally, the category of sheaves of abelian groups on a
Grothendieck site is an abelian category. In this way, abelian categories show up in
algebraic topology and algebraic geometry.
• If C is a small category and A is an abelian category, then the category of all functors 
from C to A forms an abelian category (the morphisms of this category are the natural

Abelian category
530
transformations between functors). If C is small and preadditive, then the category of all
additive functors from C to A also forms an abelian category. The latter is a
generalization of the R-module example, since a ring can be understood as a preadditive
category with a single object.
Grothendieck's axioms
In his Tôhoku article, Grothendieck listed four additional axioms (and their duals) that an
abelian category A might satisfy. These axioms are still in common use to this day. They are
the following:
• AB3) For every set {Ai} of objects of A, the coproduct ∐Ai exists in A (i.e. A is
cocomplete).
• AB4) A satisfies AB3), and the coproduct of a family of monomorphisms is a
monomorphism.
• AB5) A satisfies AB3), and filtered colimits of exact sequences are exact.
and their duals
• AB3*) For every set {Ai} of objects of A, the product ΠAi exists in A (i.e. A is complete).
• AB4*) A satisfies AB3*), and the product of a family of epimorphisms is an epimorphism.
• AB5*) A satisfies AB3*), and filtered limits of exact sequences are exact.
Axioms AB1) and AB2) were also given. They are what make an additive category abelian.
Specifically:
• AB1) Every morphism has a kernel and a cokernel.
• AB2) For every morphism f, the canonical morphism from coim f to im f is an
isomorphism.
Grothendieck also gave axioms AB6) and AB6*).
Elementary properties
Given any pair A, B of objects in an abelian category, there is a special zero morphism from
A to B. This can be defined as the zero element of the hom-set Hom(A,B), since this is an
abelian group. Alternatively, it can be defined as the unique composition A → 0 → B, where
0 is the zero object of the abelian category.
In an abelian category, every morphism f can be written as the composition of an
epimorphism followed by a monomorphism. This epimorphism is called the coimage of f,
while the monomorphism is called the image of f.
Subobjects and quotient objects are well-behaved in abelian categories. For example, the
poset of subobjects of any given object A is a bounded lattice.
Every abelian category A is a module over the monoidal category of finitely generated
abelian groups; that is, we can form a tensor product of a finitely generated abelian group
G and any object A of A. The abelian category is also a comodule; Hom(G,A) can be
interpreted as an object of A. If A is complete, then we can remove the requirement that G
be finitely generated; most generally, we can form finitary enriched limits in A.

Abelian category
531
Related concepts
Abelian categories are the most general setting for homological algebra. All of the
constructions used in that field are relevant, such as exact sequences, and especially short
exact sequences, and derived functors. Important theorems that apply in all abelian
categories include the five lemma (and the short five lemma as a special case), as well as
the snake lemma (and the nine lemma as a special case).
History
Abelian categories were introduced by Alexander Grothendieck in his famous Tôhoku paper
in the middle of the 1950s in order to unify various cohomology theories. At the time, there
was a cohomology theory for sheaves, and a cohomology theory for groups. The two were
defined completely differently, but they had formally almost identical properties. In fact,
much of category theory was developed as a language to study these similarities.
Grothendieck managed to unify the two theories: they both arise as derived functors on
abelian categories; on the one hand the abelian category of sheaves of abelian groups on a
topological space, on the other hand the abelian category of G-modules for a given group G.
References
• Freyd, Peter (1964), http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/reprints/articles/3/tr3abs.html|Abelian
Categories, New York: Harper and Row, http:/ / www. tac. mta. ca/ tac/ reprints/ articles/
3/ tr3abs. html
• Grothendieck, Alexander (1957), "Sur quelques points d'algèbre homologique", The
Tohoku Mathematical Journal. Second Series 9: 119–221, MR0102537 [1], ISSN
0040-8735 [2]
• Mitchell, Barry (1965), Theory of Categories, Boston, MA: Academic Press
• Popescu, N. (1973), Abelian categories with applications to rings and modules, Boston,
MA: Academic Press
References
[1] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0102537
[2] http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 0040-8735

Topos
532
Topos
In mathematics, a topos (plural "topoi" or "toposes") is a type of category that behaves like
the category of sheaves of sets on a topological space. For a discussion of the history of
topos theory, see the article Background and genesis of topos theory.
Grothendieck topoi (topoi in geometry)
Since the introduction of sheaves into mathematics in the 1940s a major theme has been to
study a space by studying sheaves on that space. This idea was expounded by Alexander
Grothendieck by introducing the notion of a topos. The main utility of this notion is in the
abundance of situations in mathematics where topological intuition is very effective but an
honest topological space is lacking; it is sometimes possible to find a topos formalizing the
intuition. The greatest single success of this programmatic idea to date has been the
introduction of the étale topos of a scheme.
Equivalent formulations
Let C be a category. A theorem of Giraud states that the following are equivalent:
• There is a small category D and an inclusion C 
Presh(D) that admits a
finite-limit-preserving left adjoint.
• C is the category of sheaves on a Grothendieck site.
• C satisfies Giraud's axioms, below.
A category with these properties is called a "(Grothendieck) topos". Here Presh(D) denotes
the category of contravariant functors from D to the category of sets; such a contravariant
functor is frequently called a presheaf.
Giraud's axioms
Giraud's axioms for a category C are:
• C has a small set of generators, and admits all small colimits. Furthermore, colimits
commute with fiber products.
• Sums in C are disjoint. In other words, the fiber product of X and Y over their sum is the
initial object in C.
• All equivalence relations in C are effective.
The last axiom needs the most explanation. If X is an object of C, an equivalence relation R
on X is a map R→X×X in C such that all the maps Hom(Y,R)→Hom(Y,X)×Hom(Y,X) are
equivalence relations of sets. Since C has colimits we may form the coequalizer of the two
maps R→X; call this X/R. The equivalence relation is effective if the canonical map
is an isomorphism.

Topos
533
Examples
Giraud's theorem already gives "sheaves on sites" as a complete list of examples. Note,
however, that nonequivalent sites often give rise to equivalent topoi. As indicated in the
introduction, sheaves on ordinary topological spaces motivate many of the basic definitions
and results of topos theory.
The category of sets is an important special case: it plays the role of a point in topos theory.
Indeed, a set may be thought of as a sheaf on a point.
More exotic examples, and the raison d'être of topos theory, come from algebraic geometry.
To a scheme and even a stack one may associate an étale topos, an fppf topos, a Nisnevich
topos...
Counterexamples
Topos theory is, in some sense, a generalization of classical point-set topology. One should
therefore expect to see old and new instances of pathological behavior. For instance, there
is an example due to Pierre Deligne of a nontrivial topos that has no points (see below).
Geometric morphisms
If X and Y are topoi, a geometric morphism u: X→Y is a pair of adjoint functors (u∗,u∗) such
that u∗ preserves finite limits. Note that u∗ automatically preserves colimits by virtue of
having a right adjoint.
By Freyd's adjoint functor theorem, to give a geometric morphism X → Y is to give a functor
u∗: Y → X that preserves finite limits and all small colimits. Thus geometric morphisms
between topoi may be seen as analogues of maps of locales.
If X and Y are topological spaces and u is a continuous map between them, then the
pullback and pushforward operations on sheaves yield a geometric morphism between the
associated topoi.
Points of topoi
A point of a topos X is a geometric morphism from the topos of sets to X.
If X is an ordinary space and x is a point of X, then the functor that takes a sheaf F to its
stalk Fx has a right adjoint (the "skyscraper sheaf" functor), so an ordinary point of X also
determines a topos-theoretic point. These may be constructed as the pullback-pushforward
along the continuous map x: 1 → X.
Essential geometric morphisms
A geometric morphism (u∗,u∗) is essential if u∗ has a further left adjoint u!, or equivalently
(by the adjoint functor theorem) if u∗ preserves not only finite but all small limits.
Ringed topoi
A ringed topos is a pair (X,R), where X is a topos and R is a commutative ring object in X.
Most of the constructions of ringed spaces go through for ringed topoi. The category of
R-module objects in X is an abelian category with enough injectives. A more useful abelian
category is the subcategory of quasi-coherent R-modules: these are R-modules that admit a
presentation.

Topos
534
Another important class of ringed topoi, besides ringed spaces, are the etale topoi of
Deligne-Mumford stacks.
Homotopy theory of topoi
Michael Artin and Barry Mazur associated to any topos a pro-simplicial set. Using this
inverse system of simplicial sets one may sometimes associate to a homotopy invariant in
classical topology an inverse system of invariants in topos theory.
The pro-simplicial set associated to the etale topos of a scheme is a pro-finite simplicial set.
Its study is called étale homotopy theory.
Elementary toposes (toposes in logic)
Introduction
A traditional axiomatic foundation of mathematics is set theory, in which all mathematical
objects are ultimately represented by sets (even functions which map between sets). More
recent work in category theory allows this foundation to be generalized using toposes; each
topos completely defines its own mathematical framework. The category of sets forms a
familiar topos, and working within this topos is equivalent to using traditional set theoretic
mathematics. But one could instead choose to work with many alternative toposes. A
standard formulation of the axiom of choice makes sense in any topos, and there are
toposes in which it is invalid. Constructivists will be interested to work in a topos without
the law of excluded middle. If symmetry under a particular group G is of importance, one
can use the topos consisting of all G-sets.
It is also possible to encode an algebraic theory, such as the theory of groups, as a topos.
The individual models of the theory, i.e. the groups in our example, then correspond to
functors from the encoding topos to the category of sets that respect the topos structure.
Formal definition
When used for foundational work a topos will be defined axiomatically; set theory is then
treated as a special case of topos theory. Building from category theory, there are multiple
equivalent definitions of a topos. The following has the virtue of being concise, if not
illuminating:
A topos is a category which has the following two properties:
• All limits taken over finite index categories exist.
• Every object has a power object.
From this one can derive that
• All colimits taken over finite index categories exist.
• The category has a subobject classifier.
• Any two objects have an exponential object.
• The category is cartesian closed.
In many applications, the role of the subobject classifier is pivotal, whereas power objects
are not. Thus some definitions reverse the roles of what is defined and what is derived.

Topos
535
Explanation
A topos as defined above can be understood as a cartesian closed category for which the
notion of subobject of an object has an elementary or first-order definition. This notion, as a
natural categorical abstraction of the notions of subset of a set, subgroup of a group, and
more generally subalgebra of any algebraic structure, predates the notion of topos. It is
definable in any category, not just toposes, in second-order language, i.e. in terms of
classes of morphisms instead of individual morphisms, as follows. Given two monics m, n
from respectively Y and Z to X, we say that m ≤ n when there exists a morphism p: Y → Z
for which np = m, inducing a preorder on monics to X. When m ≤ n and n ≤ m we say that
m and n are equivalent. The subobjects of X are the resulting equivalence classes of the
monics to it.
In a topos "subobject" becomes, at least implicitly, a first-order notion, as follows.
As noted above, a topos is a category C having all finite limits and hence in particular the
empty limit or final object 1. It is then natural to treat morphisms of the form x: 1 → X as
elements x ∈ X. Morphisms f: X → Y thus correspond to functions mapping each element x ∈
X to the element fx ∈ Y, with application realized by composition.
One might then think to define a subobject of X as an equivalence class of monics m: X' → X
having the same image or range {mx| x ∈ X' }. The catch is that two or more morphisms
may correspond to the same function, that is, we cannot assume that C is concrete in the
sense that the functor C(1,-): C → Set is faithful. For example the category Grph of graphs
and their associated homomorphisms is a topos whose final object 1 is the graph with one
vertex and one edge (a self-loop), but is not concrete because the elements 1 → G of a graph
G correspond only to the self-loops and not the other edges, nor the vertices without
self-loops. Whereas the second-order definition makes G and its set of self-loops (with their
vertices) distinct subobjects of G (unless every edge is, and every vertex has, a self-loop),
this image-based one does not. This can be addressed for the graph example and related
examples via the Yoneda Lemma as described in the Examples section below, but this then
ceases to be first-order. Toposes provide a more abstract, general, and first-order solution.
Figure 1. m as a pullback of the
generic subobject t along f.
As noted above a topos C has a subobject classifier Ω,
namely an object of C with an element t ∈ Ω, the
generic subobject of C, having the property that every
monic m: X' → X arises as a pullback of the generic
subobject along a unique morphism f: X → Ω, as per
Figure 1. Now the pullback of a monic is a monic, and
all elements including t are monics since there is only
one morphism to 1 from any given object, whence the
pullback of t along f: X → Ω is a monic. The monics to X
are therefore in bijection with the pullbacks of t along
morphisms from X to Ω. The latter morphisms partition
the monics into equivalence classes each determined by
a morphism f: X → Ω, the characteristic morphism of
that class, which we take to be the subobject of X characterized or named by f.
All this applies to any topos, whether or not concrete. In the concrete case, namely C(1,-) 
faithful, for example the category of sets, the situation reduces to the familiar behavior of 
functions. Here the monics m: X' → X are exactly the injections (one-one functions) from X' 
to X, and those with a given image {mx| x ∈ X' } constitute the subobject of X

Topos
536
corresponding to the morphism f: X → Ω for which f−1(t) is that image. The monics of a
subobject will in general have many domains, all of which however will be in bijection with
each other.
To summarize, this first-order notion of subobject classifier implicitly defines for a topos the
same equivalence relation on monics to X as had previously been defined explicitly by the
second-order notion of subobject for any category. The notion of equivalence relation on a
class of morphisms is itself intrinsically second-order, which the definition of topos neatly
sidesteps by explicitly defining only the notion of subobject classifier Ω, leaving the notion
of subobject of X as an implicit consequence characterized (and hence namable) by its
associated morphism f: X → Ω.
Further examples
If C is a small category, then the functor category SetC (consisting of all covariant functors
from C to sets, with natural transformations as morphisms) is a topos. For instance, the
category Grph of graphs of the kind permitting multiple directed edges between two
vertices is a topos. A graph consists of two sets, an edge set and a vertex set, and two
functions s,t between those sets, assigning to every edge e its source s(e) and target t(e).
Grph is thus equivalent to the functor category SetC, where C is the category with two
objects E and V and two morphisms s,t: E → V giving respectively the source and target of
each edge.
The categories of finite sets, of finite G-sets (actions of a group G on a finite set), and of
finite graphs are also toposes.
The Yoneda Lemma asserts that Cop embeds in SetC as a full subcategory. In the graph
example the embedding represents Cop as the subcategory of SetC whose two objects are V'
as the one-vertex no-edge graph and E' as the two-vertex one-edge graph (both as functors),
and whose two nonidentity morphisms are the two graph homomorphisms from V' to E'
(both as natural transformations). The natural transformations from V' to an arbitrary graph
(functor) G constitute the vertices of G while those from E' to G constitute its edges.
Although SetC, which we can identify with Grph, is not made concrete by either V' or E'
alone, the functor U: Grph → Set2 sending object G to the pair of sets (Grph(V',G),
Grph(E',G)) and morphism h: G → H to the pair of functions (Grph(V',h), Grph(E',h)) is
faithful. That is, a morphism of graphs can be understood as a pair of functions, one
mapping the vertices and the other the edges, with application still realized as composition
but now with multiple sorts of generalized elements. This shows that the traditional concept
of a concrete category as one whose objects have an underlying set can be generalized to
cater for a wider range of toposes by allowing an object to have multiple underlying sets,
that is, to be multisorted.

Topos
537
See also
• Background and genesis of topos theory
• Category theory
• Intuitionistic type theory
References
Some gentle papers
• John Baez: "Topos theory in a nutshell. [1]" A gentle introduction.
• Stephen Vickers: "Toposes pour les nuls [2]" and "Toposes pour les vraiment nuls. [3]"
Elementary and even more elementary introductions to toposes as generalized spaces.
• Illusie, Luc, "http://www.ams.org/notices/200409/what-is-illusie.pdf|What is a ... topos?",
Notices of the AMS, http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200409/ what-is-illusie. pdf
The following texts are easy-paced introductions to toposes and the basics of category
theory. They should be suitable for those knowing little mathematical logic and set theory,
even non-mathematicians.
• F. William Lawvere and Stephen H. Schanuel (1997) Conceptual Mathematics: A First
Introduction to Categories. Cambridge University Press. An "introduction to categories
for computer scientists, logicians, physicists, linguists, etc." (cited from cover text).
• F. William Lawvere and Robert Rosebrugh (2003) Sets for Mathematics. Cambridge
University Press. Introduces the foundations of mathematics from a categorical
perspective.
Grothendieck foundational work on toposes:
• Grothendieck and Verdier: Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas (known
as SGA4)". New York/Berlin: Springer, ??. (Lecture notes in mathematics, 269–270)
The following monographs include an introduction to some or all of topos theory, but do not
cater primarily to beginning students. Listed in (perceived) order of increasing difficulty.
• Colin McLarty (1992) Elementary Categories, Elementary Toposes. Oxford Univ. Press. A
nice introduction to the basics of category theory, topos theory, and topos logic. Assumes
very few prerequisites.
• Robert Goldblatt (1984) Topoi, the Categorial Analysis of Logic (Studies in logic and the
foundations of mathematics, 98). North-Holland. A good start. Reprinted 2006 by Dover
Publications, and available online [4] at Robert Goldblatt's homepage. [5]
• John Lane Bell (2005) The Development of Categorical Logic. Handbook of Philosophical
Logic, Volume 12. Springer. Version available online [6] at John Bell's homepage. [7]
• Saunders Mac Lane and Ieke Moerdijk (1992) Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: a First
Introduction to Topos Theory. Springer Verlag. More complete, and more difficult to
read.
• Michael Barr and Charles Wells (1985) Toposes, Triples and Theories. Springer Verlag.
Corrected online version at http:/ / www. cwru. edu/ artsci/ math/ wells/ pub/ ttt. html [8].
More concise than Sheaves in Geometry and Logic, but hard on beginners.
Reference works for experts, less suitable for first introduction
• Francis Borceux (1994) Handbook of Categorical Algebra 3: Categories of Sheaves, 
Volume 52 of the Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge 
University Press. The third part of "Borceux' remarkable magnum opus", as Johnstone

Topos
538
has labelled it. Still suitable as an introduction, though beginners may find it hard to
recognize the most relevant results among the huge amount of material given.
• Peter T. Johnstone (1977) Topos Theory, L. M. S. Monographs no. 10. Academic Press.
For a long time the standard compendium on topos theory. However, even Johnstone
describes this work as "far too hard to read, and not for the faint-hearted."
• Peter T. Johnstone (2002) Sketches of an Elephant: A Topos Theory Compendium. Oxford
Science Publications. As of early 2006, two of the scheduled three volumes of this
overwhelming compendium were available.
Books that target special applications of topos theory
• Maria Cristina Pedicchio and Walter Tholen, eds. (2004) Categorical Foundations:
Special Topics in Order, Topology, Algebra, and Sheaf Theory. Volume 97 of the
Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press. Includes
many interesting special applications.
Online encyclopedias:
• Topos [9] on PlanetMath
References
[1] http:/ / math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/ topos. html
[2] http:/ / www. cs. bham. ac. uk/ ~sjv/ #papers
[3] http:/ / www. cs. bham. ac. uk/ ~sjv/ TopPLVN. pdf
[4] http:/ / historical. library. cornell. edu/ cgi-bin/ cul. math/ docviewer?did=Gold010& id=3
[5] http:/ / www. mcs. vuw. ac. nz/ ~rob/
[6] http:/ / publish. uwo. ca/ ~jbell/ catlogprime. pdf
[7] http:/ / publish. uwo. ca/ ~jbell/
[8] http:/ / www. cwru. edu/ artsci/ math/ wells/ pub/ ttt. html
[9] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=8796

Heyting algebra
539
Heyting algebra
In mathematics, Heyting algebras are special partially ordered sets that constitute a
generalization of Boolean algebras, named after Arend Heyting. Heyting algebras arise as
models of intuitionistic logic, a logic in which the law of excluded middle does not in
general hold. Complete Heyting algebras are a central object of study in pointless topology.
Formal definition
A Heyting algebra H is a bounded lattice such that for all a and b in H there is a greatest
element x of H such that
This element is the relative pseudo-complement of a with respect to b, and is denoted
. We write 1 and 0 for the largest and the smallest element of H, respectively.
In any Heyting algebra, one defines the pseudo-complement 
of any element x by
setting 
. By definition, 
, and 
is the largest element having this
property. However, it is not in general true that 
, thus 
is only a
pseudo-complement, not a true complement, as would be the case in a Boolean algebra.
A complete Heyting algebra is a Heyting algebra that is a complete lattice.
A subalgebra of a Heyting algebra H is a subset H1 of H containing 0 and 1 and closed
under the operations ∧, ∨ and →. It follows that it is also closed under ¬. A subalgebra is
made into a Heyting algebra by the induced operations.
Alternative definitions
Lattice-theoretic definitions
An equivalent definition of Heyting algebras can be given by considering the mappings
defined by 
for some fixed a in H. A bounded lattice H is a Heyting algebra if and only if all mappings
are the lower adjoint of a monotone Galois connection. In this case the respective upper
adjoints 
are given by 
, where 
is defined as above.
Yet another definition is as a residuated lattice whose monoid operation is 
. The monoid
unit must then be the top element 1. Commutativity of this monoid implies that the two
residuals coincide as 
.
Bounded lattice with an implication operation
Given a bounded lattice A with largest and smallest elements 1 and 0, and a binary
operation 
, these together form a Heyting algebra if and only if the following hold:
1.
2.
3.
4.
(distributive law for 
)

Heyting algebra
540
Characterization using the axioms of intuitionist logic
This characterization of Heyting algebras makes the proof of the basic facts concerning the
relationship between intuitionist propositional calculus and Heyting algebras immediate.
(For these facts, see the sections "Provable identities" and "Universal constructions.") One
should think of the element 1 as meaning, intuitively, "provably true." Compare with the
axioms at Intuitionistic logic#Axiomatization.
Given a set A with three binary operations →, ∧ and ∨, and two distinguished elements 0
and 1, then A is a Heyting algebra for these operations (and the relation ≤ defined by the
condition that a ≤ b when a→b = 1) if and only if the following conditions hold for any
elements x, y and z of A:
EQUIV: if x → y = 1 and y → x = 1, then x = y ("equivalent formulas should be
identified");
MODUS-PONENS: if 1 → y = 1, then y = 1 ("provably true formulas are closed under
modus ponens");
THEN-1: x → (y → x) = 1
THEN-2: (x → (y → z)) → ((x → y) → (x → z)) = 1
AND-1: x ∧ y → x = 1
AND-2: x ∧ y → y = 1
AND-3: x → (y → (x ∧ y)) = 1
OR-1: x → x ∨ y = 1
OR-2: y → x ∨ y = 1
OR-3: (x → z) → ((y → z) → (x ∨ y → z)) = 1
FALSE: 0 → x = 1
Finally, we define ¬x to be x→0.
Of course, if a different set of axioms were chosen for logic, we could modify ours
accordingly.

Heyting algebra
541
Examples
The free Heyting algebra over one generator (aka
Rieger–Nishimura lattice)
• Every Boolean algebra is a Heyting
algebra, with p → q given by ¬p ∨ q.
• Every totally ordered set that is a
bounded lattice is also a Heyting
algebra, where p → q is equal to q
when p>q, and 1 otherwise.
• The simplest Heyting algebra that is
not already a Boolean algebra is the
totally ordered set {0, ½, 1} with →
defined as above. Notice that ½ 
½ = ½ 
(½ 
0) = ½ 
0 = ½
falsifies the law of excluded middle.
• Every topology provides a complete
Heyting algebra in the form of its
open set lattice. In this case, the
element 
is the interior of
the union of 
and B, where 
denotes the complement of the open set A. Not all complete Heyting algebras are of this
form. These issues are studied in pointless topology, where complete Heyting algebras
are also called frames or locales.
• The Lindenbaum algebra of propositional intuitionistic logic is a Heyting algebra.
• The global elements of the subobject classifier 
of an elementary topos form a Heyting
algebra; it is the Heyting algebra of truth values of the intuitionistic higher-order logic
induced by the topos.
Properties
General properties
The ordering ≤ on a Heyting algebra H can be recovered from the operation → as follows:
for any elements a, b of H, a≤b if and only if a→b=1.
In contrast to some many-valued logics, Heyting algebras share the following property with
Boolean algebras: if negation has a fixed point (i.e. 
for some 
), then the Heyting
algebra is the trivial one-element Heyting algebra.

Heyting algebra
542
Provable identities
Given a formula F(A1, A2,..., An) of propositional calculus (using, in addition to the
variables, the connectives 
, 
, 
, 
, and the constants 0 and 1), it is a fact, proved
early on in any study of Heyting algebras, that the following two conditions are equivalent:
1. the formula F is provably true in intuitionist propositional calculus;
2. the identity F(a1, a2,..., an) = 1 is true for any Heyting algebra H and any elements a1,
a2,..., an in H.
The implication 1→2 is extremely useful and is the principal practical method for proving
identities in Heyting algebras. In practice, one frequently uses the deduction theorem in
such proofs.
Since for any a and b in a Heyting algebra H we have a≤b if and only if a→b=1, it follows
from 1→2 that whenever a formula a formula F→G is provably true, we have F(a1, a2,...,
an)≤G(a1, a2,..., an) for any Heyting algebra H, and any elements a1, a2,..., an of H. (It
follows from the deduction theorem that F→G is provable [from nothing] if and only if G is a
provable from F, that is, if G is a provable consequence of F.) In particular, if F and G are
provably equivalent, then F(a1, a2,..., an) = G(a1, a2,..., an), since ≤ is an order relation.
1→2 can be proved by examining the logical axioms of the system of proof and verifying that
their value is 1 in any Heyting algebra, and then verifying that the application of the rules
of inference to expressions with value 1 in a Heyting algebra results in expressions with
value 1. For example, let us choose the system of proof having modus ponens as its sole
rule of inference, and whose axioms are the Hilbert-style ones given at Intuitionistic
logic#Axiomatization. Then the facts to be verified follow immediately from the axiom-like
definition of Heyting algebras given above.
1→2 also provides a method for proving that certain propositional formulas, though
tautologies in classical logic, cannot be proved in intuitionist propositional logic. In order to
prove that some formula F(A1, A2,..., An) is not provable, it is enough to exhibit a Heyting
algebra H and elements a1, a2,..., an of H such that F(a1, a2,..., an)≠1.
If one wishes to avoid mention of logic, then in practice it becomes necessary to prove as a
lemma a version of the deduction theorem valid for Heyting algebras: for any elements a, b
and c of a Heyting algebra H, we have (a∧b)→c=a→(b→c).
For more on the implication 2→1, see the section "Universal constructions" below.
Distributivity
Heyting algebras are always distributive. Specifically, we always have the identities
1.
2.
The distributive law is sometimes stated as an axiom, but in fact it follows from the
existence of relative pseudo-complements. The reason is that, being the lower adjoint of a
Galois connection, 
 preserves all existing suprema. Distributivity in turn is just the
preservation of binary suprema by 
.
By a similar argument, the following infinite distributive law holds in any complete Heyting
algebra:

Heyting algebra
543
for any element x in H and any subset Y of H. Conversely, any complete lattice satisfying
the above infinite distributive law is a complete Heyting algebra, with
being its relative pseudo-complement operation.
Regular and complemented elements
An element x of a Heyting algebra H is called regular if either of the following equivalent
conditions hold:
1.
.
2.
for some y in H.
The equivalence of these conditions can be restated simply as the identity 
,
valid for all x in H.
Elements x and y of a Heyting algebra H are called complements to each other if
and 
. If it exists, any such y is unique and must in fact be equal to 
.
We call an element x complemented if it admits a complement. It is true that if x is
complemented, then so is 
, and then x and 
are complements to each other.
However, confusingly, even if x is not complemented, 
may nonetheless have a
complement (not equal to x). In any Heyting algebra, the elements 0 and 1 are
complements to each other.
Any complemented element of a Heyting algebra is regular, though the converse is not true
in general. In particular, 0 and 1 are always regular.
For any Heyting algebra H, the following conditions are equivalent:
1. H is a Boolean algebra;
2. every x in H is regular;[1]
3. every x in H is complemented.[2]
In this case, the element 
is equal to 
.
The regular (resp. complemented) elements of any Heyting algebra H constitute a Boolean
algebra Hreg (resp. Hcomp), in which the operations ∧, ¬ and →, as well as the constants 0
and 1, coincide with those of H. In the case of Hcomp, the operation ∨ is also the same,
hence Hcomp is a subalgebra of H. In general however, Hreg will not be a subalgebra of H,
because its join operation ∨reg may be differ from ∨. For x, y ∈ Hreg, we have x ∨reg y =
¬(¬x ∧ ¬ y). See below for necessary and sufficient conditions in order for ∨reg to coincide
with ∨.
The De Morgan laws in a Heyting algebra
One of the two De Morgan laws is satisfied in every Heyting algebra, namely
, for all 
.
However, the other De Morgan law does not always hold. We have instead a weak de
Morgan law:
, for all 
.
The following statements are equivalent for all Heyting algebras H:
1. H satisfies both De Morgan laws;
2.
, for all 
;
3.
, for all regular 
;

Heyting algebra
544
4.
, for all x, y in H;
5.
, for all regular x, y in H;
6.
, for all regular x, y in H;
7.
, for all 
.
Condition 2 is the other De Morgan law. Condition 6 says that the join operation ∨reg on the
Boolean algebra Hreg of regular elements of H coincides with the operation ∨ of H.
Condition 7 states that every regular element is complemented, i.e., Hreg = Hcomp.
We prove the equivalence. 1→2, 2→3 and 4→5 are trivial. 3↔4 and 5↔6 result simply from
the first De Morgan law and the definition of regular elements. 7 results from 6 taking 
and 
for x and y and using the identity 
. 2→1 follows from the first De
Morgan law, and 7→6 results from the fact that the join operation ∨ on the subalgebra
Hcomp is just the restriction of ∨ to Hcomp, taking into account the characterizations we
have given of conditions 6 and 7. The implication 5→2 is a trivial consequence of the weak
De Morgan law, taking 
and 
for x and y in 5.
Heyting algebras satisfying the above properties are related to De Morgan logic in the
same way Heyting algebras in general are related to intuitionist logic.
Heyting algebra morphisms
Definition
Given two Heyting algebras H1 and H2 and a mapping f:H1→H2, we say that f is a
morphism of Heyting algebras if, for any elements x and y in H1, we have:
1. f(x∧y)=f(x)∧f(y);
2. f(x∨y)=f(x)∨f(y);
3. f(1)=1;
4. f(0)=0;
5. f(x→y)=f(x)→f(y); and
6. [f(¬x)=¬f(x)].
We put condition 6 in brackets because it follows from the others, as ¬x is just x→0, and
one may or may not wish to consider ¬ to be a basic operation.
It follows from conditions 3 and 5 (or 1 alone, or 2 alone) that f is an increasing function,
that is, that f(x)≤f(y) whenever x≤y.
Assume H1 and H2 are structures with operations →, ∧, ∨ (and possibly ¬) and constants 0
and 1, and f is a surjective mapping from H1 to H2 with properties 1 through 5 (or 1 through
6) above. Then if H1 is a Heyting algebra, so too is H2. This follows from the
characterization of Heyting algebras as bounded lattices (thought of as algebraic structures
rather than partially ordered sets) with an operation → satisfying certain identities.

Heyting algebra
545
Properties
The identity map f(x) = x from any Heyting algebra to itself is a morphism, and the
composite g ∘ f of any two morphisms f and g is a morphism. Hence Heyting algebras form
a category.
Examples
Given a Heyting algebra H and any subalgebra H1, the inclusion mapping i:H1→H is a
morphism.
For any Heyting algebra H, the map 
defines a morphism from H onto the Boolean
algebra of its regular elements Hreg. This is not in general a morphism from H to itself,
since the join operation of Hreg may be different from that of H.
Quotients
Let H be a Heyting algebra, and let F⊆H. We call F a filter on H if it satisfies the following
properties:
1. 1∈F;
2. if x,y∈F, then x∧y∈F;
3. if x∈F, y∈H, and x≤y, then y∈F.
The intersection of any set of filters on H is again a filter. Therefore, given any subset S of
H there is a smallest filter containing S. We call it the filter generated by S. If S is empty,
F={1}. Otherwise, F is equal to the set of x in H such that there exist y1, y2, ..., yn in S with
y1∧y2∧...∧yn≤x.
If H is a Heyting algebra and F is a filter on H, we define a relation ∼ on H as follows: we
write x∼y whenever x→y and y→x both belong to F. Then ∼ is an equivalence relation; we
write H/F for the quotient set. There is a unique Heyting algebra structure on H/F such that
the canonical surjection pF:H→H/F becomes a Heyting algebra morphism. We call the
Heyting algebra H/F the quotient of H by F.
Let S be a subset of a Heyting algebra H and let F be the filter generated by S. Then H/F
satisfies the following universal property:
Given any morphism of Heyting algebras f:H→H′ satisfying f(y) = 1 for every y in S, f
factors uniquely through the canonical surjection pF:H→H/F. That is, there is a unique
morphism f′:H/F→H′ satisfying f′pF=f. The morphism f′ is said to be induced by f.
Let f:H1→H2 be a morphism of Heyting algebras. The kernel of f, written ker f, is the set
f-1[{1}]. It is a filter on H1. (Care should be taken because this definition, if applied to a
morphism of Boolean algebras, is dual to what would be called the kernel of the morphism
viewed as a morphism of rings.) By the foregoing, f induces a morphism f′:H1/(ker f)→H2. It
is an isomorphism of H1/(ker f) onto the subalgebra f[H1] of H2.

Heyting algebra
546
Universal constructions
Heyting algebra of propositional formulas in n variables up to
intuitionist equivalence
The implication 2→1 in the section "Provable identities" is proved by showing that the result
of the following construction is itself a Heyting algebra:
1. Consider the set L of propositional formulas in the variables A1, A2,..., An.
2. Endow L with a preorder ≼ by defining F≼G if G is an (intuitionist) logical consequence of
F, that is, if G is provable from F. It is immediate that ≼ is a preorder.
3. Consider the equivalence relation F∼G induced by the preorder F≼G. (It is defined by
F∼G if and only if F≼G and G≼F. In fact, ∼ is the relation of (intuitionist) logical
equivalence.)
4. Let H0 be the quotient set L/∼. This will be the desired Heyting algebra.
5. We write [F] for the equivalence class of a formula F. Operations →, ∧, ∨ and ¬ are
defined in an obvious way on L. Verify that given formulas F and G, the equivalence
classes [F→G], [F∧G], [F∨G] and [¬F] depend only on [F] and [G]. This defines operations
→, ∧, ∨ and ¬ on the quotient set H0=L/∼. Further define 1 to be the class of provably
true statements, and set 0=[⊥].
6. Verify that H0, together with these operations, is a Heyting algebra. We do this using the
axiom-like definition of Heyting algebras. H0 satisfies conditions THEN-1 through FALSE
because all formulas of the given forms are axioms of intuitionist logic. MODUS-PONENS
follows from the fact that if a formula ⊤→F is provably true, where ⊤ is provably true, then
F is provably true (by application of the rule of inference modus ponens). Finally, EQUIV
results from the fact that if F→G and G→F are both provably true, then F and G are
provable from each other (by application of the rule of inference modus ponens), hence
[F]=[G].
As always under the axiom-like definition of Heyting algebras, we define ≤ on H0 by the
condition that x≤y if and only if x→y=1. Since, by the deduction theorem, a formula F→G is
provably true if and only if G is provable from F, it follows that [F]≤[G] if and only if F≼G. In
other words, ≤ is the order relation on L/∼ induced by the preorder ≼ on L.
Free Heyting algebra on an arbitrary set of generators
In fact, the preceding construction can be carried out for any set of variables {Ai: i∈I}
(possibly infinite). One obtains in this way the free Heyting algebra on the variables {Ai},
which we will again denote by H0. It is free in the sense that given any Heyting algebra H
given together with a family of its elements 〈ai: i∈I 〉, there is a unique morphism f:H0→H
satisfying f([Ai])=ai. The uniqueness of f is not difficult to see, and its existence results
essentially from the implication 1→2 of the section "Provable identities" above, in the form
of its corollary that whenever F and G are provably equivalent formulas, F(〈ai〉)=G(〈ai〉) for
any family of elements 〈ai〉in H.

Heyting algebra
547
Heyting algebra of formulas equivalent with respect to a theory T
Given a set of formulas T in the variables {Ai}, viewed as axioms, the same construction
could have been carried out with respect to a relation F≼G defined on L to mean that G is a
provable consequence of F and the set of axioms T. Let us denote by HT the Heyting algebra
so obtained. Then HT satisfies the same universal property as H0 above, but with respect to
Heyting algebras H and families of elements 〈ai〉 satisfying the property that J(〈ai〉)=1 for
any axiom J(〈Ai〉) in T. (Let us note that HT, taken with the family of its elements 〈[Ai]〉,
itself satisfies this property.) The existence and uniqueness of the morphism is proved the
same way as for H0, except that one must modify the implication 1→2 in "Provable
identities" so that 1 reads "provably true from T," and 2 reads "any elements a1, a2,..., an in
H satisfying the formulas of T."
The Heyting algebra HT that we have just defined can be viewed as a quotient of the free
Heyting algebra H0 on the same set of variables, by applying the universal property of H0
with respect to HT, and the family of its elements 〈[Ai]〉.
Every Heyting algebra is isomorphic to one of the form HT. To see this, let H be any
Heyting algebra, and let 〈ai: i∈I〉 be a family of elements generating H (for example, any
surjective family). Now consider the set T of formulas J(〈Ai〉) in the variables 〈Ai: i∈I〉 such
that J(〈ai〉)=1. Then we obtain a morphism f:HT→H by the universal property of HT, which
is clearly surjective. It is not difficult to show that f is injective.
Comparison to Lindenbaum algebras
The constructions we have just given play an entirely analogous role with respect to
Heyting algebras to that of Lindenbaum algebras with respect to Boolean algebras. In fact,
The Lindenbaum algebra BT in the variables {Ai} with respect to the axioms T is just our
HT∪T1, where T1 is the set of all formulas of the form ¬¬F→F, since the additional axioms of
T1 are the only ones that need to be added in order to make all classical tautologies
provable.
Heyting algebras as applied to intuitionistic logic
If one interprets the axioms of the intuitionistic propositional logic as terms of a Heyting
algebra, then they will evaluate to the largest element, 1, in any Heyting algebra under any
assignment of values to the formula's variables. For instance, 
is, by definition
of the pseudo-complement, the largest element x such that 
. This inequation
is satisfied for any x, so the largest such x is 1.
Furthermore the rule of modus ponens allows us to derive the formula Q from the formulas
P and P → Q. But in any Heyting algebra, if P has the value 1, and P → Q has the value 1,
then it means that 
, and so 
; it can only be that Q has the value 1.
This means that if a formula is deducible from the laws of intuitionistic logic, being derived
from its axioms by way of the rule of modus ponens, then it will always have the value 1 in
all Heyting algebras under any assignment of values to the formula's variables. However
one can construct a Heyting algebra in which the value of Peirce's law is not always 1.
Consider the 3-element algebra {0,½,1} as given above. If we assign ½ to P and 0 to Q,
then the value of Peirce's law ((P → Q) → P) → P is ½. It follows that Peirce's law cannot be
intuitionistically derived. See Curry-Howard isomorphism for the general context of what
this implies in type theory.

Heyting algebra
548
The converse can be proven as well: if a formula always has the value 1, then it is deducible
from the laws of intuitionistic logic, so the intuitionistically valid formulas are exactly those
that always have a value of 1. This is similar to the notion that classically valid formulas are
those formulas that have a value of 1 in the two-element Boolean algebra under any
possible assignment of true and false to the formula's variables — that is, they are formulas
which are tautologies in the usual truth-table sense. A Heyting algebra, from the logical
standpoint, is then a generalization of the usual system of truth values, and its largest
element 1 is analogous to 'true'. The usual two-valued logic system is a special case of a
Heyting algebra, and the smallest non-trivial one, in which the only elements of the algebra
are 1 (true) and 0 (false).
Word problem
The word problem on free Heyting algebras is difficult.[3] The only known results are that
the free Heyting algebra on one generator is infinite, and that the free complete Heyting
algebra on one generator exists (and has one more element than the free Heyting algebra).
Notes
[1] Rutherford (1965), Th.26.2 p.78.
[2] Rutherford (1965), Th.26.1 p.78.
[3] Peter T. Johnstone, Stone Spaces, (1982) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, ISBN 0-521-23893-5. (See
paragraph 4.11)
References
• Rutherford, Daniel Edwin (1965). Introduction to Lattice Theory. Oliver and Boyd.
• F. Borceux, Handbook of Categorical Algebra 3, In Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its
Applications, Vol. 53, Cambridge University Press, 1994.
• G. Gierz, K.H. Hoffmann, K. Keimel, J. D. Lawson, M. Mislove and D. S. Scott, Continuous
Lattices and Domains, In Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, Vol. 93,
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
• S. Ghilardi. Free Heyting algebras as bi-Heyting algebras, Math. Rep. Acad. Sci. Canada
XVI., 6:240–244, 1992.
See also
• List of Boolean algebra topics
External links
• Heyting algebra (GFDLed)

Subobject classifier
549
Subobject classifier
In category theory, a subobject classifier is a special object Ω of a category; intuitively,
the subobjects of an object X correspond to the morphisms from X to Ω. As the name
suggests, what a subobject classifier does is to identify/classify subobjects of a given
object according to which elements belong to the subobject in question. Because of this
role, the subobject classifier is also referred to as the truth value object. In fact the way in
which the subobject classifier classifies subobjects of a given object, is by assigning the
values true to elements belonging to the subobject in question, and false to elements not
belonging to the subobject. This is why the subobject classifier is widely used in the
categorical description of logic.
Introductory example
As an example, the set Ω = {0,1} is a subobject classifier in the category of sets and
functions: to every subset j:U → X we can assign the function χj from X to Ω that maps
precisely the elements of U to 1 (see characteristic function). Every function from X to Ω
arises in this fashion from precisely one subset U.
To render this example more clear let us consider a subset A of S (A ⊆ S), where S is a set.
The notion of being a subset can be expressed mathematically using the so-called
characteristic function: χA:S→{0,1}, which is defined as follows:
(Here we interpret 1 as true and 0 as false.) The role of the characteristic function is to
determine which elements belong or not to a certain subset. Since in any category
subobjects are identified as monic arrows, we identify the value true with the arrow: true:
{0} → {0, 1} which maps 0 to 1. Given this definition it can be easily seen that the subset A
can be uniquely defined through the characteristic function A=χA
-1(1). Therefore the
diagram
is a pullback.
The above example of subobject classifier in Set is very useful because it enables us to
easily prove the following axiom:
Axiom: Given a category C, then there exists an isomorphism,
y: SubC(X) ≅ HomC(X, Ω) ∀ X ∈ C
In Set this axiom can be restated as follows:

Subobject classifier
550
Axiom: The collection of all subsets of S denoted by 
, and the collection of all maps
from S to the set {0, 1}=2 denoted by 2S are isomorphic i.e. the function 
,
which in terms of single elements of 
is A → χA, is a bijection.
The above axiom implies the alternative definition of a subobject classifier:
Definition: Ω is a subobject classifier iff there is a one to one correspondence between
subobject of X and morphisms from X to Ω.
Definition
For the general definition, we start with a category C that has a terminal object, which we
denote by 1. The object Ω of C is a subobject classifier for C if there exists a morphism
1 → Ω
with the following property:
for each monomorphism j: U → X there is a unique morphism χ j: X → Ω such that the
following commutative diagram
is a pullback diagram — that is, U is the limit of the diagram:
The morphism χ j is then called the classifying morphism for the subobject represented
by j.
Further examples
Every topos has a subobject classifier. For the topos of sheaves of sets on a topological
space X, it can be described in these terms: For any open set U of X, 
is the set of all
open subsets of U. Roughly speaking an assertion inside this topos is variably true or false,
and its truth value from the viewpoint of an open subset U is the open subset of U where
the assertion is true.
For a small category 
, the subobject classifer in the topos of presheaves 
is
given as follows. For any 
, 
is the set of sieves on .

Subobject classifier
551
References
• Artin, Michael; Alexander Grothendieck, Jean-Louis Verdier (1964). Séminaire de
Géometrie Algébrique IV. Springer-Verlag.
• Barr, Michael; Charles Wells (1985). Toposes, Triples and Theories. Springer-Verlag.
ISBN 0-387-96115-1.
• Bell, John (1988). Toposes and Local Set Theories: an Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
• Goldblatt, Robert (1983).
http://historical.library.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/cul.math/docviewer?did=Gold010&id=3|Topoi:
The Categorial Analysis of Logic. North-Holland, Reprinted by Dover Publications, Inc
(2006). ISBN 0444852077. http:/ / historical. library. cornell. edu/ cgi-bin/ cul. math/
docviewer?did=Gold010& id=3.
• Johnstone, Peter (2002). Sketches of an Elephant: A Topos Theory Compendium. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
• Johnstone, Peter (1977). Topos Theory. Academic Press. ISBN 0123878500.
• Mac Lane, Saunders; Ieke Moerdijk (1992). Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: a First
Introduction to Topos Theory. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0387977104.
• McLarty, Colin (1992). Elementary Categories, Elementary Toposes. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. ISBN 0198533926.
• Taylor, Paul (1999). Practical Foundations of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. ISBN 0521631076.
• Topos-physics: An explanation of Topos theory and its implementation in Physics
Topos-physics, Where Geometry meets Dynamics [1]
References
[1] http:/ / topos-physics. org/

Generator
552
Generator
Generator may refer to:
• Electrical generator
• Engine-generator, an electrical generator, but with its own engine.
• Generator (mathematics), any of several closely related usages in mathematics.
Music
• "Generator" (song), a song by The Foo Fighters
• "Generator" (The Holloways song), a song by The Holloways
• Generator (Bad Religion album), an album by punk band Bad Religion, and its opening
track
• Generator (Aborym album)
• The Generators, a punk rock band formed in Los Angeles in 1997 by members of the
defunct Warner Bros. band Schleprock
• Kix (band), an American glam metal band also known as the Generators
In computing:
• Generator (computer science), a specialized routine that acts like an iterator
• A program which produces a stream of data
• Pseudorandom number generator, producer of a sequence of random or nearly-random
numbers
• Prime number generator, a producer of the ordered sequence of prime numbers
• A zero-generator, the pseudo-device /dev/zero outputs a never ending stream of
zero-valued bytes
• Code generator, a program which creates source code as its output
• anything that creates source code automatically in generative programming
• Natural language generator, a program that produces human language from a machine
representation
• Generator matrix, a matrix whose rows can generate all the elements of a linear code
In popular culture:
• A Generator in the anime Generator Gawl is a metal-organic hybrid organism with far
greater powers than that of a human.
See also
• Generate
• Ginerator

Exact sequence
553
Exact sequence
In mathematics, especially in homological algebra and other applications of abelian
category theory, as well as in differential geometry and group theory, an exact sequence
is a (finite or infinite) sequence of objects and morphisms between them such that the
image of one morphism equals the kernel of the next.
Definition
To be precise, fix an abelian category (such as the category of abelian groups or the
category of vector spaces over a given field) or some other category with kernels and
cokernels (such as the category of all groups). Choose an index set of consecutive integers.
Then for each integer i in the index set, let Ai be an object in the category and let fi be a
morphism from Ai to Ai+1. This defines a sequence of objects and morphisms.
The sequence is exact at Ai if the image of fi−1 is equal to the kernel of fi:
im fi−1 = ker fi.
The sequence itself is exact if it is exact at each object (except at the very first and the very
last object, where exactness doesn't make sense).
Example
Consider the following sequence of abelian groups:
Here the hook arrow 
indicates that the map 
from Z to Z is a monomorphism, and the
two-headed arrow 
indicates an epimorphism (the map 
). This is an exact
sequence because the image 2Z of the monomorphism is the kernel of the epimorphism.
This sequence may also be written without using special symbols for monomorphism and
epimorphism:
Here 0 denotes the trivial abelian group with a single element, the map from Z to Z is
multiplication by 2, and the map from Z to the factor group Z/2Z is given by reducing
integers modulo 2. This is indeed an exact sequence:
• the image of the map 0→Z is {0}, and the kernel of multiplication by 2 is also {0}, so the
sequence is exact at the first Z.
• the image of multiplication by 2 is 2Z, and the kernel of reducing modulo 2 is also 2Z, so
the sequence is exact at the second Z.
• the image of reducing modulo 2 is all of Z/2Z, and the kernel of the zero map is also all of
Z/2Z, so the sequence is exact at the position Z/2Z
Another example, from differential geometry, especially relevant for work on the Maxwell
equations:
,
based on the fact that

Exact sequence
554
on properly defined Hilbert spaces.
Special cases
To make sense of the definition, it is helpful to consider what it means in relatively simple
cases where the sequence is finite and begins or ends with 0.
• The sequence 0 → A → B is exact at A if and only if the map from A to B has kernel {0},
i.e. if and only if that map is a monomorphism (one-to-one).
• Dually, the sequence B → C → 0 is exact at C if and only if the image of the map from B to
C is all of C, i.e. if and only if that map is an epimorphism (onto).
• A consequence of these last two facts is that the sequence 0 → X → Y → 0 is exact if and
only if the map from X to Y is an isomorphism.
When dealing with exact sequences of groups, it is common to write 1 instead of 0 for the
trivial group with a single element.
Important are short exact sequences, which are exact sequences of the form
By the above, we know that for any such short exact sequence, f is a monomorphism and g
is an epimorphism. Furthermore, the image of f is equal to the kernel of g. It is helpful to
think of A as a subobject of B with f being the embedding of A into B, and of C as the
corresponding factor object B/A, with the map g being the natural projection from B to B/A
(whose kernel is exactly A).
Facts
The splitting lemma states that if the above short exact sequence admits a morphism t: B →
A such that t o f is the identity on A or a morphism u: C → B such that g o u is the identity on
C, then B is a twisted direct sum of A and C. (For groups, a twisted direct sum is a
semidirect product; in an abelian category, every twisted direct sum is an ordinary direct
sum.) In this case, we say that the short exact sequence splits.
The snake lemma shows how a commutative diagram with two exact rows gives rise to a
longer exact sequence. The nine lemma is a special case.
The five lemma gives conditions under which the middle map in a commutative diagram
with exact rows of length 5 is an isomorphism; the short five lemma is a special case
thereof applying to short exact sequences.
The importance of short exact sequences is underlined by the fact that every exact
sequence results from "weaving together" several overlapping short exact sequences.
Consider for instance the exact sequence
,
which implies that there exist objects 
in the category such that
.
Suppose in addition that the cokernel of each morphism exists, and is isomorphic to the
image of the next morphism in the sequence:
(This is true for a number of interesting categories, including any abelian category such as 
the abelian groups; but it is not true for all categories that allow exact sequences, and in

Exact sequence
555
particular is not true for the category of groups, in which 
is not 
but 
the conjugate closure of 
.) Then we obtain a commutative diagram in which all the
diagonals are short exact sequences:
Note that the only portion of this diagram that depends on the cokernel condition is the
object 
and the final pair of morphisms 
. If there exists any object 
and morphism 
such that 
is exact, then the exactness of
is ensured. Again taking the example of the category of groups,
the fact that 
is the kernel of some homomorphism on H implies that it is a normal
subgroup, which coincides with its conjugate closure; thus 
is isomorphic to the
image 
of the next morphism.
Conversely, given any list of overlapping short exact sequences, their middle terms form an
exact sequence in the same manner.
Applications of exact sequences
In the theory of abelian categories, short exact sequences are often used as a convenient
language to talk about sub- and factor objects.
The extension problem is essentially the question, given the end terms A and C of a short
exact sequence, what possibilities exist for the middle term B? In the category of groups,
this is equivalent to the question, what groups B have A as a normal subgroup and C as the
corresponding factor group? This problem is important in the classification of groups. See
also Outer automorphism group.
Notice that in an exact sequence, the composition fi+1 o fi maps Ai to 0 in Ai+2, so every
exact sequence is a chain complex. Furthermore, only fi-images of elements of Ai are
mapped to 0 by fi+1, so the homology of this chain complex is trivial. More succinctly:
Exact sequences are precisely those chain complexes which are acyclic.
Given any chain complex, its homology can therefore be thought of as a measure of the
degree to which it fails to be exact.
If we take a series of short exact sequences linked by chain complexes (that is, a short exact
sequence of chain complexes, or from another point of view, a chain complex of short exact
sequences), then we can derive from this a long exact sequence (i.e. an exact sequence
indexed by the natural numbers) on homology by application of the zig-zag lemma. It comes
up in algebraic topology in the study of relative homology; the Mayer–Vietoris sequence is
another example. Long exact sequences induced by short exact sequences are also
characteristic of derived functors.
Exact functors are functors that transform exact sequences into exact sequences.

Exact sequence
556
References
• Spanier, Edwin Henry (1995). Algebraic Topology. Berlin: Springer. pp. 179. ISBN
0-387-94426-5.
• Adhikari, M.R.; Adhikari, Avishek (2003). Groups, Rings and Modules with Applications.
India: Universities Press. pp. 216. ISBN 81-7371-429-0.
External links
• Exact sequence [1] on PlanetMath
• Eric W. Weisstein, Exact Sequence [2] at MathWorld.
• Eric W. Weisstein, Short Exact Sequence [3] at MathWorld.
References
[1] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=1354
[2] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ ExactSequence. html
[3] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ ShortExactSequence. html
Coproduct
In category theory, the coproduct, or categorical sum, is the category-theoretic
construction which subsumes the disjoint union of sets and of topological spaces, the free
product of groups, and the direct sum of modules and vector spaces. The coproduct of a
family of objects is essentially the "least specific" object to which each object in the family
admits a morphism. It is the category-theoretic dual notion to the categorical product,
which means the definition is the same as the product but with all arrows reversed. Despite
this innocuous-looking change in the name and notation, coproducts can be and typically
are dramatically different from products.
Definition
The formal definition is as follows: Let C be a category and let {Xj : j ∈ J} be an indexed
family of objects in C. The coproduct of the set {Xj} is an object X together with a collection
of morphisms ij : Xj → X (called canonical injections although they need not be injections or
even monic) which satisfy a universal property: for any object Y and any collection of
morphisms fj : Xj → Y, there exists a unique morphism f from X to Y such that fj = f O ij. That
is, the following diagram commutes (for each j):
The coproduct of the family {Xj} is often denoted

Coproduct
557
or
Sometimes the morphism f may be denoted
to indicate its dependence on the individual fj.
If the family of objects consists of only two members the product is usually written X1 ∐ X2
or X1 ⊕ X2 or sometimes simply X1 + X2, and the diagram takes the form:
The unique arrow f making this diagram commute is then correspondingly denoted f1 ∐ f2
or f1 ⊕ f2 or f1 + f2 or [f1, f2].
Examples
The coproduct in the category of sets is simply the disjoint union with the maps ij being
the inclusion maps. Unlike direct products, coproducts in other categories are not all
obviously based on the notion for sets, because unions don't behave well with respect to
preserving operations (e.g. the union of two groups need not be a group), and so
coproducts in different categories can be dramatically different from each other. For
example, the coproduct in the category of groups, called the free product, is quite
complicated. On the other hand, in the category of abelian groups (and equally for vector
spaces), the coproduct, called the direct sum, consists of the elements of the direct
product which have only finitely many nonzero terms (this therefore coincides exactly with
the direct product, in the case of finitely many factors). As a consequence, since most
introductory linear algebra courses deal with only finite-dimensional vector spaces, nobody
really hears much about direct sums until later on.
In the case of topological spaces coproducts are disjoint unions with their disjoint union
topologies. That is it is a disjoint union of the underlying sets, and the open sets are sets
open in each of the spaces, in a rather evident sense. In the category of pointed spaces,
fundamental in homotopy theory, the coproduct is the wedge sum (which amounts to
joining a collection of spaces with base points at a common base point).
Despite all this dissimilarity, there is still, at the heart of the whole thing, a disjoint union:
the direct sum of abelian groups is the group generated by the "almost" disjoint union
(disjoint union of all nonzero elements, together with a common zero), similarly for vector
spaces: the space spanned by the "almost" disjoint union; the free product for groups is
generated by the set of all letters from a similar "almost disjoint" union where no two
elements from different sets are allowed to commute.

Coproduct
558
Discussion
The coproduct construction given above is actually a special case of a colimit in category
theory. The coproduct in a category C can be defined as the colimit of any functor from a
discrete category J into C. Not every family {Xj} will have a coproduct in general, but if it
does, then the coproduct is unique in a strong sense: if ij : Xj → X and kj : Xj → Y are two
coproducts of the family {Xj}, then (by the definition of coproducts) there exists a unique
isomorphism f : X → Y such that ij = kj f for each j in J.
As with any universal property, the coproduct can be understood as a universal morphism.
Let Δ: C → C×C be the diagonal functor which assigns to each object X the ordered pair
(X,X) and to each morphism f:X → Y the pair (f,f). Then the coproduct X+Y in C is given by a
universal morphism to the functor Δ from the object (X,Y) in C×C.
The coproduct indexed by the empty set (that is, an empty coproduct) is the same as an
initial object in C.
If J is a set such that all coproducts for families indexed with J exist, then it is possible to
choose the products in a compatible fashion so that the coproduct turns into a functor CJ →
C. The coproduct of the family {Xj} is then often denoted by ∐j Xj, and the maps ij are
known as the natural injections.
Letting HomC(U,V) denote the set of all morphisms from U to V in C (that is, a hom-set in
C), we have a natural isomorphism
given by the bijection which maps every tuple of morphisms
(a product in Set, the category of sets, which is the Cartesian product, so it is a tuple of
morphisms) to the morphism
That this map is a surjection follows from the commutativity of the diagram: any morphism f
is the coproduct of the tuple
That it is an injection follows from the universal construction which stipulates the
uniqueness of such maps. The naturality of the isomorphism is also a consequence of the
diagram. Thus the contravariant hom-functor changes coproducts into products. Stated
another way, the hom-functor, viewed as a functor from the opposite category Copp to Set is
continuous; it preserves limits (a coproduct in C is a product in Copp).
If J is a finite set, say J = {1,...,n}, then the coproduct of objects X1,...,Xn is often denoted by
X1⊕...⊕Xn. Suppose all finite coproducts exist in C, coproduct functors have been chosen as
above, and 0 denotes the initial object of C corresponding to the empty coproduct. We then
have natural isomorphisms

Coproduct
559
These properties are formally similar to those of a commutative monoid; a category with
finite coproducts is an example of a symmetric monoidal category.
If the category has a zero object Z, then we have unique morphism X → Z (since Z is
terminal) and thus a morphism X ⊕ Y → Z ⊕ Y. Since Z is also initial, we have a canonical
isomorphism Z ⊕ Y ≅ Y as in the preceding paragraph. We thus have morphisms X ⊕ Y → X
and X ⊕ Y → Y, by which we infer a canonical morphism X ⊕ Y → X×Y. This may be extended
by induction to a canonical morphism from any finite coproduct to the corresponding
product. This morphism need not in general be an isomorphism; in Grp it is a proper
epimorphism while in Set* (the category of pointed sets) it is a proper monomorphism. In
any preadditive category, this morphism is an isomorphism and the corresponding object is
known as the biproduct. A category with all finite biproducts is known as an additive
category.
If all families of objects indexed by J have coproducts in C, then the coproduct comprises a
functor CJ → C. Note that, like the product, this functor is covariant.
See also
• Product
• Limits and colimits
• Coequalizer
• Direct limit
External links
• Interactive Web page [1] which generates examples of coproducts in the category of finite
sets. Written by Jocelyn Paine [2].
References
[1] http:/ / www. j-paine. org/ cgi-bin/ webcats/ webcats. php
[2] http:/ / www. j-paine. org/

Product
560
Product
Product may mean:
• Product (business), an item that ideally satisfies a market's want or need
• Product (project management), a deliverable or set of deliverables that contribute to a
business solution
• Product (biology), something manufactured by an organelle
• Product (chemistry), a substance found at the beginning of a chemical reaction
• Product (mathematics), the result of multiplying
• Product (category theory), a more abstract product
• Product (album), a musical recording by Norwegian group De Press
• .the .product, a notable "64K demo" by the demogroup Farbrausch
Pushout
A pushout is a student counseled or forced out of a school prior to graduation. Children
are often pushed out of an educational institutions because their presence in the school
creates difficulty in meeting some goal of the school. For example, in the case where
funding for the school is dependent upon scholastic achievement of the students, if the
school can get rid of low-performing students, average test scores on academic
performance tests will go up, thus increasing funding.[1] In Ontario, where the education
system has zero tolerance towards violence, a student is pushed out province-wide. In some
low-performing schools in Chicago combined dropout/pushout rates have exceeded 25% in
one year.[2]
Children are also pushed from schools because they present discipline problems or have
become "too old." Even in cases where a child can legally remain in high school until they
are 21, for example, they may be counseled out after they are over 18.
See also
• Dropout
References
[1] article, "To Cut Failure Rate, Schools Shed Students" (http:/ / www. nytimes. com/ 2003/ 07/ 31/ nyregion/
31PUSH. html) by Tamar Lewin and Jennifer Medina, New York Times. July 31, 2003.
[2] "Enrollment drops point to pushout effect", Catalyst, Voices of Chicago Educational Reform. June, 1999 (http:/
/ www. catalyst-chicago. org/ 06-99/ 069midyearchart. htm)

Pullback
561
Pullback
Pullback refers to two different, but related processes: precomposition and fiber-product.
Precomposition
Precomposition with a function probably provides the most elementary notion of pullback:
in simple terms, a function f of a variable y, where y itself is a function of another variable
x, may be written as a function of x. This is the pullback of f by the function y(x).
It is such a fundamental process, that it is often passed over without mention, for instance
in elementary calculus: this is sometimes called omitting pullbacks, and pervades areas as
diverse as fluid mechanics and differential geometry.
However, it is not just functions that can be "pulled back" in this sense. Pullbacks can be
applied to many other objects such as differential forms and their cohomology classes.
See:
• Pullback (differential geometry)
• Pullback (cohomology)
Fibre-product
The notion of pullback as a fibre-product ultimately leads to the very general idea of a
categorical pullback, but it has important special cases: inverse image (and pullback)
sheaves in algebraic geometry, and pullback bundles in algebraic topology and differential
geometry.
See:
• Pullback (category theory)
• Inverse image sheaf
• Pullback bundle
• Fibred category
Relationship
The relation between the two notions of pullback can perhaps best be illustrated by
sections of fibre bundles: if s is a section of a fibre bundle E over N, and f is a map from M
to N, then the pullback (precomposition) 
of s with f is a section of the pullback
(fibre-product) bundle f*E over M.

Limit
562
Limit
A limit can be:
• Limit (mathematics), including:
• Limit of a function
• Limit of a sequence
• One-sided limit
• Limit superior and limit inferior
• Limit of a net
• Limit point
• Limit (category theory)
• Direct limit
• A constraint (mathematical, physical, economical, legal, etc.) in the form of an inequality,
such as:
• Chandrasekhar limit
• Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin limit
• Budget constraint
• Speed limit
• Age of consent
• An extreme value or boundary, such as:
• High frequency limit
• A limit order is a type of order to buy a security at no more (or sell at no less) than a
specific price on an exchange.
• Other uses, such as:
• Limit (music) in just intonation
• In BDSM, limits are activities that a partner feels strongly about, and to which special
attention must be paid.
• limits.h, the header of a general purpose standard library of the C programming
language
• The Limit, a 1980s band
See also
• Limited

Colimit
563
Colimit
1. REDIRECT Limit (category theory)
Yoneda lemma
In mathematics, specifically in category theory, the Yoneda lemma is an abstract result on
functors of the type morphisms into a fixed object. It is a vast generalisation of Cayley's
theorem from group theory (viewing a group as a particular kind of category with just one
object). It allows the embedding of any category into a category of functors defined on that
category. It also clarifies how the embedded category, of representable functors and their
natural transformations, relates to the other objects in the larger functor category. It is an
important tool that underlies several modern developments in algebraic geometry and
representation theory. It is named after Nobuo Yoneda.
Generalities
The Yoneda lemma suggests that instead of studying the (small) category C, one should
study the category of all functors of C into Set (the category of sets with functions as
morphisms). Set is a category we understand well, and a functor of C into Set can be seen
as a "representation" of C in terms of known structures. The original category C is
contained in this functor category, but new objects appear in the functor category which
were absent and "hidden" in C. Treating these new objects just like the old ones often
unifies and simplifies the theory.
This approach is akin to (and in fact generalizes) the common method of studying a ring by
investigating the modules over that ring. The ring takes the place of the category C, and the
category of modules over the ring is a category of functors defined on C.
Formal statement
General version
Yoneda's lemma concerns functors from a fixed category C to the category of sets, Set. If C
is a locally small category (i.e. the hom-sets are actual sets and not proper classes), then
each object A of C gives rise to a natural functor to Set called a hom-functor. This functor is
denoted:
The hom-functor hA sends X to the set of morphisms Hom(A,X).
Let F be an arbitrary functor from C to Set. Then Yoneda's lemma says that for each object
A of C the natural transformations from hA to F are in one-to-one correspondence with the
elements of F(A). That is,
Given a natural transformation Φ from hA to F, the corresponding element of F(A) is
.

Yoneda lemma
564
There is a contravariant version of Yoneda's lemma which concerns contravariant functors
from C to Set. This version involves the contravariant hom-functor
which sends X to the hom-set Hom(X,A). Given an arbitrary contravariant functor G from C
to Set, Yoneda's lemma asserts that
Proof
The proof of Yoneda's lemma is indicated by the following commutative diagram:
This diagram shows that the natural transformation Φ is completely determined by
since for each morphism f : A → X one has
Moreover, any element u∈F(A) defines a natural transformation in this way. The proof in the
contravariant case is completely analogous.
In this way, Yoneda's Lemma provides a complete classification of all natural
transformations from the functor Hom(A,-) to an arbitrary functor F:C→Set.
The Yoneda embedding
An important special case of Yoneda's lemma is when the functor F from C to Set is another
hom-functor hB. In this case, the covariant version of Yoneda's lemma states that
That is, natural transformations between hom-functors are in one-to-one correspondence
with morphisms (in the reverse direction) between the associated objects. Given a
morphism f : B → A the associated natural transformation is denoted Hom(f,–).
Mapping each object A in C to its associated hom-functor hA = Hom(A,–) and each
morphism f : B → A to the corresponding natural transformation Hom(f,–) determines a
contravariant functor h from C to SetC, the functor category of all (covariant) functors from
C to Set. One can interpret h as a covariant functor:

Yoneda lemma
565
The meaning of Yoneda's lemma in this setting is that the functor h is fully faithful, and
therefore gives an embedding of Cop in the category of functors to Set. The collection of all
functors {hA, A in C} is a subcategory of SetC. Therefore, Yoneda embedding implies that
the category Cop is isomorphic to the category {hA, A in C}.
The contravariant version of Yoneda's lemma states that
Therefore, h′ gives rise to a covariant functor from C to the category of contravariant
functors to Set:
Yoneda's lemma then states that any locally small category C can be embedded in the
category of contravariant functors from C to Set via h′. This is called the Yoneda
embedding.
Preadditive categories, rings and modules
A preadditive category is a category where the morphism sets form abelian groups and the
composition of morphisms is bilinear; examples are categories of abelian groups or
modules. In a preadditive category, there is both a "multiplication" and an "addition" of
morphisms, which is why preadditive categories are viewed as generalizations of rings.
Rings are preadditive categories with one object.
The Yoneda lemma remains true for preadditive categories if we choose as our extension
the category of additive contravariant functors from the original category into the category
of abelian groups; these are functors which are compatible with the addition of morphisms
and should be thought of as forming a module category over the original category. The
Yoneda lemma then yields the natural procedure to enlarge a preadditive category so that
the enlarged version remains preadditive — in fact, the enlarged version is an abelian
category, a much more powerful condition. In the case of a ring R, the extended category is
the category of all left modules over R, and the statement of the Yoneda lemma reduces to
the well-known isomorphism
M ≅ HomR(R,M)   for all left modules M over R.
References
• Freyd, Peter (1964), Abelian categories, Harper and Row. Reprinted 2003 [1].
• Mac Lane, Saunders (1998), Categories for the Working Mathematician, Graduate Texts
in Mathematics, 5, Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-98403-8.
References
[1] http:/ / www. tac. mta. ca/ tac/ reprints/ articles/ 3/ tr3abs. html

Functor
566
Functor
In category theory, a branch of mathematics, a functor is a special type of mapping
between categories. Functors can be thought of as morphisms in the category of small
categories.
Functors were first considered in algebraic topology, where algebraic objects (like the
fundamental group) are associated to topological spaces, and algebraic homomorphisms
are associated to continuous maps. Nowadays, functors are used throughout modern
mathematics to relate various categories. The word "functor" was borrowed by
mathematicians from the philosopher Rudolf Carnap [Mac Lane, p. 30]. Carnap used the
term "functor" to stand in relation to functions analogously as predicates stand in relation
to properties. [See Carnap, The Logical Syntax of Language, p.13-14, 1937, Routledge &
Kegan Paul.] For Carnap then, unlike modern category theory's use of the term, a functor is
a linguistic item. For category theorists, a functor is a particular kind of function.
Definition
Let C and D be categories. A functor F from C to D is a mapping that
• associates to each object 
an object 
,
• associates to each morphism 
a morphism 
such that the following two conditions hold:
•
for every object 
•
for all morphisms 
and 
That is, functors must preserve identity morphisms and composition of morphisms.
A functor from a category to itself is called an endofunctor.
Covariance and contravariance
There are many constructions in mathematics which would be functors but for the fact that
they "turn morphisms around" and "reverse composition". We then define a contravariant
functor F from C to D as a mapping that
• associates to each object 
an object 
• associates to each morphism 
a morphism 
such that
•
for every object 
,
•
for all morphisms 
and 
Note that contravariant functors reverse the direction of composition.
Ordinary functors are also called covariant functors in order to distinguish them from
contravariant ones. Note that one can also define a contravariant functor as a covariant
functor on the dual category 
. Some authors prefer to write all expressions covariantly.
That is, instead of saying 
is a contravariant functor, they simply write
(or sometimes 
) and call it a functor.
Contravariant functors are also occasionally called cofunctors.

Functor
567
Examples
Constant functor: The functor C → D is one which maps every object of C to a fixed object
X in D and every morphism in C to the identity morphism on X. Such a functor is called a
constant or selection functor.
Diagonal functor: The diagonal functor is defined as the functor from D to the functor
category DC which sends each object in D to the constant functor at that object.
Limit functor: For a fixed index category J, if every functor J→C has a limit (for instance if
C is complete), then the limit functor CJ→C assigns to each functor its limit. The existence
of this functor can be proved by realizing that it is the right-adjoint to the diagonal functor
and invoking the Freyd adjoint functor theorem. This requires a suitable version of the
axiom of choice. Similar remarks apply to the colimit functor (which is covariant).
Power sets: The power set functor P : Set → Set maps each set to its power set and each
function 
to the map which sends 
to its image 
. One can also
consider the contravariant power set functor which sends 
to the map which
sends 
to its inverse image 
.
Dual vector space: The map which assigns to every vector space its dual space and to
every linear map its dual or transpose is a contravariant functor from the category of all
vector spaces over a fixed field to itself.
Fundamental group: Consider the category of pointed topological spaces, i.e. topological
spaces with distinguished points. The objects are pairs (X, x0), where X is a topological
space and x0 is a point in X. A morphism from (X, x0) to (Y, y0) is given by a continuous map
f : X → Y with f(x0) = y0.
To every topological space X with distinguished point x0, one can define the fundamental
group based at x0, denoted π1(X, x0). This is the group of homotopy classes of loops based
at x0. If f : X → Y morphism of pointed spaces, then every loop in X with base point x0 can be
composed with f to yield a loop in Y with base point y0. This operation is compatible with
the homotopy equivalence relation and the composition of loops, and we get a group
homomorphism from π(X, x0) to π(Y, y0). We thus obtain a functor from the category of
pointed topological spaces to the category of groups.
In the category of topological spaces (without distinguished point), one considers homotopy
classes of generic curves, but they cannot be composed unless they share an endpoint. Thus
one has the fundamental groupoid instead of the fundamental group, and this
construction is functorial.
Algebra of continuous functions: a contravariant functor from the category of
topological spaces (with continuous maps as morphisms) to the category of real associative
algebras is given by assigning to every topological space X the algebra C(X) of all
real-valued continuous functions on that space. Every continuous map f : X → Y induces an
algebra homomorphism C(f) : C(Y) → C(X) by the rule C(f)(φ) = φ o f for every φ in C(Y).
Tangent and cotangent bundles: The map which sends every differentiable manifold to
its tangent bundle and every smooth map to its derivative is a covariant functor from the
category of differentiable manifolds to the category of vector bundles. Likewise, the map
which sends every differentiable manifold to its cotangent bundle and every smooth map to
its pullback is a contravariant functor.
Doing these constructions pointwise gives covariant and contravariant functors from the
category of pointed differentiable manifolds to the category of real vector spaces.

Functor
568
Group actions/representations: Every group G can be considered as a category with a
single object whose morphisms are the elements of G. A functor from G to Set is then
nothing but a group action of G on a particular set, i.e. a G-set. Likewise, a functor from G
to the category of vector spaces, VectK, is a linear representation of G. In general, a functor
G → C can be considered as an "action" of G on an object in the category C. If C is a group,
then this action is a group homomorphism.
Lie algebras: Assigning to every real (complex) Lie group its real (complex) Lie algebra
defines a functor.
Tensor products: If C denotes the category of vector spaces over a fixed field, with linear
maps as morphisms, then the tensor product 
defines a functor C × C → C which is
covariant in both arguments.
Forgetful functors: The functor U : Grp → Set which maps a group to its underlying set
and a group homomorphism to its underlying function of sets is a functor. Functors like
these, which "forget" some structure, are termed forgetful functors. Another example is the
functor Rng → Ab which maps a ring to its underlying additive abelian group. Morphisms in
Rng (ring homomorphisms) become morphisms in Ab (abelian group homomorphisms).
Free functors: Going in the opposite direction of forgetful functors are free functors. The
free functor F : Set → Grp sends every set X to the free group generated by X. Functions
get mapped to group homomorphisms between free groups. Free constructions exist for
many categories based on structured sets. See free object.
Homomorphism groups: To every pair A, B of abelian groups one can assign the abelian
group Hom(A,B) consisting of all group homomorphisms from A to B. This is a functor
which is contravariant in the first and covariant in the second argument, i.e. it is a functor
Abop × Ab → Ab (where Ab denotes the category of abelian groups with group
homomorphisms). If f : A1 → A2 and g : B1 → B2 are morphisms in Ab, then the group
homomorphism Hom(f,g) : Hom(A2,B1) → Hom(A1,B2) is given by φ 
 g o φ o f. See Hom
functor.
Representable functors: We can generalize the previous example to any category C. To
every pair X, Y of objects in C one can assign the set Hom(X,Y) of morphisms from X to Y.
This defines a functor to Set which is contravariant in the first argument and covariant in
the second, i.e. it is a functor Cop × C → Set. If f : X1 → X2 and g : Y1 → Y2 are morphisms in
C, then the group homomorphism Hom(f,g) : Hom(X2,Y1) → Hom(X1,Y2) is given by φ 
 g o
φ o f.
Functors like these are called representable functors. An important goal in many settings is
to determine whether a given functor is representable.
Presheaves: If X is a topological space, then the open sets in X form a partially ordered set
Open(X) under inclusion. Like every partially ordered set, Open(X) forms a small category
by adding a single arrow U → V if and only if 
. Contravariant functors on Open(X)
are called presheaves on X. For instance, by assigning to every open set U the associative
algebra of real-valued continuous functions on U, one obtains a presheaf of algebras on X.

Functor
569
Properties
Two important consequences of the functor axioms are:
• F transforms each commutative diagram in C into a commutative diagram in D;
• if f is an isomorphism in C, then F(f) is an isomorphism in D.
On any category C one can define the identity functor 1C which maps each object and
morphism to itself. One can also compose functors, i.e. if F is a functor from A to B and G is
a functor from B to C then one can form the composite functor GF from A to C. Composition
of functors is associative where defined. This shows that functors can be considered as
morphisms in categories of categories, for example in the category of small categories.
A small category with a single object is the same thing as a monoid: the morphisms of a
one-object category can be thought of as elements of the monoid, and composition in the
category is thought of as the monoid operation. Functors between one-object categories
correspond to monoid homomorphisms. So in a sense, functors between arbitrary
categories are a kind of generalization of monoid homomorphisms to categories with more
than one object.
Bifunctors and multifunctors
A bifunctor (also known as a binary functor) is a functor in two arguments. The Hom
functor is a natural example; it is contravariant in one argument, covariant in the other.
Formally, a bifunctor is a functor whose domain is a product category. For example, the
Hom functor is of the type Cop × C → Set.
A multifunctor is a generalization of the functor concept to n variables. So, for example, a
bifunctor is a multifunctor with n=2.
Relation to other categorical concepts
Let C and D be categories. The collection of all functors C→D form the objects of a
category: the functor category. Morphisms in this category are natural transformations
between functors.
Functors are often defined by universal properties; examples are the tensor product, the
direct sum and direct product of groups or vector spaces, construction of free groups and
modules, direct and inverse limits. The concepts of limit and colimit generalize several of
the above.
Universal constructions often give rise to pairs of adjoint functors.

Functor
570
See also
Types of functors
• Additive functor: a functor between categories whose hom-sets are abelian groups is
additive if it is a group homomorphism of the hom-sets
• Adjoint functors: functors F and G are adjoint if Hom(FX,Y)≅Hom(X,GY), where the
isomorphism is natural in X and Y
• Derived functor: the image of a short exact sequence under a functor that is only
half-exact can be extended to a long exact sequence, the objects of which are images of a
derived functor
• Enriched functor
• Essentially surjective functor: a functor every object of whose codomain is isomorphic to
the image of an object in the domain
• Exact functor: a functor that takes short exact sequences to short exact sequences
• Faithful functor: a functor that is injective on the set of morphisms with given domain
and codomain
• Full functor: a functor that is surjective on the set of morphisms with given domain and
codomain
• Smooth functor: a functor F from K-Vect to K-Vect such that Hom(V,W) → Hom(FV,FW)
is smooth. Examples include V*, ΛkV, ΣkV and the like.
Other
• Diagram (category theory)
• Functor category
• Kan extension
References
• S. Mac Lane. Categories for the Working Mathematician. Springer-Verlag: New York,
1971.

Adjoint functors
571
Adjoint functors
In mathematics, adjoint functors are pairs of functors which stand in a particular
relationship with one another, called an adjunction. The relationship of adjunction is
ubiquitous in mathematics, as it rigorously reflects the intuitive notions of optimization and
efficiency. It is studied in generality by the branch of mathematics known as category
theory, which helps to minimize the repetition of the same logical details separately in
every subject.
In the most concise symmetric definition, an adjunction between categories C and D is a
pair of functors,
   and   
and a family of bijections
which is natural in the variables X and Y. The functor F is called a left adjoint functor,
while G is called a right adjoint functor. The relationship “F is left adjoint to G” (or
equivalently, “G is right adjoint to F”) is sometimes written
This definition and others are made precise below.
Introduction
“The slogan is ‘Adjoint functors arise everywhere’.” (Saunders Mac Lane, Categories for the
working mathematician)
The long list of examples in this article is only a partial indication of how often an
interesting mathematical construction is an adjoint functor. As a result, general theorems
about left/right adjoint functors, such as the equivalence of their various definitions or the
fact that they respectively preserve colimits/limits (which are also found in every area of
math), can encode the details of many useful and otherwise non-trivial results.
Motivation
One good way to motivate adjoint functors is to vaguely explain what problem they solve,
and how they solve it. (This motivation runs parallel to the definitions via universal
morphisms below.)
Adjoint functors as formulaic solutions to optimization problems
It can be said an adjoint functor is a way of giving the most efficient solution to some
problem via a method which is formulaic. For example, an elementary problem in ring
theory is how to turn a rng (which is like a ring that might not have a multiplicative
identity) into a ring. The most efficient way is to adjoin an element '1' to the rng, adjoin no
unnecessary extra elements (we will need to have r+1 for each r in the ring, clearly), and
impose no relations in the newly formed ring that are not forced by axioms. Moreover, this
construction is formulaic in the sense that it works in essentially the same way for any rng.
This is rather vague, though suggestive, and can be made precise in the language of 
category theory: a construction is most efficient if it satisfies a universal property, and is 
formulaic if it defines a functor. Universal properties come in two types: initial properties

Adjoint functors
572
and terminal properties. Since these are dual (opposite) notions, it is only necessary to
discuss one of them.
The idea of using an initial property is to set up the problem in terms of some auxiliary
category E, and then identify that what we want is to find an initial object of E. This has an
advantage that the optimization — the sense that we are finding the most efficient solution
— means something rigorous and is recognisable, rather like the attainment of a
supremum. Picking the right category E is something of a knack: for example, take the
given rng R, and make a category E whose objects are rng homomorphisms R → S, with S a
ring having a multiplicative identity. The morphisms in E are commutative triangles of the
form (R → S1,R → S2, S1 → S2) where S1 → S2 is a ring map (which preserves the identity).
The assertion that an object R → R* is initial in E means that the ring R* is a most efficient
solution to our problem.
The two facts that this method of turning rngs into rings is most efficient and
formulaic can be expressed simultaneously by saying that it defines an adjoint
functor.
The hidden symmetry of optimization problems
Continuing this discussion, suppose we started with the functor F, and posed the following
(vague) question: is there a problem to which F is the most efficient solution?
The notion of that F is the most efficient solution to the problem posed by G is, in a
certain rigorous sense, equivalent to the notion that G poses the most difficult
problem which F solves.
This has the intuitive meaning that adjoint functors should occur in pairs, and in fact they
do, but this is not trivial from the universal morphism definitions. The equivalent symmetric
definitions involving adjunctions and the symmetric language of adjoint functors (we can
say either F is left adjoint to G or G is right ajoint to F) have the advantage of making this
fact explicit.
Formal definitions
There are various definitions for adjoint functors. Their equivalence is elementary but not
at all trivial and in fact highly useful. This article provides several such definitions:
• The definitions via universal morphisms are easy to state, and require minimal
verifications when constructing an adjoint functor or proving two functors are adjoint.
They are also the most analogous to our intuition involving optimizations.
• The definition via counit-unit adjunction is convenient for proofs about functors which are
known to be adjoint, because they provide formulas that can be directly manipulated.
• The definition via hom-sets makes symmetry the most apparent, and is the reason for
using the word adjoint.
Adjoint functors arise everywhere, in all areas of mathematics. Their full usefulness lies in
that the structure in any of these definitions gives rise to the structures in the others via a
long but trivial series of deductions. Thus, switching between them makes implicit use of a
great deal of tedious details that would otherwise have to be repeated separately in every
subject area. For example, naturality and terminality of the counit can be used to prove that
any right adjoint functor preserves limits.

Adjoint functors
573
A helpful writing convention
The theory of adjoints has the terms left and right at its foundation, and there are many
components which live in one of two categories C and D which are under consideration. It
can therefore be extremely helpful to choose letters in alphabetical order according to
whether they live in the "lefthand" category C or the "righthand" category D, and also to
write them down in this order whenever possible.
In this article for example, the letters X, F, f, ε will consistently denote things which live in
the category C, the letters Y, G, g, η will consistently denote things which live in the
category D, and whenever possible such things will be referred to in order from left to right
(a functor F:C←D can be thought of as "living" where its outputs are, in C).
Definitions via universal morphisms
A functor F : C ← D is a left adjoint functor if for each object X in C, there exists a
terminal morphism from F to X. If G : C → D is another functor such that terminal
morphisms to F can be taken of the form   
  for each X (so each εX is a morphism
F(GX)→X), then we say G is right adjoint to F.
A functor G : C → D is a right adjoint functor if for each object Y in D, there exists an
initial morphism from Y to G. If F : C ← D is another functor such that initial morphisms to G
can be taken of the form   
  for each Y (so each ηY is a morphism Y→G(FY)), then
we say F is left adjoint to F.
Remarks: 
It is true, but not immediate from these definitions, that F is left adjoint to G if and only if G
is right adjoint to F, and that every left adjoint functor is left adjoint to some right adjoint
functor G which is essentially unique (and the dual statement). The equivalent symmetric
definitions below make these facts less confusing to remember, and have more immediate
inmplications because of the adjunction structures they invoke. On the other hand, these
universal morphism definitions are useful for establishing adjoints, because they are
technically minimalistic in their requirements, and intuitively meaningful in that finding
universal morphisms is like optimization.
Definition via counit-unit adjunction
A counit-unit adjunction between two categories C and D consists of two functors F : C ←
D and G : C → D and two natural transformations
respectively called the counit and the unit of the adjunction (terminology from universal
algebra*), such that the compositions
are the identity transformations 1F and 1G on F and G respectively.
In this situation we say that F is left adjoint to G and G is right adjoint to F , and may
indicate this relationship by writing   
 , or simply   
 .
In equation form, the above conditions on (ε,η) are the counit-unit equations

Adjoint functors
574
which mean that for each X in C and each Y in D,
.
These equations are useful in reducing proofs about adjoint functors to algebraic
manipulations. They are sometimes called the zig-zag equations because of the appearance
of the corresponding string diagrams. A way to remember them is to first write down the
nonsensical equation 
and then fill in either F or G in one of the two simple ways
which make the compositions defined.
Note: The use of the prefix "co" in counit here is not consistent with the terminology of
limits and colimits, because a colimit satisfies an initial property whereas the counit
morphisms will satisfy terminal properties, and dually. The term unit here is borrowed from
the theory of monads where it looks like the insertion of the identity 1 into a monoid.
Definition via hom-set adjunction
A hom-set adjunction between two categories C and D consists of two functors F : C ← D
and G : C → D and a natural isomorphism
.
This specifies a family of bijections
.
for all objects X in C and Y in D.
In this situation we say that F is left adjoint to G and G is right adjoint to F , and may
indicate this relationship by writing   
 , or simply   
 .
This definition is a logical compromise in that it is somewhat more difficult to satisfy than
the universal morphism definitions, and has fewer immediate implications than the
counit-unit definition. It is useful because of its obvious symmetry, and as a stepping-stone
between the other definitions.
In order to interpret Φ as a natural isomorphism, one must recognize homC(F–, –) and
homD(–, G–) as functors. In fact, they are both bifunctors from Dop × C to Set (the category
of sets). For details, see the article on hom functors. Explicitly, the naturality of Φ means
that for all morphisms f : X → X ′ in C and all morphisms g : Y ′ → Y in D the following
diagram commutes:

Adjoint functors
575
The vertical arrows in this diagram are those induced by composition with f and g.
Adjunctions in full
There are hence numerous functors and natural transformations associated with every
adjunction, and only a small portion is sufficient to determine the rest.
An 'adjunction between categories C and D consists of
• A functor F : C ← D called the left adjoint
• A functor G : C → D called the right adjoint
• A natural isomorphism Φ : homC(F–,–) → homD(–,G–)
• A natural transformation ε : FG → 1C called the counit
• A natural transformation η : 1D → GF called the unit
An equivalent formulation, where X denotes any object of C and Y denotes any object of D:
For 
every 
C-morphism 
  
  
there 
is 
a 
unique 
D-morphism 
 
  such that the diagrams below commute, and for every
D-morphism   
  there is a unique C-morphism   
  in C
such that the diagrams below commute:
From this assertion, one can recover that:
• The transformations ε, η, and Φ are related by the equations
• The transformations ε, η satisfy the counit-unit equations
• Each pair 
is a terminal morphism from F to X in C
• Each pair   
is an initial morphism from Y to G in D
In particular, the equations above allow one to define (ε,η) in terms of Φ or vice versa. We
will demonstrate the equivalence of these situations below.

Adjoint functors
576
Universal morphisms induce hom-set adjunction
Given a right adjoint functor   
  in the sense of initial morphisms, we can
construct a functor   
  and hom-set adjunction
in the following steps:
• For each Y in D, choose an initial morphism   
  from Y to G, so we have  
 .
• Initiality of these morphisms allows us to construct a unique functor   
  such
that   
  and   
  is a natural transformation.
• For every morphism   
 , initiality of   
  means we can let   
  be the unique morphism   
  such that   
 .
• The map   
  is injective by uniqueness and
surjective because we can solve its defining equation for f. It is natural in X because η is
natural, and natural in Y because G is a functor. Hence letting  
  gives a hom-set adjunction as required.
A similar argument allows one to construct a hom-set adjunction from the terminal
morphisms to a left adjoint functor. (The construction that starts with a right adjoint is
slightly more common, since the right adjoint in many adjoint pairs is a trivially defined
inclusion or forgetful functor.)
Counit-unit adjunction induces hom-set adjunction
Given functors   
 ,   
  , and a counit-unit adjunction   
 , we can construct a hom-set adjunction
in the following steps:
• For each   
  and each   
 , define
The transformations Φ and Ψ are natural because η and ε are natural.
• Using, in order, that F is a functor, that ε is natural, and the counit-unit equation  
 , we obtain
hence ΨΦ is the identity transformation.
• Dually, using that G is a functor, that η is natural, and the counit-unit equation  
 , we obtain
hence ΦΨ is the identity transformation, so Φ is a natural isomorphism with inverse Φ-1
= Ψ.

Adjoint functors
577
Hom-set adjunction induces all of the above
Given 
functors 
  
 , 
  
 , 
and 
a 
hom-set 
adjunction 
 
 , we can construct a counit-unit adjunction
 ,
which defines families of initial and terminal morphisms, in the following steps:
• Let   
  for each X in C, where  
  is the identity morphism.
• Let   
  for each Y in D, where  
  is the identity morphism.
• The bijectivity and naturality of Φ imply that each   
  is a terminal morphism
from X to F in C, and each   
  is an initial morphism from Y to G in D.
• The naturality of Φ implies the naturality of ε and η, and the two formulas
for each f: FY → X and g: Y → GX (which completely determine Φ).
• Substituting FY for X and   
  for g in the second formula gives the first
counit-unit equation
,
and substituting GX for Y and   
  for f in the first formula gives the
second counit-unit equation
.
Historical perspective
Ubiquity of adjoint functors
The idea of an adjoint functor was formulated by Daniel Kan in 1958. Like many of the
concepts in category theory, it was suggested by the needs of homological algebra, which
was at the time devoted to computations. Those faced with giving tidy, systematic
presentations of the subject would have noticed relations such as
hom(F(X), Y) = hom(X, G(Y))
in the category of abelian groups, where F was the functor 
(i.e. take the tensor
product with A), and G was the functor hom(A,–). The use of the equals sign is an abuse of
notation; those two groups are not really identical but there is a way of identifying them
that is natural. It can be seen to be natural on the basis, firstly, that these are two
alternative descriptions of the bilinear mappings from X × A to Y. That is, however,
something particular to the case of tensor product. In category theory the 'naturality' of the
bijection is subsumed in the concept of a natural isomorphism.
The terminology comes from the Hilbert space idea of adjoint operators T, U with <Tx,y> =
<x,Uy>, which is formally similar to the above relation between hom-sets. We say that F is
left adjoint to G, and G is right adjoint to F. Note that G may have itself a right adjoint that
is quite different from F (see below for an example). The analogy to adjoint maps of Hilbert
spaces can be made precise in certain contexts[1] .

Adjoint functors
578
If one starts looking for these adjoint pairs of functors, they turn out to be very common in
abstract algebra, and elsewhere as well. The example section below provides evidence of
this; furthermore, universal constructions, which may be more familiar to some, give rise to
numerous adjoint pairs of functors.
In accordance with the thinking of Saunders Mac Lane, any idea such as adjoint functors
that occurs widely enough in mathematics should be studied for its own sake.
Problems formulated with adjoint functors
Mathematicians do not generally need the full adjoint functor concept. Concepts can be
judged according to their use in solving problems, as well as for their use in building
theories. The tension between these two motivations was especially great during the 1950s
when category theory was initially developed. Enter Alexander Grothendieck, who used
category theory to take compass bearings in foundational, axiomatic work — in functional
analysis, homological algebra and finally algebraic geometry.
It is probably wrong to say that he promoted the adjoint functor concept in isolation: but
recognition of the role of adjunction was inherent in Grothendieck's approach. For example,
one of his major achievements was the formulation of Serre duality in relative form — one
could say loosely, in a continuous family of algebraic varieties. The entire proof turned on
the existence of a right adjoint to a certain functor. This is something undeniably abstract,
and non-constructive, but also powerful in its own way.
The case of partial orders
Every partially ordered set can be viewed as a category (with a single morphism between x
and y if and only if x ≤ y). A pair of adjoint functors between two partially ordered sets is
called a Galois connection (or, if it is contravariant, an antitone Galois connection). See that
article for a number of examples: the case of Galois theory of course is a leading one. Any
Galois connection gives rise to closure operators and to inverse order-preserving bijections
between the corresponding closed elements.
As is the case for Galois groups, the real interest lies often in refining a correspondence to
a duality (i.e. antitone order isomorphism). A treatment of Galois theory along these lines
by Kaplansky was influential in the recognition of the general structure here.
The partial order case collapses the adjunction definitions quite noticeably, but can provide
several themes:
• adjunctions may not be dualities or isomorphisms, but are candidates for upgrading to
that status
• closure operators may indicate the presence of adjunctions, as corresponding monads (cf.
the Kuratowski closure axioms)
• a very general comment of Martin Hyland is that syntax and semantics are adjoint: take
C to be the set of all logical theories (axiomatizations), and D the power set of the set of
all mathematical structures. For a theory T in C, let F(T) be the set of all structures that
satisfy the axioms T; for a set of mathematical structures S, let G(S) be the minimal
axiomatization of S. We can then say that F(T) is a subset of S if and only if T logically
implies G(S): the "semantics functor" F is left adjoint to the "syntax functor" G.
• division is (in general) the attempt to invert multiplication, but many examples, such as
the introduction of implication in propositional logic, or the ideal quotient for division by
ring ideals, can be recognised as the attempt to provide an adjoint.

Adjoint functors
579
Together these observations provide explanatory value all over mathematics.
Examples
Free groups (instructive example)
The construction of free groups is an extremely common adjoint construction, and a useful
example for making sense of the above details.
Suppose that F : Grp ← Set is the functor assigning to each set Y the free group generated
by the elements of Y, and that G : Grp → Set is the forgetful functor functor, which assigns
to each group X its underlying set. Then F is left adjoint to G:
Terminal morphisms. For each group X, the group FGX is the free group generated freely
by GX, the elements of X. Let   
  be the group homomorphism which sends
the generators of FGX to the elements of X they correspond to, which exists by the
universal property of free groups. Then each   
  is a terminal morphism from F to
X, because any group homomorphism from a free group FZ to X will factor through  
  via a unique set map from Z to GX. This means that (F,G) is an adjoint
pair.
Initial morphisms. For each set Y, the set GFY is just the underlying set of the free group
FY generated by Y. Let   
  be the set map given by "inclusion of
generators". Then each   
  is an initial morphism from Y to G, because any set map
from Y to the underlying set GW of a group will factor through   
  via a
unique group homomorphism from FY to W. This also means that (F,G) is an adjoint pair.
Hom-set adjunction. Maps from the free group FY to a group X correspond precisely to
maps from the set Y to the set GX: each homomorphism from FY to X is fully determined by
its action on generators. One can verify directly that this correspondence is a natural
transformation, which means it is a hom-set adjunction for the pair (F,G).
Counit-unit adjunction. One can also verify directly that ε and η are natural. Then, a
direct verification that they form a counit-unit adjunction   
  is as follows:
The first counit-unit equation   
  says that for each set Y the composition
should be the identity. The intermediate group FGFY is the free group generated freely by
the words of the free group FY. (Think of these words as placed in parentheses to indicate
that they are independent generators.) The arrow   
  is the group homomorphism
from FY into FGFY sending each generator y of FY to the corresponding word of length one
(y) as a generator of FGFY. The arrow   
  is the group homomorphism from FGFY to FY
sending each generator to the word of FY it corresponds to (so this map is "dropping
parentheses"). The composition of these maps is indeed the identity on FY.
The second counit-unit equation   
  says that for each group X the
composition
should be the identity. The intermediate set GFGX is just the underlying set of FGX. The 
arrow   
  is the "inclusion of generators" set map from the set GX to the set GFGX. The 
arrow   
  is the set map from GFGX to GX which underlies the group homomorphism 
sending each generator of FGX to the element of X it corresponds to ("dropping

Adjoint functors
580
parentheses"). The composition of these maps is indeed the identity on GX.
Free constructions and forgetful functors
Free objects are all examples of a left adjoint to a forgetful functor which assigns to an
algebraic object its underlying set. These algebraic free functors have generally the same
description of as in the detailed description of the free group situation above.
Diagonal functors and limits
Products, fibred products, equalizers, and kernels are all examples of the categorical notion
of a limit. Any limit functor is right adjoint to a corresponding diagonal functor (provided
the category has the type of limits in question), and the counit of the adjunction provides
the defining maps from the limit object. Below are some specific examples.
• Products Let Π : Grp2 → Grp the functor which assigns to each pair (X1, X2) the product
group X1×X2, and let Δ : Grp2 ← Grp be the diagonal functor which assigns to every
group X the pair (X, X) in the product category Grp2. The universal property of the
product group shows that Π is right-adjoint to Δ. The counit of this adjunction is the
defining pair of projection maps from X1×X2 to X1 and X2 which define the limit, and the
unit is the diagonal inclusion of a group X into X1×X2 (mapping x to (x,x)).
The cartesian product of sets, the product of rings, the product of topological spaces
etc. follow the same pattern; it can also be extended in a straightforward manner to
more than just two factors. More generally, any type of limit is right adjoint to a
diagonal functor.
• Kernels. Consider the category D of homomorphisms of abelian groups. If f1 : A1 → B1
and f2 : A2 → B2 are two objects of D, then a morphism from f1 to f2 is a pair (gA, gB) of
morphisms such that gBf1 = f2gA. Let G : D → Ab be the functor which assigns to each
homomorphism its kernel and let F : D ← Ab be the functor which maps the group A to
the homomorphism A → 0. Then G is right adjoint to F, which expresses the universal
property of kernels. The counit of this adjunction is the defining embedding of a
homomorphism's kernel into the homomorphism's domain, and the unit is the morphism
identifying a group A with the kernel of the homomorphism A → 0.
A suitable variation of this example also shows that the kernel functors for vector
spaces and for modules are right adjoints. Analogously, one can show that the cokernel
functors for abelian groups, vector spaces and modules are left adjoints.
Colimits and diagonal functors
Coproducts, fibred coproducts, coequalizers, and cokernels are all examples of the
categorical notion of a colimit. Any colimit functor is left adjoint to a corresponding
diagonal functor (provided the category has the type of colimits in question), and the the
unit of the adjunction provides the defining maps into the colimit object. Below are some
specific examples.
• Coproducts. If F : Ab ← Ab2 assigns to every pair (X1, X2) of abelian groups their direct 
sum, and if G : Ab → Ab2 is the functor which assigns to every abelian group Y the pair 
(Y, Y), then F is left adjoint to G, again a consequence of the universal property of direct 
sums. The unit of this adjoint pair is the defining pair of inclusion maps from X1 and X2 
into the direct sum, and the counit is the additive map from the direct sum of (X,X) to

Adjoint functors
581
back to X (sending an element (a,b) of the direct sum to the element a+b of X).
Analogous examples are given by the direct sum of vector spaces and modules, by the
free product of groups and by the disjoint union of sets.
Further examples
In algebra
• Adjoining an identity to a rng. This example was discussed in the motivation section
above. Given a rng R, a multiplicative identity element can be added by taking RxZ and
defining a Z-bilinear product with (r,0)(0,1) = (0,1)(r,0) = (r,0), (r,0)(s,0) = (rs,0),
(0,1)(0,1) = (0,1). This constructs a left adjoint to the functor taking a ring to the
underlying rng.
• Ring extensions. Suppose R and S are rings, and ρ : R → S is a ring homomorphism.
Then S can be seen as a (left) R-module, and the tensor product with S yields a functor F
: R-Mod → S-Mod. Then F is left adjoint to the forgetful functor G : S-Mod → R-Mod.
• Tensor products. If R is a ring and M is a right R module, then the tensor product with
M yields a functor F : R-Mod → Ab. The functor G : Ab → R-Mod, defined by G(A) =
homZ(M,A) for every abelian group A, is a right adjoint to F.
• From monoids and groups to rings The integral monoid ring construction gives a
functor from monoids to rings. This functor is left adjoint to the functor that associates to
a given ring its underlying multiplicative monoid. Similarly, the integral group ring
construction yields a functor from groups to rings, left adjoint to the functor that assigns
to a given ring its group of units. One can also start with a field K and consider the
category of K-algebras instead of the category of rings, to get the monoid and group rings
over K.
• Field of fractions. Consider the category Domm of integral domains with injective
morphisms. The forgetful functor Field → Domm from fields has a left adjoint - it assigns
to every integral domain its field of fractions.
• Polynomial rings. Let Ring* be the category of pointed commutative rings with unity
(pairs (A,a) where A is a ring, 
and morphisms preserve the distinguished
elements). The forgetful functor G:Ring* → Ring has a left adjoint - it assigns to every
ring R the pair (R[x],x) where R[x] is the polynomial ring with coefficients from R.
• Abelianization. Consider the inclusion functor G : Ab → Grp from the category of
abelian groups to category of groups. It has a left adjoint called abelianization which
assigns to every group G the quotient group Gab=G/[G,G].
• The Grothendieck group. In K-theory, the point of departure is to observe that the
category of vector bundles on a topological space has a commutative monoid structure
under direct sum. One may make an abelian group out of this monoid, the Grothendieck
group, by formally adding an additive inverse for each bundle (or equivalence class).
Alternatively one can observe that the functor that for each group takes the underlying
monoid (ignoring inverses) has a left adjoint. This is a once-for-all construction, in line
with the third section discussion above. That is, one can imitate the construction of
negative numbers; but there is the other option of an existence theorem. For the case of
finitary algebraic structures, the existence by itself can be referred to universal algebra,
or model theory; naturally there is also a proof adapted to category theory, too.

Adjoint functors
582
• Frobenius reciprocity in the representation theory of groups: see induced
representation. This example foreshadowed the general theory by about half a century.
In topology
• A functor with a left and a right adjoint. Let G be the functor from topological spaces
to sets that associates to every topological space its underlying set (forgetting the
topology, that is). G has a left adjoint F, creating the discrete space on a set Y, and a
right adjoint H creating the trivial topology on Y.
• Suspensions and loop spaces Given topological spaces X and Y, the space [SX, Y] of
homotopy classes of maps from the suspension SX of X to Y is naturally isomorphic to the
space [X, ΩY] of homotopy classes of maps from X to the loop space ΩY of Y. This is an
important fact in homotopy theory.
• Stone-Čech compactification. Let KHaus be the category of compact Hausdorff
spaces and G : KHaus → Top be the forgetful functor to the category of topological
spaces. Then G has a left adjoint F : Top → KHaus, the Stone–Čech compactification. The
counit of this adjoint pair yields a continuous map from every topological space X into its
Stone-Čech compactification. This map is an embedding (i.e. injective, continuous and
open) if and only if X is a Tychonoff space.
• Direct and inverse images of sheaves Every continuous map f : X → Y between
topological spaces induces a functor f ∗ from the category of sheaves (of sets, or abelian
groups, or rings...) on X to the corresponding category of sheaves on Y, the direct image
functor. It also induces a functor f −1 from the category of sheaves of abelian groups on Y
to the category of sheaves of abelian groups on X, the inverse image functor. f −1 is left
adjoint to f ∗. Here a more subtle point is that the left adjoint for coherent sheaves will
differ from that for sheaves (of sets).
• Soberification. The article on Stone duality describes an adjunction between the
category of topological spaces and the category of sober spaces that is known as
soberification. Notably, the article also contains a detailed description of another
adjunction that prepares the way for the famous duality of sober spaces and spatial
locales, exploited in pointless topology.
In category theory
• A series of adjunctions. The functor π0 which assigns to a category its sets of
connected components is left-adjoint to the functor D which assigns to a set the discrete
category on that set. Moreover, D is left-adjoint to the object functor U which assigns to
each category its set of objects, and finally U is left-adjoint to A which assigns to each set
the antidiscrete category on that set.
• Exponential object. In a cartesian closed category the endofunctor C → C given by –×A
has a right adjoint –A.

Adjoint functors
583
Properties
Uniqueness of adjoints
If the functor F : C ← D has two right adjoints G and G′, then G and G′ are naturally
isomorphic. The same is true for left adjoints.
Conversely, if F is left adjoint to G, and G is naturally isomorphic to G′ then F is also left
adjoint to G′. More generally, if 〈F, G, ε, η〉 is an adjunction (with counit-unit (ε,η)) and
σ : F → F′
τ : G → G′
are natural isomorphisms then 〈F′, G′, ε′, η′〉 is an adjunction where
Here 
denotes vertical composition of natural transformations, and 
denotes horizontal
composition.
Composition
Adjunctions can be composed in a natural fashion. Specifically, if 〈F, G, ε, η〉 is an
adjunction between C and D and 〈F′, G′, ε′, η′〉 is an adjunction between D and E then the
functor
is left adjoint to
The counit and the unit of this adjunction are given by the compositions:
One can then form a category whose objects are all small categories and whose morphisms
are adjunctions.
Adjoints preserve limits
The most important property of adjoints is their continuity: every functor that has a left
adjoint (and therefore is a right adjoint) is continuous (i.e. commutes with limits in the
category theoretical sense); every functor that has a right adjoint (and therefore is a left
adjoint) is cocontinuous (i.e. commutes with colimits).
Since many common constructions in mathematics are limits or colimits, this provides a
wealth of information. For example:
• applying a right adjoint functor to a product of objects yields the product of the images;
• applying a left adjoint functor to a coproduct of objects yields the coproduct of the
images;
• every right adjoint functor is left exact;
• every left adjoint functor is right exact.

Adjoint functors
584
Additivity
If C and D are preadditive categories and F : C ← D is an additive functor with a right
adjoint G : C → D, then G is also an additive functor and the hom-set bijections
are, in fact, isomorphisms of abelian groups. Dually, if G is additive with a left adjoint F,
then F is also additive.
Moreover, if both C and D are additive categories (i.e. preadditive categories with all finite
biproducts), then any pair of adjoint functors between them are automatically additive.
General existence theorem
Not every functor G : C → D admits a left adjoint. If C is a complete category, then the
functors with left adjoints can be characterized by the adjoint functor theorem of Peter J.
Freyd: G has a left adjoint if and only if it is continuous and a certain smallness condition is
satisfied: for every object Y of D there exists a family of morphisms
fi : Y → G(Xi)
where the indices i come from a set I, not a proper class, such that every morphism
h : Y → G(X)
can be written as
h = G(t) o fi
for some i in I and some morphism
t : Xi → X in C.
An analogous statement characterizes those functors with a right adjoint.
Relationship to other categorical concepts
Universal constructions
As stated earlier, an adjunction between categories C and D gives rise to a family of
universal morphisms, one for each object in C and one for each object in D. Conversely, if
there exists a universal morphism to a functor G : C → D from every object of D, then G has
a left adjoint.
However, universal constructions are more general than adjoint functors: a universal
construction is like an optimization problem; it gives rise to an adjoint pair if and only if this
problem has a solution for every object of D (equivalently, every object of C).
Equivalences of categories
Every equivalence of categories defines an adjunction. If F : C ← D and G : C → D are
functors with natural isomorphisms ε : FG → 1C and η : 1D → GF then (F, G) form an adjoint
pair with counit ε and unit η. Conversely, an adjunction 〈F, G, ε, η〉 defines an equivalence
of categories if and only if the counit and unit are natural isomorphisms (and not just
natural transformations).
If (F, G) define an equivalence of categories, then F is not only a left adjoint of G but a right
adjoint as well. Explicitly, if 〈F, G, ε, η〉 is an adjoint equivalence then so is 〈G, F, η−1, ε−1〉.

Adjoint functors
585
Every adjunction 〈F, G, ε, η〉 extends an equivalence of certain subcategories. Define C1 as
the full subcategory of C consisting of those objects X of C for which εX is an isomorphism,
and define D1 as the full subcategory of D consisting of those objects Y of D for which ηY is
an isomorphism. Then F and G can be restricted to D1 and C1 and yield inverse
equivalences of these subcategories.
In a sense, then, adjoints are "generalized" inverses. Note however that a right inverse of F
(i.e. a functor G such that FG is naturally isomorphic to 1D) need not be a right (or left)
adjoint of F. Adjoints generalize two-sided inverses.
Monads
Every adjunction 〈F, G, ε, η〉 gives rise to an associated monad 〈T, η, μ〉 in the category D.
The functor
is given by T = GF. The unit of the monad
is just the unit η of the adjunction and the multiplication transformation
is given by μ = GεF. Dually, the triple 〈FG, ε, FηG〉 defines a comonad in D.
Every monad arises from some adjunction—in fact, typically from many adjunctions—in the
above fashion. Two constructions, called the category of Eilenberg-Moore algebras and the
Kleisli category are two extremal solutions to the problem of constructing an adjunction
that gives rise to a given monad.
References
[1] arXiv.org: John C. Baez Higher-Dimensional Algebra II: 2-Hilbert Spaces (http:/ / www. arxiv. org/ abs/ q-alg/
9609018).
• Adámek, Jiří; Horst Herrlich, and George E. Strecker (1990).
http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc/acc.pdf|Abstract and Concrete Categories. John
Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-60922-6. http:/ / katmat. math. uni-bremen. de/ acc/ acc. pdf.
• Mac Lane, Saunders (1998). Categories for the Working Mathematician. Graduate Texts
in Mathematics 5 ((2nd ed.) ed.). Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-98403-8.
External links
• Adjunctions (http:/ / www. youtube. com/ view_play_list?p=54B49729E5102248) Seven
short lectures on adjunctions.

Representable functor
586
Representable functor
In mathematics, especially in category theory, a representable functor is a functor of a
special form from an arbitrary category into the category of sets. Such functors give
representations of an abstract category in terms of known structures (i.e. sets and
functions) allowing one to utilize, as much as possible, knowledge about the category of
sets in other settings.
From another point of view, representable functors for a category C are the functors given
with C. Their theory is a vast generalisation of upper sets in posets, and of Cayley's theorem
in group theory.
Definition
Let C be a locally small category and let Set be the category of sets. For each object A of C
let Hom(A,–) be the hom functor which maps objects X to the set Hom(A,X).
A functor F : C → Set is said to be representable if it is naturally isomorphic to Hom(A,–)
for some object A of C. A representation of F is a pair (A, Φ) where
Φ : Hom(A,–) → F
is a natural isomorphism.
A contravariant functor G : C → Set is said to be representable if it is naturally isomorphic
to the contravariant hom-functor Hom(–,A) for some object A of C.
Universal elements
According to Yoneda's lemma, natural transformations from Hom(A,–) to F are in one-to-one
correspondence with the elements of F(A). Given a natural transformation Φ : Hom(A,–) → F
the corresponding element of u ∈ F(A) is given by
Conversely, given any element u ∈ F(A) we may define a natural transformation Φ :
Hom(A,–) → F via
where f is an element of Hom(A,X). In order to get a representation of F we want to know
when the natural transformation induced by u is an isomorphism. This leads to the
following definition:
A universal element of a functor F : C → Set is a pair (A,u) consisting of an object A
of C and an element u ∈ F(A) such that for every pair (X,v) with v ∈ F(X) there exists a
unique morphism f : A → X such that (Ff)u = v.
A universal element may be viewed as a universal morphism from the one-point set {•} to
the functor F or as an initial object in the category of elements of F.
The natural transformation induced by an element u ∈ F(A) is an isomorphism if and only if
(A,u) is a universal element of F. We therefore conclude that representations of F are in
one-to-one correspondence with universal elements of F. For this reason, it is common to
refer to universal elements (A,u) as representations.

Representable functor
587
Examples
• Consider the contravariant functor P : Set → Set which maps each set to its power set
and each function to its inverse image map. To represent this functor we need a pair
(A,u) where A is a set and u is a subset of A, i.e. an element of P(A), such that for all sets
X, the hom-set Hom(X,A) is isomorphic to P(X) via ΦX(f) = (Pf)u = f–1(u). Take A = {0,1}
and u = {1}. Given a subset S ⊆ X the corresponding function from X to A is the
characteristic function of S.
• Forgetful functors to Set are very often representable. It particular, a forgetful functor is
represented by (A, u) whenever A is a free object over a singleton set with generator u.
• The forgetful functor Grp → Set on the category of groups is represented by (Z, 1).
• The forgetful functor Ring → Set on the category of rings is represented by (Z[x], x),
the polynomial ring in one variable with integer coefficients.
• The forgetful functor Vect → Set on the category of real vector spaces is represented
by (R, 1).
• The forgetful functor Top → Set on the category of topological spaces is represented
by any singleton topological space with its unique element.
• A group G can be considered a category (even a groupoid) with one object which we
denote by •. A functor from G to Set then corresponds to a G-set. The unique
hom-functor Hom(•,–) from G to Set corresponds to the canonical G-set G with the action
of left multiplication. Standard arguments from group theory show that a functor from G
to Set is representable if and only if the corresponding G-set is simply transitive (i.e. a
G-torsor). Choosing a representation amounts to choosing an identity for the group
structure.
• Let C be the category of CW-complexes with morphisms given by homotopy classes of
continuous functions. For each natural number n there is a contravariant functor Hn : C →
Ab which assigns each CW-complex its nth cohomology group (with integer coefficients).
Composing this with the forgetful functor we have a contravariant functor from C to Set.
Brown's representability theorem in algebraic topology says that this functor is
represented by a CW-complex K(Z,n) called an Eilenberg-Mac Lane space.
Properties
Uniqueness
Representations of functors are unique up to a unique isomorphism. That is, if (A1,Φ1) and
(A2,Φ2) represent the same functor, then there exists a unique isomorphism φ : A1 → A2
such that
as natural isomorphisms from Hom(A2,–) to Hom(A1,–). This fact follows easily from
Yoneda's lemma.
Stated in terms of universal elements: if (A1,u1) and (A2,u2) represent the same functor,
then there exists a unique isomorphism φ : A1 → A2 such that

Representable functor
588
Preservation of limits
Representable functors are naturally isomorphic to Hom functors and therefore share their
properties. In particular, (covariant) representable functors preserve all limits. It follows
that any functor which fails to preserve some limit is not representable.
Contravariant representable functors take colimits to limits.
Left adjoint
Any functor K : C → Set with a left adjoint F : Set → C is represented by (FX, ηX(•)) where X
= {•} is a singleton set and η is the unit of the adjunction.
Conversely, if K is represented by a pair (A, u) and all small copowers of A exist in C then K
has a left adjoint F which sends each set I to the Ith copower of A.
Therefore, if C is a category with all small copowers, a functor K : C → Set is representable
if and only if it has a left adjoint.
Relation to universal morphisms and adjoints
The categorical notions of universal morphisms and adjoint functors can both be expressed
using representable functors.
Let G : D → C be a functor and let X be an object of C. Then (A,φ) is a universal morphism
from X to G if and only if (A,φ) is a representation of the functor HomC(X,G–) from D to Set.
It follows that G has a left-adjoint F if and only if HomC(X,G–) is representable for all X in C.
The natural isomorphism ΦX : HomD(FX,–) → HomC(X,G–) yields the adjointness; that is
is a bijection for all X and Y.
The dual statements are also true. Let F : C → D be a functor and let Y be an object of D.
Then (A,φ) is a universal morphism from F to Y if and only if (A,φ) is a representation of the
functor HomD(F–,Y) from C to Set. It follows that F has a right-adjoint G if and only if
HomD(F–,Y) is representable for all Y in D.
References
• Mac Lane, Saunders (1998). Categories for the Working Mathematician. Graduate Texts
in Mathematics 5 (2nd ed.). Springer. ISBN 0-387-98403-8.

Functor category
589
Functor category
In category theory, a branch of mathematics, the functors between two given categories
can themselves be turned into a category; the morphisms in this functor category are
natural transformations between functors. Functor categories are of interest for two main
reasons:
• many commonly occurring categories are (disguised) functor categories, so any
statement proved for general functor categories is widely applicable;
• every category embeds in a functor category (via the Yoneda embedding); the functor
category often has nicer properties than the original category, allowing certain
operations that were not available in the original setting.
An element of a functor category is called a diagram.
Definition
Suppose C is a small category (i.e. the objects form a set rather than a proper class) and D
is an arbitrary category. The category of functors from C to D, written as Funct(C,D) or DC,
has as objects the covariant functors from C to D, and as morphisms the natural
transformations between such functors. Note that natural transformations can be
composed: if μ(X) : F(X) → G(X) is a natural transformation from the functor F : C → D to the
functor G : C → D, and η(X) : G(X) → H(X) is a natural transformation from the functor G to
the functor H, then the collection η(X)μ(X) : F(X) → H(X) defines a natural transformation
from F to H. With this composition of natural transformations (known as vertical
composition, see natural transformation), DC satisfies the axioms of a category.
In a completely analogous way, one can also consider the category of all contravariant
functors from C to D; we write this as Funct(Cop,D).
If C and D are both preadditive categories (i.e. their morphism sets are abelian groups and
the composition of morphisms is bilinear), then we can consider the category of all additive
functors from C to D, denoted by Add(C,D).
Examples
• If I is a small discrete category (i.e. its only morphisms are the identity morphisms), then
a functor from I to C essentially consists of a family of objects of C, indexed by I; the
functor category CI can be identified with the corresponding product category: its
elements are families of objects in C and its morphisms are families of morphisms in C.
• A directed graph consists of a set of arrows and a set of vertices, and two functions from
the arrow set to the vertex set, specifying each arrow's start and end vertex. The
category of all directed graphs is thus nothing but the functor category SetC, where C is
the category with two objects connected by two morphisms, and Set denotes the
category of sets.
• Any group G can be considered as a one-object category in which every morphism is
invertible. The category of all G-sets is the same as the functor category SetG.
• Similar to the previous example, the category of k-linear representations of the group G
is the same as the functor category k-VectG (where k-Vect denotes the category of all
vector spaces over the field k).

Functor category
590
• Any ring R can be considered as a one-object preadditive category; the category of left
modules over R is the same as the additive functor category Add(R,Ab) (where Ab
denotes the category of abelian groups), and the category of right R-modules is
Add(Rop,Ab). Because of this example, for any preadditive category C, the category
Add(C,Ab) is sometimes called the "category of left modules over C" and Add(Cop,Ab) is
the category of right modules over C.
• The category of presheaves on a topological space X is a functor category: we turn the
topological space in a category C having the open sets in X as objects and a single
morphism from U to V if and only if U is contained in V. The category of presheaves of
sets (abelian groups, rings) on X is then the same as the category of contravariant
functors from C to Set (or Ab or Ring). Because of this example, the category Funct(Cop,
Set) is sometimes called the "category of presheaves of sets on C" even for general
categories C not arising from a topological space. To define sheaves on a general
category C, one needs more structure: a Grothendieck topology on C. (Some authors
refer to categories that are equivalent to SetC as presheaf categories.[1] )
Facts
Most constructions that can be carried out in D can also be carried out in DC by performing
them "componentwise", separately for each object in C. For instance, if any two objects X
and Y in D have a product X×Y, then any two functors F and G in DC have a product F×G,
defined by (F×G)(c) = F(c)×G(c) for every object c in C. Similarly, if ηc : F(c)→G(c) is a
natural transformation and each ηc has a kernel Kc in the category D, then the kernel of η in
the functor category DC is the functor K with K(c) = Kc for every object c in C.
As a consequence we have the general rule of thumb that the functor category DC shares
most of the "nice" properties of D:
• if D is complete (or cocomplete), then so is DC;
• if D is an abelian category, then so is DC;
We also have:
• if C is any small category, then the category SetC of presheaves is a topos.
So from the above examples, we can conclude right away that the categories of directed
graphs, G-sets and presheaves on a topological space are all complete and cocomplete
topoi, and that the categories of representations of G, modules over the ring R, and
presheaves of abelian groups on a topological space X are all abelian, complete and
cocomplete.
The embedding of the category C in a functor category that was mentioned earlier uses the
Yoneda lemma as its main tool. For every object X of C, let Hom(-,X) be the contravariant
representable functor from C to Set. The Yoneda lemma states that the assignment
is a full embedding of the category C into the category Funct(Cop,Set). So C naturally sits
inside a topos.
The same can be carried out for any preadditive category C: Yoneda then yields a full
embedding of C into the functor category Add(Cop,Ab). So C naturally sits inside an abelian
category.
The intuition mentioned above (that constructions that can be carried out in D can be 
"lifted" to DC) can be made precise in several ways; the most succinct formulation uses the

Functor category
591
language of adjoint functors. Every functor F : D → E induces a functor FC : DC → EC (by
composition with F). If F and G is a pair of adjoint functors, then FC and GC is also a pair of
adjoint functors.
The functor category DC has all the formal properties of an exponential object; in particular
the functors from E × C → D stand in a natural one-to-one correspondence with the functors
from E to DC. The category Cat of all small categories with functors as morphisms is
therefore a cartesian closed category.
See also
• Diagram (category theory)
References
[1] Tom Leinster (2004). http://www.maths.gla.ac.uk/~tl/book.html|Higher Operads, Higher Categories.
Cambridge University Press. http:/ / www. maths. gla. ac. uk/ ~tl/ book. html.
Natural equivalence
1. REDIRECT Natural transformation
Natural transformation
In category theory, a branch of mathematics, a natural transformation provides a way of
transforming one functor into another while respecting the internal structure (i.e. the
composition of morphisms) of the categories involved. Hence, a natural transformation can
be considered to be a "morphism of functors". Indeed this intuition can be formalized to
define so-called functor categories. Natural transformations are, after categories and
functors, one of the most basic notions of category theory and consequently appear in the
majority of its applications.
Definition
If F and G are functors between the categories C and D, then a natural transformation η
from F to G associates to every object X in C a morphism ηX : F(X) → G(X) in D called the
component of η at X, such that for every morphism f : X → Y in C we have:
This equation can conveniently be expressed by the commutative diagram
If both F and G are contravariant, the horizontal arrows in this diagram are reversed. If η is 
a natural transformation from F to G, we also write η : F → G or η : F ⇒ G. This is also

Natural transformation
592
expressed by saying the family of morphisms ηX : F(X) → G(X) is natural in X.
If, for every object X in C, the morphism ηX is an isomorphism in D, then η is said to be a
natural isomorphism (or sometimes natural equivalence or isomorphism of functors).
Two functors F and G are called naturally isomorphic or simply isomorphic if there exists a
natural isomorphism from F to G.
An infranatural transformation η from F to G is simply a family of morphisms ηX: F(X) →
G(X). Thus a natural transformation is an infranatural transformation for which ηY o F(f) =
G(f) o ηX for every morphism f : X → Y. The naturalizer of η, nat(η), is the largest
subcategory of C containing all the objects of C on which η restricts to a natural
transformation.
Examples
A worked example
Statements such as
"Every group is naturally isomorphic to its opposite group"
abound in modern mathematics. We will now give the precise meaning of this statement as
well as its proof. Consider the category Grp of all groups with group homomorphisms as
morphisms. If (G,*) is a group, we define its opposite group (Gop,*op) as follows: Gop is the
same set as G, and the operation *op is defined by a*opb = b*a. All multiplications in Gop are
thus "turned around". Forming the opposite group becomes a (covariant!) functor from Grp
to Grp if we define fop = f for any group homomorphism f: G → H. Note that fop is indeed a
group homomorphism from Gop to Hop:
fop(a*opb) = f(b*a) = f(b)*f(a) = fop(a)*opfop(b).
The content of the above statement is:
"The identity functor IdGrp : Grp → Grp is naturally isomorphic to the opposite functor
-op : Grp → Grp."
To prove this, we need to provide isomorphisms ηG : G → Gop for every group G, such that
the above diagram commutes. Set ηG(a) = a-1. The formulas (ab)-1 = b-1 a-1 and (a-1)-1 = a
show that ηG is a group homomorphism which is its own inverse. To prove the naturality, we
start with a group homomorphism f : G → H and show ηH o f = fop o ηG, i.e. (f(a))-1 = fop(a-1)
for all a in G. This is true since fop = f and every group homomorphism has the property
(f(a))-1 = f(a-1).
Further examples
If K is a field, then for every vector space V over K we have a "natural" injective linear map
V → V** from the vector space into its double dual. These maps are "natural" in the
following sense: the double dual operation is a functor, and the maps are the components of
a natural transformation from the identity functor to the double dual functor.
Every finite dimensional vector space is also isomorphic to its dual space. But this 
isomorphism relies on an arbitrary choice of basis, and is not natural, though there is an 
infranatural 
transformation. 
More 
generally, 
any 
vector 
spaces 
with 
the 
same 
dimensionality are isomorphic, but not naturally so. (Note however that if the space has a 
nondegenerate bilinear form, then there is a natural isomorphism between the space and 
its dual. Here the space is viewed as an object in the category of vector spaces and

Natural transformation
593
transposes of maps.)
Consider the category Ab of abelian groups and group homomorphisms. For all abelian
groups X, Y and Z we have a group isomorphism
Hom(X⊗Y, Z) → Hom(X, Hom(Y, Z)).
These isomorphisms are "natural" in the sense that they define a natural transformation
between the two involved functors Ab × Abop × Abop → Ab.
Natural transformations arise frequently in conjunction with adjoint functors. Indeed,
adjoint functors are defined by a certain natural isomorphism. Additionally, every pair of
adjoint functors comes equipped with two natural transformations (generally not
isomorphisms) called the unit and counit.
Operations with natural transformations
If η : F → G and ε : G → H are natural transformations between functors F,G,H:C → D, then
we can compose them to get a natural transformation εη : F → H. This is done
componentwise: (εη)X = εXηX. This "vertical composition" of natural transformation is
associative and has an identity, and allows one to consider the collection of all functors C →
D itself as a category (see below under Functor categories).
Natural transformations also have a "horizontal composition". If η : F → G is a natural
transformation between functors F,G:C → D and ε : J → K is a natural transformation
between functors J, K:D → E, then the composition of functors allows a composition of
natural transformations ηε : JF → KG. This operation is also associative with identity, and
the identity coincides with that for vertical composition. The two operations are related by
an identity which exchanges vertical composition with horizontal composition.
If η : F → G is a natural transformation between functors F, G : C → D, and H : D → E is
another functor, then we can form the natural transformation Hη : HF → HG by defining
If on the other hand K : B → C is a functor, the natural transformation ηK : FK → GK is
defined by
Functor categories
If C is any category and I is a small category, we can form the functor category CI having as
objects all functors from I to C and as morphisms the natural transformations between
those functors. This forms a category since for any functor F there is an identity natural
transformation 1F : F → F (which assigns to every object X the identity morphism on F(X))
and the composition of two natural transformations (the "vertical composition" above) is
again a natural transformation.
The isomorphisms in CI are precisely the natural isomorphisms. That is, a natural
transformation η : F → G is a natural isomorphism if and only if there exists a natural
transformation ε : G → F such that ηε = 1G and εη = 1F.
The functor category CI is especially useful if I arises from a directed graph. For instance, if
I is the category of the directed graph • → •, then CI has as objects the morphisms of C, and
a morphism between φ : U → V and ψ : X → Y in CI is a pair of morphisms f : U → X and g : V
→ Y in C such that the "square commutes", i.e. ψ f = g φ.

Natural transformation
594
More generally, one can build the 2-category Cat whose
• 0-cells (objects) are the small categories,
• 1-cells (arrows) between two objects 
and 
are the functors from 
to 
,
• 2-cells between two 1-cells (functors) 
and 
are the natural
transformations from 
to 
.
The horizontal and vertical compositions are the compositions between natural
transformations described previously. A functor category 
is then simply a hom-category
in this category (smallness issues aside).
Yoneda lemma
If X is an object of a locally small category C, then the assignment Y 
HomC(X, Y) defines
a covariant functor FX : C → Set. This functor is called representable (more generally, a
representable functor is any functor naturally isomorphic to this functor for an appropriate
choice of X). The natural transformations from a representable functor to an arbitrary
functor F : C → Set are completely known and easy to describe; this is the content of the
Yoneda lemma.
Historical notes
Saunders Mac Lane, one of the founders of category theory, is said to have remarked, "I
didn't 
invent 
categories 
to 
study 
functors; 
I 
invented 
them 
to 
study 
natural
transformations." Just as the study of groups is not complete without a study of
homomorphisms, so the study of categories is not complete without the study of functors.
The reason for Mac Lane's comment is that the study of functors is itself not complete
without the study of natural transformations.
The context of Mac Lane's remark was the axiomatic theory of homology. Different ways of
constructing homology could be shown to coincide: for example in the case of a simplicial
complex the groups defined directly, and those of the singular theory, would be isomorphic.
What cannot easily be expressed without the language of natural transformations is how
homology groups are compatible with morphisms between objects, and how two equivalent
homology theories not only have the same homology groups, but also the same morphisms
between those groups.
References
• Mac Lane, Saunders (1998). Categories for the Working Mathematician. Graduate Texts
in Mathematics 5 (2nd ed.). Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-98403-8.

Dual (category theory)
595
Dual (category theory)
In category theory, a branch of mathematics, duality is a correspondence between
properties of a category C and so-called dual properties of the opposite category Cop.
Given a statement regarding the category C, by interchanging the source and target of each
morphism as well as interchanging the order of composing two morphisms, a corresponding
dual statement is obtained regarding the opposite category Cop. Duality, as such, is the
assertion that truth is invariant under this operation on statements. In other words, if a
statement is true about C, then its dual statement is true about Cop. Also, if a statement is
false about C, then its dual has to be false about Cop.
Given a concrete category C that mathematicians are interested, it is often the case that the
opposite category Cop per se is abstract. Cop need not be a category that arises from
mathematical practice. In this case, another category D is also termed to be in duality with
C if D and Cop are equivalent as categories.
In the case when C and its opposite Cop are equivalent, such a category is self-dual.
Formal definition
We define the elementary language of category theory as the two-sorted first order
language with objects and morphisms as distinct sorts, together with the relations of an
object being the source or target of a morphism and a symbol for composing two
morphisms.
Let σ be any statement in this language. We form the dual σop as follows:
1. Interchange each occurrence of "source" in σ with "target".
2. Interchange the order of composing morphisms. That is, replace each occurrence of
with 
Informally, these conditions state that the dual of a statement is formed by reversing
arrows and compositions.
Duality is the observation that σ is true for some category C if and only if σop is true for Cop.
Examples
• A moprhism 
is a monomorphism if 
implies 
. Performing
the dual operation, we get the statement that 
implies 
for a
morphism 
. This is precisely what is means for f to be an epimorphism. In
short, the property of being a monomorphism is dual to the property of being an
epimorphism.
Applying duality, this means that a morphism in some category C is a monomorphism if and
only if the reverse morphism in the opposite category Cop is an epimorphism.
• An example comes from reversing the direction of inequalities in a partial order. So if X is
a set and ≤ a partial order relation, we can define a new partial order relation ≤new by
x ≤new y if and only if y ≤ x.
This example on orders is a special case, since partial orders correspond to a certain kind of 
category in which Hom(A,B) can have at most one element. In applications to logic, this 
then looks like a very general description of negation (that is, proofs run in the opposite 
direction). For example, if we take the opposite of a lattice, we will find that meets and joins

Dual (category theory)
596
have their roles interchanged. This is an abstract form of De Morgan's laws, or of duality
applied to lattices.
• Limits and colimits are dual notions.
• Fibrations and cofibrations are examples of dual notions in algebraic topology and
homotopy theory. In this context, the duality is often called Eckmann-Hilton duality.
See also
• Dual object
• Duality (mathematics)
• Opposite category
References
Isomorphism
In abstract algebra, an isomorphism (Greek: ἴσος isos "equal", and μορφή morphe
"shape") is a bijective map f such that both f and its inverse f −1 are homomorphisms, i.e.,
structure-preserving mappings. In the more general setting of category theory, an
isomorphism is a morphism f:X→Y in a category for which there exists an "inverse"
f −1:Y→X, with the property that both f −1f=idX and ff −1=idY.
Informally, an isomorphism is a kind of mapping between objects, which shows a
relationship between two properties or operations. If there exists an isomorphism between
two structures, we call the two structures isomorphic. In a certain sense, isomorphic
structures are structurally identical, if you choose to ignore finer-grained differences that
may arise from how they are defined.
Purpose
Isomorphisms are studied in mathematics in order to extend insights from one phenomenon
to others: if two objects are isomorphic, then any property which is preserved by an
isomorphism and which is true of one of the objects is also true of the other. If an
isomorphism can be found from a relatively unknown part of mathematics into some well
studied division of mathematics, where many theorems are already proved, and many
methods are already available to find answers, then the function can be used to map whole
problems out of unfamiliar territory over to "solid ground" where the problem is easier to
understand and work with.

Isomorphism
597
Practical example
The following are examples of isomorphisms from ordinary algebra.
• Consider the logarithm function: For any fixed base b, the logarithm function logb maps
from the positive real numbers 
onto the real numbers 
; formally:
This mapping is one-to-one and onto, that is, it is a bijection from the domain to the
codomain of the logarithm function.
In addition to being an isomorphism of sets, the logarithm function also preserves certain
operations. Specifically, consider the group 
of positive real numbers under
ordinary multiplication. The logarithm function obeys the following identity:
But the real numbers under addition also form a group. So the logarithm function is in fact
a group isomorphism from the group 
to the group 
.
Logarithms can therefore be used to simplify multiplication of real numbers. By working
with logarithms, multiplication of positive real numbers is replaced by addition of logs. This
way it is possible to multiply real numbers using a ruler and a table of logarithms, or using
a slide rule with a logarithmic scale.
• Consider the group Z6, the numbers from 0 to 5 with addition modulo 6. Also consider
the group Z2 × Z3, the ordered pairs where the x coordinates can be 0 or 1, and the y
coordinates can be 0, 1, or 2, where addition in the x-coordinate is modulo 2 and
addition in the y-coordinate is modulo 3.
These structures are isomorphic under addition, if you identify them using the following
scheme:
(0,0) -> 0
(1,1) -> 1
(0,2) -> 2
(1,0) -> 3
(0,1) -> 4
(1,2) -> 5
or in general (a,b) -> ( 3a + 4 b ) mod 6.
For example note that (1,1) + (1,0) = (0,1) which translates in the other system as 1 + 3 =
4.
Even though these two groups "look" different in that the sets contain different elements,
they are indeed isomorphic: their structures are exactly the same. More generally, the
direct product of two cyclic groups Zn and Zm is cyclic if and only if n and m are coprime.

Isomorphism
598
Abstract examples
A relation-preserving isomorphism
If one object consists of a set X with a binary relation R and the other object consists of a
set Y with a binary relation S then an isomorphism from X to Y is a bijective function
f : X → Y such that
f(u) S f(v) if and only if u R v.
S is reflexive, irreflexive, symmetric, antisymmetric, asymmetric, transitive, total,
trichotomous, a partial order, total order, strict weak order, total preorder (weak order), an
equivalence relation, or a relation with any other special properties, if and only if R is.
For example, R is an ordering ≤ and S an ordering 
, then an isomorphism from X to Y is
a bijective function f : X → Y such that
if and only if u ≤ v.
Such an isomorphism is called an order isomorphism or (less commonly) an isotone
isomorphism.
If X = Y we have a relation-preserving automorphism.
An operation-preserving isomorphism
Suppose that on these sets X and Y, there are two binary operations 
and 
which happen
to constitute the groups (X, 
) and (Y, 
). Note that the operators operate on elements
from the domain and range, respectively, of the "one-to-one" and "onto" function f. There is
an isomorphism from X to Y if the bijective function f : X → Y happens to produce results,
that sets up a correspondence between the operator 
and the operator 
.
for all u, v in X.
Applications
In abstract algebra, two basic isomorphisms are defined:
• Group isomorphism, an isomorphism between groups
• Ring isomorphism, an isomorphism between rings. (Note that isomorphisms between
fields are actually ring isomorphisms)
Just as the automorphisms of an algebraic structure form a group, the isomorphisms
between two algebras sharing a common structure form a heap. Letting a particular
isomorphism identify the two structures turns this heap into a group.
In mathematical analysis, the Laplace transform is an isomorphism mapping hard
differential equations into easier algebraic equations.
In category theory, Iet the category C consist of two classes, one of objects and the other of
morphisms. Then a general definition of isomorphism that covers the previous and many
other cases is: an isomorphism is a morphism f : a → b that has an inverse, i.e. there exists a
morphism g : b → a with fg = 1b and gf = 1a. For example, a bijective linear map is an
isomorphism between vector spaces, and a bijective continuous function whose inverse is
also continuous is an isomorphism between topological spaces, called a homeomorphism.
In graph theory, an isomorphism between two graphs G and H is a bijective map f from the 
vertices of G to the vertices of H that preserves the "edge structure" in the sense that there

Isomorphism
599
is an edge from vertex u to vertex v in G if and only if there is an edge from f(u) to f(v) in H.
See graph isomorphism.
In early theories of logical atomism, the formal relationship between facts and true
propositions was theorized by Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein to be isomorphic.
An example of this line of thinking can be found in Russell's Introduction to the Philosophy
of Mathematics.
In cybernetics, the Good Regulator or Conant-Ashby theorem is stated "Every Good
Regulator of a system must be a model of that system". Whether regulated or
self-regulating an isomorphism is required between regulator part and the processing part
of the system.
See also
• Epimorphism
• Heap (mathematics)
• Isomorphism class
• Monomorphism
• Isometry
External links
• Isomorphism [1] on PlanetMath
• Eric W. Weisstein, Isomorphism [2] at MathWorld.
References
[1] http:/ / planetmath. org/ ?op=getobj& amp;from=objects& amp;id=1936
[2] http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ Isomorphism. html

Semigroup
600
Semigroup
In mathematics, a semigroup is an algebraic structure consisting of a nonempty set S
together with an associative binary operation. In other words, a semigroup is an associative
magma. The terminology is derived from the anterior notion of a group. A semigroup differs
from a group in that for each of its elements there may not exist an inverse; further, there
may not exist an identity element.
The binary operation of a semigroup is most often denoted multiplicatively: 
, or simply
xy, denotes the result of applying the semigroup operation to the ordered pair (x, y).
The formal study of semigroups began in the early 20th century. Semigroups are important
in many areas of mathematics because they are the abstract algebraic underpinning of
"memoryless" systems: time-dependent systems that start from scratch at each iteration. In
applied mathematics, semigroups are fundamental models for linear time-invariant systems.
In partial differential equations, a semigroup is associated to any equation whose spatial
evolution is independent of time. The theory of finite semigroups has been of particular
importance in theoretical computer science since the 1950s because of the natural link
between finite semigroups and finite automata. In probability theory, semigroups are
associated with Markov processes.
Definition
A semigroup is a set, S, together with an operation "•" that combines any two elements a
and b to form another element denoted a • b. The symbol "•" is a general placeholder for a
concretely given operation. To qualify as a semigroup, the set and operation, (S, •), must
satisfy two requirements known as the semigroup axioms:
Closure
For all a, b in S, the result of the operation a • b is also in S.
Associativity
For all a, b and c in S, the equation (a • b) • c = a • (b • c) holds.
More compactly, a semigroup is an associative magma.
Semigroup homomorphisms
A homomorphism between two semigroups 
and 
is a function 
such
that
.
Any semigroup may be embedded into a monoid (generally denoted as ) simply by adjoining
an element 
to and defining 
for all 
.
Thus, every commutative semigroup can be embedded in a group via the Grothendieck
group construction.

Semigroup
601
Examples of semigroups
• Semigroup with one element
• Semigroup with two elements
• A monoid is a semigroup with an identity element
• A group is a semigroup with an identity element and an inverse element.
• The set of positive integers with addition.
• Square nonnegative matrices with matrix multiplication.
• Any ideal of a ring with the multiplication of the ring.
• The set of all finite strings over a fixed alphabet Σ with concatenation of strings as the
semigroup operation --- the so-called "free semigroup over Σ". With the empty string
included, this semigroup becomes the free monoid over Σ.
• A probability distribution F together with all convolution powers of F, with convolution as
operation. This is called a convolution semigroup.
Special classes of semigroups
• A monoid is a semigroup with identity.
• A subsemigroup is a subset of a semigroup that is closed under the semigroup operation.
• A band is a semigroup the operation of which is idempotent.
• Semilattices: A semigroup whose operation is idempotent and commutative is a
semilattice.
• 0-simple semigroups.
• Transformation semigroups: any finite semigroup S can be represented by
transformations of a (state-) set Q of at most |S|+1 states. Each element x of S then maps
Q into itself x: Q → Q and sequence xy is defined by q(xy) = (qx)y for each q in Q.
Sequencing clearly is an associative operation, here equivalent to function composition.
This representation is basic for any automaton or finite state machine (FSM).
• Bicyclic semigroups.
• C0-semigroups.
• Regular semigroups.
• Inverse semigroups.
• Affine semigroup: a semigroup that is isomorphic to a finitely-generated subsemigroup of
Zd. These semigroups have applications to commutative algebra.
Structure of semigroups
This section sets out concepts useful for understanding the structure of semigroups. Two
semigroups S and T are said to be isomorphic if there is a bijection f : S ↔ T with the
property that, for any elements a, b in S, f(ab) = f(a)f(b). Isomorphic semigroups have the
same structure.
The semigroup operation induces an operation on the collection of its subsets: given
subsets A and B of a semigroup, A*B, written commonly as AB, is the set { ab | a in A and b
in B }. In terms of this operations, a subset A is (i) a subsemigroup if AA is a subset of A,
(ii) a right ideal if AS is a subset of A, and (iii) a left ideal if SA is a subset of A. If A is
both a left ideal and a right ideal then it is called an ideal (or a two-sided ideal). An
example of semigroup with no minimal ideal is the set of positive integers under addition.
The minimal ideal of a commutative semigroup, when it exists, is a group.

Semigroup
602
Green's relations are important tools for analysing the ideals of a semigroup and related
notions of structure.
If S is a semigroup, then the intersection of any collection of subsemigroups of S is also a
subsemigroup of S. So the subsemigroups of S form a complete lattice. For any subset A of
S there is a smallest subsemigroup T of S which contains A, and we say that A generates T.
A single element x of S generates the subsemigroup { xn | n is a positive integer }. If this is
finite, then x is said to be of finite order, otherwise it is of infinite order. A semigroup is
said to be periodic if all of its elements are of finite order. A semigroup generated by a
single element is said to be monogenic (or cyclic). If a monogenic semigroup is infinite then
it is isomorphic to the semigroup of positive integers with the operation of addition. If it is
finite and nonempty, then it must contain at least one idempotent. It follows that every
nonempty periodic semigroup has at least one idempotent.
A subsemigroup which is also a group is called a subgroup. There is a close relationship
between the subgroups of a semigroup and its idempotents. Each subgroup contains exactly
one idempotent, namely the identity element of the subgroup. For each idempotent e of the
semigroup there is a unique maximal subgroup containing e. Each maximal subgroup arises
in this way, so there is a one-to-one correspondence between idempotents and maximal
subgroups. Here the term maximal subgroup differs from its standard use in group theory.
More can often be said when the order is finite. For example, every nonempty finite
semigroup is periodic, and has a minimal ideal and at least one idempotent. For more on
the structure of finite semigroups, see Krohn-Rhodes theory.
Semigroup methods in partial differential equations
Semigroup theory can be used to study some problems in the field of partial differential
equations. Roughly speaking, the semigroup approach is to regard a time-dependent partial
differential equation as an ordinary differential equation on a function space. For example,
consider the following initial/boundary value problem for the heat equation on the spatial
interval (0, 1) ⊂ R and times t ≥ 0:
Let X be the Lp space L2((0, 1); R) and let A be the second-derivative operator with domain
Then the above initial/boundary value problem can be interpreted as an initial value
problem for an ordinary differential equation on the space X:
On an heuristic level, the solution to this problem "ought" to be u(t) = exp(tA)u0. However,
for a rigorous treatment, a meaning must be given to the exponential of tA. As a function of
t, exp(tA) is a semigroup of operators from X to itself, taking the initial state u0 at time t = 0
to the state u(t) = exp(tA)u0 at time t. The operator A is said to be the infinitesimal
generator of the semigroup.

Semigroup
603
History
The formal study of semigroups came somewhat later than that of other algebraic
structures such as groups or rings in the mid 19th century. A number of sources[1] [2]
attribute the first use of the term (in French) to J.-A. de Séguier in Élements de la Théorie
des Groupes Abstraits (Elements of the Theory of Abstract Groups) in 1904. The term is
used in English in 1908 in Harold Hinton's Theory of Groups of Finite Order. In 1970, a new
periodical called Semigroup Forum (currently edited by Springer Verlag) became one of the
rare mathematical journals devoted entirely to semigroup theory.
Anton Suschkewitsch is often credited with obtaining the first non-trivial results about
semigroups. His 1928 paper Über die endlichen Gruppen ohne das Gesetz der eindeutigen
Umkehrbarkeit (On finite groups without the rule of unique invertibility) determined the
structure of finite simple semigroups and showed that the minimal ideal (or Green's
relations J-class) of a finite semigroup is simple[2] . From that point on, the foundations of
semigroup theory were further laid by David Rees, James Alexander Green, Evgenii
Sergeevich Lyapin, Alfred H. Clifford and Gordon Preston. The latter two published a
monograph on semigroup theory in 1961.
The theory of finite semigroups is arguably more developed than its infinite counterpart.
This stems particularly from the notion of syntactic semigroup and the ensuing links
between pseudo-varieties of semigroups and so-called varieties of formal languages which
have proved particularly fruitful in finite automata theory[3] .
See also
• Absorbing element
• Biordered set
• Empty semigroup
• Grothendieck group
• Identity element
• Light's associativity test
• Weak inverse
Notes
[1] http:/ / jeff560. tripod. com/ s. html Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics
[2] http:/ / uk. geocities. com/ cdhollings/ suschkewitsch3. pdf An account of Suschkewitsch's paper by
Christopher Hollings
[3] Varieties of Formal Languages, J.É. Pin, Plenum Press, 1986.
References
• John M. Howie is the author of two books, published twenty years apart, which are often
cited as a basic reference in the mathematical community.
• Howie, John M. (1995). Fundamentals of Semigroup Theory. Clarendon Press. ISBN
0-19-851194-9.
• Howie, John M. (1976). Introduction to Semigroup Theory. Academic Press. ISBN
0-12-754633-2.
• Two volumes of Samuel Eilenberg have also been a common reference for the
applications of semigroup theory in theoretical computer science.

Semigroup
604
• Eilenberg, Samuel (1973). Automata, Languages, and Machines (Vol.A). Academic
Press. ISBN 0-12-234001-9.
• Eilenberg, Samuel (1976). Automata, Languages, and Machines (Vol.B). Academic
Press. ISBN 0-12-234002-7.
• The algebraic theory of semigroups, A. H. Clifford and G. B. Preston. American
Mathematical Society, 1961 (volume 1), 1967 (volume 2).
• Feller, William (1971), An introduction to probability theory and its applications. Vol. II.,
Second edition, New York: John Wiley & Sons, MR 0270403 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0270403).
• Hille, Einar; Phillips, Ralph S. (1974), Functional analysis and semi-groups, Providence,
R.I.: American Mathematical Society, MR 0423094 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0423094).
• Semigroups: an introduction to the structure theory, Pierre Antoine Grillet. Marcel
Dekker, Inc., 1995.
• Semigroup Forum is the best-known periodical devoted specifically to the subject of
semigroups.
Monoid
In abstract algebra, a branch of mathematics, a monoid is an algebraic structure with a
single associative binary operation and an identity element. Monoids occur in a number of
branches of mathematics and capture the idea of function composition; indeed, this notion
is abstracted in category theory, where the monoid is a category with one object. Monoids
are also commonly used to provide an algebraic foundation for computer science; in this
case, the transition monoid and syntactic monoid are used in describing a finite state
machine, whereas trace monoids and history monoids provide a foundation for process
calculi and concurrent computing. Some of the more important results in the study of
monoids are the Krohn-Rhodes theorem and the star height problem. The history of
monoids, as well as a discussion of additional general properties, are found in the article on
semigroups.
Definition
A monoid is a set, M, together with an operation "•" that combines any two elements a and
b to form another element denoted a • b. The symbol "•" is a general placeholder for a
concretely given operation. To qualify as a monoid, the set and operation, (M, •), must
satisfy three requirements known as the monoid axioms:
Closure
For all a, b in M, the result of the operation a • b is also in M.
Associativity
For all a, b and c in M, the equation (a • b) • c = a • (b • c) holds.
Identity element
There exists an element e in M, such that for all elements a in M, the equation e • a =
a • e = a holds.
More compactly, a monoid is a semigroup with an identity element.

Monoid
605
Monoid Structures
Generators and submonoids
A submonoid of a monoid M is a subset N of M containing the unit element, and such that,
if x,y∈N then x*y∈N. It is then clear that N is itself a monoid, under the binary operation
induced by that of M. Equivalently, a submonoid is a subset N such that N=N∗, where the
superscript * is the Kleene star. For any subset N of M, the monoid N* is the smallest
monoid that contains N.
A subset N is said to be a generator of M if and only if M=N*. If there is a finite generator
of M, then M is said to be finitely generated.
Commutative monoid
A monoid whose operation is commutative is called a commutative monoid (or, less
commonly, an abelian monoid). Commutative monoids are often written additively. Any
commutative monoid is endowed with its algebraic preordering ≤, defined by x ≤ y if and
only if there exists z such that x + z = y. An order-unit of a commutative monoid M is an
element u of M such that for any element x of M, there exists a positive integer n such that
x ≤ nu. This is often used in case M is the positive cone of a partially ordered abelian group
G, in which case we say that u is an order-unit of G.
Partially commutative monoid
A monoid for which the operation is commutative for some, but not all elements is a trace
monoid; trace monoids commonly occur in the theory of concurrent computation.
Examples
• Every singleton set {x} gives rise to a one-element (trivial) monoid. For fixed x this
monoid is unique, since the monoid axioms require that x*x = x in this case.
• Every group is a monoid and every abelian group a commutative monoid.
• Every bounded semilattice is an idempotent commutative monoid.
• Any semigroup S may be turned into a monoid simply by adjoining an element e not in S
and defining e*e = e and e*s = s = s*e for all s ∈ S.
• The natural numbers, N, form a commutative monoid under addition (identity element
zero), or multiplication (identity element one). A submonoid of N under addition is called
a numerical monoid.
• The elements of any unital ring, with addition or multiplication as the operation.
• The integers, rational numbers, real numbers or complex numbers, with addition or
multiplication as operation.
• The set of all n by n matrices over a given ring, with matrix addition or matrix
multiplication as the operation.
• The set of all finite strings over some fixed alphabet Σ forms a monoid with string
concatenation as the operation. The empty string serves as the identity element. This
monoid is denoted Σ∗ and is called the free monoid over Σ.
• Fix a monoid M, and consider its power set P(M) consisting of all subsets of M. A binary 
operation for such subsets can be defined by S * T = {s * t : s in S and t in T}. This turns 
P(M) into a monoid with identity element {e}. In the same way the power set of a group

Monoid
606
G is a monoid under the product of group subsets.
• Let S be a set. The set of all functions S → S forms a monoid under function composition.
The identity is just the identity function. If S is finite with n elements, the monoid of
functions on S is finite with nn elements.
• Generalizing the previous example, let C be a category and X an object in C. The set of all
endomorphisms of X, denoted EndC(X), forms a monoid under composition of morphisms.
For more on the relationship between category theory and monoids see below.
• The set of homeomorphism classes of compact surfaces with the connected sum. Its unit
element is the class of the ordinary 2-sphere. Furthermore, if a denotes the class of the
torus, and b denotes the class of the projective plane, then every element c of the monoid
has a unique expression the form c=na+mb where n is the integer ≥ 0 and m=0,1, or 2.
We have 3b=a+b.
• Let 
be a cyclic monoid of order n, that is, 
. Then 
for
some 
. In fact, each such k gives a distinct monoid of order n, and every cyclic
monoid is isomorphic to one of these.
Moreover, f can be considered as a function on the points 
given by
or, equivalently
Multiplication of elements in 
is then given by function composition.
Note also that when 
then the function f is a permutation of 
and
gives the unique cyclic group of order n.
Properties
In a monoid, one can define positive integer powers of an element x : x1=x, and xn=x*...*x
(n times) for n>1 . The rule of powers xn+p=xn * xp is obvious.
Directly from the definition, one can show that the identity element e is unique. Then, for
any x , one can set x0=e and the rule of powers is still true with nonnegative exponents.
It is possible to define invertible elements: an element x is called invertible if there exists
an element y such that x*y = e and y*x = e. The element y is called the inverse of x . If y
and z are inverses of x, then by associativity y = (zx)y = z(xy) = z. Thus inverses, if they
exist, are unique.[1]
If y is the inverse of x , one can define negative powers of x by setting x−1=y and
x−n=y*...*y (n times) for n>1 . And the rule of exponents is still verified for all n,p rational
integers. This is why the inverse of x is usually written x−1. The set of all invertible
elements in a monoid M, together with the operation *, forms a group. In that sense, every
monoid contains a group (if only the trivial one consisting of the identity alone).
However, not every monoid sits inside a group. For instance, it is perfectly possible to have 
a monoid in which two elements a and b exist such that a*b = a holds even though b is not 
the identity element. Such a monoid cannot be embedded in a group, because in the group 
we could multiply both sides with the inverse of a and would get that b = e, which isn't 
true. A monoid (M,*) has the cancellation property (or is cancellative) if for all a, b and c in

Monoid
607
M, a*b = a*c always implies b = c and b*a = c*a always implies b = c. A commutative
monoid with the cancellation property can always be embedded in a group via the
Grothendieck construction. That's how the additive group of the integers (a group with
operation +) is constructed from the additive monoid of natural numbers (a commutative
monoid with operation + and cancellation property). However, a non-commutative
cancellative monoid need not be embeddable in a group.
If a monoid has the cancellation property and is finite, then it is in fact a group. Proof: Fix
an element x in the monoid. Since the monoid is finite, xn = xm for some m > n > 0. But
then, by cancellation we have that xm-n = e where e is the identity. Therefore x * xm-n-1 = e,
so x has an inverse.
The right- and left-cancellative elements of a monoid each in turn form a submonoid (i.e.
obviously include the identity and not so obviously are closed under the operation). This
means that the cancellative elements of any commutative monoid can be extended to a
group.
An inverse monoid, is a monoid where for every a in M, there exists a unique a-1 in M such
that a=a*a-1*a and a-1=a-1*a*a-1. If an inverse monoid is cancellative, then it is a group.
Acts and operator monoids
Let M be a monoid. Then a (left) M-act (or left act over M) is a set X together with an
operation • : M × X → X which is compatible with the monoid structure as follows:
• for all x in X: e • x = x;
• for all a, b in M and x in X: a • (b • x) = (a * b) • x.
This is the analogue in monoid theory of a (left) group action. Right M-acts are defined in a
similar way. A monoid with an act is also known as an operator monoid. Important
examples include transition systems of semiautomata. A transformation semigroup can be
made into an operator monoid by adjoining the identity transformation.
Monoid homomorphisms
A homomorphism between two monoids (M,*) and (M′,•) is a function f : M → M′ such that
• f(x*y) = f(x)•f(y) for all x, y in M
• f(e) = e′
where e and e′ are the identities on M and M′ respectively. Monoid homomorphisms are
sometimes simply called monoid morphisms.
Not every semigroup homomorphism is a monoid homomorphism since it may not preserve
the identity. Contrast this with the case of group homomorphisms: the axioms of group
theory ensure that every semigroup homomorphism between groups preserves the identity.
For monoids this isn't always true and it is necessary to state it as a separate requirement.
A bijective monoid homomorphism is called a monoid isomorphism. Two monoids are said
to be isomorphic if there is an isomorphism between them.

Monoid
608
Monoid congruence and the quotient monoid
A monoid congruence is an equivalence relation that is compatible with the monoid
product. That is, it is a subset
such that it is reflexive, symmetric and transitive (just as every equivalence relation must
be), and also has the property that if 
and 
for every 
and 
in M, then
one has that 
.
A monoid congruence induces congruence classes
and the monoid operation * induces a binary operation 
on the congruence classes:
which is a monoid homomorphism. It is also clearly associative, and so the set of all
congruence classes are a monoid as well. This monoid is called the quotient monoid, and
may be written as
Several additional notations are common. Give a subset 
, one writes
for the set of congruence classes induced by L. In this notation, clearly 
. In
general, however, 
is not a monoid. Going in the opposite direction, if 
is a
subset of the quotient monoid, one writes
This is, of course, just the set-theoretic union of the members of X. In general, 
is not a
monoid.
Clearly, one has 
and 
.
Equational presentation
Monoids may be given a presentation, much in the same way that groups can be specified
by means of a group presentation. One does this by specifying a set of generators Σ, and a
set of relations on the free monoid Σ∗. One does this by extending (finite) binary relations
on Σ∗ to monoid congruences, and then constructing the quotient monoid, as above.
Given a binary relation R ⊂ Σ∗ × Σ∗, one defines its symmetric closure as R ∪ R−1. This can
be extended to a symmetric relation E ⊂ Σ∗ × Σ∗ by defining x ~E y if and only if x = sut and
y = svt for some strings u, v, s, t ∈ Σ∗ with (u,v) ∈ R ∪ R−1. Finally, one takes the reflexive
and transitive closure of E, which is then a monoid congruence.
In the typical situation, the relation R is simply given as a set of equations, so that
. Thus, for example,
is the equational presentation for the bicyclic monoid, and
is the plactic monoid of degree 2 (it has infinite order). Elements of this plactic monoid may
be written as 
for integers i, j, k, as the relations show that ba commutes with both
a and b.

Monoid
609
Relation to category theory
Group-like structures
Totality
Associativity
Identity
Inverses
Group
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Monoid
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Semigroup
Yes
Yes
No
No
Loop
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Quasigroup
Yes
No
No
Yes
Magma
Yes
No
No
No
Groupoid
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Category
No
Yes
Yes
No
Monoids can be viewed as a special class of categories. Indeed, the axioms required of a
monoid operation are exactly those required of morphism composition when restricted to
the set of all morphisms whose source and target is a given object. That is,
A monoid is, essentially, the same thing as a category with a single object.
More precisely, given a monoid (M,*), one can construct a small category with only one
object and whose morphisms are the elements of M. The composition of morphisms is given
by the monoid operation *.
Likewise, monoid homomorphisms are just functors between single object categories. In
this sense, category theory can be thought of as an extension of the concept of a monoid.
Many definitions and theorems about monoids can be generalised to small categories with
more than one object.
Monoids, just like other algebraic structures, also form their own category, Mon, whose
objects are monoids and whose morphisms are monoid homomorphisms.
There is also a notion of monoid object which is an abstract definition of what is a monoid in
a category.
See also
• Star height problem
• Kleene algebra
References
[1] Jacobson, I.5. p. 22
• John M. Howie, Fundamentals of Semigroup Theory (1995), Clarendon Press, Oxford
ISBN 0-19-851194-9
• Jacobson, Nathan (1951), Lectures in Abstract Algebra, I, D. Van Nostrand Company,
ISBN 0-387-90122-1
• M. Kilp, U. Knauer, A.V. Mikhalev, Monoids, Acts and Categories with Applications to
Wreath Products and Graphs, De Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics vol. 29, Walter de
Gruyter, 2000, ISBN 3110152487.
• Eric W. Weisstein, Monoid (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ Monoid. html) at
MathWorld.

Monoid
610
• Monoid (http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ Monoid. html) at PlanetMath.
Domain theory
Domain theory is a branch of mathematics that studies special kinds of partially ordered
sets (posets) commonly called domains. Consequently, domain theory can be considered as
a branch of order theory. The field has major applications in computer science, where it is
used to specify denotational semantics, especially for functional programming languages.
Domain theory formalizes the intuitive ideas of approximation and convergence in a very
general way and has close relations to topology. An alternative important approach to
denotational semantics in computer science is that of metric spaces.
Motivation and intuition
The primary motivation for the study of domains, which was initiated by Dana Scott in the
late 1960s, was the search for a denotational semantics of the lambda calculus. In this
formalism, one considers "functions" specified by certain terms in the language. In a purely
syntactic way, one can go from simple functions to functions that take other functions as
their input arguments. Using again just the syntactic transformations available in this
formalism, one can obtain so called fixed point combinators (the best-known of which is the
Y combinator); these, by definition, have the property that f(Y(f)) = Y(f) for all functions f.
To formulate such a denotational semantics, one might first try to construct a model for the
lambda calculus, in which a genuine (total) function is associated with each lambda term.
Such a model would formalize a link between the lambda calculus as a purely syntactic
system and the lambda calculus as a notational system for manipulating concrete
mathematical functions. Unfortunately, such a model cannot exist, for if it did, it would have
to contain a genuine, total function that corresponds to the combinator Y, that is, a function
that computes a fixed point of an arbitrary input function f. There can be no such function
for Y, because some functions (for example, the successor function) do not have a fixed
point. At best, the genuine function corresponding to Y would have to be a partial function,
necessarily undefined at some inputs.
Scott got around this difficulty by formalizing a notion of "partial" or "incomplete"
information to represent computations that have not yet returned a result. This was
modeled by considering, for each domain of computation (e.g. the natural numbers), an
additional element that represents an undefined output, i.e. the "result" of a computation
that never ends. In addition, the domain of computation is equipped with an ordering
relation, in which the "undefined result" is the least element.
The important step to find a model for the lambda calculus is to consider only those
functions (on such a partially ordered set) which are guaranteed to have least fixed points.
The set of these functions, together with an appropriate ordering, is again a "domain" in the
sense of the theory. But the restriction to a subset of all available functions has another
great benefit: it is possible to obtain domains that contain their own function spaces, i.e.
one gets functions that can be applied to themselves.
Beside these desirable properties, domain theory also allows for an appealing intuitive
interpretation. As mentioned above, the domains of computation are always partially
ordered. This ordering represents a hierarchy of information or knowledge. The higher an

Domain theory
611
element is within the order, the more specific it is and the more information it contains.
Lower elements represent incomplete knowledge or intermediate results.
Computation then is modeled by applying monotone functions repeatedly on elements of
the domain in order to refine a result. Reaching a fixed point is equivalent to finishing a
calculation. Domains provide a superior setting for these ideas since fixed points of
monotone functions can be guaranteed to exist and, under additional restrictions, can be
approximated from below.
A guide to the formal definitions
In this section, the central concepts and definitions of domain theory will be introduced.
The above intuition of domains being information orderings will be emphasized to motivate
the mathematical formalization of the theory. The precise formal definitions are to be found
in the dedicated articles for each concept. A list of general order-theoretic definitions which
include domain theoretic notions as well can be found in the order theory glossary. The
most important concepts of domain theory will nonetheless be introduced below.
Directed sets as converging specifications
As mentioned before, domain theory deals with partially ordered sets to model a domain of
computation. The goal is to interpret the elements of such an order as pieces of information
or (partial) results of a computation, where elements that are higher in the order extend the
information of the elements below them in a consistent way. From this simple intuition it is
already clear that domains often do not have a greatest element, since this would mean that
there is an element that contains the information of all other elements - a rather
uninteresting situation.
A concept that plays an important role in the theory is the one of a directed subset of a
domain, i.e. of a non-empty subset of the order in which each two elements have some
upper bound that is an element of this subset. In view of our intuition about domains, this
means that every two pieces of information within the directed subset are consistently
extended by some other element in the subset. Hence we can view directed sets as
consistent specifications, i.e. as sets of partial results in which no two elements are
contradictory. This interpretation can be compared with the notion of a sequence in
analysis, where each element is more specific than the preceding one. Indeed, in the theory
of metric spaces, sequences play a role that is in many aspects analogous to the role of
directed sets in domain theory.
Now, as in the case of sequences, we are interested in the limit of a directed set. According
to what was said above, this would be an element that is the most general piece of
information which extends the information of all elements of the directed set, i.e. the
unique element that contains exactly the information that was present in the directed set -
and nothing more. In the formalization of order theory, this is just the least upper bound
of the directed set. As in the case of limits of sequences, least upper bounds of directed sets
do not always exist.
Naturally, one has a special interest in those domains of computations in which all
consistent specifications converge, i.e. in orders in which all directed sets have a least
upper bound. This property defines the class of directed complete partial orders, or
dcpo for short. Indeed, most considerations of domain theory do only consider orders that
are at least directed complete.

Domain theory
612
From the underlying idea of partially specified results as representing incomplete
knowledge, one derives another desirable property: the existence of a least element. Such
an element models that state of no information - the place where most computations start.
It also can be regarded as the output of a computation that does not return any result at all.
Computations and domains
Now that we have some basic formal descriptions of what a domain of computation should
be, we can turn to the computations themselves. Clearly, these have to be functions, taking
inputs from some computational domain and returning outputs in some (possibly different)
domain. However, one would also expect that the output of a function will contain more
information when the information content of the input is increased. Formally, this means
that we want a function to be monotonic.
When dealing with dcpos, one might also want computations to be compatible with the
formation of limits of a directed set. Formally, this means that, for some function f, the
image f(D) of a directed set D (i.e. the set of the images of each element of D) is again
directed and has as a least upper bound the image of the least upper bound of D. One could
also say that f preserves directed suprema. Also note that, by considering directed sets of
two elements, such a function also has to be monotonic. These properties give rise to the
notion of a Scott-continuous function. Since this often is not ambiguous one also may
speak of continuous functions.
Approximation and finiteness
Domain theory is a purely qualitative approach to modeling the structure of information
states. One can say that something contains more information, but the amount of additional
information is not specified. Yet, there are some situations in which one wants to speak
about elements that are in a sense much more simple (or much more incomplete) than a
given state of information. For example, in the natural subset-inclusion ordering on some
powerset, any infinite element (i.e. set) is much more "informative" than any of its finite
subsets.
If one wants to model such a relationship, one may first want to consider the induced strict
order < of a domain with order ≤. However, while this is a useful notion in the case of total
orders, it does not tell us much in the case of partially ordered sets. Considering again
inclusion-orders of sets, a set is already strictly smaller than another, possibly infinite, set if
it contains just one less element. One would, however, hardly agree that this captures the
notion of being "much simpler".
Way-below relation
A more elaborate approach leads to the definition of the so-called order of approximation,
which is more suggestively also called the way-below relation. An element x is way below
an element y, if, for every directed set D with supremum such that
y ≤ sup D,
there is some element d in D such that
x ≤ d.
Then one also says that x approximates y and writes
x << y.

Domain theory
613
This does imply that
x ≤ y,
since the singleton set {y} is directed. For an example, in an ordering of sets, an infinite set
is way above any of its finite subsets. On the other hand, consider the directed set (in fact:
the chain) of finite sets
{0}, {0, 1}, {0, 1, 2}, ...
Since the supremum of this chain is the set of all natural numbers N, this shows that no
infinite set is way below N.
However, being way below some element is a relative notion and does not reveal much
about an element alone. For example, one would like to characterize finite sets in an
order-theoretic way, but even infinite sets can be way below some other set. The special
property of these finite elements x is that they are way below themselves, i.e.
x << x.
An element with this property is also called compact. Yet, such elements do not have to be
"finite" nor "compact" in any other mathematical usage of the terms. The notation is
nonetheless motivated by certain parallels to the respective notions in set theory and
topology. The compact elements of a domain have the important special property that they
cannot be obtained as a limit of a directed set in which they did not already occur.
Many other important results about the way-below relation support the claim that this
definition is appropriate to capture many important aspects of a domain.
Bases of domains
The previous thoughts raise another question: is it possible to guarantee that all elements
of a domain can be obtained as a limit of much simpler elements? This is quite relevant in
practice, since we cannot compute infinite objects but we may still hope to approximate
them arbitrarily closely.
More generally, we would like to restrict to a certain subset of elements as being sufficient
for getting all other elements as least upper bounds. Hence, one defines a base of a poset P
as being a subset B of P, such that, for each x in P, the set of elements in B that are way
below x contains a directed set with supremum x. The poset P is a continuous poset if it has
some base. Especially, P itself is a base in this situation. In many applications, one restricts
to continuous (d)cpos as a main object of study.
Finally, an even stronger restriction on a partially ordered set is given by requiring the
existence of a base of compact elements. Such a poset is called algebraic. From the
viewpoint of denotational semantics, algebraic posets are particularly well-behaved, since
they allow for the approximation of all elements even when restricting to finite ones. As
remarked before, not every finite element is "finite" in a classical sense and it may well be
that the finite elements constitute an uncountable set.
In some cases, however, the base for a poset is countable. In this case, one speaks of an
ω-continuous poset. Accordingly, if the countable base consists entirely of finite elements,
we obtain an order that is ω-algebraic.

Domain theory
614
Special types of domains
A simple special case of a domain is known as an elementary or flat domain. This consists
of a set of incomparable elements, such as the integers, along with a single "bottom"
element considered smaller than all other elements.
One can obtain a number of other interesting special classes of ordered structures that
could be suitable as "domains". We already mentioned continuous posets and algebraic
posets. More special versions of both are continuous and algebraic cpos. Adding even
further completeness properties one obtains continuous lattices and algebraic lattices,
which are just complete lattices with the respective properties. For the algebraic case, one
finds broader classes of posets which are still worth studying: historically, the Scott
domains were the first structures to be studied in domain theory. Still wider classes of
domains are constituted by SFP-domains, L-domains, and bifinite domains.
All of these classes of orders can be cast into various categories of dcpos, using functions
which are monotone, Scott-continuous, or even more specialized as morphisms. Finally,
note that the term domain itself is not exact and thus is only used as an abbreviation when
a formal definition has been given before or when the details are irrelevant.
Important results
A poset D is a dcpo if and only if each chain in D has a supremum. However, directed sets
are strictly more powerful than chains.
If f is a continuous function on a poset D then it has a least fixed point, given as the least
upper bound of all finite iterations of f on the least element 0: Vn in N f n(0).
Generalizations
• Synthetic domain theory [1]
• Topological domain theory [2]
See also
• Scott domain
• Scott information system
• Type theory
• Category theory
Literature
Probably one of the most recommendable books on domain theory today, giving a very clear
and detailed view on many parts of the basic theory:
• G. Gierz, K. H. Hofmann, K. Keimel, J. D. Lawson, M. Mislove, and D. S. Scott (2003).
"Continuous Lattices and Domains". Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications.
93. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-80338-1.
A standard resource on domain theory, which is freely available online:
• S. Abramsky, A. Jung (1994). "Domain theory [3]" (PDF). S. Abramsky, D. M. Gabbay, T. S.
E. Maibaum, editors, Handbook of Logic in Computer Science III, Oxford University
Press. ISBN 0-19-853762-X. Retrieved on 2007-10-13.

Domain theory
615
Another online paper explains the motivation, why the notion of “topology” can be applied
in the investigation of concepts of the computer science:
• Alex Simpson (2001-2002). http://www.dcs.ed.ac.uk/home/als/Teaching/MSfS/l3.ps|"Part
III: Topological Spaces from a Computational Perspective". Mathematical Structures for
Semantics. http:/ / www. dcs. ed. ac. uk/ home/ als/ Teaching/ MSfS/ l3. ps. Retrieved on
2007-10-13.
The “References” section of this web page provides many online materials on domain
theory.
One of Scott's classical papers:
• D. S. Scott (1975). "Data types as lattices". Proceedings of the International Summer
Institute and Logic Colloquium, Kiel, in Lecture Notes in Mathematics (Springer-Verlag)
499: 579–651.
A textbook treatment of domain theory with connections to lambda calculus and types:
• Carl A. Gunter (1992). Semantics of Programming Languages. MIT Press.
A general, easy-to-read account of order theory, including an introduction to domain theory
as well:
• B. A. Davey and H. A. Priestley (2002). Introduction to Lattices and Order (2nd ed.).
Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-78451-4.
An account of the Laws for Actor systems and how they can be used to justify Scott's
continuity criterion:
• Carl Hewitt and Henry Baker (August 1977). "Actors and Continuous Functionals".
Proceedings of IFIP Working Conference on Formal Description of Programming
Concepts.
References
[1] http:/ / citeseerx. ist. psu. edu/ viewdoc/ download?doi=10. 1. 1. 55. 903& rep=rep1& type=pdf
[2] http:/ / homepages. inf. ed. ac. uk/ als/ Research/ topological-domain-theory. html
[3] http:/ / www. cs. bham. ac. uk/ ~axj/ pub/ papers/ handy1. pdf

Baire category theorem
616
Baire category theorem
The Baire category theorem is an important tool in general topology and functional
analysis. The theorem has two forms, each of which gives sufficient conditions for a
topological space to be a Baire space.
The theorem was proved by René-Louis Baire in his 1899 doctoral thesis.[1]
Statement of the theorem
A Baire space is a topological space with the following property: for each countable
collection of open dense sets Un, their intersection ∩ Un is dense.
• (BCT1) Every complete metric space is a Baire space. More generally, every topological
space which is homeomorphic to an open subset of a complete pseudometric space is a
Baire space. Thus every completely metrizable topological space is a Baire space.
• (BCT2) Every locally compact Hausdorff space is a Baire space. The proof is similar to
the preceding statement; the finite intersection property takes the role played by
completeness.
Note that neither of these statements implies the other, since there is a complete metric
space which is not locally compact (the irrational numbers with the metric defined below),
and there is a locally compact Hausdorff space which is not metrizable (uncountable Fort
space). See Steen and Seebach in the references below.
• (BCT3) A non-empty complete metric space is NOT the countable union of
nowhere-dense sets (i.e, sets whose closure has dense complement).
This formulation is a consequence of BCT1 and is sometimes more useful in applications.
Also: if a non-empty complete metric space is the countable union of closed sets, then one
of these closed sets has non empty interior.
Relation to the axiom of choice
The proofs of BCT1 and BCT2 require some form of the axiom of choice; and in fact BCT1
is (over ZF) equivalent to a weaker version of the axiom of choice called the axiom of
dependent choices. [2]
Uses of the theorem
BCT1 is used to prove the open mapping theorem, the closed graph theorem and the
uniform boundedness principle.
BCT1 also shows that every complete metric space with no isolated points is uncountable.
(If X is a countable complete metric space with no isolated points, then each singleton {x}
in X is nowhere dense, and so X is of first category in itself.) In particular, this proves that
the set of all real numbers is uncountable.
BCT1 shows that each of the following is a Baire space:
• The space R of real numbers
• The irrational numbers, with the metric defined by d(x, y) = 1 / (n + 1), where n is the
first index for which the continued fraction expansions of x and y differ (this is a
complete metric space)

Baire category theorem
617
• The Cantor set
By BCT2, every manifold is a Baire space, since it is locally compact and Hausdorff. This is
so even for non-paracompact (hence nonmetrizable) manifolds such as the long line.
Proof
The following is a standard proof that a complete metric space 
is a Baire space.
Let 
be a collection of open dense subsets. We want to show that the intersection 
is dense. For that, let 
be an open subset. By denseness, there is 
and 
such that:
.
Recursively, we find 
and 
such that:
as well as 
.
Since 
when 
, we have that 
is Cauchy, and 
converges to some
limit 
. For any 
, by closedness,
.
Hence, 
and 
for all 
. 
Notes
[1] R. Baire. Sur les fonctions de variables réelles. (http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=cS4LAAAAYAAJ) Ann. di
Mat., 3:1–123, 1899.
[2] http:/ / www. math. vanderbilt. edu/ ~schectex/ ccc/ excerpts/ equivdc. gif
References
• Schechter, Eric, Handbook of Analysis and its Foundations, Academic Press, ISBN
0-12-622760-8
• Lynn Arthur Steen and J. Arthur Seebach, Jr., Counterexamples in Topology,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1978. Reprinted by Dover Publications, New York, 1995.
ISBN 0-486-68735-X (Dover edition).

618
Notable Algebraic Topologists and
Category Theoreticians
Michael Atiyah
Michael Atiyah
Born
April 22, 1929
Hampstead, London, England
Nationality
United Kingdom
Fields
Mathematics
Institutions
University of Cambridge
University of Oxford
Institute for Advanced Study
University of Leicester
University of Edinburgh
Alma mater
Trinity College, Cambridge
Doctoral advisor
W. V. D. Hodge
Doctoral students
Simon Donaldson
Nigel Hitchin
Frances Kirwan
Peter Kronheimer
Graeme Segal
Notable awards
Fields Medal (1966)
Copley Medal (1988)
Abel Prize (2004)
Sir Michael Francis Atiyah, OM, FRS, FRSE (born April 22, 1929) is a British
mathematician, and one of the most influential mathematicians of the twentieth century.[1]
He grew up in Sudan and Egypt, and spent most of his academic life at Oxford, Cambridge,
and Princeton. He has been President of the Royal Society (1990–1995), Master of Trinity
College, Cambridge (1990–1997), Chancellor of the University of Leicester (1995–2005),
and President of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (2005–2008). He is currently retired and
an honorary professor at the University of Edinburgh.
He has had many mathematical collaborations, in particular with Raoul Bott, Friedrich 
Hirzebruch, and Isadore Singer, and his students include Graeme Segal, Nigel Hitchin, and 
Simon Donaldson. With Hirzebruch he founded topological K-theory, a major tool in

Michael Atiyah
619
algebraic topology, that describes the ways in which high dimensional space can be twisted.
His best known result is the Atiyah–Singer index theorem, proved with Singer in 1963, a
fundamental and widely used result which can be used to count the number of independent
solutions of many important differential equations. More recently he has worked on topics
inspired by theoretical physics, such as instantons and monopoles, which are responsible
for some subtle corrections in quantum field theory.
He has received many awards for his research, including the Fields Medal in 1966, the
Copley Medal in 1988, and the Abel Prize in 2004.
Biography
Great Court of Trinity College,
Cambridge, where Atiyah was a
student and later Master
Atiyah was born in Hampstead, London to Lebanese
writer Edward Atiyah and Scot Jean Atiyah (née
Levens). Patrick Atiyah, professor of law, is his brother;
he has one other brother, Joe, and a sister, Selma.[2] He
went to primary school at the Diocesan school in
Khartoum, Sudan (1934−1941) and to secondary school
at 
Victoria 
College 
in 
Cairo 
and 
Alexandria
(1941−1945); 
the 
school 
was 
also 
attended 
by
European nobility displaced by the Second World War
and some future leaders of Arab nations.[3] He returned
to England and Manchester Grammar School for his
HSC studies (1945−1947) and did his national service with the Royal Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers (1947−1949). His undergraduate and postgraduate studies took
place at Trinity College, Cambridge (1949−1955).[4] He was a doctoral student of William
V. D. Hodge and was awarded a doctorate in 1955 for a thesis entitled Some Applications of
Topological Methods in Algebraic Geometry.[5]
The Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton, where Atiyah was professor
from 1969 to 1972
Atiyah married Lily Brown on 30 July 1955, with whom
he now has three sons.[4] He spent the academic year
1955−1956 at the Institute for Advanced Study,
Princeton, then returned to Cambridge University,
where he was a research fellow and assistant lecturer
(1957−1958), then a university lecturer and tutorial
fellow at Pembroke College (1958−1961). In 1961, he
moved to the University of Oxford, where he was a
reader and professorial fellow at St Catherine's College
(1961−1963).[4] He became Savilian Professor of
Geometry and a professorial fellow of New College,
Oxford from 1963 to 1969. He then took up a three year
professorship at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton after which he returned to
Oxford as a Royal Society Research Professor and professorial fellow of St Catherine's
College. He was president of the London Mathematical Society from 1974 to 1976.[4]
I started out by changing local currency into foreign currency everywhere I travelled as a child and
ended up making money. That’s when my father realised that I would be a mathematician some day.
—Michael Atiyah[6]

Michael Atiyah
620
Atiyah has been active on the international scene, for instance as president of the Pugwash
Conferences on Science and World Affairs from 1997 to 2002.[7] He also contributed to the
foundation of the InterAcademy Panel on International Issues, the Association of European
Academies (ALLEA), and the European Mathematical Society (EMS).[8]
Within the United Kingdom, he was involved in the creation of the Isaac Newton Institute
for Mathematical Sciences in Cambridge and was its first director (1990−1996). He was
president of the Royal Society (1990−1995), Master of Trinity College, Cambridge
(1990−1997),[7] , Chancellor of the University of Leicester (1995−2005)[7] , and president
of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (2005-2008).[9] He is now retired and an honorary
professor at the University of Edinburgh.
Collaborations
The Mathematical Institute in Oxford,
where Atiyah supervised many of his
students.
Atiyah 
has 
collaborated 
with 
many 
other
mathematicians. His three main collaborations were
with Raoul Bott on the Atiyah–Bott fixed-point theorem
and many other topics, with Isadore M. Singer on the
Atiyah–Singer index theorem, and with Friedrich
Hirzebruch on topological K-theory,[10] all of whom he
met at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in
1955.[11] His other collaborators include J. Frank
Adams 
(Hopf 
invariant 
problem), 
Jurgen 
Berndt
(projective planes), Roger Bielawski (Berry–Robbins
problem), Howard Donnelly (L-functions), Vladimir G.
Drinfeld (instantons), Johan L. Dupont (singularities of
vector fields), Lars Garding (hyperbolic differential equations), Nigel J. Hitchin
(monopoles), William V. D. Hodge (Integrals of the second kind), Michael Hopkins
(K-theory), Lisa Jeffrey (topological Lagrangians), John D. S. Jones (Yang–Mills theory), Juan
Maldacena (M-theory), Yuri I. Manin (instantons), Nick S. Manton (Skyrmions), Vijay K.
Patodi (Spectral asymmetry), A. N. Pressley (convexity), Elmer Rees (vector bundles),
Wilfried Schmid (discrete series representations), Graeme Segal (equivariant K-theory),
Alexander Shapiro (Clifford algebras), L. Smith (homotopy groups of spheres), Paul
Sutcliffe (polyhedra), David O. Tall (lambda rings), John A. Todd (Stiefel manifolds), Cumrun
Vafa (M-theory), Richard S. Ward (instantons), and Edward Witten (M-theory, topological
quantum field theories).[12]
His later research on gauge field theories, particularly Yang–Mills theory, stimulated
important interactions between geometry and physics, most notably in the work of Edward
Witten.
If you attack a mathematical problem directly, very often you come to a dead end, nothing you do
seems to work and you feel that if only you could peer round the corner there might be an easy
solution. There is nothing like having somebody else beside you, because he can usually peer round
the corner.
—Michael Atiyah[13]
Atiyah's many students include Peter Braam 1987, Simon Donaldson 1983, David Elworthy 
1967, Howard Fegan 1977, Eric Grunwald 1977, Nigel Hitchin 1972, Lisa Jeffrey 1991, 
Frances Kirwan 1984, Peter Kronheimer 1986, Ruth Lawrence 1989, George Lusztig 1971,

Michael Atiyah
621
Jack Morava 1968, Michael Murray 1983, Peter Newstead 1966, Ian Porteous 1961, John
Roe 1985, Brian Sanderson 1963, Rolph Schwarzenberger 1960, Graeme Segal 1967, David
Tall 1966, and Graham White 1982.[5]
Other contemporary mathematicians who influenced Atiyah include Roger Penrose, Lars
Hörmander, Alain Connes, and Jean-Michel Bismut.[14] Atiyah said that the mathematician
he most admired was Hermann Weyl,[15] and that his favorite mathematicians from before
the 20th century were Bernhard Riemann and William Rowan Hamilton.[16]
Mathematical work
The six volumes of Atiyah's collected papers include most of his work, except for his
commutative algebra textbook[17] and a few works written since 2004.
Algebraic geometry (1952–1958)
A twisted cubic curve, the subject of Atiyah's first
paper
Atiyah's 
early 
papers 
on 
algebraic
geometry (and some general papers) are
reprinted in the first volume of his collected
works.[18]
As an undergraduate Atiyah was interested
in classical projective geometry, and wrote
his first paper: a short note on twisted
cubics.[19] He started research under W. V.
D. Hodge and won the Smith's prize for
1954 for a sheaf-theoretic approach to
ruled surfaces,[20] which encouraged Atiyah
to continue in mathematics, rather than
switch to his other interests—architecture
and archaeology.[21] His PhD thesis with
Hodge was on a sheaf-theoretic approach
to Solomon Lefschetz's theory of integrals
of the second kind on algebraic varieties,
and resulted in an invitation to visit the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton for a year.[22] While in Princeton he classified
vector bundles on an elliptic curve (extending Grothendieck's classification of vector
bundles on a genus 0 curve), by showing that any vector bundle is a sum of (essentially
unique) indecomposable vector bundles,[23] and then showing that the space of
indecomposable vector bundles of given degree and positive dimension can be identified
with the elliptic curve.[24] He also studied double points on surfaces,[25] giving the first
example of a flop, a special birational transformation of 3-folds that was later heavily used
in Mori's work on minimal models for 3-folds.[26] Atiyah's flop can also be used to show that
the universal marked family of K3 surfaces is non-Hausdorff.[27]

Michael Atiyah
622
K theory (1959–1974)
A Möbius band is the simplest non-trivial example of a
vector bundle.
Atiyah's works on K-theory, including his
book on K-theory[28] are reprinted in
volume 2 of his collected works.[29]
The simplest example of a vector bundle is
the Möbius band (pictured on the right): a
strip of paper with a twist in it, which
represents a rank 1 vector bundle over a
circle (the circle in question being the
centerline of the Möbius band). K-theory is
a tool for working with higher dimensional
analogues of this example, or in other
words for describing higher dimensional
twistings: elements of the K-group of a
space are represented by vector bundles over it, so the Möbius band represents an element
of the K-group of a circle.
Topological K-theory was discovered by Atiyah and Friedrich Hirzebruch[30] who were
inspired by Grothendieck's proof of the Grothendieck–Riemann–Roch theorem and Bott's
work on the periodicity theorem. This paper only discussed the zeroth K-group; they shortly
after extended it to K-groups of all degrees,[31] giving the first (nontrivial) example of a
generalized cohomology theory.
Several results showed that the newly introduced K-theory was in some ways more
powerful than ordinary cohomology theory. Atiyah and Todd[32] used K-theory to improve
the lower bounds found using ordinary cohomology by Borel and Serre for the James
number, describing when a map from a complex Stiefel manifold to a sphere has a cross
section. (Adams and Grant-Walker later showed that the bound found by Atiyah and Todd
was best possible.) Atiyah and Hirzebruch[33] used K-theory to explain some relations
between Steenrod operations and Todd classes that Hirzebruch had noticed a few years
before. The original solution of the Hopf invariant one problem operations by J. F. Adams
was very long and complicated, using secondary cohomology operations. Atiyah showed
how primary operations in K-theory could be used to gives a short solution taking only a
few lines, and in joint work with Adams[34] also proved analogues of the result at odd
primes.

Michael Atiyah
623
Michael Atiyah and Friedrich Hirzebruch (right), the
creators of topological K-theory
The Atiyah–Hirzebruch spectral sequence
relates the ordinary cohomology of a space
to its generalized cohomology theory.[31]
(Atiyah and Hirzebruch used the case of
K-theory, but their method works for all
cohomology theories).
Atiyah showed[35] that for a finite group G,
the K-theory of its classifying space, BG, is
isomorphic 
to 
the 
completion 
of 
its
character ring:
The same year[36] they proved the result for G any compact connected Lie group. Although
soon the result could be extended to all compact Lie groups by incorporating results from
Graeme Segal's thesis,[37] that extension was complicated. However a simpler and more
general proof was produced by introducing equivariant K-theory, i.e. equivalence classes of
G-vector bundles over a compact G-space X.[38] It was shown that under suitable conditions
the completion of the equivariant K-theory of X is isomorphic to the ordinary K-theory of a
space, 
, which fibred over BG with fibre X:
The original result then followed as a corollary by taking X to be a point: the left hand side
reduced to the completion of R(G) and the right to K(BG). See Atiyah–Segal completion
theorem for more details.
He defined new generalized homology and cohomology theories called bordism and
cobordism, and pointed out that many of the deep results on cobordism of manifolds found
by R. Thom, C. T. C. Wall, and others could be naturally reinterpreted as statements about
these cohomology theories.[39] Some of these cohomology theories, in particular complex
cobordism, turned out to be some of the most powerful cohomology theories known.
Algebra is the offer made by the devil to the mathematician. The devil says: `I will give you this
powerful machine, it will answer any question you like. All you need to do is give me your soul: give
up geometry and you will have this marvellous machine.'
—Michael Atiyah[40]
He introduced[41] the J-group J(X) of a finite complex X, defined as the group of stable fiber
homotopy equivalence classes of sphere bundles; this was later studied in detail by J. F.
Adams in a series of papers, leading to the Adams conjecture.
With Hirzebruch he extended the Grothendieck–Riemann–Roch theorem to complex analytic
embeddings,[41] and in a related paper [42] they showed that the Hodge conjecture for
integral cohomology is false. The Hodge conjecture for rational cohomology is, as of 2008, a
major unsolved problem.[43]
The Bott periodicity theorem was a central theme in Atiyah's work on K-theory, and he 
repeatedly returned to it, reworking the proof several times to understand it better. With

Michael Atiyah
624
Bott he worked out an elementary proof,[44] and gave another version of it in his book.[45]
With Bott and Shapiro he analysed the relation of Bott periodicity to the periodicity of
Clifford algebras;[46] although this paper did not have a proof of the periodicity theorem, a
proof along similar lines was shortly afterwards found by R. Wood. In [47] he found a proof
of several generalizations using elliptic operators; this new proof used an idea that he used
to give a particularly short and easy proof of Bott's original periodicity theorem.[48]
Index theory (1963–1984)
Isadore Singer (in 1977), who worked
with Atiyah on index theory.
Atiyah's work on index theory is reprinted in volumes 3
and 4 of his collected works.[49] [50]
The index of a differential operator is closely related to
the number of independent solutions (more precisely, it
is the differences of the numbers of independent
solutions of the differential operator and its adjoint).
There are many hard and fundamental problems in
mathematics that can easily be reduced to the problem
of finding the number of independent solutions of some
differential operator, so if one has some means of
finding the index of a differential operator these
problems can often be solved. This is what the Atiyah–Singer index theorem does: it gives a
formula for the index of certain differential operators, in terms of topological invariants that
look quite complicated but are in practice usually strightforward to calculate.
Several deep theorems, such as the Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem, are special cases
of the Atiyah–Singer index theorem. In fact the index theorem gave a more powerful result,
because its proof applied to all compact complex manifolds, while Hirzebruch's proof only
worked for projective manifolds. There were also many new applications: a typical one is
calculating the dimensions of the moduli spaces of instantons. The index theorem can also
be run "in reverse": the index is obviously an integer, so the formula for it must also give an
integer, which sometimes gives subtle integrality conditions on invariants of manifolds. A
typical example of this is Rochlin's theorem, which follows from the index theorem.
The most useful piece of advice I would give to a mathematics student is always to suspect an
impressive sounding Theorem if it does not have a special case which is both simple and non-trivial.
—Michael Atiyah[51]
The index problem for elliptic differential operators was posed in 1959 by Gel'fand.[52] He
noticed the homotopy invariance of the index, and asked for a formula for it by means of
topological invariants. Some of the motivating examples included the Riemann–Roch
theorem and its generalization the Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem, and the Hirzebruch
signature theorem. Hirzebruch and Borel had proved the integrality of the Â genus of a spin
manifold, and Atiyah suggested that this integrality could be explained if it were the index
of the Dirac operator (which was rediscovered by Atiyah and Singer in 1961).
The first announcement of the Atiyah–Singer theorem was their 1963 paper.[53] The proof 
sketched 
in 
this 
announcement 
was 
inspired 
by 
Hirzebruch's 
proof 
of 
the 
Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem and was never published by them, though it is 
described in the book by Palais.[54] Their first published proof [55] was more similar to 
Grotherndieck's proof of the Grothendieck–Riemann–Roch theorem, replacing the

Michael Atiyah
625
cobordism theory of the first proof with K-theory, and they used this approach to give
proofs of various generalizations in a sequence of papers from 1968 to 1971.
Instead of just one elliptic operator, one can consider a family of elliptic operators
parameterized by some space Y. In this case the index is an element of the K-theory of Y,
rather than an integer.[56] If the operators in the family are real, then the index lies in the
real K-theory of Y. This gives a little extra information, as the map from the real K theory of
Y to the complex K theory is not always injective.[57]
Atiyah's former student Graeme Segal
(in 1982), who worked with Atiyah on
equivariant K-theory.
With Bott, Atiyah found an analogue of the Lefschetz
fixed-point formula for elliptic operators, giving the
Lefschetz number of an endomorphism of an elliptic
complex in terms of a sum over the fixed points of the
endomorphism.[58] As special cases their formula
included the Weyl character formula, and several new
results 
about 
elliptic 
curves 
with 
complex
multiplication, some of which were initially disbelieved
by experts.[59] Atiyah and Segal combined this fixed
point theorem with the index theorem as follows. If
there is a compact group action of a group G on the
compact manifold X, commuting with the elliptic
operator, then one can replace ordinary K theory in the index theorem with equivariant
K-theory. For trivial groups G this gives the index theorem, and for a finite group G acting
with isolated fixed points it gives the Atiyah–Bott fixed point theorem. In general it gives
the index as a sum over fixed point submanifolds of the group G.[60]
Atiyah[61] solved a problem asked independently by Hörmander and Gel'fand, about
whether complex powers of analytic functions define distributions. Atiyah used Hironaka's
resolution of singularities to answer this affirmatively. A ingenious and elementary solution
was found at about the same time by J. Bernstein, and discussed by Atiyah.[62]
As an application of the equivariant index theorem, Atiyah and Hirzeburch showed that
manifolds with effective circle actions have vanishing Â-genus.[63] (Lichnerowicz showed
that if an manifold has a metric of positive scalar curvature then the Â-genus vanishes.)
Wth Elmer Rees, Atiyah studied the problem of the relation between topological and
holomorphic vector bundles on projective space. They solved the simplest unknown case, by
showing that all rank 2 vector bundles over projective 3-space have a holomorphic
structure.[64] Horrocks had previously found some non-trivial examples of such vector
bundles, which were later used by Atiyah in his study of instantons on the 4-sphere.

Michael Atiyah
626
Raoul Bott, who worked with Atiyah on
fixed point formulas and several other
topics.
Atiyah, Bott, and Vijay K. Patodi[65] gave a new proof of
the index theorem using the heat equation.
If the manifold is allowed to have boundary, then some
restrictions must be put on the domain of the elliptic
operator in order to ensure a finite index. These
conditions can be local (like demanding that the
sections in the domain vanish at the boundary) or more
complicated global conditions (like requiring that the
sections 
in 
the 
domain 
solve 
some 
differential
equation). The local case was worked out by Atiyah and
Bott, but they showed that many interesting operators
(e.g., the signature operator) do not admit local boundary conditions. To handle these
operators, Atiyah, Patodi and Singer introduced global boundary conditions equivalent to
attaching a cylinder to the manifold along the boundary and then restricting the domain to
those sections that are square integrable along the cylinder. This resulted in a series of
papers on spectral asymmetry,[66] which were later unexpectedly used in theoretical
physics, in particular in Witten's work on anomalies.
The lacunas discussed by Petrovsky,
Atiyah, Bott and Gårding are similar to
the spaces between shockwaves of a
supersonic object.
The fundamental solutions of linear hyperbolic partial
differential equations often have Petrovsky lacunas:
regions where they vanish identically. These were
studied in 1945 by I. G. Petrovsky, who found
topological conditions describing which regions were
lacunas. In collaboration with Bott and Lars Gårding,
Atiyah wrote three papers updating and generalizing
Petrovsky's work.[67]
Atiyah[68] showed how to extend the index theorem to
some non-compact manifolds, acted on by a discrete
group with compact quotient. The kernel of the elliptic
operator is in general infinite dimensional in this case,
but it is possible to get a finite index using the
dimension of a module over a von Neumann algebra;
this index is in general real rather than integer valued.
This version is called the L2 index theorem, and was
used by Atiyah and Schmid[69] to give a geometric construction, using square integrable
harmonic spinors, of Harish-Chandra's discrete series representations of semisimple Lie
groups. In the course of this work they found a more elementary proof of Harish-Chandra's
fundamental theorem on the local integrability of characters of Lie groups.[70]
With H. Donnelly and I. Singer, he extended Hirzebruch's formula (relating the signature
defect at cusps of Hilbert modular surfaces to values of L-functions) from real quadratic
fields to all totally real fields.[71]

Michael Atiyah
627
Gauge theory (1977–1985)
On the left, two nearby monopoles of
the same polarity repel each other, and
on the right two nearby monopoles of
opposite polarity form a dipole. These
are abelian monopoles; the non-abelian
ones studied by Atiyah are more
complicated.
Many of his papers on gauge theory and related topics
are reprinted in volume 5 of his collected works.[72] A
common theme of these papers is the study of moduli
spaces of solutions to certain non-linear partial
differential equations, in particular the equations for
instantons and monopoles. This often involves finding a
subtle 
correspondence 
between 
solutions 
of 
two
seemingly quite different equations. An early example
of this which Atiyah used repeatedly is the Penrose
transform, which can sometimes convert solutions of a
non-linear equation over some real manifold into
solutions of some linear holomorphic equations over a
different complex manifold.
In a series of papers with several authors, Atiyah classified all instantons on 4 dimensional
Euclidean space. It is more convenient to classify instantons on a sphere as this is compact,
and this is essentially equivalent to classifing instantons on Euclidean space as this is
conformally equivalent to a sphere and the equations for instantons are conformally
invariant. With Hitchin and Singer[73] he calculated the dimension of the moduli space of
irreducible self-dual connections (instantons) for any principle bundle over a compact
4-dimensional Riemannian manifold. For example, the dimension of the space of SU2
instantons of rank k>0 is 8k−3. To do this they used the Atiyah–Singer index theorem to
calculate the dimension of the tangent space of the moduli space at a point; the tangent
space is essentially the space of solutions of an elliptic differential operator, given by the
linearization of the non-linear Yang–Mills equations. These moduli spaces were later used
by Donaldson to construct his invariants of 4-manifolds. Atiyah and Ward used the Penrose
correspondence to reduce the classification of all instantons on the 4-sphere to a problem in
algebraic geometry.[74] With Hitchin he used ideas of Horrocks to solve this problem, giving
the ADHM construction of all instantons on a sphere; Manin, and Drinfeld found the same
construction at the same time, leading to a joint paper by all four authors.[75] Atiyah
reformulated this construction using quaternions and wrote up a leisurely account of this
classification of instantons on Euclidean space as a book.[76]
The mathematical problems that have been solved or techniques that have arisen out of physics in
the past have been the lifeblood of mathematics.
—Michael Atiyah[77]
Atiyah's work on instanton moduli spaces was used in Donaldson's work on Donaldson 
theory. Donaldson showed that the moduli space of (degree 1) instantons over a compact 
simply connected 4-manifold with positive definite intersection form can be compactified to 
give a cobordism between the manifold and a sum of copies of complex projective space. He 
deduced from this that the intersection form must be a sum of one dimensional ones, which 
led to several spectacular applications to smooth 4-manifolds, such as the existence of 
non-equivalent smooth structures on 4 dimensional Euclidean space. Donaldson went on to 
use the other moduli spaces studied by Atiyah to define Donaldson invariants, which 
revolutionized the study of smooth 4-manifolds, and showed that they were more subtle 
than smooth manifolds in any other dimension, and also quite different from topological

Michael Atiyah
628
4-manifolds. Atiyah described some of these results in a survey talk.[78]
Green's functions for linear partial differential equations can often be found by using the
Fourier transform to convert this into an algebraic problem. Atiyah used a non-linear
version of this idea.[79] He used the Penrose transform to convert the Green's function for
the conformally invariant Laplacian into a complex analytic object, which turned out to be
essentially the diagonal embedding of the Penrose twistor space into its square. This
allowed him to find an explicit formula for the conformally invariant Green's function on a
4-manifold.
In his paper with Jones,[80] he studied the topology of the moduli space of SU(2) instantons
over a 4-sphere. They showed that the natural map from this moduli space to the space of
all connections induces epimorphisms of homology groups in a certain range of dimensions,
and suggested that it might induce isomorphisms of homology groups in the same range of
dimensions. This became known as the Atiyah–Jones conjecture, and was later proved by
several mathematicians.[81]
Harder and M. S. Narasimhan described the cohomology of the moduli spaces of stable
vector bundles over Riemann surfaces by counting the number of points of the moduli
spaces over finite fields, and then using the Weil conjectures to recover the cohomology
over the complex numbers.[82] Atiyah and R. Bott used Morse theory and the Yang–Mills
equations over a Riemann surface to reproduce and extending the results of Harder and
Narasimhan.[83]
An old result due to Schur and Horn states that the set of possible diagonal vectors of an
Hermitian matrix with given eigenvalues is the convex hull of all the permutations of the
eigenvalues. Atiyah proved a generalization of this that applies to all compact symplectic
manifolds acted on by a torus, showing that the image of the manifold under the moment
map is a convex polyhedron,[84] and with Pressley gave a related generalization to infinite
dimensional loop groups.[85]
Duistermaat and Heckman found a striking formula, saying that the push-forward of the
Liouville measure of a moment map for a torus action is given exactly by the stationary
phase approximation (which is in general just an asymptotic expansion rather than exact).
Atiyah and Bott [86] showed that this could be deduced from a more general formula in
equivariant cohomology, which was a consequence of well-known localization theorems.
Atiyah showed[87] that the moment map was closely related to geometric invariant theory,
and this idea was later developed much further by his student F. Kirwan. Witten shortly
after applied the Duistermaat–Heckman formula to loop spaces and showed that this
formally gave the Atiyah–Singer index theorem for the Dirac operator; this idea was
lectured on by Atiyah.[88]
With Hitchin he worked on magnetic monopoles, and studied their scattering using an idea
of Nick Manton. [89] His book [90] with Hitchin gives a detailed description of their work on
magnetic monopoles. The main theme of the book is a study of a moduli space of magnetic
monopoles; this has a natural Riemannian metric, and a key point is that this metric is
complete and hyperkahler. The metric is then used to study the scattering of two
monopoles, using a suggestion of N. Manton that the geodesic flow on the moduli space is
the low energy approximation to the scattering. For example, they show that a head-on
collision between two monopoles results in 90-degree scattering, with the direction of
scattering depending on the relative phases of the two monopoles. He also studied
monopoles on hyperbolic space.[91]

Michael Atiyah
629
Atiyah showed [92] that instantons in 4 dimensions can be identified with instantons in 2
dimensions, which are much easier to handle. There is of course a catch: in going from 4 to
2 dimensions the structure group of the gauge theory changes from a finite dimensional
group to an infinite dimensional loop group. This gives another example where the moduli
spaces of solutions of two apparently unrelated nonlinear partial differential equations turn
out to be essentially the same.
Atiyah and Singer found that anomalies in quantum field theory could be interpreted in
terms of index theory of the Dirac operator;[93] this idea later became widely used by
physicists.
Later work (1986 onwards)
Edward Witten, whose work on
invariants of manifolds and topological
quantum field theories was influenced
by Atiyah.
Many of the papers in the 6th volume[94] of his collected
works are surveys, obituaries, and general talks. Since
its publication, Atiyah has continued to publish,
including several surveys, a popular book,[95] and
another paper with Segal on twisted K-theory.
One paper[96] is a detailed study of the Dedekind eta
function from the point of view of topology and the
index theorem.
Several of his papers from around this time study the
connections between quantum field theory, knots, and
Donaldson theory. He introduced the concept of a
topological quantum field theory, inspired by Witten's
work and Segal's definition of a conformal field
theory.[97] . His book[98] describes the new knot
invariants found by Vaughan Jones and Edward Witten
in terms of topological quantum field theories, and his
paper with L. Jeffrey[99] explains Witten's Lagrangian
giving the Donaldson invariants.
He studied skyrmions with Nick Manton,[100] finding a relation with magnetic monopoles
and instantons, and giving a conjecture for the structure of the moduli space of two
skyrmions as a certain subquotient of complex projective 3-space.
Several papers[101] were inspired by a question of M. Berry, who asked if there is a map
from the configuration space of n points in 3-space to the flag manifold of the unitary
group. Atiyah gave an affirmative answer to this question, but felt his solution was too
computational and studied a conjecture that would give a more natural solution. He also
related the question to Nahm's equation.
But for most practical purposes, you just use the classical groups. The exceptional Lie groups are
just there to show you that the theory is a bit bigger; it is pretty rare that they ever turn up.
—Michael Atiyah[102]
With Juan Maldacena and Cumrun Vafa,[103] and E. Witten[104] he described the dynamics
of M-theory on manifolds with G2 holonomy. These papers seem to be the first time that
Atiyah has worked on exceptional Lie groups.

Michael Atiyah
630
In his papers with M. Hopkins[105] and G. Segal[106] he returned to his earlier interest of
K-theory, describing some twisted forms of K-theory with applications in theoretical
physics.
Awards and honours
The premises of the Royal Society,
where Atiyah was president from 1990
to 1995.
In 1966, when he was thirty-seven years old, he was
awarded the Fields Medal,[107] for his work in
developing 
K-theory, 
a 
generalized 
Lefschetz
fixed-point theorem and the Atiyah–Singer theorem, for
which he also won the Abel Prize jointly with Isadore
Singer in 2004.[108] Among other prizes he has received
are the Royal Medal of the Royal Society in 1968,[109]
the De Morgan Medal of the London Mathematical
Society in 1980, the Antonio Feltrinelli Prize from the
Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei in 1981, the King Faisal
International Prize for Science in 1987,[110] the Copley
Medal of the Royal Society in 1988,[111] the Benjamin
Franklin Medal of the American Philosophical Society in 1993,[112] the Jawaharlal Nehru
Birth Centenary Medal of the Indian National Science Academy in 1993,[113] and the
President's Medal from the Institute of Physics in 2008.[114]
So I don't think it makes much difference to mathematics to know that there are different kinds of
simple groups or not. It is a nice intellectual endpoint, but I don't think it has any fundamental
importance.
—Michael Atiyah, commenting on the classification of finite simple groups[115]
He was elected a foreign member of the National Academy of Sciences, the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Academie des Sciences, the Akademie Leopoldina, the
Royal Swedish Academy, the Royal Irish Academy, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the
American Philosophical Society, the Indian National Science Academy, the Chinese
Academy of Science, the Australian Academy of Science, the Russian Academy of Science,
the Ukrainian Academy of Science, the Georgian Academy of Science, the Venezuela
Academy of Science, the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, the Royal Spanish
Academy of Science, the Accademia dei Lincei, and the Moscow Mathematical Society.[4] [7]
Atiyah has been awarded honorary degrees by the universities of Bonn, Warwick, Durham,
St. Andrews, Dublin, Chicago, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Essex, London, Sussex, Ghent,
Reading, Helsinki, Salamanca, Montreal, Wales, Lebanon, Queen's (Canada), Keele,
Birmingham, UMIST, Brown, Heriot–Watt, Mexico, Oxford, Hong Kong (Chinese
University), The Open University, American University of Beirut, the Technical University of
Catalonia, and Leicester.[4] [7]
I had to wear a sort of bulletproof vest after that!
—Michael Atiyah, commenting on the reaction to the previous quote[116]
Atiyah was made a Knight Bachelor in 1983[4] and made a member of the Order of Merit in
1992.[7]

Michael Atiyah
631
The Michael Atiyah building[117] at the University of Leicester and the Michael Atiyah Chair
in Mathematical Sciences [118] at the American University of Beirut were named after him.
Notes
[1] http://www.abelprisen.no/nedlastning/2004/english_2004.pdf|Abel prize citation, p. 2, http:/ / www. abelprisen.
no/ nedlastning/ 2004/ english_2004. pdf.
[2] Atiyah, Joe (2007), http://www.atiyah.plus.com/family.htm|The Atiyah Family, http:/ / www. atiyah. plus. com/
family. htm, retrieved on 2008-08-14.
[3] Raafat, Samir, http://www.egy.com/victoria/96-03-30.shtml|Victoria College: educating the elite, 1902−1956,
http:/ / www. egy. com/ victoria/ 96-03-30. shtml, retrieved on 2008-08-14.
[4] Atiyah 1988a, p. xi
[5] Michael Atiyah (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=30949) at the Mathematics Genealogy
Project
[6] Batra, Amba (2003-11-08), http://cities.expressindia.com/fullstory.php?newsid=67555|Maths guru with
Einstein’s dream prefers chalk to mouse. (Interview with Atiyah.), Delhi newsline, http:/ / cities. expressindia.
com/ fullstory. php?newsid=67555, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[7] Atiyah 2004, p. ix
[8] "http://www.ams.org/notices/200406/comm-abel.pdf|Atiyah and Singer receive 2004 Abel prize", Notices of the
American Mathematical Society 51 (6): 650–651, 2006, http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200406/ comm-abel.
pdf, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[9] http://www.royalsoced.org.uk/international/other_academies/norway.htm|Royal Society of Edinburgh
announcement, http:/ / www. royalsoced. org. uk/ international/ other_academies/ norway. htm, retrieved on
2008-08-14
[10] Atiyah 2004, p. 9
[11] Atiyah 1988a, p. 2
[12] Atiyah 2004, pp. xi-xxv
[13] Atiyah 1988a, paper 12, p. 233
[14] Atiyah 2004, p. 10
[15] Atiyah 1988a, p. 307
[16] http://www.superstringtheory.com/people/atiyah.html|Interview with Michael Atiyah, superstringtheory.com,
http:/ / www. superstringtheory. com/ people/ atiyah. html, retrieved on 2008-08-14.
[17] Atiyah & Macdonald 1969
[18] Atiyah 1988a
[19] Atiyah 1988a, paper 1
[20] Atiyah 1988a, paper 2
[21] Atiyah 1988a, p. 1
[22] Atiyah 1988a, papers 3, 4
[23] Atiyah 1988a, paper 5
[24] Atiyah 1988a, paper 7
[25] Atiyah 1988a, paper 8
[26] Matsuki 2002.
[27] Barth et al. 2004
[28] Atiyah 1989
[29] Atiyah 1988b
[30] Atiyah 1988b, paper 24
[31] Atiyah 1988b, paper 28
[32] Atiyah 1988b, paper 26
[33] Atiyah 1988a, papers 30,31
[34] Atiyah 1988b, paper 42
[35] Atiyah 1961
[36] Atiyah & Hirzebruch 1961
[37] Segal 1968
[38] Atiyah & Segal 1969
[39] Atiyah 1988b, paper 34
[40] Atiyah 2004, paper 160, p. 7
[41] Atiyah 1988b, paper 37
[42] Atiyah 1988b, paper 36

Michael Atiyah
632
[43] Deligne, Pierre,
http://www.claymath.org/millennium/Hodge_Conjecture/Official_Problem_Description.pdf|The Hodge
conjecture, The Clay Math Institute, http:/ / www. claymath. org/ millennium/ Hodge_Conjecture/
Official_Problem_Description. pdf, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[44] Atiyah 1988b, paper 40
[45] Atiyah 1988b, paper 45
[46] Atiyah 1988b, paper 39
[47] Atiyah 1988b, paper 46
[48] Atiyah 1988b, paper 48
[49] Atiyah 1988c
[50] Atiyah 1988d
[51] Atiyah 1988a, paper 17, p. 76
[52] Gel'fand 1960
[53] Atiyah & Singer 1963
[54] Palais 1965
[55] Atiyah & Singer 1968a
[56] Atiyah 1988c, paper 67
[57] Atiyah 1988c, paper 68
[58] Atiyah 1988c, papers 61, 62, 63
[59] Atiyah 1988c, p. 3
[60] Atiyah 1988c, paper 65
[61] Atiyah 1988c, paper 73
[62] Atiyah 1988a, paper 15
[63] Atiyah 1988c, paper 74
[64] Atiyah 1988c, paper 76
[65] Atiyah, Bott & Patodi 1973
[66] Atiyah 1988d, papers 80–83
[67] Atiyah 1988d, papers 84, 85, 86
[68] Atiyah 1976
[69] Atiyah & Schmid 1977
[70] Atiyah 1988d, paper 91
[71] Atiyah 1988d, papers 92, 93
[72] Atiyah
[73] Atiyah 1988e, papers 94, 97
[74] Atiyah 1988e, paper 95
[75] Atiyah 1988e, paper 96
[76] Atiyah 1988e, paper 99
[77] Atiyah 1988a, paper 19, p. 13
[78] Atiyah 1988e, paper 112
[79] Atiyah 1988e, paper 101
[80] Atiyah 1988e, paper 102
[81] Boyer et al. 1993
[82] Harder & Narasimhan 1975
[83] Atiyah 1988e, papers 104–105
[84] Atiyah 1988e, paper 106
[85] Atiyah 1988e, paper 108
[86] Atiyah 1988e, paper 109
[87] Atiyah 1988e, paper 110
[88] Atiyah 1988e, paper 124
[89] Atiyah 1988e, papers 115, 116
[90] Atiyah & Hitchin 1988
[91] Atiyah 1988e, paper 118
[92] Atiyah 1988e, paper 117
[93] Atiyah 1988e, papers 119, 120, 121
[94] Michael Atiyah 2004
[95] Atiyah 2007
[96] Atiyah 2004, paper 127
[97] Atiyah 2004, paper 132
[98] Atiyah 1990

Michael Atiyah
633
[99] Atiyah 2004, paper 139
[100] Atiyah 2004, papers 141, 142
[101] Atiyah 2004, papers 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168
[102] Atiyah 1988a, paper 19, p. 19
[103] Atiyah 2004, paper 169
[104] Atiyah 2004, paper 170
[105] Atiyah 2004, paper 172
[106] Atiyah 2004, paper 173
[107] Fields medal citation: Cartan, Henri (1968), "L'oeuvre de Michael F. Atiyah", Proceedings of International
Conference of Mathematicians (Moscow, 1966), Izdatyel'stvo Mir, Moscow, pp. 9–14
[108] http://www.abelprisen.no/en/prisvinnere/2004/index.html|The Abel Prize 2004, http:/ / www. abelprisen. no/
en/ prisvinnere/ 2004/ index. html, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[109] http://royalsociety.org/page.asp?id=1751|Royal archive winners 1989–1950, http:/ / royalsociety. org/ page.
asp?id=1751, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[110] http://www.newton.ac.uk/history/atiyah.html|Sir Michael Atiyah FRS, Newton institute, http:/ / www.
newton. ac. uk/ history/ atiyah. html, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[111] http://royalsociety.org/page.asp?id=1742|Copley archive winners 1989–1900, http:/ / royalsociety. org/
page. asp?id=1742, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[112] http://www.amphilsoc.org/prizes/franklinscience.htm|Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished
Achievement in the Sciences, http:/ / www. amphilsoc. org/ prizes/ franklinscience. htm, retrieved on
2008-08-14
[113] http://insaindia.org/jnbc.htm|Jawaharlal Nehru Birth Centenary Medal, http:/ / insaindia. org/ jnbc. htm,
retrieved on 2008-08-14
[114] http://www.iop.org/activity/awards/The_President's_Medal/Presidents_medal_recipients/page_29148.html|2008
President's medal, http:/ / www. iop. org/ activity/ awards/ The_President's_Medal/ Presidents_medal_recipients/
page_29148. html, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[115] Atiyah 1988a, paper 19, p. 19
[116] Atiyah 2004, p. 10 of paper 160 (p. 660)
[117] http://www.engg.le.ac.uk/Research_Groups/Mechanics_of_Materials_Research_Group/The_Michael_Atiyah_Building|The
Michael Atiyah building, http:/ / www. engg. le. ac. uk/ Research_Groups/
Mechanics_of_Materials_Research_Group/ The_Michael_Atiyah_Building, retrieved on 2008-08-14
[118] http://www.ameinfo.com/142298.html|American University of Beirut establishes the Michael Atiyah Chair in
Mathematical Sciences, http:/ / www. ameinfo. com/ 142298. html, retrieved on 2008-08-14
References
Books by Atiyah
This subsection lists all books written by Atiyah; it omits a few books that he edited.
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Macdonald, Ian G. (1969), Introduction to commutative algebra,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Mass.-London-Don Mills, Ont., MR 0242802
(http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0242802). A classic textbook covering
standard commutative algebra.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1970), Vector fields on manifolds, Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Forschung
des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, Heft 200, Cologne: Westdeutscher Verlag, MR 0263102
(http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0263102). Reprinted as (Atiyah 1988b,
item 50).
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1974), Elliptic operators and compact groups, Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, Vol. 401, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 0482866 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0482866). Reprinted as (Atiyah 1988c, item 78).
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1979), Geometry of Yang–Mills fields, Scuola Normale Superiore Pisa,
Pisa, MR 554924 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=554924). Reprinted as
(Atiyah 1988e, item 99).

Michael Atiyah
634
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Hitchin, Nigel (1988), The geometry and dynamics of magnetic
monopoles, M. B. Porter Lectures, Princeton University Press, MR 934202 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=934202), ISBN 978-0-691-08480-0. Reprinted as
(Atiyah 2004, item 126).
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1988a), Collected works. Vol. 1 Early papers: general papers, Oxford
Science Publications, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, MR 951892 (http:/ /
www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=951892), ISBN 978-0-19-853275-0.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1988b), Collected works. Vol. 2 K-theory, Oxford Science
Publications, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, MR 951892 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=951892), ISBN 978-0-19-853276-7.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1988c), Collected works. Vol. 3 Index theory: 1, Oxford Science
Publications, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, MR 951892 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=951892), ISBN 978-0-19-853277-4.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1988d), Collected works. Vol. 4 Index theory:2, Oxford Science
Publications, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, MR 951892 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=951892), ISBN 978-0-19-853278-1.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1988e), Collected works. Vol. 5 Gauge theories, Oxford Science
Publications, The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, MR 951892 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=951892), ISBN 978-0-19-853279-8.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1989), K-theory, Advanced Book Classics (2nd ed.), Addison-Wesley,
MR 1043170 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=1043170), ISBN
978-0-201-09394-0. First edition (1967) reprinted as (Atiyah 1988b, item 45).
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1990), The geometry and physics of knots, Lezioni Lincee. [Lincei
Lectures], Cambridge University Press, MR 1078014 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1078014), ISBN 978-0-521-39521-2. Reprinted as (Atiyah 2004,
item 136).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Iagolnitzer, Daniel (1997), Fields Medallists' Lectures, World
Scientific, pp. 113–4, ISBN 9810231172.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (2004), Collected works. Vol. 6, Oxford Science Publications, The
Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, MR 2160826 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=2160826), ISBN 978-0-19-853099-2.
• Atiyah, Michael F. (2007), http://www.tuttimatematici.info/|Siamo tutti matematici
(Italian: We are all mathematicians), Roma: Di Renzo Editore, pp. 96, ISBN 8883231570,
http:/ / www. tuttimatematici. info/ .
Selected papers by Atiyah
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1961),
"http://www.numdam.org/item?id=PMIHES_1961__9__23_0|Characters and cohomology
of finite groups", Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 9: 23–64, doi:
10.1007/BF02698718 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF02698718), http:/ / www.
numdam. org/ item?id=PMIHES_1961__9__23_0. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988b, paper 29).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Hirzebruch, Friedrich (1961), "Vector bundles and homogeneous
spaces", Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. AMS 3: 7–38. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988b, paper 28).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Segal, Graeme B. (1969), "Equivariant K-Theory and Completion",
Journal of Differential Geometry 3: 1–18. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988b, paper 49).
• Atiyah, Michael F. (1976), "Elliptic operators, discrete groups and von Neumann 
algebras", Colloque "Analyse et Topologie" en l'Honneur de Henri Cartan (Orsay, 1974),

Michael Atiyah
635
Asterisque, 32–33, Soc. Math. France, Paris, pp. 43–72, MR 0420729 (http:/ / www. ams.
org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0420729). Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988d, paper 89).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Singer, Isadore M. (1963),
"http://www.ams.org/bull/1963-69-03/S0002-9904-1963-10957-X/home.html|The Index of
Elliptic Operators on Compact Manifolds", Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 69: 322–433, http:/ /
www. ams. org/ bull/ 1963-69-03/ S0002-9904-1963-10957-X/ home. html. An
announcement of the index theorem. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988c, paper 56).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Singer, Isadore M. (1968a),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(196805)2:87:3<484:TIOEOI>2.0.CO;2-M|The
Index of Elliptic Operators I", Ann. Math. 87: 484–530, doi: 10.2307/1970715 (http:/ / dx.
doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 1970715), http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28196805%292%3A87%3A3%3C484%3ATIOEOI%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-M. This gives a proof using K theory instead of cohomology. Reprinted in
(Atiyah 1988c, paper 64).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Segal, Graeme B. (1968),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(196805)2:87:3<531:TIOEOI>2.0.CO;2-2|The
Index of Elliptic Operators: II", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 87 (3): 531–545, doi:
10.2307/1970716 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 1970716), http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28196805%292%3A87%3A3%3C531%3ATIOEOI%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-2. This reformulates the result as a sort of Lefschetz fixed point theorem, using
equivariant K theory. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988c, paper 65).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Singer, Isadore M. (1968b),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(196805)2:87:3<546:TIOEOI>2.0.CO;2-V|The
Index of Elliptic Operators III.", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 87 (3): 546–604,
http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28196805%292%3A87%3A3%3C546%3ATIOEOI%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-V. This paper shows how to convert from the K-theory version to a version using
cohomology. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988c, paper 66).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Singer, Isadore M. (1971),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(197101)2:93:1<119:TIOEOI>2.0.CO;2-2|The
Index of Elliptic Operators IV.", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 93 (1): 119–138,
doi: 10.2307/1970756 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 1970756), http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28197101%292%3A93%3A1%3C119%3ATIOEOI%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-2 This paper studies families of elliptic operators, where the index is now an
element of the K-theory of the space parametrizing the family. Reprinted in (Atiyah
1988c, paper 67).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Singer, Isadore M. (1971),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(197101)2:93:1<139:TIOEOV>2.0.CO;2-V|The
Index of Elliptic Operators V.", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd Ser. 93 (1): 139–149, doi:
10.2307/1970757 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 1970757), http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28197101%292%3A93%3A1%3C139%3ATIOEOV%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-V. This studies families of real (rather than complex) elliptic operators, when
one can sometimes squeeze out a little extra information. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988c,
paper 68).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Bott, Raoul (1966), 
"http://www.ams.org/bull/1966-72-02/S0002-9904-1966-11483-0/home.html|A Lefschetz 
Fixed Point Formula for Elliptic Differential Operators.", Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 72:

Michael Atiyah
636
245–50, doi: 10.1090/S0002-9904-1966-11483-0 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/
S0002-9904-1966-11483-0), http:/ / www. ams. org/ bull/ 1966-72-02/
S0002-9904-1966-11483-0/ home. html. This states a theorem calculating the Lefschetz
number of an endomorphism of an elliptic complex. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988c, paper
61).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Bott, Raoul (1967),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(196709)2:86:2<374:ALFPFF>2.0.CO;2-N|A
Lefschetz Fixed Point Formula for Elliptic Complexes: I", The Annals of Mathematics 2nd
Ser. 86 (2): 374–407, doi: 10.2307/1970694 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 1970694),
http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28196709%292%3A86%3A2%3C374%3AALFPFF%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-N (reprinted in (Atiyah 1988c, paper 61))and Atiyah, Michael F.; Bott, Raoul
(1968),
"http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-486X(196811)2:88:3<451:ALFPFF>2.0.CO;2-B|A
Lefschetz Fixed Point Formula for Elliptic Complexes: II. Applications.", The Annals of
Mathematics 2nd Ser. 88 (3): 451–491, doi: 10.2307/1970721 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10.
2307/ 1970721), http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0003-486X%28196811%292%3A88%3A3%3C451%3AALFPFF%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-B. Reprinted in (Atiyah 1988c, paper 62). These give the proofs and some
applications of the results announced in the previous paper.
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Bott, Raoul; Patodi, Vijay K. (1973), "On the heat equation and the
index theorem", Invent. Math. 19: 279–330, doi: 10.1007/BF01425417 (http:/ / dx. doi.
org/ 10. 1007/ BF01425417), MR 0650828 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0650828); Atiyah, Michael F. (1975), "Errata", Invent. Math. 28:
277–280, doi: 10.1007/BF01425562 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF01425562), MR
0650829 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0650829) Reprinted in (Atiyah
1988d, paper 79, 79a).
• Atiyah, Michael F.; Schmid, Wilfried (1977), "A geometric construction of the discrete
series for semisimple Lie groups", Invent. Math. 42: 1–62, doi: 10.1007/BF01389783
(http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF01389783), MR 0463358 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=0463358); Atiyah, Michael F. (1979), "Erratum", Invent. Math.
54 (2): 189–192, doi: 10.1007/BF01408936 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF01408936),
MR 0550183 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0550183). Reprinted in
(Atiyah 1988d, paper 90).
Other references
• Boyer, Charles P.; Hurtubise, J. C.; Mann, B. M.; Milgram, R. J. (1993),
"http://www.jstor.org/stable/2946532|The topology of instanton moduli spaces. I. The
Atiyah–Jones conjecture", Annals of Mathematics. Second Series 137 (3): 561–609, doi:
10.2307/2946532 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 2946532), MR 1217348 (http:/ / www.
ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=1217348), ISSN 0003-486X (http:/ / worldcat. org/
issn/ 0003-486X), http:/ / www. jstor. org/ stable/ 2946532
• Barth, Wolf P.; Hulek, Klaus; Peters, Chris A.M.; Van de Ven, Antonius (2004), Compact
Complex Surfaces, Berlin: Springer, p. 334, ISBN 978-3-540-00832-3
• Gel'fand, Israel M. (1960), "On elliptic equations", Russ. Math. Surv. 15 (3): 113–123, 
doi: 10.1070/rm1960v015n03ABEH004094 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1070/ 
rm1960v015n03ABEH004094). Reprinted in volume 1 of his collected works, p. 65–75,

Michael Atiyah
637
ISBN 0-387-13619-3. On page 120 Gel'fand suggests that the index of an elliptic operator
should be expressible in terms of topological data.
• Harder, G.; Narasimhan, M. S. (1975), "On the cohomology groups of moduli spaces of
vector bundles on curves", Mathematische Annalen 212: 215–248, doi:
10.1007/BF01357141 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF01357141), MR 0364254 (http:/ /
www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0364254), ISSN 0025-5831 (http:/ / worldcat.
org/ issn/ 0025-5831)
• Matsuki, Kenji (2002), Introduction to the Mori program, Universitext, Berlin, New York:
Springer-Verlag, MR 1875410 (http:/ / www. ams. org/
mathscinet-getitem?mr=1875410), ISBN 978-0-387-98465-0
• Palais, Richard S. (1965), Seminar on the Atiyah–Singer Index Theorem, Annals of
Mathematics Studies, 57, S.l.: Princeton Univ Press, ISBN 0691080313. This describes
the original proof of the index theorem. (Atiyah and Singer never published their original
proof themselves, but only improved versions of it.)
• Segal, Graeme B. (1968),
"http://www.numdam.org/item?id=PMIHES_1968__34__113_0|The representation ring of
a compact Lie group", Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 34: 113–128, doi:
10.1007/BF02684592 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF02684592), http:/ / www.
numdam. org/ item?id=PMIHES_1968__34__113_0.
• Yau, Shing-Tung; Chan, Raymond H., eds. (1999),
"http://www.intlpress.com/AJM/AJM-v03.php|Sir Michael Atiyah: a great mathematician
of the twentieth century", Asian J. Math. (International Press) 3 (1): 1–332, MR 1701915
(http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=1701915), ISBN 978-1-57146-080-6,
http:/ / www. intlpress. com/ AJM/ AJM-v03. php.
• Yau, Shing-Tung, ed. (2005),
http://www.intlpress.com/books/FoundersIndexTheory.php|The Founders of Index
Theory: Reminiscences of Atiyah, Bott, Hirzebruch, and Singer, International Press,
pp. 358, ISBN 978-1571461209, http:/ / www. intlpress. com/ books/
FoundersIndexTheory. php.
External links
• The celebrations of Michael Atiyah's 80th birthday in Edinburgh, April 20-24, 2009 (http:/
/ www. maths. ed. ac. uk/ ~aar/ atiyah80. htm)
• Mathematical descendants of Michael Atiyah (http:/ / www. maths. ed. ac. uk/ ~aar/
confer/ atiyahd. pdf)
• Biographical poster about Michael Atiyah (http:/ / www. maths. ed. ac. uk/ ~aar/ confer/
mfa. pdf)
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Atiyah.html|"Michael Atiyah",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• http://www.superstringtheory.com/people/atiyah.html|Sir Michael Atiyah on math,
physics and fun, Official Superstring theory web site (http:/ / www. superstringtheory.
com/ index. html), http:/ / www. superstringtheory. com/ people/ atiyah. html, retrieved
on 2008-08-14
• Atiyah, Michael, 
http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-5911099858813393554|Beauty in Mathematics 
(video, 3m14s), http:/ / video. google. com/ videoplay?docid=-5911099858813393554,

Michael Atiyah
638
retrieved on 2008-08-14
• Atiyah, Michael, http://online.itp.ucsb.edu/plecture/atiyah/|The nature of space (Online
lecture), http:/ / online. itp. ucsb. edu/ plecture/ atiyah/ , retrieved on 2008-08-14
• Batra, Amba (2003-11-08),
http://cities.expressindia.com/fullstory.php?newsid=67555|Maths guru with Einstein’s
dream prefers chalk to mouse. (Interview with Atiyah.), Delhi newsline, http:/ / cities.
expressindia. com/ fullstory. php?newsid=67555, retrieved on 2008-08-14
• Michael Atiyah (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=30949) at the
Mathematics Genealogy Project
• Halim, Hala (1998), "http://weekly.ahram.org.eg/1998/391/people.htm|Michael
Atiyah:Euclid and Victoria", Al-Ahram Weekly On-line (391), http:/ / weekly. ahram. org.
eg/ 1998/ 391/ people. htm, retrieved on 2008-08-26
• Meek, James (2004-04-21),
"http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2004/apr/21/highereducation.uk|Interview with
Michael Atiyah", The Guardian, http:/ / www. guardian. co. uk/ education/ 2004/ apr/ 21/
highereducation. uk, retrieved on 2008-08-14
• http://www.newton.ac.uk/history/atiyah.html|Sir Michael Atiyah FRS, Isaac Newton
Institute, http:/ / www. newton. ac. uk/ history/ atiyah. html, retrieved on 2008-08-14
• "http://www.ams.org/notices/200406/comm-abel.pdf|Atiyah and Singer receive 2004 Abel
prize", Notices of the American Mathematical Society 51 (6): 650–651, 2006, http:/ /
www. ams. org/ notices/ 200406/ comm-abel. pdf, retrieved on 2008-08-14
• Raussen, Martin; Skau, Christian (2004-05-24),
http://www.abelprisen.no/en/prisvinnere/2004/interview_2004_1.html|Interview with
Michael Atiyah and Isadore Singer, http:/ / www. abelprisen. no/ en/ prisvinnere/ 2004/
interview_2004_1. html, retrieved on 2008-08-14
• http://owpdb.mfo.de/person_detail?id=124|Photos of Michael Francis Atiyah,
Oberwolfach photo collection, http:/ / owpdb. mfo. de/ person_detail?id=124, retrieved on
2008-08-14
• Wade, Mike (2009),
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/scotland/article6143896.ece|Maths and the
bomb: Sir Michael Atiyah at 80, Timesonline, http:/ / www. timesonline. co. uk/ tol/ news/
uk/ scotland/ article6143896. ece
 Academic offices 
Preceded by
George Porter
President of the Royal Society
1990–1995
 Succeeded by
Sir Aaron Klug
Preceded by
Sir Andrew Huxley
Master of Trinity College,
Cambridge
1990–1997
 Succeeded by
Amartya Sen
Preceded by
The Lord Porter of
Luddenham
Chancellor of the University
of Leicester
1995–2005
 Succeeded by
Sir Peter Williams
Preceded by
Lord Sutherland of
Houndwood
President of the Royal Society
of Edinburgh
2005–2008
 Succeeded by
David Wilson, Baron Wilson
of Tillyorn
Awards and achievements 

Michael Atiyah
639
Preceded by
Robin Hill
Copley Medal
1988
 Succeeded by
Cesar Milstein
Karol Borsuk
Karol Borsuk
Born
May 8, 1905
Warsaw, Poland
Died
January 24, 1982 (aged 76)
Warsaw, Poland
Nationality
  Poland
Fields
Mathematics
Alma mater
Warsaw University
Doctoral advisor
Stefan Mazurkiewicz
Notable students
Samuel Eilenberg
Krystyna Kuperberg
Known for
Borsuk's conjecture
Borsuk-Ulam theorem
Karol Borsuk (May 8, 1905, Warsaw – January 24, 1982, Warsaw) was a Polish
mathematician. His main interest was topology.
Borsuk introduced the theory of absolute retracts (ARs) and absolute neighborhood retracts
(ANRs), and the cohomotopy groups, later called Borsuk-Spanier cohomotopy groups. He
also founded the so called Shape theory. He has constructed various beautiful examples of
topological spaces, e.g. an acyclic, 3-dimensional continuum which admits a fixed point free
homeomorphism onto itself; also 2-dimensional, contractible polyhedra which have no free
edge. His topological and geometric conjectures and themes stimulated research for more
than half a century.
Borsuk received his master's degree and doctorate from Warsaw University in 1927 and
1930, respectively; his Ph.D. thesis advisor was Stefan Mazurkiewicz. He was a member of
the Polish Academy of Sciences from 1952. Borsuk's students included Samuel Eilenberg,
Krystyna Kuperberg and Włodzimierz Kuperberg.
See also
• Borsuk's conjecture
• Borsuk-Ulam theorem
• Zygmunt Janiszewski
• Stanislaw Ulam
• Scottish Café

Karol Borsuk
640
Works
• Geometria analityczna w n wymiarach (1950)
• Podstawy geometrii (1955)
• Foundations of Geometry (1960) with Wanda Szmielew, North Holland publisher
• Theory of Retracts (1966)
• Theory of Shape (1975)
External links
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Borsuk.html|"Karol Borsuk",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Karol Borsuk [1] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
References
[1] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=12548
Nicolas Bourbaki
Nicolas Bourbaki is the collective pseudonym under which a group of (mainly French)
20th-century mathematicians wrote a series of books presenting an exposition of modern
advanced mathematics, beginning in 1935. With the goal of founding all of mathematics on
set theory, the group strove for utmost rigour and generality, creating some new
terminology and concepts along the way.
While Nicolas Bourbaki is an invented personage, the Bourbaki group is officially known
as the Association des collaborateurs de Nicolas Bourbaki ("association of collaborators of
Nicolas Bourbaki"), which has an office at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris.
Books by Bourbaki
Aiming at a completely self-contained treatment of the core areas of modern mathematics
based on set theory, the group produced Elements of Mathematics (Éléments de
mathématique) series, which contain the following volumes (with the original French titles
in parentheses):
I
Set theory
(Théorie des ensembles)
II
Algebra
(Algèbre)
III
Topology
(Topologie générale)
IV
Functions of one real variable
(Fonctions d'une variable réelle)
V
Topological vector spaces
(Espaces vectoriels topologiques)
VI
Integration
(Intégration)
and
later
VII
Commutative algebra
(Algèbre commutative)
VIII
Lie groups
(Groupes et algèbres de Lie)
IX
Spectral theory
(Théories spectrales)

Nicolas Bourbaki
641
The book Variétés différentielles et analytiques was a fascicule de résultats, that is, a
summary of results, on the theory of manifolds, rather than a worked-out exposition. A final
volume IX on spectral theory (Théories spectrales) from 1983 marked the presumed end of
the publishing project; but a further commutative algebra fascicle was produced at the end
of the twentieth century.
While several of Bourbaki's books have become standard references in their fields, some
have felt that the austere presentation makes them unsuitable as textbooks[1] . The books'
influence may have been at its strongest when few other graduate-level texts in current
pure mathematics were available, between 1950 and 1960.[2]
Notations introduced by Bourbaki include: the symbol 
for the empty set and a dangerous
bend symbol, and the terms injective, surjective, and bijective.
It is frequently claimed that the use of the blackboard bold letters for the various sets of
numbers was first introduced by the group. There are several reasons to doubt this claim.[3]
Influence on mathematics in general
The emphasis on rigour may be seen as a reaction to the work of Henri Poincaré [4] , who
stressed the importance of free-flowing mathematical intuition, at a cost of completeness in
presentation. The impact of Bourbaki's work initially was great on many active research
mathematicians world-wide.
It provoked some hostility, too, mostly on the side of classical analysts; they approved of
rigour but not of high abstraction. Around 1950, also, some parts of geometry were still not
fully axiomatic — in less prominent developments, one way or another, these were brought
into line with the new foundational standards, or quietly dropped. This undoubtedly led to a
gulf with the way theoretical physics is practiced.[5]
Bourbaki's direct influence has decreased over time.[5] This is partly because certain
concepts which are now important, such as the machinery of category theory, are not
covered in the treatise. The completely uniform and essentially linear referential structure
of the books became difficult to apply to areas closer to current research than the already
mature ones treated in the published books, and thus publishing activity diminished
significantly from the 1970s [6] . It also mattered that while especially algebraic structures
can be naturally defined in Bourbaki's terms, there are areas where the Bourbaki approach
was less straightforward to apply.
On the other hand, the approach and rigor advocated by Bourbaki have permeated the
current mathematical practices to such extent that the task undertaken was completed[7] .
This is particularly true for the less applied parts of mathematics.
The Bourbaki seminar series founded in post-WWII Paris continues. It is an important
source of survey articles, written in a prescribed, careful style. The idea is that the
presentation should be on the level of absolute specialists, but for an audience which is not
specialized in the particular field.

Nicolas Bourbaki
642
The group
Accounts of the early days vary, but original documents have now come to light. The
founding members were all connected to the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris and
included Henri Cartan, Claude Chevalley, Jean Coulomb, Jean Delsarte, Jean Dieudonné,
Charles Ehresmann, René de Possel, Szolem Mandelbrojt and André Weil. There was a
preliminary meeting, towards the end of 1934.[8] Jean Leray and Paul Dubreil were present
at the preliminary meeting but dropped out before the group actually formed. Other notable
participants in later days were Laurent Schwartz, Jean-Pierre Serre, Alexander
Grothendieck, Samuel Eilenberg, Serge Lang and Roger Godement.
The original goal of the group had been to compile an improved mathematical analysis text;
it was soon decided that a more comprehensive treatment of all of mathematics was
necessary. There was no official status of membership, and at the time the group was quite
secretive and also fond of supplying disinformation. Regular meetings were scheduled,
during which the whole group would discuss vigorously every proposed line of every book.
Members had to resign by age 50.[9]
The atmosphere in the group can be illustrated by an anecdote told by Laurent Schwartz.
Dieudonné regularly and spectacularly threatened to resign unless topics were treated in
their logical order, and after a while others played on this for a joke. Godement's wife
wanted to see Dieudonné announcing his resignation, and so on one occasion while she was
there Schwartz deliberately brought up again the question of permuting the order in which
measure theory and topological vector spaces were to be handled, to precipitate a
guaranteed crisis.
The name "Bourbaki" refers to a French general Charles Denis Bourbaki;[10] it was adopted
by the group as a reference to a student anecdote about a hoax mathematical lecture, and
also possibly to a statue. It was certainly a reference to Greek mathematics, Bourbaki being
of Greek extraction. It is a valid reading to take the name as implying a transplantation of
the tradition of Euclid to a France of the 1930s, with soured expectations.[11]
Appraisal of the Bourbaki perspective
The underlying drive, in Weil and Chevalley at least, was the perceived need for French
mathematics to absorb the best ideas of the Göttingen school, particularly Hilbert and the
modern algebra school of Emmy Noether, Artin and van der Waerden. It is fairly clear that
the Bourbaki point of view, while encyclopedic, was never intended as neutral. Quite the
opposite: it was more a question of trying to make a consistent whole out of some
enthusiasms, for example for Hilbert's legacy, with emphasis on formalism and axiomatics.
But always through a transforming process of reception and selection — their ability to
sustain this collective, critical approach has been described as "something unusual".[12]
The following is a list of some of the criticisms commonly made of the Bourbaki
approach:[13]
• algorithmic content is not considered on-topic and is almost completely omitted[14]
• problem solving, in the sense of heuristics, receives less emphasis than axiomatic
theory-building[15]
• analysis is treated 'softly', without 'hard' estimates[16]
• measure theory is referred to as 'integration theory'; by taking the case of locally 
compact spaces as fundamental, the centre of the theory becomes Radon measures.[17]

Nicolas Bourbaki
643
Furthermore, the case of locally compact spaces does not apply to some situations in
probability theory.
• combinatorics is not discussed
• logic is treated minimally [18]
• applications are not covered.
Furthermore, some have claimed that Bourbaki eschewed all use of pictures,[19] although
this is not in fact accurate (see, for example, "Figure 1" of Topologie Générale, Book 1, p.
3). In general, Bourbaki has been criticized for reducing geometry as a whole to abstract
algebra and soft analysis.[20]
Dieudonné as speaker for Bourbaki
Public discussion of, and justification for, Bourbaki's thoughts has in general been through
Jean Dieudonné (who initially was the 'scribe' of the group) writing under his own name. In
a survey of le choix bourbachique written in 1977, he did not shy away from a hierarchical
development of the 'important' mathematics of the time.
He also wrote extensively under his own name: nine volumes on analysis, perhaps in
belated fulfillment of the original project or pretext; and also on other topics mostly
connected with algebraic geometry. While Dieudonné could reasonably speak on Bourbaki's
encyclopedic tendency, and tradition (after innumerable frank tais-toi, Dieudonné! ("Hush,
Dieudonné!") remarks at the meetings), it may be doubted whether all others agreed with
him about mathematical writing and research. In particular Serre has often criticised the
way the Bourbaki works were written, and has championed in France greater attention to
problem-solving, within number theory especially, not an area treated in the main Bourbaki
texts.
Dieudonné stated the view that most workers in mathematics were doing ground-clearing
work, in order that a future Riemann could find the way ahead intuitively open. He pointed
to the way the axiomatic method can be used as a tool for problem-solving, for example by
Alexander Grothendieck. Others found him too close to Grothendieck to be an unbiased
observer. Comments in Pal Turán's 1970 speech on the award of a Fields Medal to Alan
Baker about theory-building and problem-solving were a reply from the traditionalist camp
at the next opportunity[21] , Grothendieck having received a Fields Medal in absentia in
1966 and the awards being every four years.
Bourbaki's influence on mathematics education
In the longer term, the manifesto of Bourbaki has had a definite and deep influence. In
secondary education the new math movement corresponded to teachers influenced by
Bourbaki. In France the change was secured by the Lichnerowicz Commission.[22]
The influence on graduate education in pure mathematics is perhaps most noticeable in the
treatment now current of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Dieudonné at one point said 'one can
do nothing serious without them', for which he was reproached; but the change in Lie
theory to its everyday usage owes much to the type of exposition Bourbaki championed.
Beforehand Jacques Hadamard despaired of ever getting a clear idea of it.

Nicolas Bourbaki
644
See also
• Bourbaki–Witt theorem
• Arthur Besse
Notes
[1] Confronted by the task of appraising a book by N. Bourbaki, this reviewer feels as if he were required to climb
the Nordwand of the Eiger. The presentation is austere and monolithic. The route is beset by scores of
definitions, many of them apparently unmotivated. Always there are hordes of exercises to be worked through
painfully. One must be prepared to make constant cross-references to the author's many other works. Hewitt,
Edwin (1956). "Review: Espaces vectoriels topologiques". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 62:
507–508. doi: 10.1090/S0002-9904-1956-10042-6 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/ S0002-9904-1956-10042-6).
(http:/ / www. ams. org/ bull/ 1956-62-05/ S0002-9904-1956-10042-6/ home. html)
[2] ...by 1958 when the original six books were completed, the first few of these books were already almost 20
years out of date. (http:/ / turnbull. mcs. st-and. ac. uk/ ~history/ PrintHT/ Bourbaki_2. html)
[3] (1) the symbols do not appear in Bourbaki publications (rather, ordinary bold is used) at or near the era when
they began to be used elsewhere, for instance, in typewritten lecture notes from Princeton University (achieved
in some cases by overstriking R or C with I), and (an apparent first) typeset in Gunning and Rossi's textbook on
several complex variables; (2) Jean-Pierre Serre, a member of the Bourbaki group, has publicly inveighed
against the use of "blackboard bold" anywhere other than on a blackboard.
[4] Bourbaki came to terms with Poincaré only after a long struggle. When I joined the group in the fifties it was
not the fashion to value Poincaré at all. He was old-fashioned. Pierre Cartier interviewed by Marjorie Senechall.
"The Continuing Silence of Bourbaki". Mathematical Intelligencer 19: 22–28. 1998. (http:/ / www. ega-math.
narod. ru/ Bbaki/ Cartier. htm)
[5] Ian Stewart: Mathematicians knew how to decode Bourbakist messages, but the rest of the world didn't. This
led to unfortunate misunderstandings, and by the end of the sixties, mathematics and physics departments were
no longer on speaking terms. Ian Stewart (11 1995). "Bye-Bye Bourbaki: Paradigm Shifts in Mathematics". The
Mathematical Gazette (The Mathematical Association) 79 (486): 496–498. doi: 10.2307/3618076 (http:/ / dx.
doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 3618076).
[6] Borel (1998)
[7] Chevalley in Guedj (1985)
[8] The minutes are in the Bourbaki archives — for a full description of the initial meeting consult Liliane Beaulieu
in the Mathematical Intelligencer.
[9] This resulted in a complete change of personnel by 1958; see Robert Mainard paper cited below. However, the
Aubin paper cited below quotes the historian Liliane Beaulieu as never having found written affirmation of this
rule.
[10] Charles Denis Bourbaki fought in the Crimean War and Franco-Prussian War, refer to A. Weil: The
Apprenticeship of a Mathematician, Birkhäuser Verlag 1992, pp 93-122.
[11] It is said that Weil's wife Evelyne supplied Nicolas. ( Mentioned by McCleary (PDF) (http:/ / www. math.
vassar. edu/ faculty/ mccleary/ Bourbaki. pdf). This is more or less confirmed by Robert Mainard (http:/ / www.
academie-stanislas. org/ TomeXIII/ Mainard98. pdf)((PDF), a long article in French, which gives numerous
further details: why N?, and the prank lecture of Raoul Husson in a false beard that gave rise to Bourbaki's
theorem). They married in 1937, she having previously been with de Possel; who then unsurprisingly left the
group.
[12] Hector C. Sabelli, Louis H. Kauffman, BIOS (2005), p. 423.
[13] Pierre Cartier, a Bourbaki member 1955–1983, comments explicitly on several of these points ( The
Continuing Silence of Bourbaki, article from the Mathematical Intelligencer (http:/ / ega-math. narod. ru/ Bbaki/
Cartier. htm)): ...essentially no analysis beyond the foundations: nothing about partial differential equations,
nothing about probability. There is also nothing about combinatorics, nothing about algebraic topology, nothing
about concrete geometry. And Bourbaki never seriously considered logic. Dieudonné himself was very vocal
against logic. Anything connected with mathematical physics is totally absent from Bourbaki's text.
[14] This is one of the reasons for diminishing influence: Le développement des mathématiques dites appliquées,
de la statistique et des probabilités, des théories liées à l'informatique a diminué l'influence de Bourbaki (http:/
/ publimath. irem. univ-mrs. fr/ glossaire/ BO025. htm)
[15] Tim Gowers discusses at length the distinction between mathematicians who regard their central aim as
being to solve problems, and those who are more concerned with building and understanding theories in his
The Two Cultures of Mathematics (PDF) (http:/ / www. dpmms. cam. ac. uk/ ~wtg10/ 2cultures. pdf).

Nicolas Bourbaki
645
[16] Lennart Carleson spoke of this in an interview ( Infomat August 2006 (PDF) (http:/ / www.
matematikkforeningen. no/ INFOMAT/ 06/ 0608. pdf)): ...that book [from 1968] was written mostly as a way to
encourage the teachers to stay with established values. That was during the Bourbaki and New Math period
and mathematics was really going to pieces, I think. The teachers were very worried and they had very little
backing.
[17] Heinz König: The traditional abstract measure theory which emerged from the achievements of Borel and
Lebesgue in the first two decades of the 20th century is burdened with its total limitation to sequential
procedures and its neglect of regularity. The alternative theory due to Bourbaki which arose in the middle of
the century was able to relieve these burdens, but produced new ones. In particular its fundamental turn to
inner regularity, based on the profound role of compactness, was done with the inappropriate weapons from the
outer arsenal, which subsequently enforced that unfortunate construction named the essential one. All this
produced serious obstacles against a unified theory of measure and integration, for example for the notion of
signed measures, the formation of products and for the representation theorems of Daniell-Stone and Riesz
types. (http:/ / www. math. tu-dresden. de/ ~pos_iv/ Abstracts/ koenig_abstract/ index. html)
[18] Discussed by the set theorist Adrian Mathias ( The Ignorance of Bourbaki (PDF) (http:/ / www. dpmms. cam.
ac. uk/ ~ardm/ bourbaki. pdf)). See also Mashaal (2006), p.120, "Lack of interest in foundations".
[19] Pierre Cartier, in the article cited above, is quoted as later saying The Bourbaki were Puritans, and Puritans
are strongly opposed to pictorial representations of truths of their faith.
[20] In the French context it has been said that geometry was in effect exiled from secondary teaching: Pour ce
qui est des années 1960, l’effet de la réforme dite des mathématiques modernes sur l’enseignement de la
géométrie est bien connu : si Dieudonné, comme Bourlet finalement, lance "A bas Euclide", le résultat n’est pas
l’élaboration d’une géométrie plus expérimentale, plus intuitive. C’est l’effacement de la géométrie derrière
l’algèbre linéaire et la quasi-disparition de l’enseignement de la géométrie élémentaire au collège et au lycée
pour une dizaine d’années.—"As for the 1960s, the effect of this reform of modern mathematics on the teaching
of geometry is well-known: if Dieudonné, like Bourlet finally, says "push Euclid back," the result is not the
development of a geometry that is more experimental, more intuitive. It's the erasure of geometry behind linear
algebra, and the quasi-disappearance of the teaching of elementary geometry in high school, for ten years."
(http:/ / www. apmep. asso. fr/ spip. php?article210)
[21] On the Work of Alan Baker (http:/ / links. jstor. org/ sici?sici=0022-4812(197209)37:3<606:OTWOAB>2. 0.
CO;2-9)
[22] Mashaal (2006) Ch.10: New Math in the Classroom
References
• Borel, Armand (1998). "http://www.ams.org/notices/199803/borel.pdf|Twenty-Five Years
with Nicolas Bourbaki, (1949-1973)". Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 45 (3): 373–380. http:/ /
www. ams. org/ notices/ 199803/ borel. pdf.
• Guedj, D (1985). "Nicholas Bourbaki, collective mathematician : An interview with Claude
Chevalley". Math. Intelligencer 7 (2): 18–22. doi: 10.1007/BF03024169 (http:/ / dx. doi.
org/ 10. 1007/ BF03024169).
• David Aubin, The Withering Immortality of Nicolas Bourbaki: A Cultural Connector at the
Confluence of Mathematics (http:/ / www. institut. math. jussieu. fr/ ~daubin/ publis/
1997. pdf). Science in Context, 10 (1997), p. 297-342.
• Maurice Mashaal (2006). Bourbaki: A Secret Society of Mathematicians. American
Mathematical Society. ISBN 0-8218-3967-5.
• Amir Aczel (2007). The Artist and the Mathematician: The Story of Nicolas Bourbaki, the
Genius Mathematician Who Never Existed. High Stakes Publishing, London. ISBN
1-84344-034-2.

Nicolas Bourbaki
646
External links
• Official Website of L'Association des Collaborateurs de Nicolas Bourbaki (http:/ / www.
bourbaki. ens. fr/ ) ()
• A long article about Nicolas Bourbaki (http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/
NicolasBourbaki. html), from PlanetMath
• 25 Years with Bourbaki (http:/ / www. ega-math. narod. ru/ Bbaki/ Bourb3. htm), by
Armand Borel
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Bourbaki.html|"Nicolas Bourbaki",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
Ronald Brown (mathematician)
Ronald Brown, MA, D.Phil Oxon, FIMA, Emeritus Professor (born January 4, 1935) is an
English mathematician. He is best known for his many, substantial contributions to Higher
Dimensional Algebra and non-Abelian Algebraic Topology [15][1] , involving groupoids,
algebroids 
[2], category theory, categorical generalizations of Galois theory, and
generalization of the van Kampen theorem to higher homotopy groupoids. [3] These include
four fundamental books and textbooks: Elements of Modern Topology, Topology: a
geometric account of general topology, homotopy types, and the fundamental groupoid[4]
,[5] , Topology and Groupoids, and Nonabelian algebraic topology [15] (in two volumes) that
contain original and important results in algebraic topology that are hard to obtain from
other sources[6] . His editorial contributions over many years have provided generous,
expert help and international support to several generations of mathematicians in rapidly
developing areas of higher dimensional algebra, non-Abelian algebraic topology, including
Category Theory, non-Abelian and Abelian, Homology and Cohomology [7], and Higher
Dimensional Homotopy [8] with applications. Brown's interest in the general topology of
function spaces began in the early 1960s, when he introduced the notion of an adequate
and convenient category of topological spaces for homotopy theory, thus stimulating a wide
range of work on convenient categories. Moreover, the term 'Higher Dimensional Algebra'
was introduced in a 1987 survey paper by Brown [9] , following from the earlier higher
dimensional group theory[10] introduced in 1982; this area has been remarkably successful
not only in applications in other areas of mathematics, but also in quantum physics and
computer science. Such potential applications that were recently suggested are novel
algebraic topology and category theory approaches to extended quantum symmetry
through quantum groupoid representations [11] to locally-covariant quantum gravity [12]
theories and symmetry breaking. Several of Dr. Brown's papers combine methods of double
groupoids [3] with differential ideas on holonomy, leading to the development of higher
order notions of 'flows', analogous to evolving systems in concurrency theory. He
collaborated with Higgins since the 1970s, and also with several other coworkers
afterwards, on crossed complexes and the related higher homotopy groupoids [3]. He then
completed the studies on pure higher order category theory in a publication with F.A.
Al-Agl and R. Steiner, on "Multiple categories: the equivalence between a globular and
cubical approach" [13], published in Advances in Mathematics, 170 (2002) 71-118[14] .
His key scientific results in mathematics to date have included: homotopy double groupoids 
[3], double algebroids [15], cubical omega-groupoids with connections[16] , and last-but-not

Ronald Brown (mathematician)
647
least, proofs of higher-homotopy generalized van Kampen theorems [17] in homotopy
theory[18] .
Dr. Ronald Brown has 115 items listed on MathSciNet, has given numerous presentations
at scientific meetings, and published over 30 articles and items on popularization and
teaching of mathematics. Two books are now in print, and a third one is close to being
completed with two coworkers. He published over 200 research papers and presentations
at scientific meetings, including several monographs and four books.
Biography
Ronald Brown was born on January 4th, 1935 in London, England. He developed an early
interest in mathematics and was always interested in science; thus, he obtained a
mathematics scholarship to New College, Oxford, in 1953 and was awarded one of the
Junior Mathematical Prizes in 1956. He then studied algebraic topology at Oxford,
supervised first by J.H.C. Whitehead, (died 1960), and then, when at Liverpool, he was
supervised by M.G. Barratt. Brown's thesis was submitted in 1961, under the supervision of
Professor M.G. Barratt, and was on the homotopy type of function spaces, and this led to a
long term interest in the applications of what are now called monoidal closed categories.
The particular interest in the general topology of function spaces led to the notion of a
"category adequate and convenient for all purposes of topology", and in ref. [19] he
suggested for this end the categories of Hausdorff k-spaces and continuous functions, or
Hausdorff spaces and k-continuous functions, thus stimulating a wide range of work on
convenient categories. In collaboration with Peter Booth in the 1970s he helped develop
Booth's notion of fiber-wise mapping spaces, i.e. a function space in the category of
topological spaces over a given space B, [20] . The writing of a textbook on basic general
and algebraic topology from a geometric viewpoint [21] led to his development of a
generalisation to the non-connected case of the van Kampen theorem for the fundamental
group, and then the use of groupoids for an exposition of most of 1-dimensional homotopy
theory he won number 1 math student in his 3rd grade class.
After two university teaching appointments at Liverpool and at Hull University, he settled in
1970 at Bangor University in Wales where he became an Emeritus Professor in 2001.
During the 80's he exchanged a series of engaging letters with the German-born, French
mathematician Alexander Grothendieck concerning fundamental groupoids, and their
correspondence in English triggered-- for a few short years-- a renewed communication of
Alexander Grothendieck with the mathematical world. Brown visited Université Louis
Pasteur in Strasbourg as an Associate Visiting Professor during 1983 and 1984, and had
fruitful excahnges with several other French mathematicians, as for example, on groupoids
with Jean Pradines, a research associate of former Professor Charles Ehresmann, (one of
the founding mathematicians of category theory--along with Alexander Grothendieck-- in
France).
This suggested in 1965 the possibility of the existence and use of "higher homotopy
groupoids", finally realised in a sequence of 12 papers by R. Brown and P.J. Higgins from
1978 to 2003, for which a recent survey is presented in [22] , and in a different form by R.
Brown and J.-L. Loday in two papers in 1987, [23]
The idea from 1965 that these generalisations to higher dimensions of the non-Abelian 
fundamental groupoid should be developed in the spirit of group theory led to the term 
"higher dimensional group theory" [24] in 1982 and then to "higher dimensional algebra" in

Ronald Brown (mathematician)
648
1987 in the survey paper [25] . The applications to higher homotopy van Kampen theorems,
which are in the area of 'local-to-global theorems', lead to some specific non-Abelian
calculations in homotopy theory, for example of integral homotopy types, unavailable by
other means, and to an understanding of certain homotopical ideas. The use of cubical
methods in this work has also had applications in the use of algebraic and topological
methods in the theory of concurrency in computer science. The investigation of "higher
order symmetry" has also had applications to homotopy theory, in [26] . He has also worked
on topological and differential groupoids, particularly with students, and the notion of
holonomy and monodromy, pursuing ideas of Charles Ehresmann and J. Pradines. Working
with T. Porter and A. Bak, Dr. Brown has developed the work of A. Bak on "global actions"
to the notion of groupoid atlas, a kind of "algebraic patching" concept, and this has found
applications in multiagent systems. Dr. Brown also has several papers in the area of
symbolic computation and mathematical rewriting.
A long term interest in the popularization of mathematics led to a number of articles in this
area [27], and to a collaboration in presenting the work of the sculptor John Robinson [28] .
Presently, in retirement, Professor Ronald Brown actively pursues his research in the
beautiful surroundings of the village of Deganwy on the Conwy Estuary.
University education
· In 1956 B.A. at Oxford University . In 1961 Ph.D. at Liverpool University · In 1962 D.Phil.
at Oxford University
Academic positions
· In 1959 he was appointed an Assistant Lecturer, and then Lecturer at Liverpool
University. · During 1964–70 he worked as a Senior Lecturer, and then Reader at Hull
University. · From 1970 to 1999 he taught and carried out research as a full Professor of
Pure Mathematics at the University of Wales, Bangor, UK. · During 1970–1993 he
functioned as the Head of Pure Mathematics, and also of the School of Mathematics in
several variants · In 1990 he was elected as Chairman of the University of Wales Validation
Board for a four year term · During 1983–84 he visited as a `Professeur associé pour un
mois', at the Université Louis Pasteur in Strasbourg. · From 1999 to 2001 he was appointed
a Half-time Research Professorship, and in September 2001 he became Professor Emeritus
of the University of Wales.
Between 1959 and 2001 he advised 23 successful Ph.D. students in Mathematics.
Leading assignments
· 1989–2001: Director, Centre for the Popularisation of Mathematics, University of Wales,
Bangor.
· 1995–2000: Coordinator, 'INTAS Project on Algebraic K-theory, groups and categories', for
Bangor, the University of Bielefeld, Georgian Mathematical Institute, State Universities of
Moscow and of St. Petersburg, and the Steklov Institute, St. Petersburg.
· 2002–2004 Leverhulme Emeritus Research Fellowship for a project on "Crossed
complexes and homotopy groupoids".

Ronald Brown (mathematician)
649
Editorships
· Between 1968 and 86 he contributed also as Editor to the Chapman & Hall, Mathematics
Series. · During 1975–1994 he was on the Editorial Advisory Board of the London
Mathematical Society. · In 1995 he became a Founding member on the Management
Committee of the Editorial Board of several electronic journals: Theory and Applications of
Categories. · 1996–2007 Editorial Board: Applied Categorical Structures (Kluwer). · Since
1999 he is a Founding member of the electronic journal: Homology, Homotopy and
Applications. 2006 — Journal of Homotopy and Related Structures.
Honors and awards
• The Leverhulme Emeritus Fellowship
• August, 2003: Opening lecture, `Global actions and groupoid atlases', to the conference
`Directions in K-theory', Poznan, in honour of the 60th birthday of A. Bak.
• 2000: Grant to produce a CD-ROM as part of an EC Project , 'Raising Public Awareness of
Mathematics in WMY2000'.
• 2003-2005: EPSRC Grant: Higher Dimensional algebra and Differential Geometry
(Visiting Fellowship for J.F. Glazebrook, Eastern Illinois University, USA).
Selected publications
The following list of publications is selected to represent the impressively wide range of
research carried out by Dr. Ronald Brown. For example his 1964 paper on "The twisted
Eilenberg-Zilber theorem" became influential because it contained the first version of what
is now known as the Homological Perturbation Lemma; the resulting Homological
Perturbation Theory has afterwards proved to be an important theoretical and
computational tool in algebraic topology and in the computation of resolutions.
• R. Brown. [Books 1, 2 and 3] Elements of Modern Topology, McGraw Hill, Maidenhead,
(1968); second edition: Topology: a geometric account of general topology, homotopy
types, and the fundamental groupoid, Ellis Horwood, Chichester (1988) 460 pp. Third
edition: Topology and Groupoids, Booksurge LLC, (2006) xxv+525p.]
• R. Brown (with P.J. HIGGINS, R.SIVERA). [Book 4] Nonabelian algebraic topology, 2007
(vol.1), and vol.2 in 2008 (in preparation).
• R. Brown. Function spaces and product topologies, Quart. J. Math. (2) 15 (1964),
238-250. [2]
• R. Brown. The twisted Eilenberg-Zilber theorem., Celebrazioni Archimedi de secolo XX,
Syracusa, 1964: Simposi di topologia (1967) 33–37.
• R. Brown (with P.I. BOOTH), On the application of fibred mapping spaces to exponential
laws for bundles, ex-spaces and other categories of maps., Gen. Top. Appl. 8 (1978)
165–179.
• R.Brown (with J. HUEBSCHMANN), Identities among relations, in Low dimensional
topology, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Series, 48 (ed. R. Brown and T.L. Thickstun,
Cambridge University Press) (1982), pp. 153–202. **This paper on identities among
relations has been useful to many as a basic source.
• R.Brown (with S.P. HUMPHRIES), Orbits under symplectic transvections II: the case K =
F2, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 52 (1986) 532–556.

Ronald Brown (mathematician)
650
• R.Brown (with P.J. HIGGINS), Tensor products and homotopies for omega-groupoids and
crossed complexes, J. Pure Appl. Alg. 47 (1987) 1-33.
• R.Brown (with J.-L. LODAY), Homotopical excision, and Hurewicz theorems, for n-cubes
of spaces, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 54 (1987) 176–192.
• R. Brown. From groups to groupoids: a brief survey, Bull. London Math. Soc., 19 (1987)
113-134. **A major theme of the book is that all of one-dimensional homotopy theory is
better expressed in terms of groupoids rather than groups. This raised the question of
applications of groupoids in higher homotopy theory, and so to a long march to higher
order Van Kampen Theorems, which give new higher dimensional, non-Abelian,
local-to-global methods, with relations to Homology and K-theory.
• R. Brown (with J.-L. LODAY)., Van Kampen theorems for diagrams of spaces, Topology,
26 (1987) 311–334.
• R. Brown (with N.D. GILBERT)., Algebraic models of 3-types and automorphism
structures for crossed modules, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 59 (1989) 51–73.
• R. Brown (with A. RAZAK SALLEH)., Free crossed resolutions of groups and
presentations of modules of identities among relations, LMS J. Comp. and Math. 2 (1999)
28–61. Interest in algorithmic procedures and specific computations was shown in [107]
and [124]. Such computations also occur in [51], which introduced a non-Abelian tensor
product of groups which act on each other, and for which the bibliography now extends
to over 100 papers.
• R. Brown (with A. HEYWORTH)., Using rewriting systems to compute left Kan extensions
and induced actions of categories, J. Symbolic Computation 29 (2000) 5–31.
• R. Brown (with I. IÇEN), Locally Lie subgroupoids and their Lie holonomy and
monodromy groupoids, Topology and its Applications. 115 (2001) 125–138.
• R. Brown (with M. GOLASINSKI, T.PORTER and A.P.TONKS)., On function spaces of
equivariant maps and the equivariant homotopy theory of crossed complexes II: the
general topological group case., K-Theory 23 (2001) 129–155.
• R. Brown (with A. AL-AGL and R. STEINER)., Multiple categories: the equivalence
between a globular and cubical approach, Advances in Mathematics, 170 (2002) 71–118.
• R. Brown(with I. IÇEN)., Towards a 2-dimensional notion of holonomy, Advances in
Mathematics, 178 (2003) 141–175.
• R. Brown (with C.D.WENSLEY)., Computation and homotopical applications of induced
crossed modules, Journal of Symbolic Computation, 35 (2003) 59–72.
• R. Brown. Crossed complexes and homotopy groupoids as non-commutative tools for
higher dimensional local-to-global problems, Proceedings of the Fields Institute
Workshop on Categorical Structures for Descent and Galois theory, Hopf Algebras and
Semiabelian Categories, September 23–28, Fields Institute Communications 43 (2004)
101–130. math.AT/0212274 .
• R. Brown (with Bak, A., Minian, G., and Porter, T.), Global actions, groupoid atlases and
applications, J. Homotopy and Related Structures, 1 (2006) 101-167.

Ronald Brown (mathematician)
651
Notes
[1] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ ?op=getobj& from=books& id=249 Ronald Brown, Philip J. Higgins and Rafael
Sivera. 2009. Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Higher homotopy groupoids of filtered spaces, 3 parts, 549
pages, preprint, Beta-version, in press.
[2] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ RAlgebroid. html
[3] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ HigherDimensionalHomotopy. html
[4] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ FundamentalQuantumGroupoid. html
[5] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ QuantumFundamentalGroupoid. html
[6] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ ?op=getobj& from=books& id=249 Ronald Brown, Philip J. Higgins and Rafael
Sivera. 2009. Nonabelian Algebraic Topology: Higher homotopy groupoids of filtered spaces, 3 parts, 549
pages, preprint, Beta-version, in press.
[7] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ HomologicalComplexOfTopologicalVectorSpaces. html
[8] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ HigherDimensionalAlgebra2. html
[9] Ronald Brown, J.-L. Loday, (1987). "Homotopical excision, and Hurewicz theorems, for n-cubes of spaces".
Proceedings London Mathematical Society (London Mathematical Society) 3 (54): 176–192. doi:
10.1006/aima.1998.1724 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1006/ aima. 1998. 1724).
[10] Brown, R. "Higher Dimensional Group Theory." In Low-Dimensional Topology: Proceedings of a Conference
on Topology in Low Dimension, Bangor, 1979 (Ed. R. Brown and T. L. Thickstun). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 215-238, 1982.
[11] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ QuantumSymmetriesFromGroupAndGroupoidRepresentations. html
[12] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ pdffiles/ BBG-158-NAC0STQG. pdf
[13] http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0007009
[14] http:/ / www. ingentaconnect. com/ content/ ap/ ai/ 2002/ 00000170/ 00000001/ art02069
[15] http:/ / arxiv. org/ PS_cache/ arxiv/ pdf/ 0904/ 0904. 3644v1. pdf
[16] R. Brown, Groupoids and crossed objects in algebraic topology., Homology, Homotopy and Applications 1
(1999), 1–78. Available at HHA (hha- ftp) website at Rutgers University, USA (http:/ / www. math. rutgers. edu/
hha/ volumes/ 1999/ volume1-1. htm).
[17] http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ GeneralizedVanKampenTheoremsHigherDimensional. html.
[18] Higher Dimensional Algebra citations list (http:/ / www. citeulike. org/ tag/ higher-dimensional-algebra)
[19] R. Brown. Function spaces and product topologies, Quart. J. Math. (2) 15 (1964), 238-250.
[20] R. Brown (with P.I. Booth), "On the application of fibred mapping spaces to exponential laws for bundles,
ex-spaces and other categories of maps.", Gen. Topology Appl. 8 (1978) 165–179.
[21] R. Brown. [Books 1, 2 and 3] Elements of Modern Topology, McGraw Hill, Maidenhead, (1968); second
edition: Topology: a geometric account of general topology, homotopy types, and the fundamental groupoid,
Ellis Horwood, Chichester (1988) 460 pp. Third edition: Topology and Groupoids, Booksurge LLC, (2006)
xxv+525p.]
[22] R. Brown. Crossed complexes and homotopy groupoids as non-commutative tools for higher dimensional
local-to-global problems, Proceedings of the Fields Institute Workshop on Categorical Structures for Descent
and Galois Theory, Hopf Algebras and Semiabelian Categories, September 23-28, Fields Institute
Communications 43 (2004) 101-130. math.AT/0212274 [132]
[23] R. Brown and J.-L. LODAY, Homotopical excision, and Hurewicz theorems, for n-cubes of spaces, Proc.
London Math. Soc. (3) 54 (1987) 176-192. , and Van Kampen theorems for diagrams of spaces, Topology 26
(1987) 311-334. [49,51].
[24] R.Brown (with J. Huebschmann), Identities among relations, in Low dimensional topology, London Math. Soc.
Lecture Note Series, 48 (ed. R. Brown and T.L. Thickstun, Cambridge University Press) (1982), pp. 153–202.
[25] R. Brown. From groups to groupoids: a brief survey, Bull. London Math. Soc. 19 (1987) 113-134 [50]. **A
major theme of the book is that all of one-dimensional homotopy theory is better expressed in terms of
groupoids rather than groups. This raised the question of applications of groupoids in higher homotopy theory,
and so to a long march to higher order van Kampen Theorems, which give new higher dimensional,
non-Abelian, local-to-global methods, with relations toHomology and K-theory.
[26] R. Brown and N.D. Gilbert, Algebraic models of 3-types and automorphism structures for crossed modules,
Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 59 (1989) 51-73. [59]
[27] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ publar. html
[28] Collaboration with sculptor John Robinson on using mathematics in abstract art (http:/ / www. popmath. org.
uk)

Ronald Brown (mathematician)
652
References
• R. Brown (with Bak, A., Minian, G., and Porter, T.)., Global actions, groupoid atlases and
applications., J. Homotopy and Related Structures: 1 (2006) 101–167.
• Higher Dimensional Algebra citations list (http:/ / www. citeulike. org/ tag/
higher-dimensional-algebra)
• Georgescu, George and Popescu, Andrei. A common generalization for MV-algebras and
Lukasiewicz-Moisil algebras, Archive for Mathematical Logic, Vol. 45, No. 8. (November
2006), pp. 947-981. (in reference to Heyting-algebra higher-dimensional-algebra
hyperalgebras \Lukasiewicz-Moisil-algebras metalogics MV-algebras by Scis0000002 on
2007-07-11) (http:/ / www. springerlink. com/ content/ 0v565w5786lt4254/ )
• John C. Baez, James Dolan., Higher-Dimensional Algebra III: n-Categories and the
Algebra of Opetopes.,Quantum Algebra and Topology, Adv. Math. 135 (1998), 145-206
(http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ q-alg/ 9702014).
• John C. Baez, Laurel Langford., Higher-Dimensional Algebra IV: 2-Tangles.,(Quantum
Algebra (math.QA); Algebraic Topology (math.AT); Category Theory (math.CT)), Adv.
Math. 180 (2003), 705-764. (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math. QA/ 9811139)
• John C Baez, Aaron D Lauda. 2-groups category-theory higher-dimensional-algebra, and
Higher-Dimensional Algebra III: n-Categories and the Algebra of Opetopes (10 Feb 1997)
(http:/ / www. citeulike. com/ user/ mstone/ article/ 701268)
• I.C. Baianu.2004. Complex Systems Analysis of Cell Cycling Models in Carcinogenesis.,
arXiv:q-bio/0406045v2 q-bio.OT (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ q-bio/ 0406045)
• John C Baez, Aaron D Lauda. 2004. Higher-Dimensional Algebra V: 2-Groups. Theory and
Applications of Categories 12 (2004), 423-491. arXiv:math/0307200v3 -math.QA (http:/ /
arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0307200v3)
• G. L. Litvinov. The Maslov dequantization, idempotent and topical mathematics: A brief
introduction., arXiv:math/0507014v1 math.GM (http:/ / arxiv. org/ abs/ math/ 0507014)
External links
• Ronald Brown's Home Page (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ ~mas010/ )
• Full list of Professor Ronald Brown's publications (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/
~mas010/ publicfull. htm)
• Who's Who in Mathematics at Bangor University, UK (http:/ / www. informatics. bangor.
ac. uk/ public/ mathematics/ research/ staffres. html)
• Mathematics Research - List of Mathematicians at Bangor (http:/ / www. informatics.
bangor. ac. uk/ public/ mathematics/ research/ people. html)

Ronald Brown (mathematician)
653
Inline and on line citations
• The origins of Alexander Grothendieck's `Pursuing Stacks' (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/
r. brown/ pstacks. htm) "This is an account of how `Pursuing Stacks' was written in
response to a correspondence in English with Ronnie Brown and Tim Porter at Bangor,
which continued until 1991."
• 1. Ronald Brown, J.-L. Loday, (1987). "Homotopical excision, and Hurewicz theorems, for
n-cubes of spaces". Proceedings London Mathematical Society 3 (54): 176–192.
Proceedings London Mathematical Society 3 (54): 176–192. London Mathematical
Society. (http:/ / www. lms. ac. uk/ publications/ proceedings/ plmsindx. pdf)
• 2 Higher Dimensional Algebra citations list (http:/ / www. citeulike. org/ tag/
higher-dimensional-algebra)
Recent citations on line
John C. Baez and Alissa S. Crans.2004, Higher-Dimensional Algebra VI: Lie 2-Algebras.,
Theory and Applications of Categories 12 (2004), 492-528., as follows:
"*[11] R. Brown, Groupoids and crossed objects in algebraic topology., Homology,
Homotopy and Applications 1 (1999), 1–78. Available at HHA (hha- ftp) website at Rutgers
University, USA (http:/ / www. math. rutgers. edu/ hha/ volumes/ 1999/ volume1-1. htm).
• [12] R. Brown and P. Higgins, Cubical abelian groups with connections are equivalent to
chain complexes, Homology, Homotopy and Applications, 5
(2003), 49–52.
• [13] R. Brown and C. B. Spencer, G-groupoids, crossed modules, and the classifying
space of a topological group, Proc. Kon. Akad. v. Wet. 79 (1976),296–302."
• M. A. Batanin Monoidal Globular Categories As a Natural Environment for the Theory of
Weak n- Categories., Advances in Mathematics, Volume 136, Issue 1, 1 June 1998, Pages
39-103., doi:10.1006/aima.1998.1724 (http:/ / www. sciencedirect. com/
science?_ob=ArticleURL& _udi=B6W9F-45KKV3S-1J& _user=10& _rdoc=1& _fmt=&
_orig=search& _sort=d& view=c& _version=1& _urlVersion=0& _userid=10&
md5=843bfd6ca8a007d195d3ef20d5108fb1)

Henri Cartan
654
Henri Cartan
Henri Cartan
Born
July 8, 1904
Nancy, France
Died
August 13, 2008 (aged 104)
Paris, France
Nationality
French
Occupation
Mathematician
Spouse(s)
Nicole Antoinette Weiss
Parents
Élie Cartan
Marie-Louise Bianconi
Henri Cartan
Fields
Algebraic topology
Bourbaki
Doctoral advisor
Paul Montel
Doctoral students
Jean-Paul Benzécri
Jean-Paul Brasselet
Pierre Cartier
Jean Cerf
Jacques Deny
Adrien Douady
Roger Godement
Max Karoubi
Jean-Louis Koszul
Joshua Leslie
Jean-Pierre Ramis
Jean-Pierre Serre
Banwari Sharma
René Thom
Henri Paul Cartan (July 8, 1904 – August 13, 2008) was a son of Élie Cartan, and was, as
his father was, a distinguished and influential French mathematician.[1]

Henri Cartan
655
Life
Cartan studied at the Lycée Hoche in Versailles, then at the ENS, receiving his doctorate in
mathematics. He held academic positions at a number of French universities, spending the
bulk of his working life in Paris.
Cartan was known for work in algebraic topology, in particular on cohomology operations,
Killing homotopy groups and group cohomology. His seminar in Paris in the years after
1945 covered ground on several complex variables, sheaf theory, spectral sequences and
homological algebra, in a way that deeply influenced Jean-Pierre Serre, Armand Borel,
Alexander Grothendieck and Frank Adams, amongst others of the leading lights of the
younger generation. The number of his official students was small, but includes Adrien
Douady, Roger Godement, Max Karoubi, Jean-Pierre Serre and René Thom.
Cartan also was a founding member of the Bourbaki group and one of its most active
participants. His book with Samuel Eilenberg Homological Algebra (1956)[2] was an
important text, treating the subject with a moderate level of abstraction and category
theory.
Cartan used his influence to help obtain the release of some dissident mathematicians,
including Leonid Plyushch and Jose Luis Massera. For his humanitarian efforts he received
the Pagels Award from the New York Academy of Sciences.[3]
Cartan died on 13 August, 2008 at the age of 104. His funeral took place the following
Wednesday on 20 August in Die, Drome.[1]
Honours and awards
Cartan received numerous honours and awards including the Wolf Prize in 1980. From
1974 until his death he had been a member of the French Academy of Sciences. He was a
foreign member of the Finnish Academy of Science and Letters, Royal Danish Academy of
Sciences and Letters, Royal Society of London, Russian Academy of Sciences, Royal
Swedish Academy of Sciences, United States National Academy of Sciences, Polish
Academy of Sciences and other academies and societies.
See also
• Cartan's theorems A and B
Notes
[1] "http://www.lefigaro.fr/sciences/2008/08/18/01008-20080818ARTFIG00240-deces-du-mathematicien-henri-cartan-.php|Décès
du mathématicien Henri Cartan", Le Figaro, 2008-08-18, http:/ / www. lefigaro. fr/ sciences/ 2008/ 08/ 18/
01008-20080818ARTFIG00240-deces-du-mathematicien-henri-cartan-. php
[2] Henri Cartan and Samuel Eilenberg, Homological Algebra ISBN 978-0-691-04991-5
[3] Notices of the AMS, Vol. 46(7), page 788 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 199907/ fea-cartan. pdf)

Henri Cartan
656
References
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Cartan_Henri.html|"Henri Cartan",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• "http://afp.google.com/article/ALeqM5h0ohPHQlam1qDDEtg1CMLPJwj3Ow|Décès du
mathématicien français Henri Cartan", Agence France-Presse, 2008-08-18, http:/ / afp.
google. com/ article/ ALeqM5h0ohPHQlam1qDDEtg1CMLPJwj3Ow ()
• Chang, Kenneth (2008-08-25),
"http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/25/science/25cartan.html|Henri Cartan, French
Mathematician, Is Dead at 104", The New York Times: A17, http:/ / www. nytimes. com/
2008/ 08/ 25/ science/ 25cartan. html, retrieved on 2008-08-25
• Rehmeyer, Julie (2008-08-29),
"http://www.sciencenews.org/view/generic/id/36064/title/Math_Trek__Founder_of_the_Secret_Society_
of the Secret Society of Mathematicians", Science News, http:/ / www. sciencenews. org/
view/ generic/ id/ 36064/ title/
Math_Trek__Founder_of_the_Secret_Society_of_Mathematicians
External links
• Jackson, Allyn (1999-07), "http://www.ams.org/notices/199907/fea-cartan.pdf|Interview
with Henri Cartan", Notices of the American Mathematical Society 46 (7): 782–788,
http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 199907/ fea-cartan. pdf
• Henri Cartan (http:/ / www. academie-sciences. fr/ membres/ C/ Cartan_Henri. htm) at
l'Académie des Sciences ()
• Henri Cartan (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=49555) at the
Mathematics Genealogy Project
• Biographical sketch and bibliography (http:/ / smf. emath. fr/ VieSociete/ Rencontres/
JourneeCartan/ NoticeCartan. html) by the Société Mathématique de France on the
occasion of Cartan's 100th birthday. ()
• Cerf, Jean (2004-04),
"http://smf.emath.fr/Publications/Gazette/2004/100/smf_gazette_100_7-8.pdf|Trois quarts
de siècle avec Henri Cartan", Gazette des Mathématiciens (http:/ / smf. emath. fr/
Publications/ Gazette/ 2004/ 100/ ) (100): 7–8, http:/ / smf. emath. fr/ Publications/
Gazette/ 2004/ 100/ smf_gazette_100_7-8. pdf ()
• Samuel, Pierre (2004-04),
"http://smf.emath.fr/Publications/Gazette/2004/100/smf_gazette_100_12-15.pdf|Souvenirs
personnels sur H. Cartan", Gazette des Mathématiciens (http:/ / smf. emath. fr/
Publications/ Gazette/ 2004/ 100/ ) (100): 13–15, http:/ / smf. emath. fr/ Publications/
Gazette/ 2004/ 100/ smf_gazette_100_12-15. pdf ()
• "http://www.emis.de/newsletter/current/current10.pdf|100th Birthday of Henri Cartan",
European Mathematical Society Newsletter (http:/ / www. emis. de/ newsletter/
archive_contents. html#nl_53) (53): 20–21, 2004-09, http:/ / www. emis. de/ newsletter/
current/ current10. pdf (translations of above two articles from the SMF Gazette)

Alain Connes
657
Alain Connes
Alain Connes
Alain Connes in 2004
Born
April 1, 1947
France
Residence
 France
Citizenship
 French
Fields
Mathematics
Institutions
IHÉS, France
Alma mater
École Normale Supérieure, France
Doctoral advisor
Jacques Dixmier
Doctoral students
Alain Valette
Georges Skandalis
Benjamin Enriquez
Known for
Baum–Connes conjecture
Noncommutative geometry
Operator algebras
Notable awards
Fields Medal (1982)
Crafoord Prize (2001)
CNRS Gold Medal (2004)
Alain Connes (born 1 April 1947) is a French mathematician, currently Professor at the
College de France, IHÉS and Vanderbilt University.
Work
Alain Connes is one of the leading specialists on operator algebras. In his early work on von
Neumann algebras in the 1970s, he succeeded in obtaining the almost complete
classification of injective factors. Following this he made contributions in operator K-theory
and index theory, which culminated in the Baum-Connes conjecture. He also introduced
cyclic cohomology in the early 1980s as a first step in the study of noncommutative
differential geometry.
Connes has applied his work in areas of mathematics and theoretical physics, including
number theory, differential geometry and particle physics.

Alain Connes
658
Awards and honours
Connes was awarded the Fields Medal in 1982, the Crafoord Prize in 2001 and the gold
medal of the CNRS in 2004. He is a member of the French Academy of Sciences and several
foreign academies and societies, including the Danish Academy of Sciences, Norwegian
Academy of Sciences, Russian Academy of Sciences, and US National Academy of Sciences.
See also
• cyclic homology
• factor (functional analysis)
• Higgs boson
• C*-algebra
• M Theory
• Groupoid
External links
• Alain Connes Official Web Site [1] containing downloadable papers [2], and his book
Non-commutative geometry [3], ISBN 0-12-185860-X.
• Alain Connes' Standard Model [4]
• An interview with Alain Connes [5] and a discussion about it [6]
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Connes.html|"Alain Connes",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Alain Connes [7] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
References
[1] http:/ / www. alainconnes. org/
[2] http:/ / www. alainconnes. org/ en/ downloads. php
[3] http:/ / www. alainconnes. org/ docs/ book94bigpdf. pdf
[4] http:/ / resonaances. blogspot. com/ 2007/ 02/ alain-connes-standard-model. html
[5] http:/ / www. ipm. ac. ir/ ViewNewsInfo. jsp?NTID=227
[6] http:/ / www. math. columbia. edu/ ~woit/ wordpress/ ?p=313
[7] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=34220

Jean Dieudonné
659
Jean Dieudonné
Jean Alexandre Eugène Dieudonné
Jean Alexandre Eugène Dieudonné
Born
July 1, 1906
Lille, France
Died
November 29, 1992 (aged 86)
Paris, France
Nationality
  France
Fields
Mathematics
Institutions
University of São Paulo
University of Nancy
University of Michigan
Northwestern University
Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques
University of Nice
Alma mater
École Normale Supérieure
Known for
Cartan-Dieudonné Theorem
Jean Alexandre Eugène Dieudonné (July 1 1906, Lille - November 29 1992, Paris) was a
French mathematician, notable for research in abstract algebra and functional analysis, for
close involvement with the Nicolas Bourbaki pseudonymous group and the Éléments de
géométrie algébrique project of Alexander Grothendieck, and as a historian of mathematics,
particularly in the fields of functional analysis and algebraic topology. His work on the
classical groups (the book La Géométrie des groupes classiques was published in 1955),
and on formal groups, introducing what now are called Dieudonné modules, had a major
effect on those fields.
He was born and brought up in Lille, with a formative stay in England where he was
introduced to algebra. In 1924 he was accepted for the École Normale Supérieure, where
André Weil was a contemporary. He began working, conventionally enough, in complex
analysis. In 1934 he was one of the group of normaliens convened by Weil, which would
become 'Bourbaki'.

Jean Dieudonné
660
Conflict with Bourbaki
Dieudonné was explicit about Bourbaki. Formative on all French mathematicians of his
generation was the 'hecatomb'; the loss of so many of the best students of the generation
immediately before, as casualties of World War I.
Bourbaki was often seen as subversive and perversely radical, wishing to change
mathematical research by a new de facto standard of definitions and pedagogy .
Dieudonné's line was that continuity in the French tradition of mathematics had been lost:
classical analysis was on offer from the older figures, but inadequate to the needs of the
day . Hence the emphasis on the German school: David Hilbert, Emmy Noether and others
of the 'school of Göttingen' such as Hermann Weyl, the Austrian Emil Artin and Hungarian
John von Neumann.
Education and Teaching
He served in the French Army in World War II, and then taught in Clermont-Ferrand until
the liberation of France. After holding professorships at the University of São Paulo
(1946-47), the University of Nancy (1948-1952) and the University of Michigan (1952-53),
he joined the Department of Mathematics at Northwestern University in 1953, before
returning to France as a founding member of the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques.
He moved to the University of Nice to found the Department of Mathematics in 1964, and
retired in 1970. He was elected as a member of the Académie des Sciences in 1968.
Career
He drafted much of the Bourbaki series of texts, the many volumes of the EGA algebraic
geometry series, and nine volumes of his own Traité d'Analyse. The first volume of the
Traité is a French translation of the book Foundations of Modern Analysis (1960), which
had become a graduate textbook on functional analysis. A common attitude in France was
that the elaboration of the Traité was something many could have done; this is perhaps a
tribute to the success of the Bourbaki renewal, which had started with a pledge to update
the analysis treatises of figures such as Goursat.
He also wrote individual monographs on Infinitesimal Calculus, Linear Algebra and
Elementary Geometry, invariant theory, commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, and
formal groups. A broad survey of mathematics from the Bourbaki perspective provided a
natural focus of controversy. As one mathematician from another camp put it: 'good to
know where's one's research field lies — down with the social diseases'.
With Laurent Schwartz he supervised the early research of Alexander Grothendieck; later
from 1959 to 1964 he was at IHÉS alongside Grothendieck, and collaborating on the
expository work needed to support the project of refounding algebraic geometry on the new
basis of schemes. This was left in an incomplete state.

Jean Dieudonné
661
See also
• Cartan-Dieudonné Theorem
References
• Jean Dieudonné: Mathématicien complet (1995) Pierre Dugac
External links
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Dieudonne.html|"Jean Dieudonné",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Jean Dieudonné [1] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
References
[1] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=34219

Charles Ehresmann
662
Charles Ehresmann
Charles Ehresmann
Charles Ehresmann (right) at the topology conference 1949 in Mathematical Research Institute of
OberwolfachOberwolfach, together with Paul Vincensini (middle) and Georges Reeb (left)
Born
1905
Died
1979
Fields
Mathematics
Alma mater
École Normale Supérieure
Doctoral advisor
Élie Cartan
Doctoral students
Georges Reeb
Wu Wen-Tsün
André Haefliger
Valentin Poénaru
Daniel Tanré
Known for
Ehresmann's theorem
Ehresmann connection
Charles Ehresmann (1905-1979) was a French mathematician who worked on differential
topology and category theory. He is known for work on the topology of Lie groups, the jet
concept (see jet bundle), and his seminar on category theory.
He attended the École Normale Supérieure in Paris before performing one year of military
service. He finished his PhD thesis Sur la topologie de certains espaces homogènes (french:
On the topology of certain homogeneous spaces) in 1934 under the supervision of Élie
Cartan.
In 1957 he founded the mathematical journal Cahiers de Topologie et Géometrie
Différentielle Categoriques.
Jean Dieudonné describes Ehresmann's personality as "... distinguished by forthrightness,
simplicity, and total absence of conceit or careerism. As a teacher he was outstanding, not
so much for the brilliance of his lectures as for the inspiration and tireless guidance he
generously gave to his research students ... "
He had 76 Ph.D. students, including Georges Reeb, Wu Wen-Tsün, André Haefliger,
Valentin Poénaru, Daniel Tanré.

Charles Ehresmann
663
See also
• Ehresmann's theorem
• Ehresmann connection
References
• International Conference "Charles Ehresmann : 100 ans", Université de Picardie Jules
Verne à Amiens, 7-8-9 October 2005, http:/ / pagesperso-orange. fr/ vbm-ehr/ ChEh/
indexAng. htm
• `The mathematical legacy of Charles Ehresmann', Proceedings of the 7th Conference on
the Geometry and Topology of Manifolds: The Mathematical Legacy of Charles
Ehresmann, Bedlewo (Poland) 8.05.2005-15.05.2005, Edited by J. Krysinski, J. Pradines,
T. Rybicki, R. Wolak, Banach Centre Publications 76, Institute of Mathematics Polish
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, (2007).
External links
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Ehresmann.html|"Charles
Ehresmann", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Charles Ehresmann [1] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
References
[1] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=96080

Samuel Eilenberg
664
Samuel Eilenberg
Samuel Eilenberg
Samuel Eilenberg (1970)
Born
September 30, 1913
Warsaw, Russian Empire
Died
January 30, 1998 (aged 84)
Institutions
Columbia University
Alma mater
Warsaw University
Doctoral advisor
Karol Borsuk
Known for
Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms
Eilenberg swindle
Samuel Eilenberg (September 30, 1913—January 30, 1998) was a Polish and American
mathematician of Jewish descent. He was born in Warsaw, Russian Empire (now in Poland)
and died in New York City, USA, where he had spent much of his career as a professor at
Columbia University.
He earned his Ph.D. from Warsaw University in 1936. His thesis advisor was Karol Borsuk.
His main interest was algebraic topology. He worked on the axiomatic treatment of
homology theory with Norman Steenrod (whose names the Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms
bear), and on homological algebra with Saunders Mac Lane. In the process, Eilenberg and
Mac Lane created category theory.
Eilenberg took part in the Bourbaki group meetings, and, with Henri Cartan, wrote the
1956 book Homological Algebra, which became a classic.
Later in life he worked mainly in pure category theory, being one of the founders of the
field. The Eilenberg swindle (or telescope) is a construction applying the telescoping
cancellation idea to projective modules.
Eilenberg also wrote an important book on automata theory. The X-machine, a form of
automaton, was introduced by Eilenberg in 1974.
Eilenberg was also a prominent collector of Asian art. His collection mainly consisted of
small sculptures and other artifacts from Indonesia, Pakistan, India, Nepal, Thailand,
Cambodia, Sri Lanka and Central Asia. In 1991-1992, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in
New York staged an exhibition from more than 400 items that Eilenberg had donated to the
museum, entitled The Lotus Transcendent: Indian and Southeast Asian Art From the
Samuel Eilenberg Collection".[1]

Samuel Eilenberg
665
Selected publications
• Samuel Eilenberg, Automata, Languages and Machines. ISBN 0-12-234001-9
• Samuel Eilenberg & Tudor Ganea, On the Lusternik-Schnirelmann category of abstract
groups [2], Annals of Mathematics, 2nd Ser., 65 (1957), no. 3, 517 – 518. MR0085510 [3]
• Samuel Eilenberg & Saunders Mac Lane, "Relations between homology and homotopy
groups of spaces", Annals of Mathematics 46 (1945), 480–509.
• Samuel Eilenberg & Saunders Mac Lane, "Relations between homology and homotopy
groups of spaces. II", Annals of Mathematics 51 (1950), 514–533.
• Eilenberg, Samuel; Moore, John C. (1962), "Limits and spectral sequences", Topology 1
(1): 1–23, doi:10.1016/0040-9383(62)90093-9 [4], ISSN 0040-9383 [1]
• Samuel Eilenberg & Norman E. Steenrod, Axiomatic approach to homology theory, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 31, (1945). 117--120.
• Samuel Eilenberg & Norman E. Steenrod, Foundations of algebraic topology, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1952. xv+328 pp.
Footnotes
[1] New York Times obituary, February 3, 1998
[2] http:/ / links. jstor. org/ sici?sici=0003-486X%28195705%292%3A65%3A3%3C517%3AOTLCOA%3E2. 0.
CO%3B2-J
[3] http:/ / www. ams. org/ mathscinet-getitem?mr=0085510
[4] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1016%2F0040-9383%2862%2990093-9
See also
• Stefan Banach
• Stanisław Ulam
• Eilenberg-Ganea conjecture
• Eilenberg-MacLane space
• Eilenberg-Moore spectral sequence
External links
• Samuel Eilenberg (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=7643) at the
Mathematics Genealogy Project
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Eilenberg.html|"Samuel Eilenberg",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Eilenberg's biography (http:/ / newton. nap. edu/ html/ biomems/ seilenberg. html) − from
the National Academies Press, by Hyman Bass, Henri Cartan, Peter Freyd, Alex Heller
and Saunders Mac Lane.

Peter Freyd
666
Peter Freyd
1. REDIRECT Peter J. Freyd
Alexander Grothendieck
Alexander Grothendieck in Montreal, 1970
Born
March 28, 1928 (age 81)
Berlin, Germany
Residence
France
Nationality
Stateless
Field
Mathematician
Academic advisor
Laurent Schwartz
Notable students
Pierre Deligne, Jean-Louis Verdier, Michel Raynaud
Known for
algebraic geometry, homological algebra, and functional analysis
Notable prizes
Fields Medal (1966), Crafoord Prize(1988, declined)
edit data [1]
Alexander Grothendieck (born March 28, 1928 in Berlin, Germany) is considered one of
the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century. [2] [3] He is most famous for his
revolutionary advances in algebraic geometry, but he has also made major contributions to
algebraic topology, number theory, category theory, Galois theory, descent theory,
commutative homological algebra and functional analysis. He was awarded the Fields
Medal in 1966, and was co-awarded the Crafoord Prize with Pierre Deligne in 1988. He
declined the latter prize on ethical grounds in an open letter to the media.
He is noted for his mastery of abstract approaches to mathematics, and his perfectionism in
matters of formulation and presentation. In particular, he demonstrated the ability to derive
concrete results using only very general methods.[4] [5] [6] Relatively little of his work after
1960 was published by the conventional route of the learned journal, circulating initially in
duplicated volumes of seminar notes; his influence was to a considerable extent personal,
on French mathematics and the Zariski school at Harvard University. He is the subject of
many stories and some misleading rumors concerning his work habits and politics, his
confrontations with other mathematicians and the French authorities, his withdrawal from
mathematics at age 42, his retirement, and his subsequent lengthy writings.

Alexander Grothendieck
667
Mathematical achievements
Grothendieck's early mathematical work was done in functional analysis between 1949 and
1953 working on (what became) his doctoral thesis in Nancy, supervised by Jean Dieudonné
and Laurent Schwartz. His key contributions include topological tensor products of vector
spaces, the theory of nuclear spaces and the application of Lp spaces in studying linear
maps between topological vector spaces. In the space of a few years, he had turned himself
into a leading authority on the theory of topological vector spaces — to the extent that
Dieudonné compares his impact in this field to that of Banach [7] .
However, it is algebraic geometry and related fields where Grothendieck did his most
important and influential work. From about 1955 he started to work on sheaf theory and
homological algebra, rapidly producing the very influential "Tôhoku paper" (Sur quelques
points d'algèbre homologique, published in 1957) where he introduced Abelian categories
and applied it to show that sheaf cohomology can be defined as certain derived functors in
this context.
Homological methods and sheaf theory had already been introduced in algebraic geometry
by Jean-Pierre Serre and others, after sheaves had been defined by Jean Leray.
Grothendieck took them to a higher level of abstraction and turned them into a key
organising principle of his theory. He thereby changed the tools and the level of abstraction
in algebraic geometry. He shifted attention from the study of individual varieties to the
relative point of view (pairs of varieties related by a morphism), allowing a broad
generalization of many classical theorems. The first major application was the relative
version of Serre's theorem showing that the cohomology of a coherent sheaf on a complete
variety is finite dimensional; Grothendieck's theorem shows that the higher direct images of
coherent sheaves under a proper map are coherent; this reduces to Serre's theorem over a
one-point space.
Next, in 1956, he applied the same thinking to the Riemann–Roch theorem, which had
already 
recently 
been 
generalized 
to 
any 
dimension 
by 
Hirzebruch. 
The
Grothendieck–Riemann–Roch theorem was announced by Grothendieck at the initial
Mathematische Arbeitstagung in Bonn, in 1957. It appeared in print in a paper written by
Armand Borel with Serre. This result was his first major achievement in algebraic
geometry. He went on to plan and execute a major foundational programme for rebuilding
the foundations of algebraic geometry; he exposed the main outlines of this programme in
his talk at the 1958 International Congress of Mathematicians.
His foundational work on algebraic geometry is at a higher level of abstraction than all
prior versions. He adapted the use of non-closed generic points, which led to the theory of
schemes. He also pioneered the systematic use of nilpotents. As 'functions' these can take
only the value 0, but they carry infinitesimal information, in purely algebraic settings. His
theory of schemes has become established as the best universal foundation for this major
field, because of its great expressive power as well as technical depth. In that setting one
can use birational geometry, techniques from number theory, Galois theory and
commutative algebra, and close analogues of the methods of algebraic topology, all in an
integrated way.
His influence spilled over into many other branches of mathematics, for example the
contemporary theory of D-modules. (It also provoked adverse reactions, with many
mathematicians seeking out more concrete areas and problems.)

Alexander Grothendieck
668
EGA and SGA
The bulk of Grothendieck's published work is collected in the monumental, and yet
incomplete, Éléments de géométrie algébrique (EGA) and Séminaire de géométrie
algébrique (SGA). The collection Fondements de la Géometrie Algébrique (FGA), which
gathers together talks given in the Séminaire Bourbaki, also contains important material.
Perhaps Grothendieck's deepest single accomplishment is the invention of the étale and
l-adic cohomology theories, which explain an observation of André Weil's that there is a
deep connection between the topological characteristics of a variety and its diophantine
(number theoretic) properties. For example, the number of solutions of an equation over a
finite field reflects the topological nature of its solutions over the complex numbers. Weil
realized that to prove such a connection one needed a new cohomology theory, but neither
he nor any other expert saw how to do this until such a theory was found by Grothendieck.
This program culminated in the proofs of the Weil conjectures, the last of which was settled
by Grothendieck's student Pierre Deligne in the early 1970s after Grothendieck had largely
withdrawn from mathematics.
Major mathematical topics (from Récoltes et Semailles)
He wrote a retrospective assessment of his mathematical work (see the external link La
Vision below). As his main mathematical achievements ("maître-thèmes"), he chose this
collection of 12 topics (his chronological order):
1. Topological tensor products and nuclear spaces
2. "Continuous" and "discrete" duality (derived categories and "six operations").
3. Yoga of the Grothendieck–Riemann–Roch theorem (K-theory, relation with intersection
theory).
4. Schemes.
5. Topoi.
6. Étale cohomology including l-adic cohomology.
7. Motives and the motivic Galois group (and Grothendieck categories)
8. Crystals and crystalline cohomology, yoga of De Rham and Hodge coefficients.
9. Topological algebra, infinity-stacks, 'dérivateurs', cohomological formalism of toposes as
an inspiration for a new homotopic algebra
10. Tame topology.
11. Yoga of anabelian geometry and Galois–Teichmüller theory.
12. Schematic point of view, or "arithmetics" for regular polyhedra and regular
configurations of all sorts.
He wrote that the central theme of the topics above is that of topos theory, while the first
and last were of the least importance to him.
Here the term yoga denotes a kind of "meta-theory" that can be used heuristically. The
word yoke, meaning "linkage", is derived from the same Indo-European root.

Alexander Grothendieck
669
Life
Family and early life
Alexander Grothendieck was born in Berlin to anarchist parents: a Russian father from an
ultimately Hassidic family, Alexander Shapiro aka Tanaroff, and a mother from a German
Protestant family, Johanna "Hanka" Grothendieck; both of his parents had broken away
from their early backgrounds in their teens[8] . At the time of his birth Grothendieck's
mother was married to Johannes Raddatz, a German journalist, and his birthname was
initially recorded as Alexander Raddatz. The marriage was dissolved in 1929 and
Shapiro/Tanaroff acknowledged his paternity, but never married Hanka Grothendieck[9] .
Grothendieck lived with his parents until 1933 in Berlin. At the end of that year, Shapiro
moved to Paris, and Hanka followed him the next year. They left Grothendieck in the care of
Wilhelm Heydorn, a Lutheran Pastor and teacher [10] in Hamburg where he went to school.
During this time, his parents fought in the Spanish Civil War.
During WWII
In 1939 Grothendieck came to France and lived in various camps for displaced persons with
his mother, first at the Camp de Rieucros, spending 1942–44 at Le Chambon-sur-Lignon.
His father was sent via Drancy to Auschwitz where he died in 1942.
Studies and contact with research mathematics
After the war, the young Grothendieck studied mathematics in France, initially at the
University of Montpellier. He had decided to become a math teacher because he had been
told that mathematical research had been completed early in the 20th century and there
were no more open problems.[11] However, his talent was noticed, and he was encouraged
to go to Paris in 1948.
Initially, Grothendieck attended Henri Cartan's Seminar at École Normale Supérieure, but
lacking the necessary background to follow the high-powered seminar, he moved to the
University of Nancy where he wrote his dissertation under Laurent Schwartz in functional
analysis, from 1950 to 1953. At this time he was a leading expert in the theory of
topological vector spaces. By 1957, he set this subject aside in order to work in algebraic
geometry and homological algebra.
The IHÉS years
Installed at the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques (IHÉS), Grothendieck attracted
attention by an intense and highly productive activity of seminars (de facto working groups
drafting into foundational work some of the ablest French and other mathematicians of the
younger generation). Grothendieck himself practically ceased publication of papers through
the conventional, learned journal route. He was, however, able to play a dominant role in
mathematics for around a decade, gathering a strong school.
During this time he had officially as students Michel Demazure (who worked on SGA3, on
group schemes), Luc Illusie (cotangent complex), Michel Raynaud, Jean-Louis Verdier
(cofounder of the derived category theory) and Pierre Deligne. Collaborators on the SGA
projects also included Mike Artin (étale cohomology) and Nick Katz (monodromy theory and
Lefschetz pencils). Jean Giraud worked out torsor theory extensions of non-abelian
cohomology. Many others were involved.

Alexander Grothendieck
670
The 'Golden Age'
Alexander Grothendieck's work during the `Golden Age' period at IHÉS established several
unifying themes in algebraic geometry, number theory, topology, category theory and
complex analysis. His first (pre-IHÉS) breakthrough in algebraic geometry was the
Grothendieck–Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem, a far-reaching generalisation of the
Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem proved algebraically; in this context he also introduced
K-theory. Then, following the programme he outlined in his talk at the 1958 International
Congress of Mathematicians, he introduced the theory of schemes, developing it in detail in
his Éléments de géométrie algébrique (EGA) and providing the new more flexible and
general foundations for algebraic geometry that has been adopted in the field since that
time. He went on to introduce the étale cohomology theory of schemes, providing the key
tools for proving the Weil conjectures, as well as crystalline cohomology and algebraic de
Rham cohomology to complement it. Closely linked to these cohomology theories, he
originated topos theory as a generalisation of topology (relevant also in mathematical logic,
category theory, and also to computer software/programming and institutional ontology
classification and bioinformatics). He also provided an algebraic definition of fundamental
groups of schemes and more generally the main structures of a categorical Galois theory.
As a framework for his coherent duality theory he also introduced derived categories, which
were further developed by Verdier. The results of work on these and other topics were
published in the EGA and in less polished form in the notes of the Séminaire de géométrie
algébrique (SGA) that he directed at IHES.
Politics and retreat from scientific community
Grothendieck's political views were radical and pacifist, but not communist (thus he
strongly disapproved of the Soviet military expansionism as well). He gave lectures on
category theory in the forests surrounding Hanoi while the city was being bombed, to
protest against the Vietnam War (The Life and Work of Alexander Grothendieck, American
Math. Monthly, vol. 113, no. 9, footnote 6). He retired from scientific life around 1970, after
having discovered the partly military funding of IHÉS (see pp. xii and xiii of SGA1, Springer
Lecture Notes 224). He returned to academia a few years later as a professor at the
University of Montpellier, where he stayed until his retirement in 1988. His criticisms of the
scientific community, and especially of several mathematics circles, are also contained in a
letter [12], written in 1988, in which he states the reasons for his refusal of the Crafoord
Prize.
While the issue of military funding was perhaps the most obvious explanation for
Grothendieck's departure from IHÉS, those who knew him say that the causes of the
rupture ran deeper. Pierre Cartier, a visiteur de longue durée at the IHÉS, wrote a piece
about Grothendieck for a special volume published on the occasion of the IHÉS's fortieth
anniversary. The Grothendieck Festschrift was a three-volume collection of research papers
to mark his sixtieth birthday (falling in 1988), and published in 1990.[13]
In it Cartier notes that, as the son of an antimilitary anarchist and one who grew up among 
the disenfranchised, Grothendieck always had a deep compassion for the poor and the 
downtrodden. As Cartier puts it, Grothendieck came to find Bures-sur-Yvette "une cage 
dorée" [a golden cage]. While Grothendieck was at the IHÉS, opposition to the Vietnam War 
was heating up, and Cartier suggests that this also reinforced Grothendieck's distaste at 
having become a mandarin of the scientific world. In addition, after several years at the

Alexander Grothendieck
671
IHÉS Grothendieck seemed to cast about for new intellectual interests. By the late 1960s
he had started to become interested in scientific areas outside of mathematics. David
Ruelle, a physicist who joined the IHÉS faculty in 1964, said that Grothendieck came to talk
to him a few times about physics. (In the 1970s Ruelle and the Dutch mathematician Floris
Takens produced a new model for turbulence, and it was Ruelle who invented the concept
of a strange attractor in a dynamical system.) Biology interested Grothendieck much more
than physics, and he organized some seminars on biological topics.[14] After leaving the
IHÉS, Grothendieck tried but failed to get a position at the Collège de France. He then
went to Université de Montpellier, where he became increasingly estranged from the
mathematical community. Around this time, he founded a group called Survivre, which was
dedicated to antimilitary and ecological issues. His mathematical career, for the most part,
ended when he left the IHÉS. In 1984 he wrote a proposal to get a position through the
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. The proposal, entitled Esquisse d'un
Programme [Sketch of a Program] describes new ideas for studying the moduli space of
complex curves. Although Grothendieck himself never published his work in this area, the
proposal became the inspiration for work by other mathematicians and the source of the
theory of dessins d’enfants. Esquisse d’un Programme was published in the two-volume
proceedings Geometric Galois Actions (Cambridge University Press, 1997)."[15]
Manuscripts written in the 1980s
While not publishing mathematical research in conventional ways during the 1980s, he
produced several influential manuscripts with limited distribution, with both mathematical
and biographical content. During that period he also released his work on Bertini type
theorems contained in EGA 5, published by the Grothendieck Circle [16] in 2004.
La Longue Marche à travers la théorie de Galois [The Long March Through Galois Theory]
is an approximately 1600-page handwritten manuscript produced by Grothendieck during
the years 1980–1981, containing many of the ideas leading to the Esquisse d'un
programme[17] (see below, and also a more detailed entry[18] ), and in particular studying
the Teichmüller theory. (For an English translation of the tables of contents of these
manuscripts see the Wikipedia separate entry on the Esquisse d'un programme.)
In 1983 he wrote a huge extended manuscript (about 600 pages) entitled Pursuing Stacks,
stimulated by correspondence with Ronald Brown, (see also R.Brown [19] and Tim Porter [20]
at University of Bangor in Wales), and starting with a letter addressed to Daniel Quillen.
This letter and successive parts were distributed from Bangor (see External Links below):
in an informal manner, as a kind of diary, Grothendieck explained and developed his ideas
on the relationship between algebraic homotopy theory and algebraic geometry and
prospects for a noncommutative theory of stacks. The manuscript, which is being edited for
publication by G. Maltsiniotis, later led to another of his monumental works, Les
Dérivateurs. Written in 1991, this latter opus of about 2000 pages further developed the
homotopical ideas begun in Pursuing Stacks. Much of this work anticipated the subsequent
development of the motivic homotopy theory of F. Morel and V. Voevodsky in the mid
1990s.
His Esquisse d'un programme[17] (1984) is a proposal for a position at the Centre National 
de la Recherche Scientifique, which he held from 1984 to his retirement in 1988. Ideas 
from it have proved influential, and have been developed by others, in particular dessins 
d'enfants and a new field emerging as anabelian geometry. In La Clef des Songes he

Alexander Grothendieck
672
explains how the reality of dreams convinced him of God's existence.
The 1000-page autobiographical manuscript Récoltes et semailles (1986) is now available
on the internet in the French original, and an English translation is underway (these parts
of Récoltes et semailles have already been translated into Russian [21] and published in
Moscow). Some parts of Récoltes et semailles[22] [23] and the whole La Clef des Songes
[24] have been translated into Spanish.
Disappearance
In 1991, Grothendieck left his home and disappeared. He is now said to live in southern
France or Andorra and to entertain no visitors. Though he has been inactive in mathematics
for many years, he remains one of the greatest and most influential mathematicians of
modern times.
See also
• Ax-Grothendieck theorem
• Birkhoff–Grothendieck theorem
• Esquisse d'un Programme
• Grothendieck category [25]
• Grothendieck's connectedness theorem
• Grothendieck connection
• Grothendieck construction
• Grothendieck's Galois theory
• Grothendieck group
• Grothendieck inequality or Grothendieck constant
• Grothendieck–Katz p-curvature conjecture
• Grothendieck's relative point of view
• Grothendieck–Riemann–Roch theorem
• Grothendieck's Séminaire de géométrie algébrique
• Grothendieck space
• Grothendieck spectral sequence
• Grothendieck topology
• Grothendieck universe
• Tarski–Grothendieck set theory
• IHES
• IHES at Forty by Allyn Jackson [13]
Notes
[1] http:/ / en. wikipedia. org/ wiki/ Talk%3Aalexander_grothendieck%2Fpersondata
[2] Peck, Morgen, http://scienceline.org/2007/01/31/math_controversy_peck/|Equality of Mathematicians, http:/ /
scienceline. org/ 2007/ 01/ 31/ math_controversy_peck/ , "Alexandre Grothendieck is arguably the most
important mathematician of the 20th century..."
[3] Leith, Sam (20 March 2004), "http://www.lewrockwell.com/spectator/spec262.html|The Einstein of maths", The
Spectator, http:/ / www. lewrockwell. com/ spectator/ spec262. html, "[A] mathematician of staggering
accomplishment ... a legendary figure in the mathematical world."
[4] See, for example, (Deligne 1998).
[5] Jackson, Allyn (2004), "http://www.ams.org/notices/200409/fea-grothendieck-part1.pdf|Comme Appelé du
Néant — As If Summoned from the Void: The Life of Alexandre Grothendieck I", Notices of the American
Mathematical Society 51 (4): p. 1049, http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200409/ fea-grothendieck-part1. pdf

Alexander Grothendieck
673
[6] Mclarty, Colin. http://www.math.jussieu.fr/~leila/grothendieckcircle/mclarty1.pdf|"The Rising Sea:
Grothendieck on simplicity and generality I" (PDF). http:/ / www. math. jussieu. fr/ ~leila/ grothendieckcircle/
mclarty1. pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
[7] (Dieudonné 1990)
[8] Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (http:/ / www. siam. org/ news/ news. php?id=1405)
[9] Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (http:/ / www. siam. org/ news/ news. php?id=1405)
[10] Allyn Jackson, The Life of Alexander Grothendieck, p. 1040 (http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200409/
fea-grothendieck-part1. pdf)
[11] See Jackson (2004:1). The remark is from the beginning of Récoltes et Semailles (page P4, in the introductory
section Prélude en quatre Mouvements)
[12] http:/ / web. archive. org/ web/ 20060106062005/ http:/ / www. math. columbia. edu/ ~lipyan/ CrafoordPrize.
pdf
[13] The editors were Pierre Cartier, Luc Illusie, Nick Katz, Gérard Laumon, Yuri Manin, and Ken Ribet. A second
edition has been printed (2007) by Birkhauser.
[14] http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 199903/ ihes-changes. pdf
[15] http:/ / books. google. co. uk/ books?id=Hlf1j2XmXkcC& dq=Geometric+ Galois+ Actions&
printsec=frontcover& source=bl& ots=q9iN4QMkYj& sig=fAsvVlPOhN9K9LfjGFJC5zm_IA4& hl=en&
ei=KW-3ScSkHYHIMuDukOEK& sa=X& oi=book_result& resnum=1& ct=result
[16] http:/ / www. math. jussieu. fr/ ~leila/ grothendieckcircle/ index. php
[17] http:/ / kolmogorov. unex. es/ ~navarro/ res/ esquissefr. pdf
[18] http:/ / en. wikipedia. org/ wiki/ Esquisse_d%27un_Programme
[19] http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown
[20] http:/ / www. informatics. bangor. ac. uk/ ~tporter/
[21] http:/ / www. mccme. ru/ free-books/ grothendieck/ RS. html
[22] http:/ / kolmogorov. unex. es/ ~navarro/ res/ preludio. pdf
[23] http:/ / kolmogorov. unex. es/ ~navarro/ res/ carta. pdf
[24] http:/ / kolmogorov. unex. es/ ~navarro/ res/ clef1-6. pdf
[25] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ GrothendieckCategory. html
References
• Cartier, Pierre (1998), "La Folle Journée, de Grothendieck à Connes et Kontsevich —
Évolution des Notions d'Espace et de Symétrie", Les Relations entre les Mathématiques
et la Physique Théorique — Festschrift for the 40th anniversary of the IHÉS, Institut des
Hautes Études Scientifiques, pp. 11–19
• Cartier, Pierre (2001),
"http://www.ams.org/bull/2001-38-04/S0273-0979-01-00913-2/S0273-0979-01-00913-2.pdf|A
mad day's work: from Grothendieck to Connes and Kontsevich The evolution of concepts
of space and symmetry", Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 38 (4): 389–408, doi:
10.1090/S0273-0979-01-00913-2 (http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 1090/ S0273-0979-01-00913-2),
http:/ / www. ams. org/ bull/ 2001-38-04/ S0273-0979-01-00913-2/
S0273-0979-01-00913-2. pdf. An English translation of Cartier (1998)
• Deligne, Pierre (1998),
http://smf.emath.fr/Publications/SeminairesCongres/1998/3/pdf/smf_sem-cong_3_11-19.pdf|"Quelques
idées maîtresses de l'œuvre de A. Grothendieck", Matériaux pour l'histoire des
mathématiques au XXe siècle – Actes du colloque à la mémoire de Jean Dieudonné (Nice
1996), Société Mathématique de France, pp. 11–19
• Dieudonné, Jean Alexandre (1990), "De L'Analyse Fonctionelle aux Fondaments de la
Géométrie Algébrique", in Cartier, Pierre et al., Tho Grothendieck Festschrift, Volume 1,
Birkhäuser, pp. 1–14, ISBN 9780817645663
• Jackson, Allyn (2004), 
"http://www.ams.org/notices/200409/fea-grothendieck-part1.pdf|Comme Appelé du Néant 
— As If Summoned from the Void: The Life of Alexandre Grothendieck I", Notices of the

Alexander Grothendieck
674
American Mathematical Society 51 (4): 1038–1056, http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/
200409/ fea-grothendieck-part1. pdf
• Jackson, Allyn (2004),
"http://www.ams.org/notices/200410/fea-grothendieck-part2.pdf|Comme Appelé du Néant
— As If Summoned from the Void: The Life of Alexandre Grothendieck II", Notices of the
American Mathematical Society 51 (10): 1196–1212, http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/
200410/ fea-grothendieck-part2. pdf
• Rehmeyer, Julie (May 9, 2008),
"http://www.sciencenews.org/view/generic/id/31898/title/Sensitivity_to_the_harmony_of_things|Sensiti
to the Harmony of Things", Science News, http:/ / www. sciencenews. org/ view/ generic/
id/ 31898/ title/ Sensitivity_to_the_harmony_of_things
• Scharlau, Winfred, http://www.scharlau-online.de/ag_1.html|Wer ist Alexander
Grothendieck?: Anarchie,Mathematik, Spiritualität, http:/ / www. scharlau-online. de/
ag_1. html Three-volume biography.
• Scharlau, Winifred (September 2008), written at Oberwolfach, Germany,
"http://www.ams.org/notices/200808/tx080800930p.pdf|Who is Alexander Grothendieck",
Notices of the American Mathematical Society (Providence, RI: American Mathematical
Society) 55 (8): 930–941, ISSN 1088-9477 (http:/ / worldcat. org/ issn/ 1088-9477), OCLC
34550461 (http:/ / worldcat. org/ oclc/ 34550461), http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/
200808/ tx080800930p. pdf, retrieved on 2008-09-02
External links
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Grothendieck.html|"Alexander
Grothendieck", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Alexander Grothendieck (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=31245)
at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
• Grothendieck Circle (http:/ / www. math. jussieu. fr/ ~leila/ grothendieckcircle/ index.
php), collection of mathematical and biographical information, photos, links to his
writings
• Grothendieck Circle discussion Forum (http:/ / gavrilov. akatov. com/ Grothendieck)
• Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques (http:/ / www. ihes. fr)
• The origins of `Pursuing Stacks' (http:/ / www. bangor. ac. uk/ r. brown/ pstacks. htm)
This is an account of how `Pursuing Stacks' was written in response to a correspondence
in English with Ronnie Brown and Tim Porter at Bangor, which continued until 1991.
• Récoltes et Semailles (http:/ / acm. math. spbu. ru/ RS/ ) in French.
• Spanish translation (http:/ / kolmogorov. unex. es/ ~navarro/ res/ ) of "Récoltes et
Semailles" et "Le Clef des Songes" and other Grothendieck's texts
• short bio (http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200808/ tx080800930p. pdf) from Notices of
the American Mathematical Society
Persondata
NAME
Grothendieck, Alexander
ALTERNATIVE NAMES
SHORT DESCRIPTION
Mathematician
DATE OF BIRTH
March 28, 1928 (age 81)

Alexander Grothendieck
675
PLACE OF BIRTH
Berlin, Germany
DATE OF DEATH
,
PLACE OF DEATH
Heinz Hopf
Heinz Hopf (on the right) in
Oberwolfach, together with Hellmuth
Kneser
Heinz Hopf (November 19, 1894 – June 3, 1971) was a
German mathematician born in Gräbschen, Germany
(now Grabiszyn, part of Wrocław, Poland). He attended
Dr. Karl Mittelhaus' higher boys' school from 1901 to
1904, and then entered the König-Wilhelm- Gymnasium
in Breslau. He showed mathematical talent from an
early age. In 1913 he entered the Silesian Friedrich
Wilhelm University where he attended lectures by Ernst
Steinitz, Kneser, Max Dehn, Erhard Schmidt, and
Rudolf Sturm. When World War I broke out in 1914,
Hopf eagerly enlisted. He was wounded twice and
received the iron cross (first class) in 1918.
In 1920, Hopf moved to Berlin to continue his
mathematical education. He studied under Ludwig
Bieberbach, receiving his doctorate in 1925. In his
dissertation, Connections between topology and metric
of manifolds (German Über Zusammenhänge zwischen
Topologie und Metrik von Mannigfaltigkeiten), he
proved that any simply connected complete Riemannian
3-manifold of constant curvature is globally isometric to
Euclidean, spherical, or hyperbolic space. He also studied the indices of zeros of vector
fields on hypersurfaces, and connected their sum to curvature. Some six months later he
gave a new proof that the sum of the indices of the zeros of a vector field on a manifold is
independent of the choice of vector field and equal to the Euler characteristic of the
manifold. This theorem is now called the Poincaré-Hopf theorem.
Hopf spent the year after his doctorate at Göttingen, where David Hilbert, Richard Courant,
Carl Runge, and Emmy Noether were working. While there he met Paul Alexandrov and
began a lifelong friendship.
In 1926 Hopf moved back to Berlin, where he gave a course in combinatorial topology. He
spent the academic year 1927/28 at Princeton University on a Rockefeller fellowship with
Alexandrov. Solomon Lefschetz, Oswald Veblen and J.W. Alexander were all at Princeton at
the time. At this time Hopf discovered the Hopf invariant of maps 
. and proved
that the Hopf fibration has invariant 1. In the summer of 1928 Hopf returned to Berlin and
began working with Alexandrov, at the suggestion of Courant, on a book on topology. Three
volumes were planned, but only one was finished. It was published in 1935.
In October 1928 Hopf married Anja von Mickwitz (1891 - 1967). The next year he declined
a job offer from Princeton. In 1931 Hopf took Hermann Weyl's position at ETH, in Zürich.

Heinz Hopf
676
Hopf received another invitation to Princeton in 1940, but he declined it. Two years later,
however, he was forced to file for Swiss citizenship after his property was confiscated by
Nazi authorities.
In 1946/47 and 1955/56 Hopf visited the United States, staying at Princeton and giving
lectures at New York University and Stanford University. He served as president of the
International Mathematical Union from 1955 to 1958. He received honorary doctorates
from Princeton, Freiburg i. Br., Manchester, Sorbonne at Paris, Brussels, and Lausanne.
See also
• Hopf algebra
• Hopf bifurcation (actually was done by Eberhard Hopf)
• Hopf bundle
• Hopf conjecture
• Hopf link
• H-space
• Hopf–Rinow theorem
External links
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Hopf.html|"Heinz Hopf", MacTutor
History of Mathematics archive.
• Heinz Hopf [1] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
Academic Genealogy
Notable teachers
Notable students
Ludwig Bieberbach
Erhard Schmidt
Beno Eckmann
Hans Freudenthal
Werner Gysin
Friedrich Hirzebruch
Heinz Huber
Michel Kervaire
Willi Rinow
Hans Samelson
Eduard Stiefel
References
[1] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=17409

Maxim Kontsevich
677
Maxim Kontsevich
Maxim Kontsevich
Born
25 August 1964
Russia
Citizenship
France
Fields
Mathematics
Institutions
Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques
University of Miami
Alma mater
Moscow State University, mexmat
Doctoral advisor
Don Bernard Zagier
Notable awards
Fields Medal (1998)
Crafoord Prize (2008)
Maxim Lvovich Kontsevich (Russian: Максим Львович Концевич) (born 25 August 1964) is a
Russian mathematician. He received a Fields Medal in 1998, at the 23rd International
Congress of Mathematicians in Berlin. He also received a Crafoord Prize in 2008.
Biography
Born into the family of Lev Rafailovich Kontsevich – Soviet orientalist and author of the
Kontsevich system. After ranking second in the All-Union Mathematics Olympiads, he
attended Moscow State University but left without a degree in 1985 to become a researcher
at the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission in Moscow [1]. In 1992 he
received his Ph.D. at the University of Bonn under Don Bernard Zagier. His thesis claims to
prove a conjecture by Edward Witten that two quantum gravitational models are
equivalent. Currently he is a Professor at the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques
(IHÉS) in Bures-sur-Yvette, France and Distinguished Professor at University of Miami in
Coral Gables, Florida, U.S..
His work concentrates on geometric aspects of mathematical physics, most notably on knot
theory, quantization, and mirror symmetry. His most famous result is a formal deformation
quantization that holds for any Poisson manifold. He also introduced knot invariants defined
by complicated integrals analogous to Feynman integrals. In topological field theory, he
introduced the moduli space of stable maps, which may be considered a mathematically
rigorous formulation of the Feynman integral for topological string theory. These results
are a part of his "contributions to four problems of geometry" for which he was awarded the
Fields Medal in 1998.

Maxim Kontsevich
678
See also
• Kontsevich integral
• Homological mirror symmetry
• Motivic integration
References
• Fields Medal citation [2] at the website of the 2002 International Congress of
Mathematicians [3] held in Beijing.
• Taubes, Clifford Henry (1998) "The work of Maxim Kontsevich". In Proceedings of the
International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. I (Berlin, 1998). Doc. Math., Extra Vol. I,
119–126.
External links
• Maxim Kontsevich [4] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
• AMS Profile of Maxim Kontsevich [5]
References
[1] http:/ / www. berkeley. edu/ news/ berkeleyan/ 1994/ 1012/ math. html
[2] http:/ / www. icm2002. org. cn/ general/ prize/ medal/ 1998. htm#Maxim
[3] http:/ / www. icm2002. org. cn/
[4] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=26861
[5] http:/ / www. ams. org/ featurecolumn/ archive/ kontsevich. html
Otto Hermann Künneth
Otto Hermann Lorenz Künneth (July 6, 1892 Neustadt an der Haardt – May 7, 1975
Erlangen) was a German mathematician and renowned algebraic topologist, best known for
his contribution to what is now known as the Künneth theorem.
His 
1922 
doctoral 
thesis 
was 
titled 
"Über 
die 
Bettischen 
Zahlen 
einer
Produktmannigfaltigkeit" (University of Erlangen, supervised by Heinrich Franz Friedrich
Tietze).
Künneth participated in the First World War and was captured by British forces.
Sources
• Haupt, Otto: Hermann Künneth zum Gedenken, JDMV 78 (1976) 61–66; Pogg. VI, VIIa,
VIII.
External links
• Otto Hermann Künneth [1] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
References
[1] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=65471

Saunders Mac Lane
679
Saunders Mac Lane
Saunders Mac Lane
Saunders Mac Lane (4 August 1909, Taftville,
Connecticut – 14 April 2005, San Francisco) was an
American mathematician who cofounded category
theory with Samuel Eilenberg.
Career
Mac Lane was christened "Leslie Saunders MacLane",
but "Leslie" fell into disuse because his parents, Donald
MacLane and Winifred Saunders, came to dislike it. He
began inserting a space into his surname because his
first wife found it difficult to type the name without a
space.[1]
Mac Lane earned a BA from Yale University in 1930,
and an MA from the University of Chicago in 1931.
During this period, he published his first scientific
paper, 
in 
physics 
and 
co-authored 
with 
Irving
Langmuir. He attended the University of Göttingen,
1931–1933, studying logic and mathematics under Paul Bernays, Emmy Noether and
Hermann Weyl. Göttingen's Mathematisches Institut awarded him the Ph.D. in 1934.
From 1934 through 1938, Mac Lane held short term appointments at Harvard University,
Cornell University, and the University of Chicago. He then held a tenure track appointment
at Harvard, 1938–1947, before spending the rest of his career at the University of Chicago.
In 1944 and 1945, he also directed Columbia University's Applied Mathematics Group,
which was involved in the war effort as a contractor for the Applied Mathematics Panel.
Mac Lane served as vice president of the National Academy of Sciences and the American
Philosophical Society, and as president of the American Mathematical Society. While
presiding over the Mathematical Association of America in the 1950s, he initiated its
activities aimed at improving the teaching of modern mathematics. He was a member of the
National Science Board, 1974–1980, advising the American government. In 1976, he led a
delegation of mathematicians to China to study the conditions affecting mathematics there.
Mac Lane was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1949, and received the
National Medal of Science in 1989.
Contributions
After a thesis in mathematical logic, his early work was in field theory and valuation theory.
He wrote on valuation rings and Witt vectors, and separability in infinite field extensions.
He started writing on group extensions in 1942, and began his epochal collaboration with
Samuel Eilenberg in 1943, resulting in what are now called Eilenberg–Mac Lane spaces
K(G,n), having a single non-trivial homotopy group G in dimension n. This work opened the
way to group cohomology in general.
After introducing, via the Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms, the abstract approach to homology 
theory, he and Eilenberg originated category theory in 1945. He is especially known for his

Saunders Mac Lane
680
work on coherence theorems. A recurring feature of category theory, abstract algebra, and
of some other mathematics as well, is the use of diagrams, consisting of arrows
(morphisms) linking objects, such as products and coproducts. According to McLarty
(2005), this diagrammatic approach to contemporary mathematics largely stems from Mac
Lane (1948).
Mac Lane had an exemplary devotion to writing approachable texts, starting with his very
influential A Survey of Modern Algebra, coauthored in 1941 with Garrett Birkhoff. From
then on, it was possible to teach elementary modern algebra to undergraduates using an
English text. His Categories for the Working Mathematician remains the definitive
introduction to category theory.
Mac Lane supervised the Ph.Ds of, among many others, David Eisenbud, William Howard,
Irving Kaplansky, Michael Morley, Anil Nerode, Robert Solovay, and John G. Thompson.
In addition to reviewing a fair bit of his mathematical output, the obituary articles McLarty
(2005, 2007) clarify Mac Lane's contributions to the philosophy of mathematics. Mac Lane
(1986) is an approachable introduction to his views on this subject.
Books by Mac Lane
• 1997 (1941). A Survey of Modern Algebra (with Garrett Birkhoff). A K Peters. ISBN
1-56881-068-7
• 1948, "Groups, categories and duality," Proceedings of the Nat. Acad. of Sciences of the
USA 34: 263–67.
• 1995 (1963). Homology, Springer (Classics in Mathematics) ISBN 978-0387586625
(Originally, Band 114 of Die Grundlehren Der Mathematischen Wissenschaften in
Einzeldarstellungen.) AMS review. [2]
• 1999 (1967). Algebra (with Garrett Birkhoff). Chelsea. ISBN 0-8218-1646-2
• 1998 (1972). Categories for the Working Mathematician, Springer (Graduate Texts in
Mathematics) ISBN 0-387-98403-8
• 1986. Mathematics, Form and Function. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-96217-4
• 1992. Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: A First Introduction to Topos Theory (with Ieke
Moerdijk). ISBN 0-387-97710-4
• 2005. Saunders Mac Lane: A Mathematical Autobiography. A K Peters. ISBN
1-56881-150-0
Biographical
• McLarty, Colin, 2005, "Saunders Mac Lane (1909–2005): His Mathematical Life and
Philosophical Works, [3]" Philosophia Mathematica 13: 237-51. With selected bibliography
emphasizing Mac Lane's philosophical writings.
• --------, 2007, "The Last Mathematician from Hilbert's Göttingen: Saunders Mac Lane as
Philosopher of Mathematics, [4]", British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 58(1):
77-112.

Saunders Mac Lane
681
See also
• From Action to Mathematics per Mac Lane
Footnotes
[1] Mac Lane (2005), p. 6.
[2] http:/ / www. ams. org/ bull/ 2000-37-01/ S0273-0979-99-00847-2/ S0273-0979-99-00847-2. pdf
[3] http:/ / philmat. oxfordjournals. org/ cgi/ content/ full/ 13/ 3/ 237
[4] http:/ / bjps. oxfordjournals. org/ cgi/ content/ short/ 58/ 1/ 77
External links
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/MacLane.html|"Saunders Mac
Lane", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Obituary press release (http:/ / www-news. uchicago. edu/ releases/ 05/ 050421. maclane.
shtml) from the University of Chicago.
• Photographs of Mac Lane, (http:/ / www. iti. cs. tu-bs. de/ ~koslowj/ cgi-bin/
p0454?MacLane-0/ idx& 256)1984–99.
• Saunders Mac Lane (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=834) at the
Mathematics Genealogy Project
William Lawvere
Francis William Lawvere (b. February 9, 1937 in Muncie, Indiana) is a mathematician
known for his work in category theory, topos theory and the philosophy of mathematics.
Biography
Born February 9, 1937 in Muncie, Indiana, Lawvere studied continuum mechanics as an
undergraduate with Clifford Truesdell. While teaching a course on functional analysis for
Truesdell he learned of category theory from the topology text of John L. Kelley. Lawvere
found it a promising framework for simple rigorous axioms for the physical ideas of
Truesdell and Walter Noll. Truesdell, who had an appointment in mathematics himself,
supported Lawvere's application to study more pure mathematics with Samuel Eilenberg, a
founder of category theory, at Columbia University in 1960.
Before completing the Ph.D. Lawvere spent a year in Berkeley as an informal student of
model theory and set theory, following lectures by Alfred Tarski and Dana Scott. In his first
teaching position at Reed College he was instructed to devise courses in calculus and
abstract algebra from a foundational perspective. He tried to use the then current
axiomatic set theory but found it unworkable for undergraduates, so he instead developed
the first axioms for the more relevant composition of mappings of sets. He later streamlined
those axioms into the Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets (1964) which became a
key ingredient (the constant case) of elementary topos theory.

William Lawvere
682
Work
Lawvere completed his Ph.D at Columbia in 1963 with Eilenberg. His dissertation
introduced the Category of Categories in his thesis as a framework for the semantics of
algebraic theories. During 1964-1967 at the Forschungsinstitut fuer Mathematik at the ETH
in Zurich he worked on the Category of Categories and was especially influeced by Pierre
Gabriel's seminars at Oberwolfach on Grothendieck's foundation of algebraic geometry. He
then taught at the University of Chicago, working with Mac Lane, and at the City University
of New York Graduate Center (CUNY), working with Alex Heller. His Chicago lectures on
categorical dynamics were a further step toward topos theory and his CUNY lectures on
hyperdoctrines advanced categorical logic especially using his 1963 discovery that
existential and universal quantifiers can be characterized as special cases of adjoint
functors.
Back in Zurich for 1968-69 he proposed elementary (first-order) axioms for toposes
generalizing the concept of the Grothendieck topos (see background and genesis of topos
theory and worked with the algebraic topologist Tierney to clarifying and applying this
theory. Tierney discovered major simplifications in the description of Grothendieck
"topologies". Kock later found further simplifications so that a topos can be described as a
category with products and equalizers in which the notions of map space and subobject are
representable. Lawvere had pointed out that a Grothendieck topology can be entirely
described as an endomorphism of the subobject representor, and Tierney showed that the
conditions it needs to satisfy are just idempotence and the preservation of finite
intersections. These "topologies" are important in both algebraic geometry and model
theory because they determine the subtoposes as sheaf-categories.
Dalhousie University in 1969 set up a group of 15 Killam-supported researchers with
Lawvere at the head; but in 1971 it terminated the group. Lawvere was controversial for his
political opinions, for example, his opposition to the 1970 use of the War Measures Act ,
and for teaching the history of mathematics without permission. But in 1995 Dalhousie
hosted the celebration of 50 years of category theory with Lawvere and Saunders Mac Lane
present.
Lawvere ran a seminar in Perugia, Italy (1972-1974) and especially worked on various kinds
of enriched category. For example a metric space can be regarded as an enriched category.
From 1974 until his retirement in 2000 he was professor of mathematics at University at
Buffalo, often collaborating with Stephen Schanuel. In 1977 he was elected him to the
Martin professorship in mathematics for 5 years, which made possible the meeting on
"Categories in Continuum Physics" in 1982. Clifford Truesdell participated in that meeting,
as did several other researchers in the rational foundations of continuum physics and in the
synthetic differential geometry which had evolved from the spatial part of Lawvere's
categorical dynamics program). Lawvere continues to work on his 50-year quest for a
rigorous flexible base for physical ideas, free of unnecessary analytic complications. He is
now professor emeritus of mathematics and adjunct professor emeritus of philosophy at
Buffalo.

William Lawvere
683
Selected books
• 1986 Categories in Continuum Physics (Buffalo, N.Y. 1982), edited by Lawvere and
Stephen H. Schanuel (with Introduction by Lawvere pp 1-16), Springer Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 1174. ISBN 3-540-16096-5
• 1997 Conceptual Mathematics: A First Introduction to Categories (with Stephen H.
Schanuel). Cambridge Uni. Press. ISBN 0-521-47817-0
• 2003 (2002) Sets for Mathematics (with Robert Rosebrugh). Cambridge Uni. Press. ISBN
0-521-01060-8
External links
• [1] Includes reprints of seven of Lawvere's fundamental articles, among them his
dissertation and his first full treatment of the category of sets. Those two had circulated
only as mimeographs.
• Homepage. [2] Includes bibliography and downloadable papers, Ph.D. thesis.
• William Lawvere [3] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
• Photograph [4]
• John Baez's This Week's Finds in Mathematical Physics (Week 200) [5]
References
[1] http:/ / www. tac. mta. ca/ tac/ reprints/ index. html
[2] http:/ / www. acsu. buffalo. edu/ ~wlawvere/
[3] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=18947
[4] http:/ / andrej. com/ mathematicians/ L/ Lawvere_William. html
[5] http:/ / math. ucr. edu/ home/ baez/ week200. html

Egbert van Kampen
684
Egbert van Kampen
Egbert Rudolf van Kampen (May 28, 1908, Berchem, Belgium – February 11, 1942,
Baltimore, Maryland) was a mathematician. He made important contributions to topology,
especially to the study of fundamental groups.
Van Kampen received his Ph.D. degree from Leiden University in 1929. His dissertation,
entitled Die kombinatorische Topologie und die Dualitaetssaetze, was written under the
direction of Willem van der Woude.
In 1931 van Kampen left Europe and travelled to the United States to take up the position
which he had been offered at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. There he
met Oscar Zariski who had taught at Johns Hopkins University as a Johnston Scholar from
1927 until 1929 when he had joined the Faculty. Zariski had been working on the
fundamental group of the complement of an algebraic curve, and he had found generators
and relations for the fundamental group but was unable to show that he had found
sufficient relations to give a presentation for the group. Van Kampen solved the problem,
showing that Zariski's relations were sufficient, and the result is now known as the
Zariski–van Kampen theorem. This led van Kampen to formulate and prove what is
nowadays known as the Seifert–van Kampen theorem.
External links
• Egbert van Kampen [1] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Van_Kampen.html|"Egbert van
Kampen", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
References
[1] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=75364

Grigory Perelman
685
Grigory Perelman
1. REDIRECTGrigori Perelman
Nicolae Popescu
Nicolae Popescu (born 22 September 1937, at Strehaia, Romania) is a Romanian
mathematician and Emeritus Professor. Popescu was elected a Member of the Romanian
Academy in 1992, and he is best known for his contributions to Algebra and the theory of
abelian categories. Since 1964 he collaborated on the characterization of abelian categories
with the well-known French mathematician Pierre Gabriel. His areas of expertise are:
Category theory, abelian categories with Applications to Rings and Modules, Adjoint
Functors [1] and Limits/Colimits [2] ,Theory of Rings, Fields and Polynomials, and Valuation
Theory; he also has interests and published in the following areas: Algebraic Topology,
Algebraic Geometry, Commutative Algebra, K-Theory, Class-Field theory, and Algebraic
Function Theory. He published between 1962 and 2008 more than 102 papers in
peer-reviewed, mathematics journals, several monographs on the theory of sheaves, and
also six books on abelian category theory and abstract algebra. In a Grothendieck-like,
energetic style, he initiated and provided scientific leadership to several seminars on
category theory[3] , sheaves and abstract algebra which resulted in a continuous stream of
high-quality mathematical publications in international, peer-reviewed mathematics
journals by several members participating in his Seminar series. His book Abelian
Categories with Applications to Rings and Modules[4] continues to provide valuable
information to mathematicians around the world. His recent contributions have also
branched into valuation and number theory.
Biography
Popescu is married and has three children. He earned his M.S. degree in mathematics in
1964, and his Ph.D. degree in mathematics in 1967, both at the University of Bucharest. He
was awarded a D. Phil. degree (Doctor Docent) in 1972 by the University of Bucharest.
Presently, he continues his mathematics studies at the Institute of Mathematics of the
Romanian Academy in the Algebra research group [5] and also has international
collaborations on three continents. One finds from conversations with Academician Popescu
that he shares many moral, ethical and religious values with another famous mathematician
French-German-Jewish Alexander Grothendieck who visited the School of Mathematics in
Bucharest in 1968. Like Grothendieck he has a long-standing interest in category theory,
number theory, practicing Yoga, and supporting promising young mathematicians in his
fields of interest. He also supported the early developments of category theory applications
in relational biology and mathematical biophysics/mathematical biology.

Nicolae Popescu
686
Academic positions
Popescu was appointed as a Lecturer at the University of Bucharest in 1968 where he
taught graduate students until 1972. Since 1964, he also held a Research Professorship [6]
at the Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy, which institute was ruthlessly
eliminated by former dictator and president of S.R. Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu, in 1976
for reasons related to his daughter Zoe Cheaushescu who was 'hired' by the Mathematics
Institute in Bucharest two years before.
Notes
[1] http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ AdjointFunctor. html
[2] http:/ / planetmath. org/ encyclopedia/ AdjointFunctor. html
[3] http:/ / planetphysics. org/ encyclopedia/ FunctorialAlgebraicGeometry. html Seminars on Algebraic Geometry
and Category theory
[4] Nicolae Popescu. Abelian Categories with Applications to Rings and Modules, Academic Press, L. M. S.
Monograph No.3, London, 1973.,ISBN 0125615507 (http:/ / www. lib. iastate. edu:81/ ipac20/ ipac.
jsp?session=1WB345344H890. 711450& profile=parks& source=~!horizon& view=items&
uri=full=3100001~!47305~!0& ri=1& aspect=basic_search& menu=search& ipp=20& spp=20& staffonly=&
term=Modules+ (Algebra)& index=PSUBJ& uindex=& aspect=basic_search& menu=search& ri=1#focus)
[5] http:/ / www. imar. ro/ prez/ prez_algebra. html
[6] http:/ / www. imar. ro/ ~nipopesc/
Selected Publications
Peer-reviewed articles
1. On the homology and homotopy of CW-complexes. (orig. title: "Asupra omologiei si
omotopiei C.W. - complexelor", Studii si cercetari Matem., 1962. (with D. Burghelea)
2. Generalized Differential Operators (orig. title: Diferentiale generalizate, Comunicarile
Acad. R.S.R., Vol. 13, Nr. 6 (1963), 523-528. (with C. Banica)
3. Modules with generalized differentials (orig. title: Module cu diferentiala generalizata,
St. Cerc. Mat. Tom. 16 Nr. 6. (1964), 673-804.
4. Modules avec différentielle généralisée Rev. Roum. Math. Pures et Appl. Nr. 6 (1964)
5. Quelques considérations sur l'exactitude des foncteurs, Bull. Math. Soc. Sci. Math. Phis.
de la R. P. R. 7 (1963), 144-147. (with C. Banica)
6. Quotient categories (orig. title: Categorii cât), St. Cerc. Matem. 17 (1965), 951-985.
(with C. Banica)
7. Sur les catégories preabéliens, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures Appl., 10(1965), 621-633. (with
C. Banica)
8. Caractérisation des catégories abéliennes avec générateurs et limites inductives
exactes, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 258(1964), 4188-4191. (with Pierre Gabriel)
9. La localisation pour des sites, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures et Appl. 10(1965), 1031-1044.
10. La structure des modules injectifs sur an anneau á idéal principal, Bull. Math. de la
Soc. Sci. Math. Phys. de la RPR Tome 8(56), Nr. 1-2 (1964), 67-73. (with A. Radu)
11. Morphismes et co-morphismes des topos abéliens, Bull. Math. de la Soc. Sci. Math. de
la R.S.R. Tom 10(58) W 2 =4 (1996), 319-328. (with A. Radu).
12. Sur la structure des objets de certaines catégories abéliennes, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris
262(1966), 1295-1297. (with C. Nastasescu)
13. Quelques observations sur les topes abéliens, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures Appl.12 (1967),
553-563. (with C. Nastasescu)

Nicolae Popescu
687
14. Théorie générale de la décomposition, Rev. Roum Math. Pures et Appl. 12 (1967),
1365-1371.
15. Les anneaux semi-artiniens, Bull. Soc. Math. France 96 (1968) 357-368. (with C.
Nastasescu).
16. Sur les epimorphismes plants d'anneaux, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 268 (1969) 376-379.
(with T. Spircu).
17. On the localization ring of ring, J. of Algebra 15 (1970) 41-56. (with C. Nastasescu)
18. Quelques observations sur les morphismes plats des anneaux, J. Algebra 16(1970),
40-59. (with T. Spircu)
19. Le spectre gauche d'un anneau, J. Algebra 18(1971) 213-228.
20. Les quasi-ordres (á gauche) des anneaux, J. Algebra 17(1971), 474-481. (with D.
Spulber)
21. Les anneaux semi-noethériens, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 272 (1971), 1439-1441.
22. Sur les C. P. anneaux, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 272 (1971) 1493-1496.
23. Théorie de la décomposition primaire dans les anneaux semi-noethériens, J. Algebre
2399172), 482-492.
24. Some remarks about semi-artinian rings, Rev. Roumaine Math. Pures et Appl. 17, nr.
9(1973), 1413-1422. (with C. Vraciu)
25. Exemple de inele semi-artiniene, St. Cerc. Math. 26, nr.8 (1974), 1153-1157. (with T.
Spircu)
26. Quelques considérations sur les anneaux semi-artiniens commutatifs, C. R. Acad. Sci.
Paris 276(1973), 1545-1548.
27. Permanence Theorems for semi-artinian rings, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures et Appl. 21,
nr.2 (1976), 227-231. (with T. Spircu)
28. Sur la Structure des Anneaux Absolument plats commutatifs, J. Algebra 40 (1976),
364-383. (with C. Vraciu)
29. Sur l'anneau des quotients d'un anneau noethérien (à droite) par rapport au système
localisant associe à un idéal bilatéral premier, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris.
30. Some remarks about the regular ring associated to a commutative ring, Rev. Roumaine
Math. Pures et Appl. 23(1978), 269-277. (with C. Vraciu)
31. Sur la sous-catégorie localisant associée a un idéal bilatéral premier dans un anneau
noethérien (à droite), Rev. Roum. Math. Pures et Appl. T. XXVi, nr. 7 (1981), 1033-1042.
32. Sur un problème d'Arens et Kaplansky concernant la structure de quelques anneaux
absolument plats commutatifs, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures Appl., t. 27, nr.8 (1982), 867-874.
(with C. Vraciu)
33. Sur une classe de polynômes irréductibles, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris, t. 297 (1983), 9-11.
34. Galois Theory of permitted extensions of commutative regular rings, Bull. Math. Soc.
Sci. Math. R.S. Roumanie, t. 29 (77), nr.1 (1985), 121-135. (with C. Vraciu)
35. On Dedekind domains in infinite algebraic extensions, Rend. Sem. Math. Univ. Padova,
vol. 74 (1985), 39-44. (with C. Vraciu)
36. On a problem of Nagata in valuation theory, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures et Appl. 31
(1986), 639-641.
37. On subfields of k(X), Red. Sem. Mat. Univ. Padova, vol. 75 (1986), 257-273. (with V.
Alexandru)
38. On a class of intermediate Subfields, Studii si Cercetari Matematice, tom 39, Nr. 2
(1987), p.156-162. (with E.L. Popescu)

Nicolae Popescu
688
39. Sur une clase de prolongements a K(X) d'une valuation sur un corps K, Rev. Roum.
Math. Pures Appl. 33 (1988), 393-400. (with V. Alexandru)
40. A theorem of characterization of residual transcendental extensions of a valuation, J.
Math. Kyoto Univ. 28-4 (1988), 579-592. (with V. Alexandru and A. Zaharescu)
41. Sur la définition des prolongements résiduels transcendent d'une valuation sur un
corps K à K(X), Bull. Math. Soc. Sci. Math. Roumanie, t. 33 (1989), 257-264. (with E. L.
Popescu)
42. Minimal pairs of a residual transcendental extension of a valuation, J. Math. Kyoto,
Univ., Vol. 30, (1990), 207-225. (with V. Alexandru si A. Zaharescu)
43. All valuations on K(X), J. Math. Kyoto Univ., Vol. 30 (1990), 281-296. (with V. Alexandru
si A. Zaharescu)
44. On the residual transcendental extensions of a valuation. Key polynomials and
augmented valuation, Math. Tsukuba Univ. Vol. 15, No.1 (1991), 57-78. (with E.L.
Popescu)
45. On the extension of valuation on a field K to K(X), I Red. Sem. Mat. Univ. Padova, vol.
87 (1992), 151-168. (with C. Vraciu)
46. On the structure of the irreducible polynomials over local fields, J. Number Theory, Vol.
52 No.1 (1993), 98-118. (with A. Zaharescu)
47. The valuations on k(x,y) which are trivial on k, Proc. Conf. Algebra, Constanta, 1994.
48. Some elementary remarks about n-local fields, Rend. Sem. Math. Univ. Padova, Vol. 91
(1994). (with V. Alexandru)
49. A characterization of Generalized Dedekind Domains, Bull. Math. de la Soc. Sci. Math
de la Roumanie, tome 35 (83), Nr.1-2 (1991), 139-141. (with E. L. Popescu)
50. On a class of Prüfer domains, Rev. Roumaine Math. Pures et Appl. 29 (1984), 777-786.
51. Sur une classe d'anneaux qui généralisent les anneaux de Dedekind, J. of Algebra,
Vol.173, (1995), 44-66. (with M. Fontana)
52. On the extension of a valuation on a Field K to K(X), II, Rend. Sem. Mat, Univ. Padova,
Vol 96 (1996), 1-14. (with C. Vraciu)
53. On the roots of a class of lifting polynomials, Fachbereich Math. Univ. Hagen, Band 63
(1998), 586-600. (with A. Zaharescu)
54. Completion of a r. t. extension of a local field, I, Math. Z., Vol 221 (1996), 675-682.
(with V. Alexandru and A. Popescu)
55. Completion of a r. t. extension of a local field”, II, Rend. Sem. Mat. Univ. Padova,
(1998). (with V. Alexandru and A. Popescu)
56. On the main invariant of an element over a local field, Portugalia Mathematica, Vol. 54,
Fasc. 1 (1997) 73-83. (with A. Zaharescu)
57. On the closed subfields of Cp, J. Number Theory, Vol. 68 (1997), 131-150. (with V.
Alexandru and A. Zaharescu)
58. Sur une classe d'anneaux de Prüfer avec groupe de classes de torsion, Comm. Alg., 23
(1975), 4521-4533. (with M. Fontana)
59. On a class of Domains Having Prüfer Integral closure, The FOR-Domains, Commutative
ring Theory, Vol. 185, Lecture Notes in Pure and Appl. Math. Dekker 1996. (with M.
Fontana)
60. Invertible ideals and Picard group of generalized Dedekind domains, J. Pure and Appl.
Alg., Vol 135, Nr. 3 (1999), 237-251. (with S. Gabelli)
61. The Lüroth's Theorem for some complete fields, in Abelian Groups, Module Theory and
Topology, Editors Dikranian-Salce, Marcel Dekker Inc., 1998, 55-58. (with V. Alexandru)

Nicolae Popescu
689
62. On minimal pairs and residually transcendental extensions of valuations (Mathematika,
49(2002), 93-106 ) (with S. Khanduja and K.W. Roggenkamp)
63. Nagata Transform and Localizing Systems, Comm. in Algebra, 30(5), (2002),
2297-2308. (with Marco Fontana)
64. Spectral extensions of p-adic valuation, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures et Apll, Vol. 46, Nr.6
(2001), 805-817. (with E. L. Popescu and C. Vraciu)
65. Trace on Cp, J. Number Theory 88 (2001), Nr.1, 13-48. (with V. Alexandru and A.
Zaharescu)
66. Spectral norms on valued fields, Math. Z., Vol 238 (2001), 101-114. (with V. Pasol and
A. Popescu)
67. The generating degree of Cp, Canad. Math. Bull. Vol. 44, (2001), 3-11. (with V.
Alexandru and A. Zaharescu)
68. Metric invariants in BdR+ associated to differential operators, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures
Appl. 33 (1988), 393-400. (with V. Alexandru and A. Zaharescu)
69. Good elements and metric invariants in BdR+, J. Math. Kyoto Univ, vol 43, Nr. 1
(2003), 125-137. (with V. Alexandru and A. Zaharescu)
70. On afine subdomains (to appear) (with G. Groza)
71. A representation theorem for a class of rigid analytic functions, (with V. Alexandru and
A. Zaharescu) (J. Th. Nombres Bordeaux 15 (2003), 639-650.
72. On the spectral norm of Algebraic Numbers (to appear Math. Nachtr.) (with A. Popescu
and A. Zaharescu)
73. Universal Property of the Kaplansky Ideal Transform and Affiness of Open Subsets, J.
Pure and Appl. Alg., 173, (2002), 121-134. (with Marco Fontana)
74. Metric invariants over Henselian valued Fields, J. Of Algebra, 266 (1), (2003), 14-26.
(with A. Popescu and A. Zaharescu)
75. Chains of metric invariants over a local field, Acta Arithmetica, 103 (1), (2002), 27-40.
(with A. Popescu, M. Vajaitu and A. Zaharescu)
76. Transcendental divisors and their critical functions, Manuscripta Math., 110 (4),
(2003), 527-541. (with A. Popescu and A. Zaharescu)
77. The Galois Action on plane Compacts, J. Of Algebra, 270, (2003), 238-248. (with A.
Popescu and A. Zaharescu)
78. Total valuation rings of K(X, σ) containing K, Communications in Algebra, Volume 30,
Number 11 (2002), 5535 – 5546 (with S. Kobayashi, H. Marubayashi and C. Vraciu)
79. Total valuation Rings of Ore extensions, Result Math., 43 (2003), 373-379. (with S.
Kobayashi, H. Marubayashi and C. Vraciu and G. Xie)
80. Non-commutative valuation rings of the quotient artinian ring of a skew polynomial
ring, Algebra and Representation Theory (2005), 8; 57-68 (with S. Kobayashi, H.
Marubayashi and C. Vraciu and G. Xie)
81. The structure of localization systems of a class of Prüfer Domain (to appear) (with H.
Marubayashi and E. L Popescu)
82. On the existence of trace for elements of Cp Algebra and Representation Theory
(2006), 9; 47-66 (with M. Vajaitu and A. Zaharescu)
83. Trace Series on Qk, Result in Math., 43 (2003), Nr 3-4, 331-341 (with A. Popescu and A.
Zaharescu)
84. A Galois Theory for the Banach Algebra of continuous symmetric functions on absolute
Galois Group Result. Math. 45, No. 3-4, 349-358 (2004) (with A. Popescu and A.
Zaharescu)

Nicolae Popescu
690
85. On the continuity of the trace (Proceeding Romanian Academy, Series A, Volume 5,
Number 2 (2004), 117-122 (with V. Alexandru, E. L Popescu)
86. A new characterization of spectral extension of p-adic valuation, Proc. Conference in
Math. Lahore, 18-20 mars 2004 (with E. L Popescu)
87. Norms on R[X1, ...., Xr] which are multiplicative von R (to appear in Resultate der
Mathematik (with G. Groza and A. Zaharescu)
88. All non–archimedean norms on K[X1, ...., Xr] (to appear) (with G. Groza and A.
Zaharescu)
89. On the structure of compact subsets of Cp (Acta Arithmetica, 123. 3, 253-266 (2006)
(with Alla Ditta Raza Choudary, and A. Popescu)
90. A basis of over, Rev. Roum. Math. Pures Appl. Tome LI, 51 (2006), 87-88. (with E. L.
Popescu)
91. The p-adic measure on the orbit of an element of Cp (to appear) (with V. Alexandru, M.
Vajaitu and A. Zaharescu)
92. Analytic Normal Basis Theorem (with V. Alexandru and A. Zaharescu) (to appear)
Monographs, peer-reviewed
1. Elements of the theory of sheaves (orig.title: Elemente de teoria fascicolelor I, St. Cerc.
Mat. (1966) 267-296.
2. Ibid. Elemente de teoria fascicolelor II, St. Cerc. Mat. (1966) 407-456.
3. Ibid. Elemente de teoria fascicolelor III, St. Cerc. Mat. (1966) 547-583.
4. Ibid. Elemente de teoria fascicolelor IV, St. Cerc. Mat. (1966) 647-669.
5. Ibid. Elemente de teoria fascicolelor V, St. Cerc. Mat. (1966) 945-991.
6. Ibid. Elemente de teoria fascicolelor VI, St. Cerc. Mat. (1967) 205-240.
Books
1. Elemente de teoria analitica a numerelor, Univ. Bucuresti, 1968.
2. Teoria categoriilor si teoria fascicolelor, Ed. Stiintifica, 1971.
3. Categorii Abeliene, Ed. Academiei, 1971.
4. Nicolae Popescu. Abelian categories with Applications to Rings and Modules, Academic
Press, L. M. S. Monograph No.3, London, 1973, ISBN=0125615507. (http:/ / www. lib.
iastate. edu:81/ ipac20/ ipac. jsp?session=1WB345344H890. 711450& profile=parks&
source=~!horizon& view=items& uri=full=3100001~!47305~!0& ri=1&
aspect=basic_search& menu=search& ipp=20& spp=20& staffonly=& term=Modules+
(Algebra)& index=PSUBJ& uindex=& aspect=basic_search& menu=search&
ri=1#focus)
5. Popescu, Nicolae; Popescu, Liliana Theory of categories. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
The Hague; Sijthoff & Noordhoff International Publishers, Alphen aan den Rijn, 1979.
x+337 pp. ISBN: 90-286-0168-6.
6. Selected topics in valuation theory (to appear).

Nicolae Popescu
691
External links
• Nicolae Popescu - Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy (http:/ / www.
imar. ro/ ~nipopesc/ )
• Nicolae Popescu --Biography (http:/ / planetphysics. org/ ?op=getobj& from=objects&
id=810)
Robert Rosen
See also arts and entertainment celebrity producer-writer-performer: Robert M.
Rosen, Robert Ozn
Robert Rosen
Robert Rosen (27 June, 1934, - 28 December,
1998, Rochester, New York) was an American
theoretical biologist and professor of Biophysics at
Dalhousie University.
Biography
Robert Rosen was born on June 27, 1934 in
Brownsville (a section of Brooklyn), in New York
City. He studied biology, mathematics, physics,
philosophy, and history-- especially the history of
science-- and eventually became a student of
physicist 
and 
theoretical 
biologist, 
Professor
Nicholas Rashevsky at the University of Chicago. He
received his PhD in Relational Biology from the
University of Chicago in 1959 and remained there until 1964.[1] In 1964 Rosen was offered
a full professorship with tenure at the University of Buffalo, now known as the State
University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo, holding a joint appointment at the Center for
Theoretical Biology. In 1970, he took a sabbatical and spent a year as a Visiting Fellow at
Robert Hutchins' Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, in Santa Barbara,
California. It was a seminal year for him, leading to the conception and development of
what he later called Anticipatory Systems Theory, a corollary of his larger theoretical work
on relational complexity, in which it is embedded. In 1975, he left Buffalo and accepted a
position at Dalhousie University, in Halifax, Nova Scotia, as a Killam Research Professor in
the Department of Physiology & Biophysics, where he remained until he took early
retirement in 1994.[2]
He was president of the Society for General Systems Research, (now the ISSS), in 1980-81.

Robert Rosen
692
Work
Rosen's research was concerned with the most fundamental aspects of biology, specifically
the question "What is life?" or "Why are living organisms alive?". Major themes in the work
of Robert Rosen were:
• developing a specific definition of complexity that is based on relations and, by extension,
principles of organization
• developing a rigorous theoretical foundation for living organisms as "anticipatory
systems"
Rosen came to realize that the contemporary model of physics - which is still based on the
Cartesian/Newtonian world of mechanisms - was inadequate to explain or describe the
behavior of biological systems; that is, one could not properly answer the question "what is
life?" from within a scientific foundation that is entirely reductionistic. Approaching
organisms with reductionistic scientific methods and practices always sacrifices the whole
in order to study the parts, but what Rosen discovered was that the whole could not be
recaptured once the organization had been destroyed. His conclusion was that the very
thing about living organisms biologists should be studying, the organization, was the first
aspect of all biological systems to be thrown away in scientific analysis. This is a limitation
of contemporary science when science regards the machine as a model for all systems in
the universe. Rosen came to regard the machine metaphor as the single biggest
impediment to scientific exploration of questions in biology and concluded that the
paradigm needs to be expanded beyond purely reductionist capabilities. In order to do this
properly, he said there must be a sound theoretical foundation underlying the expansion
and that relational complexity provided such a foundation. So it was that, rather than
biology being a mere subset of already-known physics, it turned out that biology had
profound lessons for physics, and science in general.[3]
Notion of the scientific model
The clarification of the notion of the scientific model: Rosen maintained that modeling is the
essence of science and of thought. His book Anticipatory Systems describes, in detail, what
he termed the modeling relation. He showed the deep differences between a true modeling
relation and a simulation, which is not based on such a relation. In biology he is known by
some for a class of relational models called "(M,R)-Systems" that he devised, which he said
capture the minimal capabilities a material system would have to manifest to justify calling
it a "alive". In this class of system, M stands for metabolism and R stands for Repair. Thus,
his mode for determining life or defining life in any given system is a functional one, not a
material one.
Relational biology
Rosen's work proposes a methodology he calls "relational analysis" which needs to be 
developed in addition to the current capability of reductionistic science. ("Relational" is a 
term he attributes to Nicholas Rashevsky.) Rosen’s "relational biology" maintains that 
organisms, indeed all systems, have a distinct quality called "organization" not captured by 
the language of reductionism. It has to do with more than purely structural or material 
aspects. For example, organization includes all relations between material parts, relations 
between the effects of interactions of the material parts, and relations with time and 
environment, to name a few. Many people sum up this aspect of complex systems by saying

Robert Rosen
693
that "The whole is more than the sum of the parts". Relations between parts and between
the effects of interactions must be considered as additional parts, in some sense.
Organization, Rosen says, must be independent from the material particles which seemingly
constitute a living system. As he put it: "The human body completely changes the matter it
is made of roughly every 8 weeks, through metabolism and repair. Yet, you're still you--
with all your memories, your personality... If science insists on chasing the particles, they
will follow them right through an organism and miss the organism entirely," (as told to his
daughter, Judith Rosen).
He goes very far in this direction claiming that when studying a complex system, we can
"throw away the matter and study the organization" to learn essential things about an
entire class of systems, in general. He supports this claim (actually it is a quote which he
also attributes to Rashevsky) based on the fact that living organisms are a class of systems
with an extremely wide range of material "ingredients", different structures, different
habitats, different modes of living and reproducing, and yet we are somehow able to
recognize them all as "living". In contrast, a study of the specific material details of any
given organism, or even of a whole species, will only tell us about how that type of
organism "does it". Such a study doesn't approach what is common to all living organisms,
i.e.; life. Relational approaches in biology allow us to study organisms in ways that preserve
the qualities we are trying to learn about.
Biochemistry and Genetics
Rosen also questioned many aspects of mainstream interpretations of biochemistry and
genetics. He objects to the idea that functional aspects in biological systems can be
investigated via a material focus. One example: Rosen disputes that the functional
capability of a biologically active protein can be investigated purely using the genetically
encoded sequence of amino acids. This is because, he said, a protein must undergo a
process of "folding" to attain its characteristic three-dimensional shape before it can
become functionally active in the system. Yet, only the amino acid sequence is genetically
coded. The mechanisms by which proteins fold are not completely known. He concluded,
based on examples such as this, that phenotype cannot always be directly attributed to
genotype and that the chemically active aspect of a biologically active protein relies on
more than the sequence of amino acids, from which it was constructed: There must be
other factors at work.
Questions about Rosen's arguments were raised in a paper authored by Christopher
Landauer and Kirstie L. Bellman which claims that some of the mathematical formulations
used by Rosen are problematic. (Note, by Judith Rosen, who owns the copyrights to her
father's books: Some of the confusion is due to known errata introduced into the book,
"Life, Itself," by the publisher. For example, the diagram that refers to "(M,R)-Systems" has
more than one error; errors which do not exist in Rosen's manuscript for the book. These
errata were made known to Columbia University Press when the company switched from
hardcover to paperback version of the book (in 2006) but the errors were not corrected and
remain in the paperback version as well. The book "Anticipatory Systems; Philosophical,
Mathematical, and Methodological Foundations" has the same diagram, correctly
represented.)

Robert Rosen
694
See also
• Autopoiesis
• system theory
• philosophy of science
Publications
Rosen has written several books and articles. A selection: [4]
• 1970, Dynamical Systems Theory in Biology New York: Wiley Interscience.
• 1970, Optimality Principles, Rosen Enterprises
• 1978, Fundamentals of Measurement and Representation of Natural Systems, Elsevier
Science Ltd,
• 1985, Anticipatory Systems: Philosophical, Mathematical and Methodological
Foundations. Pergamon Press.
• 1991, Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of
Life, Columbia University Press
Published posthumously:
• 2000, Essays on Life Itself, Columbia University Press.
• 2003, "Anticipatory Systems; Philosophical, Mathematical, and Methodolical
Foundations", Rosen Enterprises
• 2003, Rosennean Complexity, Rosen Enterprises.
• 2003, The Limits of the Limits Of Science, Rosen Enterprises
References
[1] (http:/ / www. rosen-enterprises. com/ RobertRosen/ rrosenautobio. html)
[2] In Memory Dr. Robert Rosen (http:/ / communications. medicine. dal. ca/ connection/ feb1999/ rosen. htm), feb
1999, retrieved Oct 2007.
[3] Robert Rosen - Biology, Complexity and Physics (http:/ / www. panmere. com/ rosen/ rosensum. htm)
[4] A complete Bibliography (http:/ / users. viawest. net/ ~keirsey/ rosenbiblio. html) of Robert Rosens
publications.
External links
• Rosen Enterprises (http:/ / www. rosen-enterprises. com) Judith Rosen's website
providing biographical information, discussion of, and reprints of the work of Robert
Rosen.
• (http:/ / www. rosen-enterprises. com/ RobertRosen/ rrosenautobio. html)
Autobiographical Reminiscences of Robert Rosen; about his educational background, his
philosophy of science, and his general point of view.
• Rosen: Complexity and Life (http:/ / www. panmere. com/ ''Robert) A website exploring
the work of Rosen.
• Robert Rosen: June 27, 1934 — December 30, 1998 (http:/ / www. people. vcu. edu/
~mikuleck/ Rosenreq. html) by Aloisius Louie.
• Robert Rosen: The well posed question and its answer: why are organisms different from
machines? (http:/ / www. people. vcu. edu/ ~mikuleck/ PPRISS3. html) An essay by
Donald C. Mikulecky.
• Paper (http:/ / content. aip. org/ APCPCS/ v627/ i1/ 59_1. html) by Christopher Landauer 
and Kirstie L. Bellman criticising some of Rosen's mathematical formulations, followed by

Robert Rosen
695
attempts to improve the formulations.
Jean- Pierre Serre
Jean-Pierre Serre
Born
15 September 1926
Bages, Pyrénées-Orientales, France
Residence
Paris, France
Nationality
France
Fields
Mathematics
Institutions
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Collège de France
Alma mater
École Normale Supérieure
Doctoral advisor
Henri Cartan
Doctoral students
Michel Broué
John Labute
Notable awards
Abel Prize (2003)
Fields Medal (1954)
Wolf Prize in Mathematics (2000)
Balzan Prize (1985)
Jean-Pierre Serre (born 15 September 1926) is a French mathematician in the fields of
algebraic geometry, number theory and topology. He has received numerous awards and
honors for his mathematical research and exposition, including the Fields Medal in 1954
and the Abel Prize in 2003.
Biography
Early years
Born in Bages, Pyrénées-Orientales, France, Serre was educated at the Lycée de Nîmes and
then from 1945 to 1948 at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris. He was awarded his
doctorate from the Sorbonne in 1951. From 1948 to 1954 he held positions at the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique in Paris. In 1956 he was elected professor at the
Collège de France, a position he held until his retirement in 1994.

Jean- Pierre Serre
696
Career
From a very young age he was an outstanding figure in the school of Henri Cartan, working
on algebraic topology, several complex variables and then commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry, in the context of sheaf theory and homological algebra techniques.
Serre's thesis concerned the Leray–Serre spectral sequence associated to a fibration.
Together with Cartan, Serre established the technique of using Eilenberg-MacLane spaces
for computing homotopy groups of spheres, which at that time was considered as the major
problem in topology.
In his speech at the Fields Medal award ceremony in 1954, Hermann Weyl praised Serre in
seemingly extravagant terms, and also made the point that the award was for the first time
awarded to an algebraist. Serre subsequently changed his research focus; he apparently
thought that homotopy theory, where he had started, was already overly technical.
However, Weyl's perception that the central place of classical analysis had been challenged
by abstract algebra has subsequently been justified, as has his assessment of Serre's place
in this change.
Algebraic geometry
In the 1950s and 1960s, a fruitful collaboration between Serre and the two-years-younger
Alexander Grothendieck led to important foundational work, much of it motivated by the
Weil conjectures. Two major foundational papers by Serre were Faisceaux Algébriques
Cohérents (FAC), on coherent cohomology) and Géometrie Algébrique et Géométrie
Analytique (GAGA).
Even at an early stage in his work Serre had perceived a need to construct more general
and refined cohomology theories to tackle the Weil conjectures. The problem was that the
cohomology of a coherent sheaf over a finite field couldn't capture as much topology as
singular cohomology with integer coefficients. Amongst Serre's early candidate theories of
1954–55 was one based on Witt vector coefficients.
Around 1958 Serre suggested that isotrivial principal bundles on algebraic varieties —
those that become trivial after pullback by a finite étale map — are important. This acted as
one important source of inspiration for Grothendieck to develop étale topology and the
corresponding theory of étale cohomology. These tools, developed in full by Grothendieck
and collaborators in Séminaire de géométrie algébrique (SGA) 4 and SGA 5, provided the
tools for the eventual proof of the Weil conjectures.
In later years Serre was sometimes a source of counterexamples to over-optimistic
extrapolations. He also had a close working relationship with Pierre Deligne, who
eventually finished the proof of the Weil conjectures.
Other work
From 1959 onward Serre's interests turned towards number theory, in particular class field
theory and the theory of complex multiplication.
Amongst his most original contributions were: the concept of algebraic K-theory; the Galois
representation theory for ℓ-adic cohomology and the conceptions that these representations
were "large"; and the Serre conjecture on mod-p representations that made Fermat's last
theorem a connected part of mainstream arithmetic geometry.

Jean- Pierre Serre
697
Honours and awards
Serre, at twenty-seven in 1954, is the youngest ever to be awarded the Fields Medal. In
1985, he went on to win the Balzan Prize, the Steele Prize in 1995, the Wolf Prize in
Mathematics in 2000, and was the first recipient of the Abel Prize in 2003. Serre and John
Thompson are the only laureates of all three of the Fields Medal, the Wolf Prize, and the
Abel Prize.
See also
• Serre duality
• Serre's multiplicity conjectures
• Serre's property FA
• Serre spectral sequence
• Serre fibration
• Serre twist sheaf
• Thin set in the sense of Serre
• Quillen-Suslin theorem
• Nicolas Bourbaki
Bibliography
• Groupes Algébriques et Corps de Classes (1959) as Algebraic Groups and Class Fields
(1988)
• Corps Locaux (1962) as Local Fields (1980)
• Cohomologie Galoisienne (1964) Collège de France course 1962–3, as Galois Cohomology
(1997)
• Algèbre Locale, Multiplicités (1965) Collège de France course 1957–8, as Local Algebra
(2000)
• Lie Algebras and Lie Groups (1965) 1964 Harvard lectures
• Algèbres de Lie Semi-simples Complexes (1966) as Complex Semisimple Lie Algebras
(1987)
• Abelian ℓ-Adic Representations and Elliptic Curves (1968)
• Cours d'arithmétique (1970) as A Course in Arithmetic (1973)
• Représentations linéaires des groupes finis (1971) as Linear Representations of Finite
Groups (1977)
• Arbres, amalgames, SL2(1977) as Trees (1980)
• Oeuvres/Collected Papers in four volumes (1986) Vol. IV in 2000
• Lectures on the Mordell-Weil Theorem (1990)
• Topics in Galois Theory (1992)
• Motives (1994) two volumes, editor with Uwe Jannsen and Steven L. Kleiman
• Cohomological Invariants in Galois Cohomology (2003) with Skip Garibaldi and
Alexander Merkurjev
• Serre, Jean-Pierre (2001), Exposés de séminaires 1950–1999, Société Mathématique de
France, ISBN 2-85629-103-1
• Grothendieck–Serre Correspondence (2003) edited with Pierre Colmez

Jean- Pierre Serre
698
External links
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Serre.html|"Jean-Pierre Serre",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Jean-Pierre Serre [1] at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
• Jean-Pierre Serre [2] at the French Academy of Sciences, in French.
• Interview with Jean-Pierre Serre [3] in Notices of the American Mathematical Society.
• An Interview with Jean-Pierre Serre [4] by C.T. Chong and Y.K. Leong, National University
of Singapore.
• How to write mathematics badly [5] a public lecture by Jean-Pierre Serre on writing
mathematics.
References
[1] http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=34222
[2] http:/ / www. academie-sciences. fr/ membres/ S/ Serre_JP. htm
[3] http:/ / www. ams. org/ notices/ 200402/ comm-serre. pdf
[4] http:/ / sps. nus. edu. sg/ ~limchuwe/ articles/ serre. html
[5] http:/ / modular. fas. harvard. edu/ edu/ basic/ serre/

J. H. C. Whitehead
699
J. H. C. Whitehead
J. H. C. Whitehead
John Henry Constantine Whitehead
Born
11 November 1904
Madras (Chennai), India
Died
8 May 1960 (aged 55)
Princeton, New Jersey
Residence
 United Kingdom, 
 U.S.
Nationality
 British
Fields
Mathematics
Institutions
Oxford University
Alma mater
Oxford University
Princeton University
Doctoral advisor
Oswald Veblen
Doctoral students
Michael Barratt
Ronald M. Brown
Wilfred H. Cockroft
Victor K. A. M. Gugenheim
Graham Higman
Peter Hilton
Ioan James
Brian Steer
Known for
CW complex
Simple homotopy
Whitehead group
Whitehead manifold
Whitehead product
John Henry Constantine Whitehead (11 November 1904–8 May 1960), known as Henry,
was a British mathematician and was one of the founders of homotopy theory. He was born
in Chennai (then known as Madras), in India, and died in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1960.
Life
J. H. C. (Henry) Whitehead was the son of the Right Rev. Henry Whitehead, Bishop of 
Madras and brother of A. N. Whitehead, and of Isobel Duncan, who had herself studied 
mathematics at Oxford. He was brought up in Oxford, went to Eton and read mathematics 
at Balliol College, Oxford. After a year working as a stockbroker, he started a Ph.D. in 1929 
at Princeton University. His thesis, titled The representation of projective spaces, was

J. H. C. Whitehead
700
written under the direction of Oswald Veblen in 1930. While in Princeton, he also worked
with Solomon Lefschetz.
He became a fellow of Balliol in 1933. In 1934 he married the concert pianist Barbara
Smyth, great-great-granddaughter of Elizabeth Fry and a cousin of Peter Pears; they had
two sons. During the Second World War he worked on operations research for submarine
warfare. Later, he joined the codebreakers at Bletchley Park, and by 1945 was one of some
fifteen mathematicians working in the "Newmanry", a section headed by Max Newman and
responsible for breaking a German teleprinter cipher using machine methods.[1] Those
methods included the Colossus machines, early digital electronic computers.[1]
From 1947 to 1960 he was the Waynflete Professor of Pure Mathematics at Magdalen
College, Oxford.
He became president of the London Mathematical Society (LMS) in 1953, a post he held
until 1955.[2] The LMS established two prizes in memory of J. H. C. Whitehead. The first is
the annually awarded, to multiple recipients, Whitehead Prize; the second a biennially
awarded Senior Whitehead Prize.[3]
In the late 1950s, Whitehead approached Robert Maxwell, then chairman of Pergamon
Press, to start a new journal, Topology, but died before its first edition appeared in 1962.
Work
His definition of CW complexes gave a setting for homotopy theory that became standard.
He introduced the idea of simple homotopy theory, which was later much developed in
connection with algebraic K-theory. The Whitehead product is an operation in homotopy
theory. The Whitehead problem on abelian groups was solved (as an independence proof)
by Saharon Shelah. His involvement with topology and the Poincaré conjecture led to the
creation of the Whitehead manifold. The definition of crossed modules is due to him.
Whitehead also made important contributions in differential topology, particularly on
triangulations and their associated smooth structures.
Selected publications
• Whitehead, J.H.C. (1940), "On C¹ complexes", Ann. Of Math. 41: 809–824,
doi:10.2307/1968861 [4]
• J. H. C. Whitehead, On incidence matrices, nuclei and homotopy types, Ann. of Math. (2)
42 (1941), 1197–1239.
• J. H. C. Whitehead, Combinatorial homotopy. I., Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 55 (1949),
213–245
• J. H. C. Whitehead, Combinatorial homotopy. II., Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 55 (1949),
453–496
• J. H. C. Whitehead, A certain exact sequence, Ann. of Math. (2) 52 (1950), 51–110
• J. H. C. Whitehead, Simple homotopy types, Amer. J. Math. 72 (1950), 1–57.
• Saunders MacLane, J. H. C. Whitehead, On the 3-type of a complex, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 36 (1950), 41–48.
• Whitehead, J.H.C. (1961), "Manifolds with tranverse fields in Euclidean space", Ann. Of
Math. 73: 154–212, doi:10.2307/1970286 [5] (published posthumously)

J. H. C. Whitehead
701
See also
• Simple homotopy
• Spanier-Whitehead duality
• Whitehead group
• Whitehead link
• Whitehead theorem
• Whitehead torsion
References
[1] Paul Gannon, Colossus: Bletchley Park's Greatest Secret, 2006, Atlantic Books; ISBN 1-84354-330-3. p. 347
[2] http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Societies/LMSPresidents.html|"''MacTutor History of Mathematics
archive''". http:/ / www-history. mcs. st-andrews. ac. uk/ Societies/ LMSPresidents. html. Retrieved on
2007-07-08.
[3] http://www.lms.ac.uk/activities/prizes_com/index.html|"LMS Prizes". http:/ / www. lms. ac. uk/ activities/
prizes_com/ index. html. Retrieved on 2007-07-08.
[4] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1968861
[5] http:/ / dx. doi. org/ 10. 2307%2F1970286
External links
• J. H. C. Whitehead (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=1423) at the
Mathematics Genealogy Project
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Whitehead_Henry.html|"J. H. C.
Whitehead", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.

Edward Witten
702
Edward Witten
Edward Witten
Born
August 26, 1951
Baltimore, Maryland
Nationality
American
Fields
Theoretical physicist
Institutions
Institute for Advanced Study
Alma mater
Brandeis University
Doctoral advisor
David Gross
Doctoral students
Cumrun Vafa, Eva Silverstein, Shamit Kachru
Known for
string theory, M-theory, quantum field theory
Notable awards
Fields Medal (1990)
Crafoord Prize (2008)
Edward Witten (born August 26, 1951) is an American theoretical physicist and professor
at the Institute for Advanced Study. He is one of the world's leading researchers in
superstring theory. He has made extensive contributions to theoretical physics, and in 1990
he was awarded the Fields Medal for his influence on the development of mathematics. In
1995, he suggested the existence of M-theory at a conference at the University of Southern
California, and used M-theory to explain a number of previously observed dualities,
sparking a flurry of new research in string theory called the second superstring revolution.
Birth and education
Edward Witten was born in Baltimore, Maryland to a Jewish family, the son of Lorraine W.
Witten and Louis Witten, a theoretical physicist specializing in gravitation and general
relativity. He received his bachelor's degree in history (with a minor in linguistics) from
Brandeis University. Witten planned to become a political journalist, and published articles
in The New Republic and The Nation. He worked briefly for George McGovern's
presidential campaign. Then, he attended the University of Wisconsin-Madison for one
semester as an economics graduate student before dropping out. He then returned to
academia, enrolling in applied mathematics at Princeton University before shifting
departments and receiving a Ph.D. in physics in 1976 under David Gross, the 2004 Nobel
laureate in Physics.

Edward Witten
703
Academic career
After completing his PhD, he worked at Harvard University as a Junior Fellow and at
Princeton as a professor. He was a Professor of Physics at Princeton University from 1980
to 1987. He also was briefly at Caltech for two years from 1999 to 2001. He is currently the
Charles Simonyi Professor of Mathematical Physics at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton, New Jersey.
Witten has the highest h-index (110) of any living physicist.[1] [2]
Research and achievements
Witten has made extensive contributions to theoretical physics, in work that has spawned a
large number of highly mathematical results. He has been active primarily in quantum field
theory and string theory, and in related areas of topology and geometry. His many
contributions include a simplified proof of the positive energy theorem involving spinors in
general relativity, his work relating supersymmetry and Morse theory, his introduction of
topological quantum field theory and his related work on mirror symmetry and
supersymmetric gauge theories, and his conjecture of the existence of M-theory.
Witten was awarded the Fields Medal[3] by the International Mathematical Union in 1990,
becoming the first physicist to win the prize. Sir Michael Atiyah said of Witten, "Although
he is definitely a physicist, his command of mathematics is rivaled by few mathematicians...
Time and again he has surprised the mathematical community by a brilliant application of
physical insight leading to new and deep mathematical theorems... he has made a profound
impact on contemporary mathematics. In his hands physics is once again providing a rich
source of inspiration and insight in mathematics."[4] One such example of his impact on
pure mathematics is his framework for understanding the Jones polynomial using
Chern-Simons theory. This had far reaching implications on low-dimensional topology and
led to quantum invariants such as the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants.
He is currently working on the possible relations between Gauge theories and Geometric
Langlands program.
Personal life
He is married to Chiara Nappi, who is a professor of physics at Princeton University and
they have two daughters Ilana and Daniela, and one son, Raphael (Rafi). His brother Matt
Witten is a screenwriter and producer for several popular TV series including L.A. Law and
House.
Awards and honors
Witten has been honored with numerous awards, including a MacArthur Grant (1982), a
Fields Medal (1990), the National Medal of Science[5] (2002), Pythagoras Award[6] (Croton,
2005), and the Crafoord Prize (2008). Pope Benedict XVI also appointed Witten as a
member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences (2006). He also appeared in the list of TIME
magazine's 100 most influential people of 2004. In 2000, he was awarded the Nemmers
Prize in Mathematics.

Edward Witten
704
See also
• Gromov-Witten invariant
• Seiberg–Witten gauge theory
• Seiberg–Witten invariant
• Vafa-Witten theorem
• Weinberg-Witten theorem
• Wess-Zumino-Witten model
• Witten index
References
[1] http:/ / www. nature. com/ nature/ journal/ v436/ n7053/ full/ 436900a. html
[2] http:/ / www. timeshighereducation. co. uk/ story. asp?storyCode=401175& sectioncode=26
[3] "On the work of Edward Witten" (http:/ / www. emis. ams. org/ mirror/ IMU/ medals/ Fields/ 1990/ Witten/
page1. html) (when being awarded the Field's medal)
[4] Atiyah, Michael (2005). Michael Atiyah: Collected Works: Volume 6. Oxford Science Publications. pp. 209,212.
ISBN 978-0198530992.
[5] "Edward Witten" (http:/ / www. nsf. gov/ od/ nms/ recip_details. cfm?recip_id=5000000000422), The
President's National Medal of Science: Recipient Details.
[6] http:/ / www. premiopitagora. it/ index. htm
External links
• Witten's web page at the Institute (http:/ / www. sns. ias. edu/ ~witten/ )
• Publications on ArXiv (http:/ / arxiv. org/ find/ hep-th/ 1/ au:+ Witten_E/ 0/ 1/ 0/ all/ 0/ 1)
• Witten theme tree on arxiv.org (http:/ / xstructure. inr. ac. ru/ x-bin/ search_e3.
py?archive=all& search_year=all& au=Witten_E& per_page=100& skip=0)
• Futurama episode information (http:/ / www. gotfuturama. com/ Information/ Capsules/
1ACV11. txt)
• Edward Witten reference in the web comic Abstruse Goose (http:/ / abstrusegoose. com/
30)
• O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.,
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Witten.html|"Edward Witten",
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
• Edward Witten (http:/ / genealogy. math. ndsu. nodak. edu/ id. php?id=31293) at the
Mathematics Genealogy Project

Article Sources and Contributors
705
Article Sources and Contributors
Table of contents  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=283570796  Contributors: RichardF
Symmetry  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297652891  Contributors: 0waldo, 16@r, AceVentura, Akriasas, Alansohn, Alanyst,
AllS33ingI, Altenmann, Andycjp, Anetode, Antabus, Antandrus, Arthur Rubin, Atomota, AugPi, AxelBoldt, BadSanta, Bbik, Ben Babcock, BenWillard,
Benbread, Bevo, BigrTex, Brentt, Brews ohare, Brianga, Bryan Derksen, Burtonator, C4, CBM, CSWarren, Caltas, CatherineMunro, Charles Matthews,
CosmonautLaunchPad, Coyets, Cullinane, CuriousOne, Cyan, DO'Neil, DWPittelli, Darvasg, David Haslam, Dcooper, Debanjum, Dekimasu, Delldot,
DerHexer, Dreftymac, Drini, Earth, ElBenevolente, Enno, Enormousdude, Epbr123, Eric B, Eugcc, Feezo, Finlay McWalter, Firefox13, Fplay, Geni,
Giftlite, GregorB, Grubber, Haakon, Hal8999, HarmonicSphere, Hayabusa future, Herbee, Hersfold tool account, Hrafn, Hyacinth, Iced Kola, Ikiroid,
Imroy, J.delanoy, JFreeman, JackSchmidt, Japo, Jeandré du Toit, JeffC, Jeffq, Jeffrey Smith, JerroldPease-Atlanta, Jitse Niesen, John Ellsworth, John
Reaves, Johnbibby, Jon Cates, Joseph Myers, Joseph Solis in Australia, Joshua.mccall, Jpiñacheeto, Jtir, Justanother, KYPark, Kilva, King of Hearts,
Kostmo, Lakinekaki, Lbeaumont, Lillebi, Linas, Lviatour, MIckStephenson, Malcolmxl5, Marc Venot, Marksuppes, Martin von Gagern, MathsIsFun,
Maximus Rex, Mel Etitis, MelRip, Melchoir, Michael Hardy, Monurkar, Mpulier, Mysid, NawlinWiki, Nigholith, Nitya Dharma, Nn123645, NotARusski,
Nubiatech, Nv8200p, Octahedron80, Olathe, Oleg Alexandrov, Omegatron, Onevalefan, Onopearls, Ottre, Oxymoron83, Pandammonium, Patrick, Paul
August, Paul Murray, Pax:Vobiscum, Petitjeanmichel, Pfalstad, Pgk, Phys, Pink!Teen, PjOfAustralia, Pomte, Porges, Promethean, Quadell, Qwfp, RexNL,
Rifleman 82, RodC, Romanm, RonnieBrown, Rossami, Rursus, Ruud Koot, S0me l0ser, Sadi Carnot, Salix alba, Sbyrnes321, SchuminWeb, Seberle,
Segv11, Shadow12l, Silly rabbit, Smack, Snaily, Snigbrook, Soliloquial, SparrowsWing, SpectrumDT, Splash, Staffwaterboy, Stardust8212, Steelpillow,
Stemonitis, Stevertigo, Struthious Bandersnatch, Tabletop, Tamfang, Taranet, Tarquin, Termer, Terry Bollinger, The Anome, The Font, TheLimbicOne,
Theone00, TimVickers, TimothyRias, Tom harrison, Tompw, Trojanavenger, Txomin, Uieoa, Until It Sleeps, V8rik, Venu62, Violncello, Vybr8, Wavelength,
Wdflake, Weena Eloi, Wik, Wiki alf, Wlodzimierz, Wytenus208, XJamRastafire, Xaosflux, Xev lexx, Xminivann, Yaragn, Yarnover, Ybact, Zamphuor,
Zoicon5, 270 anonymous edits
Time symmetry  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=16629554  Contributors: -
Spacetime symmetries  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=257879059  Contributors: Bornhj, BradBeattie, Charles Matthews, Edward,
Hillman, Hooperbloob, Ligulem, Mpatel, Oleg Alexandrov, Salix alba, That Guy, From That Show!
Symmetry (biology)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=277855167  Contributors: -
Symmetric relation  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293652903  Contributors: Ascánder, Charles Matthews, David Eppstein,
Elektron, Fresheneesz, Giftlite, Gregbard, Isnow, Jamelan, Jdthood, Joriki, Laurentius, Looxix, MathMartin, Mouchoir le Souris, Patrick, Paul August,
Salix alba, Syp, Unyoyega, 11 anonymous edits
Commutativity  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297263133  Contributors: 12cookk, 16@r, Acdx, Ahoerstemeier, Am Fiosaigear,
Arthena, Ashmoo, B.d.mills, Bando26, BenFrantzDale, Burn, Charles Matthews, Childzy, Christian List, Complexica, Dan Gluck, Daniele.tampieri,
Derek.cashman, Dithridge, Dreftymac, Dysprosia, Dzer0, Ebelular, El C, Enochlau, Floridi, Fr33ke, Frencheigh, Ftbhrygvn, GTBacchus, Gail, Gcm, Gdr,
Geometry guy, Giftlite, GraYoshi2x, Ground Zero, Hairy Dude, Haseldon, Herbee, Isopropyl, Ivan Štambuk, Jeff3000, Jeffq, Jll, Joe8824, JoergenB, Josh
Parris, JustUser, Knutux, Kozuch, Larsnostdal, Life, Liberty, Property, Linas, Lupin, MacMed, Malcolm rowe, Masnevets, Mattpickman, Melchoir,
Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Mikael Brockman, Mike2vil, Mikemill, MisterSheik, Mlessard, Mlm42, Mormegil, Nacho Librarian, Nev1, Octahedron80,
Oleg Alexandrov, OverlordQ, Patrick, Paul August, Peruvianllama, Petri Krohn, RedWolf, Reetep, Rich Farmbrough, Rick Norwood, Rjwilmsi,
Robert.McGibbon, Robinh, Romanm, Salix alba, Samuel Huang, Sarregouset, SchfiftyThree, Snoyes, Srleffler, Stillnotelf, Szquirrel, Thehakimboy,
Thomprod, Tony Sidaway, Unmitigated Success, VKokielov, Vicarious, Waltpohl, Weisicong, Weston.pace, Wikiborg, Wmasterj, Wolfmankurd, Wshun,
Xvani, YellowMonkey, Zundark, 86 anonymous edits
Abelian group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=286539444  Contributors: 128.111.201.xxx, Aeons, Amire80, Andres, Andyparkerson,
Arcfrk, AxelBoldt, Brighterorange, Brona, Bryan Derksen, Charles Matthews, Chas zzz brown, Ciphers, Conversion script, DHN, DL144, Dcoetzee, Dr
Caligari, Drgruppenpest, Drilnoth, Dysprosia, Fibonacci, Fropuff, Gandalf61, Gauge, Giftlite, Gregbard, Grubber, Isnow, JackSchmidt, Jdforrester, Jitse
Niesen, Jlaire, Joe Campbell, Jonathans, Jorend, Karada, Keenan Pepper, Konradek, Lagelspeil, Leonard G., Lethe, Lovro, Madmath789, Magic in the
night, Mathisreallycool, Mets501, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Mikael V, Namwob0, Negi(afk), Oleg Alexandrov, Oli Filth, P3d0, Pakaran, Patrick,
Philosophygeek, Pmanderson, Poor Yorick, Punkmorten, Recognizance, Revolver, Rickterp, Romanm, Salix alba, Saxbryn, Schneelocke, SetaLyas,
Shenme, Silly rabbit, SirJective, Ste4k, Stevertigo, Stifle, TakuyaMurata, Tango, Theresa knott, Tobias Bergemann, Topology Expert, Trhaynes, Vanish2,
Vipul, Waltpohl, Warut, Zabadooken, Zundark, 73 anonymous edits
Nonabelian group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=273056229  Contributors: Linas, Mccready, Zundark, 1 anonymous edits
Symmetry group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=269945988  Contributors: AndrewKepert, Anonymous Dissident, Auximines,
AxelBoldt, Beland, BenFrantzDale, Bornintheguz, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, Cullinane, Debivort, Dominus, Dysprosia, Fropuff, Giftlite,
Hannes Eder, IstvanWolf, Jkominek, Josh Grosse, KSmrq, Kilva, LarryLACa, Lillebi, MFH, Martin von Gagern, Maverick starstrider, Mets501, Nonenmac,
Oleg Alexandrov, Patrick, Qutezuce, Raven4x4x, RedWolf, Rich Farmbrough, Romaioi, Silly rabbit, Sir Vicious, Snags, Stevenj, Stevertigo, Sverdrup,
Tamfang, Tarquin, TheLimbicOne, TimBentley, Tokek, Wikipedist, 37 anonymous edits
Isometry  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297269110  Contributors: Albmont, Alembert, Alexb@cut-the-knot.com, Charles Matthews,
Crasshopper, Fropuff, Gaius Cornelius, Giftlite, Glenn, Isnow, Jackzhp, Jopxton, KRS, LaMenta3, Lupin, Lupo, ManoaChild, Marino-slo, Matematico,
MathMartin, Michael Hardy, Oleg Alexandrov, Patrick, Peya, Point-set topologist, Reuben, Salix alba, Silly rabbit, Sniffnoy, Sullivan.t.j, TakuyaMurata,
TomyDuby, Topology Expert, Tosha, Trioculite, Turgidson, Vanish2, Zundark, 30 anonymous edits
Space group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=279376512  Contributors: Asrghasrhiojadrhr, Baccyak4H, Bwmodular, DeadEyeArrow,
Dmb000006, Encephalon, Giftlite, Hetar, JackSchmidt, Jcwf, Jimduck, Joseph Myers, KSmrq, Michael Hardy, Mpatel, Nikai, Oleg Alexandrov, Oysteinp,
Patrick, R.e.b., Rifleman 82, Rjwilmsi, Rossami, Syntax, Tagishsimon, Tantalate, Template namespace initialisation script, That Guy, From That Show!,
Tosha, Truelight, Vespristiano, Warp0009, Wik, Սահակ, 54 anonymous edits
Crystal system  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=283755617  Contributors: Alexei Kouprianov, Axelv, Baccyak4H, CanadianLinuxUser,
Charles Matthews, Clicketyclack, Crestu, Crystal whacker, Danieljamesscott, David Eppstein, Dferg, Dmb000006, DrBob, Flewis, Fordmadoxfraud,
Giftlite, Hadal, Isnow, Julius Sahara, KSmrq, Kymacpherson, Linnell, Ludvig14, Mani1, Michael Hardy, Mormegil, Obradovic Goran, Oleg Alexandrov,
Oysteinp, Pamputt, Patrick, Pbroks13, Raz1el, Rdsmith4, Shalom Yechiel, Siim, Smith609, South Bay, Stannered, StaticGull, Stepanovas, The way, the
truth, and the light, Towerman86, Truelight, Visor, Vsmith, WVhybrid, Սահակ, 31 anonymous edits
Mirror image  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293631799  Contributors: ABF, Aamrun, Alphachimp, Art LaPella, Auntof6, Ayudante,
Behemote, Benjah-bmm27, Bertg, Blainster, Bumphoney, Cardamon, Charles Matthews, ChildofMidnight, Christopherlin, CommonsDelinker, DerHexer,
ENIAC, Enormousdude, Giftlite, Goldenrowley, Hotcrocodile, Isnow, JessB, Jkasd, Johnbojaen, KD5TVI, Lakinekaki, Laurascudder, Lights, Linas, Luna
Santin, Martin Hogbin, Michael Hardy, Nn123645, Oleg Alexandrov, Pakaran, Patrick, Rizzoj, SHARU(ja), SWAdair, Shimgray, Srleffler, StanislavJ,
SteinbDJ, Tarquin, The Nameless, Until It Sleeps, WLU, Waggers, Wandering Ghost, West London Dweller, Wikicheng, 60 anonymous edits
Asymmetry  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=292146012  Contributors: AlphaPyro, Apers0n, Arthur Rubin, Blckgismo, Caknuck,
Charles Matthews, Citizen Premier, Dreftymac, Drew R. Smith, Edward321, Everyking, G7a, HEL, Hector Sabelli, Henrygb, Hrafn, I Love Bukets,
Insanity Incarnate, Jitse Niesen, JuanFox, KYPark, Keilana, Lakinekaki, MaCRoEco, Marskuzz, Michael Hardy, Northgrove, Ot, Ottawa4ever, Pearle,
Rcalbert, Rebekahzinn, Rich Farmbrough, Rjwilmsi, RockMFR, Sashag, Scoutersig, Shniken1, SpectrumDT, TheLeopard, TimVickers, Tkynerd, Txomin,
Verbal, Vicarious, Zahid Abdassabur, 45 anonymous edits

Article Sources and Contributors
706
Non- abelian  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=151066056  Contributors: Fropuff, Grubber, Jitse Niesen, Oleg Alexandrov, The Great
Redirector
Skewness  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=287317373  Contributors: 2D, ANONYMOUS COWARD0xC0DE, Accretivehealth, Alaexis,
Amarsesh, Audriusa, AxelBoldt, BenFrantzDale, Bjoram11@yahoo.co.in, Calbaer, Christopher Mahan, Christopherlin, Conversion script, Cruise, DGX,
Dale Arnett, David Haslam, Den fjättrade ankan, Econotechie, Efender, Eliezg, Eric Kvaalen, Fadiwiki, G716, Giftlite, Henrygb, Itamblyn, Ivan rome,
Ixfd64, Jauerback, JavOs, Jdm64, Jim.henderson, Jitse Niesen, Jkasd, Jtneill, Justcop4, Kappa, Kareekacha, Lamro, Lebha, Lingwitt, MarkSweep,
Martial75, Melcombe, Memming, Michael Hardy, MrOllie, Myhvac, Nbarth, PBH, Peter Hiemeyer, Petitjeanmichel, Pgadfor, Piotrus, Pps, Qwfp, Ramin
Nakisa, Rodolfo Hermans, SDM 010, Salix alba, Salmanazar, SimonP, Simon_J_Kissane, Sound of a desire, Stephenb, Sympa, Tangerines, The imp,
Timneu22, Vance.naughton, Velocidex, Woohookitty, ZeroOne, Zundark, 111 anonymous edits
Chirality  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296337541  Contributors: -- April, 1984, 62.7.81.xxx, AJim, Amdk8800, Arch dude,
ArnoldReinhold, AttoRenato, Bevo, Charles Matthews, Chinju, Choij, Cje, Conversion script, Cst17, Diderot's dreams, Dysprosia, Extraordinary Machine,
Fleem, Gentgeen, Graham Chapman, H Padleckas, Invertzoo, Jidanni, Josh Grosse, Jpo, Julmaro, Kjkolb, Kpjas, Kurykh, Littleclimpa, Looxix,
MITBeaverRocks, Mahanga, Marco Krohn, Mastercampbell, Maximaximax, Michael Hardy, Naddy, Oleg Alexandrov, Pan Dan, Patrick, Peak, Pjacobi, R
sirahata, RangerJ, Rorro, Salmar, Smack, Stephex, Sysy, Tarquin, V8rik, Vary, Wikiborg, Zana Dark,  ,ينام52 anonymous edits
Chirality (mathematics)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296311674  Contributors: Arch dude, C S, Charles Matthews, ChuckHG,
Dcljr, EdgeOfEpsilon, Hasanisawi, Jkasd, Maksim-e, Michael Hardy, Nekura, Noe, Paolo.dL, Patrick, Peak, Petitjeanmichel, PhotoBox, Pleasantville, Salix
alba, Smack, Stevertigo, Sysy, 15 anonymous edits
Chirality (physics)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294442644  Contributors: .:Ajvol:., Aiwendil42, Arch dude, Avillia, Bambaiah,
BartekChom, Bob108, Choij, Dcljr, Deadworm222, Difty, DrKiernan, Drkarat, Erkcan, Ernsts, Ettlz, Frankie816, Goudzovski, HEL, Headbomb, Icep,
Itinerant1, Jeffq, Jkasd, Leftfoot69, Linas, Nickptar, Nneonneo, Paolo.dL, Patrick, Phys, PhysPhD, R sirahata, RP459, Radagast83, Roggg, Smack,
Stannered, Synchronism, TobiS, Tom Lougheed, WhiteHatLurker, Yevgeny Kats, 22 anonymous edits
Even and odd functions  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293415445  Contributors: 16@r, Albedo, Anskas, CALR, CecilBlade,
Charles Matthews, Cremepuff222, Dbfirs, Doctormatt, Dogah, Download, Dysprosia, El aprendelenguas, Gandalf61, GeordieMcBain, Giftlite, Ih8evilstuff,
Johnuniq, KPH2293, KYN, KYPark, Kilva, Laurentius, Lixy, MagneticFlux, Marino-slo, Melchoir, Mets501, Michael Devore, Michael Hardy, Mochi,
Mormegil, Oleg Alexandrov, Omegatron, PV=nRT, Paul August, Pizza1512, Plastikspork, Rbj, Revolver, Salgueiro, Six.oh.six, Spoon!, Staka, Taejo,
Tomruen, WOSlinker, Yoshigev, Zvika, გიგა, 99 anonymous edits
Spin group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=288354561  Contributors: Ajohnryan, Charles Matthews, Cheesefondue, Fkbreitl,
Fropuff, Giftlite, Jim.belk, KSmrq, Kevin Hickerson, Keyi, Linas, MarSch, Marozols, MatthewMain, Michael Hardy, Michael Kinyon, Nbarth, Niout, Oleg
Alexandrov, Patrick, Phys, R.e.b., Trovatore, 29 anonymous edits
Lagrangian mechanics  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=286242970  Contributors: ANONYMOUS COWARD0xC0DE, Aither,
AmarChandra, BertSen, Bobo192, CALR, Chairboy, Charles Matthews, ChrisChiasson, ChrisnHouston, CompuChip, Crowsnest, E104421, Elzair, Filos96,
Frédérick Lacasse, Galoubet, Giftlite, Gregbard, Haham hanuka, Headbomb, Helixblue, Hoyabird8, Icairns, Isnow, JBdV, JRSpriggs, Jgates, K3wq,
KnowledgeOfSelf, Ksyrie, L-H, Lambiam, Laudak, Laurascudder, Lethe, Linas, Lseixas, Luis Sanchez, Michael Hardy, Mpatel, Phys, Pixel ;-), Plasticup,
R6144, Raul654, Robert Turner, Rwmcgwier, Sbandrews, SeventyThree, Shsteven, Silly rabbit, Szabolcs Nagy, Tom harrison, Wolfkeeper, Xenure, Zen
Mind, Zhen Lin,  ,یعس128 anonymous edits
Hamiltonian mechanics  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294785982  Contributors: 7segment, Akriasas, Andrej.westermann,
Archelon, Army1987, AstroMark, AugPi, Bachrach44, Bb vb, Bevo, Borgx, CYD, Charles Matthews, Commutator, Complexica, Crasshopper,
Cuzkatzimhut, Cyde, D6, DS1000, Darrel francis, David R. Ingham, Dchristle, Ebyabe, Epq, Freeskyman, Frédérick Lacasse, Gene Nygaard, Geometry
guy, Giftlite, Headbomb, Hessammehr, HorsePunchKid, Hyandat, Isnow, JRSpriggs, JerroldPease-Atlanta, JerrySteal, Jheald, Jitse Niesen, K3wq, KSmrq,
Lethe, Linas, Linuxlad, Looxix, MK8, Mbell, Mct mht, Mebden, Michael Hardy, Mjb, Movementarian, OS2Warp, PhoenixPinion, Phys, Pit, RE, Rbeas,
Reddi, Rephorm, Rico402, Samuel Blanning, Sanpaz, Sbandrews, Sheliak, Srleffler, Stefansquintet, StewartMH, Sverdrup, Thurth, Tobias Bergemann,
UrsusArctosL71, Voorlandt, Xenure, Zhen Lin, Zundark, 74 anonymous edits
Noether's theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297675891  Contributors: .:Ajvol:., Ae-a, Albertplanck, Alfred Centauri,
AmarChandra, Ancheta Wis, Andejons, AnonyScientist, Arcfrk, Archelon, AugPi, Babajobu, Berland, BeteNoir, Brews ohare, Brim, CALR, CBM, Charles
Matthews, Complexica, Craig Pemberton, David Haslam, Deamon138, DefLog, Driftwoodzebulin, Dysprosia, Długosz, Ems57fcva, Enormousdude,
Fourohfour, Giftlite, Gseryakov, Harp, Headbomb, Heron, HolIgor, HorsePunchKid, JRSpriggs, Jcobb, Jitse Niesen, Jjauregui, Jpowell, Karol Langner,
Ksoileau, Kusma, Lambiam, Light current, Linas, Lisagosselin, Lisatwo, Looxix, Lumidek, Lupin, Luqui, MarSch, Michael C Price, Michael Hardy,
Missphysics, Modest Genius, Myasuda, Nahmad, Nathan Penton, Niout, Ntmatter, Oleg Alexandrov, Oreo Priest, Osmodiar, Paul D. Anderson,
PaulGarner, Pfalstad, Phys, Pointillist blur, QFT, Qiushi, R.e.b., Rangek, Sae1962, Silly rabbit, SteakNShake, Stevertigo, StewartMH, Substar, Tarquin,
Teorth, The Anome, Thehotelambush, Tom Lougheed, Tong, Tseller, Twolves14, Vyznev Xnebara, Weialawaga, WillowW, WriterHound, Yevgeny Kats,
ZICO, Zowie, Zundark, 霧木諒二, 117 anonymous edits
Rigged Hilbert space  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=270388556  Contributors: CSTAR, Charles Matthews, Dstewart7309, Erik
Zachte, Gala.martin, Garrison, Gauge, Giftlite, Josemiotto, Kusma, Lethe, Linas, Mat cross, Mct mht, Rafaelo10, Rick Block, Silly rabbit, 9 anonymous
edits
Kac–Moody algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295402938  Contributors: Arcfrk, Blotwell, Ceyockey, Charles Matthews,
Cronholm144, Drschawrz, Gauge, JarahE, Jason Quinn, Lumidek, Michael Hardy, Moez, Phys, R.e.b., Reinyday, Sullivan.t.j, TakuyaMurata, Uncle G,
Waltpohl, 7 anonymous edits
Operator algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=292605652  Contributors: Aliotra, CSTAR, Charles Matthews, Charvest,
GTBacchus, Jorend, Lupin, Makotoy, Michael Hardy, Psniady, R.e.b., RJFJR, Ruhrjung, Silverfish, Steve Crossin, Trovatore, TubularWorld, Zigger, 12
anonymous edits
Clifford algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295735827  Contributors: Aetheling, Ajohnryan, Athor, AugPi, AxelBoldt, Bobo192,
Cenarium, Charles Matthews, Cjfsyntropy, Cyp, DefLog, Drbreznjev, Drini, Dysprosia, Emperorbma, Fjung, Foice, Fropuff, Gaius Cornelius, Gauge,
Geometry guy, Giftlite, Jakob.scholbach, Jheald, Jim.belk, Jordi Burguet Castell, Junglytoofan, Koeplinger, Lockeownzj00, Michael Hardy, Michael Kinyon,
Msh210, Nbarth, Nina Gerlach, Oleg Alexandrov, OneWeirdDude, Ophion, Paolo.dL, Pol098, R.e.b., RainerBlome, Rgdboer, Rich Farmbrough, Sanders
muc, Schneelocke, Shaddack, Silly rabbit, Tobias Bergemann, Wwoods, 41 anonymous edits
Von Neumann algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296410311  Contributors: A Geek Tragedy, Adiioana, Asperal, Blainster,
Btyner, C quest000, CSTAR, Charles Matthews, Deiz, GTBacchus, Gauge, Gene Nygaard, Giftlite, HStel, Jeff3000, KennyDC, Kerry Raymond, Kisonecat,
Linas, Loewepeter, Lupin, Mathsci, Mct mht, Mets501, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Mohan ravichandran, NowhereDense, Phys, Prumpf, R.e.b.,
RandomP, Rheun, Ringspectrum, Robert K S, Saibod, Sam, Sdornan, Stormwatch, TakuyaMurata, Teorth, Thehotelambush, Trovatore, Unifey, Wmahan,
38 anonymous edits
C*- algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294706645  Contributors: AeonicOmega, Ahoerstemeier, AxelBoldt, Bdmy, Ben Tillman,
BenFrantzDale, Blotwell, CSTAR, Charles Matthews, Charles Sturm, Conversion script, DefLog, Fropuff, GTBacchus, Gauge, Giftlite, Haziel, Headbomb,
Henry Delforn, HrHolm, Humus sapiens, Ilan770, Joriki, KennyDC, Lethe, Linas, Loadmaster, Lupin, Mark Durst, MathMartin, Mct mht, Mets501,
Michael Hardy, Mtaub, NowhereDense, Ntmatter, Oleg Alexandrov, Phys, Prumpf, R.e.b., Reinderien, RogierBrussee, Shanes, Shlomi Hillel, Slaniel,
TakuyaMurata, Tinchote, Tobias Bergemann, Urzyfka, Waltpohl, Who, Zahd, 39 anonymous edits
Jones polynomial  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=282529849  Contributors: Archelon, Ari Nieh, ArnoldReinhold, Asdfdsa, C S, 
Charles Matthews, Declan Davis, Fropuff, Giftlite, Hesam7, Jkasd, LeYaYa, MSGJ, Michael Hardy, Nicholas Jackson, Pbroks13, Salix alba, Trovatore, 15

Article Sources and Contributors
707
anonymous edits
Subfactor  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=285571569  Contributors: Charles Matthews, KennyDC, Mathsci, R.e.b., Semorrison, 1
anonymous edits
Quantum logic  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297664527  Contributors: Andris, Angela, Archelon, Aster Rainbow, BD2412, Bci2,
CSTAR, Charles Matthews, Cybercobra, DJIndica, David edwards, Dcoetzee, Dmr2, Dysprosia, Edward, Epsilon0, GTBacchus, Gaius Cornelius, Gene
Ward Smith, Giftlite, GordonRoss, Hairy Dude, Headbomb, Icairns, Ilan770, Jengod, John Baez, Kimberlyg, KnightRider, Kuratowski's Ghost, Kzollman,
Lethe, Linas, Lucidish, Mct mht, Mhss, Michael Hardy, Modify, Oerjan, Parkyere, Rsimmonds01, Sheliak, Shlomi Hillel, StevenJohnston, Stevertigo, T=0,
Trovatore, V79, Zumbo,  ,یعس36 anonymous edits
Quantum group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=290327607  Contributors: Almit39, Anville, Arcfrk, CBM, Charles Matthews,
Charvest, Efio, Figaro, FlyHigh, Giftlite, Gpap.gpap, Henry Delforn, Itinerant1, Linas, MSGJ, Masnevets, Mets501, Michael Hardy, Ntsimp, Phys,
Sławomir Biały, TakuyaMurata, 9 anonymous edits
Hopf algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=292137829  Contributors: (:Julien:), Alu042, Ancheta Wis, AxelBoldt, Charles
Matthews, Docu, Dysprosia, Figaro, Fropuff, Gauge, Geometry guy, Giftlite, HrHolm, Javirl, Jhp64, LW77, Linas, Michael Hardy, Michael Kinyon, Michael
Slone, Nbarth, Pdehaye, Phys, Prumpf, QFT, QuantumGroupie, Quasicharacter, Ryan Reich, Smimram, Tiphareth, Waltpohl, 19 anonymous edits
Quasitriangular Hopf algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=239241821  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Figaro, FlyHigh,
Fropuff, Iedit2, LW77, MSGJ, Megapixie, QuantumGroupie, Quuxplusone, Rror, YellowMonkey, 8 anonymous edits
Quantum double  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=288135106  Contributors: Henry Delforn, Michael Hardy
Grassman algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=17240076  Contributors: -
Special unitary group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296803820  Contributors: Anonymous Dissident, AxelBoldt, Banus, Cacadril,
Charles Matthews, David Eppstein, Dr.enh, Drschawrz, Dysprosia, Eequor, Eric Kvaalen, Etale, Fropuff, Giftlite, HappyCamper, Harryboyles, Haseldon,
Itinerant1, JATerg, JabberWok, JackSchmidt, Jason Quinn, Jlenthe, KnightRider, Koeplinger, Lethe, Looxix, Lumidek, Marozols, MatthewMain, Michael C
Price, Michael Hardy, Movementarian, Nbarth, Nowhither, Paul August, Phys, Rjwilmsi, Robinh, Rudminjd, Ryulong, Savant13, Shender, Silly rabbit,
Simetrical, Spoon!, StevenJohnston, StuffOfInterest, Taral, Tetracube, Tobias Bergemann, Tom Lougheed, Vaughan Pratt, Vyznev Xnebara, WISo,
Waltruda, Xezbeth, Yartsa, 75 anonymous edits
Gauge theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297216984  Contributors: 100110100, 271828182, Ace Antoni, Acipsen,
Ahoerstemeier, Akriasas, Alfred Centauri, AmarChandra, Ancheta Wis, Andre Engels, Anville, Archelon, Archie Paulson, Arturj, Arvindra, AugPi, Bakken,
Bambaiah, Bci2, BenFrantzDale, Bergsten, Bevo, Borgx, Boud, Brews ohare, CDN99, CesarB, Cesiumfrog, Charles Matthews, Complexica, CosmiCarl,
Count Iblis, CryptoDerk, Dachannien, Dante Alighieri, Domanix, Dysprosia, El C, Enrico Poli, Equendil, Gauge, Geometry guy, Gianluigi, Giftlite,
Green0eggs, HEL, Hanzo 88, Harold f, Harp, Headbomb, Helix84, HowardFrampton, Ht686rg90, Igoldste, Impunv, Isnow, Isomorphic, J.delanoy,
JavierReynaldo, Jfrancis, Jmhodges, JohnHarold, Jpod2, Jskline, Karada, Kymara, Laurascudder, Lethe, Light current, Limitcycle, Linas, Lockeownzj00,
Lseixas, Lumidek, Lycurgus, Mac Davis, Mannafredo, MarSch, Masterpiece2000, Mathsci, Matthil, Mbell, Melchoir, Michael C Price, Michael Hardy,
Michael K. Edwards, Mihovil, Mjamja, Mormegil, Mpatel, MuDavid, Nbarth, Netrapt, Nikkimaria, Pak21, Palpher, Paolo.dL, Paul August, Pdelong,
Pearle, Phys, Pra1998, QFT, R.e.b., Reinyday, Rick Norwood, Rockfang, SS2005, Salsb, SebastianHelm, Serenity-Fr, Sheliak, Shlomi Hillel, Slashme,
Smartcat, SpuriousQ, Srleffler, StewartMH, Sverdrup, TakuyaMurata, Tarotcards, Template namespace initialisation script, Terry Bollinger, The Anome,
Thehotelambush, Tom Lougheed, TomyDuby, Useight, Vrkaul, Vyznev Xnebara, Waltpohl, WhiteHatLurker, Wing gundam, Yartsa, YouRang?, Zoicon5,
Zundark,  ,ץכ דמלמ120 anonymous edits
Yang–Mills theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289404461  Contributors: Ajtolland, Axiomsofchoice, Bender235, Berland,
Falcorian, Giftlite, Headbomb, HorsePunchKid, Huw Powell, Kocio, Lumidek, MTd2, Michael C Price, Michael Hardy, Oberflaechenelement, Peterwoit,
Pra1998, Sheliak, StevenJohnston, StewartMH, TakuyaMurata, Tikiwont, Timwi, YellowMonkey, YuryKirienko, 22 anonymous edits
Yangian  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=284895974  Contributors: Arcfrk, CivilGive, Henry Delforn, ManyAgainAndAgain, Mathsci, 4
anonymous edits
Superalgebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289237317  Contributors: Bluemoose, Encephalon, Fropuff, Gaius Cornelius,
Geometry guy, Giftlite, Michael Kinyon, Nbarth, Phys, Silly rabbit, SimonP, Wdkv, 5 anonymous edits
Supergroup  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=279103442  Contributors: Angela, Anthony Appleyard, Cambyses, Crazy4metallica,
Daniel Olsen, Esprit15d, Frostie Jack, Gargaj, Googling googling, Interiot, Jonathan.s.kt, Koavf, KramarDanIkabu, Mav, Phys, Piet Delport, SidP,
Template namespace initialisation script, Tim Long, Woodwalker, Wshun, Zundark, 5 anonymous edits
Symmetry breaking  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294126951  Contributors: Aleron235, BD2412, Brews ohare, Charles Matthews,
Dan Gluck, Debivort, Gauge, Kku, Michael Hardy, Nihiltres, Parthasarathy.kr, Phys, Splash, TheParanoidOne, Torage, 5 anonymous edits
Spontaneous symmetry breaking  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=288708021  Contributors: Akriasas, Alison, Archelon, Ascánder,
Bambaiah, Barticus88, Bender235, Bevo, BjKa, Bryan Derksen, Charles Matthews, Christopher Pritchard, Clement Cherlin, Complexica, Dan Gluck,
Dennis Estenson II, DragonflySixtyseven, Dusik, Freddy78, Gadfium, Giftlite, Gökhan, Headbomb, Hetar, Hidaspal, Hillarryous, Holme053, JMK, JarahE,
Jcobb, JeffBobFrank, Jmhodges, Jpod2, Lagrangian, Lethe, Lexor, Linas, Lseixas, Lumidek, MPS, Maksim-e, Michael Hardy, Pamputt, PhilHibbs, Phys,
Physicistjedi, Renatops, Reyk, Salix alba, StuTheSheep, Truthnlove, Ugha, XJamRastafire, Yakiv Gluck, Yotcmdr, Zahd, Zimboz Montizawooba, Zzuuzz,
42 anonymous edits
Goldstone boson  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297375275  Contributors: Amtiss, AnonyScientist, Antixt, BenRG, Bryan Derksen,
Centrx, Chaiken, Charles Matthews, Cuzkatzimhut, Drfizz, Giftlite, Gil987, HEL, Icairns, Jag123, JanderClamber, JarahE, JeffBobFrank, Jni, Jpod2,
Kbdank71, Likebox, Linas, Lysdexia, MPS, Maliz, Michael C Price, Michael Hardy, MilkMiruku, Pharotic, Phys, Rmrfstar, SCZenz, Tiddly Tom, Tom
Lougheed, Uisqebaugh, WISo, WhiteHatLurker, Wile E. Heresiarch, Yevgeny Kats, Zahd, 7 anonymous edits
Higgs boson  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297612498  Contributors: -dennis-, A Man In Black, ABF, Abdullais4u, Allstarecho, 
Altenmann, Alyjack, AnOddName, AndersFeder, Andrius.v, Anonymi, Antixt, Archelon, Artur80, Atomicthumbs, AxelBoldt, Baad, Bambaiah, Bcody80, 
Bcorr, BenRG, Benplowman, Betterusername, Bevo, BobertWABC, Bodhitha, Bookofjude, Boson15, Brian Fenton, Brians, Bryan Derksen, Bubba73, 
BullRangifer, C S, CYD, Cadmasteradam, Caknuck, CamB424, CamB4242, CesarB, Cgd8d, Cgwaldman, CharlesC, Chuckupd, Cinkcool, Closedmouth, 
Consumed Crustacean, CrazyInSane, Cructacean, D'Agosta, DBGustavson, DMurphy, Daniel C, DannyDaWriter, Dante Alighieri, Dauto, Dbachmann, 
DeadlyMETAL, Deceglie, Discospinster, Diza, Donarreiskoffer, DrGaellon, Dragon of the Pants, Dratman, Drmies, DÅ‚ugosz, EchetusXe, Ehn, Eikern, El 
C, ElfQrin, Eliga, Endersdouble, Epastore, Er ouz, Eritain, Ernsts, Excirial, Fatram, Fiziker, Fleisher, Fleminra, Foobar, Foober, Frglee, Frymaster, 
Gaurav, Giandrea, Giftlite, Gil987, Gobbledygeek, Goethean, Golbez, Goudzovski, GregorB, Gurch, Gwib, Hadal, Hairy Dude, Harold f, Harp, Headbomb, 
Herbee, Heron, Hippypink, Icairns, Iknowyourider, Impunv, Infestor, Itinerant, Itinerant1, Iwpg, J M Rice, J mcandrews, J.delanoy, JCSantos, JTiago, 
JabberWok, Jacques Antoine, JasonAQuest, Jc odcsmf, Jde123, Jehochman, Jfromcanada, Jgwacker, Jimtpat, Jkl, JohnArmagh, Jonathan D. Parshall, Jor63, 
Joriki, Josh Cherry, Jpod2, Jtuggle, Justinrossetti, Kaihsu, KapilTagore, Kbdank71, Kborland, Kencf0618, Kendrick7, Kenneth Dawson, Kgf0, Koavf, Konor 
org, Kooo, Kyng, La goutte de pluie, Lambiam, Laurascudder, Lee M, Lethe, LilHelpa, Linas, Loves martyr, M-Falcon, Mani1, Manning Bartlett, Marcel 
Kosko, Marcus Brute, Markdavid2000, Martaf, Martijn Hoekstra, Masterofpsi, Matan568, McVities, Mcorazao, Melchoir, Meldor, Merovingian, Mesons, 
Mgimpel, Michael C Price, Mike Peel, Mindmatrix, Moeron, Moose-32, Mukadderat, Mxn, N4tur4le, Nafhan, NawlinWiki, NeilN, Netrapt, Newzebras, 
Nightscream, Nihiltres, Nimur, Nondisclosure, Norm mit, Norvy, Novemberrain94, Now dance, fu.cker, dance!, Nsbinsnj, Nskillen, Nurg, Oddz, 
Ohnoitsjamie, Oreo Priest, Orionus, Owain, Pagw, PeterTheWall, Peterbullockismyname, Phil Boswell, Photonh2o, Phys, PhysicsGrad2013, Pie4all88, 
Pip2andahalf, Pizza1512, Praveen pillay, ProjeX, Proofreader77, Pulickkal, Quadell, Qutezuce, R.e.b., Rangelov, Reinoutr, Resonance cascade, 
RetiredUser2, Reuben, RevenDS, Rich Farmbrough, Rick7425, Rjwilmsi, Roadrunner, RobertG, Rotiro, Ruslik0, SCZenz, Salsb, Sasquatch, Sbove,

Article Sources and Contributors
708
Sburke, ScAvenger, Selva, ShaneCavanaugh, Shawn@garbett.org, Shimgray, Sjdunn9, Slawojarek, Sligocki, Spemble, Splarka, SqueakBox, Srleffler,
Strait, Superm401, Tburket, Tdent, TeunSpaans, Tevatron, The Original Wildbear, TheBendster, Thor Waldsen, Three887, Thruston, Ti-30X, Tigga en,
Tom12519, TotoBaggins, Tpbradbury, TriTertButoxy, Tritium6, Twas Now, Universalsuffrage, Until It Sleeps, Usp, V1adis1av, Varlaam, WAS 4.250,
WikiUserPedia, Wikiborg, Wmlschlotterer, Wnt, Xerxes314, Yevgeny Kats, Yoweigh, Zekemurdock, Zentropa, 346 anonymous edits
Higgs mechanism  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297293992  Contributors: AVM, Algebraist, Ancheta Wis, Bakken, Bambaiah,
Barak Sh, Bender235, Benzh, Brews ohare, CYD, Caco de vidro, Capricorn42, Charles Matthews, Chris the speller, Ciphers, Crowsnest, Difty, Drmies,
Duncan.france, Długosz, Edcolins, Epbr123, Galaxydraem, General Epitaph, Giftlite, Gillleke, Haydarhan, Hekerui, Herbee, Jpod2, Kelly Martin, Koavf,
Likebox, Linas, LokiClock, LoserJoke, Lumidek, Maksim-e, Markdroberts, Mat cross, Michael C Price, Michael Hardy, Moose-32, Oleg Alexandrov, Pac72,
Palfrey, Phys, RickyCayley, Saintswithin, Sbisolo, Strait, Tetracube, Triple333, Viriditas, West Brom 4ever, Wwheaton, Xxanthippe, 136 anonymous edits
Topological order  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296294890  Contributors: Aragorn2, Bci2, Breakpoint, Charles Matthews,
Charvest, EverettYou, Freddy78, Gauge, GregorB, Khatru2, Kusma, Linas, Maayanh, Reyk, Tobias Bergemann, Venny85, Xiao-Gang Wen, Yaoyao78, 27
anonymous edits
Topological quantum field theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=287290394  Contributors: 345Kai, Aenar, Ajt, Charles Matthews,
Charvest, Chris Pressey, Conscious, David Farris, Fropuff, Fuzheado, Hadal, Icairns, Marknen, Nbarth, Phys, R.e.b., RJFJR, Rsocol, Sheliak, Twyder,
Unara, YK Times, 21 anonymous edits
Quantum geometry  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=226808218  Contributors: Caco de vidro, Ceyockey, Charles Matthews,
Conscious, Herbee, Jag123, Lakers, Lumidek, Pjacobi, Salsb, TheoClarke, Vald, 4 anonymous edits
Noncommutative geometry  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=284287893  Contributors: -Ril-, Alterationx10, Bmicomp, CSTAR, Caco
de vidro, Ceyockey, Charles Matthews, Count Iblis, Declan Davis, DefLog, GTBacchus, Gauge, Giftlite, GregorB, Henry Delforn, Japanese Searobin, John
Z, JonL, JonathanD, Jrdioko, Krampma, Lantonov, Linas, Lupin, Michael Slone, Oleg Alexandrov, Paul August, Phys, Pqnelson, Schucker, Shell Kinney,
TakuyaMurata, Triddle, Tristanreid, Unyoyega, William M. Connolley, Wireader, Youssefsan, Yserarau, 25 anonymous edits
Noncommutative quantum field theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=280369501  Contributors: Algebraist, Charles Matthews,
Danny, Henry Delforn, JoanneB, JonL, Linas, Phys, Rich Farmbrough, Sheliak, StevenJohnston, Thue, Wireader, Zoicon5, 28 anonymous edits
Noncommutative standard model  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=287731864  Contributors: Headbomb, Maliz, Rjwilmsi, SCZenz,
Schlafly, Schucker, Sigmundur, Vessels42, 9 anonymous edits
Fuzzy sphere  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=272212103  Contributors: Djr32, JocK, Linas, Lumidek, Silverfish, 7 anonymous edits
Quantum torus  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=287572160  Contributors: Davehi1, Headbomb, Henry Delforn, JackSchmidt,
Michael Hardy, 1 anonymous edits
Homological mirror symmetry  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=258077524  Contributors: Charles Matthews, JarahE, Oleg
Alexandrov, Silverfish, Wimt, 13 anonymous edits
Algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297323129  Contributors: (jarbarf), *Dark Dragon*, 2D, 3rdAlcove, A.Ou, AThing,
Aaronthegr8, AbsolutDan, Acroterion, Aenar, Aiowe ;nhg8ohegpo8haeog, Airplanesrus, Akanemoto, Aldux, Alfred Legrand, Aligebra,
AllUrBseRB3l0ngToM3, Alpha 4615, AlphaEta, Alphachimp, Amir1981, Amire80, Amitprabhakar, Andre Engels, Andres, AndrewHowse, AndyZ, Angela,
Angus Lepper, Antandrus, Anthony Appleyard, Arab League, Archanamiya, Aristotle2600, Artichoker, Artistspace222, Ascend, AugPi, AxelBoldt, Ayman,
Aziz1005, BANMENOWPLZ, BD2412, Badagnani, Balloonguy, Barnaby dawson, BaronLarf, Batkins, Bbowenjr, Bcherkas, Ben Standeven,
Benandorsqueaks, Bertfried Fauser, Bfigura, Bgohla, BlueAmethyst, BlueDevil, Bobblewik, Bobo192, Bogey97, Bongwarrior, Boothy443, Bored461,
Boud, Brian0918, Brion VIBBER, Brona, Bryan Derksen, BuickCenturyDriver, Bumdah, Burntsauce, Burzmali, C1932, Calor, Caltas, Can't sleep, clown
will eat me, CanadianLinuxUser, Canyouhearmenow, Captmog, Casito, Ccmolik, Cdthedude, Cenarium, Charles Matthews, Chase me ladies, I'm the
Cavalry, Chiapr, Chinju, Chris 73, CiteCop, Cleared as filed, Cliff smith, Closedmouth, Commator, Conversion script, Coolfire276, Corti, Cowsnatcher27,
CrackdownSamSung, Cronholm144, Cyp, DVader, Dagger20, Dale S. Satre, Dan100, Danaghafari, DancingMan, DanielCD, Danski14, Dantecubed,
DaveReece, Daven200520, David spector, DavidCBryant, DavidStern, Dbachmann, Dbfirs, Dcljr, DeadEyeArrow, DealPete, Delirium, Demmy100, Deor,
DerHexer, Diaa abdelmoneim, Dib14, Didre, Dietary Fiber, Dineshjk, Doctormatt, Dominus, Domthedude001, DopefishJustin, Dorum, Doug Hogg,
Drilnoth, Dusti, Dysepsion, Dysprosia, E-Dogg, ERHSHaxor, ESkog, Ed Poor, EdJohnston, Edgesnext, Editor91, Edivorce, Edward Z. Yang, Edward321,
Egil, El C, Eleinax0x0, Emilva, Endersdouble, Epbr123, Erikp 92, Everyking, Evil Monkey, EyeSerene, Ezh, Fantastic4boy, Farmanesh, Fastfission,
Fatima irshad, Fheo, Finngall, Fivelittlemonkeys, Flatbush756, FocalPoint, Francine 21, Frecklefoot, Fred Fury, Fredrik, Fresheneesz, Fsotrain09,
Fullmetal123321, Fumblebruschi, G O T R, GHe, Gail, Gaius Cornelius, Galoubet, Gary King, Garzo, Gauge, Gauss, Gene Ward Smith, Geometry guy,
Geomprof, Giftlite, Gilgamesh, Gilliam, Gnp, Go for it!, Gogo Dodo, Googl, GoonerDP, GraemeL, Grokmoo, Grubber, Gtg204y, Guanaco, Gurchzilla,
Gökhan, Haakon, Hacker300, Hairy Dude, HalfShadow, Hbent, Heatmizer323, Heron, Hi332211-, Hippie Metalhead, Hornetchuck,
Howsthatfordamage25, Hut 8.5, I need a name, Icep, Ichudov, Ido50, Imawsome, Inflate, Iraq-Irak, Iridescent, Irishguy, Ivan Štambuk, J'raxis, JGHowes,
JVz, JackSchmidt, Jagged 85, Jamesfranklingresham, Jaredroberts, Jclemens, Jddphd, Jeff Fries, Jeff G., Jeff3000, Jennavecia, Jidan, Jiddisch, Jim, Jirt,
Jitse Niesen, Jmartinsson, JodyB, Joe Faust, Joel Butts, John, JohnSteinbeck, Johndburger, Jordgubbe, Jossi, Jumbuck, Kamek900, Kanags, Karada,
Karafias, Kaspg, Keilana, Ken Kuniyuki, Kevin Ryde, Keycard, Khoikhoi, Kierah, Kilva, Kingnosis, Kirbytime, Klausness, KnowledgeOfSelf, KopiKat,
Kozuch, Kpthanuman, KrakatoaKatie, Kukini, Kuratowski's Ghost, Kuru, La goutte de pluie, Lambiam, Lantonov, LarsTheViking, Latka, LeaveSleaves,
LeeG, Leonard^Bloom, Lesotho, Lights, Linas, LinkTiger, Llanowan, Lolololh4x, Lost-theory, Luna Santin, Ma Baker, Macintosh User, Macy, Madden
king, Makmac22, Malhonen, Manop, Manouchehr78, Mardavich, Mark J, MarkSweep, Markdraper, Markerdancerboy, Mas0090, Masonprof,
Masterjake1295, Math Teacher, Mattbrundage, Matthew0028, Maurreen, Mav, Mayumashu, MearsMan, Meegs, Meggar, Metagraph, Mets501, Michael
Devore, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, MichaelCaricofe, Miladsafa, MindstormsKid, Miquonranger03, Miranda, Miss Madeline, Mk*, Monkeyboy1268,
Monty845, Mountainofdoom, Mr Rofl, MrFish, Mrdthree, Ms2ger, Msh210, Mukadderat, Mumia-w-18, Mxn, Mysdaao, Mzajac, NERIC-Security,
Nabuchadnessar, Natalie Erin, NawlinWiki, Ncfriel, Ncmvocalist, Neonstarlight, Nery00, Netesq, Neverquick, NewEnglandYankee, Nibuod, Nikai,
Nilamdoc, NinjaCharlie, Nintendomon74, Nis81, Nivix, Nixdorf, Nk, No Guru, Nousernamesleft, Nymphomaniac, Obradovic Goran, Oda Mari, Oleg
Alexandrov, Oliver202, Oliverkroll, One-dimensional Tangent, Onebravemonkey, Orioneight, Palestine48, Paolo.dL, Paul August, PeaceNT, Pengo,
PeterSymonds, Pfffff, Pizza Puzzle, Platinum Knight, Poetaris, Poor Yorick, Pranathi, Prashanthns, Prb4, Ptk, Puchiko, Puranjan Dev, Pwqn, Python eggs,
Qwertyus, R3m0t, RSStockdale, RainbowOfLight, Ramah71, Randomblue, RandorXeus, Raptorz, RayGates, Rdobet, Rdsmith4, Rebrane, Reccanboy,
RedKlonoa, Res2216firestar, RexNL, Reywas92, Rgclegg, Riana, Rich Farmbrough, Rjanag, Rmsgrey, RobHar, Romanm, Rose Garden, Ruud Koot,
Ruwanraj, Ryan524, RyanCross, S56k, SP angel 1, Salix alba, Sam Hocevar, Samtheboy, Samuelsen, Sangwinc, Sannse, Sayama, Saycgthm999,
Sbarnard, SchfiftyThree, Sciurinæ, Scohoust, Sdornan, Sean Whitton, Sebesta, Secretlondon, Selfworm, Senator Palpatine, Sgunteratparamus.k12.nj.us,
Shanel, Shanes, Shastra, Shoessss, SidJ, Silly rabbit, SilverSurf, Siroxo, Skull eyes, Slakr, Smmurphy, Snowmanmelting, Snowolf, Sohmc, SpectrumDT,
Spiff, Squirepants101, StarcraftBuff, Stargazer84, Starship Trooper, Stiltskin, Stinerman, Strawberryx7, Stumps, Suliu, Sweetkidjoey, Swerdnaneb,
THEN WHO WAS PHONE?, THF, TJTheRealist36, TakuyaMurata, Tarquin, Tbsmith, Tcop, TeH nOmInAtOr, Terence, That Guy, From That Show!, The
Rambling Man, The Transhumanist (AWB), The dark lord trombonator, TheDarkArchon, TheKMan, Thebrat132, Thefutureschannel, Thingg, Think
outside the box, Tifego, Timir2, Tista, Titoxd, Tompw, Tony Fox, Tonybrown100, Treelo, Trickmyster, TrigWorks, Triona, Trovatore, Trusilver,
Tumadreescaliente, Twooars, TylerDorsanoTJmans, Ubertoaster, Uhomako, Undeadwarlock, Unknownroad4, Ur ugly face, Useight, Utcursch, VASANTH
S.N., VSimonian, Van helsing, Vary, Vertaloni, Vina, Viskonsas, Vivero, Vv22, WCX, WODUP, Waynebrady 77, Weierstraß, Westfall, Weston.pace, Wiki
alf, Wikilibrarian, Wmahan, Wmgan, Woohookitty, Wormdoggy, Xantharius, Xanthoxyl, Xaos, Xavic69, Xiahou, YK Times, Yafujifide, Yamamoto Ichiro,
Yanksox, Yboord028, YellowMonkey, Yorick8080, Youlittlehandsomeguy, Zaharous, Zarvok, Zaslav, Zereshk, Zimbardo Cookie Experiment, Zundark,
Zytroft, 917 anonymous edits
Abstract Algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=290580326  Contributors: -
Algebraic logic  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295384025  Contributors: CBM, Chalst, Charles Matthews, Elwikipedista, EmilJ,
Giftlite, Gregbard, Hmains, Jitse Niesen, Mhss, Michael Hardy, PWilkinson, Palnot, Strangename, The Tetrast, Trovatore, 11 anonymous edits

Article Sources and Contributors
709
Galois group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=288834798  Contributors: Alro, AugPi, AxelBoldt, Charles Matthews, Chowbok,
Conversion script, Cwkmail, Dan Gardner, Daniel Mahu, Dmharvey, Dysprosia, EmilJ, Fredrik, Giftlite, Grubber, Hesam7, JackSchmidt, Jakob.scholbach,
Keyi, Lagelspeil, Loren Rosen, MattTait, Michael Hardy, Moxmalin, RobHar, TakuyaMurata, TomyDuby, Unyoyega, Vivacissamamente, Zundark, 12
anonymous edits
Galois theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295594995  Contributors: Abdullais4u, AxelBoldt, Boojum, C S, Charles Matthews,
Chas zzz brown, Chtito, Cwkmail, D6, DDerbes, Dino, Dmharvey, Dogaroon, Dominus, Drae, Dunkstr, Dysprosia, Eef (A), Fibonacci, Figma, Fintler,
Flamingspinach, Forcey, Giftlite, Glimz, Gnomz007, GregorB, Hadal, Haham hanuka, HannsEwald, Iames, Instantaneous, JYOuyang, JackSchmidt,
Jakob.scholbach, Jan Hidders, Jasperdoomen, Jim Horning, John Reid, Juan Marquez, KnightRider, Lenthe, Linas, Lunae, Magmi, MathMartin, Mazi,
Michael Hardy, Msh210, Nbarth, OggSmith, Olivier, Ouedbirdwatcher, Quuxplusone, Rbonvall, Reilly, Robertwb, RonnieBrown, Salix alba, Scott
Tillinghast, Houston TX, Smaines, StradivariusTV, TakuyaMurata, Tokek, TomyDuby, Turgidson, Ugha, Until It Sleeps, Vivacissamamente, Xanzzibar,
Zundark, გიგა, 71 anonymous edits
Grothendieck's Galois theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=280265702  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Gaius Cornelius,
Jim.belk, Makotoy, Michael Slone, RonnieBrown, Stephenb, TKilbourn, Vivacissamamente, 5 anonymous edits
Table of contents  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=283570796  Contributors: RichardF
Algebraic Topology  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=174443973  Contributors: -
Open set  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297179995  Contributors: AutomaticWriting, AxelBoldt, Cbigorgne, Chrystomath, Ciphers,
Daniele.tampieri, Dethron, Dharma6662000, Dino, Drini, Dslc, Dubhe.sk, Dysprosia, Elwikipedista, Foxjwill, Gerweck, Giftlite, Hairy Dude, Incnis Mrsi,
Iorsh, Iulianu, Jackzhp, Joeabauer, Jordankayla123, K-UNIT, Lethe, LiDaobing, LkNsngth, MartinPackerIBM, MathMartin, MiNombreDeGuerra, Miguel,
Mike Segal, Moxfyre, Mpatel, Nickj, Nsaa, Obradovic Goran, Oleg Alexandrov, Patrick, Paul August, Pdbailey, Point-set topologist, Pred, Python eggs,
Qwfp, Richard Giuly, Rob Hooft, Saforrest, Salix alba, Simetrical, Taral, Tchakra, Thobitz, Toby, Toby Bartels, Tzanko Matev, VKokielov, Wikiborg,
XJamRastafire, Xantharius, Zundark, 42 anonymous edits
Topology  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297203266  Contributors: 160.94.28.xxx, 213.253.40.xxx, 2D, ADOGisAboat, APH, AbcXyz,
Abdull, Aidanb, Alan U. Kennington, Algebraist, Alsandro, Altenmann, Anilkumarphysics, Aristolaos, Atoll, Aude, AxelBoldt, Bazza1971, Bdesham,
Bentong Isles, Betacommand, Borgx, Brentt, Brion VIBBER, Bubba hotep, Byrgenwulf, C S, Camembert, CesarB, Chaojoker, Chaos, Charles Matthews,
Charvest, Cokebingo, Conversion script, Corpx, Cryptic, Curps, Cyp, D6, Dan Gardner, Daniarmo, Danog, Darkov, Darth Panda, David Kernow,
Dbenbenn, Dcoetzee, Delldot, Deputyduck, Derbeth, Dharma6662000, Digby Tantrum, Dino, Discospinster, Divisbyzero, Dmr2, Donreed, Dr. Gabriel
Gojon, Drini, Dylan Thurston, Dysprosia, Dzordzm, ELApro, El C, Emeraldcityserendipity, Enviroboy, Epbr123, ErickOrtiz, Everyking, Evil saltine,
Fieldday-sunday, Fropuff, GTBacchus, Gadfium, Gandalf61, Gaoos, Gauge, Gauss, Geoffr, George Kontopoulos, Giftlite, Gilliam, Gnomon, GromXXVII,
Guanaco, Haham hanuka, Hairy Dude, Hede2000, Henrygb, Hephaestos, Hhanke, Honza Záruba, Hyacinth, Hychu, Ilmari Karonen, Imroy, Inter, Ioeth,
Isotope23, Ivan Štambuk, J. Charles Taylor, J.delanoy, Jackohare, Jbolden1517, Jeanmichel, Jludwig, Jon Awbrey, Jorgen W, Joth, Jozal, Jrolland, Jumbuck,
Jung dalglish, Jusjih, Jyril, K-topology, Karada, Katzmik, Kevin Saff, Kieff, Knakts, KnowledgeOfSelf, Kumioko, Laurentseries, Lethe, Liftarn, Linas,
MER-C, MONGO, Madmath789, Manatee331, Marc Venot, Mariontte User, Mark Foskey, MathMartin, Maurreen, Maximaximax, Mayumashu, Mdd,
Meldor, Mhym, MiNombreDeGuerra, MiamiMath, Michael Hardy, MightCould, Miguel, Mmernex, Monty42, Mountain, Mr Stephen, MrOllie, Msh210,
Mxn, Natkeeran, Nicinic, Nick Levine, Nivix, NonNobis, Nousernamesleft, Novjunulo, Oleg Alexandrov, Oliphaunt, Olivier, Onco p53, Orz, Patrick, Paul
August, Pax:Vobiscum, Pdenapo, Pendlehaven, Philosotox, Point-set topologist, Porcher, Prophile, Prosfilaes, Ptk, PyroGamer, Qxz, Ramir, RandomP,
Ranicki, Rick Norwood, Rknasc, Robertabrams, Robinh, Rootneg2, Rory096, Rudolf 1922, Rybu, Saeed, Salix alba, Sammtamm, Sannse, SapphireJay,
Shenme, Sicro, Skizzik, Skomorokh, SnakeChess5, Softkitten88, Spamguy, Starship Trooper, Stefan Udrea, Steinsky, Stephenb, Stevage, Sullivan.t.j,
TMott, Ta bu shi da yu, TakuyaMurata, Tangotango, Tchakra, TeH nOmInAtOr, TechnoGuyRob, Tetracube, TexasDex, The Anome, The Ogre, TheSmuel,
Thevelho, Tobias Bergemann, Toby, Toby Bartels, Tompw, Topologyxpert, Tosha, Triathematician, Triwbe, Trovatore, Ttopperr, Turgidson, User27091,
Usgnus, Varuna, Velho, Violetriga, Voice of All, WadeSimMiser, Weialawaga, Weixifan, Werratal, Wik, Wikikris, Wolfrock, Wshun, XJamRastafire,
Yamamoto Ichiro, Zoicon5, Zundark, 288 anonymous edits
Topological property  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=282868713  Contributors: Askirz, Charles Matthews, Fropuff, Gregbard,
Hardmath, J.delanoy, Kompik, Kuratowski's Ghost, Lethe, Linas, MathMartin, MiNombreDeGuerra, Michael Hardy, Ntsimp, Orionus, Patrick, Paul
August, Peruvianllama, Plclark, Pomte, R.e.b., Tobias Bergemann, Trovatore, 13 anonymous edits
Topological space  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295153185  Contributors: Algebraist, Andrew Delong, AnnaFrance, Anonymous
Dissident, Arcfrk, Arialblack, Aude, AxelBoldt, Charles Matthews, Ciphers, Conversion script, Danog, Dcoetzee, DefLog, Dineshjk, Dolda2000, Dysprosia,
Eaefremov, Elwikipedista, Failure.exe, FlordiaSunshine342, Fredrik, Fropuff, Gene Ward Smith, Giftlite, Hairy Dude, Hirak 99, Iridescent, J.delanoy,
JackSchmidt, JerroldPease-Atlanta, JoanneB, Karada, Kbk, Keenan Pepper, Kku, Kuratowski's Ghost, Lendu, Lethe, LkNsngth, Luqui, Maksim-e,
MathMartin, MiNombreDeGuerra, Michael Hardy, Msh210, Oleg Alexandrov, Olivier, P0lyglut, Palnot, Patrick, Paul August, Pharaoh of the Wizards,
Phys, Plclark, Revolver, Rhobite, Rick Norwood, Roccorossi, Saaska, Salgueiro, Sciyoshi, SgtThroat, Spambit, Stefan Udrea, Taxman, The Mudge, Tillmo,
Tobias Bergemann, Toby Bartels, Tompw, Tschwenn, Varuna, Vriullop, Wshun, XJamRastafire, Xantharius, YK Times, Zhaoway, Zundark, 104 anonymous
edits
Continuous function (topology)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=286808193  Contributors: ABCD, Archelon, Arjun r acharya,
Charles Matthews, Cronholm144, Dcoetzee, Dysprosia, Elroch, Fropuff, Giftlite, Hairy Dude, JahJah, Jopxton, Karl-Henner, Kilva, LachlanA, Leoremy,
Lethe, MathMartin, Michael Hardy, Patrick, Phil Boswell, Phys, Revolver, S14235325235, Sniffnoy, Squizzz, Tosha, 24 anonymous edits
Fibration  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294566271  Contributors: Charles Matthews, DanGrayson, Docu, Dysprosia, Fropuff, Gaius
Cornelius, Gauge, Georg Muntingh, Giftlite, Heron, Jag123, Jakob.scholbach, John Z, Kcordina, Keyi, Loren Rosen, MarSch, Masnevets, Mets501,
Michael Slone, Nbarth, Phys, PigFlu Oink, R nendo, Sam Staton, Smimram, Sylvain Mielot, TakuyaMurata, Tosha, Woohookitty, 9 anonymous edits
Homeomorphism  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289795389  Contributors: Ahoerstemeier, Andrew Delong, Arjun r acharya, Asztal,
AxelBoldt, BenFrantzDale, Brians, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, Declan Davis, Dominus, Dysprosia, Elwikipedista, EmilJ, Explorall, Frencheigh,
Fropuff, Giftlite, Glenn, Hadal, Hakeem.gadi, Juan Marquez, Kieff, Linas, Mark Foskey, MathKnight, MathMartin, Michael Angelkovich, Michael Hardy,
Miguel, MisfitToys, Msh210, Nbarth, Ojigiri, Oleg Alexandrov, Orionus, Orthografer, Parudox, Paul August, Pengo, Prijutme4ty, Renamed user 1, Salix
alba, Seqsea, SingingDragon, Tasoskessaris, The cattr, TheObtuseAngleOfDoom, ThomasWinwood, Toby Bartels, Topology Expert, Tosha, Vonkje,
Weialawaga, Wjmallard, XJamRastafire, Xmlizer, Youandme, Zero sharp, Zhaoway, Zundark,  ,ينام47 anonymous edits
Compact space  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294556390  Contributors: ALife, Algebraist, Algebran, Andi5, Andre Engels,
AxelBoldt, Bdmy, BenKovitz, BeteNoir, Blair P. Houghton, Caesura, Calvin 1998, Cenarium, Charles Matthews, Ciphers, Compsonheir, Conversion script,
DRMacIver, Dbastos, Dbeatty, Dcoetzee, Deadlyhair, Dionyziz, Dysprosia, Eigenlambda, El C, Eraserhead1, Eric Kvaalen, Fakhredinblog, Fell Collar,
Firebirth, Fropuff, Futurebird, Gandalfxviv, GeoffO, Giftlite, Gmaxwell, Ht686rg90, J.delanoy, JackSchmidt, JohnyDog, Landonproctor, Lenthe, Lethe,
Linas, Lumos3, ManoaChild, Markus Krötzsch, MathMartin, Mathematix, Matt Crypto, Michael Hardy, Mike Segal, Neocapitalist, Numbo3,
OdedSchramm, Oleg Alexandrov, Patrick, Paul August, Plclark, Pyrop, Python eggs, Qwertyus, RFightmaster, Revolver, Roed314, Roquedias, Silly rabbit,
Slaniel, Sniffnoy, Sullivan.t.j, Sławomir Biały, TakuyaMurata, TedPavlic, Template namespace initialisation script, Teorth, Tobias Bergemann, Toby, Toby
Bartels, TomyDuby, Topology Expert, Tosha, Trovatore, Vipul, Vivacissamamente, Weialawaga, Wikimorphism, Youandme, Zoicon5, Zundark, Саша
Стефановић, 77 anonymous edits
Hausdorff space  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293370003  Contributors: .:Ajvol:., 0, 194.117.133.xxx, Alazaris, AxelBoldt,
B4hand, BenKovitz, Charles Matthews, Ciphers, Clarknova, Conversion script, Cyp, DVD R W, Dallashan, Dcoetzee, Dharma6662000, Dp462090,
Dysprosia, EconomicsGuy, El C, Ellywa, Eric Kvaalen, Fibonacci, Fropuff, Germandemat, Giftlite, Grendelkhan, Hairy Dude, Icairns, Ideyal, JakeVortex,
Jessesaurus, Jim Slim, Jon Awbrey, Kennethleebaker, Linas, Magnus Manske, MathMartin, Mets501, Michael Hardy, Paul August, Randomblue, RobHar,
Salgueiro, Sławomir Biały, TakuyaMurata, Tarquin, TedPavlic, Tobias Bergemann, Toby Bartels, Tosha, Vasile, Vipul, Westendgirl, Zundark, 25
anonymous edits

Article Sources and Contributors
710
Tangent space  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289062182  Contributors: 212.29.241.xxx, Ahadley, Alexwright, AugPi, AxelBoldt,
BenFrantzDale, Bepube, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, David Cherney, Dysprosia, EconoPhysicist, Everyking, Forgetfulfunctor, Fropuff,
Geometry guy, Ht686rg90, Isnow, Jitse Niesen, Juan Marquez, KnightRider, Lysdexia, MarSch, McSush, Michael Kinyon, Ogai, Phatsphere, Raven in
Orbit, Rich Farmbrough, SetaLyas, Silly rabbit, TakuyaMurata, Tangent Bundle, Tosha, Waltpohl, Weialawaga, Zero sharp, 28 anonymous edits
Riemann space  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=56700434  Contributors: -
Riemannian manifold  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=284796056  Contributors: Anville, AugPi, AxelBoldt, BenFrantzDale, Charles
Matthews, Dr. Leibniz, Ersik, Fropuff, Gauge, Geo.per, Giftlite, Hairy Dude, Hanshuo, Haseldon, Ht686rg90, Isnow, Jakob.scholbach, Jitse Niesen, Josh
Parris, Jxr, Lantonov, Lethe, Linas, MarSch, Masterpiece2000, Mav, Mct mht, Michael Hardy, Oleg Alexandrov, Oliver Pereira, Owen, Pfortuny, Phys,
Quietbritishjim, Qutezuce, Salix alba, Silly rabbit, Sullivan.t.j, Susurrus, Tajmahall, TakuyaMurata, Terse, ToddFincannon, Tomisti, TomyDuby, Tosha,
Ulner, Woseph, Xantharius, Zadigus, 26 anonymous edits
Kähler manifold  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295261325  Contributors: Benzh, Charles Matthews, Cronholm144, Dysprosia,
Ebyabe, Fropuff, Gene Nygaard, Geometry guy, Giftlite, Gro-Tsen, Hottiger, Ideal gas equation, Jbaber, Jjauregui, Lantonov, Linas, MFH, Maliz, MarSch,
Michael Hardy, Nbarth, Nsk92, Orthografer, Pjacobi, Shellgirl, Topology Expert, Tosha, Unyoyega, Uruk2008, 13 anonymous edits
Calabi–Yau manifold  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295261548  Contributors: Aaron Meyers, Anville, Arcfrk, BesigedB, Bryan
Derksen, CBM, Ceyockey, Charles Matthews, Daibhid C, Dan Gluck, Ddirac, Deryck Chan, Dmr2, Docu, Dorftrottel, El C, Euyyn, Fropuff, Gauge,
Geometry guy, Giftlite, Giro720, Gtrmp, Hadal, Headbomb, Hephaestos, Isnow, Jakob.scholbach, JarahE, Jbourjai, JerrySteal, Juhachi, Justo, KSmrq,
Kurochka, Lethe, LilHelpa, Lionelbrits, Lumidek, Lunch, MSGJ, MarSch, Michael Hardy, Migp, Mordent, Mreplatinum, Nbarth, Olaf Davis, Owen,
Paulnwatts, Pfortuny, Phys, Pissant, Pjacobi, Pleasantville, PrimeHunter, Quadell, R.e.b., Silentaria, SlashDot, Spiegelprime, The Anome, Tosha,
Toyotacorona, Tr!stan, Unyoyega, Uruk2008, WLior, Zahd, Zchenyu, Zoe, Zsejk, 61 anonymous edits
Pseudo- Riemannian manifold  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295634990  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Dcoetzee, Fropuff,
Giftlite, Haseldon, Hillman, Hotcrocodile, Isnow, JATerg, Konradek, Linas, Michael Hardy, Mmoroz, Modify, Notheruser, Phys, Raven in Orbit, RobHar,
Ryan Roos, StevenJohnston, Tosha, Vancouverguy, William Ackerman, 16 anonymous edits
Hypersurface  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296331045  Contributors: Anonymous Dissident, Charles Matthews, Fropuff, Giftlite,
Julian Mendez, Kit.macallister, Linas, Longbowman, MD87, Oleg Alexandrov, Rgdboer, Template namespace initialisation script, The Great Redirector, 4
anonymous edits
CR manifold  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=265746561  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Cronholm144, Giftlite, Reyk, Silly rabbit,
Tango, 2 anonymous edits
Symplectic manifold  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293744904  Contributors: 192.115.22.xxx, 198.81.16.xxx, 212.29.241.xxx,
AmarChandra, Anonymous editor, AxelBoldt, BenBaker, BenFrantzDale, Bobo192, CUSENZA Mario, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, David Farris,
DefLog, Dysprosia, Erkabo, Fropuff, Gaius Cornelius, Geometry guy, Giftlite, Gsard, Gzornenplatz, Ht686rg90, Jitse Niesen, KSmrq, Katzmik,
KnightRider, Linas, Longhair, Loren Rosen, Mathieu Perrin, Miguel, Msh210, Nbarth, Orthografer, Pfortuny, Phys, Pjacobi, R.e.b., Silly rabbit, Sympleko,
Sławomir Biały, Tobias Bergemann, Tosha, VectorPosse, Wesley, Whiterabbit74, Мыша, 27 anonymous edits
Betti number  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293813409  Contributors: Abiola Lapite, Charles Matthews, Chris Pressey, David
Eppstein, Dysprosia, Giftlite, Graham87, Jayme, Joerite, KSmrq, Mathsci, Msh210, Nbarth, Phys, Shawnarchy, Silly rabbit, Smimram, Taxipom, Tosha,
Turgidson, Woood, 18 anonymous edits
Euler characteristic  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296766800  Contributors: 1984, 345Kai, Aghitza, Akriasas, Almwi, Awegmann,
AxelBoldt, AyAn4m1, Bellhalla, CRGreathouse, Cbuckley, Charles Matthews, ChrisRuvolo, Colonies Chris, DESiegel, DO'Neil, David Eppstein,
Divisbyzero, Dominus, Doodle77, Dysprosia, Edemaine, Eequor, Engbers, Giftlite, Isnow, JYOuyang, Jjauregui, Jml104, KSmrq, Keyi, Kieff, Kmhkmh,
Maggu, Maksim-e, MathMartin, Mgnbar, Mhym, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Msh210, Nbarth, NoSyu, Oleg Alexandrov, Patrick, Paul August, PhiJ,
Salix alba, Sbisolo, Sigfpe, Stannered, Stephen.c.johnson, Svick, Thehotelambush, TimDoster, Togo, Tomo, Tomruen, Tosha, Voorlandt, Yuliyag, ,.ב לאינד
58 anonymous edits
Presheaf (category theory)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=213420460  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Smimram, Thiseye, Toby
Bartels, 5 anonymous edits
Sheaf (mathematics)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=292241404  Contributors: AJRobbins, Angela, Arcfrk, Archelon, Avihu,
AxelBoldt, Blotwell, Brockert, C quest000, Chalst, Charles Matthews, Clicketyclack, Crisófilax, Cícero, Daniele.tampieri, David96, Dharma6662000,
Dmharvey, Dominus, Dr Caligari, Dysprosia, ED, Elwikipedista, Filos96, Fropuff, Galoubet, Gauge, Geometry guy, Giftlite, GregorB, Hans Lundmark,
Ivanip, Jakob.scholbach, James pic, Jason Quinn, Jeff3000, Jor, Karada, Komap, Ksoileau, Leland McInnes, Lethe, Linas, MFH, MNAdam, MarSch,
MathMartin, Mhss, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Miguel, Mistercupcake, Mlm42, Msh210, Nbarth, Negi(afk), Nommonomanac, Ozob, Paul August,
Pfortuny, PhilKnight, Phys, Rich Farmbrough, Rjwilmsi, Ron.garcia, Rswarbrick, Rvollmert, S84, Sam Hocevar, Shinsonh, Smimram, Stca74, Tesseran,
Toby Bartels, Tyrrell McAllister, Unara, Vivacissamamente, Youssefsan, Zundark, 94 anonymous edits
Postnikov system  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296167676  Contributors: Michael Hardy, Oleg Alexandrov, Tilmanbauer
Grothendieck topology  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=260838291  Contributors: AxelBoldt, Changbao, Charles Matthews, Chas
zzz brown, Cherlin, Conversion script, Elwikipedista, Fropuff, Gauge, Giftlite, Jakob.scholbach, Jcreed, Jinhyun park, Michael Hardy, Owenjonesuk, Ozob,
PatheticHuman, Perelaar, Toby Bartels, 57 anonymous edits
Groupoid  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296322858  Contributors: 3mta3, Akriasas, Altenmann, Ancheta Wis, Andreasabel, Angela,
Aretakis, AxelBoldt, Bci1new, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, Damian Yerrick, DavidHobby, DefLog, Drini, Elwikipedista, Finn-Zoltan, Fropuff,
Functor salad, Giftlite, Hairy Dude, Hamaryns, Hqb, Jakob.scholbach, Joelr31, Kate, Lethe, Linas, MarSch, Masnevets, Mattblack82, Mets501, Michael K.
Edwards, Mike40033, Nbarth, Pmanderson, RDOlivaw, RonnieBrown, Salgueiro, Salix alba, Sam Hocevar, Sjf, Smimram, TheObtuseAngleOfDoom, Toby
Bartels, Zaslav, Zero sharp, Zundark, 43 anonymous edits
Lie groupoid  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=254416394  Contributors: DefLog, Docu, Jemiller226, John Baez, Key45, Keyi, Phys,
Tirabo, 7 anonymous edits
Lie algebroid  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=252791203  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Cypa, Docu, FlyHigh, John Baez, Keyi,
Lukaste, Maurreen, Oleg Alexandrov, Phys, Stca74, 12 anonymous edits
Algebroid  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=64120926  Contributors: Charles Matthews, GregorB
Fundamental group  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=290665031  Contributors: Akriasas, Alksentrs, Andi5, Archelon, AxelBoldt,
Blotwell, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, Cruccone, Dan Gardner, Declan Davis, Dpv, Dysprosia, Fropuff, Gauge, Giftlite, Haiviet, Ht686rg90,
JackSchmidt, Jakob.scholbach, Klausness, Lethe, Linas, Mathsci, Michael Hardy, Msh210, Myasuda, Nbarth, OdedSchramm, Orthografer, Patrick, Phys,
Point-set topologist, Poor Yorick, R.e.b., Ranicki, Raven in Orbit, Rgrizza, Ringspectrum, Rjwilmsi, Sam nead, Silly rabbit, Staecker, TakuyaMurata,
Tobias Bergemann, Tosha, Turgidson, Wlod, Zundark, 26 anonymous edits
Homotopy  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295120831  Contributors: Alabama Moon, AxelBoldt, BenFrantzDale, Blotwell, Charles 
Matthews, Ciphergoth, Cmapm, DMacks, Dan Gardner, David Eppstein, Delirium, Dmoews, Drbreznjev, Dysprosia, Gauge, Giftlite, Gorlim, Gwaihir, 
Haiviet, HenrikRueping, Ht686rg90, JoergenB, Joshuabowman, Juan Marquez, KSmrq, Kummi, Linas, Lupin, Masnevets, MathMartin, Mct mht, Mhss, 
Michael Hardy, Mintleaf, Msh210, Nbarth, Obradovic Goran, PMDrive1061, Phys, Physis, Raman Arora, Ranicki, RobHar, Salix alba, Silly rabbit, 
Squa-la-la! We're off!, Sullivan.t.j, TakuyaMurata, The Raven, TheObtuseAngleOfDoom, Timinou, Tkeu, Wik, Yahya Abdal-Aziz, Zerxp, Zundark, 32

Article Sources and Contributors
711
anonymous edits
Crossed module  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=236749698  Contributors: Bgohla, Charles Matthews, John Baez, Joriki, Oleg
Alexandrov, RonnieBrown, Toby Bartels, 2 anonymous edits
Homology (mathematics)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296317630  Contributors: Amdk8800, Aretakis, Bejnar, Blotwell, Charles
Matthews, Christopher Parham, David Eppstein, David Shay, Dysprosia, Elwikipedista, Feraudyh, Fropuff, GTBacchus, Giftlite, Gigapixel, Hasanisawi,
Heldergeovane, JackSchmidt, JensG, Lbeuschlein, Linas, Lumidek, Masnevets, Michael Hardy, Msh210, Nbarth, Omnipedian, Orthografer, Paul August,
Ranicki, Ryan Reich, Silly rabbit, Toby Bartels, Tong, Topology Expert, Turgidson, Waltpohl, Zundark, 30 anonymous edits
Cohomology  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293388573  Contributors: Al Lemos, Bejnar, Charles Matthews, Cícero, Dan Gardner,
Dreadstar, Dysprosia, Finlay McWalter, Fropuff, Gauge, Giftlite, Henry Delforn, Heron, JahJah, JamieVicary, Jko, Jon Awbrey, Lethe, Linas, Looxix,
MarSch, MathMartin, Mgnbar, Michael Slone, Mlm42, Msh210, Nbarth, Savarona, Silly rabbit, Tomerfekete, Tosha, Turgidson, UU, Zaslav, 24
anonymous edits
Homology theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=265456344  Contributors: Ahmed Sammy, Charles Matthews, Dysprosia, Finlay
McWalter, Fowler&fowler, Gdr, GeometryGirl, Giganut, Jon Awbrey, Lethe, Light current, Linas, Msh210, Neparis, Patrick, Point-set topologist, R.e.b.,
Turgidson, UU, Waltpohl, 11 anonymous edits
Chain complex  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296956165  Contributors: Andi5, Andri Egilsson, AxelBoldt, Charles Matthews,
Commentor, Computer97, Daniel GG, David Eppstein, David Farris, Gauge, Giftlite, Jakob.scholbach, JeLuF, Jkloos, MarSch, MathMartin, Mct mht,
Molinagaray, Msh210, Oleg Alexandrov, Phil Boswell, SMP, Silly rabbit, Vivacissamamente, Waltpohl, Wckronholm, 19 anonymous edits
Crystalline cohomology  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296317768  Contributors: Arcfrk, Bci2, Charles Matthews, Giftlite,
Jakob.scholbach, Lohengrin9, R.e.b., Rich Farmbrough, Sharlaon, Silly rabbit, Voorlandt, 5 anonymous edits
Homological algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=283231230  Contributors: Alberto da Calvairate, Arcfrk, AxelBoldt, Bobo192,
Charles Matthews, Cícero, Dysprosia, Gauge, GeometryGirl, Giftlite, Icairns, Jakob.scholbach, KSmrq, MathMartin, Mhss, Michael Slone, Msh210,
RobHar, Stca74, Turgidson, Youandme, 15 anonymous edits
Algebraic K- theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295080137  Contributors: ArnoldReinhold, Artie p, Bergsten, Betacommand,
Charles Matthews, ChrisCork, ChuckHG, ComplexZeta, DanGrayson, Der Shim, Dysprosia, Etale, Giftlite, Gwaihir, Harryboyles, Hesam7, JackSchmidt,
Jakob.scholbach, Joriki, Kwiki, Martin500, Msh210, Natalya, Nbarth, Nono64, Ranicki, Rich Farmbrough, Ringspectrum, Ryan Reich, Sam Staton, Silly
rabbit, Tbone762, Wurzel33, 17 anonymous edits
Topological K- theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297577773  Contributors: Adam1729, Charles Matthews, Cmdrjameson,
Fropuff, Giftlite, Henry Delforn, Keyi, Lethe, Molinagaray, Ryan Reich, Sam Derbyshire, Wurzel33, 2 anonymous edits
Stack (descent theory)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=290921658  Contributors: ABF, Gregbard, Hnaef, Lantonov, Stca74,
Truthanado, 1 anonymous edits
Esquisse d'un Programme  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297497449  Contributors: Ale jrb, Arbitrarily0, Bci2, D6, David Eppstein,
Hans Adler, Ilmari Karonen, Jons63, MichaelQSchmidt, Pohta ce-am pohtit, RobHar, Vanish2, 1 anonymous edits
Hairy ball theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296020046  Contributors: AKK, Abce2, Adashiel, Addshore, Anonymous
Dissident, Arbitrary username, Bdesham, BenFrantzDale, Benandorsqueaks, BeteNoir, Bobo192, Bradeos Graphon, C S, CBM, Catslash, Charles
Matthews, Choihei, Commander Keane, Crushthor, CryptoDerk, Dan Gardner, Dmmaus, Doktor, Dominus, DragonflySixtyseven, Dysprosia,
Edinborgarstefan, ElKevbo, Elb2000, Epbr123, Femto, FireV, Func, Gdawg69, Gerbrant, Giantpinkdick, Giftlite, Goathair, Grue, Habbit, HappyCamper,
HelloAnnyong, Hezekiah Blackalicious, Indon, Iridescent, JForget, Jafet, Jayyjayycurti, Jed 20012, Jsnx, K2king, KnowledgeOfSelf, Kostmo, Kreachure,
Krisos, Leif, Luca Antonelli, MKoltnow, Mark.detroit, Mathew5000, MetsFan76, Metterklume, MiNombreDeGuerra, Micheal dinardo, MilkMiruku,
Mindspillage, Nickhann, Oleg Alexandrov, Pak21, Paolo.dL, Paul August, Picaroon, Pjacobi, Pokipsy76, Polfbroekstraat, Postglock, Pred, Q5 den, Quentin
mcalmott, RadicalBender, Richard Arthur Norton (1958- ), Richard W.M. Jones, Robpatro, Roleplayer, Schneelocke, Sciyoshi, Sigfpe, Siroxo, Smjg,
Southwest, SpacemanAfrica, Staecker, Starshadow, TheKoG, Tijm6140, Tobias Bergemann, Vecter, Versus22, WallWriter, 110 anonymous edits
Universal coefficient theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=215208402  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Gwaihir, KSmrq,
Michael Devore, Simplifix, Zundark, 1 anonymous edits
Borsuk- Ulam theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=24431806  Contributors: -
Brouwer fixed point theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297701374  Contributors: Alexb@cut-the-knot.com, Angr, Arthena,
Arthur Rubin, AxelBoldt, Bdmy, BeteNoir, C S, Charles Matthews, Charleswallingford, Ciphergoth, Delaszk, Dogah, El C, Emvee, Experiment123, Giftlite,
Gillis, Gwaihir, Hans Adler, Hegariz, Henrygb, Heron, Ideal gas equation, James086, Jenny Harrison, Lambiam, Lechatjaune, LutzL, Matthew cargo,
Michael Hardy, Oleg Alexandrov, Patrick, Pm5, Quest for Truth, RJFJR, RaitisMath, Rich Farmbrough, Schneelocke, Silly rabbit, Stebulus, The Raven,
Tosha, Triathematician, Wickie, XJamRastafire, Xantharius, Zundark, 31 anonymous edits
Cellular approximation theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294973252  Contributors: Michael Hardy, Rasmus Hedegaard, 2
anonymous edits
Eilenberg–Zilber theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=285236229  Contributors: Artie p, Giftlite, Michael Slone, 4 anonymous
edits
Hurewicz theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289996581  Contributors: BeteNoir, Cgd8d, Charles Matthews, Cheesus,
Dcoetzee, Gauge, Haiviet, Jaberwocky6669, Jakob.scholbach, KSmrq, Linas, MarSch, Michael Hardy, RonnieBrown, Salix alba, Turgidson, 13 anonymous
edits
Künneth theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=270299760  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Cheesus, DVD R W, Dbenbenn,
Giftlite, KSmrq, Marhahs, Old Man Grumpus, Ozob, Ryan Reich, Silly rabbit, 12 anonymous edits
Poincaré duality theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=286401013  Contributors: AxelBoldt, Charles Matthews, Dan Gardner,
Fropuff, Gauge, Giftlite, Gorlim, JCSantos, Jakob.scholbach, Jcobb, JerroldPease-Atlanta, KnightRider, Masnevets, MathMartin, Michael Hardy, Nbarth,
Ranicki, Revolver, Rich Farmbrough, Ringspectrum, Rvollmert, Rybu, Sam nead, Silly rabbit, That Guy, From That Show!, Tomruen, Turgidson, 14
anonymous edits
Tychonoff's theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=290593349  Contributors: ABCD, Albmont, Amit Moscovich, Arthena,
AxelBoldt, BeteNoir, Charles Matthews, Chinju, Choni, Dcoetzee, Dogah, Dysprosia, Fibonacci, Giftlite, Grasyop, Haham hanuka, Jasperdoomen, Jinhyun
park, Linas, Lupin, Markus Krötzsch, MathMartin, Mets501, Michael Hardy, Momotaro, Oleg Alexandrov, Plclark, Point-set topologist, Poor Yorick,
Raijinili, Revolver, Ruud Koot, Ryan Reich, Selbiniyaz, Shalom Yechiel, Soler97, Sullivan.t.j, TakuyaMurata, Toby Bartels, Wjcook, Yosha, Zundark, Zvika,
54 anonymous edits
Tietze extension theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293182910  Contributors: AxelBoldt, BeteNoir, Charles Matthews,
Conversion script, Dysprosia, EmilJ, Filos96, Giftlite, Ideal gas equation, Jim Slim, Linas, Lupin, Sir Dagon, Squizzz, The Scarlet Letter, Zundark, 6
anonymous edits
Universal coefficient theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=215208402  Contributors: Charles Matthews, Gwaihir, KSmrq,
Michael Devore, Simplifix, Zundark, 1 anonymous edits

Article Sources and Contributors
712
Seifert–van Kampen theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297616200  Contributors: Akriasas, Aquishix, Bci1new, Bci2,
BeteNoir, C S, Charles Matthews, Compsonheir, Dan Gardner, Gala.martin, GeometryGirl, Giftlite, JackSchmidt, Kazakov, Lethe, Linas, LkNsngth, Mct
mht, Mistercupcake, Nsk92, Ntsimp, Orthografer, Psychonaut, Randomblue, RonnieBrown, Turgidson, Vadik, Willow1729, 19 anonymous edits
Whitehead theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=276067507  Contributors: BeteNoir, Cgwaldman, Charles Matthews, Mct mht,
Michael Hardy, Ringspectrum, S.racaniere, Tlawson, Turgidson, Waltpohl, 4 anonymous edits
List of important publications in mathematics  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297104215  Contributors: APH, Adandrews,
Adking80, Alensha, Altenmann, Angela, Ardric47, Bci2, Bduke, Berland, Bharathrangarajan, Blisco, Burkhard.Plache, C quest000, Charles Matthews,
Closedmouth, Cmdr Clarke, CryptoDerk, DVanDyck, Dcljr, Deeptrivia, Dizzyjosh, Duncharris, Equendil, Fropuff, Gadykozma, Gandalf61, Gareth Owen,
Gauge, Giftlite, Grantsky, Gzornenplatz, Haza-w, Henning Makholm, Howard Cleeves, Humbugde, Hv, Isnow, Jagged 85, JamesLee, JdH, Jitse Niesen,
JohnyDog, Jon Awbrey, Kanzure, Kevyn, Kungfuadam, Lambiam, Leland McInnes, Linas, M a s, Madmath789, Masnevets, Mateo SA, MathMartin,
Mathisreallycool, Maurreen, McSly, Mets501, Michael Hardy, Mpatel, Myasuda, Nbarth, Nefertum17, Nickj, Nono64, Nparikh, Oleg Alexandrov, Ozob,
PMajer, Paki.tv, PaulGarner, Pegship, Poetsoutback, Proteus71, RMcGuigan, Reedy, Rich Farmbrough, Rjwilmsi, RobHar, Salix alba, Sam Hocevar,
Sangwinc, SaxTeacher, Silly rabbit, Sl, Smack, Sodin, Spiffy sperry, Taemyr, Taxipom, Tesseran, Theaterfreak64, Thorne, Thunderboltz, Tobias
Bergemann, Trovatore, Turgidson, Uncia, WebsterRiver, WhisperToMe, Who, Wile E. Heresiarch, Woohookitty, Xdamr, XudongGuan, Yendor1958,
Zerida, 66 anonymous edits
Higher- dimensional algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297679885  Contributors: Bci1new, Bci2, Fram, Headbomb, JimVC3,
Michael Hardy, RHaworth, Мыша
Higher category theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=291422809  Contributors: Bci2, Cenarium, Charles Matthews,
ComputScientist, Hairy Dude, Ringspectrum, Smimram, The Anome, 3 anonymous edits
Enriched category  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295561186  Contributors: AxelBoldt, Balrivo, Cenarium, Fropuff, Gauge, Giftlite,
Hildebrandt, Lethe, Msh210, Puffinry, Salix alba, Smimram, Toby Bartels, Хацкер, 4 anonymous edits
Graph coloring  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294522597  Contributors: -Midorihana-, Abelson, Adking80, Aeons, AgarwalSumeet,
AgentPeppermint, Alexs2008, Altenmann, Antonio Lopez, Arbor, Beta79, Booyabazooka, CRGreathouse, Caesura, CanisRufus, Charles Matthews,
Cheeser1, Chris Capoccia, Chris Pressey, Claygate, Corti, David Eppstein, David Jordan, Dcoetzee, Dysprosia, Eubulides, Flyingspuds, Galaxy07,
Gazimoff, Geeee, Gene Nygaard, Giftlite, Glomerule, GregorB, Guybrush, Hlg, Hv, Jamelan, Joshxyz, Jérôme, Ke4roh, Kuszi, Lwr314, Lyondif02,
MathMartin, Maxim, Mbell, McKay, Mellum, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Miym, Mjaredd, Nick twisper, Nitishkorula, Oleg Alexandrov, Optim, Ott2,
P3d0, Peter Kwok, Ptrillian, Robert Samal, S.K., Sam Hocevar, SausageLady, Shirifan, Suisui, Superdosh, Terryn3, Thesilverbail, Thore Husfeldt, VMS
Mosaic, Wikirao, Xrchz, Zaslav, ZeroOne,  ,ينام78 anonymous edits
Graph theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297223618  Contributors: APH, Abeg92, Agro1986, Aknxy, Alan Au, Alcidesfonseca,
Alex Bakharev, Almi, Altenmann, Ams80, Andre Engels, Andreas Kaufmann, Andris, Anthonynow12, Aquae, Arbor, Arvindn, Astrophil, AxelBoldt, Ayda D,
Bact, Beda42, Berteun, Boleslav Bobcik, Booyabazooka, Brent Gulanowski, Brick Thrower, Brona, Bumbulski, C S, Camembert, CanadianLinuxUser,
Caramdir, Cerber, CesarB, Chalst, Charles Matthews, Chas zzz brown, Chmod007, Conversion script, Csl77, DFRussia, Damien Karras, Daniel Quinlan,
David Eppstein, Davidfstr, Dbenbenn, Delaszk, DerHexer, Dgrant, Dicklyon, Diego UFCG, Dina, Disavian, Discospinster, Dittaeva, Doctorbozzball,
Dr.S.Ramachandran, Drini, Duncharris, Dycedarg, Dysprosia, Dze27, ElBenevolente, Eleuther, Elf, Eric.weigle, Eugeneiiim, FayssalF, Fchristo,
Feeeshboy, Fivelittlemonkeys, Fred Bradstadt, Fredrik, FvdP, GGordonWorleyIII, GTBacchus, Gaius Cornelius, Gandalf61, Garyzx, Geometry guy, George
Burgess, Gianfranco, Giftlite, GiveAFishABone, Glinos, Gmelli, Goochelaar, GraphTheoryPwns, GregorB, Grog, Gutza, Gyan, Hannes Eder, Hbruhn,
Henning Makholm, Hirzel, Idiosyncratic-bumblebee, Iffcool, Ignatzmice, Igodard, Ino5hiro, Jakob Voss, Jalpar75, Jaxl, JeLuF, Jeronimo, Jheuristic, Jinma,
Joespiff, Jojit fb, Jon Awbrey, Jon har, Jwissick, Karl E. V. Palmen, KellyCoinGuy, King Bee, Knutux, Kope, Kpjas, LC, LOL, Ldecola, Liao, Linas, Looxix,
Lpgeffen, Lupin, Madewokherd, Magmi, Mahlerite, Mailer diablo, Mani1, Marek69, Marianocecowski, Mark Foskey, MathMartin, Matusz, Maurobio,
Maxime.Debosschere, McKay, Meekohi, Melchoir, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Miguel, Mild Bill Hiccup, Miym, Mlpkr, Msh210, Mxn, Myanw,
MynameisJayden, Naerbnic, Nanshu, Nichtich, Ntsimp, Obradovic Goran, Ohnoitsjamie, Oleg Alexandrov, Onorem, Optim, OrangeDog, Oskar Flordal,
Pashute, Patrick, Paul August, Paul Murray, PaulHoadley, Pcb21, Peter Kwok, Piano non troppo, PierreAbbat, Poor Yorick, Populus, Puckly, Pugget,
Quaeler, Qutezuce, RUVARD, Radagast3, Ratiocinate, Renice, Requestion, Restname, Rev3nant, RexNL, Rmiesen, Roachmeister, Robert Merkel, Robin
klein, Ronz, Ruud Koot, SCEhardt, Sacredmint, Shanes, Shd, Shikhar1986, Shizhao, SlumdogAramis, Smoke73, Solitude, Stochata, Sundar, Sverdrup,
TakuyaMurata, Tangi-tamma, Tarotcards, Taw, Taxipom, Tckma, Template namespace initialisation script, The Cave Troll, The Isiah, Thesilverbail, Thv,
Titanic4000, Tomo, Tompw, Tyir, Tyler McHenry, Uncle Dick, Vonkje, Whiteknox, Whyfish, Womiller99, Wshun, XJamRastafire, Xdenizen, Xiong,
XxjwuxX, Yecril, Ylloh, Zaslav, Zero0000, Zoicon5, Zundark, Александър, 317 anonymous edits
Multicategory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=290730288  Contributors: Bobblehead, Quadell, Toby Bartels, 2 anonymous edits
Metatheory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=282891006  Contributors: Adam M. Gadomski, Anarchia, Arthur Rubin, Banno, Bobo192,
Bvanderveen, Elviajeropaisa, Gregbard, Overix, Skomorokh, Woland37, Xyzzyplugh, Ziusudra, 10 anonymous edits
Metalogic  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294255258  Contributors: Andrewa, Arthur Rubin, CBM, Chalst, D3, Eliyak, Googl,
Gregbard, Hans Adler, Iranway, Jorend, Mets501, Oleg Alexandrov, Pearle, Silverfish, TheParanoidOne
Metamathematics  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=287421097  Contributors: Adam M. Gadomski, Almit39, Ams80, Ardric47, Arthur
Rubin, Bci2, CBM, Charles Matthews, CuriousOne, Dpv, Dyaa, Dysprosia, Eric Herboso, Fredrik, Gregbard, Guardian of Light, Hair Commodore, Husond,
Jitse Niesen, Ksyrie, Lambiam, Leibniz, M a s, MDE, Marudubshinki, MathMartin, Metric, Mets501, Oleg Alexandrov, Sapphic, Somesh, Toby Bartels,
Xyzzyplugh, 24 anonymous edits
Category theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297655633  Contributors: 0, 63.162.153.xxx, 7.239, APH, Alexwright, Anonymous
Dissident, Archelon, AxelBoldt, Azrael ezra, Balrivo, Barnaby dawson, Bci2, Bevo, Blaisorblade, Brentt, Bryan Derksen, CBM, CSTAR, Calculuslover,
Cambyses, Campani, Cbcarlson, Cenarium, Ceyockey, Chalst, Charles Matthews, Chas zzz brown, Choni, Chris Pressey, Conversion script, Creidieki,
Cyde, David Sneek, Davin, DesolateReality, Dominus, Dysprosia, Elwikipedista, Erik Zachte, Fotino, Fropuff, Gandalf61, Gdr, Giftlite, Go for it!,
Goclenius, Grubber, Gzhanstong, Hadal, Hairy Dude, Hans Adler, Hesam7, Htamas, Inkling, JeffreyYasskin, Jiang, Jimp, Jmabel, John Z, Jon Awbrey,
Julian Mendez, LC, Lambiam, Laurentius, Lethe, Linas, Lotte Monz, Loupeter, Lupin, Luqui, Lysdexia, Magmi, Marco Krohn, MarkSweep, Markus
Krötzsch, Marudubshinki, Mat cross, Matt Crypto, Maurice Carbonaro, Michael Hardy, Mikeblas, Mikolt, Msh210, Nbarth, Oliverkroll, Palnot, Paul
August, Phils, Phys, Physis, Point-set topologist, Popx, Pred, Rec syn, Revolver, Roadrunner, Robertbyrne, Ryan Reich, Salix alba, Sam Staton,
SamStokes, Selvakumar.sarangan, Semorrison, SixWingedSeraph, Smimram, Szquirrel, TakuyaMurata, TeH nOmInAtOr, Template namespace
initialisation script, Tkeu, Tlepp, Tobias Bergemann, Toby, Toby Bartels, Topology Expert, Tzanko Matev, Unyoyega, Wik, WikiWizard, XudongGuan,
Youandme, Zhaoway, Zundark, 138 anonymous edits
Algebraic category  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=278353187  Contributors: Backslash Forwardslash, Cambyses, Charles
Matthews, Dorchard, Giftlite, Hans Adler, JMK, JackSchmidt, Jesper Carlstrom, Linas, Livajo, Pascal.Tesson, Smimram, Taeshadow, Thorwald, Tobias
Bergemann, Trovatore, Uncle G, Vaughan Pratt, Zoz, 7 anonymous edits
Categorical logic  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=292885360  Contributors: CBM, Charles Matthews, Classicalecon, Edward,
Elwikipedista, ErWenn, Gregbard, Hairy Dude, Jon Awbrey, Michael Fourman, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Physis, SDC, Tassedethe, Tim Band, 5
anonymous edits
Category (mathematics)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295775147  Contributors: Alberthilbert, Albmont, AxelBoldt, Ben
Standeven, Bobo192, COGDEN, Cat-oh, Cenarium, Charles Matthews, Classicalecon, ComputScientist, Depassp, Fadmmatt, Fropuff, Geometry guy,
Giftlite, Go for it!, Jao, Kilva, Konradek, Linas, Maurice Carbonaro, Michael Slone, N4nojohn, Nbarth, Netrapt, Ninte, OdedSchramm, Reetep, RexNL,
Salix alba, Sam Staton, ShoobyD, SixWingedSeraph, Smimram, Sullivan.t.j, The Anome, Tobias Bergemann, Topology Expert, Vaughan Pratt, Weppens,
Мыша, 30 anonymous edits

Article Sources and Contributors
713
Abelian category  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297599740  Contributors: 0, Andre Engels, Angela, AxelBoldt, Bci2, Bryan
Derksen, Cenarium, Charles Matthews, Christopher Thomas, Fropuff, Gauge, Giftlite, Go for it!, Gwaihir, Jakob.scholbach, JamieVicary, Jshadias,
Knotwork, Michael Hardy, Momotaro, Pissant, Punkmorten, R.e.b., Revolver, RobHar, Rs2, Rswarbrick, RyanCross, Schneelocke, Silly rabbit, Toby
Bartels, Waltpohl, Zundark, 16 anonymous edits
Topos  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296084447  Contributors: AxelBoldt, B4hand, Brion VIBBER, Carcharoth, Cenarium, Chalst,
Changbao, Charles Matthews, Chithanh, Classicalecon, Conversion script, Cronholm144, David Eppstein, DefLog, Dominus, Dori, Dpaking,
Dreamyshade, Ed g2s, Elwikipedista, Filll, Galoubet, Gauge, Ghewgill, Giftlite, Goclenius, Graham87, Guanaco, Hairy Dude, Hamaryns, Jnkfrancis,
JohnKel, KSmrq, Loom91, ManSpan, MarkSweep, Markus Krötzsch, Matt314, Maurice Carbonaro, Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Niteowlneils,
Pedant17, Penarc, Phys, Pit-trout, Ringspectrum, Salix alba, Sam Staton, SixWingedSeraph, Smimram, SurrealWarrior, Thoughtactivist, Tobias
Bergemann, Toby Bartels, Trifonov, Vaughan Pratt, Vonkje, Wikimorphism, Мыша, 35 anonymous edits
Heyting algebra  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295547488  Contributors: Accidus, Altenmann, CBM, Ceroklis, Charles Matthews,
Charvest, David Eppstein, DefLog, Elwikipedista, EmilJ, Gauge, Giftlite, Giorgiomugnaini, Gregbard, Gzhanstong, Husond, Kompik, Lethe, Linas, Markus
Krötzsch, Mets501, Mhss, Michael Hardy, Nortexoid, Phys, Rjwilmsi, Rogério Brito, Sam Staton, Sopholatre, TheNewLayoutSucks, Tillmo, Trovatore,
Urhixidur, Vaughan Pratt, Zundark, 63 anonymous edits
Subobject classifier  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297196782  Contributors: Cecilia-flori, Charles Matthews, Colin McLarty,
DefLog, Falcon Kirtaran, Fropuff, Gillyweed, Jakob.scholbach, KSmrq, Lexor, MathMartin, Paul Taylor, Rjwilmsi, Sam Staton, Zundark, 30 anonymous
edits
Generator  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296051150  Contributors: 16@r, Al Silonov, Andres, AtikuX, Bilboq, Bogdangiusca, Bryan
Derksen, C777, Cate, Dysprosia, Eep², Epolk, Frap, Hillman, Hlucho, Jim Wills, Jorend, Kornflakes59, Kzollman, Lag, Ldlster, Lightsup55, Lord Wally,
MER-C, Mr. Ables, Piet Delport, Redvers, Rjschulte, Saigon from europe, Schissel, Tassedethe, Template namespace initialisation script, The sunder
king, Tom harrison, Towel401, Tregoweth, TuukkaH, Vincent.alblasEN, Willking1979, X56, Zsught, 27 anonymous edits
Exact sequence  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=279998612  Contributors: Altenmann, AxelBoldt, Bookandcoffee, Charles Matthews,
Chas zzz brown, Chinju, Dethron, El C, Gandalfxviv, GeometryGirl, Giftlite, Hvc, JeLuF, Juan Marquez, KSmrq, Lethe, Maclary, Marozols, Michael K.
Edwards, Oleg Alexandrov, Ororon, PierreAbbat, RobHar, Simonfairfax, Toby Bartels, Tosha, Ugha, Woodstone, 39 anonymous edits
Coproduct  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=287127490  Contributors: Albmont, Charles Matthews, CryptoDerk, Dreadstar,
Dysprosia, Fibonacci, Fropuff, Gaius Cornelius, Giftlite, Lethe, MathMartin, Moocowpong1, Paisa, Phys, Popx, Saibod, Voorlandt, Writer on wiki,
Zundark, Мыша, 16 anonymous edits
Product  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297514653  Contributors: 7, AJRobbins, Ahoerstemeier, Alex S, Beland, Bloodshedder,
Brolin Empey, CDepiereux, Carn, Casablanca2000in, Centrx, Colonies Chris, Commander Keane, DanCasti, Dwarf Kirlston, Gaius Cornelius, Glenn,
Greyskinnedboy, J.delanoy, JoeSever, Julian Mendez, Jusjih, Keenan Pepper, Kjkolb, KnightRider, Lir, MJSkia1, Melsaran, Miquonranger03, Mitchan,
Mkoval, Muchness, Mydogategodshat, Notheruser, Pielover87, Rgathercoal, Stigko, Stolsvik, Template namespace initialisation script, Trsr99, Tuoreco,
Xyzzyplugh, 25 anonymous edits
Pushout  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295459324  Contributors: Alksub, Bumm13, Copysan, Curtsurly, David91, Fred Bauder,
Freechild, Guanaco, Patrick, RichardF, SD6-Agent, The Anome, Tnuocca, WhatamIdoing, 2 anonymous edits
Pullback  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=271482568  Contributors: Fropuff, Fubar Obfusco, Geometry guy, Nonenmac, The Great
Redirector, 2 anonymous edits
Limit  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293324029  Contributors: 16@r, Adashiel, Aim Here, AllynJ, Aviados, AxelBoldt, Chubbles,
Cmelsted, Conversion script, Eep², Fredbauder, Hyacinth, I already forgot, KaptainKaos, Kfsung, Kuru, Lethe, Magmafox, Master Jay, Mkill, Pascal666,
Patrick, Phr, Popsracer, Quasipalm, RTC, RexNL, Rich Farmbrough, Ryguasu, Seancdaug, Template namespace initialisation script, Thue, Toby Bartels,
Tosha, Wafulz, WikiLeon, Wshun, Yamamoto Ichiro, Zenohockey, Zundark, 36 anonymous edits
Colimit  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=15956663  Contributors: -
Yoneda lemma  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=294803154  Contributors: Acepectif, Almeo, Aretakis, AxelBoldt, Bryan Derksen,
Charles Matthews, Chinju, Conversion script, DefLog, Fredrik, Fropuff, Gaius Cornelius, Gauge, HStel, Hairy Dude, Julien Tuerlinckx, Kilva, Lethe,
Michael Hardy, Michael Kinyon, Michael Slone, Paul August, Semorrison, Smimram, Toby Bartels, Tyrrell McAllister, Viriditas, WAREL, Waltpohl, Xy7,
Zero sharp, 25 anonymous edits
Functor  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297526826  Contributors: 16@r, Adamarthurryan, AlexG, Antonielly, AxelBoldt, Blotwell,
Cenarium, Charles Matthews, Clotito, Conversion script, Coreyoconnor, Cypa, DefLog, Dysprosia, EndlessWorld, Fropuff, Gauge, Giftlite, Greenrd, Hairy
Dude, Iq1001, Jan Hidders, Julian Mendez, Kenyon, Kilva, Lambiam, Lethe, McGeddon, Michael Hardy, Minesweeper, Mmernex, Msh210, Nbarth, Rec
syn, Robert K S, Robertbyrne, Sam Staton, SimonP, Smelialichu, Smimram, TakuyaMurata, Tobias Bergemann, Toby Bartels, XJamRastafire, Yahya
Abdal-Aziz, Мыша, 39 anonymous edits
Adjoint functors  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=292561455  Contributors: AlexG, AxelBoldt, Cgwaldman, Charles Matthews,
Conniption, DefLog, Dysprosia, Etale, Ewlyahoocom, Fpahl, Fropuff, Functor salad, Gaius Cornelius, Gauge, Giftlite, Googl, Hairy Dude, Harold f,
Ht686rg90, Josh Parris, Jtwdog, Jwy, Lethe, Lightmouse, LilHelpa, Linas, Ling.Nut, Loren Rosen, Marc Harper, Markus Krötzsch, Mav, Melchoir, Michael
Hardy, Michael Slone, Myasuda, Neelix, Noegenesis, Oleg Alexandrov, Paul August, Physis, Render787, Richard L. Peterson, Salix alba, Sam Hocevar,
Schneelocke, Smimram, Stewartadcock, SurrealWarrior, Tdvance, Thehotelambush, Tillmo, Toby Bartels, Tyrrell McAllister, Waltpohl, WikHead,
Wikimorphism, Wlod, Мыша, 51 anonymous edits
Representable functor  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=288227691  Contributors: AndrewHowse, Avakar, Charles Matthews,
Edcolins, Fropuff, Lethe, Mat cross, Mets501, Salix alba, Smimram, Thehotelambush, 8 anonymous edits
Functor category  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=261268834  Contributors: AxelBoldt, Cenarium, Charles Matthews, Dysprosia,
Gauge, Go for it!, Lethe, Mets501, Nbarth, Sam Staton, TakuyaMurata, Waltpohl, 1 anonymous edits
Natural equivalence  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=16118554  Contributors: -
Natural transformation  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=277481240  Contributors: AxelBoldt, Baarslag, Cenarium, Charles
Matthews, Clements, CommonsDelinker, Crisófilax, David Sneek, DefLog, Fropuff, GTBacchus, Gauge, Giftlite, Greenrd, Hairy Dude, JanCK, Jsnx, Lethe,
Marc Harper, Markus Krötzsch, Metterklume, Paisa, Patrick, Physis, Ryan Reich, Silly rabbit, Smimram, Stephen Gilbert, Sullivan.t.j, TakuyaMurata, The
Anome, Tobias Bergemann, Tpikonen, Tyrrell McAllister, Vaughan Pratt, Zundark, 16 anonymous edits
Dual (category theory)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295946438  Contributors: Akriasas, AxelBoldt, Blaisorblade, Buster79,
Charles Matthews, DesolateReality, Docu, Fropuff, Go for it!, Isaac Dupree, Joriki, Jwy, MarSch, Masnevets, Michael Hardy, MrJones, Phys, PigFlu Oink,
Salix alba, Sam Derbyshire, Silly rabbit, Smimram, Tarret, Trovatore, Zundark, 2 anonymous edits
Isomorphism  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=288484849  Contributors: 16@r, Albmont, Andre Engels, Army1987, AxelBoldt, 
Bahar101, Banus, Bkell, Borhan0, Bryanmcdonald, CRGreathouse, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, Coolhandscot, Cronholm144, Dan Granahan, 
Dysprosia, Edemaine, Elwikipedista, Ezequiels.90, Fantomdrives, Ghakko, Giftlite, Glenn, Grubber, Hannes Eder, Ioannis.Demetriou, Isomorphic, Ivan 
Štambuk, Jlittlet, KSmrq, Kmarinas86, Koberozendaal, Lubos, Marc Venot, MarkSweep, MathKnight, Mattmacf, Mcole13, Mets501, Michael Angelkovich, 
Michael Hardy, Michael Slone, Mike4ty4, Msh210, Mxn, Nabla, Netsnipe, Nick Green, Oleg Alexandrov, Omnipedian, PV=nRT, Patrick, Peruvianllama, 
Philip Cross, PhotoBox, Phys, QuiteUnusual, Revolver, Richard Molnár-Szipai, Rljacobson, Rlupsa, Rmrfstar, Ryguasu, Sam Staton, Spacepotato,

Article Sources and Contributors
714
Spinality, Ssavelan, Stevertigo, Stuhacking, Taemyr, Thaddeus Slamp, The Rhymesmith, Thehotelambush, Tosha, Uncle Dick, Wrp103, Youandme,
Youssefsan, Yuide, Yurik, Zero0000, Zundark, 74 anonymous edits
Semigroup  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297587711  Contributors: 3mta3, Alan U. Kennington, AlexG, AxelBoldt, Benschop,
Bryan Derksen, CDH, Cambyses, Charles Matthews, Chenxlee, Classicalecon, Conversion script, Dysprosia, EmilJ, Fnielsen, Foolip, G20071221,
GaborLajos, Geometry guy, Giftlite, Ideyal, JMK, James pic, Kjetil1001, Kompik, Krishnachandranvn, Linas, LittleDan, MFH, MarkSweep, Markus
Krötzsch, Michael Hardy, Michael Kinyon, Mikeblas, Msh210, Natalya, Nbarth, Negi(afk), Nishantjr, Obradovic Goran, Oleg Alexandrov, Output,
Pascal.Tesson, Pohta ce-am pohtit, Point-set topologist, Pretzelpaws, Rdancer, Salgueiro, Salix alba, Shlomi Hillel, Simetrical, Sullivan.t.j, Sweetjazz3,
Sxtr, Sławomir Biały, Thehotelambush, Theowoll, Tobias Bergemann, Vina, Wile E. Heresiarch, XJamRastafire, Youandme, Zundark, 41 anonymous edits
Monoid  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289797851  Contributors: 128.59.130.xxx, 192.35.241.xxx, Andres, Anthony, Antonielly,
AxelBoldt, Ben-Zin, Brion VIBBER, Bryan Derksen, Cambyses, Charles Matthews, Chenxlee, Ciphers, Conversion script, DRLB, Damian Yerrick, Daveagp,
Deadspirit90, Dosboot, Dysprosia, El C, Fredrik, Fropuff, Fwehrung, GaborLajos, Gauss, Gentlestone, Geometry guy, Giftlite, Gogo Dodo, Grubber, Hairy
Dude, Hannes Eder, Ideyal, Jakob.scholbach, Jorgen W, Jsnx, Kimse, Kusunose, LDH, LiDaobing, Linas, MarkSweep, Mattblack82, Michael Slone,
Mikeblas, Mjb, Msh210, Obradovic Goran, Oleg Alexandrov, Pascal.Tesson, Paulsavala, Pohta ce-am pohtit, Rawling, Revolver, Salgueiro, Salix alba,
Simian1k, SimonMayer, Smimram, StephenBuxton, Thehotelambush, Tobias Bergemann, TooMuchMath, VKokielov, XJamRastafire, Youandme, Zundark,
57 anonymous edits
Domain theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289848460  Contributors: Axlle, BrEyes, CarlHewitt, Charles Matthews, Charvest,
Crystallina, Dfletter, Dominus, Elwikipedista, Erxnmedia, Ferkelparade, Frege, Gandalf61, Hairy Dude, Hike395, Inquam, Japanese Searobin, Jeff3000,
Jpbowen, Kbdank71, Koffieyahoo, Leibniz, Magmi, Malcohol, Markus Krötzsch, Mets501, Mhss, Michael Hardy, Msh210, Novacatz, Oleg Alexandrov,
Physis, QplQyer, ST47, Salasks, Sam Staton, Suisui, Tobias Bergemann, Xy7, Zaslav, 41 anonymous edits
Baire category theorem  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=286503775  Contributors: Alecobbe, Aleph4, AxelBoldt, Bdmy, BeteNoir,
CRGreathouse, Crisófilax, Dzordzm, Enlil2, Fibonacci, Giftlite, Go for it!, JackSchmidt, Jitse Niesen, Loewepeter, Loupeter, Luca Antonelli, Lumos3,
Lupin, MathMartin, Mct mht, PV=nRT, Revolver, Silly rabbit, TakuyaMurata, Teorth, Toby Bartels, Tosha, Trovatore, Waltpohl, Winterstein, Zundark, 20
anonymous edits
Michael Atiyah  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296841091  Contributors: Achim Jäger, Adoniscik, Ageo020, Akriasas, Al Lemos,
Ambrose H. Field, Ameliorate!, Ams80, Andrewbadr, BHA, Bejnar, Berland, Bharatveer, Bluap, Bradka, Bwithh, C S, CRGreathouse, Charles Matthews,
Chaser, Chicheley, Cmapm, Conversion script, D6, DBose2, DSachan, Dannyno, David Eppstein, Demophon, Domminico, Duncharris, Dwain, Emerson7,
Espresso Addict, Etacar11, Etale, Fowler&fowler, Gaius Cornelius, Gareth Jones, Gareth McCaughan, Geodyde, Geometry guy, Giftlite, Haseldon, Henri
poincare, Henrygb, Huldra, Icairns, Iridescent, Ironholds, JRawle, JYi, Jaraalbe, Jason Hughes, Jeepday, Jeff3000, Jetman, Jinhyun park, Jitse Niesen, John
Kenney, Joriki, Jtwdog, Kaihsu, Keyton, KnowledgeHegemonyPart2, Kraxler, Kriak, Lesnail, Little_guru, Loren Rosen, Mathsci, Mayumashu, Mhym,
Michael Drew, Michael Hardy, Mintleaf, Morningmath, NBeale, Nigosh, Nishkid64, OldSpot61, Phoe, Proteus, R.e.b., RS1900, Ranicki, Redf0x, Rich
Farmbrough, Rjwilmsi, Roundhouse0, Runningmouse, Rwilsker, ST47, Samuelsen, Sardanaphalus, Schneelocke, Serinde, Shim'on, Silly rabbit,
Skomorokh, Snowolf, Spacepotato, Ssd, Stone, Stumps, T. Anthony, Tassedethe, Timrollpickering, Tsiaojian lee, Ttfreck, Viriditas, VivaEmilyDavies,
Waterwhile11, YUL89YYZ, 75 anonymous edits
Karol Borsuk  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=267570658  Contributors: Appleseed, C S, Cautious, Charles Matthews, CiaPan, D6,
Dan Gardner, EBL, Everyking, Gadfium, Gcm, Jaredwf, Kbdank71, Kowalmistrz, M0rph, Masterpiece2000, Mhym, Morwen, Ntsimp, Oleg Alexandrov,
PolishPoliticians, Rgdboer, Selfworm, TonyW, Topbanana, Turgidson, Waltpohl, Warrickball, Witkacy, Wlod, 5 anonymous edits
Nicolas Bourbaki  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297131471  Contributors: 16@r, Acepectif, Akriasas, Andi5, AndrewKepert,
Applerod, Awad helper, AxelBoldt, Barbara678, Bkkbrad, Bob.v.R, C S, C quest000, Carl Logan, Casu Marzu, Cferrero, Chalst, Charles Matthews,
CiaPan, Cimon Avaro, David Shay, David.Monniaux, Delirium, DragonflySixtyseven, Flups, Four Dog Night, Gadfium, Gauss, Gershwinrb, Giftlite,
Graham87, Hans Adler, Hibbleton, History2007, Humus sapiens, Hwasungmars, Itai, JRM, Jaan513, JackSchmidt, Jacobolus, Jaredwf, Jeff3000, Jerzy,
Johnbibby, Jorge Stolfi, Joseph Solis in Australia, KarlFrei, Katzmik, Komponisto, Landonproctor, LiDaobing, Lzur, MathMartin, MattKingston, Maxim
Razin, Michael Hardy, Mike1973hall, Nbarth, Nixdorf, Noe, Norm mit, Ozob, PaulGarner, Philopedia, Pizza1512, Rgdboer, SDC, Salgueiro, Sam Staton,
Schutz, Seraphita, Sietse Snel, Snowdog, Stca74, TheObtuseAngleOfDoom, Timwi, Tlesher, TonyW, Tregoweth, VeryVerily, Victor Gijsbers, Viyu5,
Wesley Holt, XJamRastafire, Zyqqh, Δρακόλακκος, 52 anonymous edits
Ronald Brown (mathematician)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296784689  Contributors: Bci1new, Bci2, Boleyn, D6, Henry
Delforn, Ilmari Karonen, LilHelpa, Michael Hardy, PamD, Tassedethe, Whpq, 2 anonymous edits
Henri Cartan  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295481984  Contributors: Agingjb, Akriasas, Alex Bakharev, Berasategui, Billymac00,
CJLL Wright, CRKingston, Canadian Paul, Carbuncle, Cha'yu, Charles Matthews, Conversion script, D6, Dovea, Emerson7, Etacar11, Fabiform, Gadfium,
Gaius Cornelius, Gareth Jones, Gauge, Giftlite, JYOuyang, Jaredwf, Jetman, Jkaharper, Katagelophobia, Keyi, KnightRider, LDH, Luwilt, Mhym, Michael
Hardy, Morhange, Myasuda, Olivier, Owen, Piccadilly, RS1900, RandomOrca2, Roger Hui, Snowolf, Sullivan.t.j, TFBCT1, Tomruen, Turgidson, WWGB,
Welsh, Wencer, Wickedmangroves, Xasodfuih, Zsam, Zyxw, 19 anonymous edits
Alain Connes  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=283112124  Contributors: Aconnes, Akriasas, Alex Bakharev, Appraiser, Ascánder,
Asperal, Asyndeton, Bilboon, Charles Matthews, Cmapm, Conversion script, D6, Esrever, Etacar11, Everyking, Fconnes, GTBacchus, Gadfium, Giftlite,
Goochelaar, Govin, Harryboyles, J JMesserly, JYOuyang, Jaredwf, Jbadger, Jinhyun park, Jtwdog, Kraxler, Lightmouse, Lou Crazy, MathMartin, Mathsci,
Mhym, MikeCapone, Myasuda, Nsaa, Peruvianllama, Phils, Piccadilly, Quadell, Quiest, R.e.b., Rich Farmbrough, Rlevse, Roger Hui, Schneelocke,
Snowolf, Spoirier, Ssd, Tazmaniacs, Tzartzam, Unyoyega, Yill577, Ze miguel, 19 anonymous edits
Jean Dieudonné  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=295337331  Contributors: AN(Ger), Akriasas, Cdc, Charles Matthews, D6, Dr.
Blofeld, EGetzler, EmreSevinc, Everyking, Gardar Rurak, Geoffrey2009, Giftlite, Kauczuk, KissL, MathMartin, Mathsci, Myasuda, Ntsimp, Plindenbaum,
Profangelo, ReneMages, Rjwilmsi, Stifle, Warrickball, 8 anonymous edits
Charles Ehresmann  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293807111  Contributors: Charles Matthews, D6, Gadfium, GeorgeLouis,
Giftlite, Jaredwf, KHarbaugh, Keyi, Lenthe, MathMartin, Molh394, Momotaro, Pearle, RonnieBrown, Smimram, TonyW, Trollminator, Turgidson,
Warrickball, 2 anonymous edits
Samuel Eilenberg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293181453  Contributors: Almit39, Avraham, Bnynms, C S, CJLL Wright,
CRKingston, Cautious, Charles Matthews, D3, D6, Elwikipedista, Emax, Emerson7, Everyking, Filemon, Giftlite, Hadal, Hbass, JRB-Europe, Jaredwf,
Kowalmistrz, Leibniz, Lethe, Lockley, Lysdexia, Masterpiece2000, Mathiasrex, Matthew Stannard, Mhym, Michael Fourman, Michael Hardy, Ntsimp,
Ojigiri, OwenX, Pizza1512, R.e.b., RS1900, Radiant!, Ruszewski, Sanbec, Smimram, Turgidson, Warrickball, Wassermann, Wlod, 12 anonymous edits
Peter Freyd  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=98639013  Contributors: -
Alexander Grothendieck  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=293579485  Contributors: 171.64.38.xxx, Adoniscik, Agricola44,
AlexanderWinston, Algebraist, Amillar, Angela, Artie p, Arundel77, Avraham, AxelBoldt, BACbKA, Bci2, Blotwell, Bpalmer, Brandon97, Brownlee,
Bucephalus, C S, CJauff, Camw, Carcharoth, Charles Matthews, Cmapm, Colonies Chris, Conversion script, Cyde, D6, Danny, David Eppstein, David
Gerard, David.Monniaux, Dick Shane, Emerson7, Etaicq, Etale, Explendido Rocha, F3et, Feketekave, Fotino, Gabbe, Gala.martin, Gauge, Geni,
Genisock2, Geometry guy, Giftlite, Gilisa, Gleuschk, Good Olfactory, GregorB, Gro-Tsen, Gzornenplatz, Hasdrubal, Ilya, JCDenton2052, JYOuyang,
Jaredwf, Jinhyun park, Jmath666, Johnbibby, Joke137, Joriki, Jrehmeyer, Jtwdog, JzG, Kingturtle, Koavf, Krakko, L'omo del batocio, Languagehat, Lenthe,
Lestrade, Lethe, Lightmouse, Luwilt, MathMartin, Mathieu Perrin, Mathisreallycool, MightyWarrior, Myasuda, Nakazanie, Newport, Nlu, Orz, Otto ter
Haar, Pdc1, Peruvianllama, Pfortuny, Piccadilly, Pigsonthewing, Quaeler, Quuxplusone, R.e.b., Rich Farmbrough, Rjwilmsi, Robin klein, Rocinante9x,
Rockdrom, RonnieBrown, Roundhouse0, Runcorn, Russvr, Ryan Reich, SDC, Samuel Blanning, Scullender, Shamir1, Sjc, Sodin, Spacepotato, Ssd,
Stca74, TakuyaMurata, Thomaspaine, Twp, Udzu, Unixer, Youssefsan, ZELBOG, Ziggurat, 151 anonymous edits

Article Sources and Contributors
715
Heinz Hopf  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=291440427  Contributors: ACW, AntOnTrack, ArnoldReinhold, Betacommand, Biruitorul,
Bo Lindbergh, Brownlee, Burn, C S, Curps, D6, Dan Gardner, Daniel Mahu, DavidCBryant, DerHexer, Entheta, GeorgeLouis, Gerhard51, Giftlite, Good
Olfactory, Hmains, Jaredwf, Jengod, Kevinbrianhopf, MathMartin, Momotaro, Owen, Pjacobi, Qutezuce, RS1900, Ranicki, Runcorn, TonyW, Turgidson, 5
anonymous edits
Maxim Kontsevich  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=281512308  Contributors: Ajt, AlekseyP, Alex Bakharev, Altenmann, Arla,
BACbKA, Cartan, Charles Matthews, Cmapm, D6, Dassiebtekreuz, David Gerard, Deerstop, Djsasso, Dmoskovich, Etale, Everyking, Ghirlandajo, Giftlite,
Gilisa, Gmr329, Jaredwf, Jinfo, Jtwdog, Kestrel man hoovers in the dark, KingTT, Kirjtc2, Kraxler, Looxix, Masterpiece2000, MathMartin, Mgnbar,
Morningmath, N.Nahber, Piccadilly, RS1900, RedWolf, Rjwilmsi, Runcorn, Sorumbatico, Turgidson, Warrickball, XJamRastafire, 30 anonymous edits
Otto Hermann Künneth  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=290579232  Contributors: Akriasas, Fabrictramp, Haasfelix, Michael
Hardy, 1 anonymous edits
Saunders Mac Lane  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=291861699  Contributors: AlexG, Angela, BenetD, Berasategui, Bird of paradox,
Cambyses, Charles Matthews, D6, David Eppstein, Elwikipedista, G716, Giftlite, Harold f, JMK, JRB-Europe, Jaredwf, John Z, Jon Awbrey, Keithh,
Lambiam, Massimo Trizio, Mattisse, Michael Hardy, Mufka, PDH, PWilkinson, Palnot, RS1900, Roger Hui, Saaska, Smimram, Sullivan.t.j, Tnitz, Toby
Bartels, Waltpohl, Will Thomas, 22 anonymous edits
William Lawvere  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297413991  Contributors: Abt 12, Amalas, BACbKA, Brossow, CanisRufus, Colin
McLarty, Elwikipedista, Hans Lundmark, Lambiam, Loadmaster, Magioladitis, Michael Hardy, NNtw22, Oleg Alexandrov, Pethan, Pinktulip, Rvollmert,
Smimram, Tnitz, Unyoyega, 10 anonymous edits
Egbert van Kampen  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=289513985  Contributors: Algebraist, Ntsimp, T@nn, Turgidson, 1 anonymous
edits
Grigory Perelman  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=16988689  Contributors: -
Nicolae Popescu  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=297580034  Contributors: AdamSmithee, Amalas, Bci2, BeverlyCrusher,
Bogdangiusca, D6, DA3N, Dahn, Demophon, Dgies, Equendil, Natalya, OldakQuill, Owen, Paul August, Rjwilmsi, SimonP, TheParanoidOne, Turgidson,
 ,טראהנייר ירעל14 anonymous edits
Robert Rosen  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296679771  Contributors: Adrian 1001, Aik, Asamind, Bart133, Bci2, Charles
Matthews, D3, D6, Dozens, EBN-OZNFan, Erkan Yilmaz, Floridi, Jeargle, Judithrosen, Lexor, Mathewthebig, Mdd, Omegatron, Rje, RobertRosen,
Shimofusa Dainagon, Tiddly Tom, Txomin, 29 anonymous edits
Jean- Pierre Serre  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=284603264  Contributors: Akriasas, Attilios, AxelBoldt, Banach, Berland,
Blotwell, C S, CJLL Wright, CRKingston, Charles Matthews, Cmapm, Cícero, D.vegetali, D6, David.Monniaux, Dmharvey, Emerson7, Etacar11, Etale, Ffx,
Gadfium, Gareth Jones, Gauge, Giftlite, GreyCat, Icairns, Ideyal, JYOuyang, Jaredwf, Jinhyun park, Jonas Mur, Jtwdog, KSmrq, Kraxler, Kuszi, LDH,
Looxix, MarSch, Masnevets, Mgnbar, Mhym, Michael Hardy, Mikez, Mrwojo, Ndokos, Newport, Nono64, Nsk92, Optim, Paul A, Peruvianllama,
Piccadilly, Pjacobi, Poor Yorick, Profangelo, RFBailey, RS1900, RS2007, Rajpaj, Rockdrom, Ryan Reich, Sardanaphalus, Sir marek, Snowolf, Stca74,
Tazmaniacs, Tesseran, TimBentley, TonyW, Turgidson, Warrickball, Wernher, Woood, XJamRastafire, Xtv, Yaronf, 35 anonymous edits
J. H. C. Whitehead  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=284534800  Contributors: Amillar, Asperal, Bencherlite, Bgohla, Biruitorul, C S,
CatherineMunro, Charles Matthews, D6, Ems57fcva, EurekaLott, Fratrep, Giftlite, Harro5, Hillman, Jwillbur, Maelnuneb, Marcus2, Mathsci, Matt
Crypto, Michael Hardy, Modify, Nikai, Oleg Alexandrov, RedWolf, Sosayso, Spamguy, Spilla, Sullivan.t.j, Turgidson, Warofdreams, 6 anonymous edits
Edward Witten  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?oldid=296700003  Contributors: 0, Ageo020, Ahm2307, Ajt, Albertod4, Algae, Alight,
Aloysius Patacsil, AlphaNumeric, Amalgam82, Amelio Vázquez, Angr, Avraham, Babemonkey, Bellbird, Bender235, Borhan0, BorzooB, Brusegadi, C S,
CBM, Carbuncle, Cartan, CatherineMunro, Cferrara, Charles Matthews, ChazBeckett, Chillum, Cirt, Cleeseheb, Cmapm, Commander Keane, D6, David
H. Flint, Dmn, Dmr2, Ehn, Eloise wiki, Epbr123, Etale, EthanHerd, Everyking, Firefly322, Fredrik, Fropuff, G716, GaeusOctavius, Gareth Jones,
Georgeryp, Ghirlandajo, Giftlite, Gilisa, Gogo Dodo, GregorB, Guy Peters, Harp, Headbomb, Henry Delforn, Hillman, Hujaza, Hwasungmars,
Hypergeometric2F1(a,b,c,x), IZAK, Iamfscked, Icairns, Inderonline1988, Infradig, Iridescence, Ishboyfay, Ivan Štambuk, J mcandrews, JLHoffman,
Jaredwf, Jitse Niesen, John, Jtwdog, Justinbg, Kocio, Kotika98, Kraxler, Kuningas, Kurochka, Lethe, Liaose, Loodog, Looxix, Lumidek, Lunchboxhero,
MZMcBride, Mandarax, MarcAurel, Marcka, Mark Foskey, Mathsci, Mav, MayerG, Miaers, Michael Snow, Mike Selinker, Minerva2, Misterstark,
Mloclam901, Mosaffa, Msh210, Mushlack, Myasuda, Nakon, Newport, Nishkid64, Ojan, OlEnglish, Otisjimmy1, PDH, Physicistjedi, Piccadilly, Pichote,
Pietrovnemenesky, Porcher, R.e.b., RFBailey, RS1900, RS2007, Repairkitz, RoddyYoung, Roger Hui, Rsabbatini, Runcorn, Salgueiro, Schumi24, Shawnc,
Skewyou, SlashDot, Snowolf, SocratesJedi, Stephenb, Suruena, Sussman2006, Thingg, TonyW, Tonymaric, Uinhfonhnohg, Unusual Cheese, Vulturell,
WLGades, Wikiklrsc, XJamRastafire, Zargulon, Zeyn1,  ,دمحأ187 anonymous edits

Image Sources, Licenses and Contributors
716
Image Sources, Licenses and
Contributors
Image:Asymmetric (PSF).png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Asymmetric_(PSF).png  License: unknown  Contributors:
Bastique, Igno2, Liftarn, PatríciaR
Image:Sphere symmetry group o.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Sphere_symmetry_group_o.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Tomruen
Image:Da Vinci Vitruve Luc Viatour.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Da_Vinci_Vitruve_Luc_Viatour.jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: user:Lviatour
Image:400px-Drillbit.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:400px-Drillbit.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Sonett72, User:Terry Bollinger
Image:Religious syms.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Religious_syms.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Rursus
Image:Lightmatter pisa.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Lightmatter_pisa.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors: Fabien1309,
Quadell, Themadchopper, Warburg
Image:Sialk pot.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Sialk_pot.jpg  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors:
Original uploader and creator was Zereshk at en.wikipedia
Image:kitchen kaleid.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Kitchen_kaleid.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Wdflake
Image:Farsh1.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Farsh1.jpg  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Original
uploader was Zereshk at en.wikipedia,
Image:Celticknotwork.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Celticknotwork.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
CatherineMunro, Sfan00 IMG
Image:Bothodd.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Bothodd.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Fresheneesz,
MithrandirMage, Simetrical, 1 anonymous edits
Image:Commutative Addition.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Commutative_Addition.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:Weston.pace
Image:Commutative Word Origin.PNG  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Commutative_Word_Origin.PNG  License: Public
Domain  Contributors: Francois Servois
Image:Symmetry Of Addition.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Symmetry_Of_Addition.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Weston.pace
Image:Noncommutative Example Concatenation.svg  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Noncommutative_Example_Concatenation.svg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Sarregouset,
User:Weston.pace
Image:Tetrahedral group 2.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Tetrahedral_group_2.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation
License  Contributors: User Debivort on en.wikipedia
Image:Triclinic.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Triclinic.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors:
User:Stannered
Image:Monoclinic.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Monoclinic.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Monoclinic-base-centered.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Monoclinic-base-centered.svg  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Orthorhombic.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Orthorhombic.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Orthorhombic-base-centered.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Orthorhombic-base-centered.svg  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Orthorhombic-body-centered.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Orthorhombic-body-centered.svg  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Orthorhombic-face-centered.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Orthorhombic-face-centered.svg  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: User:Rocha, User:Stannered
Image:Tetragonal.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Tetragonal.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors:
User:Stannered
Image:Tetragonal-body-centered.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Tetragonal-body-centered.svg  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: User:Rocha, User:Stannered
Image:Rhombohedral.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Rhombohedral.svg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Hexagonal lattice.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Hexagonal_lattice.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:Stannered
Image:Cubic.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Cubic.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors:
User:Stannered
Image:Cubic-body-centered.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Cubic-body-centered.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation
License  Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Cubic-face-centered.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Cubic-face-centered.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation
License  Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Mirror.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Mirror.jpg  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Cgs
Image:Fire-mirror-image.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Fire-mirror-image.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
Benjah-bmm27, Mutter Erde, Panoha, Pibwl, TimTay
Image:Fiddler_Crab_Gulf_Coast.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Fiddler_Crab_Gulf_Coast.jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: User:Junglecat
Image:SkewedDistribution.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:SkewedDistribution.png  License: GNU Free Documentation
License  Contributors: Audrius Meskauskas
Image:Skewness Statistics.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Skewness_Statistics.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
Original uploader was Godot at en.wikipedia
Image:Right left helicity.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Right_left_helicity.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:Stannered
Image:Function x^2.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Function_x^2.svg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Qualc1
Image:Function-x3.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Function-x3.svg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Oleg Alexandrov

Image Sources, Licenses and Contributors
717
Image:Function-x3plus1.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Function-x3plus1.svg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Oleg
Alexandrov
Image:pendulumWithMovableSupport.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:PendulumWithMovableSupport.svg  License: GNU
Free Documentation License  Contributors: CompuChip
Image:CliffordAlgebra-01.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:CliffordAlgebra-01.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
Fropuff, Ricky81682
Image:Skein_(HOMFLY).svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Skein_(HOMFLY).svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Pbroks13
Image:Hopf algebra.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Hopf_algebra.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Ryan
Reich
Image:Feynman-Diagram.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Feynman-Diagram.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
user:helix84
Image:FeynRulesEN.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:FeynRulesEN.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Pra1998
Image:Spontaneous symmetry breaking.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Spontaneous_symmetry_breaking.jpg  License:
GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Bender235, Maksim
Image:One-loop-diagram.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:One-loop-diagram.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: JabberWok
Image:Gluon-top-higgs.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Gluon-top-higgs.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: JabberWok
Image:Mecanismo de Higgs PH.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Mecanismo_de_Higgs_PH.png  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: Yrithinnd
File:Pants.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Pants.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Al Silonov, Darapti, Maksim,
Schneelocke, Themightyquill
File:Image-Al-Kitāb al-muḫtaṣar fī ḥisāb al-ğabr wa-l-muqābala.jpg  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Image-Al-Kitāb_al-muḫtaṣar_fī_ḥisāb_al-ğabr_wa-l-muqābala.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors:
al-Khwarizmi
Image:red blue circle.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Red_blue_circle.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Original
uploader was Richard Giuly at en.wikipedia
Image:Möbius strip.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Möbius_strip.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Dbenbenn
Image:Konigsberg bridges.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Konigsberg_bridges.png  License: GNU Free Documentation
License  Contributors: Bogdan Giuşcă
Image:Mug and Torus morph.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Mug_and_Torus_morph.gif  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Howcheng, Kieff, Manco Capac, Maximaximax, Rovnet, 10 anonymous edits
Image:alphabet_homeo.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Alphabet_homeo.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:C S
Image:alphabet_homotopy.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Alphabet_homotopy.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:C S
Image:Topological space examples.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Topological_space_examples.svg  License: Public
Domain  Contributors: User:Dcoetzee
Image:continuity topology.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Continuity_topology.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Dcoetzee
Image:Trefoil knot arb.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Trefoil_knot_arb.png  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: Editor at Large, Ylebru, 2 anonymous edits
Image:Hausdorff space.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Hausdorff_space.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:Fibonacci
Image:Tangent-plane.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Tangent-plane.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Alexwright
Image:Tangentialvektor.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Tangentialvektor.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:McSush
Image:Calabi yau.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Calabi_yau.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Jbourjai
Image:tetrahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Tetrahedron.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Tomruen
Image:hexahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Hexahedron.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Tomruen
Image:octahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Octahedron.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Tomruen
Image:dodecahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Dodecahedron.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Tomruen
Image:icosahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Icosahedron.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Tomruen
Image:Tetrahemihexahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Tetrahemihexahedron.png  License: unknown  Contributors:
Jidari
Image:Octahemioctahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Octahemioctahedron.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Darapti, Jidari, Maksim, Oodzunadaira
Image:Cubohemioctahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Cubohemioctahedron.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Jidari, Rtc
Image:Great icosahedron.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Great_icosahedron.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Jim2k,
Severino666, Tomia
Image:V-E+F=2 Proof Illustration.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:V-E+F=2_Proof_Illustration.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Maggu
Image:Complete graph K2.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Complete_graph_K2.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Dbenbenn
Image:Cirklo.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Cirklo.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Maksim, Rocket000
Image:Disc Plain grey.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Disc_Plain_grey.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Amada44
Image:Sphere-wireframe.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Sphere-wireframe.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
Geek3, Jahobr, Kieff, Snaily, 1 anonymous edits
Image:Torus illustration.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Torus_illustration.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Oleg Alexandrov
Image:Double torus illustration.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Double_torus_illustration.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Oleg Alexandrov
Image:Triple torus illustration.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Triple_torus_illustration.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Oleg Alexandrov

Image Sources, Licenses and Contributors
718
Image:Steiners Roman.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Steiners_Roman.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Mike
Williams
Image:MobiusStrip-01.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:MobiusStrip-01.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Fropuff
Image:KleinBottle-01.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:KleinBottle-01.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Darapti,
Dbenbenn, Fropuff, Tttrung, Wikiborg, たね
Image:Associatividadecat.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Associatividadecat.png  License: GNU Free Documentation
License  Contributors: Campani, EugeneZelenko
Image:SheafMorphism-01.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:SheafMorphism-01.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
Adam majewski, Darapti, Dbenbenn, EugeneZelenko, Fropuff
Image:Homotopy between two paths.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Homotopy_between_two_paths.svg  License: Public
Domain  Contributors: User:Archibald
Image:Hairy ball.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Hairy_ball.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Original uploader
was The Evil Midnight Uploader what Uploads at Midnight at en.wikipedia
Image:Hairy doughnut.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Hairy_doughnut.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
Original uploader was The Evil Midnight Uploader what Uploads at Midnight at en.wikipedia
Image:AtmosphCirc2.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:AtmosphCirc2.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Deadstar,
Hastings
Image:poincare.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Poincare.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Luis Fernández García,
Mu, Ske, 1 anonymous edits
File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-dim-1.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-dim-1.jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: User:Jean-Luc W
File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-dim-2.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-dim-2.jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: User:Jean-Luc W
File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-dim-3.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-dim-3.jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: User:Jean-Luc W
File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-(cond-1).jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-(cond-1).jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: User:Jean-Luc W
File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-(cond-2).jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Théorème-de-Brouwer-(cond-2).jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: User:Jean-Luc W
Image:Hadamard2.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Hadamard2.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Gian-, Kilom691
Image:John f nash 20061102 2.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:John_f_nash_20061102_2.jpg  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: User:Elya
Image:Brouwer fixed point theorem retraction.svg  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Brouwer_fixed_point_theorem_retraction.svg  License: unknown  Contributors: w:de:Benutzer:Gunther
Image:Categorical pullback.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Categorical_pullback.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Ryan Reich
Image:Enriched_mult.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Enriched_mult.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Maksim, 1
anonymous edits
Image:Enrichedidentity.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Enrichedidentity.png  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: Lethe
Image:Enrichedmult.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Enrichedmult.png  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: Lethe
Image:Petersen graph 3-coloring.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Petersen_graph_3-coloring.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Booyabazooka, Dcoetzee
Image:Graph with all three-colourings.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Graph_with_all_three-colourings.svg  License: GNU
Free Documentation License  Contributors: User:Arbor, User:Booyabazooka
Image:Chromatic_polynomial_of_all_3-vertex_graphs.png  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Chromatic_polynomial_of_all_3-vertex_graphs.png  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Thore Husfeldt
Image:3-coloringEx.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:3-coloringEx.svg  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: Booyabazooka, Dcoetzee
Image:Greedy colourings.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Greedy_colourings.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:Thore Husfeldt
Image:6n-graf.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:6n-graf.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:AzaToth
File:Commutative diagram for morphism.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Commutative_diagram_for_morphism.svg
 License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Cepheus
Image:Natural transformation.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Natural_transformation.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Ryan Reich
Image:Directed.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Directed.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Josette
Image:SubobjectPullbackTopos.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:SubobjectPullbackTopos.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Vaughan Pratt
Image:Rieger-Nishimura.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Rieger-Nishimura.svg  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:EmilJ
Image:SubobjectClassifier-01.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:SubobjectClassifier-01.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Fropuff
Image:SubobjectClassifier-02.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:SubobjectClassifier-02.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Fropuff
Image:SubobjectClassifier-03.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:SubobjectClassifier-03.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: Fropuff, Kilom691
Image:long short exact sequences.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Long_short_exact_sequences.png  License: Public
Domain  Contributors: AxelBoldt, Closedmouth, Quadell
Image:Coproduct-01.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Coproduct-01.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Darapti,
EugeneZelenko, Fropuff
Image:Coproduct-03.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Coproduct-03.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Original uploader
was Lethe at en.wikipedia
Image:YonedaLemma-02.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:YonedaLemma-02.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
EugeneZelenko, Fropuff
Image:AdjointFunctorsHomSets.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:AdjointFunctorsHomSets.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Wikimorphism

Image Sources, Licenses and Contributors
719
Image:AdjointFunctorSymmetry.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:AdjointFunctorSymmetry.png  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Wikimorphism
File:Michael Francis Atiyah.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Michael_Francis_Atiyah.jpg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: Gert-Martin Greuel
Image:TrinityCollegeCamGreatCourt.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:TrinityCollegeCamGreatCourt.jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: Formulax, JackyR, Jdforrester, Kurpfalzbilder.de, Oxyman, Solipsist
Image:IAS Princeton.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:IAS_Princeton.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: user:Eecc
Image:Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford.jpg  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Mathematical_Institute,_University_of_Oxford.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Stannered
Image:Twisted cubic curve.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Twisted_cubic_curve.png  License: unknown  Contributors:
User:Rocchini
Image:Atiyah-Hirzebruch.jpeg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Atiyah-Hirzebruch.jpeg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: Konrad Jacobs, Erlangen
Image:Isadore Singer 1977.jpeg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Isadore_Singer_1977.jpeg  License: GNU Free Documentation
License  Contributors: George M. Bergman
Image:Graeme Segal.jpeg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Graeme_Segal.jpeg  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: George M. Bergman
Image:Raoul Bott 1986.jpeg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Raoul_Bott_1986.jpeg  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: George M. Bergman, Berkeley
Image:Schlierenfoto Mach 1-2 Pfeilflügel - NASA.jpg  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Schlierenfoto_Mach_1-2_Pfeilflügel_-_NASA.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Roomba,
Stahlkocher, Wst
Image:Camposcargas.PNG  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Camposcargas.PNG  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Chanchocan
Image:Edward Witten at Harvard.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Edward_Witten_at_Harvard.jpg  License: unknown
 Contributors: Conscious, Darapti, Floriang, Ojan
Image:RoyalSociety20040420CopyrightKaihsuTai.jpg  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:RoyalSociety20040420CopyrightKaihsuTai.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Kaihsu
Image:Flag of Poland.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Flag_of_Poland.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Mareklug, User:Wanted
Image:HCartan.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:HCartan.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors: Mhym
File:Alain_Connes_in_2004.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Alain_Connes_in_2004.jpg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.5  Contributors: Jérôme Chatin Original uploader was Aconnes at en.wikipedia
Image:Flag of France.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Flag_of_France.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:SKopp, User:SKopp, User:SKopp, User:SKopp, User:SKopp, User:SKopp
File:JeanDieudonné.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:JeanDieudonné.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors: Dr. Blofeld
File:Georges Reeb, Paul Vincensini, Charles Ehresmann.jpeg  Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Georges_Reeb,_Paul_Vincensini,_Charles_Ehresmann.jpeg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: unknown
File:Samuel Eilenberg MFO.jpeg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Samuel_Eilenberg_MFO.jpeg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: Konrad Jacobs, Erlangen
Image:Alexander Grothendieck.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Alexander_Grothendieck.jpg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: Konrad Jacobs, Erlangen, Copyright by MFO / Original uploader was AEDP at it.wikipedia
File:Heinz Hopf, Hellmuth Kneser.jpeg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Heinz_Hopf,_Hellmuth_Kneser.jpeg  License: Creative
Commons Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: Konrad Jacobs, Erlangen
File:MaximKontsevich.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:MaximKontsevich.jpg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: Gert-Martin Greuel
Image:Saunders MacLane.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Saunders_MacLane.jpg  License: Creative Commons
Attribution-Sharealike 2.0  Contributors: Konrad Jacobs
Image:Robert Rosen.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Robert_Rosen.jpg  License: unknown  Contributors: User:Mdd
File:Serre.JPG  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Serre.JPG  License: unknown  Contributors: Xtv
File:Henry_whitehead_age_30_approx.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Henry_whitehead_age_30_approx.jpg  License:
Creative Commons Attribution-Sharealike 2.5  Contributors: Genisock2, Sosayso
Image:Flag of the United Kingdom.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Flag_of_the_United_Kingdom.svg  License: Public
Domain  Contributors: User:Zscout370
Image:Flag of the United States.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Flag_of_the_United_States.svg  License: Public Domain
 Contributors: User:Dbenbenn, User:Indolences, User:Jacobolus, User:Technion, User:Zscout370
File:Witten Blackboard.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/windex.php?title=File:Witten_Blackboard.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Ojan

License
720
License
GNU Free Documentation License
http:/ / www. gnu. org/ copyleft/ fdl. html

