   
Indiana
ISSN: 0341-8642
indiana@iai.spk-berlin.de
Ibero-Amerikanisches Institut Preußischer
Kulturbesitz
Alemania
Halbmayer, Ernst
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse
Indiana, vol. 29, 2012, pp. 103-125
Ibero-Amerikanisches Institut Preußischer Kulturbesitz
Berlin, Alemania
Available in: http://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=247026964005
   How to cite
   Complete issue
   More information about this article
   Journal's homepage in redalyc.org
Scientific Information System
Network of Scientific Journals from Latin America, the Caribbean, Spain and Portugal
Non-profit academic project, developed under the open access initiative

INDIANA 29 (2012): 103-125
Ernst Halbmayer*
Amerindian mereology:  
Animism, analogy, and the multiverse
Abstract:  This paper develops the assumption that different ontologies go hand in 
hand with different mereological relations between parts and wholes and between 
multiplicity and singularity. It explores these relations among Carib-speaking Am-
erindians. In the process, an ontology that goes beyond the animic inversion of the 
nature/culture divide and an irreducible difference of perspectives is identified. 
It shows the importance of analogies between micro- and macro-cosmological 
orders, which, however, do not form encompassing totalities or an integrated uni-
verse. Further, a logic of partial encompassment is identified, commonly going 
hand in hand with multiple beings and a multiverse of co-existent worlds among 
Carib-speaking Amerindians.
Keywords:  Carib-speaking Amerindians, mereology, multiverse, partial encom-
passment, animism, analogism.
Resumen:  En este trabajo se desarrolla la hipótesis que diferentes ontologías 
van de la mano de diferentes relaciones mereológicas entre partes y totalidades 
así como entre la multiplicidad y la singularidad. Se indaga estas relaciones entre 
los amerindios caribe-hablantes, identificándose una ontología que va más allá de 
la inversión anímica de la división naturaleza/cultura y una diferencia irreducible 
de perspectivas. Muestra la importancia de las analogías entre las órdenes micro 
y macro-cosmológicas que, sin embargo, no forman totalidades integrales o un 
universo integrado. Mucho más se identifica una lógica de abarcamiento parcial, 
que con frecuencia va de la mano de múltiples seres y un multiverso de mundos 
coexistentes entre los amerindios caribe-hablantes.
Palabras clave:  Amerindios caribe-hablantes, mereología, multiverso, inclusión 
parcial, animismo, analogismo.
*	
Ernst Halbmayer is professor for cultural and social anthropology at the Department for Comparative 
Cultural Research at the University of Marburg. He received his Ph.D and his habilitation at Vienna 
University. His ethnographic work is focusing on the Yukpa in Venezuela and Colombia, the Carib-
speaking Amerindians and most recently on the ethnography of the “intermediate zone” between 
the Andes, Amazonia and Mesoamerica.

104
The aim of this paper is to rethink some central notions and assumptions in the 
current reflexions on ontologies, especially the animist ontology which is most 
commonly associated with Lowland South America.1 Ontological approaches in an-
thropology have demonstrated that the fundamental categories of what exists, the 
structures of the world and the corresponding schemata of praxis may differ signifi-
cantly (Descola 2011; Viveiros de Castro 1998). Consequently, different ontologies 
have been identified and a need for richer ontologies has been formulated (Viveiros 
de Castro 2004: 484). I will start from the basic assumption that if there are different 
ontologies and not just one nature of being in the world, it is likely that there are also 
different mereologies,2 that is, more than one way of conceiving and conceptualizing 
relations between parts and wholes. In this paper, I will analyze the relationship 
between specific forms of multiple entities and their parts in order to understand 
ontological notions among Carib-speaking groups.
Therefore, naturalism, with its distinction of nature and culture or society, and 
of the material versus the immaterial, is just one ontology among others. Since the 
enlightenment, naturalism has never­theless been taken for granted and considered 
rational and objective. Other cosmologies appeared as wrong, bizarre and exotic 
views of the world based on primitive and childish mentalities and on irrational 
assumptions. By discussing the motion “Ontology is just another word for culture” 
(which was then rejected), the reconstituted Group for Debates in Anthropological 
Theory (2010) illustrated the basic differences between an ontological and a cultur-
alistic position. Martin Holbraad strongly summarizes the dissimilarity of an onto-
logical and a cultural approach by stating: 
So what makes the ontological approach to alterity not only pretty different from the 
culturalist one, but also rather better, is that it gets us out of the absurd position of thinking 
that [...] they get (the) stuff wrong. [...] the fact that the people we study may say or do 
things that to us appear as wrong just indicates that we have reached the limits of our 
own conceptual repertoire. [...] we have grounds to suspect that there is something wrong 
with our ability to describe what others are saying, rather than with what they are actually 
saying, about which we a fortiori know nothing other than our own misunderstanding. 
The anthropological task, then, is not to account for why ethnographic data are as they 
are, but rather to understand what they are – instead of explanation or interpretation, what 
is called for is conceptualization. [...] Rather than using our own analytical concepts to 
make sense of a given ethnography (explanation, interpretation), we use the ethnography 
to rethink our analytical concepts (Carrithers et al. 2010: 184).
1	
I would like to thank Bernd Brabec and Eithne Carlin for inspiring comments and suggestions.
2	
From the Greek meros, “part”, parthood relations.
Ernst Halbmayer

105
Although various approaches are still focusing on epistemology, and the naturalistic 
and mentalist justification of other world-views (Guthrie 1993), Viveiros de Castro 
convincingly replied to Bird-David (1999), that “Animism is surely an ontology, 
concerned with being and not with how we come to know it” (1999: 79). Animism, as 
well as other ontologies, is a mode of existence and a form of being which constitutes 
specific persons and worlds. By means of these ontologically rethought analytical 
concepts, among others, the old debate between universalism (the existence of a 
single reality following general laws) and relativism (the assumption that reality is 
multiple and culturally specific) has been reformulated by arguing for the existence 
of a limited set of distinct ontologies that constitute specific worlds. 
In the course of my argument it will appear that different ontological perspec-
tives can communicate with one another and therefore are not necessarily entirely 
incompatible. To a large extent, cosmologies are able to integrate different ontologi-
cal positions, at least at their peripheries. For instance, the core of Lowland Amerin-
dian cosmologies is based on animic assumptions. However, among Carib-speaking 
groups also clearly developed aspects of analogism are visible, connecting the per-
son, the houses’ architecture and the settlements’ layout, and the cosmos. Animic 
cosmologies also know animals and plants that are not commonly thought to be 
personalized and humanized and which are perceived in ways that resemble natural-
istic positions, or notions of nature. In contrast, although naturalism is the dominant 
ontology of our own cosmology, there are areas and contexts – inspired by esoteric 
reasoning, for example – where animic or analogic concepts and practices emerge. 
By drawing on my previous work on Carib-speaking Amerindians (see Halb­
mayer 2010) I am going to develop some theses about the analogy between micro- 
and macro-cosmos in terms of partial encompassment and fractality a step further. 
Thereby I will refer to Descola’s (2011) inspiring differentiation of four ontologies 
(animism, totemism, naturalism and analogism), as well as to current reflections on 
(dividual, composite, fractal) Amazonian persons (Viveiros de Castro 2001; Kelly 
2005; Vilaça 2005, 2011; Santos-Granero 2009) and their relationship with the mac-
ro-cosmos (see Halbmayer 2010). 
Many cosmologies of Carib-speaking Amerindians show both animic and clearly 
analogical characteristics, but the latter are in general not integrated in a holistic and 
encompassing manner, which would be typical for analogism. These cosmologies do 
not create encompassing totalities or an integrated universe, but a multiverse of co-
existing worlds relying on a specific form of non-totalizing partial encompassment. 
I will show that this is more than a simple asymmetry of perspectives and less than 
an integrated encompassing totality. 
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

106
1.	 Animic theories and hierarchical inversion
Two central and fundamental aspects of those cosmologies generally labeled as “new 
animism”, or “animic” (e.g. Bird-David 1999; Viveiros de Castro 1998; Descola 
2011; Costa & Fausto 2010) are:
1.	 There exist other than human persons. Animation, agentivity, reflexivity and 
intentionality are not restricted to humans but commonly attributed also to 
objects, spirits and natural phenomena.3 
2.	 In animic ontologies, relations and interactions with these persons as well 
as animated forms of agentivity are maintained, including communication, 
mutual understanding and the possibility of transforming into and becoming 
the other. 
Despite these assumptions, areas of non-personalized “nature” may exist in animic 
ontologies (see Descola 1994), and perspectivism does not involve all animal spe-
cies (Viveiros de Castro 1998: 471). However, in sum it can be stated that animals 
are people. It is neither necessary to belong to the human species to be a person (as 
important animals and plants are also personified to different degrees, they are like 
humans),4 nor is it necessary to be a plant or animal to be animated and to have agen-
tivity. In addition, spirits and (some) objects are animated, have different grades of 
agentivity and intentionality (see Guss 1989; Velthem 2003; Santos-Granero 2009; 
Goulard & Karadimas 2011). Practically we seem to be confronted with graduated 
systems of animation, agentivity and reflexivity which in most cases still need to be 
explored in more detail.
According to these minimal assumptions, an animic ontology is relational. It 
crosses the naturalistic nature/culture divide (where the relationship toward animals 
and plants is generally instrumental, excluding most options for communicative in-
teractions based on mutual understanding with aspects of what we call nature).5 On 
a higher classificatory level, however, the nature/culture distinction is retained in 
current theories which may be called “inversionist”, as they understand animism as a 
hierarchical inversion of naturalism (Viveiros de Castro 1998; Descola 2011).6 While 
3	
Turner (2009) recently argued that these persons and beings are not necessarily human in the sense 
suggested by animism and perspectivism. I propose that their ontological status should be inquired 
empirically by focusing on the linguistic constructions such as for example agentivity, animacy 
and possession. 
4	
Among the Yukpa, where I conducted most of my fieldwork, animals are not Yukpa but they once 
were Yukpa-pe, “Yukpa-like”.
5	
For such a rational, enlighted and naturalistic view see Habermas (1988: 369ff.).
6	
See Descola for a distinction between animism and perspectivism as a specific version of animism: 
Ernst Halbmayer

107
the distinction between nature (physicality) and culture (interiority) is retained,7 its 
relationship is hierarchically reversed:8 nature encompasses culture in naturalism, 
and the relations between society and nature are themselves natural. Nature or physi-
cality is considered the unmarked state and common ground that unites all beings, 
from which multiple cultures, or a so-called multiculturalism, emerge. By contrast, 
in animic ontologies, culture, spirit or interiority encompasses nature.
Animism could be defined as an ontology which postulates the social character of rela-
tions between humans and non-humans: the space between nature and society is itself 
social (Viveiros de Castro 1998: 473). 
Therefore culture is no longer a privilege of humans (Descola 2011: 202). 
A common spiritual interiority is the unmarked state and the common ground 
that unites beings beyond humans. From this common ground, multiple natures, or a 
so-called multinaturalism emerge, as the principle for differentiating diverse beings.
2.	 Shared content, different forms and transformation
In Viveiros de Castro’s multinaturalism bodies are not “physiological differences” 
but rather “affects, dispositions or capacities which render the body of every species 
unique”. The body is “a bundle of affects and capacities [...] which is the origin 
of perspectives” (1998: 478). Descola takes a different position by arguing that 
the physical distinctions are not distinctions of substance9 (substance in this sense 
circulates in form of food, energy and life-force between different kinds of species 
and across the cosmos), but distinctions of form, or, more specifically, of the form of 
physicality (Descola 2011: 198-199). 
Therefore, it seems that the distinction of physicality and interiority, which may 
be understood as an expression of the nature/culture distinction, is cross-cut by a 
In perspectivism non-humans see humans as non-humans whereas in general animism non-humans 
see humans simply as humans (2011: 214).
7	
As there “are already too many things which do not exist” (Viveiros de Castro 1998: 470).
8	
In the sense of Dumont (1980: 43) as a form of hierarchical opposition, where one part of the 
distinction encompasses its opposite, thereby forming a totality. 
9	
Viveiros de Castro argued at least in the German version of his widely cited paper on perspectivism 
“Mein etwas schlaffer Gebrauch von ‚Seele‘ und ‚Geist‘ als analoge Begriffe beruht indessen 
auf der Überzeugung, dass diese Wörter einen semantisch kontinuierlichen Bereich abdecken, 
der in einer radikalen Diskontinuität zum semantischen Bereich steht, der von den Begriffen wie 
‚Körper‘, ‚Materie‘ und (in ihren modernen und nicht-philosophischen Verwendungen) ‚Substanz‘ 
steht” (1997: 100). (“My somewhat flabby use of ‘soul’ and ‘spirit’ as analogous terms, however, 
is based on the conviction that these words cover a semantically continuous range, standing in a 
radical discontinuity to the semantic range covered by the terms such as ‘body’, ‘matter’ and (in its 
modern and non-philosophical uses) ‘substance’”).
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

108
distinction of form and content. Humans and animals within animist ontology share 
a common interiority or cultural ground as well as substance, which would – from a 
naturalistic position – be considered as physicality. In animism, physical difference 
is one of form but not of substance. Cultural similarity, on the other hand, seems to 
manifest in content expressing itself in different forms (e.g., jaguars drink blood, 
while humans drink manioc beer). Consequently, if physical sameness through 
(shared) consumption of food is produced across species, or if underlying cultural 
similarity assumes identical forms, problems may arise. Obviously, these are the 
points where transformations between different species intentionally or unintention-
ally occur.
Carib-speaking groups use at least three different non-exclusive idioms to ex-
press differences and potential influences between species (see Halbmayer 2010: 
587-589). The “spiritual” one is focusing on the contact and exchange of “soul(s)” 
and “soul matter”, which have a broad meaning from double, shadow, specter to life 
force, energy, or light deriving from sun and radiating through the cosmos, inherent 
in all living things. A second “physical form-logical” idiom, seems to be based on 
the idea that different species are established by the distribution of different physical 
attributes (like teeth, claws or more or less colorful clothes). But physical attributes 
may also be transferred across species through spiritual contact (see Fock 1963: 17 
for the Waiwai) or the consumption of meat. The Yukpa developed a whole series of 
such statements: sloth’s meat would cause a child to be born with only two fingers, 
anteater’s meat would cause a small and pointed mouth, the consumption of arma-
dillo would cause small circuited eyes, etc. (Halbmayer 1999). The third idiom is a 
humoral pathological substance etiology of diseases based on the classification of 
substances.10 Butt Colson has shown that the categories of sweet/bitter and cold/hot 
are in the center of such logic among the Akawaio. She writes: 
Sweet foods ‘cause blood’, which is itself classified as sweet. Since bleeding must be 
reduced at the time of, and after, birth, sweet foods which encourage bleeding have to 
be avoided. Blood is also classified as cold. Cold liquids and foods must be avoided too 
and it is said that ‘the stomach must not have cold things’. According to one informant, 
‘all food must be warm: cold food would kill the mother’ (Butt Colson 1975: 292; see 
also 1976).
Also Patrick Menget’s analysis of couvade among the Ikpeng relies on a comparable 
logic (1979). It is neither the spirit or soul nor the form but the quality, strength 
and polarity of substances that is the idiom in which the avoidances are expressed. 
A specific taboo can therefore be formulated in these three different idioms: the 
10	 Descola considers such logic as typical for analogism (2011: 325f). 
Ernst Halbmayer

109
consumption of tapir meat is prohibited a) because of the dangerous animal’s spirit, 
b) due to the clumsiness of the tapir, which would be transferred to the child, or c) 
because of the strong features (humors) of his flesh. In all three cases, the physical 
condition of the person, her well-being, balance and appearance, but also illness 
and pain communicate the results of consciously or unconsciously established 
relationships. A radical discontinuity between soul and matter or spirit and substance 
is evidently not always given.
3.	 From hierarchical oppositions to 2nd order classifications and fractals
In addition to naturalims and animism, Descola identifies two more ontologies: 
totemism, where a hybrid identity between specific natural species and specific 
human groups in terms of physicality and interiority is established,11 and analogism, 
where graduated differences in terms of interiority and physicality are established 
and bridged by analogies between different levels of existence and beings. His 
overarching schema integrating the four ontologies is based on a second order 
nature/culture (physicality/interiority) distinction. While naturalism and animism are 
understood as hierarchically encompassed, offering differing versions respectively 
of the nature/culture distinction, totemism and analogism systematically cross this 
distinction by creating either hybrid identities between humans and non-humans at 
the spiritual and physical level, or analogies bridging graduated differences on both 
levels. 
According to this theory animism produces autonomous isomorph collectives12 
for each species, and naturalism produces different collectives (cultures) among 
humans, excluding non-humans. Totemism, so Descola, produces common iso-
morph and complementary collectives of humans and non-humans, while analogism 
establishes ranked collectives of humans and non-humans organized in different seg-
ments of the world. Such a conceptualization of different collectives is an attempt to 
overcome the great western divide between nature and culture and the practices of 
purification (Latour 1991) that go hand in hand with it.
However, in the current anthropological discussion on ontologies in relation to 
South America, a certain paradox may be observed. While in philosophy, mereology 
(the study of parts and wholes and their relationship to one another) is an established 
branch of formal ontology, in anthropology, especially in South American anthro­
11	 Whereas the relations toward animals outside this form of identification remain largely unspecified.
12	 For the terms collective, describing not just associations among humans but of humans and non-
humans, see Latour 1991.
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

110
pology, terms like “mereology”, “mereologic” or Strathern’s term of “merography”13 
(Strathern 1992: 72-73) are hardly ever mentioned, despite an intense theorization of 
ontologies.14 One could speculate that this avoidance might be related to the fact that 
animism is conceptualized as an inversion of naturalistic nature/culture distinction 
and that consequently each species is forming a collective of its own. Such a rela-
tionship of parts and wholes might pass as largely commensurable with part/whole 
relationships we are used to. In other words, the major and inspiring attempts to 
overcome the great western divide between nature and culture limit their full impact 
by re-inscribing the nature/culture difference in notions of parthood.
The main difference of animism and naturalism is also reproduced at the level of 
the person. Humans themselves become nature/culture dividuals in the current theo-
rization. As Vilaça argues, based on Viveiros de Castro (2001), Strathern’s concept 
of a composite Melanesian dividual based on gender differences (Strathern 1988) 
takes on a specific human/non-human form in Amazonia. “While Melanesia reveals 
dividuals conceived as male and female, in Amazonia we are faced with dividuals 
conveived as human and non-human (or body and soul)” (Vilaça 2005: 453; see also 
Vilaça 2011: 248-249; Viveiros de Castro 2001: 33). 
In contrast, following my own analysis of the Carib-speaking groups, it appears 
that persons should not be understood as dividuals reproducing a nature/culture or 
body/soul distinction.15 Rather we are confronted with dividuals reproducing multi-
ple distinctions or an internal multiplicity going beyond a binary distinction (Halb­
mayer 2010: 594). We are confronted with multi-dividuals or multividuals, multiply 
partible persons beyond an undividable individual or a dualist dividual.
4.	 Rethinking analytical concepts: Person, house and cosmos 
More than thirty years ago, Strathern (1980) argued “No nature, no culture”. How-
ever, we still seem to be trapped in a paradox regarding binary concepts of nature/
culture and body/soul. We know that the nature/culture, body/soul, physicality/
spirituality distinctions are specific expressions of a naturalist ontology. At the same 
time, current theories re-inscribe these distinctions – although significantly trans-
formed – into other ontologies, or frame the difference between ontologies in terms 
of these distinctions. They use the nature/culture distinction to explain how other 
ontologies cross this divide, which is finally alien to them.
13	 A mode of exposition of partial relations or “the English view that anything may be part of 
something else” (Strathern 1992: 73).
14	 But see for example with a different focus Thornton (1988) and Zeitlyn (2009).
15	 Although in some cases like the Yukpa we come close to such a distinction, generally we are 
confronted with beings encompassing an internal and external multiplicity. 
Ernst Halbmayer

111
Which picture would emerge if we were to start looking for recurring similari-
ties at different scales? Among Carib-speaking groups, human persons themselves 
are often considered a house, accommodating different spiritual aspects located in 
different body parts or organs such as the eyes or the heart. During sickness and in 
dreams, these parts may leave the body. When a person dies and definitively disin-
tegrates, these different aspects are set free. The head or eye part travels to the sky, 
other parts settle in the caves or mountains and yet others transform into animals. 
Hence we are confronted with a form of differentiation that reproduces an internal 
multiplicity which is generally not reducible to a binary distinction. This internal 
multiplicity partially reproduces itself at different levels, between different worlds 
(or cosmological layers), and within this visible world outside the human person. 
It therefore would be quite misleading to view Wayana, Trio, Yekuana or Pemon 
persons, amongst others, from a body-soul perspective. Ethnographic evidence 
shows that in many cases, multiple spiritual aspects locate themselves in and even – 
like in the case of analogism (Descola 2011: 301ff) – outside the indigenous bodies. 
The Yekuana are maybe the best-known example for people with a multitude of 
akato doubles. They distinguish six souls of which only two reside within the body, 
in particular the heart-soul (ayewana akano akato) and the eye-soul (ayenudu akano 
akato). These return to heaven after death and are responsible for dreaming (Guss 
1989: 50). Additionally there are other akatos, such as the akato in the moon (nuna 
awono akato), the akato in the sun (shi awono akato), the akatos in the water and 
the akato on earth. 
For the Pemon and Kapon, the body’s life-force is likewise associated with Sun’s 
light and referred to as akwaru (Kapon) or ekaton (Pemon). This particular vitality is 
also located in different body parts. 
One of the three principal souls, the kamong, or shadow soul, leaves a person’s body 
upon death and goes to the mountaintops, adding to the number of the mawari. The 
mawari are stealers of the tyekaton soul (heart soul or breath soul), and it is the loss of 
the tyekaton soul which can cause illness. If the tyekaton soul, which can be stolen or 
go wandering from the body in dreams, is not recovered in time, death will result. One 
old shaman averred that people have at least three principal souls: the tyekaton soul, the 
kamong soul, and the enuto, or eye soul, which can be seen as a very small man deep in 
the pupil of the eye. He said that the tyeka­ton soul normally goes to the sky, or to God 
(he used the Spanish word Dios at that point) when a person dies, while the kamong soul 
goes to the mawari (Thomas 1982: 142). 
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

112
Among the Pemon Mawari are spirits living in the forest or in mountains.16 A person’s 
different spiritual aspects therefore reproduce parts of the cosmological structure 
and thereby humans relate to the different planes of the cosmos. The body and its 
common division into torso, head and extremities may also be related to different 
layers of the world (imno the sky, epi the world that forms a membrane toward the 
surrounding waterworld wapara), as Teixeiro-Pinto (1997) showed for the Carib-
speaking Arara. 
Figure 1.  The cosmological layout and the destiny of body parts.  
Redrawn from: Teixeira-Pinto 1997.
The associated body parts transform into different beings after death which then go 
to respectively different layers of the world (Teixeiro Pinto 1997: 165f; Halbmayer 
2010: 357f). 
Among Carib-speaking groups, other-than-human persons are well known, as 
well as other-than-human houses, villages and other-than-human social species. Ac-
cordingly, being a human is not a prerequisite for living in a house, for perform-
ing specific ways of living, eating, feasting or singing. The notion of human-like 
species goes beyond animals and may include plants, like trees, especially if they 
have powers to heal or to poison, or, like maize or manioc, serve as basic food. Also 
stars, constellations, or rainbows are frequently considered such human-like persons. 
Stones as well may be powerful and associated with specific spirits. Therefore they 
are placed at specific locations, where they are cared for. Such stones may be used to  
 
16	 Among the Waiwai and Mawayana Mawari is a culture hero.
Ernst Halbmayer

113
attract animals and garden products (Butt 1966/67). Even if they are not considered 
to be persons or humans, they obviously have agentivity, power and incorporate 
certain aspects of animicy.
4.1.  Human like-persons: Proto-, ex- and non-humans
There also exist other than human persons. These persons are not necessarily humans 
but more or less human-like (see also Brabec this volume). Generally speaking, there 
are at least three forms of human-like persons: proto-humans, ex-humans, or non-
humans. Pre- or proto-humans are usually powerful, sometimes trickster-like beings 
that fabricated or manufactured the first humans. From these first humans, animals 
were differentiated later on (for example Amouritsha who made the first women out 
of a manüratsha tree among the Yukpa, or Kwatïngï who fabricated the human sub-
stitute daughters out of a tree trunk and natural materials among the Kalapalo, see 
Basso 1987a: 24 and Halbmayer 2010: 423f).
Santos-Granero recently focussed on the topic of the manufacture of persons and 
reasoned that in Amazonia, creation is usually a process of transformation of given 
entities. Consequently, humans generally are composite beings. People and objects 
share the same “symbolic frame of fabrication” (Santos-Granero 2009: 6). He further 
argued that “we are forced to conclude that the model of the human body is not the 
body of animals but rather the body of artifacts” (2009: 7). To that effect, the artifac-
tual mode of production/reproduction would be prior to genital (2009: 8). Among the 
Carib-speaking groups such a fabrication is not just producing composite beings but 
specifically human attributes, emotions and behaviour.
While humans and humanity have been fabricated by proto-human beings, ani-
mals are generally considered to be ex-humans that became differentiated out of 
a common past humanity (see Viveiros de Castro 1998: 472, 2004: 465; Descola 
2011: 201). Among the Yukpa this is conceived in terms of the distribution of dif-
ferent physical qualities and bodily adornments (in the logic of fabricating physical 
differences), but also in terms of conflict between humans and animals leading to 
the separation of the latter. In former times, mutual understanding and communica-
tion between these species was possible. This possibility was definitively lost since 
the human/animal separation, so that henceforth only shamans are able to willingly 
establish interspecies communication in general. But besides proto- and ex-humans 
we also find non-humans. In most of the cases, these are spiritual and often mon-
strous beings which may appear in human-like form but developed from a different 
origin and possess non-human behaviour and morality. They lack a common shared 
humanity. The Arara were maybe most explicit about this idea. They distinguished 
between beings coming from the inside, and persons coming from the outside water-
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

114
world wapara. Beings from the inside would neither share substance or descent, nor 
ancestry with these waterworld beings. This category of beings included neighbour-
ing Amerindian groups such as the Kalapalo17 (Teixeira Pinto 1997: 136; Halbmayer 
2010: 350-352). 
In such a categorization of human-like beings, different relations are inscribed: 
one of fabrication and care (proto-humans – humans), one of a reversed evolution 
with humanity as common origin and a subsequent differentiation (humanity → 
humans/animal species) and non-humans appearing in human form. 
4.2.  Multiverses 
In sociological terms, among Carib-speaking groups several cognatically organized 
units can be found, such as family hearth groups or settlement groups organized in 
houses, villages, river groups, etc. There are settlement places (ata, pata), houses and 
the different people that dwell in them. These “people/s” are often but not always 
marked by suffixes like -yana, -koto or -komo. In the conception of Carib-speaking 
groups they range from known human neighbours, to animal-peoples residing in the 
forest, bird or vulture-people with their pata in the sky-world or star-peoples. But 
they may also include what Magaña (1982) referred to as monstrous and unusual 
razas plínicas marked by their different physical appearances, like cephalopods with 
strikingly different habits and practices.
In the Carib-speaking Amerindians’ conception, these peoples constitute and in-
habit different worlds in a multiverse that sometimes includes several skyworlds, 
underworlds, the waterworld, or the world of the dead. The Yekuana, for example, 
distinguish eight skyworlds and three underworlds (Halbmayer 2010: 94-137), the 
Trio, according to Magaña (1987, 1990), four skyworlds. These worlds reproduce 
and locate themselves in the landscape, in the rivers, mountains, caves and the sky. 
Rapids, constellations and specific parts of the mountains are visible markers, dwell-
ing places or houses of such peoples and junctures from and to these other worlds. 
Among the Yekuana and the Waiwai, the cosmological differentiation between these 
worlds reproduces itself typically in the architectural structure of the collective round 
house or the concentric village layout (Halbmayer 2010: 94-104, 249-258).
17	 In contrast to this original understanding the Arara cooperate today with the Kayapo in the context 
of indigenous politics and the protests against the Bello Monte dam complex.
Ernst Halbmayer

115
Figure 2.  The Yekuana cosmos, drawn by Pedro Matakuni (12 years) (left, from 
Barandiarán 1979: 137) and Dawasehuwa (right, from Civrieux 1985: 57). 
In Carib-speaking Amerindian cosmologies, the main task of differentiation does not 
occur in society as opposed to nature, but within the world, the house and the person 
as such. Carib-speaking cosmologies are, as is often the case in Amazonia, based on 
a model of the cosmos that distinguishes multiple worlds and different species of 
persons. Such cosmologies do not form an integrated universe, but a multiverse of 
coexisting and interrelated worlds. Being and acting in, as well as travelling to these 
worlds – as much as relating to these persons involved – is central for the effects 
of any interrelations which may be experienced or were once experienced ideally. 
However, knowledge about these worlds is not necessarily and exclusively gained in 
direct engagement and from a dwelling perspective.18 It is also codified in narrations, 
rituals, music, and in talk about ways to deal with animals and plants, or ways to 
produce (Guss 1989; Velthem 2003) and to use objects (Rival 1996). 
Rituals and music are not just media of intra-species communication but also 
media of transformation. Similarly, mythical narrations and daily talk do not just 
describe such transformations but demonstrate what happens if one deals with as-
pects of the world in an improper way. These experiences and the gained knowledge 
are exchanged and shared among humans, encoded in proper forms of behaviour, 
inscribed into the landscape, and therefore form the basis for proper engagement 
with the world.
18	 For such an argumentation see e.g. Willerslev (2007).
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

116
Hunting and gardening always imply instrumental intervention into the envi-
ronment, and thus constitute important ways of engaging with non-human others. 
Rituals, music, dreams, vision quests, weaving and carving may be equally pow-
erful interactional and communicative tools to engage and relate with different 
others, human-like persons, houses, villages and peoples. Humans may knowingly 
or unknowingly enter the dwelling places of other beings in the forest or the moun-
tains. Humans relate to them through the ingestion of food, through the circulation 
of substances or – even less material – of energy, light and life-force. The question 
therefore is not if other than instrumental relationships may be established with as-
pects we call nature, but how to establish them properly. 
But how may the multiple relations toward other than human beings be 
consciously established, maintained and controlled? Also, how can potential harm 
resulting from such exchanges be avoided? Such interactions are controlled through 
specific forms of behaviour, avoidances, withdrawal, fasting and taboos as well as 
by demonstrations of respect, by conscious interventions and ritual transformations. 
These aim to establish temporary contact with the beings or their masters (Fausto 
2008), but try to avoid an irreversible metamorphosis into the other (Monod Becque-
lin 1982). Moreover, the relationship with the cosmological structure is expressed 
in multiple souls and body parts associated with cosmological levels and relevant 
beings in various ways. 
5.  Forms of distinction
Facing these empirical examples, serious doubts may arise, questioning the assumption 
that Carib-speaking persons may be understood as binary body/soul dividuals. But 
what is the form of distinction we are confronted with in these examples? What is 
the relationship between parts and wholes underlying these examples? How do parts 
build up to a whole and in which ways is a whole differentiated, divided or split into 
parts? 
Are fractal analogies, increasingly applied and developed in recent publications 
including my own work (Halbmayer 2010: 295-299), an answer to this problem? 
Such analogies are currently advanced in different directions including exchange 
logics (Kelly 2005), the theory of rhizomes (Viveiros de Castro 2010) and by meta-
phorical uses of the term fractal in regard to the human/nonhuman interface of an 
Amazonian “cosmic body”, being considered the basis for an alternative modernity 
beyond the commodity relations of global history (Uzendoski 2010). These latter 
attempts refer to chaos theory (Mosko 2005; Wagner 2001, 2005), Appadurai’s 
(1996) fractal notion of global culture (Uzendoski 2010: 46) and the Deleuzian rhi-
zomatic theory (e.g. Viveiros de Castro 2010). 
Ernst Halbmayer

117
However, a strong relationship between binary reasoning and current notions of 
fractality may still be observed (Mosko 2005). The dualism between identity (non-
affinity/consanguinity) and alterity (affinity), which in Viveiros de Castros words is 
fractally and endlessly reproduced at all levels of the system is a good example.
Intra-personal and inter-personal relations are also ‘co-extensive’, [...], just as the socius 
is the person on a collective scale. In other words, this structure is fractal: a distinction 
between part and whole is meaningless (Viveiros de Castro 2001: 31).19
In such mereologies where every part is a whole and every whole a part, and this is 
repeated in a logic scale invariant self-similary, the parts and wholes are similar but 
still distinguished by scale.
Which mereologies do we apply to analyze and understand cultures and cos­
mologies and what are the distinctions we use to construct and differentiate ontolo-
gies? And in addition to that, how far do they relate to available empirical data? Let 
me focus on three areas where a bifurcation between current theories and empirical 
data may be observed, and a need for further research emerges.
Firstly, there is a need to explain the obvious abundance of analogical features 
within animist ontologies. Secondly, we will have to evaluate in which sense the 
import of notions of fractality may help to understand Amerindian mereologies. Are 
uses of fractal notions and references to chaos theory more than just new analogies 
imported from post-structuralist Western thought? Finally, we need to answer the 
question whether and how far specific Amerindian mereologies go beyond current 
inversions of the nature/culture divide and notions of self-recurring fractality. 
Thereby we will have to keep in mind that such abstract theoretical considerations 
always reflect our own models. They are necessarily radical reductions of lived social 
and cultural complexity. Therefore the question is how to reduce complexity in a 
way the models may reflect the available data concerning the Amerindian persons, 
settlements and the cosmos? 
19	 Thereby Viveiros de Castro contradicts his original focus on hierarchical encompassment that led 
him to argue that Amazonian kinship systems are hierarchically encompassing affinity on the local 
level and are being hierarchically encompassed by potential or symbolic affinity and a symbolic 
economy of predation. In recent years he has been developing this fractal and rhizomatic Deleuzian 
position. 
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

118
6.	 Scale invariant approximate self-similarity and non-self identical entities
If nature/culture is the great differentiator that divides the naturalistic ontology, 
while the mediating practice produces abounding nature/culture hybrids (Latour 
1991), what may be the differentiator of the relational ontologies found among 
Carib-speaking groups? This ontology includes other than human persons, houses 
and villages, but also relies on a multiverse and constitutes human persons that par-
tially reproduce the multiple distinctions on which their world and the multiverse are 
based on. 
Obviously it has to be a differentiator that (re-)produces co-existing units in a ba-
sically non-hierarchically and non-totalizing manner that are at the same time similar 
and different to one another. Persons, houses, villages and peoples are conceptual-
ized as basically similar, despite their obvious differences. However, they do not 
constitute an overarching unit that is more than the sum of its parts, despite their 
similarity. Their similarity is based on a double analogy across existing differences. 
As I have argued elsewhere (Halbmayer 2004, 2010) such a form of differentia-
tion does not produce a hierarchical encompassment in a Dumontian sense. It does 
not produce a totality, encompassing its difference as in the classical understanding. 
Mereologically speaking, there is no underlapping of parts under a common whole, 
just a partial overlapping of parts – a creative partial encompassment (Halbmayer 
2010) – forming temporary and rather unstable units. These temporary and unstable 
units are internally multiple, but they are not more than the parts they originate from, 
but less. They are not formed by a totalizing encompassment but by partial encom-
passment, creating entities merely integrating parts of the aspects they rely on. As a 
consequence the encompassed aspects exist not just as parts of the units but also out-
side either in non-encompassed form or encompassed by other temporary entities. 
Such non-totalizing entities, which may be human persons, villages, or even the 
visible world people are living in, result from partial overlapping. This leads to a 
paradoxical situation: such temporary units are at the same time different from the 
parts they integrate (since they exist also in non-integrated form or integrated by 
other entities) as they also intrinsically rely on and integrate these parts. Such an 
overlapping leads to a partial encompassment and such a partial encompassment 
produces a differentiation between integrated and non-integrated parts. This differ-
entiation and the thereby created fuzzy borders hardly lead to stable and continually 
self-reproducing units. Rather such partial encompassment has to be actively main- 
Ernst Halbmayer

119
tained. Aspects of persons may get lost or be added. Villages may split or incorporate 
persons. The consequences are rather unstable and temporary units: persons, villages 
or even the multiverse which may collide in a cataclysm.20
Consequently there is a double similarity between units. Different entities may 
be based on similar forms of internal multiplicities and differentiation. The person, 
the house and the cosmos may show obvious signs of scale invariant approximate 
self-similarity. Such entities are connected to different outsides in multiple ways, and 
aspects of their internal multiplicity exist also in the exterior or within other entities. 
Therefore, multiple logics of establishing and/or avoiding contact, communication, 
exchange or predative appropriation exist. These very logics may then lead, among 
other things, to loss and illness, elaborated cosmological exchange logics, personal 
empowerment or the continuous production of a common corporality through incor-
poration of the same food. An important part of these cosmological exchange logics 
is formulated in terms of loss and appropriation of soul matter or substance. Among 
the northern Carib-speakers in the Guianas such exchange notions in terms of spirit 
and soul are common (variations of the terms ekati, ekaton, okaton, or akato, or 
akwa, auka),21 but among the southern groups, like the Ikpeng, Arara and Bakairi, 
the spiritual dimension of souls is subordinated to a logic of substance (Menget 
1979: 256). This vital substance is called ekuru and is found in all body liquids 
among the Arara and Bakairi (Teixeiro Pinto 1997: 159; Barros 1994). 
However we may call such ontology relying on partial encompassment, we should 
be aware that most of our intellectual problems with the animation of non-animated 
things, the attribution of human qualities and spiritual aspects to non-humans, the 
possibility of communication and interaction with other-than-human persons point 
to the rationality of a naturalist ontology. Our problems with animism, for example, 
are not the problems of those who take such an animic ontology for granted. From 
within such an ontology, it is completely clear that communication and interaction 
with other-than-human persons may be achieved and how this is done. The main 
question inside the ontology is how reasonable exchange and communication across 
the borders of unstable and temporary entities and worlds may be managed without 
being permanently transformed into the other. Politics of fragile inter-species and 
multi-world border management become central in a world in which the avoidance 
and limitation of such contact and exchange is at least as important as its strategic 
establishment. 
20	 According to their cosmology, the Arara live in a post-cataclysmic world, where the original sepa-
ration of wapara, epi and emno broke down (Teixeiro Pinto 1997; Halbmayer 2010: 351, 385-387).
21	 But also the akũa among the Kalapalo, called “interactive self” by Basso (1987b).
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

120
7.	 Conclusion
The mereology of partial encompassment and the resulting multiple entities such 
as the multividuals and the multiverse obviously do not erase, or substitute core 
aspects of animism, but they reach beyond an hierarchical inversion of the nature/
culture distinction and a logic were “the only asymmetry possible is internal to the 
difference between perspectives [...] that are never reducible one to the other” (Costa 
& Fausto 2010: 99). At the same time it differs from analogism as Carib-speaking 
cosmologies establish multiple analogical correlations between the micro- and the 
macro-level but not a holistic and total(itarian) ideology based on hierarchical en-
compassment (Descola 2011: 340). Their cosmologies do not create encompassing 
totalities or an integrated universe, but, as I am arguing, a multiverse of co-existing 
and multiply connected worlds relying on a specific form of non-totalizing partial 
encompassment. 
We are confronted with an ontology producing multiple analogies and scale in-
variant forms of approximate self-similarity, while the entities resulting from par-
tial encompassment are multiple and therefore basically not self-identical. Conse-
quently, fractal analogies work, but they do so only to certain extent. A basket, a 
person, a house, or the visible world is not just a basket, a person, a house or the 
visible world. Each entity actualizes and materializes – through its multiplicity and 
its multiple references to co-existing worlds and entities – social and cosmological 
relations that go beyond the actual relation. However, the multiple entities are ma-
terializing relations that are specific and not the same for every being or object and 
changing over time.
Finally by proposing an ontology based on partial encompassment resulting in 
a multiverse and multiple beings beyond the nature/culture divide a whole new set 
of questions arises. Is that a specific feature of Carib-speaking groups or are such 
principles widely dispersed among Lowland South American groups? To what ex-
tent does this ontology, with its references to animism and analogism, reflect ideas 
of hierarchy?22 This ontology apparently goes beyond a non-hierarchical difference 
of perspectives and at the same time it rejects the totalizing hierarchical encompass-
ment typical for pre-modern states. What is its relation to old chieftaincies and com-
plex socio-political organisation in lowland South America? 
22	 Descola (2011) associates analogism with hierarchic encompassment in Mesoamerica and the 
Andes. The formerly so-called Circum-Caribbean culture area was associated with chiefdoms 
(Steward 1963). Today archaeological and ethnohistoric research is revealing a socio-political 
complexity for regions inhabited by Carib-speakers such as Guiana (Roosevelt 1987, Whitehead 
1994, 1998) and the Upper Xingu (Heckenberger 2005). Nevertheless recent theories are asso-
ciating notions of hierarchy in a revival of the Schmidt’s (1917) work especially with Arawak-
speaking groups (Hill & Santos-Granero 2002, see also Hornborg 2005). 
Ernst Halbmayer

121
Bibliographical references 
Appadurai, Arjun
1996	
Diversity and disciplinarity as cultural artifacts. In: Nelson, Cary & Dilip Parameshwar 
Gaonkar (eds.): Disciplinarity and dissent in cultural studies. New York: Routledge, 23-
36.
Barandiarán, Daniel de
1979	
Introducción a la cosmovision de los indios ye’kuana-makiritare. Caracas: Universidad 
Catolica Andres Bello, Instituto de Investigaciones Historicas, Centro de Lenguas 
Indigenas.
Barros, Edir Pina de
1994	
Os bakairi: economia e cosmologia. Revista de Antropología 37: 257-308.
Basso, Ellen
1987a	
In favour of Deceit. A study of tricksters in an Amazonian society. Tucson: The University 
of Amazonia Press.
1987b	
The implications of a progressive theory of dreaming. In: Tedlock, Barbara (ed.): 
Dreaming. Anthropological and psychological interpretations. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University, 86-104.
Bird-David, Nurit
1999	
‘Animism’ revisited. Personhood, environment, and relational epistemology. Current 
Anthropology 40 (Supplement): S67-S91.
Butt, Audrey
1966/67	
Akawaio charm stones. Folk 8/9: 69-81.
Butt Colson, Audrey
1975	
Birth customs of the Akawaio. In: Beattie, John & R. Godfrey Lienhardt (eds.): Studies in 
Social Anthropology in memory of E. E. Evans-Pritchard by his former Oxford colleagues. 
Oxford: Claredon Press, 285-309.
1976	
Binary opposition and the treatment of sickness among the Akawaio. In: Loudon, Joseph 
Buist (ed.): Social anthropology and medicine. London: Academic Press, 422-499.
Carrithers, Michael, Matei Candea, Karen Sykes, Martin Holbraad & Soumhya Venkatesan 
2010	
Ontology is just another word for culture: Motion tabled at the 2008 meeting of the 
Group for Debates in Anthropological Theory, University of Manchester. Critique of 
Anthropology 30(2): 152-200.
Civrieux, Marc de
1985	
Medatia: A Makiritare shaman’s tale. In: Guss, David M. (ed.): The language of the birds: 
Tales, texts, and poems of interspecies communication. San Francisco: North Point Press, 
55-75.
Costa, Luiz & Carlos Fausto
2010	
The return of the animists: Recent studies of Amazonian ontologies. Religion and Society: 
Advances in Research 1(1): 89-109.
Descola, Philippe
1992	
Societies of nature and the nature of society. In: Kuper, Adam (ed.): Conzeptualizing 
society. London/New York: Routledge, 107-126.
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

122
1994	
In the society of nature. A native ecology in Amazonia. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
[2005] 2011  Jenseits von Natur und Kultur. Berlin: Suhrkamp.
Dumont, Luis
1980	
Homo hierarchicus: The caste system and its implications. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Fausto, Carlos
2008	
Too many owners: mastery and ownership in Amazonia. Mana 4. (<http://
socialsciences.scielo.org/scielo.php?pid=S0104-93132008000100001&script 
=sci_arttext&tlng=pt>; (02.10.2012) 
Fock, Niels
1963	
Waiwai: religion and society of an Amazonian tribe. Copenhagen: The National Museum.
Goulard, Jean Pierre & Dimitri Karadimas
2011	
Masques des hommes, visages des dieux. Regards d’Amazonie. Paris: CNRS Editions.
Guss, David M. 
1989	
To weave and sing. Art symbol, and narrative in the South American rain forest. Berkeley/
Los Angeles/London: University of California Press.
Guthrie, Stewart
1993	
Faces in the cloud: A new theory of religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Habermas, Jürgen
1988	
Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Halbmayer, Ernst
1999	
Nahrung und Sexualität als Kommunikationsmedien des Identischen, des Sozialisierten 
und des Wilden bei den Yukpa Nordwest-Venezuelas. In: Mader,Elke & Maria Dabringer 
(eds.): Von der realen Magie zum magischen Realismus. Frankfurt/Wien: Brandes & 
Apsel/Südwind, 67-90.
2004	
Elementary distinctions in world-making among the Yukpa. Anthropos 99: 39-55.
2010	
Kosmos und Kommunikation. Weltkonzeptionen in der südamerikanischen Sprachfamilie 
der Cariben. 2 Vols. Wien: Facultas.
Heckenberger, Michael 
2005	
The ecology of power: Culture, place, and personhood in the Southern Amazon, A.D. 
1000-2000. New York: Routledge.
Hill, Jonathan D. & Fernando Santos-Granero (eds.)
2002	
Comparative Arawakan histories. Rethinking language family and culture area in 
Amazonia. Illinois: University of Illinois Press.
Hornborg, Alf 
2005	
Ethnogenesis, regional integration, and ecology in prehistoric Amazonia. Toward a 
system perspective. Current Anthropology 46(4): 589-620.
Kelly, José A. 
2005	
Fractality and the exchange of perspectives. In: Mosko, Mark S. & Frederick H. Damon 
(eds.): On the order of chaos: Social anthropology and the science of chaos. New York/
Oxford: Berghahn Books, 108-135.
Ernst Halbmayer

123
Latour, Bruno
1991	
Nous n’avons jamais été modernes. Essai d’anthropologie symétrique. Paris: La 
Découverte.
Magaña, Edmundo
1982	
Hombres salvajes y razas monstruosas de los indios kaliña de Surinam. Journal of Latin 
American Lore 8(1): 63-114.
1987	
Astronomía shamanística tarëno. In: Magaña, Edmundo (ed.): Contribuciones al 
estudio de la mitología y astronomía de los indios de las Guayanas. Dordrecht: FORIS 
Publications, 167-213.
1990	
Zarigueya Señor de los sueños. Una teoría tarëno. In: Perrin, Michel (ed.):  Antropología 
y experiencia del sueño. Quito: Abya Yala, 117-143.
Menget, Patrick
1979	
Temps de naître, temps d’être: la couvade. In: Izard, Michael & Pierre Smith (eds.): La 
fonction symbolique. Paris: Gallimard, 245-264.
Monod Becquelin, Aurore
1982	
La metamorphose. Journal de la Société des Américanistes 68: 133-147.
Mosko, Mark S.
2005	
Introduction: A (re)turn to chaos: Chaos theory, the sciences and social anthropological 
theory. In: Mosko, Mark S. & Frederick H. Damon (eds.): On the order of chaos: Social 
anthropology and the science of chaos. New York/Oxford: Berghahn Books, 1-46.
Rival, Laura
1996	
Blowpipes and spears: The social significance of Huaorani technological choices. 
In: Descola, Philippe & Gísli Pálsson (eds.): Nature and Society. Anthropological 
Perspectives. London/New York: Routledge, 145-164.
Roosevelt, Anna C. 
1987	
Chiefdoms of the Amazon and Orinoco. In: Drennan, Robert D. & Carlos A. Uribe (eds.): 
Chiefdoms in the Americas. Lanham: University Press of America, 153-185.
Santos-Granero, Fernando
2009	
The occult life of things: Native Amazonian theories of materiality and personhood. 
Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Schmidt, Max
1917	
Die Aruaken. Ein Beitrag zum Problem der Kulturverbreitung. Leipzig: Veit.
Steward, Julian H. (ed.)
1963	
Handbook of South American Indians: The circum-Caribbean tribes. Washington,  D.C.: 
United States Government Printing Office.
Strathern, Marilyn
1980	
No nature, no culture: The Hagen case. In MacCormack, Carol P. & Marilyn Strathern 
(eds.): Nature, culture and gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 174-219.
1988	
The gender of the gift. Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: University of California Press.
1992	
After nature: English kinship in the late twentieth century. Cambridge/New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse

124
Teixeira-Pinto, Marnio
1997	
Ieipari. Sacrifício e vida social entre os índios Arara (Caribe). São Paulo: Editora Hucitec 
Anpocs.
Thomas, David J.
1982	
Order without government. The society of the Pemon Indians of Venezuela.Urbana/
Chicago/London: University of Illinois Press.
Thornton, Robert J. 
1988	
The rhetoric of ethnographic holism. Cultural Anthropology 3(3): 285-303.
Turner, Terence. S.
2009	
The crisis of late structuralism. Perspectivism and animism: Rethinking culture, nature, 
spirit, and bodiliness.  Tipití 7(1): 3-40.
Uzendoski, Michael A.
2010	
Fractal subjectivities: An Amazonian-inspired critique globalization theory. In: Hutchins, 
Frank & Patrick C. Wilson (eds.): Editing Eden: A reconsideration of identity, politics, 
and place in Amazonia. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 38-69.
Velthem, Lúcia H. v. 
2003	
O belo é a fera: a estética da produção e da predação entre os Wayana. Lisboa: Assírio 
& Alvim
Vilaça, Aparecida
2005	
Chronically unstable bodies: Reflections on Amazonian corporalities. Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute 11: 445-464.
2011	
Dividuality in Amazonia: God, the Devil, and the constitution of personhood in Wari’ 
Christianity. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute: 17(2): 243-262.
Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo B.
1997	
Die kosmologischen Pronomina und der indianische Perspektivismus. Bulletin de la 
Societé Suisse des Américanistes 61: 99-114.
1998	
Cosmological deixis and Amerindian perspectivism. Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute 4(3): 469-488.
2001	
GUT feelings about Amazonia: Potential affinity and the construction of sociality. In: 
Rival Laura M. & Neil L. Whitehead (eds.): Beyond the visible and the material. Oxford/
New York: Oxford University Press, 19-44.
2004	
Exchanging perspectives. The transformation of objects into subjects in Amerindian 
ontologies. Common Knowledge 10(3): 463-484.
2010	
Intensive filiation and demonic alliance. In: Jensen, Casper B. & Kjetil Rödje (eds.): 
Deleuzian intersections: Science, technology, anthropology. New York/Oxford: Berghahn 
Books, 219-250.
Wagner, Roy
2001	
An anthropology of the subject: Holographic worldview in New Guinea and its meaning 
and significance for the world of anthropology. Berkeley: University of California Press.
2005	
Afterword: Order is what happens when chaos loses its temper. In: Mosko, Mark S. & 
Frederick H. Damon (eds.): On the order of chaos: Social anthropology and the science 
of chaos. New York/Oxford: Berghahn Books, 206-248.
Ernst Halbmayer

125
Willerslev, Rane
2007	
Soul hunters. Hunting, animism, and personhood among the Siberian Yukaghirs. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Whitehead, Neil L. 
1994	
The ancient Amerindian polities of the Amazon, the Orinoco, and the Atlantic coast. In: 
Roosevelt, Anna C. (ed.): Amazonian Indians from prehistory to the present. Tucson: 
University of Arizona Press, 33-53.
1998	
Colonial chieftains of the lower Orinoco and Guayana coast. In: Redmond, Elsa M. (ed.) 
Chiefdoms and chieftaincy in the Americas. Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 150-
163.
Zeitlyn, David
2009	
Understanding anthropological understanding. Anthropological Theory 9(2): 209-231.
Amerindian mereology: Animism, analogy, and the multiverse


