Logic and Logical Philosophy
Volume 25 (2016), 259–283
DOI: 10.12775/LLP.2015.012
Peter Forrest
THE MEREOLOGY OF STRUCTURAL
UNIVERSALS
In memory of David Armstrong (1926–2014)
Abstract.
This paper explores the mereology of structural universals, using
the structural richness of a non-classical mereology without unique fusions.
The paper focuses on a problem posed by David Lewis, who using the
example of methane, and assuming classical mereology, argues against any
purely mereological theory of structural universals. The problem is that
being a methane molecule would have to contain being a hydrogen atom
four times over, but mereology does not have the concept of the same part
occurring several times. This paper takes up the challenge by providing
mereological analysis of three operations suﬃcient for a theory of structural
universals: (1) Reﬂexive binding, i.e. identifying two of the places of a uni-
versal; (2) Existential binding, i.e. the language-independent correlate of
an existential quantiﬁcation; and (3) Conjunction.
Keywords: mereology; conjunction; existential binding; David Lewis; reﬂex-
ive binding; structural universals; unique fusion
Introduction
This paper explores the mereology of structural universals, and in doing
so it also explores some of the structural richness of mereology, provided
we do not assume the uniqueness of fusion. The paper focuses on a prob-
lem posed by David Lewis in [9]. Using the example of methane, he ar-
gued against any purely mereological theory of structural universals. For
on a mereological theory, the universal being a methane (CH4) molecule
Special Issue: Mereology and Beyond (II). Edited by A. C. Varzi and R. Gruszczyński
© 2015 by Nicolaus Copernicus University
Published online May 27, 2015

260
Peter Forrest
should be the sum of its parts, namely the universals being a carbon
atom, being a hydrogen atom, and being bonded. As Lewis points out,
being a methane molecule would have to contain being a hydrogen atom
four times over, but mereology does not have the concept of the same
part occurring several times. Hence, he argues, there cannot be a purely
mereological account of structural universals, which he takes to be a se-
rious objection to realism about universals. This problem may be re-
formulated as the challenge to distinguish the universal being a methane
molecule from the universal being a methylene (CH2) molecule, and to
make this distinction using mereology alone.
An obvious thought is
that being a methane molecule has a part, being the sum of 4 hydrogen
atoms that being a methylene molecule lacks. But this just shifts the
challenge to providing a mereological distinction between being the sum
of 4 hydrogen atoms and being the sum of 2 hydrogen atoms. This paper
takes up the challenge by rejecting the classical mereology that Lewis
assumed. To do so, I provide mereological analyses of three operations
suﬃcient for a theory of structural universals.
1. Reﬂexive binding: identifying two of the places of a universal to
obtain another universal. In the dyadic case this is forming Rxx out
of Rxy. (E.g. x’s loving self is the reﬂexive binding of x loving y.)
I stipulate the no universal is a reﬂexive binding of itself. Thus if
Rxx = Rxy then we do not call Rxx a reﬂexive binding of Rxy.
(Suppose it was a deep metaphysical truth that necessarily if you
truly love yourself you love everyone. Then x’s loving self and x’s
loving y turn out to be the same universal, x loves.)
2. Existential binding: the language-independent correlate of an exis-
tential quantiﬁcation that binds one free variable, so as to form an-
other universal (E.g. Both x’s loving someone and someone’s loving
x are existential bindings of x loving y.) I stipulate that no universal
is an existential binding of itself. An n-adic universal can have up to
n successive existential binding. The result of the n of them is the
total existential binding.
3. Conjunction.
I am considering a sparse theory of universals, inspired by [1]1.
Therefore three further operations, disjunction, negation and subtrac-
1 [9] distinguishes sparse from abundant conceptions of universals, citing Arm-
strong as the proponent of the former.

The mereology of structural universals
261
tion do not apply automatically. It is nonetheless interesting to decide
when, if at all, they can be given a mereological analysis.
I hypothesise that if we start with some universals without struc-
ture then using the three operations repeatedly we can derive all the
structural universals.2
The way our predicates apply is, in non-ﬁctional cases, determined by
the universals and their instances. There are more and less complicated
ways linking a univocal predicate to one or more universals. The most
straightforward is the way the predicate Ux applies to the instances of the
corresponding property Ux. Greater complexity is illustrated by disjunc-
tions. If Ux and V y have no disjunction, the disjunctive predicate ‘Ux
and/or Vx’ applies both to instances of Ux and of V y. But where there
is a disjunctive universal the disjunctive predicate also applies directly
to instances of the disjunctive universal.
The core of this paper consists of a section in which the mereology of
structural universals is explored and a section in which I show how the
various structure-forming operations can be characterised mereologically.
Of the three sections preceding the core, the ﬁrst will deal with some
preliminaries such as notation. Then I expound the non-classical mere-
ology that I employ. This theory is a reﬁnement of classical mereology,
in the sense that there is an equivalence relation (overlapping the very
same items) and the equivalence classes satisfy the axioms of classical
mereology. Next I provide (nominal) deﬁnitions of the operations. After
the mereological analyses of these operations, I reply to some objections.
This paper is part of a larger project of Ontology Within the Bounds
of Mereology, something I have provided a preliminary sketch elsewhere
(see [7]).3
In this paper I shall assume that universals are somehow
distinguished from particulars, and I shall not rely on the mereologi-
cal characterisation of instantiation in. Likewise, I shall ignore second
and higher order universals until I reply to the ﬁnal objection. So the
2 In this paper I shall stick to the ﬁnite case, so the problem of inﬁnite complexity
does not arise.
3 I there distinguished a relation from its converse, which I now think is an unwar-
ranted projection onto universals of the distinction among predicates. More impor-
tant, I attempted a mereological characterization of the exempliﬁcation of a universal
by one or more particulars.
This was too complicated.
I now consider it best to
concentrate on instantiation in, which I distinguish from exempliﬁcation by in Sec-
tion One below. The complexities are thus shifted to semantics, which as a human
construct should not be expected to be simple.

262
Peter Forrest
part/whole and other mereological operations are restricted to ﬁrst or-
der universals.
1. Preliminaries
1.1. Stipulation concerning the terms ‘property’ and ‘relation’
By a property I mean a monadic universal, by a relation a universal of
adicity greater than one. I shall also be considering 0-adic universals.
These are neither properties nor relations.
1.2. A sparse platonist theory of universals4
Following Armstrong I analyse similarity in a respect as the sharing of
a universal. Similarity in a respect is something we have quite strong
intuitions about, extrapolating from perceived resemblance. Intuitively,
being of a precise hue of colour such as scarlet is a respect of similarity,
and so intuitively we expect there to be a universal x’s being scarlet.
As this example indicates, such intuitions are not infallible. For there is
a lively debate between realists and anti-realists about colour, conducted
independently of debates about universals So a realist about universals
who is an anti-realist about colours will treat x’s being scarlet as a ﬁc-
tional universal.
Intuitions about similarity are not the only data for a sparse theory.
The statements of laws of nature and the truths about causation distin-
guish various predicates that should correspond to universals. In addi-
tion, a theory of structural universals should provide enough (ﬁrst and
higher-order universals) to form the topic of mathematics (see [8]).
On a sparse theory we have a list of basic ﬁrst-order universals, ones
lacking structure.
There is a range of operations on them that does
not imply that every property has a negation, and does not imply that
any two properties have a disjunction. Nor are these restrictions merely
consequences of the requirement that no property belongs to everything
possible and no property belongs to nothing possible. In this context,
the mark of the sparse conception is the reluctance to admit disjunctive
4 ‘Platonist’ only in the sense of granting the existence of uninstantiated
universals, including uninstantiated 0-adic universals, which may be said to obtain (in
something like Roderick Chisholm’s sense) if and only if they are actually instantiated
in some particular.

The mereology of structural universals
263
or negative properties, rather than the positing of some minimal list of
basic universals. I shall, therefore, help myself to illustrative examples,
such as the relation of x’s loving y, which might not meet the strict
standards of a sparse theory.
There are two respects in which my proposed theory is sparser than
Armstrong’s. The ﬁrst is that there are no impure relational properties,
such as x’s being within a billion kilometres from the Sun. There are,
however pure relational properties, such as x′s being within a billion
kilometres from a star. The second respect in which I am sparser than
Armstrong is that I do not treat as distinct a dyadic relation (e.g. x lov-
ing y) and its converse (x being loved by y).5 And generalizing, I do
not accept a multiplicity of n-adic universals obtained by permuting the
places. As a consequence we do not need the operation of permuting
places.
I require every universal to be possibly instantiated.
In addition,
to avoid trivial universals I require every universal to have a possible
non-instance.6 For example, the putative relation of x’s being identical
to y collapses into the property of x’s being identical to x, which I reject
as trivial.
1.3. Some notation
To avoid cumbersome notation I rely heavily on two conventions. The
ﬁrst is that universals are referred to using italics, but predicates are
not.
The second is that the same letters will be used for predicates
and the corresponding universals, where there are any. Consequently
referring expressions for a universal have free variables, as would the
corresponding predicate. In this way there is no confusion with other
uses of italics.
Thus the metathety (between-ness) universal would be referred to not
as being between but as y being between x and z. If considering a monadic
universal I write Ux or Uy, V x or V y etc. For a dyadic universal, I write
Uxy or Uyz, V xy or V yz etc. When considering universals of arbitrary
adicity, I write Uxy . . ., V xy . . ., etc.
5 This non-distinction is intuitive provided we scrupulously refrain from project-
ing the structure of language onto our ontology.
6 Because of my reliance on instantiation in, this amounts to requiring that for
every universal it be possible that there be some particular in which the universal is
not instantiated.

264
Peter Forrest
1.4. Correspondence
On a sparse theory only some predicates correspond to universals.
On the other hand, for any universal Uxy . . ., we can form the fol-
lowing predicate: u, v etc. exemplify Uxy . . ..
This is an especially
straightforward case of the correspondence of some predicates and some
universals. I shall use ‘Uxy . . .’ (or with any distinct letters replacing
x and y) ambiguously for any predicate corresponding to Uxy . . ..
Correspondence could easily be deﬁned if we assumed Modal Ex-
tensionality, the principle that if Uxy . . . and V xy . . . are necessarily
co-extensive, then Uxy . . . is identical to V xy . . ..
For in that case,
a predicate corresponds to a universal just in case the predicate and
universal are necessarily co-extensive; that is, necessarily the predicate
applies to all and only the (n-tuples) of particulars that exemplify the
universal. I shall not, however, assume Modal Extensionality. The case
provided by Elliott Sober in [12] against it might persuade some readers.
He uses the putative counter-example of triangularity and trilaterality.
In addition, the operations on universals that I consider may themselves
generate counter-examples as I show below. I shall, therefore, assume we
know what correspondence amounts to and consider my need to deﬁne
it as one of the objections I consider at the end.
Because I shall not be distinguishing a relation from its converses,
correspondence is ambiguous up to the order of the n-tuples in the pred-
icate. Thus the same relation corresponds to ‘x loves y’ and ‘y loves x’,
but not, alas, to the symmetric ‘x and y love each other’. More alarming,
if, for instance, Px corresponds to a universal Px then the predicates,
Px & Py, Px & Py & Pz etc. all correspond to the same universal Px.
So by the adicity of a universal I mean the minimum number of variables
in a corresponding predicate.
1.5. Instantiation in
If a universal Uxy . . . is exempliﬁed by u, v etc, and if u, v etc. are all
parts of w, then I say that Uxy . . . is instantiated in w. So, obviously if
w is part of w′ then Uxy . . . is also instantiated in w′. Although I mark
the contrast with the words ‘exemplify’ and ‘instantiate’ the contrast is
between being exempliﬁed by and being instantiated in.
My reason for considering instantiation in is that the mereological
theory of properties is part of the more ambitious program of Ontology

The mereology of structural universals
265
Within the Bounds of Mereology, in which a 0-adic universal is instanti-
ated in a particular just in case it is part of that particular.7 Although
I shall not be assuming that more general program, I propound nothing
incompatible with it. This motivates the basic hypothesis of my theory:
Parthood Instantiation Principle: If universal Uxy . . . is part of
universal V xy . . . then: necessarily, for all u, if V xy . . . is instan-
tiated in u so is Uxy . . ..
I take it that this provides an explanation of the situation in which
necessarily for all u, if V xy . . . is instantiated in u so is Uxy . . . I shall
be guided by this and, where it coheres well with the other hypotheses
assume that this is the correct explanation.
Hence mutual parthood
is the default explanation of fact that universal Uxy . . . and V xy . . .are
necessarily instantiated in the same particulars. And, in accordance with
the assumed mereology, mutual parthood implies identity. An example
is the above mentioned case of Px = Px & Py = Px & Py & Pz.
For the remainder of the paper, I shall ignore exempliﬁcation and
concentrate on instantiation in.
1.6. More notation
The symbols ‘&’, ‘∃’, ‘∨’ and ‘¬’ are reserved for operations on predi-
cates. Hence the nominal deﬁnition of the (narrow) conjunction of two
monadic universals Ux and V y is Uz & V z, which is equivalent to:
The conjunction of two monadic universals Ux and V y is the
universal corresponding to the predicate ‘z exempliﬁes U and
z exempliﬁes V ’.
A theory of the structure of universals should provide characterizations
of such operations as conjunction without using correspondence.
To
use the same symbols for operations on predicates and universals might
suggest that we are assimilating universals to predicates. My restriction
of the symbols ‘&’, ‘∃’, ‘∨’ and ‘¬’ to operations on predicates helps to
avoid this suggestion. If, for instance, I wrote the (narrow) conjunction
7 To avoid the paradox that the 0-adic universal there being something simple is
a proper part of any simple particular, I claim that although the predicate ‘is simple’
applies univocally to particulars and to universals there is no corresponding universal.
Instead there is a universal of x’s being simple qua particular, that is, having no other
particular as a part.

266
Peter Forrest
of Ux and V y as Uz & V z, the nominal deﬁnition would be: Uz & V z =
Uz & V z, where the left and right hand sides diﬀer only in whether the
symbol ‘&’ is in italics.
2. Mereology without unique fusion
As a reminder that the mereology being considered holds for universals
as well as particulars I use upper case letters for the variables. I take the
primitive predicate to be the transitive reﬂexive dyadic predicate ‘X is
a part of Y ’ (‘X ⩽Y ’). We may deﬁne identity (X = Y iﬀX ⩽Y and
Y ⩽X), proper parts (X < Y iﬀX ⩽Y and not Y ⩽X), overlapping
(X ◦Y iﬀfor some Z, Z ⩽X and Z ⩽Y ) and being disjoint: X and Y
are disjoint just in case they do not overlap)8. X is a maximal proper
part of Y if X < Y but for no Z do we have X < Z < Y . X and Y
are mutual fusions iﬀ: for all Z, X ◦Z iﬀY ◦Z. Mutual fusion is
obviously an equivalence relation. The equivalence classes will be called
fusion classes.
An alternative development of mereology is based on the concept
of mereological sum.
Then we may deﬁne X ⩽Y as Y = X + Y .
This is I think inferior for two reasons. First, the paradigms of things
with parts are not mereological sums but rather structured things with
essential relations between the parts. The idea of a mereological sum is
an abstraction away from these relations. For artefacts this abstraction
is easy. A piece of ﬂat pack furniture might consist of, say, 97 parts to
banged and screwed together. The resulting piece of furniture consists
of 96 parts with various essential geometric relations plus the left-over
screw. It is easy to abstract away from these relations and consider the
sum of the 96 parts, which existed before assembly and would continue
to exist given a gentle enough disassembly. Such abstraction is harder
for the case of an animal composed of distinct organs. Thus Aristotle’s
unwillingness to think of the organs as parts is understandable if we
take summation as primitive. He was a brilliant zoologist but it would
have been unfair to ask him to take his sea urchin apart and put it
back together again alive. The lesson is to prefer ‘⩽’ as the primitive
predicate, and take an animal’s organs as paradigm parts.
8 Or, if identity is taken as a distinct primitive predicate, proper parthood may be
taken as primitive, and parthood characterised as X ⩽Y if either X = Y or X < Y .
In that case, we require that proper parthood is transitive and strictly anti-symmetric
(i.e. for no X and Y do we have X < Y and Y < X).

The mereology of structural universals
267
Another reason for preferring ‘⩽’ as the mereological primitive, is
that, in the interests of intellectual economy, we should try to give an ac-
count of structure in terms of mereology and hence avoid a structural
theory of mereology. I admit that it is not that clear just what counts
as structure, but X being the sum of Y and Z seems more like structure
than U being part of V .
I conclude that the idea of summation as composition relies too much
on the use of artefacts as paradigms, and I draw the corollary that we
should not rely upon intuitions based on the summation-as-composition
approach to mereology.
How then do we analyse summation? Elsewhere I have used examples
to argue that our intuitive idea of a sum is of a least upper bound that
is also a fusion (see [6]).
If readers disagree they may take that as
a stipulative deﬁnition of summation. So I have the following deﬁnitions.
1. An upper bound of some things is something that has all of them as
parts. A lower bound of some things is something that is part of them
all.
2. A least upper bound or join of some things is an upper bound of
them that is part of any other upper bound of them.
A greatest
lower bound or meet of some things is an lower bound of them of
which any other lower bound is part.
3. A fusion of some things, the Fs, is something that overlaps precisely
those things that overlap some F. (Hence, as expected, X and Y are
fusion equivalent iﬀX is a fusion of Y and vice versa.)
4. A sum of some things, the Fs, is a join of the Fs that is also a fusion.
A proper sum is a proper join that is also a fusion.
By anti-symmetry there cannot be more than one join of some things,
and we may talk of the sum of X and Y , X +Y . I shall assume a general
principle governing the mereology of universals, namely that any univer-
sals X and Y have a join and this join is the sum X + Y . I have no
objection to assuming that even inﬁnitely many universals have a sum,
which is required for a theory of inﬁnitely complex universals, but that
is not my present concern.
Mereology in Leśniewski’s sense (Classical Mereology) is obtained
by assuming the existence and uniqueness of arbitrary fusions.
This
paper is compatible with the existence of arbitrary fusions although
some readers might want to restrict fusion to things of the same
kind. Uniqueness of fusion is, however, more problematic and I reject

268
Peter Forrest
it along with Weak Supplementation.
The case for their rejection
is that putative counter-examples occur in several diﬀerent areas of
metaphysics. Here are some instances.
First, suppose we follow David Lewis and take the subsets of a set
to be parts. If we then allow the empty set as a genuine subset of every
set, all sets overlap. Assuming also that pure sets have no parts other
than sets, it follows that every pure set is a fusion of every other pure set.
In particular ∅and {∅} are mutual fusions, as well as providing a counter-
example to Weak Supplementation. ‘So much the worse for the empty
set’, you might retort; and if this was the only putative counter-example
to unique fusion that retort would be appropriate.
My next case is that some of us ﬁnd it intuitive that s and all its
parts are among the parts of {s}. In that case, {{s}} and {s} are mutual
fusions, and a counter-example to Weak Supplementation9.
Finally, there is the lump of clay and the statue of ‘The Maid of
All Work’ presumably. Here is a simpliﬁed case. Suppose b and c are
distinct particular atoms that are adjacent. Then we may consider both
the analog of the clay, their sum (b + c), and the analog of the statue, b-
adjacent-to-c. First suppose we are nominalists and deny the existence of
a relation of x being adjacent to y, as well as derived properties such as x
being adjacent to something. Then (b+c) and b-adjacent-to-c are mutual
fusions and provide a counter-example to Uniqueness of Fusion. Judith
Jarvis Thompson (1998: 155) takes the statue and the lump of clay as
mutual parts, on the basis that if at some time the location of x is part of
that of y then at that time x is itself part of y. Aaron Cotnoir ([4]) would
say that because they are mutual parts they provide a counter-example
to Mereological Extensionality.10 Both on grounds of conservativism and
intuition even a nominalist should concede that (b + c) is a proper part
of b-adjacent-to-c, and not vice versa. So this is a counter-example to
Weak Supplementation rather than Mereological Extensionality.
If, as I advocate, however, we are realists about the relation x being
adjacent to y, holding between b and c, then we could say that b-adjacent-
9 Ben Caplan, Chris Tillman, and Pat Reeder (see [3]) share my intuition. They
assume that ∅< {s} < {{s}}, but not ∅⩽s, unless s is itself a set.
10 The supposed failure of antisymmetry for parthood without identity is also
discussed by Cotnoir and Andrew Bacon in [5] and Lida Obojska in [11].
Chris
Tillman and Gregory Fowler in [14] argue for this failure on the grounds that the sum
of everything is a part of propositions about this sum of everything, which in turn is
part of the sum of everything.

The mereology of structural universals
269
to-c overlaps that relation, but (b + c) does not, so they are not mutual
fusions. But now consider three atoms, b, c and d each adjacent to the
other two, and compare (b + c-adjacent-to-d) with (b-adjacent-to-c + d).
If the adjacency relations are the same in the two cases this is another
counter-example to Uniqueness of Fusion. So classical mereology drives
us to taking the relations as relation-instances (‘tropes’).
In all three examples we could reject otherwise fairly promising meta-
physical speculations by an appeal to the uniqueness of fusions. In the
third case our conclusion would not merely be negative; we would have
a positive argument for the ‘trope’ theory. In none of the three examples,
however, is the uniqueness intuitive in the circumstances. In addition,
I hold that the uniqueness of sums, and, I suspect, the uniqueness of fu-
sions, is held largely as a result of identifying fusions with sums. I take
these considerations to undermine the Uniqueness of Fusions.
Given arbitrary summation, for any given Y , we may consider the
sum Y Σ of the fusion class containing Y . It is itself fusion equivalent
to Y . So we may think of the Y Σ obtained this way as the members of
a classical mereological system. Hence we may analyse the mereology
into (a) the classical mereology of the classical representatives, the Y Σ,
and (b) the structure of the fusion classes. I see no need however to
reject the anti-symmetry of proper parthood, as Cotnoir ([4]) and others
have. (That would result in a further reﬁnement of classical mereology.)
This digression is relevant because it shows that concentrating, as
I shall, on fusion classes is not some technical trick but a natural way
of thinking of non-classical mereology as a reﬁnement of classical mere-
ology without going as far as Cotnoir. It is also explains why classical
mereology fails to provide a theory of structural universals. For such
a theory requires operations for ‘forming’ a universal out of another
fusion equivalent one.
3. Operations on universals, with examples
My method is to consider the operations used to ‘compose’ structural
universals. I shall then show how these operations may be analysed in
purely mereological terms.
The ﬁrst operation I consider is reﬂexive binding whereby two of the
places of a universal are identiﬁed.
For instance, if Rxy is a dyadic
relation then often there is a monadic universal, Rxx.
So if there is

270
Peter Forrest
a relation Rxy of x being a mirror image of y, Rxx is the property
x’s being its own mirror image. The exceptions occur when Rxx either
for no x or for all. If, for instance, we take x being a part of y to be
a universal then it has no reﬂexive binding because everything is part of
itself, and if we take x being a proper part of y to be a universal then
it has no reﬂexive binding because nothing is a proper part of itself.
In general, if n ⩾0 and Ux1x2 . . .xn+1 is (n + 1)-adic, then there may
be reﬂexive bindings to an n-adic universal obtained by replacing xi and
xj by z, for any i ̸= j.
Next there is existential binding. If Uxy is an (n + 1)-adic universal,
where n ⩾1 then there universals such as ∃x Uxy and ∃y Uxy in which
a free variable is bound by an existential quantiﬁer.
This operation
applies, I submit, even to properties.
For I hypothesize that for any
property Ux there is an existential state of aﬀairs of the form ∃x Ux,
which obtains in a particular z just in case Ux is instantiated in z.
Because they can obtain in many disjoint particulars these are 0-adic
universals not particulars.
These two operations of reﬂexive and existential binding generate the
counter-example to modal extensionality that I mentioned above. Con-
sider a transitive symmetric relation Rxy that is not reﬂexive. In that
case Ryy and ∃x Rxy are necessarily co-extensive. And such relations
cannot be excluded by appeal to the sparse character of the realism
about universals. For consider Sxy, a symmetric irreﬂexive relation, for
example x being adjacent to y without overlapping. Then the ancestral
Rxy of Sxy will be symmetric and transitive but perhaps not reﬂexive.
In the example, Sxy is the property of y being adjacent to something
(without overlap).
The conjunction of two monadic universals Ux and V y is usually 
I say narrowly deﬁned as Uz & V z, using the convention that the
symbol ‘&’ connects predicates. This deﬁnition of narrow conjunction
extends straightforwardly to two universals of the same adicity:
If Ux1x2 . . . xn and V y1y2 . . . yn are both n-adic, then their nar-
row conjunctions are the n-adic universals obtained from the
predicate Ux1x2 . . .xn & Vy1y2 . . .yn by identifying the xi with
the yj, in a 1 to 1 fashion.
For example, we may consider the universal Mxyz = y being (geomet-
rically) between x and z, and Bxyz = y being of mass between x and z.
Then there is a narrow conjunction Mxyz & Bxyz. It holds between the

The mereology of structural universals
271
Sun, the Earth and the Moon during an eclipse of the Moon but not dur-
ing an eclipse of the Sun. Another narrow conjunction is Mxyz & Bzyx,
which holds between Sun, Moon and Earth during an eclipse of the Sun.
To introduce some order into the proliferation of kinds of conjunction,
I introduce the broad conjunction of universals Uxy . . . and V xy . . . . This
is the least universal whose instantiation in w implies that both Uxy . . .
and V xy . . . are instantiated in w. Later I shall characterise it as the
join of Uxy . . . and V xy . . .. Often the broad conjunction of the m-adic
Ux1x2 . . .xm and the n-adic V y1y2 . . . yn is the (n + m)-adic universal
Ux1x2 . . .xm & V y1y2 . . .yn. The broad conjunction may, however, have
adicity less than n + m. For instance, I shall argue that every universal
is the broad conjunction of it with itself.
Any other conjunction of universals is the result of one or more re-
ﬂexive bindings of a broad conjunction.
Thus if n = m the narrow
conjunctions (e.g. Uz1z2 . . . zm & V z1z2 . . .zm) are obtained from the
broad conjunction Ux1x2 . . . xm & V y1y2 . . .yn by reﬂexive bindings that
identify xi with yi in some order (e.g. xi = yi = zi).
The broad conjunction of a universal with itself is, I now argue, the
same universal. For simplicity consider a monadic universal Ux. Then
the broad conjunction is Ux & Uy. There is no requirement that x ̸= y,
so Ux is instantiated in precisely the same particulars as Ux & Uy.
That does not, I admit, prove that they are the same but it supports the
identiﬁcation. In addition, they make the same contribution to resem-
blance, causal powers and any other roles played by universals. Likewise,
if Rxy is not itself a conjunction Ux & V y, it corresponds to the 2k-ary
predicates Ruv, Ruv & Rwx, Ruv & Rwx & Ryz, etc. In general a non-
conjunctive n-adic universal corresponds to nk-ary predicates.
There will not, in general be a unique narrow conjunction of uni-
versals.
For example, if Rwx and Syz are distinct and neither is
symmetric then we have two dyadic narrow conjunctions Rxy & Sxy
and Rxy & Syx, as well as the four triadic conjunctions Rxy & Sxz,
Rxy & Szx, Rxy & Syz, and Rxy & Szy. The triadic conjunctions are
distinct results of reﬂexive binding of the broad conjunction and the two
dyadic conjunctions further reﬂexive bindings.
Because the n-adic Rx1x2 . . .xn is also the 2n-adic Rx1x2 . . . xn &
Ry1y2 . . .yn, there can be non-trivial narrow conjunctions of a universal
with itself, such as Rxy & Ryz. Hence the adicity of a reﬂexive binding
can be greater than that of the relation being bound. Thus if Rxy is not
transitive Rxy & Ryz has adicity 3.

272
Peter Forrest
Some other non-trivial narrow conjunctions of a universal with itself
are the various symmetrisations such as the symmetrisation Rxy & Ryx
of a non-symmetric non-antisymmetric dyadic relation Rxy.
A narrow conjunction of special importance in a theory of structural
universals is Ux & V y & Rxy, if Rxy is dyadic, and its analogs for
relations of higher adicity.
For suppose Ux and V y are the natures
of particulars u and v, which, I further suppose, are the unique exem-
pliﬁcations of those universals in w. In that case the instantiation of
Ux & V y & Rxy in w is a surrogate for the particular state of aﬀairs
Ruv. Now I am not considering particulars or exempliﬁcation, so this
surrogate is a way of characterising the structural universals as if we
could describe them in terms of complex particulars.
The universal
Ux & V y & Rxy may be treated as a reﬂexive binding of the broad
conjunction of Ux & Rxy with V u & Ruv.
If two universals of the same adicity n, Uxy . . . and V wz . . . have no
narrow conjunction (U & V )xy . . ., then they are incompatible. Because
I am not distinguishing relations from their converses, incompatibility is
in general stronger than inconsistency between a pair of corresponding
predicates. The resulting problems do not, however, arise with monadic
universals or totally symmetric universals. So we may use incompatibil-
ity to deﬁne their negations:
If universal Uxy . . . is monadic or totally symmetric then it has
a negation V xy . . . = ¬Uxy . . ., only if V xy . . . is the disjunction
of all those universals of the same adicity as Uxy . . . that are
incompatible with Uxy . . ..
On a sparse theory not all universals have negations. Some plausible
examples of negation nonetheless holding between universals are the
monadic x is ﬁnite and x is inﬁnite; and the symmetric dyadic x over-
lapping y, and x and y being disjoint.
Relative negation or subtraction results in universals of the form
Uxy . . . & ¬V xy . . ., where V xy . . . is ether monadic or totally sym-
metric. These, if they exist, are the disjunctions of all those universals
that are narrow conjunctions of Uxy . . . with a universal incompatible
with V xy . . .. One important example is the irreﬂexive strengthening
of a dyadic relation Uxy, which, if it exists, is the subtraction of the
symmetrisation of Uxy from Uxy itself. For example if Uxy is x loving
y, the irreﬂexive strengthening is x loving y but not vice versa. Another
important example is the universal x having as parts exactly n disjoint

The mereology of structural universals
273
Us, which is the result of subtracting x having as parts at least n dis-
joint Us from x having as parts at least n −1 disjoint Us. The universal
x having as parts at least n disjoint Us will be analysed below.
The broad and other disjunctions of universals, if they exist, are
deﬁned much as for conjunctions, by replacing ‘&’ by ‘and/or’. It should
be noted, however, that three or more universals might have a disjunction
without two of them having one.
This is the typical situation with
determinables of a determinate: there is no disjunction of x’s being dove
grey and x’s being charcoal grey but there is a disjunction of all the
(50?) shades of grey, namely the determinable x’s being grey. A theory
of sparse universals should tell us some of the circumstances in which
universals have disjunctions.
I submit that determinable properties
may well be such cases of systematic disjunction. We have an intuition,
which should be endorsed by those who are realist both about colours
and about universals, that being red is a respect of resemblance, and
hence that the predicate ’is red’ corresponds to a determinable property
rather than referring to several precise red hues. Likewise, enthusiasts
for speculative physics (a.k.a. mathematical metaphysics) who are also
realists about universals might well wonder whether the determinable
universal x’s being of hypervolume less than one Planck unit has any
(actual) instances.
It is natural, although not compulsory, to think
of determinables whose determinates are ﬁrst order properties as
themselves ﬁrst order properties, namely the disjunction of the, perhaps
inﬁnitely many, determinates. The alternative is to treat determinables
as higher order properties. In that case ’red’ applies to x just in case
x is an instance of some universal X that is itself an instance of X’s
being a shade of red. Without settling this, I shall provide a theory that
treats a determinable as the disjunction of its determinates.
The determinates of a determinable are pairwise inconsistent, which
would cause me problems if there were polyadic determinables that were
not totally symmetric.
A putative example would be x being earlier
than y, whose determinates would be of the form x being earlier than
y by t seconds for any positive real number t. I submit, however, that
we can analyse this as the conjunction of x being earlier than y with x
being separated from y by t seconds. The determinable x being separated
from y by some positive number of seconds is, then, symmetric. Quite
generally given any antisymmetric determinable we may analyse it in
terms of its qualitative structure and a symmetric quantitative deter-
minable.

274
Peter Forrest
I shall conclude this section with a couple of examples, starting with
x having as parts at least n disjoint Us.
This is, I say, one relatum
of the higher order dyadic relation, of cardinality at least n. The other
relatum is Ux itself. Clearly x having as parts at least n disjoint Us is to
be characterised recursively. The recursion requires the dyadic relation
x and y are disjoint.
Then x having as parts at least n + 1 disjoint
Us is the result of existential binding (of x and y) of repeated reﬂexive
bindings (putting x = x1 = x2 = x3, and y = y1 = y2 = y3) of the broad
conjunction of:
(1) x1 is part of z,
(2) y1 as part of z,
(3) x2 having as parts at least n disjoint Us,
(4) y2 having a U as a part and
(5) the relation of x3 being disjoint from y3.
Of these (4) y2 having a U as a part, is itself obtained by existential
binding (of w) of the repeated reﬂexive binding (putting w = w1 = w2)
of the broad conjunction of w1 is part of y2 and Uw2. The case n = 1,
which starts the recursion does not require (3).
Finally, in honour of Lewis’ objection, u is a methane molecule is the
narrow conjunction of:
(1) u has one part that is a carbon atom,
(2) u has four parts that are hydrogen atoms and
(3) the existential binding (of v, w, x, y, and z) of the repeated reﬂexive
binding (obtained by ignoring subscripts) of the external conjunction
of: v1 is part of u, w1 is part of u, x1 is part of u, y1 is part of u,
z1 is part if u; v2 is a carbon atom, w2 is a hydrogen atom, x2 is
a hydrogen atom, y2 is a hydrogen atom, z2 is a hydrogen atom; v3
is bonded to w3, v4 is bonded to x3, v5 is bonded to y3, and v6 is
bonded to z3.
4. The mereology of structural universals
In this section I explore the mereology of structural universals, a topic
that is both of intrinsic interest (to me anyway) and a preliminary to
the mereological characterisation of the operations considered above.

The mereology of structural universals
275
4.1. Broad conjunction
I identify the broad conjunction of two universals with their join, which
I am assuming is also their sum, noting that the rival hypothesis (the
identiﬁcation of narrow conjunction with the sum) violates the theoreti-
cally elegant principle that any two things (of the same kind) have a sum.
For inconsistent universals have no narrow conjunction. Moreover the
rival requires the distinction between a dyadic relation and its converse.
Consider for instance the narrow conjunctions of the anti-symmetric re-
lations:
Ewx = w being earlier than x
and
Syz = y being shorter (i.e. of less duration) than z.
Then Exy & Sxy ̸= Exy & Syz, but if narrow conjunctions were sums
both would have equal claim to be the sum.
4.2. Existential binding
Relying on the Parthood Instantiation Principle, I take a universal to
be part of any of its reﬂexive bindings.
Existential bindings are not
so straightforward. For Uxy . . . and its existential binding ∃x Uxy . . .
are instantiated in precisely the same particulars. Consider the case of
the monadic V x and its 0-adic existential binding ∃x V x. They diﬀer
in their negations, if they have them. For example, take V x to be x’s
being inﬁnite. Its negation is x’s being ﬁnite but the negation of ∃x V x
is the state of aﬀairs of there being nothing inﬁnite, that is of everything
being ﬁnite, which is instantiated in a region w just in case w has no
inﬁnite parts and so w is itself ﬁnite. The property x’s being ﬁnite is,
however, instantiated in w just in case w has some ﬁnite part. Relying on
the Parthood Instantiation Principle, x’s being ﬁnite is plausibly taken,
therefore, as a proper part of everything being ﬁnite.
Given the way
negation was characterised ∃x V x should therefore be a proper part of
V x. Generalising, I hypothesise that any existential binding of Uxy . . .
is a proper part of Uxy . . .. A consequence is that any universals with
a common part Uxy . . . also have a common part that is the 0-adic
universal obtained by existential bindings.

276
Peter Forrest
4.3. Determinables of determinates
I begin with two pieces of terminology. The ﬁrst is that if either Uxy . . .
stands to V xy . . . as determinable to determinate or Uxy . . .= V xy . . .,
then Uxy . . . is said to be within V xy . . .. The second stipulation is that
Uxy . . . is said to be the core of V xy . . . if it is within V xy . . . . and there
is no universal distinct from Uxy . . . within V xy . . ..
4.4. Some fusion equivalences
Because any two universals that overlap have a 0-adic universal as a com-
mon part, fusion may be characterised in terms of 0-overlapping, that is
universals sharing the same 0-adic parts. It follows that a fusion class is
closed under the operation of existential binding. I hypothesise that it
is also closed under the operation of reﬂexive binding.
I also hypothesise that the fusion class of a conjunction Uwx . . . &
V yz . . . has for its members the universals Xwx . . . & Y yz . . . such that
Xwx . . . is fusion equivalent to Uwx . . . and Y wx . . . is fusion equivalent
to V wx . . .. A bolder hypothesis, a conjecture even, is that if some uni-
versals have a disjunction then it is fusion equivalent to all the disjuncts,
because it is their determinable.
Any determinable is, I hypothesise, fusion equivalent to its determi-
nates. Here I include determinable structural universals because sub-
stituting a fusion equivalent property in a complex universal preserves
fusion equivalence. Thus x’s having red and black parts is fusion equiv-
alent to x’s having scarlet and black parts.
The fusion equivalence class of a system of determinates of a deter-
minable property includes its existential bindings, that is the state of
aﬀairs that some determinate is instantiated. This suggests a further
hypothesis about the fusion class of a universal:
1. Any fusion class has a meet, which is itself a member of the fusion
classes.
(Hence universals are mutual fusions iﬀthe meet of their
classes is the same.)
2. The meet of the fusion class of Uxy . . . is the total existential binding
of a universal U ∗xy . . . that is the core either of Uxy . . . itself or
some universal V xy . . . from which Uxy . . . is obtained by one or more
reﬂexive bindings.
3. If Wxy . . . is the join of Uxy . . . and V xy . . . then W ∗xy . . . is the join
of U ∗xy . . . and V ∗xy . . . .

The mereology of structural universals
277
The above hypotheses about mutual fusion are all based on the time-
honoured method of inability to think of a counter-example.
4.5. The mereology of narrow conjunction and incompatibility
If neither Uwx . . . nor V yz . . . are parts of the other then they have
a proper sum (U +V )wx . . .yz . . ., which a maximal proper part of any of
the narrower by one conjunctions obtained by one operation of reﬂexive
binding. Consider any universal Rxy of which (U + V )wx . . .yz . . . is
a maximal proper part. I hypothesise that either it is the sum of two
universals of which Uwx . . . and V yz . . . are parts or it is a narrower by
one conjunction of Uwx . . . and V yz . . . .
I deﬁne the compatibility number of two universals neither part of
the other as the number of their narrower by one conjunctions. Incom-
patible properties and relations have compatibility 0. A 0-adic universal
has compatibility 0 with any other universal. If we consider the class of
all properties and a totally symmetric universals their pairwise compat-
ibility is at most 1.
4.6. The mereology of determinables and determinates
If we are given the mereological structure of a fusion class we could
easily recognise non-trivial systems of determinates of a determinate, as
follows. (By a trivial system I mean one with only the one member.)
For simplicity I shall concentrate on the discrete case, namely that
in which if Uxy . . . is the core of V xy . . . then for some n there is no
sequence of distinct universals:
Uxy . . . = U0xy . . ., U1xy . . ., . . ., Unxy . . . = V xy . . .
such that Ujxy . . . is within Uj+1xy . . .. The greatest such n indicates
the level of the V xy . . ., with a core determinable being on level 1.
The mereology of a system of determinables of a determinate has
a tree structure.
1. If Uxy . . . is of level 1 less than V xy . . ., then Uxy . . . is a maximal
proper part of V xy . . ., and is of the same adicity.
2. Uxy . . . is meet of any two of the determinables on the next level that
it is within.

278
Peter Forrest
3. For systems of determinables that are either properties or symmetric
relations: If neither Uxy . . . is within V xy . . . nor vice versa then
Uxy . . . and V xy are incompatible.
4.7. The product structure of a fusion class
We may consider the universals in a given fusion class F that are all cores
of systems of determinables. This is a partially ordered system C ordered
by parthood. We may also consider all the 0-adic members of the fusion
class, which forms another partially ordered system D, again ordered
by parthood.
Consider the functions c and d from F onto C and D
respectively, such that c maps each universal to its core and d maps
each universal to its total existential binding. Then, I hypothesise, the
pair of functions c and d exhibit F as a product C × D of partially
ordered systems. That is, both c and d preserve parthood and: if both
c(Uxy . . .) = c(V xy . . .) and d(Uxy . . .) = d(V xy . . .) then Uxy . . . =
V xy . . ..
We may think of the determinable structure exempliﬁed by D stretch-
ing out horizontally in a diagram and the structure of existential and
reﬂexive binding exempliﬁed by C rising vertically above each member
of D. For some fusion classes this will be trivial because there is no
genuine system of determinates of a determinable, everything univer-
sal being of level 1. But in non-trivial cases the product structure is
a perspicuous analysis.
5. Using mereology to characterise the operations
By relaxing the requirement of unique fusion the system of all univer-
sals has enough mereological structure for us to characterise the various
operations.
First note that the product structure enables systems of
determinates of determinables to be picked out, so, we may if we choose
concentrate on the absolute determinates (determinables of level 1).
5.1. The adicity of universals
The 0-adic universals are characterised as those universals incompatible
with any other universal. Any universal with a maximal proper part
that is 0-adic and which is not itself 0-adic is a property. (The maximal
proper part is an existential binding).

The mereology of structural universals
279
For any universal Uxy . . . that is not a proper sum of universals, we
may consider a sequence of narrower by one conjunctions with n prop-
erties P1x1, P2x2, . . ., Pnxn, resulting in a universal V xy . . . such that:
1. No narrow conjunction of any two of the P1x1, P2x2, . . ., Pnxnis part
of V xy . . ., and
2. V xy . . . is not itself a proper sum.
If n is the largest integer for which there is such a sequence, then Uxy . . .
is n-adic. In that case V xy . . . is the universal Ux1x2 . . . xn & Q1x1 &
Q2x2 & . . . & Qnxn, where the Qjx are the Pix in some order or other.
Call a universal of this form a full conjunction of Uxy . . . with Q1x,
Q2y etc. The stipulation that V xy . . . is not itself a proper sum excludes
cases such as that in which because Ux = Uy & Uz, we could consider:
V xy = (Ux & Uy) & P1x & P2y = (Ux & P1x) + (Uy & P2y) .
5.2. Characterising reﬂexive binding
Reﬂexive bindings are of two kinds, that in which the Uxx . . . is formed
out of Uxy . . ., and so has adicity one less than Uxy . . ., and that in
which the adicity of the reﬂexive binding is equal or greater than that
of the universal that is bound.
The former is characterised thus: if
V wx . . . is an (n −1)-adic universal with an n-adic part Uyz . . . that is
maximal among n-adic parts of V wx . . ., and for which V wx . . . is min-
imal among the n-adic universals with Uyz . . . as a part, then V wx . . .
is a reﬂexive binding of Uyz . . .. In the second kind of reﬂexive bind-
ing Uxy . . . & Uyz . . . is formed out of Uxy . . . .11 This can be charac-
terised using full conjunctions. The (2n−1)-adic V xy . . . is the reﬂexive
binding of the n-adic Uxy . . . if the full conjunction of V xy . . . with
2n −1 properties P1x1, P2x2, . . ., Pn−1xn−1, Q1y1, Q2y2, . . ., Qn−1yn−1,
and Pn−1 & Qn−1z is the reﬂexive binding (of the kind just charac-
terised) of the sum of the full conjunction of Uxy . . . and the n properties
P1x1, P2x2, . . ., Pnxn with the full conjunction of Uxy . . . and n other
properties, the Q1y1, Q2y2, . . ., Qnyn.
11 Strictly speaking, reﬂexive bindings of the second kind include cases in which
Uxy . . . & Uyz . . . & Rwz . . . is formed out of Uxy . . . & Rwz . . ., where Rwz . . . is m-
adic. In that case the (2n + m −1)-adic V xy . . . & Rwz = Uxy . . . & Uyz . . . & Rwz.
But these can be analysed using broad conjunction with Rwz . . . and the reﬂexive
binding of the second kind without the & Rwz . . . .

280
Peter Forrest
5.3. Existential binding
If a universal Uxy . . . is maximal among (n −1)-adic parts of a n-adic
universal V xy . . . and V xy . . . is minimal among n-adic universals with
Uxy . . . as a part then either V xy . . . is a reﬂexive binding of Uxy . . .
or Uxy . . . is an existential binding of V xy . . . .
Having characterised
reﬂexive binding, the remaining cases must be existential bindings.
6. Objections and replies
I have characterised various operations on universals using non-classical
mereology. I now reply to various objections.
6.1. Correspondence
The operations on universals were deﬁned using correspondence and sub-
sequently characterised mereologically. It remains to characterise corre-
spondence, without relying on Modal Extensionality. For some pred-
icates, we may refer to in some way (perhaps by means of ﬁgurative
language) some paradigms. In such cases the predicate corresponds to
the salient universal instantiated by those particulars, if there is a unique
salient universal. To say it is salient among those that are instantiated
by the paradigms is to say that is the one we humans think of most easily.
It is a contingent fact about human beings that we have rather limited
ability to think of universals.
Otherwise there might not be enough
salient ones. But given this limited ability I hold there are enough corre-
spondences to provide paradigms of the operations on universals. Given
our limited powers to think of second-order universals we then can con-
sider the second order universals corresponding to the operations on ﬁrst
order universals. It follows that we do not need a complete correspon-
dence between predicates and (some) universals in order to characterise
the operations on universals. It also follows that we may use these oper-
ations to extend the domain of predicates for which there is correspon-
dence to include ones corresponding to structural universals ‘formed out
of’ ‘more basic’ universals to which predicates already correspond.
6.2. The application of asymmetric predicates
If a relation lacks total symmetry then there is more than one predicate
corresponding to it. So, for example, the universal x’s loving y (Lxy)

The mereology of structural universals
281
corresponds to both the predicates ‘x loves y’ and ‘y loves x’. The objec-
tion is that, on my proposed theory, there is nothing that makes it true
that Mary loves John rather than John loves Mary.
My reply is that there will be some distinguishing monadic properties,
Mx and Jx, to do with, say, Mary’s not being called ‘John’ and vice
versa. And the universal Mx & Jy & Lxy is not the same as Mx &
Jy & Lyx. They are both upper bounds of the three universals Mx,
Jy, and Luv, but neither is the join, which is the broad conjunction, the
4-adic, Jx & My & Luv.
Suppose the only distinguishing features of Mary and John is that
Mary loves John but not vice versa maybe they are angels of the same
species. Then my previous reply fails. But in this case we do not need
anything to make it true that Mary loves John, not vice versa. Mary is
characterised precisely as the one of the pair that loves the other.
Maybe you posit thisnesses, so that in spite of a lack of monadic
universals to distinguish Mary from John they have diﬀerent thisnesses.
Then, I submit, thisnesses are to be considered honorary universals and
incorporated into the mereological theory as such.
6.3. The perverse convoluted ontology
The complicated mereological characterisation of the ‘structure’ of uni-
versals could be objected to both by a misguided appeal to simplicity
and in a less obvious way, to which I must reply in detail. The misguided
objection is that the complications of my proposed theory rule it out as
a fundamental ontology. It is not, I reply, the proposed ontology that is
shown to be complicated but the correspondence with our predicates.
The less obvious objection relies upon the way that scientiﬁc real-
ism presupposes that scientists ‘carve nature at the joints’. Hence, the
predicates of established science must correspond straightforwardly to
universals. For example methane and other hydrocarbons may be clas-
siﬁed in terms of the structure of carbon, hydrogen and bonding. Again,
the various atomic nuclei are classiﬁed in terms of the numbers of protons
and neutrons in them. If we replace this classiﬁcation by the proposed
mereological analyses, we get gobbledegook.
I concede that the way we think of things does correspond rather
closely to the structure of universals. I further concede that the mere-
ological theory of structural universals does not reveal this correspon-
dence, which may, however, be described in terms of second-order univer-

282
Peter Forrest
sals. Thus the second-order relation of X being the narrow conjunction
of Y and Z holds between three universals Uxy . . ., V xy . . . and Wxy . . .
just in case . . . , where the dots are ﬁlled in by the proposed mereological
analysis of narrow conjunction; and likewise for all the other operations.
These second-order universals reveal the structure of complex universals,
as proposed by John Bigelow in [2]. The mereological analysis of the op-
erations has the advantage over Bigelow’s of not multiplying primitive
second-order universals.
Nonetheless these second-order relations are
real, and underpin the anti-Kantian correspondence between the way we
think and the way things are in themselves, which is presupposed, I say,
by scientiﬁc realism.
Conclusion
If we reject classical mereology then it is possible to develop a mereologi-
cal theory of ﬁrst-order universals, illustrating the power of non-classical
mereology. This is just one step towards a mereological theory of the
whole of analytic ontology.
Acknowledgments. Many thanks to Rafał Gruszczyński, Achille Varzi
and an anonymous reader for their helpful comments.
References
[1] Armstrong, D., Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism, Vol. II. A Theory of
Universals, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978.
[2] Bigelow, J., “Towards structural universals”, Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy, 64 (1986): 94–96. DOI: 10.1080/00048408612342291
[3] Caplan, B., Ch. Tillman, and P. Reeder, “Parts of singletons”, Journal of
Philosophy, 107 (2010): 501–533.
[4] Cotnoir, A. J., “Anti-symmetry and non-extensional mereology”, The
Philosophical Quarterly, 60 (2010):
396–405. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-
9213.2009.649.x
[5] Cotnoir, A. J., and A. Bacon, “Non-wellfounded mereology”, Review of
Symbolic Logic, 5 (2012): 187–204. DOI: 10.1017/S1755020311000293
[6] Forrest, P., The Necessary Structure of the All-pervading Aether: Dis-
crete or Continuous? Simple or Symmetric?, Ontos, 2012. DOI: 10.1515/
9783110325928

The mereology of structural universals
283
[7] Forrest, P., “Exempliﬁcation and parthood”, Axiomathes, 23 (2013): 323–
341. DOI: 10.1007/s10516-013-9215-6
[8] Franklin, J., An Aristotelian Realist Philosophy of Mathematics: Math-
ematics as the Science of Quantity and Structure, Palgrave MacMillan,
2014. DOI: 10.1057/9781137400734
[9] Lewis, D., “Against structural universals”, Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy, 64 (1986): 25–46. DOI: 10.1080/00048408612342211
[10] Lewis, D., Parts of Classes, Blackwell, 1991.
[11] Obojska, L., “Some remarks on supplementation principles in the absence
of antisymmetry”, Review of Symbolic Logic, 6 (2013): 343–347. DOI: 10.
1017/S1755020312000330
[12] Sober, E., “Why logically equivalent predicates may pick out diﬀerent
properties”, American Philosophical Quarterly, 19 (1982): 183–189.
[13] Thompson, J. J., “The statue and the clay”, Nous, 32 (1998): 149–173.
DOI: 10.1111/0029-4624.00094
[14] Tillman, Ch., and G. Fowler, “Propositions and parthood: The universe
and antisymmetry”, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 90 (2012): 525–
539. DOI: 10.1080/00048402.2011.611812
[15] Varzi, A., “The extensionality of parthood and composition”, The Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 58 (2008): 108–133. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9213.
2007.542.x
Peter Forrest
School of Humanities
University of New England
Australia
pforrest@une.edu.au

