 
 
 
 
 
THE MIND IS NOT THE BRAIN: JOHN 
DEWEY, NEUROSCIENCE, AND 
AVOIDING THE MEREOLOGICAL 
FALLACY 
 
DERON BOYLES (Georgia State University) 
& JIM GARRISON (Virginia Tech & Uppsala University) 
 
 
 
The purpose of this paper is to argue that however impressive and 
useful its results, neuroscience alone does not provide a complete 
theory of mind. We specifically enlist John Dewey to help dispel the 
notion that the mind is the brain. In doing so, we explore 
functionalism to clarify Dewey’s modified functionalist stance 
(biological psychology) and argue for avoiding “the mereological 
fallacy.” Mereology (from the Greek μερος, “part”) is the study of 
part-whole relations. The mereological fallacy arises from confusing 
the properties of a necessary subfunction with the properties that 
derive from the unity of the whole functional coordination. We 
conclude that the mind is a complex distributed biological-
sociocultural function that is not simply located anywhere and, 
therefore, is not completely in the possession of any one (person, 
place, or thing): it occurs wherever it has consequences. 
 
 
 
Volume 1 · Number 1 · Spring 2017 · Pages 111-130 
 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    112 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
Introduction 
 
rom the popular press to academic journals, neuroscience 
appears to be enjoying a steady expansion of coverage.  
Newspapers headline “cutting edge research” in neuroscience. 
Corporations like Lumosity continue to promote the idea that the 
brain is a muscle and, for a monthly fee, will offer puzzles to increase 
“brain function.” Instead of the familiar questions these examples 
illustrate regarding what the mind does (thinks, feels, cognizes, 
imagines, remembers, etc.), we shift the focus to query where it is 
located so as to avoid “the mereological fallacy.”1 The mind is not 
some thing located in the brain or any place else. It is a complex 
distributed biological-sociocultural function occurring wherever it 
operates in a complex world without withins.2 We must avoid the 
mereological fallacy of confusing the properties of necessary 
subfunctions such as those studied by neuroscience with the 
properties that derive from the unity of the whole functional 
coordination of an agent’s transactions with its environment. 
 
Perhaps surprisingly, the classical educational philosopher 
and pragmatist John Dewey helps us recognize that the excessive 
claims of some cognitive neuroscientists involve a timeworn 
dualism: 
                                                        
1 We borrow the phrase from Maxwell R. Bennett and Peter M.S. Hacker, 
Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2003).  John 
Searle calls this the “fallacy of composition.” See John R. Searle, Freedom and 
Neurobiology: Reflections on Free Will, Language, and Politics of Power (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2004), 76. 
2 We must not confuse biological-sociocultural functionalism with philosophical 
functionalism, which we will soon see is its antithesis. The concept of a “world 
without withins” comes from an essay by J.E. Tiles. He argues that Dewey’s 
reaction to Bertrand Russell’s book, Our Knowledge of the External World, was to 
basically reject the problem assumed; that is, a separation between internal and 
external worlds. It simply was not a problem, on Dewey’s view. As Tiles notes, 
“Dewey’s whole philosophy suggests in effect that we do better to reconstruct our 
conception of the relationship between the mind and the world so that the 
problem does not arise.” See J.E. Tiles, “Dewey’s Realism: Applying the Term 
‘Mental’ in a World without Withins,” Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 31, 
no. 1 (Winter, 1995): 137-166, 137. 
F

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    113 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
 
The advance of physiology and the psychology associated 
with it have shown the connection of mental activity with 
that of the nervous system. Too often recognition of 
connection has stopped short at this point; the older dualism 
of soul and body has been replaced by that of the brain and 
the rest of the body. But in fact the nervous system is only a 
specialized mechanism for keeping all bodily activities 
working together.3 
 
The connection of neurology with mental functioning is immensely 
important as long as we do not confuse the nervous system with the 
mind. There is an even more fundamental error here toward which 
Dewey gestures. 
Mereology (from the Greek μερος, “part”) is the study of part-
whole relations. The mereological fallacy arises from confusing the 
properties of a necessary subfunction with the properties that derive 
from the unity of the whole functional coordination. Cognitive 
neuroscientists and their votaries commit some version of the 
mereological fallacy when they confuse a part (e.g., the brain) with 
the larger whole involved in mental functioning. Humans are a 
psychophysical union.  We may say of human beings that they 
reason, emote, consider, and self-reflect.  We may not say of the 
human brain the same things.    
Although Dewey does not use the word “mereology,” he 
clearly identifies the fallacy: 
 
The dualism is found today even among those who have 
abandoned its earlier manifestations. It is shown in 
separations made between the structural and the functional; 
between the brain and the rest of the body; between the 
central nervous system and the vegetative nervous system 
and viscera; and, most fundamentally, between the organism 
and the environment. For the first of each of these pairs of 
terms—structure, brain, organism—retains something of the 
                                                        
3 MW 9:346. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    114 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
isolation and alleged independence that used to belong to the 
“soul and the mind,” and later to “consciousness.”4  
 
That somehow the mind could function without the large internal 
organs of heart, lungs, kidney, and such (i.e., the viscera) expresses 
the curiously disembodied thinking of many in cognitive 
neuroscience. 
Understanding 
mental 
functioning 
involves 
comprehending the part (i.e., brain or neural system) within the 
larger nervous system, viscera, and body as well as the environment, 
perhaps especially the social environment. 
 
The Travails of Philosophical Functionalism 
 
The following provides a useful working definition of philosophical 
functionalism, which dominates contemporary theories of the mind 
in psychology, sociology, and beyond:  
 
Functionalism is a philosophical theory (or family of 
theories) concerning the nature of mental states. According 
to functionalism psychological/cognitive states are essentially 
functional 
states 
of 
whole 
systems. 
Functionalism 
characterizes psychological states essentially…by their 
relations to stimulus inputs and behavioral outputs as well as 
their relations to other psychological and nonpsychological 
internal states of a system.5  
 
Philosophical functionalism assumes the internal configuration of the 
system determines a mental state and not its physical or perhaps 
nonphysical (psychic?) substance. 
                                                        
4 LW 13: 324. 
5 Thomas W. Polger, “Functionalism as a Philosophical Theory of the Cognitive 
Sciences,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science 3, no. 3 (2012): 337-348, 
337. For one indication of the detailed analyses of functionalism, see Martin  
Mahner and Mario Bunge, “Function and Functionalism: A Synthetic Perspective,” 
Philosophy of Science. 68, no. 1 (March, 2001): 75-94. 
 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    115 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
Turing machine functionalism provided the first and still 
classic example. Hilary Putnam first proposed the idea that the mind 
is a Turing machine; that is, an abstract finite state digital computer 
that transitions from one state to another according to specific 
recursive rules (i.e., the code or program).6 This theory identifies 
mental states with computer or machine states. Consider the 
following: 
 
Suppose a barometer displays an unusually low reading and 
upon seeing this George takes steps appropriate to wet 
weather. The barometer indicator standing where it does is 
not anything mental; the rainy weather (actual or 
prospective) is not anything mental. What is mental is the 
way the barometer indicator functions to influence George’s 
actions as stormy weather would influence his actions. No 
one gets rained on or windblown by a barometer (even one 
indicating unusually low pressure); nevertheless the 
barometer prompts in George action which anticipates his 
being rained on or windblown.7 
 
Levin (2010) believes it is going to rain is a machine state regarded as 
a disposition to take one’s umbrella with them given the weather 
report.8 A Touring machine functionalist account of George’s action 
involves a two-ply account involving first dispositions to act and, 
second, 
mental 
states 
understood 
as 
internal 
functional 
configurations of some system. 
Putnam ultimately abandoned not only Turing machine state 
functionalism, 
but 
also 
all 
other 
forms 
of 
philosophical 
functionalism. Chapter 5 of his widely influential Representation and 
Reality is titled: “Why Functionalism Didn’t Work.”9 He outlines his 
                                                        
6 Hilary Putnam, “Minds and Machines,” in Sidney Hook, ed., Dimensions of Mind 
(New York: New York University Press, 1960). 
7 Tiles, 142-143. 
8 See Janet Levin, "Functionalism," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 
2010 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta, 
  
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2010/entries/functionalism/>. 
9 Hilary Putnam, Representation and Reality (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988). 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    116 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
basic ideas in the first chapter on intentionality. Putnam gives three 
reasons why philosophical functionalism fails. We will not only 
discover all three operating in Dewey’s social psychology, but will 
find them prefigured in biological functioning. 
First, 
philosophical 
functionalism 
treats 
meaning 
atomistically as an isolated state and a set of rules (e.g., a program) 
for moving from one isolated state to the next. However, according 
to Putnam, meaning is holistic. This implies that meaning cannot be 
captured by words or sentences that are merely “given by . . . a rule 
which determines in exactly which experiential situations the 
sentence is assertable.”10 Holism also “runs counter to the great 
tendency to stress definition as the means by which the meaning of 
words is to be explained or fixed.”11 His example is the history of the 
word “momentum” in physics; “number” would work as well. 
Second, meaning is partially normative. That is, “deciding to 
interpret someone one way rather than another is intimately tied to 
normative judgments.”12 Most commonly, this means a principle of 
“charity” that assumes “general intelligence” on the part of the 
speaker. There is an ancient report that the Pythagorean who 
discovered the proof of irrational numbers did so while at sea and his 
colleagues threw him overboard to drown because it destroyed their 
norms of rationality. Later mathematicians expressed greater charity 
regarding the meaning of number—including real numbers, 
imaginary numbers, and, quite recently, Chaitin’s number. 
Finally, and most devastatingly, “Our Concepts Depend on Our 
Physical and Social Environment in a Way That Evolution (Which was 
Completed, for Our Brains, about 300,000 Years Ago) Couldn’t Foresee.”13 
This position leads to semantic externalism; the notion that 
psychological functioning is dependent on the environment. “The 
semantic externalist postulates necessary connections between the 
content of our thinking and the external world.”14 Such 
                                                        
10 Ibid., 8. 
11 Ibid., 9. 
12 Ibid., 14. 
13 Ibid., 15. 
14 Timothy Williamson, “Skepticism, Semantic Externalism, and Keith’s Mom,” 
Southern Journal of Philosophy XXXVIII, no. 1 (2000): 149-158, 149. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    117 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
considerations devastate those like Noam Chomsky and Jerry Fodor 
who are committed to strong psycho-functional innateness theories 
of mind.15 How could the language of thought contain “carburetor” 
before its emergence in culture?  
Consider, however, that “changes in a community’s ‘procedures’ for 
using a lexical term do not usually count as a change in the meaning 
of the item [e.g., momentum or number].”16 Indeed, “[I]f semantic 
representations in the brain are developed from experience, just as 
words in public language are . . . there is no reason to think that a 
given representation (described syntactically) will not come to be 
given different meanings by different groups.”17 There is no reason to 
think that the mental language is the same as the cultural language, 
or the “language” of the brain (i.e., semantic representations, or states 
and procedures) needed to establish meaning identity. Therefore, we 
should not suppose brain states uniquely match up with meanings of 
any kind. This is a version of Putnam’s famous multiple realizability 
argument, which leads to a non-reductive (or emergent) materialism 
that closely resembles Dewey’s emergent naturalism. 
Putnam also developed a “direct realism” that emphasizes the 
way people actually experience the world and rejects the notion of 
mental representations as intermediaries between “inner” mind and 
the “outer” world. This view has much in common with Dewey, who 
writes: “The material and spiritual, the physical and the mental or 
psychical; body and mind; experience and reason; sense and intellect, 
appetitive desire and will; subjective and objective, individual and 
social; inner and outer; this last division underlying in a way all the 
others.”18 For Dewey the Darwinian, human nature is a part of 
nature. There is no dualism of the knower and the known, the mind 
and the world, or the inner and the outer. While there are serious 
problems regarding knowledge, how we know the world is not so 
different from how we eat it.  
                                                        
15 See Noam Chomsky, Syntactic Structures (New York: Martino, 1957/2015); and 
Jerry A. Fodor, Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind 
(New York: Bradford Book, 1989). 
16 Putnam, Representation and Reality, 15. 
17 Ibid., 16. 
18 LW 16: 408. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    118 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
 
Dewey’s Functionalism:  Biological Psychology 
 
In many ways, American functional psychology and sociology 
originated in the work of Dewey and his colleagues James Angell and 
George Herbert Mead at the University of Chicago in the 1890s. 
Unlike philosophical functionalism, classical functional psychology 
investigates thought, feeling, and action in terms of the organism’s 
active adaptation to its environment. The classical statement was 
Dewey’s “The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology.”19 
 
In a past-presidential address to the American Psychological 
Association titled “The Need for Social Psychology,” Dewey affirmed: 
 
From the point of view of the psychology of behavior all 
psychology is either biological or social psychology. And if it 
still be true that man is not only an animal but a social 
animal, the two cannot be dissevered when we deal with 
man.20 
 
In this section, we concentrate on biological psychology, which 
includes the brain and other neurophysiological functions as well as 
all the biological functions of the body that the brain coordinates and 
depends upon. Social psychology involves abstract, arbitrary, 
linguistic meanings that Putnam argues are holistic, externalist, and 
normative. 
Dewey the Darwinian identifies “experience with a living 
function.”21 Psychological functioning is an emergent living function. 
Experience is what happens to sentient beings as they transact with 
their environment, which seems to exclude plants and sponges much 
less Turing machines. It is a continuation of emergent physical and 
chemical transactions. The familiar example is water. Hydrogen is 
                                                        
19 EW 5: 96-109.  In 1943, a committee of seventy eminent psychologists polled by 
the editors of The Psychological Review voted this essay the most important 
contribution to the journal during its first fifty years.  
20 MW 10: 63. 
21 MW 13: 377. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    119 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
combustible, oxygen sustains combustion, and H2O puts out most 
types of fires. 
Let us inspect some of the characteristics of any living 
function. Dewey claims: “Any process, sufficiently complex to 
involve an arrangement or coordination of minor processes, which 
fulfills a specific end in such a way as to conserve itself, is called a 
function.”22 Functions are exceedingly complex: “Any operative 
function gets us behind the ordinary distinction of organism and 
environment. It presents us with their undifferentiated unity, not 
with their unification. It is primary; distinction is subsequent and 
derived.”23 Dewey rejects the organism versus environment dualism 
asserting that “a living organism and its life processes involve a world 
or nature temporally and spatially ‘external’ to itself but ‘internal’ to 
its functions.”24 Food, water, and a mate are external to our 
epidermis, but unless they become internal to our functioning, the 
Darwinian imperatives of survival and reproduction become 
impossible to satisfy. No organism is simply located in space or time. 
We may say the same for psychological functions. This is the 
biological matrix of semantic externalism. 
Dewey observes: “An organism may be studied just as 
organism (physiology, anatomy) separately from study of its 
surroundings. But at every point the connection with environment—
or a prior unity of function is presupposed and implied.”25 We may 
study lungs, heart, and blood circulation apart from the chemical 
properties of the surrounding air, but we cannot hope for an 
adequate understanding without reference to the oxygen and carbon 
dioxide cycle involving the fauna and flora of the planet. The same 
holds for studying the brain as a subfunction of psychological 
functioning. We commit the mereological fallacy in psychology just as we 
do in biology when we confuse a useful methodological simplification for 
the purposes of inquiry for the whole of a complex physical, biological, and 
social function. 
                                                        
22 MW 6: 466. 
23 MW 13: 377. 
24 LW 1: 212. 
25 MW 13: 381. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    120 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
What Dewey says next explains the parallels we have been 
drawing between organism-environmental transactions and mind-
body transactions: 
 
Exactly the same state of things holds for psychology. We 
inquire separately into the states and processes that are 
referred to the subject. This does not mean that they exist 
separately. A tree may be subject-matter of legal inquiry, as 
property; of economic science as productive of saleable 
commodities; of horticultural art; of botany; of physics and 
chemistry; of geography; of trigonometry; even as geological 
subject-matter. So it may be studied as psychological subject-
matter; as perceived, remembered, imagined, conceived, 
longed for, enjoyed, etc.26  
 
None of these functions exist separately any more than an organism 
exists separately from the environment, the lungs from the chemical 
properties of air, or the brain from the body and the larger physical, 
biological, and social environment. 
Dewey claims: “Habits are the basis of organic learning.”27 
The neurosciences including brain research have much to offer 
educators who wish to understand the organic basis of learning. 
From birth, we have species-specific neurophysiological instincts, or 
so-called “first nature.” Habits are “second nature:” 
 
Habits may be profitably compared to physiological functions 
like breathing, digesting. The latter are, to be sure, 
involuntary, while habits are acquired . . . . Habits are like 
functions in many respects, and especially in requiring the 
cooperation of organism and environment.28  
 
Dewey observes that like “the functions of breathing and digesting, 
habits are not complete within the human body . . . .  [F]unctions 
                                                        
26 MW 13: 381. 
27 LW 12: 38. 
28 MW 14: 15. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    121 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
and habits are ways of using and incorporating the environment in 
which the latter has its say as surely as the former.”29 He later 
remarks, “habits endure, because these habits incorporate objective 
conditions in themselves.”30 As with innate biological functions, 
habits are biological subfunctions of a transactional world without 
withins. They involve the brain, but the brain is only a subfunction 
of habitual functioning.  
Habits, for Dewey, are dispositions to act evincing emotions; 
they are generalized forms of response to a given certain class of 
stimuli.31 They are organic universals serving as instruments of 
existential inference while prefiguring formal logical implication. 
Even our formal theories of inquiry arise “as an articulate expression 
of the habit that is involved in a class of inferences.”32 “The universal 
is not primarily logic, but is factual, habitual.”33 “This concrete logic 
of action,” Dewey believes, “long precedes the logic of pure 
speculation or abstract investigation, and through the mental habits 
that it forms is the best of preparations for the latter.”34 “Thought 
carried on by anyone,” he insists, “depends upon his habits.”35 Habits 
become “articulate” when we acquire the habits of linguistic usage in 
the domain of social psychology. 
Habits coordinate neurophysiological sensory-motor activity 
with environmental conditions. They involve the biochemistry of 
neurotransmission. A neuron’s resting electrical charge is negative 
inside and positive outside; firing reverses the potential. The primary 
synaptic transmitters are an excitatory transmitter glutamate and an 
inhibitor gamma-aminobutyric acid. Donald Hebb developed the 
idea that “Cells that fire together wire together.”36 Demonstrating 
association in the brain occurs when neurons receiving information 
from stimuli fire simultaneously. Terje Lømo and Tim Bliss’s long-
                                                        
29 Ibid., 15. 
30 Ibid., 19. 
31 MW 14: 32. 
32 LW 12: 20. 
33 MW 13: 389. 
34 MW 1: 93. 
35 LW 8: 171. 
36 See Joseph LeDoux, Synaptic Self (New York: Viking Penguin, 2003), 79. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    122 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
term potentiation allows us to “translate neural activity generated by 
environmental stimuli into changes in synaptic efficiency . . . to 
record and store information.”37 There is no doubt that the brain is 
the primary site of this activity. We may study habits using 
functional magnetic resonance image (fMRI) and the like and draw 
important conclusions based on cognitive neuroscience. It is a useful 
methodological simplification that creates no mischief as long as we 
avoid the mereological fallacy. However we must never forget that 
there is much external to the neurophysiology of a habit that is 
nonetheless internal to its functioning. We must never lose sight of 
the larger functional whole of which a habit is a subfunction. Habits 
are not entirely “in” the brain or even the body. They distribute their 
functioning throughout a world without withins.  
 
Dewey’s Theory of Intentionality 
 
In his essay, “Dewey’s Realism: Applying the Term ‘Mental’ in a 
World without Withins,” J. E. Tiles connects Dewey’s participatory 
realism with his criteria of mental functioning.38 A similar relation 
exists between Putnam’s “direct realism” and his meaning 
externalism. Tiles begins by observing that the word “intention” 
derives from “the Latin, ‘intendo’ meaning ‘point [at],’ ‘aim [at]’, 
‘extend [toward].’”39 Tiles observes that “signs, for example words 
[propositions, symbol strings, and such], can help to clarify the 
notion of an intentional state or act as well as the importance of the 
condition that it refer to or be ‘about’ something (normally) beyond 
itself.”40 A mental state or act such as reasoning, imagining, reacting 
emotionally toward an object “is not intentional, i.e., is not a mental 
state or act, by virtue of any inherent properties it may have but by 
virtue of its referring or being about its object or objects.”41 Hence, it 
is possible to speak of signs as having mental properties, which, 
                                                        
37 Ibid., 139. 
38 Tiles, op. cit. 
39 Ibid., 140. 
40 Ibid. 
41 Ibid. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    123 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
surprisingly, is precisely Dewey’s position. 
Tiles calls attention to the following passage in which it is the 
function that is mental not some substance supporting the function: 
 
But a thing which has or exercises the quality of being a 
surrogate of some absent thing is so distinctive, so unique, 
that it needs a distinctive name. As exercising the function we 
may call it mental. Neither the thing meant nor the thing 
signifying is mental. Nor is meaning itself mental in any 
psychical, dualistic, existential sense. Traditional dualism 
takes the undoubted logical duality, or division of labor, 
between data and meanings, and gets into the epistemological 
predicament by transforming it into an existential dualism, a 
separation of two radically diverse orders of being. Starting 
from the undoubted existence of inference, or from a logical 
function, "ideas" denote problematic objects so far as they are 
signified by present things and are capable of logical 
manipulation. A probable rain storm, as indicated to us by 
the look of the clouds or the barometer, gets embodied in a 
word or some other present thing and hence can be treated 
for certain purposes just as an actual rain storm would be 
treated. We may then term it a mental entity.42  
 
Compare this situation with the one depicted by Levin (2010) of 
believing it is going to rain as a machine state regarded as a 
disposition to take one’s umbrella with them given the weather 
report. The philosophical functionalists are right that the platform 
upon which mental functioning is actualized is irrelevant, but wrong 
to simply locate mental functioning as “internal” to anything (body, 
brain, mind, or whatever). 
Tiles asks us to imagine “George” noticing the barometer 
mentioned earlier as displaying an unusually low reading and taking 
appropriate action, perhaps taking an umbrella with him: “What is 
mental,” to emphasize Tiles’ point again, “is the way the barometer 
indicator functions to influence George’s actions as stormy weather 
                                                        
42 MW 13: 56-57. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    124 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
would influence his actions.”43 We might say the same for the clouds. 
We will later consider the psychological difference between 
barometers and clouds. The point is that the barometer “may be 
taken to ‘mean’ severe weather,” regardless of whether anyone 
notices it; that is because the relation that “connects the state of the 
barometer to the state of the weather, obtains objectively and 
independently of being recognized.”44 Of course, it requires a 
creature with sufficient intelligence to recognize the relation. What 
comes next is critical: “Compared to the account of ‘mental’ based on 
the criterion of intentionality, Dewey has displaced the term so that, 
instead of applying primarily to a state or ‘act’ of George, it applies . . 
. to a function of the barometer.”45 Remember, Putnam thinks it is a 
mistake to “postulate that desires and beliefs are ‘functional states’ of 
the brain.”46 On Dewey’s account, the brain, a neural network, a state 
of a computer, etc., are only subfunctions of a complex distributed 
function in which, as Tiles states it, “the term ‘mental’ gets pushed 
out into the world,” but not “divorcing it from, and treating it as 
independent of, subjects or agents.”47 Dewey’s criteria replaces the 
“relatively simple two-term schema” to which intentionality usually 
appeals with “a three-term schema.”48 “Instead of a subject or agent 
whose state or act refers to something beyond the subject or agent,” 
Tiles observes, “we have a subject or agent whose act is to take 
something beyond itself as referring to something else beyond 
itself.”49 This taking and using is a function of Darwinian intelligence 
operating so as to coordinate the organism with its physical, 
biological, and as we are about to see, its social environment. 
 
 
 
                                                        
43 Tiles, 143. 
44 Ibid. 
45 Ibid. 
46 Putnam, Representation and Reality, 7. 
47 Tiles, 143. 
48 Ibid., 144. 
49 Ibid. Emphasis added. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    125 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
Dewey’s Functionalism: Social Psychology  
 
Dewey deems that “modification of organic behavior in and by the 
cultural environment accounts for, or rather is, the transformation of 
purely organic behavior into behavior marked by intellectual 
properties.”50 “When things have a meaning for us,” Dewey notes, 
“we mean (intend, propose, purpose) what we do: when they do not, 
we act blindly, unconsciously, unintelligently.”51 Instead of 
responding to stimuli, say a cloud, in terms of our first or second 
nature, we may respond because we grasp the cognitive meaning of 
the stimuli within a given situation; we literally have an idea 
(concept) of what needs doing; therefore, we act with intention. He 
remarks on “the especial function of language in effecting the 
transformation of the biological into the intellectual and the 
potentially logical.”52 Linguistic functioning supervenes upon 
habitual functioning: “Any habit is a way or manner of action, not a 
particular act or deed. When it is formulated it becomes, as far as it is 
accepted, a rule, or more generally, a principle or ‘law’ of action.”53 
Articulate habits enable cognitive functioning. 
For Dewey, to have a mind in the sense of abstract cognition 
is to have linguistic meanings: “Mind denotes the whole system of 
meanings as they are embodied in the workings of organic life; 
consciousness in a being with language denotes awareness or 
perception of meanings; it is the perception of actual events, whether 
past, contemporary or future, in their meanings, the having of actual 
ideas.”54 This is Dewey’s semantic holism. For him it is “association, 
communication, participation” that “define mind as intellect: 
possession of and response to meanings.”55 To understand any 
language, we “have to be able to re-instate the whole social context 
                                                        
50 LW 12: 49. Michael Cole’s work on cultural psychology is an important part of 
psychology. He makes good use of Dewey. See Michael Cole, Cultural Psychology: A 
Once and Future Discipline (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996). 
51 LW 12: 34. 
52 Ibid., 51. 
53 Ibid., 21. 
54 LW 1: 230. 
55 Ibid., 208. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    126 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
which alone supplies the meaning.”56 This is the social component of 
Putnam’s semantic holism. 
Dewey states: “Through speech a person dramatically 
identifies himself with potential acts and deeds; he plays many roles, 
not in successive stages of life but in a contemporaneously enacted 
drama. Thus mind emerges.”57 Here is an example: 
 
A requests B to bring him something, to which A points, say 
a flower. There is an original mechanism by which B may 
react to A’s movement in pointing. But natively such a 
reaction is to the movement, not to the pointing, not to the 
object pointed out. But B learns that the movement is a 
pointing; he responds to it not in itself, but as an index of 
something else. His response is transferred from A’s direct 
movement to the object to which A points . . . .58 
 
Linguistic meaning involves the functional coordination of A and B 
with the object O in a shared context of action. It requires taking the 
attitude of the other in the transaction.59 B must take “the 
movement” of A and use it as a surrogate of the object to which it 
refers. As Dewey indicates, “there is something present in organic 
action which acts as a surrogate for the remote things signified.”60 
That something is the habit that serves as the embodied interpretant 
of the meaning function. Like other habits, linguistic habits 
incorporate something, perhaps a conspecific, external to the living 
creature’s existence yet nonetheless internal to its (meaning) 
                                                        
56 Ibid., 16. 
57 Ibid., 135. 
58 Ibid., 140. Those familiar with the slab game in Wittgenstein’s Philosophical 
Investigations know exactly what Dewey is up to here. Many have commented on 
the multiple similarities between the later Wittgenstein and Dewey, including such 
prominent philosophers such as W. V. O. Quine and Richard Rorty. Rorty rightly 
adds Heidegger to the mix. 
59 Mirror neurons facilitate taking the attitude of others. They fire much the same 
as the neurons of someone you see gesturing. Try yawning expansively at a social 
affair (see Robert Provine, “Yawning,” American Scientist 93 (2005): 532-539). 
Neurology is an important subfunction of mental functioning. 
60 LW 1: 222. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    127 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
functioning. However, “The nervous system is in no sense the ‘seat’ 
of the idea. It is a mechanism of the connection or integration of 
acts.”61 Here we may appreciate what the biological matrix 
contributes to semantic externalism. 
Notice the meaning function is a three-term schema; the 
same schema Tiles uses to depict Dewey’s theory of intentionality. In 
the context of the social construction of meaning we have two agents 
that take and use each other to refer to a third thing they make in 
common. More precisely: The two subjects and the object emerge 
simultaneously in the social transaction. They create each other as well 
as the common object within the emergent social-construction. 
Dewey remarks: “For a meaning is a method of action, a way 
of using things as a means to a shared consummation . . . . Meanings 
are rules for using and interpreting things; interpretation being 
always an imputation of potentiality for some consequence.”62 
Dewey’s example involves rules of the road. He describes how traffic 
officers hold up their hands while blowing a whistle. It is not just an 
“episodic stimulus,” because it “embodied a rule of social action;” i.e., 
a habit.63 Its meaning involves socially coordinating the movements 
of persons and vehicles: “Its essence is the rule . . . the standardized 
habit, of social interaction . . . . This meaning is independent of the 
psychical landscape.”64 The rule, the meaning, is not just some brain 
state; it also has an objective and intersubjective as well as 
neurophysiological subfunctions (i.e., a habit). What we grasp when 
comprehending meaning is an objective norm of functionally 
coordinated action that, once rendered conscious, may be expressed 
symbolically using verbal gestures, writing, pointing, and such. 
In Putnam’s terms, meaning involves normative judgments 
requiring charity regarding the intelligence of our co-participants. 
Bring me a flower might involve agreement in action over a rose, a 
plastic rose, a rose window, and so on. 65 The difficulties are evident 
                                                        
61 Ibid. 
62 Ibid., 147. 
63 Ibid., 149. 
64 Ibid. 
65 After Representation and Reality, Putnam took a strong turn toward Deweyan 
pragmatism. Perhaps the chief debate of the 1990s in North American Philosophy 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    128 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
in games where referees not only interpret the rules, but also bend 
them within the “spirit of the game.” Some linguistic communities 
are more rigid in their norms and rules (e.g., science and 
mathematics) than are others such as literature and poetry. The 
customs, laws, rules, norms, and such of a community inscribe 
themselves upon the bodies of individuals as habits of practice. 
Further, as with a traffic officer, the power of enforcement always 
accompanies the rules and norms. Normative interpretation is an 
ongoing affair, a constant struggle over power, and perhaps the most 
amazing act a sentient being can perform. 
 
Conclusion: Where is the Mind? 
 
We should avoid the mereological fallacy. Having a human mind 
requires having a human brain functioning in a human body 
continually transacting with its physical, biological, sociocultural 
environment. Lacking any of these, we lose mental capacity. Where 
is the mind? We argue that the question is misplaced, as it were, and 
indicative of the very problem Dewey helps us solve. The answer to 
the question, nonetheless, is: wherever intentional functioning 
occurs. The mind is a complex distributed biological-sociocultural function 
that is not simply located anywhere and, therefore, is not completely in the 
possession of any one (person, place or thing); it occurs wherever it has 
consequences.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                            
was between two Deweyan pragmatists: Putnam and Rorty over realism and 
nominalism. Both got it wrong from a Deweyan perspective, although Putnam was 
much closer. See David L. Hildebrand, Beyond Realism and Antirealism: John Dewey 
and the Neopragmatists (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2003). 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    129 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
Bennett, Maxwell, Dennett, Daniel, Hacker, Peter, and Searle, John.  
Neuroscience and Philosophy: Brain, Mind, and Language. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2003. 
 
Bennett, Maxwell R. and Hacker, Peter M.S. Philosophical Foundations  
of Neuroscience. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2003. 
 
Chomsky, Noam. Syntactic Structures. New York: Martino,  
1957/2015. 
 
Cole, Michael. Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline.  
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996. 
 
Dewey, John. The Collected Works of John Dewey, 1882-1953, edited by  
Jo Ann Boydston.  Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern 
Illinois University Press, 1967-1990.   
 
Fodor, Jerry A. Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in the  
Philosophy of Mind. New York: Bradford Books, 1989. 
 
Hildebrand, David L. Beyond Realism and Antirealism: John Dewey and  
the Neopragmatists. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 
2003. 
 
LeDoux, Joseph. Synaptic Self. New York: Viking Pengui, 2003. 
 
Mahner, Martin and Mario Bunge, “Function and Functionalism: A  
Synthetic Perspective,” Philosophy of Science. 68, no. 1 (March, 
2001): 75-94. 
 
Polger, Thomas W. “Functionalism as a Philosophical Theory of the  
Cognitive Sciences.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive 
Science. 3, no. 3 (2012): 337-348. 

Deron Boyles & Jim Garrison 
 
 
 
    130 
Dewey Studies  
 
 
 
 
      Vol 1 · No 1 · Spring 2017 
 
 
Provine, Robert. “Yawning.” American Scientist. 93 (2005): 532-539.  
 
Putnam, Hilary. “Minds and Machines.” In Sidney Hook (ed.)  
Dimensions of Mind. New York: New York University Press, 
1960. 
 
—. Representation and Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988. 
 
Quine, W. V. “Ontological Relativity.” In W. V. Quine, Ontological  
Relativity and Other Essays New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1969. 
 
Rorty, Richard. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, N. J.:  
Princeton University Press, 1979. 
 
Searle, John R. Freedom and Neurobiology: Reflections on Free Will,  
Language, and Politics of Power. New York:  Columbia  
University Press, 2004. 
 
Tiles, J. E. “Dewey’s Realism: Applying the Term ‘Mental’ in a World  
Without Within.” Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society. 
XXXI, no.1 (1995): 137-166. 
 
Williamson, Timothy. “Skepticism, Semantic Externalism, and  
Keith’s Mom.” Southern Journal of Philosophy. XXXVIII, no. 1 
(2000): 149-158. 
 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. New York: The  
Macmillan Company, 1953. 
 
 

