 Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
2212-0173 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2012.03.019
The 2012 Iberoamerican Conference on Electronics Engineering and Computer Science 
Virtual Board: A low cost Multi Touch Human Computer 
Interaction System 
Wan-Chen Leea, Dora Adriana Merino-Schettinoa, Ignacio López-Martíneza, Ruben 
Posada-Gómeza ,Ulises Juárez-Martíneza,* 
aDivision of Research and Postgraduate Studies, Instituto Tecnológico de Orizaba 94320, Veracruz, Mexico. 
 
Abstract 
Nowadays, there are new techniques to interact remotely with a computer which by hand offer an easy 
management for the users and by another hand are more interactive with them. But some devices are 
expensive, difficult to carry out. And devices as Wiimote and Webcam are low cost, easy to carry out, but 
they have problems, like bad detection of signals, instability of connection with Bluetooth. Therefore, most of 
these devices cannot support multiple contact points; however this function is becoming more and more 
useful for several applications. We propose a prototype of a system to solve these deficiencies, using a 
Webcam and infrared active markers. The developed system offers a low cost solution for human computer 
interaction with a better manipulation of multiple contact points. The case study in which uses of the device 
and active markers to manipulate is an image viewer of satellite and aerial imagery maps. 
 
© 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
Key words: remote control; infrared light; active marker; multiple contact points; image viewer 
 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel/fax: +52-272-72-57056 
E-mail addresses: leewc5689@gmail.com, dmerino@acm.org, nachouno@hotmail.com, pgruben@yahoo.com,  
 
 
               ujuarez@itorizaba.edu.mx. 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

179
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
1. Introduction 
Nowadays, the use of the computer has become more common, to support many of our daily activities, 
and every time more functionality of a computer is required to be able to control them more easily. In some 
situations such as lectures, meetings, classes and even in some areas of the industry or medicine, it is 
necessary to control the computer from some distance, here is when the evolution of the control of the 
computer with different human computer interaction devices emerges, such as the touch screen, wireless 
mouse, wireless keyboard, electronic whiteboard, electronic devices of remote control (Wiimote, Webcam, 
Kinect), among others. 
There are different techniques used on different devices Williams [1] such as the detection of infrared 
lights, colors, motion detection of the human body or detection of objects, etc. by Webcam device; electronic 
whiteboard Chuang et al. [2] using techniques like: electromagnetic blackboard, ultrasound-infrared 
blackboard, optical blackboard, among others devices. Each device and each technique has its feature, which 
will be briefly presented in this paper. 
Even if there are many different devices that use different techniques, in a broad way they can be divided 
into two concepts: active marker and passive marker. An active marker has better stability when detecting the 
signals, few failures wide workspace, etc. but mostly it is expensive; a passive marker has a low cost but is 
unstable in detecting signals. In addition, not all of these devices detected multiples contact points. Some 
applications are needed the use of multiples contact points for easier control such as maps manipulation, 
manipulation of 2D or 3D image Beverley et al. [3] where they need a more interactive with image, and not 
all the devices we mention previous can manipulate these kind of applications. 
This paper presents a prototype system of a computer remote control using the technique of infrared 
lights detection and the use of active markers; its device is a Webcam with an infrared filter to detect locations 
of multiple points of infrared lights shown by active markers (like function of multi touch, but not a normal 
multi touch, in this system means a virtual touch). The system uses as active marker, two gloves with infrared 
on index finger tip and a button on end of the middle finger using thumb to switch infrared, these active 
markers are designed by the natural movement of human hand, giving users easier manipulation.  
For the system’s testing, a case study of image viewer of satellite and aerial imagery maps is presented, 
the system can manipulate images for zoom in, zoom out, rotation, and translation and uses two active 
markers, then Webcam device finds these markers, after that the software gets the position of markers and 
shows image manipulation during the mathematical calculation. 
2. Devices for remote control  
Several devices like Kinect and Wiimote which offer technology by remote for computer can be found in 
the market, each devices use different techniques to manipulate the computer with their respective 
characteristics and limitations. 
2.1. Electronic whiteboard  
The electronic whiteboard Chuang et al. [2] is a touch screen connected to the computer and to a 
projector. It has a feature to display its interface. This kind of board operates by touching them with a pointer 
or finger (sometimes) in order to control the computer. The electronic whiteboard has been successful with 
the computer interaction, sharing information and functionalities of the computer in different areas such as: 
x Workspace: Possibility of meetings, conferences and presentations easier to share information, more 
control on the computer and better interactivity. 
x Advantages: few failures for detecting point, easy to control.  

180  
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
x Limitations: it is expensive, no all electronic whiteboard support multiple contact points, difficult to carry 
from place to place. 
x The most common technologies on the electronic whiteboard are: Electromagnetic, Ultrasound-infrared, 
Resistive and Optical 
2.3. Touch screen 
A touch screen is an input data device (tactile signals) and output data (screen); input data communicates 
and controls the remote control for the computer by touching screen’s surface. Nowadays it is common to find 
devices with touch screen, such as computers, laptops, multi-touch tables, touch tablets and mobile phones.  
x Advantages: few failures for detecting point, easy to control.  
x Limitations: Expensive, difficult to carry out (big screen), limited workspace (small screen) 
 
There are several types of touch screens, most commercial are: 
x Resistive: On touch screen surface is composed by several layers, when a user makes contact with the 
outsize layer, this layer will press together with inside layers, then causing electrical resistance and identify 
the signal. 
x Capacitive: Capacitive touch screen uses the same approach to detect changes in electric current, this has 
electronic current sensor that disposes capacitive, the sensor is altered by another capacitance field. For 
example, human’s hand or finger. 
The resistive Touch screen is cheaper then capacitive Touch screen, but it has less precision, less sensitive to 
the touch and less brightness. 
 
2.4. Interactive projector 
Interactive projector is an addition of a projector and an infrared camera together, with the purpose of getting 
the function of an electronic whiteboard without a big and heavy physical board; instead it is projected on any 
surface and is easy to carry from place to place. Using a software for calculate the position of a pointer of 
infrared light on a projected area for manipulate the computer. 
x Advantages: easy to carry out, easy to use.  
x Limitations: Expensive, only new interactive projectors support multiple contact points.   
2.5 Wiimote  
Wiimote with infrared marker: Wiimote connects with a computer by Bluetooth with an infrared pen, 
then user points it on computer interface displayed by a projector and Wiimote is setting on the way that can 
detect all the area shown by the projector, Wiimote recognizes infrared lights and returns the position of these 
lights, with this mode the computer gains control for the computer.   
x Advantages: low cost, easy to carry out, not use big space.  
x The limitations: can only work with some Bluetooth driver. 
2.5. Webcam 
There are many ways to use Webcam for remote control, here we present the most common, Webcam 

181
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
detects infrared marker, detects colors or objects and detects the movement of human body.   
x  Webcam with infrared marker: this technique is similar to Wiimote, just only change the driver of a 
Webcam and computer realize the position calculation, the Webcam should carry an infrared light’s filter 
so it only recognizes the infrared light. 
x Webcam to detect colors or objects Burke et al. [4] Jonas et al. [5]: the technique is the same as above, but 
without use the light’s filter, and in place of wearing an infrared pen take an object or specific color, and 
then the program identifies the position of that color or object. 
x  Webcam detecting the movement of human body, hands, eyes or face Agustin et al. [6]: this model 
recognizes all or part of the body, which that with a change in movement will detect the indicated point to 
reach computer remote control. 
x Advantages: low cost, easy to carry out, does  not use big space.  
x The limitations of Webcam detecting colors, objects or human body are: more failures of detection, 
workspace limited, exists interference of development colors.  
3. Passive and active markers 
The remote control devices from previous section, using different detection techniques, and each one 
requires different markers (infrared pen, human body, color, etc.) according on the device used. These 
markers can work with different devices and these can divided into 2 types depending on their techniques.    
Active markers: there are emitted signals for the devices to find them, such as infrared light bar emit the 
signal be detected by Wiimote, Wiimote will calculate location depending the intensity of light, another 
example is to use a pointer or human finger (depending on the technology used by the board) touch 
whiteboard’s area work. 
Passive markers: not emitted signal, it is reflected and waits for other devices that find them, for 
example, a Kinect device, which has a depth sensor (an infrared laser sensor projector combined with a sensor 
detecting infrared light) emits infrared light to an area and at the same time detects objects found in this area, 
the object can be a moving person, in this case the person is a passive marker, other examples of passive 
markers would be the colors, objects or the human body detected by a Webcam.   
Active markers are more robust and with fewer errors for detection of signals compared with passive 
markers, the reason is because active markers emit signals to the devices in the right time and right signals. 
However, the passive markers don’t emit signals, just expect devices find them, the devices are no able to 
receive signal correctly, confusing by environment’s interventions and may take wrong signals.  
4. Virtual board 
Virtual board is a system using device of remote control for computer, making functions like an 
electronic whiteboard, see Fig. 1, for example: drawing on virtual board using a pen from a toolbar, select 
pen’s colors from a toolbar, import images, manipulate images, save the archive, etc., but virtual board is 
without the tangible whiteboard, also can be manipulated on different flat surface. 
Our system is used with the Webcam device and two active markers (glove with infrared), it offers 
benefits like: inexpensive, easy to move, good detection of markers points, allows multiple contacts points, 
gives better functions, not sensible of color of environment, can use the virtual board on different flat surface 
not necessarily be a tangible whiteboard.  

182  
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
 
Fig. 1. Virtual board 
4.1. Active marker- glove with infrared 
There are many types of pointers, the most common is pen pointer, the reason that we don’t use a pen 
pointer is because our system allows multiple contacts points and if it uses a pen it will be difficult a user to 
hold more than one pen in each hand, therefore it is no able to use all the functions in this system. 
We designed a glove active marker thinking about natural movement of human hands, see Fig. 2, with 
purpose so the users do not feel tired their hands, easy to use. These active markers have infrared on index 
finger tip and a button on end of the middle finger use of the thumb to switch infrared, and it is planned for 
adding more infrareds on the glove and buttons to switch them, with the purpose of adding more 
functionalities, for example: add a infrared on the end of the index finger and a button to switch on two 
infrareds (the original and the new one), when switch on the two infrareds open the quick menu (like function 
of mouse left click). At the same time we considerer each person has a different hand size therefore, the 
material of gloves is elastic, to adapted different hand size, we also considered over heating so, the glove only 
covers part of the hand. 
          
 
 
Fig. 2. (a);(b) ;(c) active marker 
4.2  Device- Webcam 
The device used in this system is a Webcam that only finding infrared light, it is using a normal Webcam 
and adds an infrared light filter, to filter colors and another light. This filter can be found in a Wiimote control 
or another remote control, like television remote control. The device is low cost, with a normal Webcam, it 
can cost around $15.00 dollars, a filter of a remote control, a new remote control is cost around $3.00 dollars, 
par of glove are cost around $2.00 dollars, one IR led around $ 40 ¢, one interrupter around $ 40 ¢, one 
battery around $ 1.00 dollars, plus all these things cost around $ 21.80 dollars. This device needs use a 

183
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
projector or a screen or be direct use of a computer monitor, a projector cost around $ 800.00 dollars, but the 
user can use any projector that user have, and the screen can use any screen can connected with computer, like 
TV is not need buy a new one. Compare with other devices mention in section 2 this one is lower cost, for 
example: a electronic whiteboard cost around $1,700.00 dollars and it needs use a projector, a Interactive 
projector is cost around $2,800.00 dollars.   
4.2.1 Usability 
This system is designed for easy use for example; the connection to the Webcam is by USB only need the 
own driver provides by the Webcam, Wiimote API needs specifically Bluetooth driver and it is more work for 
the user find it and install it correctly, and it is easy to lose the connection of Wiimote and the user needs to 
connect Wiimote to Bluetooth again Williams [1]  
This system use the active marker which has fewer faults in detecting the signs, compared to the passive 
marker Burke et al. [4] and Agustin et al. [6] which may have more faults from the environment.       
 4.2.2 Grassmann law  
The system takes images captured by the device and save on array of byte with colors dates (red, green 
and blue), then calculated the gray intensity with the Grassmann law (1), when the result is bigger it is means 
the color is closer white if not it means the color is closer black. When the results are big means they are 
infrared lights.   
gray = 0.30 * (red) + 0.59 * (green) + 0.11 * (blue) 
(1) 
4.3 Image Viewer   
We developed an application to manipulate image, using two active markers and Webcam device. This 
system was written on JAVA, it works when it found two infrareds, and checks the position and distance of 
this two points, by the way to calculate their movement, when the user opens his or her hands more, that 
makes the active marker gain distance, then image viewer makes effect of zoom out and the image imported 
by user will be enlarged, otherwise when user close more his active markers, then image viewer make effect 
of zoom in and the image will be decrease. When the user moves up his hands, the system moves up image, 
when user moves down his hands, then image moves down too. In the case of rotation, when user rotates up 
or down one hand and other hand doesn’t move, then the image rotate according address that user shows.  
Here we add a time counter, if the last state and actual state of active marker is more than 1.5 seconds, 
delete the state and save the actual state like last state. This is for avoiding the problem of doing the 
manipulation doesn’t wanted by the user. 
4.3.1 Zoom in and Zoom out  
The mechanism we are using is to calculate the distance of two points with equation (2), and then is 
compare and calculate the difference between last distance and current distance. This difference in distance is 
the data for enlarge or decrease the image, see Fig. 3. 




2
2
1
2
1
2
distance 
 
x
x
 y
y
 



  
 
(2) 

184  
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
 
Fig. 3. Zoom in and Zoom out 
4.3.2 Translation  
For translating the image, we compare the last and current position (x,y), to find direction of movement, 
then change the location of image according with the direction of movement, see Fig. 4. It is important to 
mention that the image taken by Webcam is reversed from real world, and it affect the translation, when users 
want moving image to right but the image just move to left. For this detail, we calculate the real location of x 
for prevent this fault. 
      
 
Fig. 4. (a)Translated an image and; (b) change location of x. 
4.3.2 Rotation 
The rotation function is important to considerer some things, fist we calculate angle with trigonometric law 
(3). 




( )
|
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
x
x
Sin
 
 
x
x
 y
y
T

 



 
 (3) 
In this case, the angle will never be more than 90°; it cannot rotate by 360°. Therefore, we need to 
identify the location between two infrared lights for rotate by 360°, first we need to identify which is the point 
1 and which is the point 2 for calculating the correct angle.  In first time, we consider that the first point that 
computer found is point 1, and check position of point 2 according to point 1, after that, we consider the new 
point that near to last point 1 is point 1 and is same for find point 2, using (4) to obtain the angle according 
their position. 
 
                      
 
(4) 
For calculating rotation is similar to calculate zoom in and zoom out functions: obtaining the value of the 
difference between last angle and current angle, see Fig. 5.  








& &
  
0
& &
  
0
& &
  
0
& &
  
0
if x1
x2
y1
y2 angle 
 9
if x1
x2
y1
y2 angle 
9
if x1
x2
y1
y2 angle 
 27  
if x1
x2
y1
y2 angle 
27
T
T
T
T


 


!
 

!
!
 

!

 


185
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
     
 
Fig. 5. (a) Calculate the angle and (b) Calculate location of two points 
5. Case study. Image viewer of satellite and aerial imagery maps 
Finally the system was used in an aerial and satellite image to evaluate the capability to manipulate this 
kind of image, see Fig. 6. The system has the usability to control maps with 2 glove markers, just moving the 
hands in way that the user wants the maps move, and the maps response according to the hands movement. At 
this point of the research with this kind of images the system can zoom in, zoom out, translate and rotate the 
images with multi point signs in a more intuitive way compared to devices with only one point control, for 
one point control device, it needs extra buttons like zoom in, zoom out, rotate left, rotate right to manipulate 
the images. This functionality can improve the study of this kind of images because it is necessary to keep the 
image and manipulate it at the same time, so this system is an interesting tool to interact with computer in a 
more intuitive way. 
6. Conclusion and future work 
As presented in this paper, nowadays there are many options to manipulate remote control for computer, 
providing users with different devices according to their needs, achieving the goals with these techniques, also 
each device has its advantage and limitation. All devices offer to users better control for computer on different 
areas such as education, because of students interest in more interactive classes Chuang et al. [2]; Hu et al. 
[7], that increase the quality of study and learning; also at work, industry and medicine areas are relevant 
Ruvalcaba et al. [8] and Delgado et al. [9] e.g. in the work area will be easier interaction with the public in 
meetings and in videoconferencing, in medicine can help in rehabilitation.  
Nowadays, more and more applications are using multiple contact points to facilitate easier handling, but 
most of these devices are expensive.  
The purpose of the system prototype is to create a low cost system with multiple contact points 
functionality, therefore it is giving easier manipulation for users, reduces device cost and failure of signals 
detection, avoid the need for large spaces, helps users to manipulate the computer on different surfaces even 
without solid surface. This project with the advantage of low cost, easier manipulation for users will be able to 
motivate more users interested using in it. And this way can promote use it as school, make the class more 
attractive; to promote use it has an attractive presentation for the class, of work or of conference.        
As future work we are focusing on concluding the system and improve functionality like right click, 
multiple users. Also, the next step is to work on developing an application of virtual board with functions of 
an electronic whiteboard, like painting, select color for pen, erase, cut, import images, manipulate images, 
save files and add quick menu.  
 

186  
 Wan-Chen Lee et al. /  Procedia Technology  3 ( 2012 )  178 – 186 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. (a) Rotate; (b) Zoom; (c) translate 
Acknowledgements 
This work is supported by the General Council of Superior Technological Education of Mexico (DGEST). 
Additionally, this work is sponsored by the National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT). 
References 
[1]  R.C. Williams, “Finger trascking and gesture interfaceing using the nintendo wiimote” Proceedings of the 48th Annual Southeast 
Regional Conference ACM New York, NY, USA, 2010. 
[2] H.-M. Chuang, C.-C. Shen, and L.-C. Wan, “Using an interactive response system in conjunction with interactive whiteboards 
technology to enhance learning,” Fourth International Conference on Natural Computation, 2008. 
[3] Beverley Laundry, Masood Masoodian, Bill Rogers.” Interaction with 3D Models on Large Displays using 3D Input Techniques”. 
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of the NZ Chapter of the ACM Special Interest Group on Human-Computer Interaction, 
2010. 
[4] J. W. Burke, M. D. McNeill, D. K. Charles, P. J. Morrow, J. Crosbie, and S. M. McDonough., “Augmented reality games for upper-
limb stroke rehabilitation,” Second International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications, 2010. 
[5] Jonas Fredriksson, Sven Berg Ryen, Morten Fjeld. “Real-Time 3D Hand-Computer Interaction: Optimization and Complexity 
Reduction”. In Proceedings of the 5th Nordic conference on Human-computerinteraction, pages 133-141, New York, NY, USA,2008. 
[6] J. S. Agustin, H. Skovsgaard, J. P. Hansen, and D. W. Hansen, “Low-cost gaze interaction:Ready to deliver the promises,” 
Proceedings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, 2009. 
[7] G. Hu, Q. Liu, M. Chen, and C. Yu, “Design of soft whiteboard system and its application in education,” Second International 
Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling, vol. 02, 2009. 
[8] Ruvalcaba R., Delgado-Mata C., Ibanez J., “Low Cost Technologies for Measuring the Psychomotor Coordination in Children from 7 
to 11 Years”, Research in Computing Science, special issue in Advances in Computer Science and Electronic Systems, Vol. 52, 2011. 
[9] Delgado-Mata, C., Ruvalcaba-Manzano, R., Quezada-Patino, O., Gomez-Pimentel, D., Ibanez-Martinez, J., “Low cost video game 
technology to measure and improve motor skills in children”, AFRICON, 2009. AFRICON '09., pp.1-6, 23-25 Sept. 2009. 

