
Epistemology

SUNY series in Philosophy
George R. Lucas Jr., editor

Epistemology
An Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge
Nicholas Rescher
State University of New York

Published by
State University of New York Press, Albany
© 2003 State University of New York
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever
without written permission. No part of this book may be stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means including electronic,
electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise
without the prior permission in writing of the publisher.
For information, address State University of New York Press,
90 State Street, Suite 700, Albany, NY 12207
Production by Michael Haggett
Marketing by Anne M. Valentine
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rescher, Nicholas.
Epistemology : an introduction to the theory of knowledge / Nicholas
Rescher.
p. cm. — (SUNY series in philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7914-5811-3 (alk. paper) — ISBN 0-7914-5812-1 (pbk. : alk.
paper)
1. Knowledge, Theory of.
I. Title.
II. Series
BD161R477
2003
121—dc21
2003057270
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

v
Contents
Preface
xi
Introduction
xiii
KNOWLEDGE AND ITS PROBLEMS
Chapter 1:
Modes of Knowledge
3
IS KNOWLEDGE TRUE JUSTIFIED BELIEF?
3
MODES OF (PROPOSITIONAL) KNOWLEDGE
7
OTHER BASIC PRINCIPLES
10
Chapter 2:
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
15
PROBLEMS OF METAKNOWLEDGE
16
THE PREFACE PARADOX
19
THE DIALLELUS
22
AN APORY AND ITS RECONCILIATION:
K-DESTABILIZATION
23
COSTS AND BENEFITS
26
MORE ON FALLIBILISM
27
THE COMPARATIVE FRAGILITY OF SCIENCE:
SCIENTIFIC CLAIMS AS MERE ESTIMATES
30
FALLIBILISM AND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN
OUR (PUTATIVE) TRUTH AND THE REAL TRUTH
34
Chapter 3:
Skepticism and Its Deficits
37
THE SKEPTIC’S “NO CERTAINTY” ARGUMENT
37
THE ROLE OF CERTAINTY
39
THE CERTAINTY OF LOGIC VERSUS
THE CERTAINTY OF LIFE
41

PRAGMATIC INCONSISTENCY
42
SKEPTICISM AND RISK
45
RATIONALITY AND COGNITIVE RISK
49
THE ECONOMIC DIMENSION: COSTS AND BENEFITS
53
THE DEFICIENCY OF SKEPTICISM
56
Chapter 4:
Epistemic Justification in a Functionalistic and 
Naturalistic Perspective
61
EXPERIENCE AND FACT
61
PROBLEMS OF COMMON-CAUSE EPISTEMOLOGY
62
MODES OF JUSTIFICATION
64
THE EVOLUTIONARY ASPECT OF SENSORY EPISTEMOLOGY
68
RATIONAL VERSUS NATURAL SELECTION
69
AGAINST “PURE” INTELLECTUALISM
74
THE PROBLEM OF ERROR
76
CONCLUSION
78
Chapter 5:
Plausibility and Presumption
81
THE NEED FOR PRESUMPTIONS
81
THE ROLE OF PRESUMPTION
85
PLAUSIBILITY AND PRESUMPTION
87
PRESUMPTION AND PROBABILITY
90
PRESUMPTION AND SKEPTICISM
92
HOW PRESUMPTION WORKS: WHAT JUSTIFIES
PRESUMPTIONS
96
Chapter 6:
Trust and Cooperation in Pragmatic Perspective
101
THE COST EFFECTIVENESS OF SHARING AND COOPERATING
IN INFORMATION ACQUISITION AND MANAGEMENT
101
THE ADVANTAGES OF COOPERATION
103
BUILDING UP TRUST: AN ECONOMIC APPROACH
104
TRUST AND PRESUMPTION
106
A COMMUNITY OF INQUIRERS
108
RATIONAL INQUIRY AND THE QUEST FOR TRUTH
Chapter 7:
Foundationalism and Coherentism
113
HIERARCHICAL SYSTEMIZATION: THE EUCLIDEAN
MODEL OF KNOWLEDGE
113
CYCLIC SYSTEMIZATION: THE NETWORK MODEL—
AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE EUCLIDEAN MODEL
118
vi
Contents

THE CONTRAST BETWEEN FOUNDATIONALISM
AND COHERENTISM
123
PROBLEMS OF FOUNDATIONALISM
128
Chapter 8:
The Pursuit of Truth: Coherentist Criteriology
131
THE COHERENTIST APPROACH TO INQUIRY
131
THE CENTRAL ROLE OF DATA FOR A COHERENTIST
TRUTH-CRITERIOLOGY
135
ON VALIDATING THE COHERENCE APPROACH
139
IDEAL COHERENCE
145
TRUTH AS AN IDEALIZATION
147
Chapter 9:
Cognitive Relativism and Contexualism
151
COGNITIVE REALISM
152
WHAT’S WRONG WITH RELATIVISM
154
THE CIRCUMSTANTIAL CONTEXTUALISM OF REASON
155
A FOOTHOLD OF ONE’S OWN: THE PRIMACY OF OUR
OWN POSITION
159
THE ARBITRAMENT OF EXPERIENCE
161
AGAINST RELATIVISM
165
CONTEXTUALISTIC PLURALISM IS COMPATIBLE WITH
COMMITMENT ON PURSUING “THE TRUTH”
168
THE ACHILLES’ HEEL OF RELATIVISM
170
Chapter 10:
The Pragmatic Rationale of Cognitive Objectivity 
173
OBJECTIVITY AND THE CIRCUMSTANTIAL UNIVERSITY
OF REASON
173
THE BASIS OF OBJECTIVITY
175
THE PROBLEM OF VALIDATING OBJECTIVITY
177
WHAT IS RIGHT WITH OBJECTIVISM
180
ABANDONING OBJECTIVITY IS PRAGMATICALLY
SELF-DEFEATING
182
Chapter 11:
Rationality
187
STAGE-SETTING FOR THE PROBLEM
187
OPTIMUM-INSTABILITY
188
IDEAL VERSUS PRACTICAL RATIONALITY: THE
PREDICAMENT OF REASON
190
THE PROBLEM OF VALIDATING RATIONALITY
193
THE PRAGMATIC TURN: EVEN COGNITIVE
RATIONALITY HAS A PRAGMATIC RATIONALE
196
Contents
vii

ALTERNATIVE MODES OF RATIONALITY?
198
THE SELF-RELIANCE OF RATIONALITY IS NOT
VICIOUSLY CIRCULAR
203
COGNITIVE PROGRESS
Chapter 12:
Scientific Progress
209
THE EXPLORATION MODEL OF SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY
210
THE DEMAND FOR ENHANCEMENT
211
TECHNOLOGICAL ESCALATION: AN ARMS RACE
AGAINST NATURE
212
THEORIZING AS INDUCTIVE PROJECTION
215
LATER NEED NOT BE LESSER
217
COGNITIVE COPERNICANISM
221
THE PROBLEM OF PROGRESS
223
Chapter 13:
The Law of Logarithmic Returns and the 
Complexification of Natural Science
229
THE PRINCIPLE OF LEAST EFFORT AND THE
METHODOLOGICAL STATUS OF SIMPLICITY-PREFERENCE
IN SCIENCE
230
COMPLEXIFICATION
234
THE EXPANSION OF SCIENCE
239
THE LAW OF LOGARITHMIC RETURNS
240
THE RATIONALE AND IMPLICATIONS OF THE LAW
OF LOGARITHMIC RETURNS
245
THE GROWTH OF KNOWLEDGE
248
THE DECELERATION OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS
251
PREDICTIVE IMPLICATIONS OF THE INFORMATION/
KNOWLEDGE RELATIONSHIP
253
THE CENTRALITY OF QUALITY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
254
Chapter 14:
The Imperfectability of Knowledge: Knowledge as 
Boundless
257
CONDITIONS OF PERFECTED SCIENCE
257
THEORETICAL ADEQUACY: ISSUES OF EROTETIC
COMPLETENESS
259
PRAGMATIC COMPLETENESS
262
PREDICTIVE COMPLETENESS
264
TEMPORAL FINALITY
267
viii
Contents

“PERFECTED SCIENCE” AS AN IDEALIZATION THAT
AFFORDS A USEFUL CONTRAST CONCEPTION
271
THE DISPENSABILITY OF PERFECTION
274
COGNITIVE LIMITS AND THE QUEST FOR TRUTH
Chapter 15:
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
279
EXPLAINING THE POSSIBILITY OF NATURAL SCIENCE
279
“OUR” SIDE
282
NATURE’S SIDE
284
SYNTHESIS
287
IMPLICATIONS
289
Chapter 16:
Human Science as Characteristically Human
293
THE POTENTIAL DIVERSITY OF “SCIENCE”
293
THE ONE WORLD, ONE SCIENCE ARGUMENT
297
A QUANTITATIVE PERSPECTIVE
299
COMPARABILITY AND JUDGMENTS OF RELATIVE
ADVANCEMENT OR BACKWARDNESS
305
BASIC PRINCIPLES
308
Chapter 17:
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
315
CONCRETE VERSUS GENERIC KNOWLEDGE AND
IGNORANCE
316
EROTETIC INCAPACITY
317
DIVINE VERSUS MUNDANE KNOWLEDGE
318
ISSUES OF TEMPORALIZED KNOWLEDGE
319
KANT’S PRINCIPLE OF QUESTION EXFOLIATION
321
COGNITIVE INCAPACITY
323
INSOLUBILIA THEN AND NOW
324
COGNITIVE INCAPACITY
325
IDENTIFYING INSOLUBILIA
327
RELATING KNOWLEDGE TO IGNORANCE
329
POSTSCRIPT: A COGNITIVELY INDETERMINATE
UNIVERSE
330
Chapter 18:
Cognitive Realism
333
EXISTENCE
334
IS MAN THE MEASURE?
335
REALISM AND INCAPACITY
337
Contents
ix

THE COGNITIVE OPACITY OF REAL THINGS
339
THE COGNITIVE INEXHAUSTIBILITY OF THINGS
341
THE CORRIGIBILITY OF CONCEPTIONS
343
THE COGNITIVE INEXHAUSTIBILITY OF THINGS
344
COGNITIVE DYNAMICS
345
CONCEPTUAL BASIS OF REALISM AS A POSTULATE
347
HIDDEN DEPTHS: THE IMPETUS TO REALISM
352
THE PRAGMATIC FOUNDATION OF REALISM AS A BASIS
FOR COMMUNICATION AND DISCOURSE
355
THE IDEALISTIC ASPECT OF METAPHYSICAL REALISM
360
SCIENCE AND REALITY
361
Notes
369
Index
403
x
Contents

xi
PREFACE
This book is based on work in epistemology extending over several
decades. It combines into a systematic whole ideas, arguments, and doctrines
evolved in various earlier investigations. The time has at last seemed right to
combine these deliberations into a single systematic whole and this book is the
result.
Philosophers are sometimes heard to say that the present is a post-episte-
mological era and that epistemology is dead. But this is rubbish. If the time
ever came when people ceased to care for epistemological questions—as illus-
trated by the topics treated in the present book—it would not be just episte-
mology that has expired but human curiosity itself.
I am grateful to Estelle Burris for her competence and patience in putting
this material into a form where it can meet the printer’s needs.
Nicholas Rescher
Pittsburgh
March 2002

This page intentionally left blank.

xiii
Introduction
The mission of epistemology, the theory of knowledge, is to clarify what the
conception of knowledge involves, how it is applied, and to explain why it has
the features it does. And the idea of knowledge at issue here must, in the first in-
stance at least, be construed in its modest sense to include also belief, conjecture,
and the like. For it is misleading to call cognitive theory at large “epistemology”
or “the theory of knowledge.” Its range of concern includes not only knowledge
proper but also rational belief, probability, plausibility, evidentiation and—addi-
tionally but not least—erotetics, the business of raising and resolving questions.
It is this last area—the theory of rational inquiry with its local concern for ques-
tions and their management—that constitutes the focus of the present book. Its
aim is to maintain and substantiate the utility of approaching epistemological is-
sues from the angle of questions. As Aristotle already indicated, human inquiry
is grounded in wonder. When matters are running along in their accustomed
way, we generally do not puzzle about it and stop to ask questions. But when
things are in any way out of the ordinary we puzzle over the reason why and seek
for an explanation. And gradually our horizons expand. With increasing sophis-
tication, we learn to be surprised by virtually all of it. We increasingly want to
know what makes things tick—the ordinary as well as the extraordinary, so that
questions gain an increasing prominence within epistemology in general.
Any profitable discussion of knowledge does well to begin by recognizing
some basic linguistic facts about how the verb to know and its cognates actually
function in the usual range of relevant discourse. For if one neglects these facts
one is well en route to “changing the subject” to talk about something different
from that very conception that must remain at the center of our concern. It would
clearly be self-defeating to turn away from knowledge as we in fact conceive and
discuss it and deal with some sort of so-called knowledge different from that
whose elucidation is the very reason for being so such a theory. If a philosophical
analysis is to elucidate a conception that is in actual use, it has no choice but to
address itself to that usage and conform to its actual characteristics.
The first essential step is to recognize that “to know” has both a proposi-
tional and a procedural sense: there is the intellectual matter of “knowing that

something or other is the case” (that-knowledge) and the practical matter of
knowing how to perform some action and to go about realizing some end
(how-to-knowledge).This distinction is crucial because only the former, intel-
lectual and propositional mode of knowledge has generally been the focus of
attention in traditional philosophical epistemology, rather than the latter,
practical and performatory mode. We shall accordingly focus here on specifi-
cally propositional knowledge—that sort of knowledge which is at issue in lo-
cutions to the effect that someone knows something-or-other to be the case
(“x knows that p”).
The terminology at issue generally so operates that in flatly saying that “X
knows that p” one not only gives a report about X ’s cognitive posture, but also
endorses the proposition P that is at issue. To disengage oneself from this com-
mitment one must say something like, “X thinks (or is convinced) that he
knows that p.” In the present discussion, however, it will be just this latter sort
of thing—apparent or purported knowledge—that is under consideration.
Knowledge claims can be regarded from two points of view, namely, inter-
nally and committally, subject to an acceptance thereof as correct and authentic,
and externally and detachedly, viewed from an “epistemic distance” without the
commitment of actual acceptance, and seen as merely representing purported
knowledge. We shall here adopt this second perspective, viewing knowledge in
an externalized way, so that we shall be dealing with ostensible knowledge rather
than certifiedly authentic knowledge. Our concern is with the merely putative
knowledge of fallible flesh-and-blood humans and not the capital-K Knowl-
edge of an omniscient being.
There is a wide variety of cognitive involvements: one can know, believe or
accept (disbelieve or reject), conjecture or surmise or suspect, imagine or think
about, assume or suppose, deem likely or unlikely, and so on. And there is also a
wide variety of cognitive performances: realizing, noticing, remembering,
wondering—and sometimes also their negatives: ignoring, forgetting, and so on.
All of these cognitive circumstances belong to “the theory of knowledge”—to
epistemology broadly speaking, which accordingly extends far beyond the do-
main of knowledge as such. But knowledge lies at the center of the range, and as
the very expression indicates, the “theory of knowledge” focuses on knowledge.
The conception of “knowledge” itself represents a flexible and internally
diversified idea. In general terms, it relates to the way in which persons can be
said to have access to correct information. This can, of course, occur in rather
different ways, so that there are various significantly distinguishable sorts of
knowledge in terms of the kind of thing that is at issue:
1.
Knowledge-that something or other is the case (i.e., knowledge of
facts). Examples: I know that Paris is the capital of France. I know
that 2 plus 2 is 4.
2.
Adverbial knowledge. Examples: Knowing what, when, how, why, and
so forth.
xiv
Introduction

3.
Knowledge by acquaintance with individuals or things. Examples: I
know Jones. I know the owner of that car.
4.
Performatory (or “how-to”) knowledge. Examples: I know how to ice
skate. I know how to swim.
Traditionally epistemology, the theory of knowledge, has focused on
knowledge of the first type, propositional or factual knowledge of the sort
where “I know that bears are mammals” is paradigmatic. However, the present
book culminates in prioritizing the fourth sort of knowledge. It portrays the
pivotal use in practical terms, pivoting on the question of how we go about the
business of inquiry—of securing tenable answers to our questions.
As long as we are concerned merely with what we know, the idea of lim-
its of knowledge lies outside our ken. We cannot be specific about our igno-
rance in terms of knowledge: It makes no sense to say “p is a fact that I do not
know” for if we know something in specific to be a fact we can, for that very
reason, no longer be in ignorance about it. However, “Q is a question that I
cannot answer” poses no difficulty. It is thus only when we turn to ques-
tions—when we ask whether or not something is so in situations where we
simply cannot say—that we come up against the idea of limits to knowledge.
Only as we come to realize that there are questions that we cannot answer
does the reality of ignorance confront us. Accordingly, questions are episte-
mologically crucial because it is in their context that matters of unknowing—
also come to the fore. After all, we need information to remove ignorance and
settle doubt, and “our knowledge” is constituted by the answers that we ac-
cept. What people know—or take themselves to know—is simply the sum
total of the answers they offer to the questions they can resolve.
Propositional knowledge is coordinate with the capacity to answer ques-
tions, above all, in the case of knowledge-that-p, being in a position correctly
and appropriately to answer the question: “Is p true or not?” And it is this sort
of knowledge that will in the main, be at the focus of concern in the present
discussion because there is good reason for seeing it as basic to all modes of
knowledge in general. This sort of knowledge can further be classified
•
by subject matter (as per mathematical or botanical knowledge)
•
by source (personal observation, reliable reportage, etc.) 
•
by mode of justification or validation (personal or vicarious experience,
scientific investigation, mathematical calculation, etc.)
•
by the cognitive status of the matters at issue (empirical facts, conven-
tion in linguistic matters, formal relationships in logic or mathematics)
•
by mode of formulation (verbally, by pictograms, by mathematical
symbolism, etc.)
But what is propositional knowledge? It is emphatically not an activity or
performance. You cannot answer the question “What are you doing?” with the
Introduction
xv

response “I am knowing that Paris is the capital of France,” any more than you
could say “I am owning this watch” or “I am liking roses.” Knowing a fact is not
something that one does; it is a condition one has come to occupy in relation to
information. It is not the process (buying, being inaugurated) but the end-state
(owning, being president) in which a process culminates. To know something,
then, is not to be engaged in an activity but to have entered into a certain con-
dition—a cognitive condition. In sum, propositional knowledge is a cognitive
affair—a condition of things coordinate with a suitable relationship between
people and facts. And it is this aspect of knowledge that will primarily concern
us here.
The fundamental features of propositional knowledge are inherent in the
modus operandi of knowledge discourse—in the very way in which language gets
used in this connection. The following three features are salient in this regard:
1.
Truth Commitment. Only the truth can be known. If someone
knows that p then p must be true. It simply makes no sense to say “I
know that p, but it might not be true.” or “X knows that p but it
might not be true.” Only if one accepts p as true can one say of
someone that they know that p. If one is not prepared to accept that
p then one cannot say that someone knows it. Otherwise one has to
withdraw the claim that actual knowledge is at issue and rest content
with saying that the individual thinks or believes that he know that p.
2.
Grounding. Knowledge must be appropriately grounded. A person
may accept something without a reason but cannot then be said to
know it. It makes no sense to say “X knows that p, but has no suffi-
cient grounds for thinking so.” Knowledge is not just a matter of be-
lief—or indeed even of correct belief—but of rationally appropriate
belief. Guesswork, conjecture, and so on are not a sufficient basis for
what deserves to be characterized as knowledge.
3.
Reflexivity. To attribute a specific item of propositional knowledge
to someone else is ipso facto to claim it for oneself. It makes no sense
to say “You know that p, but I don’t.” Of course one can be generic
about it: “You know various things that I don’t.” But one cannot be
specific about it and identify these items. To characterize such an
item as knowledge is to assert one’s own entitlement to it.
4.
Coherence. Since all items of propositional knowledge must be true,
they must in consequence be collectively coherent. It cannot be that
x knows that p but that y knows that not-p. Since we are committed
to the principle that the truth is consistent, the truth-commitment
of knowledge demands its consistency.
Knowledge development is a practice that we humans pursue because we
have a need for its products. Life is full of questions that must be answered.
xvi
Introduction

(Will that bridge hold up? Is that food safe?) The cognitive project is accord-
ingly a deeply practical endeavor, irrespective of whatever purely theoretical
interest may attach to its products.
For sure, knowledge brings great benefits.The relief of ignorance is foremost
among them. We have evolved within nature into the ecological niche of an in-
telligent being. In consequence, the need for understanding, for “knowing one’s
way about,” is one of the most fundamental demands of the human condition.
Man is Homo quaerens. The need for knowledge is part and parcel to our nature.
A deep-rooted demand for information and understanding presses in on us, and
we have little choice but to satisfy it. Once the ball is set rolling it keeps on under
its own momentum—far beyond the limits of strictly practical necessity.
Knowledge is a situational imperative for us humans to acquire informa-
tion about the world. Homo sapiens is a creature that must, by its very nature,
feel cognitively at home in the world. The requirement for information, for
cognitive orientation within our environment, is as pressing a human need as
that for food itself. The basic human urge to make sense of things is a charac-
teristic aspect of our makeup—we cannot live a satisfactory life in an environ-
ment we do not understand. For us intelligent creatures, cognitive orientation
is itself a practical need: cognitive disorientation is physically stressful and dis-
tressing. As William James observed: “It is of the utmost practical importance
to an animal that he should have prevision of the qualities of the objects that
surround him.”1
However, not only is knowledge indispensably useful for our practice but
the reverse is the case as well. Knowledge development is itself a practice and
various practical processes and perspectives are correspondingly useful—or
even necessary—to the way in which we go about constituting and validating
our knowledge. Expounding such a praxis-oriented approach to knowledge
development is one of the prime tasks of this book. Its principal thesis is that
we have not only the (trivial) circumstance that knowledge is required for
effective practice, but also the reverse, that practical and pragmatic consider-
ations are crucially at work in the way in which human knowledge comes to
be secured.
Introduction
xvii

This page intentionally left blank.

Part I
Knowledge and Its Problems

This page intentionally left blank.

3
Chapter 1
Modes of Knowledge
SYNOPSIS
•
The traditional idea that knowledge is true justified belief requires both
clarification and qualification.
•
Propositional knowledge is subject to various distinctions, among which
that between explicit and inferential knowledge and that between occur-
rent and dispositional knowledge are particularly prominent.
•
When “knowledge” is construed as inferentially accessible knowledge, it
becomes possible to construct what can plausibly be seen as a “logic” of
knowledge.
IS KNOWLEDGE TRUE JUSTIFIED BELIEF?
It is something of an oversimplification to say the knowledge involves belief.
For one thing, believing is sometimes contrasted with knowing as a somewhat
weaker cousin. (“I don’t just believe that, I know it.”) And there are other con-
trast locutions as well. (“I know we won the lottery, but still can’t quite get my-
self to believe it.”) Still in one of the prime senses of belief—that of acceptance,
of commitment to the idea that something or other is so—the knowledge of
matters of fact does require an acceptance that is either actual and overt or at
least a matter of tacit implicit commitment to accept.
Various epistemologists have sought to characterize knowledge as true justi-
fied belief.1 In his widely discussed 1963 article, Edmund Gettier followed up on

suggestions of Bertrand Russell by offering two sorts of counterexamples against
this view of knowledge as consisting of beliefs that are both true and justified.
Counterexample 1
Let it be that:
1.
X believes p
2.
p is true
3.
X has justification for believing p, for example, because it
follows logically from something—say q—that he also be-
lieves, although in fact
4.
q is false.
Here X clearly has justification for believing p, since by hypothesis thus
follows logically from something that he believes. Accordingly, p is a true, jus-
tified belief. Nevertheless, we would certainly not want to say that X knows that
p, seeing that his (only) grounds for believing it are false.
To concretize this schematic situation let it be that:
1.
X believes that Smith is in London (which is false since Smith is
actually in Manchester).
2.
Smith’s being in London entails that Smith is in England (which
conclusion is indeed true since Smith is in Manchester).
3.
X believes that Smith is in England (because he believes him to be in
London).
That Smith is in England is accordingly a belief of X ’s that is both true and for
which X has justification. Nevertheless we would clearly not want to say that X
knows that Smith is in England, since his (only) reason for accepting this is
something quite false.
The lesson that emerges here is that knowledge is not simply a matter of
having a true belief that is somehow justified, but rather that knowledge calls for
having a true belief that is appropriately justified. For the problem that the
counterexample clearly indicates is that in this case the grounds that lead the
individuals to adopt the belief just do not suffice to assure that which is be-
lieved. Its derivation from a false belief is emphatically not an appropriate jus-
tification for a belief.
Counterexample 2
Let it be that:
1.
X believes p-or-q.
2.
q is true (and consequently p-or-q is also true).
4
Knowledge and Its Problems

3.
X disbelieves q.
4.
X believes p-or-q, but does so (only) because he believes p.
5.
p is false.
Here p-or-q is true. And X has justification for believing p-or-q since it follows
from p which he believes. And since p-or-q is true—albeit in virtue of q’s being
true (when X actually disbelieves)—it follows that p-or-q is a true, justified be-
lief of X’s. Nevertheless, in the circumstances we would certainly not say that X
knows that p-or-q, seeing that his sole grounds for believing it is once more
something that is false.
The difficulty here is that X holds the belief p-or-q which is justified for X
because it follows from X’s (false) belief that p, but is true just because q is true
(which X altogether rejects).
To concretize this situation let it be that:
1.
X believes that Jefferson succeeded America’s first president, George
Washington, as president
2.
X accordingly believes that Jefferson or Adams was the second
American president, although he thinks that Adams was the third
president.
3.
Since Adams was in fact the second American president, X’s belief
that Jefferson or Adams was the second American president is in-
deed true
So X’s (2)-belief is indeed both true and justified. Nevertheless we would cer-
tainly not say that X knows this since his grounds for holding this belief are
simply false. However, maintaining that knowledge is constituted by true and
appropriately justified belief would once again resolve the problem, seeing that
a belief held on the basis of falsehoods can clearly not count as appropriate.The
difficulty is that the grounds on which the belief is held will in various cases
prove insufficient to establish the belief ’s truth. And this blocks a merely con-
junctive conception that knowledge is a matter of belief that is both true and
justifiably adopted. But this problem is precluded by the adjectival conception
of knowledge as belief that is at once correct and appropriately seen to be so, so
that truth and justification are not separable but blended and conflated.
What is critical for knowledge attribution is that the believer’s grounds for
the particular belief at issue endorsed by the attributor as well.2 When one says
“A truth is known when it is a justified belief ” one is not (or should not) take
the line that it is believed and (somehow) justified, but rather that it is justifiedly
believed in that the belief ’s rationale is flawless. The basic idea is that there can
be no problem in crediting x with knowledge of p if:
X believes p on grounds sufficient to guarantee its truth and realizes
this to be the case.
Modes of Knowledge
5

And so, the crucial point is that when knowledge is characterized as being
true justified belief one has to construe justification in a complex, two-sided
way because that belief must be accepted by its believer
•
on grounds that he deems adequate
and moreover
•
these grounds must be that we (the attributers of the belief) endorse
by way of deeming them adequate as well.
The “subjective” justification of the attributee must be satisfied by the “objec-
tive” justification of the attributor if an attribution of knowledge is to be viable.
This line of consideration brings to light the inadequacy of cognitive con-
clusion: the view that knowledge is belief that is caused in the proper way. Be-
cause here “proper way” means proper as we (the attributors) see it, which may
fail to be how the holder of that true belief sees it. (Those belief-engendering
causes may fail to correspond to his actual cognitive grounds or reasons for
holding the belief.)
And much the same is true of reliabilism: the view that knowledge is
belief produced by a reliable process. For this reliability again holds for that
attributer’s view of the matter and its issuing from that reliable process 
may not in fact be the believer’s own ground for holding the belief. (Causes
can only provide reasons when their confirmatory operation is correctly rec-
ognized.)
So much for what is at issue with someone’s actually knowing a fact. But of
course here, as elsewhere, there is a distinction between (1) something actually
being so, and (2) having adequate grounds for claiming that it is so. And the for-
mer (actually being) always goes beyond the latter (having adequate grounds).
We can have good reason for seeing our belief grounds as flawless even when
this is actually not the case. In cognitive matters as elsewhere we must reckon
with the prospect of unpleasant surprises. The prospect of error is pervasive in
human affairs—cognition included.
Consider the issue from another angle. It is part of the truth conditions for
the claim that something is an apple—a necessary condition for its being so—
that was grown on an apple tree, that it contains seeds, and that it not turn into
a frog if immersed in a bowl of water for 100 days. And yet many is the time we
call something an apple without checking up in these things. The use condition
for establishment to call something an apple are vastly more lenient. If it looks
like an apple, feels like an apple should, and smells like an apple, then that is
quite good enough.
And the same sort of thing also holds for knowledge (or for certainty).The
truth conditions here are very demanding. But the use conditions that author-
6
Knowledge and Its Problems

ize responsible employment of the term in normal discourse are a great deal
more relaxed.
Actually, to have knowledge is one sort of thing, something that goes well
beyond is required for its being the case that you or I have adequate grounds for
claiming that it is the case. With claims appropriate, assurance of all sorts stops
well short of guaranteeing actual truth. And this is so with our subjectively jus-
tified knowledge claims as well.
It is important in this regard to note that one of the basic ground rules of
(defeasible) presumption in the cognitive domain inheres in the rule of thumb
that people’s conventionally justified beliefs are true—where “conventional justifi-
cation” is constituted by the usual sorts of ground (“taking oneself to see it to be
so,” etc.) on which people standardly base their knowledge claims. And so
whenever this groundrule comes into play the preceding formula that true jus-
tified beliefs constitute knowledge becomes redundant and knowledge comes
to be viewed simply as appropriately justified belief where appropriateness may
stop short of full-fledged theoretical adequacy. However what is at issue here
is accordingly not a truth of general principle: it is no more than a principle of
practical procedure which—as we fully recognize—may well fail to work out in
particular cases.
Use conditions are geared to the world’s operational realities. They bear
not on what must invariably be in some necessitarian manner, but on what is
usually and normally the case. And here—in the realm of the general rule, the
ordinary course of things—it is perfectly acceptable to say that “knowledge is
true justified belief.” For ordinarily subjective and objective warrant stand in
alignment. Those cases where knowledge fails to accompany true and (subjec-
tively) justified belief all represent unusual (abnormal, nonstandard) situations.
The practical justification of the principle at issue is nevertheless substan-
tial. For in our own case, at any rate, we have no choice but to presume our con-
scientiously held beliefs to be true. The injunction “Tell me what is true in the
matter independently of what you genuinely believe to be true” is one that we
cannot but regard as absurd. And the privilege we claim for ourselves here is
one that we are pragmatically well advised to extent to others as well. For un-
less we are prepared to presume that their beliefs too generally represent the
truth of the matter one cannot derive information from them. An important
principle of practical procedure is at issue. In failing to extend the credit of cre-
dence to others we would deny ourselves the prospect of extending our knowl-
edge by drawing on theirs.3
MODES OF (PROPOSITIONAL) KNOWLEDGE
When one speaks of “belief ” in matters of knowledge one has in view what a
person stands committed to accepting by way of propositional (“it is the case
Modes of Knowledge
7

that”) contentions. Knowledge is not an activity—mental or otherwise. Nor is
knowing a psychological process. What is at issue here is not a matter of a
mode of action or activity. The question “What are you doing?” cannot be an-
swered by saying “I am knowing that Paris is the capital of France.” This is
something you may be thinking about or wondering about, but it is not some-
thing you can be knowing. The verb “to know” admits of no present continu-
ous: one cannot be engaged in knowing. We can ascribe knowledge without
knowing what goes on in people’s heads (let alone in their brains). To know
something is a matter not of process but of product.
To realize that Columbus knew that wood can float I do not have to 
probe into the complex of thought processes he conducted in Italian or Span-
ish or whatever—let alone into his brain processes. Knowledge in the sense a
issue here is a matter of a relation being held to obtain between a person and 
a proposition, and will in general have the format Kxp (“x knows that p”). Like
owning or owing, knowing is a state: a condition into which one has entered.
It is not an action one does or an activity in which one engages. (Those
philosophers who do or have spoken of “the act of knowing” talk gibberish.) In-
stead what is at issue is a state or condition, namely the sate or condition of a
person who stands in a certain sort of relationship—a cognitive relationship—
to a fact.
What is this relationship like? Here it is both useful and important to dis-
tinguish between explicit, dispositional, and inferential knowledge.
Explicit knowledge is a matter of what we can adduce on demand, so to
speak. It takes two principal forms:
•
Occurrent knowledge.
This is a matter of actively paying heed or at-
tention to accepted information. A person can say: “I am (at this very
moment) considering or attending to or otherwise taking note of the
fact that hydrogen is the lightest element.” The present evidence of
our senses—“I am looking at the cat on the mat”—is also an example
of this sort of thing where what is claimed as knowledge is geared to
circumvent cognitive activity.
•
Dispositional knowledge.
This is a matter of what people would say
or think if the occasion arose—of what, for example, they would say
if asked. Even when X is reading Hamlet or, for that matter, sleeping,
we would say that an individual knows (in the presently relevant dis-
positional manner) that Tokyo is the capital of Japan. Here those
items of knowledge can automatically be rendered occurrent by suit-
able stimuli.
Inferential knowledge, by contrast, is (potentially) something more remote.
It is something deeply latent and tacit, not a matter of what one can produce on
demand, but of what one would produce if only one were clever enough about
8
Knowledge and Its Problems

exploiting one’s occurrent and dispositional knowledge. We understand un-
problematically what that means, namely—he must think, reflect, try to re-
member, exert some intellectual effort and patience. Inferential knowledge is a
matter of exploiting one’s noninferential (occurent or dispositional) knowledge.
It is the sort of extracted knowledge that heeds materials to work out—grist to
its mill. Since it is transformative rather than generative, there can be no infer-
ential outputs in the absence of noninferential inputs. (This, of course, is not to
say that it cannot be new—or even surprising in bringing previously unrecog-
nizable relationships to light.)
What an individual himself is in a position to infer from known facts are
facts he also knows
if Kxp and Kx(p  q), then Kxq.
Here Kxp abbreviates “x knows that p.”) This sort of inferential knowledge
is a matter of what the individual does—or by rights should—derive from
what is known. It is this feature of knowledge—its accessibility that provides
for the inferential construal of the idea that is at work in these deliberations.
For our concern in epistemology is less with the impersonal question of what
people do accept than with the normative question of what, in the circum-
stances, it is both appropriate and practicable for them to accept. Thus in at-
tributing knowledge we look not only to the information that people have in
a more or less explicit way but also to what they are bound to be able to infer
from this.
This points toward the still more liberal conception of what might be
called available knowledge, which turns on not what the individual themselves
can derive from their knowledge but on what we can derive from it, so that
something is “known” in this sense whenever (∃q)(Kxq & q  p). We arrive here
at a disjunctive specification of fundamentally recursive nature:
X knows that p iff (i) X knows p occurrently, or (ii) X knows p dispo-
sitionally, or (iii) p can be inferentially derived by using only those
facts that X knows.
The “logical omniscience” of the consequences of what one knows is a charac-
terizing feature of this particualr (and overly generous) conception of knowl-
edge. K* is thus radically different from K.
Since one of our main concerns will be with the limits of knowledge, it will
be of some interest to see if there are things not known even in this particularly
generous sense of the term that is at issue with available knowledge. In general,
however, it will be the more standard and received sense of accessible knowledge
that will concern us here.
Modes of Knowledge
9

OTHER BASIC PRINCIPLES
Accessible knowledge involves its holder in acceptance (endorsement, sub-
scription, credence, belief, etc.). To accept a contention is to espouse and en-
dorse it, to give it credence, to view it as an established fact, to take it to be able
to serve as a (true) premiss in one’s thinking and as a suitable basis for one’s ac-
tions.4 And a person cannot be said to know that something is the case when
this individual is not prepared to “accept” it in this sort of way. And accordingly,
the claim “x knows that p” is only tenable when x holds p to be the case. It is
senseless to say “x knows that p,” but he does not really believe it or “x knows
that p, but does not stand committed to accepting it.”5
Accordingly, one cannot be said to know something if this is not true.6 Let
“Kxp” abbreviate “x knows that p.” It than transpires that we have:
•
The Veracity Principle
If Kxp, then p.
This relation between “x knows that p” and “p is true” is a necessary link that
obtains ex vi terminorum. Knowledge must be veracious:The truth of p is a pre-
supposition of its knowability: if p were not true, we would (ex hypothesi) have
no alternative (as a matter of the “logic” of the conceptual situation) to with-
draw the claim that somebody know p.
Some writers see the linkage between knowledge and truth as a merely
contingent one.7 But such a view inflicts violence on the concept of knowledge
as it actually operates in our discourse. The locution “x knows that p, but it is
not true that p” is senseless. One would have to say “x thinks he knows that p,
but . . .” When even the mere possibility of the falsity of something that one ac-
cepts comes to light, the knowledge claim must be withdrawn; it cannot be as-
serted flatly, but must be qualified in some such qualified way as “While I don’t
actually know that p, I am virtually certain that it is so.”
Knowledge veracity straightaway assures knowledge consistency. If some-
one knows something, then no one knows anything inconsistent with it.
•
Knowledge-Coherence Principle
If Kxp and Kyp, then p compat q.
Proof. If Kxp, then p, and if Kxq, then q. Hence we have p & q, and so, since
their conjunction is true, p and q cannot be incompatible.
Again, certain other “perfectly obvious” deductions from what is known
must be assumed to be at the disposal of every (rational) knower. We thus have
the principles that separably known items are cognitively conjunctive:
•
The Conjunctivity Principle:
10
Knowledge and Its Problems

Someone who knows both p and q separately, thereby also knows their
conjunction:
If Kxp and Kxq, then Kx(p & q)—and conversely.
A person who is unable to exploit his information by “putting two and two to-
gether” does not really have knowledge in the way that is at issue with specifi-
cally inferential knowledge. It seems only natural to suppose that any rational
knower could put two and two together in this way.
To these principles of inferential knowledge we can also adjoin the following:
•
Knowledge-Reflexivity Principle
Actually to know that someone knows something requires knowing this
fact oneself.
If KxKyp, then Kxp; and indeed: If Kx(∃y)Kyp, then Kxp.
Letting i be oneself so that Kip comes to “I know that p” we may note that the
Knowledge-Reflexivity Principle entails
If KiKyp, then Kip; and more generally: if Kx(∃y)Kyp, then Kxp.
To claim to know that someone else knows something (i.e., some specific
fact) is to assert this item for oneself. Put differently, one can only know 
with respect to the propositional knowledge of others that which one knows
oneself.
However, it lies in the nature of things that there are—or can be—facts that
X can know about Y but Y cannot. Thus X can know that Y has only opinions
but no knowledge, but Y cannot.
Knowledge entails justification (warrant, grounding, evidence, or the
like). One can maintain that someone knows something only if one is pre-
pared to maintain that he has an adequate rational basis for accepting it. It is
senseless to say things like “x knows that p, but has no adequate basis for its
acceptance,” or again “x knows that p, but has no sufficient grounding for it.”
To say that “x knows that p” is to say (inter alia) that x has conclusive warrant
for claiming p, and, moreover, that x accepts p on the basis of the conclusive
warrant he has for it (rather than on some other, evidentially insufficient
basis). It is senseless to say things like “x knows that p, but there is some room
for doubt” or “x knows that p, but his grounds in the matter leave something
to be desired.”8
G. E. Moore pointed out long ago that it is anomalous to say “p but I don’t
believe it” or indeed even “p but I don’t know it.”9 That this circumstance of what
might be called “Moore’s Thesis” be so is readily shown. For in maintaining a
Modes of Knowledge
11

claim one standardly purports to know it. Accordingly, one would not—should
not—say p & ~Kip unless one were prepared to subscribe to
Ki(p & ~Kip),
where i = oneself. But in view of Veracity and Conjunctivity this straightaway
yields
Kip & ~Kip,
which is self-contradictory. (Observe, however, that “I suspect p but do not fully
believe it” [or “really know it”] is in a different boat.)
It is also important to recognize that which is known must be compatible
with whatever else is actually known. No part of knowledge can constitute de-
cisive counterevidence against some other part. The whole “body of (genuine)
knowledge” must be self-consistent. Accordingly we shall have
If Kxp and Kxq, then compat (p, q)
and consequently:
If Kxp & Kxq, then ~(p  ~q).10
Given this circumstance, logic alone suffices to assure the implication:
If Kxp and p  q, then ~Kx~q.
Accordingly, one decisive way of defeating a claim to knowledge is by estab-
lishing that its denial follows from something one knows.11 But of course not
knowing something to be false (i.e., ~Kx~q) is very different from—and much
weaker than—knowing this item to be true (Kxq). And so—as was just noted
in the preceding dismissal of “logical omniscience”—the just-indicated princi-
ple must not be strengthened to the objectionable
If Kxp and p  q, then Kxq,
which has already been rejected above.
A further, particularly interesting facet of knowledge-discourse relates to
the automatic self-assumption of particularized knowledge attributions. It makes no
sense to say “You know that p, but I don’t” or “x knows that p, but not I.” In con-
ceding an item of knowledge, one automatically claims it for oneself as well. To
12
Knowledge and Its Problems

be sure, this holds only for that-knowledge, and not how-to-knowledge (even
how to do something “purely intellectual”—like “answering a certain question
correctly”). It makes perfectly good sense to say that someone else knows how
to do something one cannot do oneself. Again, abstract (i.e., unidentified)
knowledge attributions will not be self-assumptive. One can quite appropri-
ately say “x knows everything (or ‘something interesting’) about automobile en-
gines, though I certainly do not.” But particularized and identified claims to
factual knowledge are different in this regard. One cannot say “x knows that au-
tomobile engines use gasoline as fuel, but I myself do not know this.” To be
sure, we certainly do not have the omniscience thesis:
If Kxp, then Kip
(with i  I myself).
One’s being entitled to claim Ksp follows from one’s being entitled to claim
Kxp, but the content of the former claim does not follow from the content of
the latter.
Moreover, the ground rules of language use being what they are, mere as-
sertion is in itself inherently knowledge-claiming. One cannot say “p but I don’t
know that p.” To be sure, one can introduce various qualifications like “I ac-
cept p although I don’t actually know it to be true,” But to affirm a thesis
flatly (without qualification) is eo ipso to claim knowledge of it. (Again, what
is at issue is certainly not captured by the—clearly unacceptable—thesis: If p,
then Kip.)
Such “logical principles of epistemology” will of course hinge crucially on the
exact construction that is to be placed on the conception of “knowledge.” In par-
ticular, if it were not for the inferential availability character of this concept, the
situation would be very different—and radically impoverished—in this regard.
One further point. The statement “possibly somebody knows p” ◊(∃x)Kxp
says something quite different from (and weaker than) “somebody possibly
knows p” (∃x)◊Kxp. It is accordingly necessary to distinguish
1.
Only if p is true will it be possible that somebody knows it:
If ◊(∃x)Kxp, then p
from
2.
Only if p is true will there be someone who possibly knows it:
If (∃x)◊Kxp, then p.
Because the modality in (1)’s antecedent precedes that qualified the statement
carries us beyond the bounds of the actual world into the realm of merely
Modes of Knowledge
13

possible existence. But with (2)’s antecedent we remain within it: we discuss
only what is possible for the membership of this world. Hence (2) is a plausi-
ble thesis, while (1) is not.
Be this as it may, the cardinal point is that of clarifying the nature of
knowledge. And in this regard putative knowledge is a matter of someone’s
staking a claim to truth for which that individual (subjectively) deems himself
to have adequate grounds, while actual knowledge by contrast is a matter of
someone’s correctly staking a claim to truth when that individual has (objec-
tively) adequate grounds.
The various principles specified here all represent more or less straightfor-
ward facts about how the concept at issue in talk about actual knowledge actu-
ally functions. Any philosophical theory of knowledge must—to the peril of its
own adequacy—be prepared to accommodate them.
14
Knowledge and Its Problems

15
Chapter 2
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
SYNOPSIS
•
Metaknowledge, the development higher-order knowledge about our knowl-
edge itself, is one of the principal tasks of epistemology. And one of its key les-
sons is that of fallibility, the almost inevitable liability of our knowledge to
the discovery of error.
•
The acknowledgment of error with its denial the overall conjunction of
one’s affirmations seems paradoxical. (Indeed it is characterized as “The
Preface Paradox.”) Nevertheless, such fallibility represents a fact of life
with which we must come to terms.
•
The ancient problem of the diallelus posed by the absence of any cognitive-
external standard of cognitive adequacy—also has to be reckoned with.
•
There is a wide variety of possible responses to this view of the cognitive
situation.
•
But in balancing costs and benefits it emerges that a fallibilism that views
our knowledge-claims in the light of best-available estimates is itself our
best-available option.
•
Such a fallibilism means that our “scientific knowledge” is no more (but also
no less) than our best estimate of the truth.
•
Accordingly, we have to see our knowledge claims in scientific matters as
representing merely putative truth, that is, as truth-estimates.

PROBLEMS OF METAKNOWLEDGE
The reflexive aspect of human cognition is one of its most characteristic and
significant features. Nothing is more significant for and characteristic of our
human cognitive situation than our ability to step back from what we deem
ourselves to know and take a critically evaluative attitude toward it.
The development of metaknowledge—of information about our knowl-
edge itself—is a crucial component of the cognitive enterprise at large. Meta-
knowledge is higher-order knowledge regarding the facts that we know (or
believe ourselves to know); the object of its concern is our own knowledge (or
putative knowledge).The prospect of metaknowledge roots in the reflexivity of
thought—the circumstance we can have doubts about our doubts, beliefs about
our beliefs, knowledge about our knowledge. The development of metaknowl-
edge is a crucial component of epistemology, and in its pursuit we encounter
some very interesting but also disconcerting results, seeing that attention to the
actual nature of our knowledge yields some rather paradoxical facts.
Of course, knowledge as such must be certain. After all, we are very em-
phatically fair-weather friends to our knowledge. When the least problem
arises with regard to a belief we would not, could not call it knowledge. There
is no such thing as defeasible knowledge. Once the prospect of defeat is ex-
plicitly acknowledged, we have to characterize the item as merely putative
knowledge.
Let K * be the manifold of propositions that we take ourselves to know:
the collection of our appropriately (though not necessarily correctly) staked
knowledge claims, specifically including the theoretical claims that we en-
dorse in the domain of the sciences. Thus K * is the body of our putative
knowledge, including all of the claims which, in our considered judgment,
represent something that a reasonable person is entitled—in the prevailing
epistemic circumstances—to claim as an item of knowledge. It includes the
sum total of presently available (scientific) knowledge as well as the informa-
tion we manage to acquire in ordinary life.
Given this conception of knowledge, it is clear that we can appropriately
endorse the rule:
(R) For any p: If p belongs to K*, then p is true.
In effect, (R) represents the determination to equate K* with K, the body of our
actual knowledge. We accept this precisely equation because its membership in
K * represents acceptance as true; a claim would not be a K *-member did we
not see it as true. However, K *  K represents not a theoretical truth but a
practical principle—a matter of procedural policy. Unfortunately, we know full
well that we are sometimes mistaken in what we accept as knowledge, even
when every practicable safeguard is supplied. And this is true not only for the
16
Knowledge and Its Problems

ordinary knowledge of everyday life but for our scientific knowledge as well.
Accordingly, the rule (R) is not a true generalization but rather represents a rule
of thumb; it is a practical pinnacle of procedure rather than a flat out truth. It
reflects our determination to treat our putative knowledge as actual.
The following considerations confront us with some of the inescapable
facts of (cognitive) life:
Cognitive Imperfection
We are (or at any rate should be) clearly aware of our own liability to error. We
cannot avoid recognizing that any human attempt to state the truth of things
will include misstatements as well. Our “knowledge” is involved not just in er-
rors of omission but in errors of commission as well. We do—and should—rec-
ognize that no matter how carefully we propose to implement the idea of
membership in our “body of accepted knowledge,” in practice some goats will
slip in along with the sheep. (The skeptic’s route of cognitive nihilism—of ac-
cepting absolutely nothing—is the only totally secure way to avoid mistakes in
acceptance.)
An Epistemic Gap
The epistemic gap that inevitably arises between our objective factual claims
and the comparatively meager evidence on which we base them also means that
such claims are always at risk. In epistemic as in other regards, we live in a
world without guarantees.
Scientific Fallibilism
We do (or at any rate should) realize full well that our scientific knowledge of
the day contains a great deal of plausible error. We are (or should be) prepared to
acknowledge that the scientists of the year 3000 will think the scientific knowl-
edge of today to be every bit as imperfect and extensively correction-requiring as
we ourselves think to be so with respect to the science of 300 years ago. To be
sure, we can safely and unproblematically make the conditional prediction that
if a generalization states a genuine law of nature, then the next century’s phe-
nomena will conform to it every bit as much as those of the last. But we can
never—in the prevailing condition of our information—predict with unalloyed
confidence that people will still continue to regard that generalization as a law of
nature in the future. Scientific progress brings in its wake not only new facts but
also change of mind regarding the old ones; what we have in hand are not really
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
17

certified “laws of nature” as such, but mere theories—that is, laws as we currently
conceive them to be in the prevailing state of the scientific art.
After all, if any induction whatsoever can safely be drawn from the history
of science it is this: that much of what we currently accept as the established
knowledge of the day is wrong, and that what we see as our body of knowledge
encompasses a variety of errors. In fact, there are few inductions within science
that are more secure than this induction about science. Despite the occasional
overenthusiastic pretentions of some scientists to having it exactly right in un-
derstanding nature’s phenomena—to be in a position to say “the last word”—
the fact remains that the realities of the scientific situation pose virtually
insurmountable obstacles in this regard.1
Blind Spots
There are not only errors of commission but errors of omission as well—blind
spots as it were. We know that there are facts we do not know, though we can-
not say what these items of ignorance are. We know that there are answers we
cannot give to some questions, but do not know what those missing answers
are. We know there are various specific truths we do not know, but cannot iden-
tify any of them. We realize the incompleteness of our knowledge—and can
even often localize where this incompleteness exists—but of course cannot
characterize those missing items of information positively by identifying them
as an individuated item.2
Predictive Biases
People’s best-made predictions—like their best-made plans—“gang aft agley.”
We can safely predict that the cost of any major construction project will exceed
our most carefully constructed cost-prediction; and we can safely predict that
its actual completion will postdate our most carefully contrived prediction of
the date of its accomplishment. In this way, we can come to recognize that our
most carefully contrived predictions will in certain areas go systematically amiss.
This sort of thing also happens in other prediction situations. For example, a
statistical analysis of weather forecasts shows that present-day meteorologists
systematically underestimate the change in temperatures from one day to the
next by approximately 10 percent. Now it is clear that metaknowledge of this
sort can be eminently productive. For we can indeed make effective use of it to
correct our errors, proceeding to replace our first-order predictions by second-
order predictions designed to correct them in the light of the systematic biases
revealed by experience at the first-order level.
18
Knowledge and Its Problems

Estimation Biases
Predictive biases of the just-indicated sort are reflections of the more general
situation of estimation biases. For we can come to recognize that in various sit-
uations of estimation there is a general tendency of a displacement of people’s
best estimates of various factors on the direction of too big, too little, too long,
too short, and so on. And then, of course, we can make straightforward use of
such metaknowledge regarding the error-tendencies in people’s base level
knowledge to effect second-order improvements. For example, the combination
of estimates drawn from different sources or methods (say the average for the
sense of simplicity) will generally be more accurate than the best estimate of
most of the individual contributions.3
There emerge certain rather paradoxical facts about our knowledge. For
much of what we see and accept as knowledge—and in fact knowledge of the
highest quality, namely, scientific knowledge—has to be acknowledged as being
little more than yet unmasked error. All too clearly, the cognitive resources at
our disposal never enable us to represent reality with full adequacy in the pres-
ent condition of things—irrespective of what the date on the calendar happens
to be.
THE PREFACE PARADOX
It is important to recognize that operating with the distinction between real
and putative knowledge—though unavoidable—is a tricky business. We cer-
tainly can apply this distinction retrospectively. (“Yesterday I took myself to
know that p but I was quite wrong about it.”) But we cannot apply it to what is
presently before us. (“I know that p but I really don’t” is in deep semantical
trouble on grounds of simple inconsistency.) There is, clearly, something very
frustrating about this situation. The self-critical aspect of our metaknowl-
edge—the circumstance that it involves highly general claims about the imper-
fections of our knowledge—endows it with a paradoxical aspect.
This circumstance is readily brought to view by considering some further
examples. One of the most vivid of these is the so-called Preface Paradox.4 The
conscientious author of a fact-laden book apologizes in the Preface for the error
the book contains. “Several friends have read the MS and helped me to elimi-
nate various errors. But the responsibility for the errors that yet remain is en-
tirely mine.” But why not simply correct these mistakes? Alas, one cannot. (If
only one knew what they were one would of course correct them.) They are lost
in a fog of unknowing.
Yet there is a straightforward logical conflict here. One cannot consistently
accept a collection of contentions distributively and yet also maintain that they
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
19

are not all true collectively. From the standpoint of logic, the things we claim as
true severally and individually must also be claimed as true conjointly. And yet
this is not realistic. It just does not reflect—always and everywhere—the reali-
ties as we must actually acknowledge them.
The Preface Paradox situation is indicative of a larger predicament.
We know or must presume that (at the synoptic level) our science contains
various errors of omission and commission—though we certainly cannot say
where and how they arise. And it does not matter how the calendar reads.This
state of affairs hold just as much for the science of the future as for that of our
own day. Natural science is not only imperfect but imperfectable.5 And this fact
has profound implications for the nature of our “scientific knowledge.” Our
knowledge as an aggregate of accepted claims is one thing. But our metacogni-
tive recognition—indeed knowledge—of the presence of error in the whole
collection is another of no lesser significance. Both are facts. And our knowl-
edge here is to all intents and purposes consistent with our metaknowledge.
The paradox is that our metaknowledge conflict with our knowledge, seeing
that one of the things we cannot avoid adding to our knowledge is the item of
metaknowledge that some of our knowledge claims are mistaken.
The Preface Paradox analogy accordingly indicates that we cannot use
present knowledge to correct itself—even where we recognize and acknowledge
that it requires correction. And our deliberations here indicate that we cannot
use present knowledge to complete itself even though we know it requires com-
pletion. Either way, we have the predicament of remaining powerless in the
face of acknowledged shortcomings.
The point of such considerations emerges in the context of the following
challenge:
You are clever enough to realize that what you purport as knowledge
contains errors of various sorts. So why not just refrain from such pur-
portings and tell us the truth instead.
This plausible challenge is in fact absurd. We have no viable option here. We
have no access way to the truth save via what we think to be true—there sim-
ply is no such thing. “Tell us what is true independently of what you think to be
so” is an absurd challenge. Despite our recognition that it contains errors—that
all too often what we think to be true just is not—we have no alternative but to
accept our best estimate of the truth as a viable surrogate for the real thing. In
matters of truth estimation as elsewhere, we have no alternative but to do the
best we can.
To be sure, actual knowledge as such has to be absolutely certain. It makes
no sense to say “X knows that p but it is uncertain whether or not p is true.” If
that were the case, we would have to qualify our knowledge claim by saying
something like “X thinks he knows that p.”
20
Knowledge and Its Problems

But absolute certainty is all too often difficult to obtain. We know full well
that our knowledge claims are often wrong. We realize full well that much of
our “knowledge” is not more than purported knowledge—that our knowledge is
defeasible—that our claims to knowledge must often be retracted in the course
of cognitive progress.
But while all of this is true, and our knowledge claims gang aft agley and
may well prove to be wrong, nevertheless we cannot say which ones. Although
we are—or should be—cognitive fallibilists the fact remains that we are error-
blind. While we can say with confidence that some—perhaps many—of our
knowledge claims are wrong, we can never say in advance with respect to which
ones this possibly will be realized. We are—or should be—reasonably confident
that our knowledge contains error, but we can never say with comparable rea-
sonable confidence pinpoint just where it is that this prospect will be realized.
All the same, while we cannot pinpoint potential error in our knowledge by
way of specific identification we can indeed say where it is at the generic level
of types or regions of knowledge that error is more or less likely to occur.
Specifically the following observations are in order in this regard.
1.
Other things equal, objective claims to knowledge in the language of
what is are more vulnerable than subjective ones in the language of
what seems to be. It is more risky to claim to know that the cat is
black than to claim to know that it looks black. A cognitive claim
that something is so is always more vulnerable than one that claim
than it appears so.
2.
Other things being equal, general claims to knowledge are more vul-
nerable than particular ones. It is more risky to claim to know that
that this weather report underestimates rainfall than it is to claim
that some forecast underestimates rainfall.
3.
Vague and indefinite knowledge claims are always more secure than
detailed and definite ones. It is less risky to claim to know that
someone was born early in the twentieth century than to claim that
person was born on 5 January 1904.
4.
Guarded or qualified claims are always securer than their unguarded
and unqualified counterparts. If I claim to know that there is good
reason to think such-and-such I am on firmer ground than in claim-
ing to know that such-and-such is actually the case.
And there are doubtless other general principles along these lines. But the over-
all lesson is perfectly clear. By revising our knowledge claims so as to make them
more qualified, less general, more indefinite and more grounded we can always
ensure their certainty. This enhancement of certainty will, all too clearly, be
achieved at the price of informativeness. But at least there is always the option of
protecting our knowledge claims in this sort of way whenever any sort of reason
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
21

for doing this comes to view. All the same, we have to face some harsh realities
where the issue is one of securing significant knowledge of factual matters. Here
we must be prepared to come to terms with the fact of life that our knowledge is
something of a Swiss cheese replete with holes of unrecognized error.
THE DIALLELUS
We have a set of standards for deciding what to accept as true—let us call it the
Criterion. But how can we possibly test such a standard—how can we subject
it to quality control. Clearly we cannot do so by means of the usual and
straightforward process of comparing its deliverances with the real truth. Given
that the Criterion is itself our standard of deciding what is true, we have no way
of effecting such a comparison.
An important negative line of reasoning regarding man’s prospects of at-
taining knowledge about the world has been known from the days of the scep-
tics of antiquity under the title of the “diallelus” (ho diallêlos tropos)—or “the
wheel”—which presents a particular sort of vicious-circle argumentation (circu-
lus vitiosus in probandi). Montaigne presented this Wheel Argument, as we may
term it, as follows:
To adjudicate [between the true and the false] among the appear-
ances of things we need to have a distinguishing method (un instru-
ment judicatoire); to validate this method we need to have a justifying
argument; but to validate this justifying argument we need the very
method at issue. And there we are, going round on the wheel.6
But the argument is far older than Montaigne, and goes back to the skeptics
of classical antiquity. The classical formulation of the argument comes from
Sextus Empiricus:
[I]n order to decide the dispute which has arisen about the criterion
we must possess an accepted criterion by which we shall be able to
judge the dispute; and in order to possess an accepted criterion, the
dispute about the criterion must first be decided. And when the ar-
gument thus reduces itself to a form of circular reasoning (dialle-lus),
the discovery of the criterion becomes impracticable, since we do not
allow them to adopt a criterion by assumption, while if they offer to
judge the criterion by a criterion we force them to a regress ad in-
finitum. And furthermore, since demonstration requires an approved
demonstration, they are forced into circular reasoning.7
It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of this extremely simple line of rea-
soning, which present the skeptic’s “No Criterion” Argument to the effect that
22
Knowledge and Its Problems

an adequate standard of knowledge can never be secured. One of the prime aims
of the subsequent deliberations is to determine just how serious the implications
of this situation are.
AN APORY AND ITS RECONCILIATION:
K-DESTABILIZATION
It is helpful to look once more at some individually plausible but collectively in-
consistent beliefs regarding the nature of our knowledge—at any rate our
knowledge at the level of scientific generality and precision rather than that of
everyday discourse imprecision. Let us return to the situation already sketched
above regarding our commitment—or seeming commitment—to the (putative)
facts constituting our body of knowledge K:
(I)
K includes only truths: If p ∈K, then p.
After all, if we did not see p as being true, then we would not have included it
in K in the first place. The point is that the claims that committed our body of
putative knowledge are ipso facto what we take or accept as being generic
knowledge.
But as we have seen, it is pretty well inescapable that we also stand com-
mitted to:
(II)
K includes some falsehoods: (∃p)(p ∈K & ~p).
And these two theses are clearly contradictories: they stand in patent conflict
with one another. How are we to respond to this situation?
Clearly there is just no way of getting around (II). No induction from the
history of science stands more secure than this idea that some of the theories
we currently accept as true are just plain false.
But (II) is an item of metaknowledge that destabilizes (I). And so we have
no real choice but to abandon (I)—or rather, to weaken it. After all, we here
confront a fundamental axiom of philosophical method: “Never simply aban-
don. In the face of insuperable difficulties, introduce distinctions and qualifica-
tions that enable you to save what you can of your commitments.”
Let us inventory the available ways of effecting the unavoidable weakening
of thesis (I). The object of the enterprise here is to survey the avenues open to
us for obtaining an at least plausible weaker variant of this thesis.Those that are
available here are mapped out in Table 2.1. Let us briefly examine the tenor and
tendency of each of these positions.
Probabilism is a historic position which was variously espoused in the
middle ages as a response to radical skepticism regarding human knowledge
in general. (It was already anticipated in antiquity by some of the moderate
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
23

skeptics of the Middle Academy.) More recently, it has been adopted with
respect to scientific theories by the mainstream logical positivists and logical
empiricists of the prewar era, in particular Rudolf Carnap and Hans
Reichenbach.
Sophistry is also an historic position that goes back to classical antiquity. It
would have us see the members of K as representing no more than plausible
opinion. As Nietzsche put it, human “knowledge” is fiction masquerading as
truth. Present-day “postmodernism,” for all intents and purposes returns to this
position—as does the sociology of knowledge school of the so-called strong
program.
Skepticism represents perhaps the most drastic step—that of accepting . . .
nothing at all and remaining adoxastos (doctrinally uncommitted), as the Greek
skeptics put it. It calls for simply suspending judgment in matters of scientific
theorizing. This position has a long and depressing history for classical antiq-
uity to our own day with exponents ranging from Sextus Empiricus to Peter
24
Knowledge and Its Problems
TABLE 2.1
A Survey of Possibilities
If p ∈K, then p is true.
POSSIBLE QUALIFICATIONS OF THIS THESIS: Change the ending from “is true” to:
A.
is (only) probably true. PROBABILISM: whatever we accept as true is no more than
probably so. We never achieve secure truths but only probability.
B.
is (only) putatively true. SOPHISTRY: K consists of mere opinion. There is no point in
speaking of what is so but only of what people think to be so.
C.
is (only) putatively BUT NOT actually true. RADICAL SKEPTICISM: Our so-called
knowledge is no more than currently accepted falsehood.
D.
is (only) approximately true. APPROXIMATIONISM: Our so-called knowledge never
achieves more than rough correctness—“being in the right ball-park”).
E.
is (only) presumptively true. PRESUMPTIONISM or FALLIBILISM: Our so-called
knowledge only consists of tentative estimate—claims we are only provisionally to endorse
as truths, subject to future defeat.
F.
is generally (or almost always) true. STATISTICISM or REGULISM: We change that
basic thesis from a universal generalization to a general—but exception-admitting—rule
by replacing “is” by “is generally.”
G.
is true provided that p also belongs to K  ⊂K. DISCRIMINATIONISM: The idea that K
consists of a secure core (K ) and a more problematic remainder (K ).
H.
is without any claim or pretentions to truth as such: its acceptance is no more than merely a
practical expedient to guide our conduct in certain regards. (INSTRUMENTALISM)
Plan Z. Accept inconsistencies and take them in stride. (INCONSISTENCY TOLERANCE).

Unger. On this approach, scientific knowledge is seen as effectively amounting
to currently accepted error that has not been unmasked as such yet. This, in
essence, was Nietzsche’s view: what we see as our “scientific” knowledge as
merely a matter of useful illusion.
Approximationism or something pretty close to the instinctive views of
most scientists, who hesitate to claim that they have got us exactly right, but
like to think they have at least got it pretty much right—that our favored sci-
entific theories are correct “in the essentials” as it were. This was—roughly
speaking—the view of C. S. Peirce.
Presumptionism or Fallibilism. On this view, a scientific theory is a tempo-
rary expedient to be replaced when and if something better comes along. One
commitment to it is merely provisional and tentative—though, to be sure, we
can only displace something with something else. One could characterize the
falsificationist position of Karl Popper as a version of this approach.
Regulism or Statisticism. This position calls for replacing (I) by “K includes
mainly truths,” and being prepared to tolerate exceptions. Here (I) is read as
stating merely a general (but not strictly universal) rule—one which, as such,
admits of exceptions, though of course we cannot identify them in advance. In
the context of scientific theories, this approach has no historical precedents that
I know of.8
Discriminationism. The strategy of this approach is to divide K into two
components: the unproblematic K  (whose members must, of course, be mu-
tually consistent), and the problematic (K ). And then it proposes to adopt:
(I') If p ∈ K , then p. [Note that the membership of K * must ac-
cordingly be seen individually certain and collectively consistent.]
(II'') Not- (If p ∈K , then p) or equivalently (∃ p) (p ∈ K  & not-p)
There does not seem to be on record any theoretician who has adopted this dis-
criminationist position, though there is (as we shall see) much to be said for it.
Instrumentalism. This view of the matter takes science out of the business
of claims to truth. Its work is seen not as providing answers to substantive ques-
tions but to providing practical guidance for the conduct of affairs in matters of
application and of inquiry. Our scientific theories are thus not actual truth-pur-
porting beliefs but belief-neutral instruments for predicting and controlling the
phenomenon.This position—or something substantially like it—has been held
by some pragmatists (e.g., John Dewey)—and by such twentieth-century
philosophers of science as P. W. Bridgman and Bas van Fraassen.
Inconsistency Tolerance. This rather drastic approach of simply taking con-
sistencies in stride view is in favor among some logicians9 and was to some ex-
tent favored by Ludwig Wittgenstein as regards pure mathematics. Some
physicists have entertained the idea in with quantum mechanics. However,
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
25

philosophers of science have been distinctly disinclined to resort to so radical
a recourse.
It must be noted—and conceded—that these several positions are probably
not exhaustive and that for sure they are in many cases not mutually exclusive.
Thus, for example, one can combine instrumentalism and discriminationism by
relegating all scientific theories to the “problematic remainder,” while positioning
particular observation reports (these are creatures of the moon”) within the se-
cure core. Here one would take the stance that we do not actually believe these
problematic theories but see them as mere instruments for predicting true core
statements.
COSTS AND BENEFITS
The crucial fact about these various alternative approaches is that none of the
options that they afford us are cost-free: each has its characteristic balance of
advantages and disadvantages, of costs and benefits. Let us examine somewhat
more closely the issue of the costs of adopting the various plans.
Plan A: Probabilism. The domain of the probable is not inferentially
closed. So there is now no justification for simply combining a variety of ac-
cepted propositions as collective premisses for inference. We arrive at a situa-
tion of deductive disfunctionality. Moreover, we cannot now make our way to
any definite (unprobabilistic) assertion. We secure no answers to our questions
about how things work in the world. (To distribute probabilities across a spec-
trum of alternatives is emphatically not to provide an answer.) 
Plan B: Sophistry. In its substance, this approach represents a know-
nothing position, that destroys any prospect of a workable distinction between
knowledge and opinion.
Plan C: Radical Skepticism. This position is simply a cognitive nihilism.
By seeing all of our scientific knowledge as categorically mistaken it throws out
the baby with the bathwater. It is an all-annihilating H-bomb that allows us no
answers, no guidance, no nothing.
Plan D: Approximationism. This approach confronts us with the notori-
ous difficulties of defining approximation. If we claim to have it right “in its es-
sentials,” it would be nice to know (as we do not and cannot) what those
essentials are. Then too there are all those problems of confirming approxima-
tions. (In cognitive contexts, is somewhere between difficult and impossible to
preestablish how matters will evolve over the long run.)
Plan E: Presumptionism, Fallibilism. On this approach we can only ever
stake only guarded claims to truth. We insist that whatever we maintain as true
need hold only pro tem, to be replaced when and if something better comes
along. (Note that we must here differentiate between “is presumably true” and
“is presumably-true.”)
26
Knowledge and Its Problems

Plan F: Regularism/Statisticism. This approach indulges a certain over-
optimism. For it does not do justice to the extent to which K has problems, see-
ing that K is simply not plausible to see the bulk our present scientific theories
as exact and definitive truths.
Plan G: Discriminationism. This approach confronts us with the burden
of delineating that unproblematic case K   K. It saddles us with the problem
of differentiating K  from K —of identifying (at least some of) unproblem-
atic knowledge.10
Plan H: Instrumentalism. This approach has the disadvantage of cogni-
tive vacuity. Like skepticism (to which it is closely akin) it leaves us without an-
swers to our questions.
Plan Z: Inconsistency Tolerance. This approach would have us simply take
the inconsistency between principles (I) and (II) in stride, and to accept at face
value the incoherence of what we know. This involves abandoning the tradi-
tional idea that it is a nonnegotiable demand of rationality to insist on the con-
sistency of one’s knowledge claims. The modern semanticological theory of
inconsistency tolerance (“passconsistency”) has created mechanisms for imple-
menting this sceemingly absurd strategy in a more or less workable way.11 This
approach represents so radical a recourse, however—one that cuts so deep a
swath across so large a terrain—that it cannot count as more than a plan of last
resort, a desperate expedient to be adopted if and when all else fails.
MORE ON FALLIBILISM
It would be an error to think that a conclusion based on fuller information is
necessarily an improvement, presenting us with a result that cannot be false if
its “inferior” predecessor was already true. For if this were so, then as more in-
formation is added, an outcome’s probability would increasingly move in the
same direction, and could not oscillate between increases and decreases. But
this is clearly not the case.
Consider the following example, based on the question: “What will
John do to occupy himself on the trip?” Suppose we require an answer to this
question. But suppose further that the following data becomes successively
available:
1.
He loves doing crosswords.
2.
He loves reading mysteries even more.
3.
He didn’t take any books along.
It is clear that we are led to and fro. Initially (at stage (1) of information access)
we incline to the answer that he will be working crosswords. At the next stage,
when item (2) arrives we change our mind and incline to the answer that he
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
27

will be reading. At stage (3) we abandon this idea and go back to our initial
view. And of course a subsequent stage, say one where we have 
4.
One of his fellow passengers lends him a book
can nevertheless reverse the situation and return matters to step (2). And who
know what step (5) will bring? The crucial point is that additional information
need not serve to settle matters by bringing us closer to the truth.
When we are dealing with assured truths, additional information cannot
unravel or destabilize what we have. For truths have to be compatible with one
another and new truths cannot come into logical conflict with old ones.Truths,
once we have them, are money in the bank. But likely truths—plausible or
probable truths—are something else again. Here additional evidence can un-
ravel old conclusions. P can be highly probable relative to Q and yet improba-
ble relative to Q & R. Inductive conclusions are never money in the bank. It is
an ever-present prospect that we will have to revisit and reassess them in the
light of new information.
The fact is that throughout the realm of inductive or plausible reasoning, a
larger, conjunctive fact F & G can always point to a conclusion at odds with
that indicated by F alone: the circumstance that fact F renders X highly prob-
able is wholly compatible with the existence of another fact G of such a sort
that F & G renders X highly improbable. And yet what G undermines here can
always be restored by some yet further additional fact.
The reality of it is that inductive “inference” is what logicians call non-
monotonic through learning the future that even if premiss p supports conclu-
sion q, premiss p & r need not support q. For since an inductive linkage is not
airtight something can always creep into the gap to soil things. Since owls can
blink, you will confer when told that an owl is in the cage it too can blink. And
this seems sensible enough. But if told additionally that a stuffed owl is at issue,
this conclusion is no longer forthcoming.
Exactly because additional information always has the potential of con-
straining a change of mind—rather than merely providing additional substanti-
ation for a fixed result—we have no assurance that further information produces
“a closer approximation to the truth.” Conclusions based on additional informa-
tion may in some sense be comparatively “better” or “securer” but they need cer-
tainly not be “truer” or “more accurate.” (There are no degrees here, true is true.)
Whenever what we accept is deductively derived from truths the results be
realize are bond to be secure. Here what we do not know can do no damage to
the knowledge we have. But when what we accept is inductively derived from
probabilities and plausibilities it is vulnerable to unraveling. Here what we do
not know can do great damage. With deductions from truths, ignorance may be
bliss, but with inductions from plausibilities and probabilities it poses potential
28
Knowledge and Its Problems

threats. This said, the fact remains that here as elsewhere we can only do the
best we can.
On the basis of these considerations, it emerges that what is to all appear-
ances the best available course of resolution is that afforded by the mixed strategy
of combining a presumptivistic Fallibilism (Plan E) with a judicious Discrimina-
tionism (Plan G). In effect, this strategy calls for endorsing two positions:
1.
That we see the scientific theories of the day as representing—in the
main—not categorical truths, but rather merely best estimates that we
can accept provisionally and pro tem, as viable truth-surrogates
adopted with due tentativity until such time as something better
comes along.
2.
That while this position is something which we adopt on a “by and
large” and “in general” basis (symbolized by that qualification “in the
main”), we nevertheless stand prepared to endorse as categorically
true certain particular categories of contentions, so that we do not see
everything as fallible. On the one hand this secure core (K) of cate-
gorically endorsed contentions will include such predominantly ob-
servational information as “There are craters on the moon.” On the
other hand, as regards predominantly theoretical information, this un-
problematic core will also contain (among others) two further groups:
a.
Vague knowledge (schoolbook science). [For example,“The
structure of matter is granular—that is to say, atomic.”]12
b.
Metaknowledge. [For example, “The bulk of our scien-
tific theories will eventually have to be replaced or
emended.”]13
Knowledge on such a view is, for the most part, our cognitively optimal estimate
of the truth.
This position may be motivated on the basis of a cousin of the epistemo-
logical “Sherlock Holmes Principle”: “When you have eliminated the impossi-
ble, then whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.”14
However, in the present context, this precept should be so transmuted so as to
take variant form of an axiological principle: “When you have eliminated the
even less appealing alternatives, then whatever remains, however unappealing,
must be accepted.” That is—when all the other alternatives are even less ap-
pealing, then a given alternative, however unappealing, must be endorsed. (In
effect, this represents an axiologically geared policy of rational choice in the
context of a fixed range of alternatives.)
It is on this basis of comparative cost-effectiveness (rather than any claims
to inherent and unconditional appropriateness) that the present deliberations
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
29

will unfold so as to support the claims of a Fallibilistic Discriminationism—or,
perhaps better, a Discriminating Fallibilism.15
THE COMPARATIVE FRAGILITY OF SCIENCE:
SCIENTIFIC CLAIMS AS MERE ESTIMATES
Scientific “knowledge” at the level of deep theory is always purported knowledge:
knowledge as we see it today. In our heart of hearts, we realize that we may see
it differently tomorrow—or the day after. We must stand ready to acknowledge
the fragility of our scientific theorizing. All we are ever able to do in natural sci-
ence is to select the optimal answer to the questions we manage to formulate
within the realm of alternatives specifiable by means of the conceptual machin-
ery of the day. And we have no reason to doubt—nay, we have every reason to
believe—that the day will come when this conceptual basis will be abandoned,
in the light of yet unrealizable developments, as altogether inadequate.
Give that Sn is (ex hypothesi) our own current body of (putative) scientific
knowledge—the science of the day, St with t  n for “now”—we ourselves un-
questionably stand committed to the inference schema: If p ∈S, then p. At the
level of specific claims, we have little alternative but to look on our knowledge
as real knowledge—a thesis p would not be part of “our truth” if we did not take
it to form part of “the truth.” The answers we give to our questions are literally
the best we can provide.The “knowledge” at issue is to be knowledge according
to our own lights—the only ones we have got. But despite our resort to this ad-
equacy principle at the level of particular claims, we nevertheless should not
have the hubris to think that our science has “got it right.”
The relationship of “our (putative) scientific knowledge” to “the (real)
truth” has to be conceived of in terms of estimation. At the frontiers of general-
ity and precision,“our truth” in matters of scientific theorizing is not—and may
well never actually be—the real truth. Science does not secure the truth (deliver
it into our hands in its definitive finality). We have no alternative to acknowl-
edging that our science, as it stands here and now, does not present the real to
provide us with a tentative and provisional estimate of it. However confidently
it may affirm its conclusions, the realization must be maintained that the dec-
larations of natural science are provisional and tentative—subject to revision
and even to outright rejection. The most we can ever do is to take our science
(Sn) as the imperfect best we can do here and now to conjecture “the real truth.”
To be sure, there is no question that we can improve our science. The his-
tory of science cries out for the Whig interpretation. Every applicable standard,
from systemic sophistication to practical applicability, yields reason to think
that later science is better science. But of course this does not mean that later
science is any the truer—for true it cannot be if it, too, is destined for eventual
rejection.The standards of scientific acceptability do not and cannot assure ac-
30
Knowledge and Its Problems

tual or indeed even probable or approximate truth. As Larry Laudan has argued
with substantial evidence and eloquence: “No one has been able even to say
what it would mean to be ‘closer to the truth,’ let alone to offer criteria for de-
termining how we could assess such proximity.”16 All claims that emerge frown
scientific theorizing are vulnerable—subject to improvement and replacement.
We can claim that later, “superior” science affords a better warranted estimate of
the truth, but we cannot claim that it manages somehow to capture more of the
truth or to approximate to it more closely.17
Interestingly enough, in point of vulnerability science compares unfavor-
ably with the commonplace knowledge of matters of prescientific fact—our
knowledge regarding sticks and stones and sealing wax and the other parapher-
nalia of everyday life. And there is good reason for this.
Increased security can always be purchased for our estimates at the price of
decreased accuracy. We estimate the height of a tree at around 25 feet. We are
quite sure that the tree is 25  5 feet high. We are virtually certain that its height
is 25  10 feet. But we are completely and absolutely sure that its height is be-
tween 1 inch and 100 yards. Of this we are “completely sure” in the sense that
we are “absolutely certain,”“certain beyond the shadow of a doubt,”“a certain as
we can be of anything in the world,” “so sure that we would be willing to stake
our life on it,” and the like. For any sort of estimate whatsoever, there is always
a characteristic trade-off between the evidential security or reliability of the es-
timate, on the one hand (as determinable on the basis of its probability or de-
gree of acceptability), and, on the other hand, its contentual definiteness
(exactness, detail, precision, etc.). A situation of the sort depicted by the con-
cave curve of Figure 2.1 obtains.
Now, the crucial point is that natural science eschews the security of in-
definiteness. In science we operate at the right-hand side of the diagram: we al-
ways strive for the maximal achievable universality, precision, exactness, and so
on. The law-claims of science are strict: precise, wholly explicit, exceptionless,
and unshaded. They involve no hedging, no fuzziness, no incompleteness, and
no exceptions. In stating that “the melting point of lead is 327.545°C at stan-
dard pressure,” the physicist asserts that all pieces of (pure) lead will unfailingly
melt at exactly this temperature; he certainly does not mean to assert that most
pieces of (pure) lead will probably melt at somewhere around this temperature. By
contrast, when we assert in ordinary life that “peaches are delicious,” we mean
something like “most people will find the eating of suitably grown and duly
matured peaches a relatively pleasurable experience.” Such statements have all
sorts of built-in safeguards like “more or less,” “in ordinary circumstances,” “by
and large,” “normally,” “if other things are equal,” and the like. They are not
laws but rules of thumb, a matter of practical lore rather than scientific rigor. In
natural science, however, we deliberately accept risk by aiming at maximal def-
initeness—and thus at maximal informativeness and testability.The theories of
natural science take no notice of what happens ordinarily or normally; they seek
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
31

to transact their explanatory business in terms of high generality and strict uni-
versality—in terms of what happens always and everywhere and in all circum-
stances. In consequence, we must recognize the vulnerability of our scientific
statements. The fact that the theoretical claims of science are “mere estimates”
that are always cognitively at risk and enjoy only a modest life span has its roots
in science’s inherent commitment to the pursuit of maximal definiteness. Its
cultivation of informativeness (of definiteness of information) everywhere
forces science to risk error
A tenable fallibilism must take this inverse relationship between definite-
ness and security into careful account. Consider the “atomic theory,” for exam-
ple. It has an ancient and distinguished history in the annals of science,
stretching from the speculations of Democritus in antiquity, through the work
of Dalton, Rutherford, and Bohr, to the baroque complexities of the present
day. “It is surely unlikely that science will ever give up on atoms!” you say. Quite
true! But what we are dealing with here is clearly not a scientific theory at all,
but a vast family of scientific theories, a great bundle loosely held together by
threads of historical influence and family resemblances.There is not much that
Rutherford’s atoms, and Bohr’s, and our contemporary quantum theorists’ have
in common. As such, the “atomic theory” is no more than a rough generic
schema based on the more or less metaphorical intuition that “matter is granu-
lar in the small, composed of tiny structures separated in space,” This is surely
incomplete and indeterminate—a large box into which a vast number of par-
ticular theories can be fitted. It claims that there are atoms, but leaves open an
almost endless range of possibilities as to what they are like. This sort of con-
tention may well be safe enough; at this level of schematic indiscriminateness
32
Knowledge and Its Problems
FIGURE 2.1. The Degradation of Security with Increasing Definiteness.

and open-endedness, scientific claims can of course achieve security. But they
do so only at the expense of definiteness—of that generality and precision that
reflect what science is all about.
The quest for enhanced definiteness is unquestionably a prime mover of
scientific inquiry. The ever-continuing pursuit of increasing accuracy, greater
generality, widened comprehensiveness, and improved systematicity for its as-
sertions is the motive force behind scientific research. And this innovative
process—impelled by the quest for enhanced definiteness—drives the concep-
tual scheme of science to regions ever more distant from the familiar conceptual
scheme of our everyday life. For the ground rules of ordinary life discourse are
altogether different. Ordinary-life communication is a practically oriented en-
deavor carried on in a social context: it stresses such maxims as “Aim for security,
even at the price of definiteness”; “Protect your credibility”; “Avoid misleading
people, or—even worse—lying by asserting outright falsehoods”; “Do not take a
risk and ‘cry wolf.’”
The aims of ordinary-life discourse are primarily practical, largely geared to
social interaction and the coordination of human effort. In this context, it is cru-
cial that we aim at credibility and acceptance—that we establish and maintain a
good reputation for reliability and trustworthiness. In the framework of com-
mon-life discourse, we thus take our stance at a point far removed from that of
science.Very different probative orientations prevail in the two areas. In everyday
contexts, our approach is one of situational satisficing: we stop at the first level of
sophistication and complexity that suffices for our present needs. In science, how-
ever, our objectives are primarily theoretical and governed by the aims of disin-
terested inquiry. Here our approach is one of systemic maximizing: we press on
toward the ideals of systemic completeness and comprehensiveness. In science we
put ourselves at greater risk because we ask much more of the project.
A view along the following lines is very tempting: “Science is the best,
most thoroughly tested knowledge we have; the ‘knowledge’ of everyday life
pales by comparison. The theses of science are really secure; those of everyday
life, casual and fragile.” But the very reverse is the case: our scientific theories
are vulnerable and have a short life span; it is our claims at the looser level of
ordinary life that are relatively secure and stable.
But, of course, the claims of everyday life have sacrificed definiteness in
order to gain this security and reliability. One recent writer has quite correctly
written that:
we sometimes forget . . . how completely our own knowledge has ab-
sorbed what the cavemen knew, and what Ptolemy, Copernicus,
Galileo and Newton knew. True, some of the things our predecessors
thought they knew turned out not to be knowledge at all: and these
counterfeit facts have been rejected along with the theories that “ex-
plained” them. But consider some of the facts and low-level regulari-
ties our ancestors knew, which we know, and which any astronomical
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
33

theory is obligated to explain: the sky looks about the same every
night; it is darker at night than during the day; there is a moon; the
moon changes its appearance regularity; there is a cycle of seasons.18
To be sure, the sort of “knowledge” at issue here does not go very far in afford-
ing us a detailed understanding of the ways of the world. It lacks detailed sci-
entific substance. But just exactly that is the basis of its comparative security.
We must recognize, without lapsing into skepticism, that the cognitive
stance characteristic of science requires the acceptance of fallibility and corrigi-
bility, and so requires a certain tentativeness engendering the presumption of
error. Because the aims of the enterprises are characteristically different, our in-
quiries in everyday life and in science have a wholly different aspect; the former
achieves stability and security at the price of sacrificing definiteness, a price that
the latter scorns to pay.
FALLIBILISM AND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN OUR
(PUTATIVE) TRUTH AND THE REAL TRUTH
While we would like to think of our science as “money in the bank”—as some-
thing safe, solid, and reliable—history unfortunately militates against this com-
fortable view of our scientific theorizing. In science, new knowledge does not
just supplement but generally upsets our knowledge-in-hand. We must come to
terms with the fact that—at any rate, at the scientific level of generality and
precision—each of our accepted beliefs may turn out to be false, and many of
our accepted beliefs will turn out to be false.
Let us explore the ramifications of a cognitive fallibilism that holds that sci-
ence—our science, the body of our scientific beliefs as a whole consists largely,
and even predominantly, of false beliefs, embracing various theses that we will ul-
timately come to see (with the wisdom of hindsight) as quite untenable. It is use-
ful to distinguish between potential error at the particularistic and collectivistic
levels—between thesis defeasibility and systemic fallibilism. The former position
makes the claim that each of our scientific beliefs may be false, while the latter
claims that many or most of our scientific beliefs are false. The two theses are in-
dependent. Of the pair,“Each might be false” and “Most are false,” neither entails
the other. (Each of the entrants in the contest might be its winner, but it could
not turn out that most of them indeed are. Conversely, most of the integers of the
sequence 1, 2, 3, . . . come after 3, but it cannot be that all might do so.)
Though the theses are independent, both are true. Thesis defeasibility fol-
lows from the fact that it is perfectly possible—and not only theoretically but re-
alistically possible—that one could play the game of scientific inquiry correctly by
all the accepted rules and still come to a result that fails to be true. For the truth
of our objective claims hinges on “how matters really stand in the world,” and not
34
Knowledge and Its Problems

on the (inevitably incomplete) grounding or evidence of justification that we our-
selves have in hand.We cannot cross the epistemic gap between the apparent and
the real by any logically secure means; and so we must always be careful to distin-
guish between “our (putative or ostensible) truth,” what we think to be true, on the
one hand, and, on the other, “the real truth,” what actually is true—the authentic
and unqualified truth of the matter. In scientific theorizing, we are never in a
position to take this epistemic gap as closed.
Systemic fallibilism is the more serious matter, however, for it means that
one must presume that our whole scientific picture of the world is seriously
flawed and will ultimately come to be recognized as such in that many of our
present-day beliefs at the scientific frontier will eventually have to be aban-
doned. We learn by empirical inquiry about empirical inquiry, and one of the
key things we learn is that at no actual stage does science yield a final and un-
changing result. All the experience we can muster indicates that there is no jus-
tification for regarding our science as more than an inherently imperfect stage
within an ongoing development. And we have no responsible alternative to
supposing the imperfection of what we take ourselves to know. We occupy the
predicament of the “Preface Paradox” exemplified by the author who apologizes
in his preface for those errors that have doubtless made their way into his work,
and yet blithely remains committed to all those assertions he makes in the body
of the work itself. We know or must presume that (at the synoptic level) there
are errors, though we certainly cannot say where and how they arise. There is
no realistic alternative to the supposition that science is wrong—in various
ways and that much of our supposed “knowledge” of the world is no more than
a tissue of plausible error. We are thus ill advised to view the science of our
day—or of any day—as affording “the final truth of the matter.”
It goes without saying that we can never be in a position to claim justi-
fiedly that our current corpus of scientific knowledge has managed to capture
“the whole truth.” But we are also not even in a position justifiedly to claim that
we have got “nothing but the truth.” Our scientific picture of nature must al-
ways be held provisionally and tentatively, however deeply we may be attached
to some of its details.
All attempts to equate the real truth with apparent truth of some sort are
condemned to failure: having the same generic structure, they have the same basic
defect.They all view “the real truth” as “the putative truth when arrived at under
conditions C” (be it in favorable circumstances or under careful procedures). And
in each case the equation is destroyed by the ineliminable possibility of a separa-
tion between “the real truth” and the putative truth that we ourselves actually
reach (by whatever route we have arrived there). None of our scientific beliefs are
so “cataleptic” or so “clear and distinct” that they cannot run awry. Nobody’s pu-
tative “scientific truth” can be authenticated as genuine—be it that of the experts
or of those who prudently implement established epistemic methods. With
claims to knowledge at the level of scientific generality and precision, there is no
Fallibilism and Truth Estimation
35

way in which we can effect an inferentially secure transition to the real truth from
anybody’s ostensible truth (our own included).
The transition from appearance to reality can perhaps be salvaged by tak-
ing God or the community of perfect scientists or some comparable idealiza-
tion to be the “privileged individual” whose putative truth is at issue. The
doctrine can thus be saved by resorting to the Myth of the God’s Eye View:
With S* as the cognitive corpus of “perfected science,” we can indeed establish
an equivalence between S * membership and “the real truth.” But this desper-
ate remedy is of little practical avail. For only God knows what “perfected sci-
ence” is like; we ourselves certainly do not. And the Schoolmen were right: in
these matters we have no right to call on God to bail us out. (Non in scientia re-
currere est ad deum.) While the idea at issue may provide a useful contrast-con-
ception, it is something that we cannot put to concrete implementation.
Of course, we stand committed to our truths; imperfect they may be, but
we have nowhere else to go. We have no alternative to proceeding on the
“working hypothesis” that in scientific matters our truth is the truth. But we
must also recognize that is simply not so—that the working hypothesis in ques-
tion is no more than just that, a convenient fiction.
We recognize that the workaday identification of our truth with the truth
is little more than a makeshift—albeit one that stands above criticism because
no alternative course is open to us. Fallibilism is our destiny. Given our nature
as a creature that makes its way in the world by use of information we have to
do the best we can. The recognition that this may well not be good enough is
simply an ineliminable part of the human condition. No deity has made a
covenant with us to assure that what we take to be “adequately established” the-
ories must indeed be true in these matters of scientific inquiry.
The proper lesson here is not the skeptic’s conclusion that our “science”
counts for naught, but simply, and less devastatingly, the realization that our
scientific knowledge—or putative and purported knowledge—regarding how
things work in the world is flawed; that the science of the day is replete with in-
exactitudes and errors that we ourselves are impotent to distinguish from the
rest. With respect to the claims of science, we realize that our herd is full of
goats that nevertheless appear altogether sheeplike to us.
36
Knowledge and Its Problems

37
Chapter 3
Skepticism and Its Deficits
SYNOPSIS
•
The fact that knowledge must be certain seems to open the door to skepticism.
•
However, what is at issue is not categorical or desolate certainty but prac-
tical or effective certainty.
•
What is called for is not the theoretical centrality of logic but the practical
certainty of life.
•
Skepticism’s case rests on the impossibilities engendered by unrealistic and
unachievable standards.
•
The statement “I know that p but it could possibly be the case the not-p” is
not so much a logical as a pragmatic contradiction.
•
Skepticism is fostered by an unrealistic unwillingness to run cognitive risks.
•
This itself runs counter to the demands of reason.
•
It is at variance not with cognitive reason alone but with practical reason
as well.
•
For the sckptic loses sight of the very reason for being of our cognitive endeavors.
•
The fact of it is that skepticism is economically irrational: The price we
would pay in endorsing the skeptic’s position is so high as to outweigh
whatever benefit could possibly accrue from it.
THE SKEPTICS “NO CERTAINTY” ARGUMENT
As stressed above, attributions of authentic knowledge do not admit of any ele-
ment of doubt or qualification, so that authentic knowledge must be unqualifiedly

certain and undeniably true. On the other hand, philosophers since Plato’s day1
have stressed the unattainability of absolutes in our knowledge of this world.
And the plausibility of such a view is readily established.
A straightforward and plausible argument is at work here. If a contention
is to be absolutely, secure relative to the grounds by which it is supported, then
its content must not go beyond the content of those contentions that serve as
grounds for the claim. But with factual statements there is always an “evidential
gap,” because the data at our disposal were exhaust the content of our objective
claims. “The apple looks red to me” is an autobiographical statement about me
while “The apple is red ” is an objective claim that has involvements (e.g., how
it will look to others in different sorts of light) that I have not checked and can-
not check in toto. Factual claims are invariably such that there is a wide gap be-
tween the evidence we need to have at our disposal to make a claim warrantedly
and the content of this claim. The milkman leaves the familiar sort of bottle of
white liquid on the doorstep. One does not hesitate to call it “milk.” A small
cylinder of hard, white, earthen material is lying next to the blackboard. One
does not hesitate to call it “chalk.”The content of such claims clearly ranges far
wider than our meager Evidence and extends to chemical composition, sources
of origin, behavior under pressure, and so on and so forth. And this story is a
standard one. For the fact is that all of our statements regarding matters of ob-
jective fact (i.e., “That is an apple” as opposed to “Something appears to me to
be an apple”) are such that the content of the claim—its overall set of commit-
ments and implications—moves far beyond the (relatively meager) evidence for
it that is actually at our disposal. And this evidential gap between the evidence-
in-hand and the substantive contention at issue seemingly foredooms any
prospect of attaining certainty.2 For all intents and purposes this circumstance
squarely violates the absolutism of claims to knowledge. What we have called
“the facts of cognitive life” are to all appearances such that the definitive condi-
tions for knowledge cannot be met in the factual domain. This, at any rate, is
the skeptic’s contention.
The skeptic bolsters this claim by inserting into the evidential gap the
sharp wedge of a knowledge-defeating possibility—the supposition that life
is but a dream, or the hypothesis of the Cartesian arch-deceiver and its lat-
ter-day successor, the wicked powerful scientist. The unattainability of any
knowledge in matters of objective fact is supported by the skeptic on the
basis of the impossibility in principle of ruling out such certainty-defeating
possibilities. Do we, for example, know for sure that the person who jumps
off the Empire State Building will crash downward? Why should that person
not float gently skyward? This would, no doubt, surprise us, but surprises do
happen; in such matters of generalization “we may be in no better position
than the chicken which unexpectedly has its neck wrung.”3 After all, the
skeptic insists:
We are thus caught in the inexorable grip of the skeptic’s “No Certainty”
Argument:4
38
Knowledge and Its Problems

1.
All knowledge-claims are committed to a demand for absolute
certainty
2.
Objective factual claims are always evidence-transcending: they are
never in a position to meet absolutistic demands.
∴
Our objective factual claims can never amount to actual knowledge.5
The task of these present deliberations is to examine whether—and how—this
sort of sceptical argumentation can be defeated.6
THE ROLE OF CERTAINTY
Skepticism’s pet thesis to the contrary notwithstanding, however, something’s
being absolutely certain—or even being true—in fact just is not a necessary pre-
condition for staking a rationally warranted claim to knowledge. Consider the
two propositions:
•
P is justifiably held by X to be true.
•
P is true.
Does the first entail or presuppose the second? Surely not. For the evidence-in-
hand that suffices to justify someone in holding a thesis to be true need not
provide a deductive guarantee of this thesis. For a strictly analogous situation
obtains with the pair:
•
P is justifiably held by X to be certain.
•
P is certain.
Again,the first proposition does not entail or require the second.The standard gap
between the epistemic issue of what someone justifiably holds to be and the onto-
logical issue of what is again comes into the picture. One must be willing to admit
in general the existence of a gap between warranted assertability and ultimate cor-
rectness, holding that on occasion even incorrect theses can be maintained with
due warrant. And there is no decisive reason for blocking the application of this
general rule to certainty-claims in particular. It would be a fallacy to think that
claims to certainty are warranted only if they themselves are certain.
Here, as elsewhere, use-conditions stop short of truth-conditions. The
rules of reasoned discourse are such that we are rationally entitled to make our
descriptive claims—notwithstanding the literally endless implicative ramifica-
tions of their content, ramifications over whose obtaining we in fact have no ra-
tional control without making specific verificatory checks. And note that even
if such checks were made, their results would be incomplete and would pertain
to a few specific samples drawn from an infinite range.
Skepticism and Its Deficits
39

And this state of things has an important application when knowledge-
discourse is at issue. For here too we must distinguish between evidence and
claim, between the warrant for a claim and its content, its evidentiation and its
implications.
The assertion “I know that p” has all of those absolutistic facets we have
considered (certainty, unqualifiedness, etc.). All are ineliminably parts of the
content of the claim. But with this particular factual claim, as with any other,
one need not establish full rational control over the whole gamut of its entail-
ments and implications. One can appropriately assert “I know that P’’ when one
has adequate rational warrant for this assertion, and this warrant may well stop
at adequately conclusive7—rather than comprehensively exhaustive evidence
for the claim.
The thesis that knowledge must be certain requires critical scrutiny and
analysis in the light of these considerations. For “certainty” here must not be
construed to mean “derived by infallible processes from theoretically unassail-
able premisses” since one is surely justified in “being certain” in circumstances
that do not logically preclude any possibility of error. The operative mode of
“certainty” here is not some absolutistic sense of logical infallibility—it is the
realistic concept that underlies our actual, real-life processes of argumentation
and reasoning. It is impossible to give too heavy emphasis to the crucial fact
that to say of a thesis that it “is certain” is to say no more than it is as certain as
in the nature of the case, a thesis of this sort reasonably could be rendered. And
this does not—and need not—preclude any possibility of error, but any real or
genuine possibility of error.
The cognitivist who rejects skepticism and purports to know some fact
need not insist that he has intrinsically irrefutable and logically conclusive evi-
dence that it obtains. It is simply not necessary for him to make an assertion of
this sort in support of his contention. It is sufficient that his evidence for his
claim p is as good as that for anything of p’s type can reasonably be asked for.To
be sure we must be certain of what we know, but the “certainty” that must at-
tach to knowledge-claims need not be absolutistic in some way that is in prin-
ciple unrealizable. It must be construed in the sense of as certain as can
reasonably be expected in the circumstance. A claim to knowledge does not—
as the skeptics charge—transgress by offering in principle infeasible guarantees;
it simply means that one is to rest secure in the assurance that everything has
indeed been done that one can possibly ask for within the limits of reasonable-
ness to ascertain the fact at issue.
A claim to knowledge extends an assurance that all due care and caution
has been exercised to ensure that any real possibility of error can be written off:
it issues a guarantee that every proper safeguard has been exercised. Exactly this
is the reason why the statement “I know p, but might be mistaken” is self-
inconsistent. For the man who claims to know that p, thereby issues a guaran-
tee that the qualification “but I might be mistaken” effectively revokes. What
40
Knowledge and Its Problems

is established by the self-defeating nature of locutions of the type of “I know
that p but might well be wrong” is thus not that knowledge is inherently inde-
feasible, but simply that knowledge-claims offer guarantees and assurances so
strong as to preempt any safeguarding qualifications: they preclude abridgment
of the sort at issue in protective clauses like “1 might well be wrong.”
THE CERTAINTY OF LOGIC VERSUS THE CERTAINLY OF LIFE
It is not possible to overemphasize that the certainty of knowledge is the cer-
tainty of life—realistic certainty and not that of some transcendentally inacces-
sible realm.8 It is the certainty that precludes any realistic possibility of error:
any possibility of error that is “worth bothering about,” the closing of every
loophole that one can reasonably ask for.9 This is, and must be so because
knowledge claims are asserted and denied here, in this world—and not in some
transcendentally inaccessible one, so that the norms and ground rules govern-
ing their use must be appropriately applicable (at least in principle) here and
now. Accordingly, there is no contradiction in terms involved in saying that the
absolutistic aspect of a knowledge claim is compatible with an element of
(claim-externalized) qualification.
As we have seen, the “epistemic gap” between available evidence and as-
serted content means that the falsity of our objective factual claims is always
logically compatible with the evidence at our disposal. But this undoubted fact
remains epistemically irrelevant.To be sure, the evidential gap is real and unde-
niable. And since it exists, it is always possible to insert an hypothesis into it to
sever what we ourselves think to be the case from “the real truth of the matter.”
But there are hypotheses and hypotheses—sensible ones as well as those which
cannot but strike us as strained and bizarre. An hypothesis capable of undoing
“There are rocks in the world” (to take an ordinary-life example) or that in the
present cosmic era s  ½gt2 (to take a scientific one) would illustrate the latter,
far-fetched variety. That either thesis is false is “unthinkable”—any hypothesis
capable of undoing the thesis at issue is too peculiar and “unrealistic” to afford
a real possibility of error. Admittedly there are such (far-fetched) hypotheses
and such (implausible) possibilities. But their very far-fetchedness and implau-
sibility mean that the possibilities of error they pose are not realistic. The up-
sets at issue are simply too drastic—the whole demonology of deceitful deities,
powerful mad scientists, and so on brings our entire view of the world crashing
down about our ears. Such possibilities cannot be ruled out from the domain of
the imaginable, but we can and do exclude them from the arena of the practical
politics of the cognitive situation.
There is no changing the fact that the person who claims to know some-
thing also becomes committed thereby to its implications (its logical conse-
quences and its presuppositions). But a claim to knowledge can be made
Skepticism and Its Deficits
41

reasonably and defensibly even by one who realizes that it involves commit-
ments and ramifications that may not stand up in the final analysis to the chal-
lenges of a difficult and often recalcitrant world. No assurances that extend
beyond the limits of the possible can be given—or sensibly asked for. The ab-
solute certainty of our knowledge claims is not and cannot be the sort of thing
which one is in principle precluded from realizing. (Ultra posse nemo obligatur.
To reemphasize: the certainty of knowledge is the certainty of life!)
After all, the “certainty” of knowledge claims can seemingly be understood
in two very different perspectives:
1.
as an unattainable ideal, a condition at which a knowledge claim
aims but which in the very nature of things it cannot attain—to its
own decisive detriment.
2.
as an assurance, a promise, a guarantee that everything needful has
been done for the ascertainment of the knowledge claim, and this
must be construed in socially oriented terms as a real-life resource of
the operative dynamics of communication.
Various philosophers—and most skeptics—insist on the former interpretation,
an insistence which is as unnecessary as it is unrealistic.10 For it is clearly the
second, mundane or realistic interpretation that is operative in the conception
of knowledge we actually use within the setting of real life.
It is thus tempting to speak of a contrast between “the hyperbolic certainty
of the philosopher” and “the mundane certainty of the plain man” in the setting
of the actual transaction of our cognitive business.11 Philosophers have often
felt driven to a conception of knowledge so rigid as to yield the result that there
is little if anything left that one ever be said to know. Indeed, skeptical thinkers
of this inclination launch on an explication of the “nature of knowledge” which
sets the standards of its attainment so high that it becomes in principle impos-
sible for anything to meet such hyperbolic demands. Against this tendency it
is proper to insist that while what is known must indeed be true—and certainly
true—it is nevertheless in order to insist that the conceptions at issue can and
should be so construed that there are realistic and realizable circumstances in
which our claims to certainly and to knowledge are perfectly legitimate and alto-
gether justified. A doctrine which admits the defeasibility of quite appropriate
claims to knowledge need involve no contradictions in terms.
PRAGMATIC INCONSISTENCY
The line between authentic and putative knowledge simply cannot be drawn in
our own case. The challenge, “Indicate to me something that you indeed think
you know but really don’t” is a challenge I cannot possibly meet. You might
42
Knowledge and Its Problems

possibly be able to do this for me, but neither you not I can bring it off on our
own account.
This line of consideration brings to light the effective basis of the untenabil-
ity of “I know that p, but it is not certain that p” or “I know that p, but it could pos-
sibly be the case that not-p.” The crux is not that these are logically inconsistent
but that they are incoherent on grounds of being pragmatically self-defeating—
that is, self-defeating in the context of the relevant communicative aims and ob-
jectives. For it is clear that the former part of these statements extends an
assurance that the qualifications of the second part effectively abrogate.
A knowledge-claim requires that the grounding-in-hand is sufficient to
preclude any real possibility of error, whereas the but-addendum says that there
are still such possibilities worth worrying about. And so the statement as a whole
is inconsistent: it takes away with one hand what it gives with the other.12
This difference between real and merely conjectural possibilities of error is
crucial for rational warrant for claims or concessions to knowledge. A real pos-
sibility must be case-specific and not abstractly generic and somehow based on
general principles alone. And this, it must be insisted, is not incompatible with
the existence of a “purely theoretical” (let alone “purely logical”) prospect of error.
There is thus no real anomaly in holding, on the one hand, that knowledge
“must be certain” (in the effective sense of this term) and, on the other hand, that
a valid knowledge claim “might possibly be wrong” (with “might” construed in
the light of a merely theoretical or “purely logical” mode of possibility).
For example, we need not in the usual course of things exert ourselves in an
endeavor to rule out the imaginative skeptic’s recourse to the whole de-
monology of uncannily real dreams, deceitful demons, powerful evil scientists,
and so forth.The general principles and presumptions of the domain suffice to
put all this aside. To claim knowledge in specific cases, all we need do is elimi-
nate those case-specific considerations that would countervail against the claim
at issue.
Some philosophers have endeavored to evade skepticism by emptying
knowledge claims of any and all pretentions to certainty. For example, in his
interesting book, Knowledge, Keith Lehrer writes:
Thus, our theory of knowledge is a theory of knowledge without cer-
tainty. We agree with the sceptic that if a man claims to know for cer-
tain, he does not know whereof he speaks. However, when we claim to
know, we make no claim to certainty. We conjecture that to speak ~n
this way ~s a departure from the most customary use of the word
“know.” Commonly, when men say they know, they mean they know
for certain.13
But this approach of extruding certainty from knowledge and so of going over
to a construction of knowledge at variance with that of our standard usage—
Skepticism and Its Deficits
43

avoids skepticism too high a price. Claims to certainly cannot simply be elimi-
nated from the conception of knowledge. Our present position, by contrast,
emphatically preserves the certainty-involvement of all our knowledge claims.
It simply insists that the certainty of knowledge is the certainty of real life—the
sort of certainty that is not timeless and untarnishable but can be abrogated by
the difficult circumstances of an uncooperative world.
To be sure, a skeptical objection may well be offered:
If we sometimes fall into error even when doing the best we can, how
can we tell that we have not done so in the present case? And if we
cannot guarantee truth, then how can we speak of knowledge?
The answer is simple. If we have done all that can reasonably be asked of us, the
best that can realistically be done, then there can be no need for any further as-
surance. The objection suggests that we must be in a position to do better than
the best we can. And of course we cannot—and so this must not be asked of us.
Accordingly, the “No Certainty” Argument becomes invalidated: It is not
true that knowledge claims are committed to a demand for absolute certainty
in any hyperbolically inaccessible way.They are indeed committed to a demand
for certainty, but this “certainty” must be construed realistically—in the effec-
tive, mundane, and practical sense of the term. The certainty at issue in our
knowledge-claims is not inherently unattainable; it is simply that the ground-
ing in hand must be strong enough to indicate that further substantiation is su-
perfluous in the sense of yielding every reasonable assurance that the thing at
issue is as certain as something of its sort need appropriately be. To repeat: it
suffices to ask for an adequate grounding for these claims; logically exhaustive
grounding is not a reasonable requirement, for the simple reason—so elo-
quently stressed by the skeptic himself—that it is in principle incapable of
being satisfied.
The skeptic sets up standards on “knowledge” that are so unrealistic as to
move outside the range of considerations at work in the conception as it actu-
ally functions in the language. He insists on construing knowledge in such a
way as to foist on the cognitivist a Sisyphus-like task by subjecting all knowl-
edge-claims to an effectively undischargeable burden of proof. But this hyper-
bolic standard separates the skeptic from the concept of knowledge as it
functions in common life and in (most) philosophical discussions.
To be sure, the skeptic might well ask: “What gives you the right to impose
your probative standards on me?
After all, if it is knowledge as the language deals with it that we wish to
discuss—and not some artificial construct whose consideration constitutes a
change of subject-then we must abide by the ground rules of the conceptual
scheme that is at issue. And this simply is nor a negotiable matter of playing the
game by X’s rules instead of Y’s. It is not a conventional game that is defined by
44
Knowledge and Its Problems

the rules we arbitrarily adopt, but an impersonal set of rules established in the
public instrumentality of a language. We must not afford the skeptic the luxury
of a permission to rewrite at his own whim the warranting standards for the
terminology of our cognitive discourse.
The skeptic simply is not free to impose his hyperbolic probative standards
on us. If he wishes to dispute about knowledge, he must take the concept as he
finds it in the language-based conceptual system that we actually use. (He can-
not substitute a more rigoristic standard for counting as knowledge, any more
than he can substitute a more rigoristic standard for counting as a dog, say a
standard that ruled chihuahuas out as just too small.) In failing to make effec-
tive contact with the conceptual scheme in which our actual knowledge claims
in fact function, the skeptic assumes an irrational posture in the debate. And
the crucial fact is that our actual standards here root in the ground rules for ra-
tional controversy and the conditions for making out a conclusive (probatively
solid) case, ground rules and conditions in which all of the standard mecha-
nisms of presumptions and burden of proof are embedded.
SKEPTICISM AND RISK
The scientific researcher, the inquiring philosopher, and the plain man, all desire
and strive for information about the “real” world. The sceptic rejects their ven-
tures as vain and their hopes as foredoomed to disappointment from the very
outset. As he sees it, any and all sufficiently trustworthy information about fac-
tual matters is simply unavailable as a matter of general principle. To put such a
radical scepticism into a sensible perspective, it is useful to consider the issue of
cognitive rationality in the light of the situation of risk taking in general.
There are three very different sorts of personal approaches to risk and
three very different sorts of personalities corresponding to these approaches,
as follows:
Type 1: Risk avoiders
Type 2: Risk calculators
2.1: cautious
2.2: daring
Type 3: Risk seekers
The type 1, risk-avoidance, approach calls for risk aversion and evasion. Its ad-
herents have little or no tolerance for risk and gambling.Their approach to risk
is altogether negative. Their mottos are Take no chances, Always expect the
worst, and Play it safe.
Skepticism and Its Deficits
45

The type 2, risk-calculating, approach to risk is more realistic. It is a
guarded middle-of-the-road position, based on due care and calculation. It
comes in two varieties. The type 2.1, cautiously calculating, approach sees risk
taking as subject to a negative presumption, which can however, be defeated by
suitably large benefits. Its line is: Avoid risks unless it is relatively clear that a
suitably large gain beckons at sufficiently suspicious odds. If reflects the path of
prudence and guarded caution. The type 2.2, daringly calculating, approach
sees risk taking as subject to a positive presumption, which can, however, be de-
feated by suitably large negativities. Its line is: Be prepared to take risks unless
it is relatively clear that an unacceptably large loss threatens at sufficiently
inauspicious odds. It reflects the path of optimistic hopefulness.
The type 3, risk-seeking, approach sees risk as something to be welcomed
and courted. Its adherents close their eyes to danger and take a rosy view of risk
situations. The mind of the risk seeker is intent on the delightful situation of a
favorable issue of events: the sweet savor of success is already in his nostrils.
Risk seekers are chance takers and go-for-broke gamblers. They react to risk
the way an old warhorse responds to the sound of the musketry: with eager
anticipation and positive relish. Their motto is: Things will work out.
In the conduct of practical affairs, risk avoiders are hypercautious; they have
no stomach for uncertainty and insist on playing it absolutely safe. In any po-
tentially unfavorable situation, the mind of the risk avoider is given to imagin-
ing the myriad things that could go wrong. Risk seekers, on the other hand, leap
first and look later, apparently counting on a benign fate to ensure that all will be
well; they dwell in the heady atmosphere of “anything may happen.” Risk calcu-
lators take a middle-of-the-road approach. Proceeding with care, they take due
safeguards but still run risks when the situation looks sufficiently favorable. It is
thus clear that people can have very different attitudes toward risk.
So much for risk taking in general. Let us now look more closely at the
cognitive case in particular.
The situation with regard to specifically cognitive risks can be approached
as simply a special case of the general strategies sketched above. In particular,
it is clear that risk avoidance stands coordinate with skepticism. The skeptic’s
line is: Run no risk of error; take no chances; accept nothing that does not come
with ironclad guarantees. And the proviso here is largely academic, seeing that
little if anything in this world comes with ironclad guarantees-certainly noth-
ing by way of interesting knowledge. By contrast, the adventuresome syncretist
is inclined, along with radical Popperians such as P. K. Feyerabend, to think
that anything goes. His cognitive stance is tolerant and open to input from all
quarters. He is gullible, as it were, and stands ready to endorse everything and
to see good on all sides.The evidentialist, on the other hand, conducts his cog-
nitive business with comparative care and calculation, regarding various sorts of
claims as perfectly acceptable, provided that the evidential circumstances are
duly favorable.
46
Knowledge and Its Problems

The skeptic accepts nothing, the evidentialist only the chosen few, the syn-
cretist virtually anything. In effect, the positions at issue in skepticism, syn-
cretism, and evidentialism simply replicate, in the specifically cognitive domain,
the various approaches to risks at large.
It must, however, be recognized that in general two fundamentally differ-
ent kinds of misfortunes are possible in situations where risks are run and
chances taken:
1.
We reject something that, as it turns out, we should have accepted.
We decline to take the chance, we avoid running the risk at issue, but
things turn out favorably after all, so that we lose out on the gamble.
2.
We accept something that, as it turns out, we should have rejected.
We do take the chance and run the risk at issue, but things go
wrong, so that we lose the gamble.
On the one hand, if we are risk seekers, we will incur few misfortunes of
the first kind, but things being what they are, many of the second kind will be-
fall us. On the other hand, if we are risk avoiders, we shall suffer few misfor-
tunes of the second kind, but shall inevitably incur many of the first. The
overall situation has the general structure depicted in Figure 3.1.
Clearly, the reasonable thing to do is to adopt a policy that minimizes mis-
fortunes overall. It is thus evident that both type 1 and type 3 approaches will,
in general, fail to be rationally optimal. Both approaches engender too many
misfortunes for comfort. The sensible and prudent thing is to adopt the mid-
dle-of-the-road policy of risk calculation, striving as best we can to balance the
positive risks of outright loss against the negative ones of lost opportunity. Ra-
tionality thus counterindicates approaches of type 1 and type 2, taking the line
of the counsel, Neither avoid nor court risks, but manage them prudently in the
search for an overall minimization of misfortunes. The rule of reason calls for
sensible management and a prudent calculation of risks; it standardly enjoins
on us the Aristotelian golden mean between the extremes of risk avoidance and
risk seeking. Turning now to the specifically cognitive case, it may be observed
that the skeptic succeeds splendidly in averting misfortunes of the second kind.
He makes no errors of commission; by accepting nothing, he accepts nothing
false. But, of course, he loses out on the opportunity to obtain any sort of in-
formation.The skeptic thus errs on the side of safety, even as the syncretist errs
on that of gullibility.The sensible course is clearly that of a prudent calculation
of risks.
Being mistaken is unquestionably a negativity. When we accept something
false, we have failed in our endeavors to get a clear view of things—to answer
our questions correctly. And moreover, mistakes tend to ramify, to infect envi-
roning issues. If I (correctly) realize that p logically entails q but incorrectly be-
lieve not-q, then I am constrained to accept not-p, which may well be quite
Skepticism and Its Deficits
47

wrong. Error is fertile of further error. So quite apart from practical matters
(suffering painful practical consequences when things go wrong), there are also
the purely cognitive penalties of mistakes—entrapment in an incorrect view of
things. All this must be granted and taken into account. But the fact remains
that errors of commission are not the only sort of misfortune there are.14 Igno-
rance, lack of information, cognitive disconnection from the world’s course of
things—in short, errors of omission—are also negativities of substantial pro-
portions. This too is something we must work into our reckoning.
In claiming that his position wins out because it makes the fewest mis-
takes, the skeptic uses a fallacious system of scoring, for while he indeed makes
the fewest errors of one kind, he does this at the cost of proliferating those of
another. Once we look on this matter of error realistically, the skeptic’s
vaunted advantage vanishes. The skeptic is simply a risk avoider, who is pre-
pared to take no risks and who stubbornly insists on minimizing errors of the
second kind alone, heedless of the errors of the first kind into which he falls at
every opportunity.
Ultimately, we face a question of value trade-offs. Are we prepared to run a
greater risk of mistakes to secure the potential benefit of an enlarged understand-
ing? In the end, the matter is one of priorities—of safety as against information,
of ontological economy as against cognitive advantage, of an epistemological risk
48
Knowledge and Its Problems
FIGURE 3.1 Risk Acceptance and Misfortunes

aversion as against the impetus to understanding.The ultimate issue is one of val-
ues and priorities, weighing the negativity of ignorance and incomprehension
against the risk of mistakes and misinformation.
The crucial fact is that inquiry, like virtually all other human endeavors, is
not a cost-free enterprise.The process of getting plausible answers to our ques-
tions also involves costs and risks. Whether these costs and risks are worth in-
curring depends on our valuation of the potential benefit to be gained. And
unlike the committed skeptic, most of us deem the value of information about
the world we live in to be a benefit of immense value something that is well
worth substantial risks.
Philosophical epistemologists tend to view knowledge acquisition in
purely theoretical terms and to abstract it from the crass business of exerting ef-
fort, expending resources, and running risks. But this is simply unrealistic. Even
the purest and most theoretical of inquiries has its practical and mundanely
economic dimension.
The key point is that our epistemological procedures such as explanation,
substantiation, justification are all essentially communicative acts performed in
the context of an interpersonal interchange of ideas and information that is sub-
ject to communally established ground rules. A fundamental communicative pur-
pose underlies all these probative activities.The end of the road of the process of
justification is clearly reached when anything further that could be brought in
would be less plausible than what is already at hand. Even as one must not explain
by the yet more obscure (non est explanandum obscurum per obscurius), so we must
not defend by the yet more dubious. In the preceding dialogue, a stage is reached
when the existence of the pen in question is (ex hypothesi) something that is as
sure under the epistemic circumstances at issue as one could ever be of the further
supporting considerations that could be adduced on its behalf. And when this
stage is reached, there is no point in going on.15
RATIONALITY AND COGNITIVE RISK
Skepticism not only runs us into practical difficulties by impeding the cognitive
direction of action, but it has great theoretical disadvantages as well.The trouble
is that it treats the avoidance of mistakes as a paramount good, one worth pur-
chasing even at a considerable cost in ignorance and lack of understanding. For
the radical sceptic’s seemingly high-minded insistence on definitive truth, in
contradistinction to merely having reasonable warrant for acceptance—duly fol-
lowed by the mock-tragic recognition that this is of course unachievable—is to-
tally counterproductive. It blocks from the very outset any prospect of staking
reasonable claims to information about the ways of the world. To be sure, the
averting of errors of commission is a very good thing when it comes free of
charge, or at any rate cheap. But it may well be bought at too high a cost when
it requires us to accept massive sacrifices in for going the intellectual satisfaction
Skepticism and Its Deficits
49

of explanation and understanding. It would of course be nice if we could sepa-
rate errors of commission from errors of omission and deploy a method free
from both. But the realities do not permit this. Any method of inquiry that is
operable in real life is caught up in the sort of trade-off illustrated in Figure 3.1.
From such a standpoint, it becomes clear that skepticism purchases the
avoidance of mistakes at an unacceptable price. After all, no method of in-
quiry, no cognitive process or procedure that we can operate in this imperfect
world, can be altogether failure free and totally secure against error of every
description. Any workable screening process will let some goats in among the
sheep. With our cognitive mechanisms, as with machines of nay sort, perfec-
tion is unattainable; the prospect of malfunction can never be eliminated, and
certainly not at any acceptable price. Of course, we could always add more
elaborate safeguarding devices. (We could make automobiles so laden with
safety devices that they would become as large, expensive, and cumbersome as
busses.) But that defeats the balance of our purposes. A further series of
checks and balances prolonging our inquiries by a week (or a decade) might
avert certain mistakes. But for each mistake avoided, we would lose much in-
formation. Safety engineering in inquiry is like safety engineering in life.
There must be proper balance between costs and benefits. If accident avoid-
ance were all that mattered, we could take our mechanical technology back to
the stone age, and our cognitive technology as well.
The skeptics’ insistence on safety at any price is simply unrealistic, and it is
so on the essentially economic basis of a sensible balance of costs and benefits.
Risk of error is worth running because it is unavoidable in the context of the
cognitive project of rational inquiry. Here as elsewhere, the situation is simply
one of nothing ventured, nothing gained. Since Greek antiquity, various
philosophers have answered our present question, Why accept anything at all?,
by taking the line that man is a rational animal. Qua animal, he must act, since
his very survival depends on action. But qua rational being, he cannot act avail-
ingly, save insofar as his actions are guided by his beliefs, by what he accepts.
This argument has been revived in modern times by a succession of pragmati-
cally minded thinkers, from David Hume to William James.
The contrast line of reasoning to this position is not, If you want to act ef-
fectively, then you must accept something. Rather, its line is, If you want to enter
into the cognitive enterprise, that is, if you wish to be in a position to secure in-
formation about the world and to achieve a cognitive orientation within it, then
you must be prepared to accept something. Both approaches take a stance that is
not categorical and unconditional, but rather hypothetical and conditional. But in
the classically pragmatic case, the focus is on the requisites for effective action,
while our present, cognitively oriented approach focuses on the requisites for ra-
tional inquiry.The one approach is purely practical, the other also theoretical. On
the present perspective, then, it is the negativism of automatically frustrating our
basic cognitive aims (no matter how much the sceptic himself may be willing to
50
Knowledge and Its Problems

turn his back on them) that constitutes the salient theoretical impediment to
skepticism in the eyes of most sensible people.
Now here it must be conceded that life without knowledge, reason, or belief
is certainly not in principle impossible: animals, for example, manage very well.
Or again, a somewhat less radical strategy is available, one that countenances ac-
ceptance (and belief), but only on a wholly unreasoned basis (e.g., instinct, con-
straint by the appearances, etc). The skeptic can accordingly hold—and act
on—all those beliefs that people ordinarily adopt, with only this difference: that
he regards them as reflecting mere appearances and denies that the holding of
these beliefs is justified. But such a view simply heads rationality underfoot.
Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote: “The squirrel does not infer by induction that
it is going to need stores next winter as well. And no more do we need a law of
induction to justify (rechtfertigen) our actions or our predictions.” This gets the
matter exactly wrong. Had Wittgenstein written perform (or carry out) in place
of justify, all would have been well. But once justification (Rechfertigung) is
brought upon the stage, induction or some functional equivalent for establish-
ing the need is just exactly what does become necessary. Saying that someone is
being rational commits us to holding that this person is in a position to ration-
alize what he says and what he does—to justify it and exhibit it as the sensible
thing to do. The rational use of a technique inevitably requires a great deal of
factual backing from our knowledge—our purported knowledge—regarding
how things work in the world. The rational man as such requires the availabil-
ity of cogent reasons for action, and only with the abandonment of a rigorous
all-out skepticism can such reasons possibly be obtained.
The traditional pragmatic argument against skeptical agnosticism goes
roughly as follows:
On the plane of abstract, theoretical reasoning the skeptical position
is, to be sure, secure and irrefutable. But scepticism founders on the
structure of the human condition—that man finds himself emplaced
in medias res within a world where his very survival demands action.
And the action of a rational being requires the guidance of belief. Not
the inferences of theory and cognition but the demands of practice
and action make manifest the untenability of the sceptic’s position.
Conceding that skepticism cannot be defeated on its own ground, that of
pure theory, it is held to be invalidated on practical grounds by an incapacity to
support the requisites of human action. Essentially this argument is advanced
by such diverse thinkers as the Academic Skeptics of classical antiquity, David
Hume and William James.16
Unfortunately however, this position leaves it open for the sceptic to take
to the high ground of a partisan of rigorous rationality. For the skeptic may well
take the following line:
Skepticism and Its Deficits
51

This charge of stultifying practice is really beneath my notice. Theo-
retical reason and abstract rationality are what concerns the true
philosopher. The issue of what is merely practical does not concern
me. As far as “mere practice” goes, I am perfectly prepared to conform
my actions to the pattern that men in general see fit to follow. But
one should recognize that the demands of theoretical rigor point in
another—and altogether sceptical—direction.17
The present line of argument does not afford the skeptic this comfortable op-
tion. Its fulcrum is not the issue of practice as such, but the issue of pragmatic
rationality included—since it is our specifically cognitive practice of rational in-
quiry and argumentation that is at issue. In affecting to disdain this the skeptic
must now turn his back not simply on the practice of ordinary life, but ration-
ality itself. His “victory” is futile because he conveniently ignores the fact that
the whole enterprise of reason-giving is aimed at rationale construction and is
thus pointless save in the presence of a route to adequacy in this regard—the
standard machinery for assessing probative propriety. The skeptic in effect
emerges as unwilling to abide by the evidential ground rules that govern the
management of rational deliberation along the established lines.
In the final analysis, the skeptic thus runs afoul of the demands of that
very rationality in whose name he so high-mindedly claims to speak. Ratio-
nality, after all, is not a matter of logic alone—of commitment to the logical
principles of consistency (i.e., not to accept what contradicts accepted prem-
ises) and completeness (i.e., to accept what is entailed by accepted premises),
which are, after all, purely hypothetical in nature (“If you accept . . . , then—”)
Cognition is not just a hypothetical issue of making proper inferences from
given premises; it involves also the categorical issue of giving their proper evi-
dential weight to the premises themselves. Thus rationality indispensably
requires a categorical and material constraint inherent in the conception of
evidence—namely, to abide by the established evidential ground rules of
various domains of discussion in terms of the locus of presumption and the
allocation of benefit of doubt.
The skeptic is not embarked on a defense of reason, but on a self-imposed
exile from the enterprise of cogent discussion and the community of rational in-
quirers. And at this juncture he is no longer left in possession of the high
ground. In refusing to give to the standard evidential considerations the pre-
sumptive and prima farie weight that is their established value on the market of
rational interchange, the skeptic, rather than being the defender of rigid reason,
is in fact profoundly irrational. The sceptic seemingly moves within the orbit of
rationality. But by his refusal to acknowledge the ordinary probative rules of
plausibility, presumption, evidence, and so on, he effectively opts out of the ra-
tional enterprise in the interests of a private, idiosyncratic rigorism that results
from attachment to an inappropriately hyperbolic standard.
52
Knowledge and Its Problems

The line of thought being developed here does not involve any immediate
resort to practical considerations. Since the days of the Academic Skeptics of
Greek antiquity, philosophers have often answered our present question “Why
accept anything at all” by taking roughly the following line: Man is a rational
animal. Qua animal he must act—his very survival depends on action. But qua
rational being he cannot act availingly save insofar as his actions are guided by
what he accepts. The practical circumstances of the human condition preclude
the systematic suspension of belief as a viable policy.
THE ECONOMIC DIMENSION: COSTS AND BENEFITS
Knowledge has a significant economic dimension because of its substantial in-
volvement with costs and benefits. Many aspects of the way we acquire, main-
tain, and use our knowledge can be properly understood and explained only
from an economic point of view. Attention to economic considerations regard-
ing the costs and benefits of the acquisition and management of information
can help us both to account for how people proceed in cognitive matters and to
provide normative guidance toward better serving the aims of the enterprise.
Any theory of knowledge that ignores this economic aspect does so at the risk
of its own adequacy.
Homo sapiens has evolved within nature to fill the ecological niche of an in-
telligent being. With us, the imperative to understanding is something alto-
gether basic: things being as they are, we cannot function, let alone thrive,
without knowledge of what goes on about us. The knowledge that orients our
activities in this world is itself the most practical of things—a rational animal
cannot feel at ease in situations of which it can make no cognitive sense. We
have questions and want (nay, need), to have answers to them. And not just an-
swers, but answers that cohere and fit together in an orderly way can alone sat-
isfy a rational creature. This basic practical impetus to (coherent) information
provides a fundamental imperative to cognitive intelligence.
We humans want and need our cognitive commitments to comprise an in-
telligible story, to give a comprehensive and coherent account of things. For us,
cognitive satisfaction is unattainable on any other basis—the need for informa-
tion, for knowledge to nourish the mind, is every bit as critical as the need for
food to nourish the body. Cognitive vacuity or dissonance is as distressing to us
as physical pain. Bafflement and ignorance—to give suspensions of judgment
the somewhat harsher name that is their due—exact a substantial price from us.
The quest for cognitive orientation in a difficult world represents a deeply prac-
tical requisite for us. That basic demand for information and understanding
presses in upon us and we must do (and are pragmatically justified in doing)
what is needed for its satisfaction. For us, cognition is the most practical of
matters: Knowledge itself fulfills an acute practical need.
Skepticism and Its Deficits
53

It has come to be increasingly apparent in recent years that knowledge is
cognitive capital, and that its development involves the creation of intellectual
assets, in which both producers and users have a very real interest. Knowledge,
in short, is a good of sorts—a commodity on which one can put a price tag and
which can be bought and sold much like any other—save that the price of its
acquisition often involves not just money alone but other resources, such as
time, effort, and ingenuity. Man is a finite being who has only limited time and
energy at his disposal. And even the development of knowledge, important
though it is, is nevertheless of limited value it is not worth the expenditure of
every minute of every day at our disposal.
Charles Sanders Peirce proposed to construe the “economy of research” at
issue in knowledge development in terms of the sort of balance of assets and li-
abilities that we today would call cost-benefit analysis.18 On the side of benefits
of scientific claims, he was prepared to consider a wide variety of factors: close-
ness of fit to data, explanatory value, novelty, simplicity, accuracy of detail, pre-
cision, parsimony, concordance with other accepted theories, even antecedent
likelihood and intuitive appeal. And in the liability column, he placed those de-
manding factors of “the dismal science”: the expenditure of time, effort, energy,
and money needed to substantiate our claims.
The introduction of such an economic perspective does not of course de-
tract from the value of the quest for knowledge as an intrinsically worthy ven-
ture with a perfectly valid l’art pour l’art aspect. But as Peirce emphasized, one
must recognize the inevitably economic aspect of any rational human enter-
prise—inquiry included. It is clear that staking claims to knowledge is the risk
of error. But, of course, knowledge brings critical benefits. Our species has
evolved within nature into the ecological niche of an intelligent being. In con-
sequence, the need for understanding, for “knowing one’s way about,” is one of
the most fundamental demands of the human condition. Homo sapiens is Homo
quaerens.The requirement for information, for cognitive orientation within our
environment, is as pressing a human need as that for food itself. We are rational
animals and must feed our minds even as we must feed our bodies.
The need for knowledge is part and parcel of our nature. A deep-rooted
demand for information and understanding presses in on us, and we have little
choice but to satisfy it. Once the ball is set rolling it keeps on under its own mo-
mentum—far beyond the limits of strictly practical necessity. The great Nor-
wegian polar explorer Fridtjof Nansen put it well. What drives men to the polar
regions, he said, is
The power to the unknown over the human spirit. As ideas have
cleared with the ages, so has this power extended its might, and driven
Man willy-nilly onwards along the path of progress. It drives us in to
Nature’s hidden powers and secrets, down to the immeasurably little
world of the microscopic, and out into the unprobed expanses of the
54
Knowledge and Its Problems

Universe. . . . it gives us no peace until we know this planet on which
we live, from the greatest depth of the ocean to the highest layers of
the atmosphere.This Power runs like a strand through the whole his-
tory of polar exploration. In spite of all declarations of possible profit
in one way or another, it was that which, in our hearts, has always
driven us back there again, despite all setbacks and suffering.19
The discomfort of unknowing is a natural component of human sensibility. To
be ignorant of what goes on about us is almost physically painful for us—no
doubt because it is so dangerous from an evolutionary point of view. As William
James observed: “The utility of this emotional effect of [security of] expectation
is perfectly obvious “natural selection,” in fact, was bound to bring it about
sooner or later. It is of the utmost practical importance to an animal that he
should have prevision of the qualities of the objects that surround him.”20
It is a situational imperative for us humans to acquire information about
the world. We have questions and we need answers. Homo sapiens is a creature
that must, by nature, feel cognitively at home in the world. Relief from igno-
rance, puzzlement, and cognitive dissonance is one of cognition’s most impor-
tant benefits.These benefits are both positive (pleasures of understanding) and
negative (reducing intellectual discomfort through the removal of unknowing
and ignorance and the diminution of cognitive dissonance). The basic human
urge to make sense of things is a characteristic aspect of our makeup—we can-
not live a satisfactory life in an environment we do not understand. For us, cog-
nitive orientation is itself a practical need: cognitive disorientation is actually
stressful and distressing.
The benefits of knowledge are twofold: theoretical (or purely cognitive) and
practical (or applied).The theoretical/cognitive benefits of knowledge, on the one
hand, relate to its satisfactions in and for itself, for understanding is an end unto
itself and, as such, is the bearer of important and substantial benefits—benefits
that are purely cognitive.The practical benefits of knowledge, on the other hand,
relate to its role in guiding the processes by which we satisfy our (noncognitive)
needs and wants.The satisfaction of our needs for food, shelter, protection against
the elements, and security against natural and human hazards all require infor-
mation. And the satisfaction of mere desiderata comes into it as well.We can, do,
and must put knowledge to work to facilitate the attainment of our goals, guid-
ing our actions and activities in this world into productive and rewarding lines.
And this is where the practical payoff of knowledge comes into play.
The impetus to inquiry to investigation, research, and acquisition of in-
formation—can thus be validated in strictly economic terms with a view to
potential benefits of both theoretical and practical sorts. We humans need to
achieve both an intellectual and a physical accommodation to our environs.
Efforts to secure and enlarge knowledge are worthwhile insofar as they are
cost effective, in that the resources we expend for these purposes are more than
Skepticism and Its Deficits
55

compensated for through benefits obtained. And in this regard skepticism
simply proves uneconomic.
THE DEFICIENCY OF SKEPTICISM
The skeptic too readily loses sight of the very reason of being of our cognitive
endeavors.The object of rational inquiry is not just to avoid error but to answer
our questions, to secure information about the world. And here, as elsewhere,
“Nothing ventured, nothing gained” is the operative principle. Granted, a sys-
tematic abstention from cognitive involvement is a surefire safeguard against one
kind of error. But it affords this security at too steep a price.The shortcoming of
that “no-risk” option is that it guarantees failure from the very outset.
It is self-defeating to follow the radical skeptic into letting discretion be
the whole of epistemic valor by systematically avoiding accepting anything
whatsoever in the domain of empirical fact. To be sure, when we set out to ac-
quire information we may well discover in the end that, try as we will, success
in reaching our goal is beyond our means. But we shall certainly get nowhere at
all if we do not even set out on the journey—which is exactly what the skeptic’s
blanket proscription of acceptance amounts to.
In “playing the game” of making assertions and laying claims to credence,
we may well lose: our contentions may well turn out to be mistaken. But, in a
refusal to play this game at all we face not just the possibility but the certainty
of losing the prize—we abandon any chance to realize our cognitive objectives.
A skeptical policy of systematic avoidance of acceptance is fundamentally irra-
tional, because it blocks from the very outset any prospect of realizing the in-
herent goals of the enterprise of factual inquiry. In cognition, as in other sectors
of life, there are no guarantees, no ways of averting risk altogether, no option
that is totally safe and secure. The best and most we can do is to make optimal
use of the resources at our disposal to “manage” risks as best we can. To decline
to do this by refusing to accept any sort of risk is to become immobilized. The
skeptic thus pays a great price for the comfort of safety and security. If we want
information—if we deem ignorance no less a negativity than error—then we
must be prepared to “take the gamble” of answering our questions in ways that
risk some possibility of error. A middle-of-the-road evidentialism emerges as
the most sensible approach.
Perhaps, no other objection to radical skepticism in the factual domain is
as impressive as the fact that, for the all-out skeptic, any and all assertions about
the world’s objective facts must lie on the same cognitive plane. No con-
tention—no matter how bizarre—is any better off than any other in point of its
legitimative credentials. For the thoroughgoing skeptic there just is no ration-
ality-relevant difference between “More than three people are currently living
in China” and “There are at present fewer than three automobiles in North
56
Knowledge and Its Problems

America.” As far as the cognitive venture goes, it stands committed to the view
that there is “nothing to choose” in point of warrant between one factual claim
and another. Radical skepticism is an H-bomb that levels everything in the
cognitive domain.
The all-out skeptic writes off at the very outset a prospect whose aban-
donment would only be rationally defensible at the very end. As Charles
Sanders Peirce never tired of maintaining, inquiry only has a point if we accept
from the outset that there is some prospect that it may terminate in a satisfac-
tory answer to our questions. He indicated the appropriate stance with trench-
ant cogency: “The first question, then, which I have to ask is: Supposing such
a thing to be true, what is the kind of proof which I ought to demand to satisfy
me of its truth?”21 A general epistemic policy which would as a matter of prin-
ciple make it impossible for us to discover something which is ex hypothesi the
case is clearly irrational. And the skeptical proscription of all acceptance is ob-
viously such a policy—one that abrogates the project of inquiry at the very out-
set, without according it the benefit of a fair trial. A presumption in favor of
rationality—cognitive rationality included—is rationally inescapable. It could,
to be sure, eventuate at the end of the day that satisfactory knowledge of phys-
ical reality is unachievable. But, until the end of the proverbial day arrives, we
can and should proceed on the idea that this possibility is not in prospect.
“Never bar the path of inquiry,” Peirce rightly insisted. And radical skepticism’s
fatal flaw is that it aborts inquiry at the start.
Reason’s commitment to the cognitive enterprise of inquiry is absolute and
establishes an insatiable demand for extending and deepening the range of our
information. As Aristotle observed,“Man by nature desires to know.” In this cog-
nitive sphere, reason cannot leave well enough alone, but insists on a continual
enhancement in the range and depth of our understanding of ourselves and of the
world about us. Cognitive rationality is a matter of using cogent reasons to gov-
ern one’s acceptance of beliefs—of answering one’s questions in the best feasible
way. But is this project realizable at all? We must consider the skeptic’s long-
standing challenge that it is not. For, skeptics—in their more radical moments, at
any rate—insists that there is never a satisfactory justification for accepting any-
thing whatsoever. By rejecting the very possibility of securing trustworthy infor-
mation in factual matters, skepticism sets up a purportedly decisive obstacle to
implementing these aims of reason.
The skeptical challenge to the project of empirical inquiry based on princi-
ples of cognitive rationality has a very plausible look about it. Our means for the
acquisition of factual knowledge are unquestionably imperfect.Where, for exam-
ple, are the “scientific truths” of yesteryear—those earth-shaking syntheses of
Aristotle and Ptolemy, of Newton and Maxwell? Virtually no part of them has
survived wholly unscathed. And given this past course of bitter experience, how
can we possibly validate our present acceptance of factual contentions in a
rationally convincing way? This alone indicates the need of coming to terms with
Skepticism and Its Deficits
57

a radical skepticism, which maintains that rational cognition is unattainable—
that the quest for knowledge is in principle a vain and vacuous pursuit.
The skeptic seemingly moves within the orbit of rationality, but only seem-
ingly so. For, in fact skepticism runs afoul of the only promising epistemologi-
cal instrumentalities that we have. Philosophical sceptics generally set up some
abstract standard of absolutistic certainty and then try to show that no knowl-
edge claims in a certain area (sense, memory, scientific theory, and the like) can
possibly meet the conditions of this standard. From this circumstance, the im-
possibility of such a category of “knowledge” is accordingly inferred. But this
inference is totally misguided. For, what follows is rather the inappropriateness
or incorrectness of the standard at issue. If the vaunted standard is such that
knowledge claims cannot possibly meet it, the moral is not “too bad for knowl-
edge claims,” but “too bad for the standard.” Any position that precludes in
principle the possibility of valid knowledge claims thereby effectively manifests
its own unacceptability.
The skeptic’s argument is a double-edged sword that cuts both ways and
inflicts the more serious damage on itself. It is senseless to impose on some-
thing qualification conditions which it cannot in the very nature of things
meet. An analogue of the old Roman legal precept is operative here—one is
never obliged beyond the limits of the possible (ultra posse nemo obligatur). It
cannot rationally be required of us to do more than the best that is possible in
any situation—cognition included. But rationality also conveys the comforting
realization that more than this cannot be required of us: we are clearly entitled
to see the best that can be done as good enough.
Historically, to be sure, committed skeptics like Sextus Empiricus occa-
sionally been prepared to grant that they are destroyers of logos (reason and dis-
course), insisting that they use reason and discourse simply as instruments for
their own destruction. They have been prepared to grasp the nettle and
admit—perhaps even welcome—the consequence that their position does not
only gainsay knowledge, but actually rejects the whole project of cognitive ra-
tionality (at any rate at the level of our factual beliefs). But whatever satisfaction
this posture may afford the skeptic, it has little appeal to those who do not al-
ready share his position since (on its own telling) no cogent reason can be given
for its adoption.The collapse of the prospect of rational inquiry and communi-
cation is the ultimate sanction barring the way to any rational espousal of rad-
ical skepticism. It is a price that a fanatically dedicated devotee of the skeptical
position may be willing to meet, but it is clearly one that people who are not so
precommitted cannot possibly pay. Sensible people require cogent reasons for
what they do, and only with the abandonment of a rigoristic all-out skepticism
can such reasons be obtained.
The only sort of critique of skepticism that makes sense to ask for is a ra-
tional critique. And, viewed from this standpoint, the decisive flaw of skepti-
cism is that it makes rationality itself impossible.
58
Knowledge and Its Problems

In a last-ditch defense of a skeptical position, the radical sceptic may still
take the following line: “Departing from your view of ‘rationality’ and falling
short by your standards is not something that I need regard as a genuine failing.
Indeed, my very thesis is that your “rationality” has no suitable credentials.” To
meet this desperate but profound tactic we must shift the ground of argumen-
tation. It now becomes advantageous to approach the whole issue from a new
point of departure, namely that of the prospects of communication. For, it turns
out that not only does his refusal to accept claims preclude the radical skeptic
from participating in the enterprise of inquiry, he is blocked from the enterprise
of communication as well.
The process of transmitting information through communication is pred-
icated on the fundamental convention that ordinarily and normally what one
declares to be so is something that (1) one accepts as true, and (2) one claims to
be rationally warranted in accepting.22 In rejecting the ground rules of our rea-
soning as inappropriate, the skeptic also abandons the ground rules of our com-
munication. In denying the prospect of any sort of rational warrant—however
tentative—the all-out skeptic embarks upon a self-imposed exile from the
community of communicators, seeing that the communicative use of language
is predicated on conceding the warranting presuppositions of language use. To
enter into a discussion at all, one must acquiesce in the underlying rules of
meaning and information-transmission that make discussion in general possi-
ble. But, if nothing can appropriately be accepted, then no rules can be estab-
lished—and thus no statements made, since meaningful discourse requires an
agreement on the informative conventions. If the skeptic denies us (and him-
self) knowledge—or at least plausible beliefs—about the meanings of words
and symbols, then there is just no way he can communicate with us (and per-
haps even with himself). A radical skepticism, in the final analysis, engenders
the collapse of communication and deliberation, thereby leading to a with-
drawal from the human community.
Skepticism defeats from the very start any prospect of realizing our cogni-
tive purposes and aspirations. It runs counter to the teleological enterprise to
which we humans stand committed in virtue of being the sort of intelligent
creatures we are. It is ultimately this collision between skepticism and our need
for the products of rational inquiry that makes the rejection of skepticism a ra-
tional imperative. A radical skepticism conflicts not only with the realities and
practicalities of the human situation but also no less decidedly with its equally
important idealities.23
Skepticism and Its Deficits
59

This page intentionally left blank.

61
Chapter 4
Epistemic Justification in a Functionalistic
and Naturalistic Perspective
SYNOPSIS
•
Experience is always personal—a biographical episode in the life of an in-
dividual.The move from such subjectivity to objective, person-independent
fact is never automatic.
•
Some suggest that a coordination can be effected through common-cause
considerations. But this embarking is on a sea of difficulties.
•
The epistemologically appropriate justification of objective claims calls for a
recourse to pragmatic argumentation.
•
The validation at issue emerges from evolutionary considerations,although it
is rational rather than natural selection that is crucial here.
•
There, of course, remains an ineliminable prospect of error in relation to our
experientially based knowledge claims. But this need not stand in the way of
claiming the appropriateness—or even the truth—of our claims to objective
knowledge.
•
As such considerations indicate, the concept of presumption is a crucial
involvement of cognitive validation.
EXPERIENCE AND FACT
Once the idea of sensory certainty is called into question, the way is cleared to
seeing sense-based knowledge in a practicalistic light.To gain a firm grip on the

issue, it helps to draw a crucial distinction between cognitive experiences (which
are always personal and subjective) and objective situations (which are not). “I
take myself to be seeing a cat on that mat” is one sort of thing and “There actu-
ally is a cat on that mat” is something quite different. The former is purely per-
son-coordinated and thereby merely autobiographical while the latter objective
claim is decidedly impersonal.1 (Only in the special case of automatically self-
appertaining issues such as feeling aches and pains will subjective experiences
authorize claims in objective territory: to feel a headache is to have a headache.)
Two facts are crucial in this connection:
•
Experience as such is always personal: it is always a matter of what oc-
curs within the thought-realm of some individual. Thus all that is
ever secured directly and totally by experience are claims in the order
of subjectivity.
•
Such subjective claims are always autobiographical: they can never as-
sure objective claims about facts regarding the “external” world with-
out some further ado.
These facts separate experience from objectivity. With objectively world-
regarding facts we always transcend experience as such.The assertoric context of
an objectively factual statement (“There is a cat there”) is something that out-
runs any merely experiential fact (“I take myself to be seeing a cat there”).There
is always an epistemic gap between subjectivel experience and objective fact.
But how can one manage to cross this epistemic gap between subjective ex-
perience and subject-transcending reality? Some theorists think that causality pro-
vides a natural and effective bridge across the gap.2 Let us examine this prospect.
PROBLEMS OF COMMON-CAUSE EPISTEMOLOGY
The basic idea of the causal approach is epistemic justification roots in the
circumstance.
Sosa’s endorsement of causal epistemology pivots on that experience causes
our beliefs in some appropriate or standard way. However, this formula makes
it transparently clear that epistemic justification will turn not just on causality
alone but its suitability and thereby on the way in which this causality operates.
And this little qualification of “standard appropriateness” has to carry a big
burden of weight. Of course we cannot do without it: mere causality as such
does not engender epistemic justification. (I was not epistemically justified in
expecting the villain’s death after being shot on stage even when the wicked
prop man had substituted a real loaded pistol—unbeknownst to one and all.)
And the fly in the ointment is that things become unraveled when we proceed
to take this idea of appropriate causation seriously.
62
Knowledge and Its Problems

Suppose that I espouse the objective claim “That there is a cat on that
mat” because I have a seeing-a-cat-on-the-mat experience, that is, because I
take myself to be looking at a cat on the mat. What is now required for that ex-
perience to “be caused in the appropriate way”—that is, being appropriately
produced by a cat on that mat? Clearly the only correct/appropriate/standard
mode of experience production here is one that proceeds via an actual cat on
that mat. Unless one construes “experience” in a question-begging way that is
not just psychologically phenomenological but objectively authentic, experi-
ences will not suffice for justifactory authentications. That is, something like
the following causal story must obtain:
There really is a cat on the mat. And in the circumstances it is this
situation—duly elaborated in its causal complexity by way of involving
a light source, eyes looking in the right direction, photons emanating
from the light source impacting on the retina, etc.—that stimulates my
cerebral cortex in such a way as to engender this cat-on-the-mat seeing
experience.
But note the difficulty here. Unless a real cat on that real mat is appropriately
the causal source of my taking myself to be seeing a cat on the mat, that cat-
on-the-mat belief of mine is simply not “caused in the appropriate way.” (If
Pavlovian conditioning leads me to experience a cat-conviction when con-
fronted by any domestic quadruped—cats included—then my “Cat on the
mat belief,” even when indeed caused by a cat’s presence on the mat, is not
caused in the right sort of way for knowledge.) But on any such account the
APPROPRIATE production of that belief not merely assures but actually PRESUPPOSES
its truth. Only when one assumes an account that already assures the truth of
the belief at issue can one tell that the belief is epistemically justified. On this
basis, determining the epistemic justification of a belief does not just sub-
stantiate the truth of that belief but requires it. On such a construction of the
matter, epistemic justification is available only when it is too late because it
is no longer needed.
This condition of things creates big problems when it indeed is “the epis-
temic being of sensory experience upon knowledge” that we have in view. For
given that epistemic justification is our only cognitive pathway to establishing
the truth of beliefs, there is no point to a concept of justification that requires
an appropriateness that is available only after this truth has already been estab-
lished. If appropriateness cannot be determined independently of establishing
the actual truth, then it is question-beggingly self-defeating to include it
among the criteria of our truth-claims.
Sosa’s endorsement of the idea that “it is enough [for the epistemic justifi-
cation of claims to knowledge] that the experience cause the belief in some ap-
propriate or standard way” (p. 284) places him squarely into the increasingly
Epistemic Justification
63

popular tradition of causal epistemology. This approach looks to the following
plausible-looking thesis generally favored by causal epistemologists:
A person X knows that p is the case iff the (causal) processes that actual-
ize p as a state-of-affairs (in nature) and the (causal) processes that en-
gender X’s belief that this state of affairs obtains are suitably coordinated.
Implementing this idea requires the following three elements:
1.
A set [p] of causal factors engendering P’s actualization via a causal
relationship: [p] ⇒p.
2.
A set [X believes p] of causal factors engendering X’s belief in P via
a causal relationship: [X believes p] ⇒x believes p.
3.
A (duly specified) relationship of “harmonious coordination” between
the two opposite sets of causal factors [p] and [X believes p].
Those three elements must all be in proper alignment with one another for a
knowledge claim to qualify as appropriate.
But a rocky and winding road now lies before us. For one thing, it now be-
comes extremely difficult ever to attribute knowledge to others. If I know any-
thing about history, I know that Edward Gibbon knew that Julius Caesar was
assassinated. But I certainly do not have much of a clue about the specific causal
factors that produced this belief in Gibbon. (Indeed I am not even in a position
to say anything much about the causal sources of my own metabelief.) All those
now requisite causal issues are lost in a fog of unknowing.3 I can plausibly conjec-
ture that a cogent causal story can be told but I do not have much of clue as to
what it is and would thus be hard put to evidentiate it. Moreover—and more
damagingly yet—the sorts of claims that I could ever make about this causal story
are in epistemically far more problematic than is my belief that Gibbon knew that
Caesar was assassinated. The problem is that the causal approach to knowledge
explains the obscure by what is yet far or more so.To establish simple knowledge
claims on its basis we would need to go through a rigamarole so cumbersome in
its demands for generally unavailable information as to lead sensible people to de-
spair of the whole project. If that is what is required to substantiate claims about
other people’s knowledge, then skepticism on the subject offers the best option. If
any plausible alternatives to common-cause epistemology are available, they
surely deserve our most sympathetic consideration.
MODES OF JUSTIFICATION
To see how a cogent alternative approach to the appropriate epistemic justifi-
cation of objective claims might be developed, it is necessary to go back to
64
Knowledge and Its Problems

square one and begin with a closer look at the question of just what it is to
“justify” a belief.
Belief justification is a complex idea subject to a considerable variety of
distinctions and elaborations. But for present purposes the crucial distinction is
that between:
•
strong epistemic justification, that is, justification for accepting the be-
lief as definitively true, for seeing it as meriting outright acceptance.
•
weak epistemic justification, that is, justification for according the belief
some credit, for seeing it as a plausible prospect.
With strong justification we regard the issue of acceptability as settled, with
weak justification we regard it as yet substantially open, viewing whatever com-
mitment we have to the belief as tentative, provisional, and defeasible.
Now the critical considerations in the light of this distinction are (1) that
while we must grant foundationalists that perceptual experience provides epis-
temic justification, nevertheless where objective factual claims are concerned we
have to acknowledge this can only be justification of the weak sort, and (2) that
while we must grant the coherentists that strong justification is in general not
available on the basis of experience alone but is something that is only to be had
on a larger contextual and systemic basis.
Thus consider again that cat-on-the-mat experience where “I take myself
to be seeing a cat on the mat.” On its basis I would arrive quite unproblemati-
cally at the following contentions:
•
It seems plausible to suppose that there is a cat on the mat
•
There is presumably a cat on the mat
But to claim unqualified assurance that there indeed is a cat on the mat in such
circumstances would be stretching matters too far. The Sceptic is right in this,
that there is a possibility of illusion or delusion—that something controversial
might be being done with mirrors or puppets, and so on. But the indicated pro-
inclination toward the theses at issue is certainly warranted. Conclusiveness
may be absent but plausibility is certainly there.
Yet how is one to get beyond such tentativity? To step from that visual
experience to an objective factual claim on the order of
•
There actually is a cat there
•
There actually is a mat there
•
The cat is actually emplaced on the mat
is a move that can be made—but not without further ado. Let us consider what
sort of “further ado” is required here.
Epistemic Justification
65

The position at issue is a “direct realism” of sorts. The step from a sensory
experience (“I take myself to be seeing a cat”) to an objective factual claim
(“There is a cat over there and I am looking at it” is operationally direct but epis-
temically mediated. And it is mediated not by an inference but by a policy, namely
the policy of trusting one’s own senses. This policy itself is based neither on
wishful thinking not on arbitrary decisions: it emerges in the school of praxis
from the consideration that a long course of experience has taught us that our
senses generally guide us aright—that the indications of visual experience, un-
like, say, those of dream experience, generally provide reliable information that
can be implemented in practice.
Consider the prospect of devising an inference of the format:
—I take myself to be seeing a COTM (cat on the mat)
—Additional Premise X
Therefore: There is a COTM
Clearly if that Additional Premise X were “Whatever I take myself to be seeing
is actually there” we would be home free. But it is also clear that no such factual
premiss able to effect the transit from subjective appearances to objective real-
ity is going to be available.
We thus seem to have two prime choices. One is to weaken the conclusion
to: “There is probably a COTM.” But, of course, probabilities do not fix objective
facts: we can count cats alright, but not probable cats. And so we now lose our
grip on the actual objective constitution of things.
The other prime alternative is to shift that Additional Premise from the
reaches of available fact to that of epistemic policy. On this basis, we would
move to a more complex course of reasoning that would run somewhat as
follows:
1.
[Experiential fact] By all presently available indications there is a
COTM (≅I take myself to be seeing a COTM).
2.
[Experiential fact—encompassed in (1)] There are no concrete coun-
terindications in hand: no case-specific evidence indicating that it is
not the case that there is a COTM.
3.
[Principle of rational procedure] It is rational to adopt the policy of
accepting noncounterindicated visual indications as veridical.
4.
[Derivative contention—from (1)–(3)] It is rational to adopt the
claim “There is a COTM” as veridical.
5.
[Principle of rational procedure] To implement whatever course is
rationally warranted in the circumstances.
6.
[Policy Implementation—of (5) in the light of (1)–(4)] Accepting the
claim: “There is a COTM”
66
Knowledge and Its Problems

The transit from the premise of our rational argument to its contention is
now not effected by a process of deductive or inductive interference at all. In-
stead, it is now the product of a prudent policy of procedure geared to the im-
plementation of a rationality principle. The long and short of it is that the
epistemic gap between subjective experience and subject-transcending reality is
crossed neither by a quasi-cogical inference nor by a conceptually grounded
general principle but by a practical policy: a procedural modus operandi
grounded in the functional teleology of the communicative enterprise.
To be sure, the line of thought at issue here leads to the question of how a
principle of procedure is to be validated. This turns the problem in a new di-
rection. And here the crucial point is that we need not necessarily proceed on a
factual basis With factual claims validation is a matter of securing evidence of
truth. But with procedural process validation can take many forms. Preemi-
nently there are such alternatives as:
1.
This-will-work argumentation to the effect that the method at issue
is efficient and effective in delivering the envisioned results.
But this is not our only option. For there is also the prospect of:
2.
This-is-bound-to-work argumentation to the effect that it any method
or standardization procedure will deliver the envisioned results, then
the method at issue will do so as well.
And going beyond this we also have:
3.
This-or-nothing argumentation to the effect that the method at issue
is our only hope for realizing the envisioned result: that if it does not
work, then nothing will.
and
4.
This-or-nothing-better argumentation to the effect that the method at
issue is bound to do at least as well as any available alternative.
The principal point is now clear. In order to validate those practical policies of
procedure at issue in the revised course of reasoning at issue in our argument we
need not proceed on the factual/evidential order of justification at all but can
shift to the practical/methodological arena of deliberation where altogether dif-
ferent ground rules of justification and validation apply.
But how would this emergence of policy validation from a body of experi-
ence work in practice? The idea of presumption provides the key that unlocks
the issue.
Epistemic Justification
67

THE EVOLUTIONARY ASPECT OF SENSORY EPISTEMOLOGY
A presumption-based practicalistic theory of knowledge development clearly
differs from a causal physicalisitic account. And it enjoys substantial advantages.
Recent philosophy of knowledge has been pervaded by a “revolt against
dualism” that insists on continuities and overlaps where earlier theorists had
seen clear divisions and sharp separations. William James stressed the continu-
ity of thought and inveighed against division and compartmentalization.
Whitehead condemned bifurcation. John Dewey inveighed against all du-
alisms. And their successors have been enthusiastic in continuing their ten-
dency in matters of detail. W. V. Quine strives to consign the analytic/synthetic
distinction to oblivion. Donald Davidson denigrates the conceptual/substantive
distinction. And innumerable contemporary philosophy of science object to the
fact/theory distinction because they regard all factual claims as “theory laden.”
But throughout all his turning away from division and dualism, one tradi-
tional distinction has remained sacrosanct: that between cause and reason, be-
tween efficient causation and final causation. Where the medievals tended to
construe causa broadly and to group paternal and volitional “causation” together
as reflecting differences in mode but not in kind, the moderns from Descartes
onward have erected a Chinese wall between the two. Immanual Kant stressed
the distinction:“There are two and only two kinds of causality conceivable by us:
causality is either according to nature [and is thus efficient causality] or accord-
ing to free will and choices [and is thus final causality].”4 And so even Davidson,
in the very midst of his polemic against the conceptual/substantive distinction,
argues that:
[we must] give up the idea that meaning or knowledge is grounded in
something [external to cognition proper] . . . No doubt meaning and
knowledge depend on experience and experience ultimately on sen-
sation. But this is the “depend” of causality, not that of evidence or
justification.5
And so as Davidson sees it, causation is one sort of thing and justification an-
other, and never the twain shall meet in the cognitive realm. For while beliefs
may well have causes, these do not matter in the context of justification. Causes
are not reasons since “nothing can count as a reason for holding a belief except
another belief.”6 All belief validation (justification) is discursive and proceeds by
means of other beliefs. “Causes are rationally inert” is the motto here: they may
provide the occasion for the provision of reasons but they themselves can never
provide reasons. Or so Davidson has it.
But not so with causal epistemologists. For they propose to join the two
hemispheres together. And with good reason. For having abandoned such other
Kantian dichotomies as synthetic/analytic, empirical/conceptual, a priori/a pos-
68
Knowledge and Its Problems

teriori we would do well to abandon this cause/reason division also. The fact is
that causes and reasons can and should be seen as systemically coordinated not
by a Leibnizian preestablished harmony but by a Darwinian process of evolu-
tion. With intelligent beings whose modus operandi is suitably shaped by their
evolutionary heritage, the step from a suitable experience to a belief is at once
causal AND rational: we hold the belief because of the experience both in the order
of efficient (causal) and in the order of final (rational) causation. With creatures
such as ourselves, experiences of certain sorts are dual-purpose; owing to their—
and our—evolutionary nature their occurrence both causally engenders and ra-
tionally justifies the holding of certain beliefs through a disposition that
evolution has engendered exactly because it is objectively justified to some sub-
stantial extent. If this is evolutionary reliabilism, then we are well-advised to
make the most of it.7 Let us examine a bit more closely what is at issue here.
RATIONAL VERSUS NATURAL SELECTION
Scientifically minded epistemologists nowadays incline to consider how the
workings of the “mind” can be explained in terms of the operations of the
“brain.”8 But this approach has its limits. Biological evolution is doubtless
what accounts for the cognitive machinery whose functioning provides for
our possession of intelligence, but explaining the ways in which we use it
largely calls for a rather different sort of evolutionary approach, one that ad-
dresses the development of thought-procedures rather than that of thought-
mechanisms—of “software” rather than “hardware.” What is at issue here is a
matter of cultural-teleological evolution through a process of rational rather
than Darwinian natural selection. Very different processes are accordingly at
work, the one as it were blind, the other purposive. (In particular, biological
evolution reacts only to actually realized changes in environing conditions:
cultural evolution in its advanced stages can react also to merely potential
changes in condition through people’s capacity to think hypothetically and
thereby to envision “what could happen if ” certain changes occurred.) Once
intelligence appears on the scene to any extent, no matter how small, it sets
up pressures toward the enlargement of its scope, powerfully conditioning
any and all future cultural evolution through the rational selection of
processes and procedures on the basis of purposive efficacy.
Rationality thus emerges as a key element in the evolutionary development
of methods as distinguished from faculties. The “selective” survival of effective
methods is no blind and mechanical process produced by some inexorable agency
of nature; rational agents place their bets in theory and practice in line with meth-
ods that prove themselves successful, tending to follow the guidance of those 
that succeed and to abandon—or readjust—those that fail. Once we posit a
method-using community that functions under the guidance of intelligence—
Epistemic Justification
69

itself a factor of biologically evolutionary advantage—only a short step separates
the pragmatic issue of the applicative success of its methods (of any sort) from
the evolutionary issue of their historical survival. As long as these intelligent ra-
tional agents have a prudent concern for their own interests, the survival of rel-
atively successful methods as against relatively unsuccessful ones is a foregone
conclusion.
Rational selection is a complex process that transpires not in a “population”
but in a culture. It pivots on the tendency of a community of rational agents to
adopt and perpetuate, through example and teaching, practices and modes of
operation that are relatively more effective for the attainment of given ends
than their available alternatives. Accordingly, the historical development of
methods and modes of operation within a society of rational agents is likely to
reflect a course of actual improvement. Rational agents involved in a course of
trial-and-error experimentation with different processes and procedures are un-
likely to prefer (for adoption by themselves and transmission to their succes-
sors) practices and procedures which are ineffective or inefficient.
This line of consideration does not envision a direct causal linkage be-
tween the historical survival of method users and the functional effectiveness of
their methods. The relationship is one of common causation. The intelligence
that proves itself normal conducive also forms functional efficacy. In conse-
quence, survival in actual use of a method within a community of (realistic, nor-
mal) rational agents through this very fact affords evidence for its being
successful in realizing its correlative purposes.9
These deliberations regarding rational selection have to this point been al-
together general in their abstract bearing on methodologies of any shape or de-
scription. They apply to methods across the board, and hold for methods for
peeling apples as much as of methods for substantiating knowledge-claims. But
let us now focus more restrictedly on specifically cognitive methods, and con-
sider the development of the cognitive and material technology of intellectual
production.
There is certainly no need to exempt cognitive methodology from the
range of rational selection in the evolution of methodologies. Quite to the con-
trary: there is every reason to think that the cognitive methods and informa-
tion-engendering procedures that we deploy in forming our view of reality
evolve selectively by an historic, evolutionary process of trial and error—analo-
gous in role though different in character from the biological mutations affect-
ing the bodily mechanisms by which we comport ourselves in the physical
world. Accordingly, cognitive methods develop subject to revision in response
to the element of “success and failure” in terms of the teleology of the practice
of rational inquiry. An inquiry procedure is an instrument for organizing our ex-
perience into a systematized view of reality. And as with any tool or method or
instrument, the paramount question takes the instrumentalistic form: Does it
work? To be more specific, does it produce the desired result? Is it successful in
70
Knowledge and Its Problems

practice? Legitimation along these lines is found in substantial part on the fact
of survival through historical vicissitudes in the context of this pivotal issue of
“working out best.”This sort of legitimation has at the basis of the cultural de-
velopment of our cognitive resources via the varieties and selective retention of
our epistemically oriented intellectual products.10
It is clear that there are various alternative approaches to the problem of de-
termining “how things work in the world.” The examples of such occult cogni-
tive frameworks as those of numerology (with its benign ratios), astrology (with
its astral influences), and black magic (with its mystic forces) indicate that alter-
native explanatory frameworks exist, and that these can have very diverse de-
grees of merit. Now in the Western tradition the governing standards of human
rationality are implicit in the goals of explanation, prediction, and preeminently
control. (And thus the crucial factor is not, for example, sentimental “at-oneness
with nature”—think of the magician vs. the mystic vs. the sage as cultural
ideals.) These standards revolve about considerations of practice and are implicit
in the use of our conceptual resources in the management of our affairs.
Given the reasonable agent’s well-advised predilection for success in one’s
ventures, the fact that the cognitive methods we employ have a good record of
demonstrated effectiveness in regard to explanation, prediction, and control is
not surprising but only to be expected: the community of rational inquirers
would have given them up long ago were they not comparatively successful.
The effectiveness of our cognitive methodology is thus readily accounted for on
an evolutionary perspective based on rational selection and the requirements for
survival through adoption and transmission.
Yet, people are surely not all that rational—they have their moments of
aberration and self-indulgence. Might not such tendencies selectively favor the
survival of the ineffective over the effective—of the fallacious rather than the
true—and slant the process of cognitive evolution in inappropriate directions?
C. S. Peirce clearly recognized this prospect:
Logicality in regard to practical matters . . . is the most useful quality an
animal can possess, and might, therefore, result from the action of nat-
ural selection; but outside of these it is probably of more advantage to
the animal to have his mind filled with pleasing and encouraging vi-
sions, independently of their truth; and thus, upon unpractical subjects,
natural selection might occasion a fallacious tendency of thought.11
However, the methodological orientation of our approach provides a safeguard
against an unwarranted penchant for such fallacious tendencies. At the level of
individual beliefs “pleasing and encouraging visions” might indeed receive a
survival-favoring impetus. But this unhappy prospect is effectively removed
where a systematic method of inquiry is concerned—a method that must by its
very synoptic nature lie in the sphere of the pragmatically effective.
Epistemic Justification
71

The objection looms: But is it true that evolutionary survival among cog-
nitive methods is inherently rational? Hasn’t astrology survived to the present
day—as its continuing presence in newspaper columns attests? The response
runs: Astrology has indeed survived. But not in the scientific community, that
is, among people dedicated in a serious way to the understanding, explana-
tion, and control of nature. In the Western, Faustian12 intellectual tradition of
science, the ultimate arbiter of rationality is represented by the factor of
knowledge-wed-to-action, and the ultimate validation of our beliefs lies in
the combination of theoretical and practical success—with “practice” con-
strued primarily in its pragmatic sense. All these “occult” procedures may
have survived in some ecological niche in Western culture. But in science they
are long extinct.
It is accordingly not difficult to give examples of the operation of evolution-
ary processes in the cognitive domain. The intellectual landscape of human his-
tory is littered with the skeletal remains of the extinct dinosaurs of this sphere.
Examples of such defunct methods for the acquisition and explanatory utilization
of information include astrology, numerology, oracles, dream-interpretation, the
reading of tea leaves or the entrails of birds, animism, the teleological physics 
of the Pre-Socratics, and so on. No doubt, such processes continue in issue in
some human communities to this very day; but clearly not among those dedi-
cated to serious inquiry into nature’s ways—that is, scientists. There is nothing
intrinsically absurd or inherently contemptible about such unorthodox cogni-
tive programs—even the most occult of them have a long and not wholly un-
successful history. (Think, for example, of the prominent role of numerological
explanation from Pythagoreanism, through Platonism, to the medieval Arabs,
down to Kepler in the Renaissance.) Distinctly different scientific methodolo-
gies and programs have been mooted: Ptolemaic “saving the phenomena” ver-
sus the hypothetico-deductive method, or again, Baconian collectionism versus
the post-Newtonian theory of experimental science, and so forth. The emer-
gence, development, and ultimate triumph of scientific method of inquiry and
explanation invite an evolutionary account—though clearly one that involves
rational rather than natural selection.
The scientific approach to factual inquiry is simply one alternative among
others, and it does not have an unshakable basis in the very constitution of the
human intellect. Rather, the basis of our historically developed and entrenched
cognitive tools lies in their (presumably) having established themselves in open
competition with their rivals. It has come to be shown before the tribunal of
bitter experience—through the historical vagaries of an evolutionary process of
selection—that the accepted methods work out most effectively in actual prac-
tical vis-à-vis other tried alternatives. Such a legitimation is not absolute, but
only presumptive. It does, however, manage to give justificatory weight to the
historical factor of being in de facto possession of the field. The emergence of
the principles of scientific understanding (simplicity, uniformity, and the like)
72
Knowledge and Its Problems

is thus a matter of cultural rather than biological evolution subject to rational
rather than natural selection.
To be sure cultural evolution is shaped and canalized by constraints that
themselves are the products of biological evolution. For our instincts, inclina-
tions, and natural dispositions are all programmed into us by evolution. The
transition from a biologically advantageous economy of effective physical effort
to a cognitively advantageous economy of effective intellectual efforts is a short
and easy step.
An individual’s heritage comes from two main sources: a biological her-
itage derived from the parents and a cultural heritage derived from the society.
However, in the development of our knowledge, this second factor becomes
critical.To establish and perpetuate itself in any community of rational agents,
a practice or method of procedure must prove itself in the course of experi-
ence. Not only must it be to some extent effective in realizing the pertinent
aims and ends, but it must prove itself to be more efficient than comparably
available alternatives. With societies composed of rational agents, the pressure
of means-ends efficacy is ever at work in forging a process of cultural (rather
than natural) selection for replacing less by more cost-effective ways of achiev-
ing the group’s committed ends—its cognitive ends emphatically included.
Our cognitive faculties are doubtless the product of biological evolution, but
the processes and procedures by which we put them to work are the results of
a cultural evolution, which proceeds through rationally guided trial and error
subject to a pragmatic preference for retaining those processes and procedures
that prove theorists efficient and effective. Rational people have a strong bias
for what works.6 And progress is swift because once rationality gains an inch,
it wants a mile.
We know that various highly “convenient” principles of knowledge-
production are simply false:
•
What seems to be, is.
•
What people say is true.
•
The simplest patterns that fit the data are actually correct.
We realize full well that such generalizations do not hold—however nice it
would be if they did. Nevertheless throughout the conduct of inquiry we accept
them as principles of presumption. We follow the higher-level metarule: “In the
absence of concrete indications to the contrary, proceed as though such princi-
ples were true—that is, accept what seems to be (what people say, etc.) as true.”
The justification of this step as a measure of practical procedure is not the fac-
tual consideration that, “In proceeding in this way, you will come at correct in-
formation—you will not fall into error.” Rather it is the methodological
justification: “In proceeding in this way you will efficiently foster the interests of
the cognitive enterprise: the benefits will—on the whole—outweigh the costs.”
Epistemic Justification
73

AGAINST “PURE” INTELLECTUALISM
The process of presumption accordingly provides us with a nondiscursive route to
knowledge. After all, it is or should be—clear that beliefs can be justified not just
by other beliefs but also by experiences. My belief that the cat is on the mat need
not rest on the yet different belief that I am under the impression of seeing it
there; it can rest directly and immediately on my visual experience. My reason for
holding that belief of mine is not yet another belief but an experience—which
both occasions and at the same time considered from another point of view vali-
dates and justifies that belief.13 But in point of validation the linkage of belief to
experience is not direct but systemic.
Contemporary theorists often see the cognitive domain as confined to the
realm of verbalized belief. There is no hors de texte says Derrida. The only rea-
son for a belief is yet another belief says Davidson. But this sort of postmodern
cognitivistic “wisdom” is folly. The world of thought is not self-contained; it is
integral to the wider world of nature, part of a realm in which events happen
and experiences occur. A perfectly good reason for believing that the cat is on
the mat is just that we experience (i.e., observe) it to be there. The acceptabil-
ity of beliefs frequently roots not in other beliefs but in experience—and expe-
rience must here be understood in rather general and broadly inclusive terms.
For while the productive order of causes and the explanatory order of rea-
sons are fundamentally distinct: they melt together into a seamless whole with
rational agents whose thoughts and acts reflect the impetus of reasons. In the
case of rational beings, these two factors of causality and justification can come
together in a conjoint fusion because here informatively meaningful perceptions
and physical stimuli run together in coordinated unison. Since intelligent agents
operate both in the realm of the causality of nature and the causality of reason it
transpires that for them experiences such as a “cat-on-mat vision” have a double
aspect, able at once to engender and (in view of imprinted practical policies) to
justify suitable beliefs.
Accordingly, such intelligent agents have dual-function experiences that
conjointly both cause their beliefs and provide them with reasons for holding
them. For the justifactory links of experience to belief validation is not directly
causal. We can—of course—construct a causal account linking experience to be-
lief. But what plays a justifactory role in the rational validation of belief is not the
existence of such a causal account—it is, rather, the contextual belief (itself the
product of an ample body of experience) that such an account can be constituted.
Yet what sort of rationale is there for taking this line? The answer lies in
the Darwinian revolution. For in its wake we can contemplate the evolutionary
development of intelligent beings—the emergence of intelligent creatures for
which the realization of reasons can be causally effective and, conversely, suit-
ably operative causes can assume the form of reasons. We should, in fact, pro-
ceed to see intelligence itself as a capacity that renders it possible for certain
modes of experience-causation concurrently to provide reasons for beliefs.
74
Knowledge and Its Problems

It is exactly here—in explaining the modus operandi of evolutionarily
emergent rational beings—that causes and reasons must not be separated. The
“experience of having a cat perception of a certain sort”—exactly because it is a
cognitively significant experience—at once and concurrently constitutes the
cause of someone’s disposition to assent to “The cat is on the mat” and affords
them with a reason for making this claim. In the cognitive experience of intel-
ligent beings the regions of causes and of reasons are not disjoint but rather co-
ordinated: one and the same of experience can at once provide for the ground
and for the reason of a belief.
The fact is that intelligent agency brings something new on nature’s scene.
Certain sorts of eventuations are now amphibious because they are able to func-
tion at once and concurrently both in the realm of natural causes and in the realm
of reasons. My perceptual experience of “seeing the cat on the mat” is at once the
cause of my belief and affords my reason for holding that belief. Q: “What
causally produced his belief that the cat is on the mat?” A: “He saw it there.”
“Why—with what reason—does he claim that the cat is on the mat?” A: “He
saw it there.” His seeing experience is a matter of dual action. With intelligent
agents, such as ourselves, experiences can do double-duty as eventuations in na-
ture and as reasons for belief. For we have an evolution-imprinted “rational dis-
position” to effect the transition from a subjective experience (“I take myself to
be seeing a cat on the mat”) to the endorsement of an duly coordinated objective
claim (“There is a cat on the mat.”)
In a way, the difference between causes and reasons in the realm of cogni-
tive lies in the angle of vision, in whether those productive experiences are
viewed from an agent’s first-person or an observer’s third-person vantage
point. What we have here is one uniform sort of process experienced in two
different modes: internally to the experiencing subject as psychic; externally to
the third party observer as physical. And since a single underlying process is at
issue, psychophysical coordination is assured.The perspective in question pro-
vides for an automatic response to Mark Twain’s question “When the body
gets drunk, does the mind stay sober?”—and also to the reverse question:
“When the mind decides to get up and leave, does the body remain behind?”
What we have here is not a supranaturally preestablished harmony but an evo-
lution-programmed coordination: two different ways of processing one uni-
form basic sort of material. The question of causal effect versus rational
response is not one of primacy but rather one of coordination. (That of an
analogy: the same occurrence—sugar ingestion—engenders one result in rela-
tion to the tongue (taste) and another in relation to the nose (odor). The up-
shot is a cognitive theory close to the ontological “neutral monism” of Bertrand
Russell or the “radical empiricism” of William James.
To be sure, we must distinguish the mental (conceptual, rational) order of
the physical (causal) order. But where human knowledge is concerned evolu-
tionary processes can and do coordinate these two orders into a parallel align-
ment. An intelligent being is by natural design one for which certain
Epistemic Justification
75

transactions in the causal order appear (from the internal experiential stand-
point) as processes in the mental order capable of rationally engendering (i.e.,
in the modus operandi natural to the mental order) the acceptance of verbal-
ized responses of the type we characterize as beliefs. In sum, the experiential
route to belief validation and the causal sorts of belief production come into
coordinative fusion for such a creature in virtue of its evolution-designed
modus operandi. Only on this basis can we validate seeing our experience-pro-
vided “reasons” as authentic reasons. (After all, if beliefs alone could ever justify
beliefs it is hard to see how the process of belief-justification could ever get
under way?)
THE PROBLEM OF ERROR
But are there not deceptive experiences—experiences that both engender and
“justify” erroneous beliefs? Of course there are! But the threat is not as serious
as it looks. Even in cognitive matters we can—strange to say—manage to ex-
tract truth from error. Accordingly, one fundamental feature of inquiry is rep-
resented by the following observation:
Insofar as our thinking is vague, truth is accessible even in the face of error.
Consider the situation where you correctly accept P-or-Q. But—so let it
be supposed—the truth of this disjunction roots entirely in that of P while Q is
quite false. However, you accept P-or-Q only because you are convinced of the
truth of Q; it so happens that P is something you actually disbelieve. Yet despite
your error, your belief is entirely true.14 Consider a concrete instance. You be-
lieve that Smith bought some furniture because he bought a table. However it
was, in fact, a chair that he bought, something you would flatly reject. Never-
theless your belief that he bought some furniture is unquestionably correct.The
error in which you are involved, although real, is not so grave as to destabilize
the truth of your belief.
Ignorance is reflected in an inability to answer questions. But one has to be
careful in this regard. Answering a question informatively is not just a matter of
offering a correct answer but also a matter of offering an exact answer.
Thus consider the question “What is the population of Shanghai?” If I re-
spond “More than ten and less than ten billion” I have provided a correct answer,
but one that is not particularly helpful. This example illustrates a more far-
reaching point.
There is in general an inverse relationship between the precision or defi-
niteness of a judgment and its security: detail and probability stand in a
competing interconnection.
76
Knowledge and Its Problems

As we saw in chapter 2, increased confidence in the correctness of our es-
timates can always be purchased at the price of decreased accuracy. For any
sort of estimate whatsoever there is always a characteristic trade-off relation-
ship between the evidential security of the estimate, on the one hand (as deter-
minable on the basis of its probability or degree of acceptability), and on the
other hand its contentual definitiveness by way of exactness, detail, precision,
and the like. A complementarity relationship of sorts thus obtains here as be-
tween definiteness and security. The moral of this story is that, insofar as our
ignorance of relevant matters leads us to be vague in our judgments, we may
well manage to enhance the likelihood of being right.The fact of the matter is
that we have:
By constraining us to make vaguer judgments, ignorance can actually en-
hance our access to correct information (albeit at the cost of less detail and
precision).
Thus if I have forgotten that Seattle is in Washington State then if
“forced to guess” I might well erroneously locate it in Oregon. Nevertheless,
my vague judgment that “Seattle is located in the Northwestern United
States” is quite correct. This state of affairs means that when the truth of our
claims is critical we generally “play it safe” and make our commitments less
definite and detailed.
Consider, for example, so simple and colloquial a statement as “The ser-
vant declared that he could no longer do his master’s bidding.” This state-
ment is pervaded by a magisterial vagueness. It conveys very little about
what went on in the exchange between servant and master. We are told vir-
tually nothing about what either of them actually said. What the object of
their discussion was, what form of words they used, the manner of their dis-
course (did the master order or request? was the servant speaking from rue-
ful incapacity or from belligerent defiance?), all these are questions we
cannot begin to answer. Even the relationship at issue, whether owner/slave
or employer/employee is left in total obscurity. In sum, there is a vast range
of indeterminacy here—a great multitude of very different scenarios would
fit perfectly well to the description of events which that individual statement
puts before us. And this vagueness clearly provides a protective shell to
guard that statement against a charge of falsity. Irrespective of how matters
might actually stand within a vast range of alternative circumstances and
conditions, the statement remains secure, its truth unaffected by which pos-
sibility is realized. And in practical matters in particular, such rough guid-
ance is often altogether enough. We need not know just how much rain
there will be to make it sensible for us to take an umbrella. And so their po-
tential fragility does not—or need not—stand in the way of the utility—or
even of the truth—of our claims to objective knowledge.
Epistemic Justification
77

CONCLUSION
A whole generation of epistemologists have turned against the idea of “the ex-
perientially given” by supplementing the perfectly sound idea that Nothing is
given in experience by way of categorical truth regarding matters of objective fact
with the very mistaken conception that In epistemic contexts GIVEN must be con-
strued as GIVEN AS TRUE. When these theses are combined, it indeed follows that
there are no experiential givens. But of course the situation is drastically trans-
formed when one acknowledges that beyond the given as true, there is also the
given as plausible, or as probable, or as presumption-deserving. Once this step is
taken, Sosa’s question of “the epistemic bearing or sensory experience upon our
knowledge” acquires a very different aspect. For consider the salient question:
Does the fact that I take myself to be seeing a cat on a mat—that I have a “see-
ing a cat on a mat” experience—“entitle” or “suffice to justify” me to adopt the
belief that there actually is a cat on the mat there? This question, once raised,
this leads back to the underlying issues: What is at issue with belief entitlement
in such a context? Does it require guaranteed correctness beyond the reach of
any prospect of error—however far-fetched and remote? It is clear that the an-
swer is: surely not! Entitlement and justification here is no more than the sort
of rational assurance that it makes sense to ask for in the context at issue: a mat-
ter of reasonable evidentiation rather than categorical proof. The fundamental
question, after all, is not “Does subjective experience unfailingly guarantee its
objective proportions?” but rather “Does it appropriately evidentiate it?”
The shift from a proof-oriented “given as true” to a presumption-ori-
ented “given as plausible or credible” also has the advantage that in episte-
mology we are not driven outside the epistemic realm of reasons-for into that
of ontologically problematic causes-of. A sensible epistemology can without
difficulty remain within the epistemic realm of reasons by drawing a due
distinction between reasons-for-unblinking-acceptance-as-true and reasons-
for-endorsement-as-plausible.
Accordingly, the principal theses of these deliberations regarding the epis-
temic bearing of sensory experience on our knowledge can be set out at follows:
1.
There indeed are experiential givens. But these “givens” are actually
“takens.” They are not products of inference (hence “givens”), but of
an epistemic endorsement policy or practice (hence “takens”).
2.
Most critically, those experiential givens are not “givens as categor-
ically and infallibly true,” but rather merely as plausible. What is at
issue is not something categorically certified but merely something
presumptive.
3.
The move from plausibility to warranted acceptance (“justified be-
lief ”) is automatic in those cases where nihil obstat—that is, when-
ever there are no case-specific counterindications.
78
Knowledge and Its Problems

4.
Although this way of proceeding does not deliver categorical guaran-
tees or infallible certitude, such things are just not required for the ra-
tional validation (or “epistemic justification”) of belief.
5.
On this basis, subjective experience can—and does—validate our
claims to objective factual knowledge. But the step at issue in moving
across the subjectivity/objectivity divide is indeed a step—a mode of
praxis. And the modus operandi at issue in this practice or policy is at
once validated by experience and established through a complex
process in which rational and natural selection come into concurrent
operation.15
From the angle of this perspective it appears that the causal theory of epistemic
justification leaves one very crucial validating factor out of sight—the role of
presumption as filtered through the process of evolution in its relation to our
cognitive hardware and software. What this theory offers us is, in a way, Ham-
let without the ghost.
The critical role that presumptions play in this regard make it desirable to
take a closer look at what is at issue here.
Epistemic Justification
79

This page intentionally left blank.

81
Chapter 5
Plausibility and Presumption
SYNOPSIS
•
Presumption is a cognitive resource borrowed from its origins in the setting
of legal deliberations.
•
The concept of presumption plays a crucial role in epistemology.
•
It is intimately intertwined with the conception of plausibility,
•
and also—but more distantly—with that of probability.
•
Presumption provides an important instrument in the critiques of skepticism.
•
The use of presumptions is initially validated on grounds of practical ra-
tionality, but ultimately achieves retrovalidation on factual grounds.
(The case for presumption is fundamentally analogous to that from trust
in general.)
THE NEED FOR PRESUMPTIONS
A presumption is something distinctive that is characteristically its own within 
the cognitive domain.What is at issue here is not knowledge, nor probability, nor
postulation, nor assumption, but something quite different and destructive,
namely a provisional gap-filler for an informational void. The key idea of pre-
sumption thus roots in an analogy with the legal principle: innocent until proven
guilty. A presumption is a thesis that is provisionally appropriate—on which can
be maintained pro tem, viewed as acceptable until or unless sufficiently weighty
counterconsiderations arise to displace it. On this basis, a presumption is a con-
tention that remains in place until something better comes along.

For example we generally presume that what our senses tell us is correct.
We know full well that our senses sometimes deceive us: the held at an angle
under water looks bent even though touch tells us it is straight. Nevertheless we
are entitled to trust sight and maintain what we see to be so until something
else (like touch) comes along to disagree. Again, we generally presume that
what uniformity tells us deserves the benefit of doubt. We know full well that
generally reliable informants can provide misinformation, but nevertheless
deem ourselves entitled to treat what otherwise reliable people tell us as correct
unless and until some counterindication comes to view. We know full well that
what our expert advisers in medical, or economic, or legal matters tell us is
often incorrect but nevertheless are well advised to treat it as true until good
reason to do otherwise comes to view. All of these instances—sensory indica-
tions, informal reports, expert judgments—illustrate matters of presumption.
Much of what we take ourselves to know is actually presumptive knowledge:
claims to knowledge that may in the end have to be withdrawn.
It must be stressed from the very start that the acceptance or assertion of
claims and contentions is not something that is uniform and monolithic but
rather something that can take markedly different types or forms. For we can
“accept” a thesis as necessary and certain on logicoconceptual grounds (“Forks
have tynes”), or as unquestionably true, although only contingently so (“The
Louvre Museum is in Paris”), or in a much more tentative and hesitant frame
of mind as merely plausible or presumably true (“Dinosaurs became extinct
owing to the earth’s cooling when the sun was blocked by commetary debris”).
When a proposition is so guardedly endorsed we do not have it that, à la Tarski,
asserting p is tantamount to claiming that “p is true.” What is at issue with the
guided endorsement of a claim p as plausible is simply the contention that “p is
presumably true.” And what this means is that we will endorse and employ p in-
sofar as we can do so without encountering problems but are prepared to aban-
don it should problems arise. In effect we are not dedicated partisans of such a
claim but merely its fair-weather friends.
The sort of tentative plausibility at issue with presumptions is preeviden-
tial in its bearing. As far as evidentiation goes, plausibility awaits further devel-
opments. Plausibilities are accordingly something of a practical epistemic
device. We use them where this can render effective service for purposes of in-
quiry. But we are careful to refrain from committing ourselves to them unqual-
ifiedly and come what may. And we would, in particular, refrain from using
them where this leads to contradiction. In sum, our commitment to them is not
absolute but situational: whether or not we endorse them will depend on the
context. To reemphasize: the “acceptance” that is at issue here represents no
more than a merely tentative or provisional endorsement.
Plausibilities are thus one thing and established truths another. We “ac-
cept” plausible statements only tentatively and provisionally, subject to their
proving unproblematic in our deliberations. Of course, problems do often
82
Knowledge and Its Problems

arise. X says twenty-five people were present, Y says fifteen. Sight tells us that
the stick held at an angle under water is bent, touch tells us that it is straight.
The hand held in cold water indicates that the tepid liquid is warm but held in
hot water indicates that it is cold. In such cases we cannot have it both ways.
Where our sources of information conflict—where they point to aporetic and
paradoxical conclusions—we can no longer accept their deliverances at face
value, but must somehow intervene to straighten things out. And here plausi-
bility has to be our guide, subject to the idea that the most plausible prospect
has a favorable presumption on its side.
Plausibility is in principle a comparative matter of more or less. Here it
is not a question of yes or no, of definitive acceptability, but one of a cooper-
ative assessment of differentially eligible alternatives of comparative advan-
tages and disadvantages. We are attached to the claims that we regard as
plausible, but this attachment will vary in strength in line with the epistemic
circumstances. And this fact has significant ramifications. For the idea of
plausibility functions in such a way that presumption always favors the most
plausible of rival alternatives.
Presumption represents a way of filling in—at least pro tem—the gaps that
may otherwise confront us at any stage of information. The French Code civil
defines “presumptions” as: “des conséquences qui la loi ou le magistrat tire d’un fait
cunnu à un fait incunnu.”1 A presumption indicates that in the absence of spe-
cific counterindications we are to accept how things “as a rule” are taken as
standing. For example, there is, in most probative contexts, a standing pre-
sumption in favor of the usual, normal, customary course of things. The con-
ception of burden of proof is correlative with that of a presumption. The
“presumption of innocence” can serve as a paradigm example here.
In its legal setting, the conception of presumption has been explicated in
the following terms:
A presumption in the ordinary sense is an inference. . . . The subject of
presumptions so far as they are mere inferences or arguments, belongs
not to the law of evidence, or to law at all, but to rules of reasoning. But
a legal presumption, or, as it is sometimes called, a presumption of law,
as distinguished from presumptions of fact, is something more. It may
be described, in (Sir James) Stephen’s language, as “a rule of law that
courts and judges shall draw a particular inference from a particular fact,
or from particular evidence, unless and until the truth” (perhaps it would
be better to say “soundness”) “of the inference is disproved.”2
Such a presumptio juris is a supposition relative to the known facts which, by
legal prescription, is to stand until refuted.
Accordingly, presumptions, though possessed of significant probative
weight, will in general be defeasible, subject to defeat in being overthrown by
Plausibility and Presumption
83

sufficiently weighty countervailing considerations. In its legal aspect, the
matter has been expounded as follows:
[A] presumption of validity . . . retains its force in general even if sub-
ject to exceptions in particular cases. It may not by itself state all the
relevant considerations, but it says enough that the party charged
should be made to explain the allegation or avoid responsibility; the
plaintiff has given a reason why the defendant should be held liable,
and thereby invites the defendant to provide a reason why, in this
case, the presumption should not be made absolute.The presumption
lends structure to the argument, but it does not foreclose its further
development.3
Presumptions are, as it were, in tentative and provisional possession of the cog-
nitive terrain, holding their place until displaced by something more eviden-
tially substantial.4 In the law, such presumptions are governed by strict and
specific rules (the accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty; the indi-
vidual missing for seven years is presumed dead). In this way, the standing of a
presumption is usually tentative and provisional, not absolute and final. A pre-
sumption only stands until the crucial issues that “remain to be seen” have been
clarified, so that it is actually seen whether the presumptive truth will in fact
stand up once everything is said and done.”5 Absent competition, it stays in
place, on analogy with the politician’s maxim: “You can’t beat somebody with
nobody.” A presumptive answer is one that enables us to make do until that
point (if ever) when something better comes along. This is a resource we con-
stantly employ in communication, allowing matters to go unsaid that—in the
circumstances—are sufficiently probable. (If I tell you that I met a man in
town, it can go unsaid that he wore clothes.)
Specifically defeasible presumptions are closely interconnected with the
conception of burden of proof:
The effect of a presumption is to impute to certain facts or groups of
facts prima facie significance or operation, and thus, in legal proceed-
ings, to throw upon the party against whom it works the duty of
bringing forward evidence to meet it. Accordingly, the subject of pre-
sumption is intimately connected with the subject of burden of proof,
and the same legal rule may be expressed in different forms, either as
throwing the advantage of a presumption on one side, or as throwing
the burden of proof on the other.6
In effect, a defeasible presumption is just the reverse of a burden of proof (of
the “burden of further reply” variety). Whenever there is a “burden of proof” for
84
Knowledge and Its Problems

establishing that P is so, the correlative defeasible presumption that not-P
stands until the burden has been discharged definitively. Archbishop Whately
has formulated the relationship at issue in the following terms:
According to the most current use of the term, a “presumption” in
favour of any supposition means, not (as has been sometimes erro-
neously imagined) a preponderance of probability in its favour, but
such a preoccupation of the ground as implies that it must stand good
till some sufficient reason is adduced against it; in short, that burden of
proof lies on the side of him who would dispute it.7
It is in just this sense, for example, that the “presumption of innocence” in favor
of the accused is correlative with the burden of proof carried by the state in
establishing his guilt.
For a proposition to count as a presumption is something altogether dif-
ferent from its counting as an accepted truth. A presumption is a plausible
present-day to truth whose credentials may well prove insufficient, a runner
in a race it may not win. The “acceptance” of a proposition as a presumptive
truth is not acceptance at all but a highly provisional and conditional epis-
temic inclination toward it, an inclination that falls far short of outright
commitment.
Our stance towards presumptions is unashamedly chat of fair-weather
friends: we adhere to them when this involves no problems whatsoever, but
abandon them at the onset of difficulties. But it is quite clear that such loose at-
tachment to a presumption is by no means tantamount to no attachment at
all.8 However, a presumption stands secure only “until further notice,” and it is
perfectly possible that such notice might be forthcoming.
THE ROLE OF PRESUMPTION
The classical theories of perception from Descartes to the sense-datum theo-
rists of the first half of the twentieth century all involve a common difficulty.
For all of them saw a real and deep problem to be rooted in the question:
Under what circumstances are our actual experiences genuinely veridi-
cal? In particular: which facts about the perceptual situation validate
the move from “I (take myself to) see a cat on the mat” to “There is a
cat on the mat”? How are we to monitor the appropriateness of the
step from “perceptual experiences” to actual perceptions of real things-
in-the-world, seeing that experience is by its very nature something
personal and subjective.
Plausibility and Presumption
85

The traditional theories of perception—all face the roadblock of the problem:
How do we get from here to there, from subjective experience to warranted
claims of objective fact?
However, what all these theories ignore is the fact that in actual practice
we operate within the setting of a concept-scheme that reverses the burden of
proof here: that our perceptions (and conceptions) are standardly treated as in-
nocent until proven guilty.The whole course of relevant experience is such that
the standing presumption is on their side. The indications of experience are
taken as true provisionally—allowed to stand until such time (if ever) when
concrete evidential counterindications come to view. Barring indications to the
contrary, we can and do move immediately and unproblematically from “I take
myself to be seeing a cat on the mat” to “There really is a cat on the mat and I
actually see it there.” But what is at issue here is not an inference (or a deriving)
from determinable facts but a mere presumption (or a taking). The transition
from subjectivity to objectivity is automatic, though, to be sure, it is always pro-
visional, that is, subject to the proviso that all goes as it ought. For unless and
until something goes amiss—that is, unless there is a mishap of some sort—
those “subjective percepts” are standardly allowed to count as “objective facts.”
To be sure, there is no prospect of making an inventory of the necessary
conditions here. Life is too complex: neither in making assertions nor in driv-
ing an automobile can one provide a comprehensive advance survey of possible
accidents and list all the things that can possibly go wrong. But the key point
is that the linkage between appearance and reality is neither conceptual nor
causal: it is the product of a pragmatic policy in the management of informa-
tion, a ground rule of presumption that governs our epistemic practice.
The rational legitimation of a presumptively justified belief lies in the
consideration that some generic mode of “suitably favorable indication”
speaks on it behalf while no as-yet available counterindication speaks against
it. When, after a careful look, I am under the impression that there is a cat on
the mat, I can (quite appropriately) base my acceptance of the contention
“There is a cat on the mat” not on certain preestablished premisses, but sim-
ply on my experience—on my visual impression. The salient consideration is
that there just is no good reason why (in this case) I should not indulge my
inclination to endorse a visual indications of this kind as veridical. (If there
were such evidence—if, for example, I was aware of being in a wax museum—
then the situation would, of course, be altered.)
With presumption we take to be so what we could not otherwise derive.
This idea of such presumptive “taking” is a crucial aspect of our language-
deploying discursive practice. For presumptively justified beliefs are the raw
materials of cognition. They represent contentions that—in the absence of
preestablished counterindications—are acceptable to us “until further notice,”
thus permitting us to make a start in the venture of cognitive justification with-
out the benefit of prejustified materials. They are defeasible alright, vulnerable
86
Knowledge and Its Problems

to being overturned, but only by something else yet more secure some other
preestablished conflicting consideration. They are entitled to remain in place
until displaced by something better. Accordingly, their impetus averts the dire
consequences that would ensue of any and every cogent process of rational de-
liberation required inputs which themselves had to be authenticated by a prior
process of rational deliberation—in which case the whole process could never
get under way.9
PLAUSIBILITY AND PRESUMPTION
Perhaps the single most important device for putting the idea of presumption
to work is the natural inclination to credence inherent in the conception of
plausibility.10 For such plausibility can serve as the crucial determinant of where
presumption resides. The basic principle here is that of the rule:
Presumption favors the most plausible of rival alternatives—when in-
deed there is one. This alternative will always stand until set aside (by
the entry of another, yet more plausible, presumption).
The operation of this rule creates a key role for plausibility in the theory of rea-
soning and argumentation.11 In the face of discordant considerations, one “plays
safe” in one’s cognitive involvements by endeavoring to maximize the plausibil-
ity levels achievable in the circumstances. Such an epistemic policy is closely
analogous to the prudential principle of action—that of opting for the available
alternative from which the least possible harm can result. Plausibility-tropism
is an instrument of epistemic prudence.
There are many bases for plausibility. For one thing, the standing of our in-
formative sources in point of their authoritativeness affords one major entry
point to plausibility. In this approach, a thesis is more or less plausible depend-
ing on the reliability of the sources that vouch for it—their entitlement to qual-
ify as well-informed or otherwise in a position to make good claims to
credibility. It is on this basis that “expert testimony” and “general agreement”
(the consensus of men) come to count as conditions for plausibility.12
Again, the probative strength of confirming evidence could serve as yet an-
other basis of plausibility. In this approach, the rival theses whose supporting
case of substantiating evidence is the strongest is thereby the most plausible.
Our evidential sources will clearly play a primary role.
The plausibility of contentions may, however, be based not on a thesis-
warranting source but a thesis-warranting principle. Here inductive considera-
tions may come prominently into play; in particular such warranting principles
are the standard inductive desiderata: simplicity, uniformity, specificity, defi-
niteness, determinativeness, “naturalness,” and so on. In such an approach one
Plausibility and Presumption
87

would say that the more simple, the more uniform, the more specific a thesis—
either internally, of itself, or externally, in relation to some stipulated basis—the
more emphatically this thesis is to count as plausible.
For example, the concept of simplicity affords a crucial entry point for plau-
sibility considerations.The injunction “Other things being anything like equal,
give precedence to simpler hypotheses over more complex ones” can reasonably
be espoused as a procedural, regulative principle of presumption, rather a meta-
physical claim as to “the simplicity of nature.” On such an approach, we espouse
not the Scholastic adage “Simplicity is the sign of truth” (simplex sigilium veri),
but its cousin, the precept “Simplicity is the sign of plausibility” (simplex sig-
ilium plausibili). In adopting this policy we shift the discussion from the plane
of the constitutive/descriptive/ontological to that of the regulative/method-
ological/prescriptive.
Again, uniformity can also serve as a plausibilistic guide to reasoning.Thus
consider the Uniformity Principle:
In the absence of explicit counterindications, a thesis about unscruti-
nized cases which conforms to a patterned uniformity obtaining among
the data at our disposal with respect to scrutinized cases—a uniformity
that is in fact present throughout these data—is more plausible than any
of its regularity-discordant contraries. Moreover, the more extensive this
pattern-conformity, the more highly plausible the thesis.
This principle is tantamount to the thesis that when the initially given ev-
idence exhibits a marked logical pattern, then pattern-concordant claims rela-
tive to this evidence are—ceteris paribus—to be evaluated as more plausible than
pattern-discordant ones (and the more comprehensively pattern-accordant, the
more highly plausible). This rule implements the guiding idea of the familiar
practice of judging the plausibility of theories and theses on the basis of a “suf-
ficiently close analogy” with other cases.13 (The uniformity principle thus
forges a special rule for normality—reference to “the usual course of things”—
in plausibility assessment.)14
The situation may thus be summarized as follows. The natural bases of
plausibility—the criteria operative in determining its presence in greater or
lesser degree—fall primarily into three groups:
1.
The standing of sources in point of authoritativeness. On this principle
the plausibility of a thesis is a function of the reliability of the sources
that vouch for it—their entitlement to qualify as well-informed or
otherwise in a position to make good claims to credibility. It is on this
basis that expert testimony and general agreement (the consensus of
men) come to count as conditions for plausibility.
88
Knowledge and Its Problems

2.
The probative strength of confirming evidence. Of rival theses, that
whose supporting case of substantiating evidence is the strongest is
thereby the most plausible.
3.
The impetus of principles of inductive systematization. Other things being
sufficiently equal, that one of rival theses is the most plausible which
scores best in point of simplicity, in point of regularity in point of uni-
formity (with other cases), in point of normalcy, and the like.The prin-
ciples of presumption of this range correlate with the parameters of
cognitive systematization.15
These three factors (source reliability, supportive evidence, and systematicity)
are the prime criteria governing the assessment of plausibility in deliberations
regarding the domain of empirical fact.
In general, the more plausible a thesis, the more smoothly it is consistent
and consonant with the rest of our knowledge of the matters at issue. Ordinar-
ily, the removal of a highly plausible thesis from the framework of cognitive
commitments would cause a virtual earthquake; removal of a highly implausi-
ble one would cause scarcely a tremor; in between we have to do with varying
degrees of readjustment and realignment when plausible contentions have to be
abandoned. In general, then, the closer its fit and the smoother its consonance
with our cognitive commitments, the more highly plausible the thesis.16
In the cognitive scheme of things the principles of presumption are postu-
lates. They too play a special and distinctive role in the “theory of knowledge.”
First of all, they are not items of knowledge at all. If we know something we do
not need to postulate it. On the other hand they differ from mere assumptions
or hypotheses. For our commitment to such things is extremely tentative: we
generally assume or suppose simply for the sake of discussion or for the sake of
argument. By their very nature as such, assumptions, hypotheses, and supposi-
tions are matters to which we have no particular commitment and to which we
are not bound in any seriously committed way. Postulates, by contrast, are
claims that we endorse and to which we stand committed. But knowledge they
are not—they are not the sort of thing for which we have substantiating
grounds or evidence.
How then, do postulates enter into the rational order of things? Their justi-
fication does not come a tergo—from the rear, so to speak, on the basis of a back-
ground of supporting fact. Rather it comes a fronte, from the future-oriented
perspectives of what they can for us.
Postulates are indeed parts of the rational fabric—they have their validation
and justification. But this of a functional and prospective nature.Their legitimiza-
tion lies in what they enable us to do.
Here the practical aspect becomes crucial. For the validation of postulates
is ultimately pragmatic, rooting in the fact that without them we could not
Plausibility and Presumption
89

achieve our ends—or at any rate not achieve them as effectively.The validation
of a postulate lies in the fact that it renders the achievement of a mandatory ob-
jective possible—or at least far easier than it otherwise would be. The rational
justification of postulates, in sum, lies in their pragmatic efficacy on the basis 
of considerations/effectiveness and efficiency in goal attainment within the
domain of deliberation to which the presumption belongs.
PRESUMPTION AND PROBABILITY
The plausibility of a thesis will not, however simply be a measure of its proba-
bility—of how likely we deem it, or how surprised we would be to find it falsi-
fied. Rather, it is a matter of how chagrined we would be into our larger
cognitive scheme of things at forgoing something that fits smoothly. The core
of the present conception of plausibility is the notion of the extent of our cog-
nitive inclination toward a proposition—of the extent of its epistemic hold on us in
the light of the credentials represented by the bases of its credibility. The key
issue is that of how readily the thesis in view could make its peace within the
overall framework of our cognitive commitments.
One of the cardinal lessons of modern epistemology is that considerations
of probability cannot provide a validating basis for accepting factual claims.
This lesson is driven home by the so-called Lottery Paradox.
This paradox is the immediate result of a decision policy for acceptance
that is based on a probabilistic threshold values.Thus let us suppose the thresh-
old level to be 0.80, and consider the following series of six statements:
This (fair and normal) die will not come up i when tossed (where i is
to be taken as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, each in turn).
According to the specified standard, each and every one of these six state-
ments must be accepted as true. Yet their conjunction results in the patent ab-
surdity that there will be no result whatsoever. Moreover, the fact that the
threshold was set as low as 0.80 instead of 0.90 or 0.9999 is wholly immate-
rial. To reconstitute the same problem with respect to a higher threshold we
need simply assume a lottery wholly having enough (equal) divisions to ex-
haust the spectrum of possibilities with individual alternatives of sufficiently
small probability. Then the probability that each specific result will not obtain
is less then 1 minus the threshold value, and so can be brought as close to 1 as
we please. Accordingly, we should, by accepting each of these claims and con-
joining them into a single whole, again be driven to the impossible conclusion
of resultlessness.
This, then, is the Lottery Paradox.17 It decisively rules out a propositional
acceptance rule that is based on a probabilistic threshold.18 This line of consid-
90
Knowledge and Its Problems

eration inclined both Rudolf Carnap and his inductionist school and Hans
Reichenbach and his probabilist school of inductive reasoning to exile cate-
gorical acceptance processes from the sphere of inductive epistemology alto-
gether.19 As epistemologists of the Carnap-Reichenbach orientation saw it,
we are faced with a difficult and unpleasant choice. We must either give up an
acceptance-oriented view of rational inquiry in science or else abandon the
probabilistic theory of inductive reasoning.
But of course these difficulties arise only with respect to an acceptance that
enrolls propositions on the register of consolidated truths. A mere presumption
that enrolls them in the register of plausible answers to questions is another
kettle of fish altogether.
There is a crucial difference between acceptance and presumption. Accep-
tance is nonlocalizable: to be accepted anywhere is to be accepted everywhere.
Presumptions, by contrast, are contextual and issue relative: they arise and have
their standing in the setting of particular problems, particular questions.
This fundamental difference between acceptance and presumption enables
us after all to make some use of probabilistic considerations as a basis of pre-
sumption. An oversimple example can illustrate the principle at issue. Suppose
that we classify people by gender (M or F) and age (y  young, m  mature).
And suppose that in a group of five persons we have the following statistic:
y
m
M
•
•
F
••
•
If the question before us with respect to an otherwise unidentified (presumably
random) member of this group is, What is this individual’s age-group? we
would respond: presumably the individual is young—the majority are. Similarly
with respect to the question of gender we will say, Presumably the individual is
female—the majority are. But we cannot combine those two separate pre-
sumptions to justify presuming that the individual is a young female. If the
question before us is: Is that individual a young female? Then we must presume
the answer to be negative, seeing that most of the individuals at issue do not fall
into this category. Our two earlier presumptions just do not combine. Proba-
bilistically grounded plausibilities are not necessarily consistent—a fact which
sets plausibility sharply aside from truth. (After all, plausibilities can be com-
petitive so that not all of them can prevail.)
Two important lessons with respect to presumption emerge in the light of
these considerations: (1) The presumption that can appropriately be made on
probabilistic ground depends on just exactly what the question context happens
to be. And (2) One cannot plausibly conjoin such presumptions across the
board—detaching them from their question context and throwing them together.
Plausibility and Presumption
91

The sort of difficulty that arises here will block acceptance and assertion, but
will fail to impede taking the more tentative, conjectural epistemic stance that
is at issue with presumption.
PRESUMPTION AND SKEPTICISM
The following objections might be offered against the idea of defeasible pre-
sumptions: “How can you speak of asserting a proposition merely as a presump-
tion but not as a truth! If one is to assert (accept, maintain) the proposition in
any way at all, does one not thereby assert (accept, maintain) it to be true.” The
answer here is simply a head-on denial, for there are different modes of accept-
ance. To maintain P as a presumption, as potentially or presumptively factual, is
akin to maintaining P as possible or as probable. In no case are these contentions
tantamount to maintaining the proposition as true. Putting a proposition for-
ward as “possible” or “probable” commits one to claiming no more than that it is
“possibly true” or “probably true.” Similarly, to assert P as a presumption is to say
no more than that P is potentially or presumptively true that it is a promising
truth-candidate—but does not say that P is actually true, that it is a truth. Ac-
ceptance does not lie along a one-dimensional spectrum which ranges from “un-
certainty” to “certainty.”There are not only degrees of acceptance but also kinds
of acceptance. And presumption represents such a kind: it is sui generis, and not
just an attenuated version of “acceptance as certain.”
In fact, however, the conception of a presumption does not “open the
floodgates” in an indiscriminate way. Not everything qualifies as a presumption:
the concept is to have some probative bite. A presumption is not merely some-
thing that is “possibly true” or that is “true for all I know about the matter,” To
class a proposition as a presumption is to take a definite and committal position
with respect to it, so as to say “I propose to accept it as true insofar as no diffi-
culties arise from doing so.”
There is thus a crucial difference between an alleged truth and a presump-
tive truth. For allegation is a merely rhetorical category: every contention that
is advanced in discussion is “allegedly true”—that is, alleged-to-be-true. But
presumption—that is, warranted presumption—is an epistemic category: only in
certain special circumstances are contentions of a sort that they merit to be ac-
cepted as true provisionally, “until further notice.”20
The idea that the burden of proof always rests with the party asserting a the-
sis means that there is automatically a presumption against anything ever main-
tained thesis. But, of course, if the adducing of evidence in the dialectic of rational
argumentation is to be possible at all, this doctrine must have its limits. Clearly, if
the burden of proof inclined against every contention—if there were an automatic
presumption of falsity against any contention whatsoever—it would become in
principle impossible ever to provide a persuasive case. The rule that each con-
92
Knowledge and Its Problems

tention needs evidential support through the adducing of further substantiating
contentions cannot reasonably be made operative ad indefinitum.
In “accepting” a thesis as presumptively true one concedes it a probative
status that is strictly provisional and pro tem; there is no need here to invoke
the idea of unquestionable theses, theses that are inherently uncontestable, cer-
tain, and irrefutable.21 To take this view would involve a misreading of the pro-
bative situation. It is to succumb to the tempting epistemological doctrine of
foundationalism, that insists on the need for and ultimate primacy of absolutely
certain, indefeasible, crystalline truths, totally beyond any possibility of invali-
dation. The search for such self-evident or protocol theses—inherently invio-
late and yet informatively committal about the nature of the world—represents
one of the great quixotic quests of modern philosophy.22 It deserves stress that
an epistemic quest for categories of data that are prima facie acceptable (inno-
cent until proven guilty, as it were) is altogether different from this quest for ab-
solutely certain or totally self-evidencing theses that has characterized the
mainstream of epistemological tradition from Descartes via Brentano to pres-
ent-day writers such as Roderick Chisholm.
The idea of presumptive truth must thus play a pivotal role in all such var-
ious contexts where the notion of a “burden of proof” applies. The mechanism
of presumption accomplishes a crucial epistemological task in the structure of
rational argumentation. For there must clearly be some class of claims chat are
allowed at least pro tem to enter acceptably into the framework of argumenta-
tion, because if everything were contested then the process of inquiry could not
progress at all.
In any essentially dialectical situation in which the idea of burden of proof
figures, the very “rules of the game” remain inadequately defined until the issue
of the nature, extent, and weight of the range of operative presumptions has
been resolved in some suitable way. Burden of proof and presumption represent
correlative conceptions inevitably coordinate with one another throughout the
context of rational dialectic, because the recourse to presumptions affords the
indispensable means by which a burden of proof can—at least provisionally—
be discharged.
The reality of it is that we cannot pursue the cognitive project—the quest for
information about the world—without granting certain initial presumptions.
They are reminiscent of Kantian “conditions under which alone” the business of
securing answers to questions about the world is even possible. And prominent
among these conditions is the consideration that we can take our “data” about the
world as evidence, that a presumption of experiential veridicality is in order. In
matters of sense perception, for example, we presume that mere appearances (“the
data”) provide an indication of how things actually stand (however imperfect this
indication may ultimately pose to be). That we can use the products of our ex-
perience of the world to form at least somewhat reliable views of it is an indis-
pensable presupposition of our cognitive endeavors in the realm of fictional
Plausibility and Presumption
93

inquiry. If we systematically refuse, always and everywhere, to accept seeming
evidence as real evidence—at least provisionally, until the time comes when it is
discredited as such—then we can get nowhere in the domain of practical cog-
nition. When the skeptic rejects any and all presumptions, he automatically
blocks any prospect of reasoning with him within the standard framework of
discussion about the empirical facts of the world. The machinery of presump-
tions is part and parcel of the mechanisms of cognitive rationality; abandoning
it aborts the entire project at the very outset.
If it is indeed the case that rationally justified belief must always be based
on rationally prejustified inputs, then skepticism becomes unavoidable. For, then
the process of rationally validating our accepted beliefs can never get started.To
all appearances, we here enter on a regress that is either vitiatingly infinite or vi-
ciously circular.The rational justification of belief becomes in principle impos-
sible—as skeptics have always insisted.
But this particular skeptical foray rests on a false supposition. For, the ra-
tional justification of a belief does not necessarily require prejustified inputs.
The idea that even as human life can come only from prior human life so ra-
tional justification can come only from prior rational justification is deeply er-
roneous. For, the important distinction between discursive and presumptive
justification becomes crucial here in a way that skeptics conveniently overlook.
A belief is justified discursively when there is some other preestablished be-
lief on whose basis this belief is evidentially grounded, that is, when the belief
is substantiated by some particular item of supporting evidence.The discursive
justification of a belief lies in there being an already available, prejustified belief
that evidentiates it. In information-processing terms, this discursive sort of jus-
tification is not innovative but merely transformatory as a production process:
there must be justified beliefs as inputs to arrive at justified beliefs as outputs.
However, discursive justification is not the only sort there is. For there is also
presumptive justification.
Presumptive justification—unlike discursive justification—does not pro-
ceed through the evidential meditation of previously justified grounds but di-
rectly and immediately through the force of a “presumption.” A belief is
justified in this way when there is a standing presumption in its favor and no
preestablished (rationally justified) reason that stands in the way of its accept-
ance. Beliefs of this sort are appropriate—are rationally justified—as long as
nothing speaks against them. Presumption is the epistemic analogue of “inno-
cent until proven guilty.”
The rational legitimation of a presumptively justified belief lies in the
fact that some generic mode of “suitably favorable indication” speaks on it
behalf while no already justified counterindication speaks against it. When,
after a careful look, I am under the impression that there is a cat on the mat,
I can (quite appropriately) base my acceptance of the contention “There is
a cat on the mat” not on certain preestablished premises, but simply on my
94
Knowledge and Its Problems

experience—on my visual impression. The salient consideration is that there
just is no good reason why (in this case) I should not indulge my inclinations
to endorse a visually grounded belief of this kind as veridical. (If there were
such evidence—if, for example, I was aware of being in a wax museum—then
the situation would, of course, be altered.)
Presumptively justified beliefs are the raw materials of cognition. They
represent contentions that—in the absence of preestablished counterindica-
tions—are acceptable to us “until further notice,” thus permitting us to make a
start in the venture of cognitive justification without the benefit of prejustified
materials. They are defeasible alright, vulnerable to being overturned, but only
by something else yet more secure some other preestablished conflicting con-
sideration. They are entitled to remain in place until displaced by something
superior. Accordingly, their impetus averts the dire consequences that would
ensue of any and every cogent process of rational deliberation required inputs
that themselves had to be authenticated by a prior process of rational delibera-
tion—in which case the whole process could never get under way.
But indispensability apart, what is it that justifies making presumptions,
seeing that they are not established truths? The answer is that this is not so
much a matter of evidentially probative considerations as of procedurally prac-
tical ones. Presumptions arise in contexts where we have questions and need
answers. And when sufficient evidence for a conclusive answer is lacking, we
must, in the circumstances, settle for a more or less plausible one. It is a matter
of faute de mieux, of this or nothing (or at any rate nothing better). Presumption
is a thought instrumentality that so functions as to make it possible for us to do
the best we can in circumstances where something must be done. And so pre-
sumption affords yet another instance where practical principles play a leading
role on the stage of our cognitive and communicative practice. For presumption
is, in the end, a practical device whose rationale of validation lies on the order
of pragmatic considerations.
We proceed in cognitive contexts in much the same manner in which
banks proceed in financial contexts. We extend credit to others, doing so at
first to a relatively modest extent. When and as they comport themselves in a
way that indicates that this credit was warranted, then we extend more. By re-
sponding to trust in a “responsible” way—proceeding to amortize the credit
one already has—one can increase one’s credit rating in cognitive much as in
financial contexts.
In trusting the senses, in relying on other people, and even in being rational,
we always run a risk. Whenever in life we place our faith in something, we run
a risk of being let down and disappointed. Nevertheless, it seems perfectly rea-
sonable to bet on the general trustworthiness of the senses, the general reliabil-
ity of our fellow men, and the general utility of reason. In such matters, no
absolute guarantees can be had. But, one may as well venture, for, if venturing
fails, the cause is lost anyhow—we have no more promising alternative to turn
Plausibility and Presumption
95

to. There is little choice about the matter: it is a case of “this or nothing.” If we
want answers to factual questions, we have no real alternative but to trust in the
cognitively cooperative disposition of the natural order of things. We cannot
preestablish the appropriateness of this trust by somehow demonstrating, in
advance of events, that it is actually warranted. Rather, its rationale is that with-
out it we remove the basis on which alone creatures such as ourselves can con-
fidently live a life of effective thought and action. In such cases, pragmatic
rationality urges us to gamble on trust in reason, not because it cannot fail us,
but because in so doing little is to be lost and much to be gained. A general
policy of judicious trust is eminently cost-effective in yielding good results in
matters of cognition.
Of course, a problem remains: Utility is all very good but what of valid-
ity? What sorts of considerations validate our particular presumptions as
such: how is it that they become entitled to this epistemic status? The crux of
the answer has already been foreshadowed. A twofold process is involved.
Initially it is a matter of the generic need for answers to our questions: of
being so circumstanced that if we are willing to presume we are able to get . .
. anything. But ultimately we go beyond such this-or-nothing consideration,
and the validity of a presumption emerges ex post facto through the utility
(both cognitive and practical) of the results it yields. We advance from “this
or nothing” to “This or nothing that is determinably better.” Legitimation is
thus available, albeit only through experiential retrovalidation, retrospective
validation in the light of eventual experience.23 It is a matter of learning that
a certain issue is more effective in meeting the needs of the situation than its
available alternatives. Initially we look to promise and potential but in the
end it is applicative efficacy that counts.
The fact is that our cognitive practices have a fundamentally economic ra-
tionale. They are all cost-effective within the setting of the project of inquiry
to which we stand committed (by our place in the world’s scheme of things).
Presumptions are the instrument through which we achieve a favorable bal-
ance of trade in the complex trade-offs between ignorance of fact and mistake
of belief—between unknowing and error.
HOW PRESUMPTION WORKS:
WHAT JUSTIFIES PRESUMPTIONS
But just what sorts of claims are presumptively justified? The ordinary and
standard probative practice of empirical inquiry stipulates a presumption in
favor of such cognitive “sources” of information as the senses and memory—or
for that matter trustworthy personal or documentary resources such as experts
and encyclopedias. And the literature further contemplates such cognitively
useful alternatives as:
96
Knowledge and Its Problems

1.
Natural inclination: a “natural disposition” to accept (e.g., in the case
of sense observation).
2.
Epistemic utility in terms of the sorts of things that would, if accepted,
explain things that need explanation.
3.
Analogy with what has proved acceptable in other contexts.
4.
Fit: coherence with other accepted theses.
Even a weak reed like analogy—the assimilation of a present, problematic case
to similar past ones—is rendered a useful and appropriate instrumentality of
presumption through providing our readiest source of answers to questions.24
However, the salient feature of a viable basis of prescription is that it must have
a good track record for providing useful information.
Our cognitive proceedings accordingly incorporate a host of fundamental
presumptions of reliability, such as:
•
Believe the evidence of your own senses.
•
Accept at face value the declarations of other people (in the absence
of any counterindications and in the absence of any specific evidence
undermining the generic trustworthiness of those others).
•
Trust in the reliability of the standardly employed cognitive aids and
instruments (telescopes, calculating machines, reference works, loga-
rithmic tables, etc.) in the absence of any specific indications to the
contrary.
•
Accept the declarations of recognized experts and authorities within
the area of their expertise (again, in the absence of counterindica-
tions).
All in all, presumption favors the usual and the natural—its tendency is one of
convenience and ease of operation in cognitive affairs. For presumption is a
matter of cognitive economy—of following “the path of least resistance” to an
acceptable conclusion. Its leading principle is: introduce complications only
when you need to, always making do with the least complex resolution of an
issue. There is, of course, nothing sacrosanct about the result of such a proce-
dure.The choice of the easiest way out may fail us, that which serves adequately
in the first analysis may well not longer do so in the end. But it is clearly the
sensible way to begin. At this elemental level of presumption we proceed by
“doing what comes naturally.”
The salient point for validating a presumption is that there is reason to
think—or experience to show—that in proceeding in this way we fare better than
we would do otherwise.The justification of these presumptions is not the factual
one of the substantive generalization.“In proceeding in this way, you will come at
correct information and will not fall into error.” Rather, it is methodological jus-
tification. In proceeding in this way, you will efficiently foster the interests of the
Plausibility and Presumption
97

cognitive enterprise; the gains and benefits will, on the whole, outweigh the losses
and costs. Principles of this sort are integral parts of the operational code of
agents who transact their cognitive business rationally.
Presumption is a matter of cognitive economy—of following “the path of
least resistance” to an acceptable conclusion. Its leading principle is: introduce
complications only when you need to, always making do with the least complex
resolution of an issue.There is, of course, nothing sacrosanct about the result of
such a procedure. The choice of the easiest way out may fail us, that which
serves adequately in the first analysis may well not longer do so in the end. But
it is clearly the sensible way to begin. At this elemental level of presumption we
proceed by “doing what comes naturally.” What is fundamental here is the prin-
ciple of letting appearance be our guide to reality—of accepting the evidence as
evidence of actual fact, by taking its indications as decisive until such time as
suitably weighty counterindications come to countervail against them.
The justifactory rationale for a policy of presumption lies in the human need
for information. It is undoubtedly true that information is a good thing: that
other things equal it is better to have information—to have answers to our ques-
tions—than not to do so. But the reality of it is much more powerful than that.
For us humans, information is not just a mere desideratum but an actual need.
This role of presumptions is absolutely crucial for cognitive rationality.
For this mode rationality has two compartments, the discursive (or condi-
tionalized) and the substantive (or categorical). The former is a matter of hy-
pothetical reasoning—of adhering to the conditionalized principle that if you
accept certain theses, then you should also accept their duly evidentiated con-
sequences. But of course this conditionalized principle cannot yield anything
until one has already secured some acceptable these from somewhere or
other. And this is where substantive rationality comes in, by enabling us to
make categorical moves. Presumptions determine our “starter-set” of initial
commitments, enabling us to make a start on whose basis further “inferential”
reasoning may proceed.
While the mechanism of a presumption affords a most useful cognitive and
communicative resource, it is only recently that it has begun to interest logi-
cians, semanticists, and epistemologists.Their discussions have, in the main, fo-
cused on the relation of presumption to the issues of benefit of doubt and
burden of proof.
But what is it that justifies making presumptions since they are neither es-
tablished truths nor probabilities in the most standard sense? The answer is that
this is not so much a matter of evidentially probative considerations as of proce-
durally practical ones. Presumptions arise in contexts where we have questions
and need answers. And when sufficient evidence for a conclusive answer is lack-
ing, we must, in the circumstances, settle for a more or less plausible one. It is a
matter of faute de mieux, of this or nothing (or at any rate nothing better). Pre-
sumption is a thought instrumentality that so functions as to make it possible for
98
Knowledge and Its Problems

us to do the best we can in circumstances where something must be done. And
so presumption affords yet another instance where practical considerations play
a leading role on the stage of our cognitive and communicative practice.
The obvious and evident advantage of presumption as an epistemic device
is that it enables us vastly to extend the range of questions we are able to answer.
It affords an instrument that enables us to extract a maximum of information
from communicative situations. Presumption, in sum, is an ultimately pragmatic
resource. To be sure, its evident disadvantage is that the answers that we obtain
by its means are given not in the clarion tones of knowledge and assertion but in
the more hesitant and uncertain tones of presumption and probability. We thus
do not get the advantages of presumption without an accompanying negativity.
Here, as elsewhere, we cannot have our cake and eat it too.
What justifies a presumption initially is a need: that is, the fact that we re-
quire an information gap to be filled and that the presumption accomplishes this
for us. But this is only a start. For the question remains: What sorts of consider-
ations validate our particular presumptions as such: how is it that they become
entitled to this epistemic status? The basis of the answer has already been indi-
cated. A twofold process is involved. Initially it is a matter of the generic need
for true presumptions continued with the mere convenience of these presump-
tions. But ultimately a this-or-nothing recognition of the validity of a presump-
tion emerges ex post facto through the utility (both cognitive and practical) of the
results it yields. Legitimation is thus available but only through experiential
retrovalidation, retrospective validation in the light of eventual experience.25 For
what validates presumptions is something quite different, namely experience.
All the same, the concession of presumptive status to our presystematic in-
dications of credibility is the most fundamental principle of cognitive rational-
ity. The details of presumption management are clearly negotiable in the light
of eventual experience—and improvable over the course of time. But without a
programmatic policy for presumption cognitive rationality cannot get under
way at all.
For present purposes, then, the salient point is that presumption provides
the basis for letting appearance be our guide to reality—of accepting the evi-
dence as evidence of actual fact, by taking its indications as decisive until such
time as suitably weighty counterindications come to countervail against them.
What is at issue here is part of the operational code of agents who transact their
cognitive business rationally.
It is thus clear that all such cognition practices have a fundamentally
economic rationale. They are all cost-effective within the setting of the proj-
ect of inquiry to which we stand committed (by our place in the world’s
scheme of things).
To be sure, such a validation of our presumptions is not really theoretical
but practical. It does not show that cannot sometimes or often go awry when we
endorse the presumptions at issue. Instead it argues only that when we indeed
Plausibility and Presumption
99

need or want here-and-now to resolve issues ad fill informative gaps then those
presumptions represent the most promising ways of doing so, affording us those
means to accomplish our goals which—as best we can tell—offer the best
prospect of success. Such a process of validation is not a matter of theoretical ad-
equacy as of practical efficacy. It is a practical or pragmatic validation in terms of
a rational recourse to the best available alternative.26
Accordingly, presumption, like our cognitive practices in general, has a fun-
damentally economic rationale. Like the rest, it too is a cost effective within the
setting of the project of inquiry to which we stand committed by our place in the
world’s scheme of things.They are characteristics of the cheapest (most conven-
ient) way for us to secure the data needed to resolve our cognitive problems—to
secure answers to our questions about the world we live in. On this basis, we can
make ready sense of many of the established rules of information development
and management on economic grounds. By and large, they prevail because this
is maximally cost effective in comparison with the available alternatives.
And just here the idea of presumption connects with the idea of trust.
100
Knowledge and Its Problems

101
Chapter 6
Trust and Cooperation in 
Pragmatic Perspective
SYNOPSIS
•
Knowledge is power. But the hoarding of knowledge—monopolization, se-
cretiveness, collaboration avoidance—is generally counterproductive.
•
In anything like ordinary circumstances, mutual aid in the development
and handling of information is highly cost effective.
•
The way in which people build up epistemic credibility in cognitive contexts
is structurally the same as that in which they build up financial credit in
economic contexts.
•
And this is so in particular with regard to our cognitive presumptions.
•
Considerations of cost effectiveness—of economic rationality, in short—
operate to ensure that any group of rational inquirers will in the end be-
come a community of sorts, bound together by a shared practice of trust and
cooperation.
THE COST EFFECTIVENESS OF SHARING AND COOPERATING
IN INFORMATION ACQUISITION AND MANAGEMENT
The pragmatic aspect of knowledge is an unavoidable fact of life. In many ways,
knowledge is power. Its possession facilitates efficacy and influence in the man-
agement of public affairs. It enables those who have “inside” information to
make a killing in the marketplace. It opens doors to the corridors of power in

corporations. It maintains experts in the style to which the present century has
accustomed them, and assures that the U.S. government supports more think
tanks than aircraft carriers.
Since information is power, there is a constant temptation to monopolize
it. But information monopolies, however advantageous for some few favor-
ably circumstanced beneficiaries, exact a substantial price from the commu-
nity as a whole. In this regard, sixteenth- and seventeenth-century science
affords an admonitory object lesson. The secretiveness of investigators in
those times—Isaac Newton preeminent among them—in matters of mathe-
matics and astronomy assured that the development of natural science would
be slow and difficult. In protecting the priority of their claims through secre-
tiveness and mystification, and adepts of the day greatly impeded the devel-
opment and dissemination of knowledge.1 Only with the emergence of new
means of information sharing to facilitate the diffusion of knowledge, such as
academies and learned societies with their meetings and published proceed-
ings, could modern science begin it sure and steady march. In particular, the
open scientific literature can be seen as an effective and productive system for
the authentication and protection of the state of the creative scientist in the
“intellectual property” created by his innovative efforts.2
While there are, of course, exceptions, in most circumstances of ordinary
life, and above all in the sciences, it pays all concerned to share information.
From an economic point of view, we confront the classic format of a coopera-
tion-inviting situation, where the resultant gain in productivity creates a surplus
in which all can share to their own benefit. The evident advantages for the sci-
entific community and its members of creating a system that provides induce-
ment for people to promulgate their findings promptly, while at the same time
imposing strong sanctions against cheating, falsification, and carelessness, mili-
tate powerfully in this direction. The open exchange of information in science
benefits the work of the community, except possibly in these cases where secrecy
can confer an economic advantage that can serve as a stimulant to creative effort.
To be sure, secrecy survives even now in various nooks and crannies of
the scientific enterprise, and good claims can sometimes be made on its be-
half. For example, editors of scientific journals do not let authors of submit-
ted papers know the identity of those who review their submissions. Or
again, such journals do not publish lists of authors whose submissions have
been declined for publication. These practices obviously serve the interests of
the journal’s effectiveness by helping to maintain pools of willing reviewers
and submitters.
The fundamental principles are the same either way, however. Both the
general policy of information sharing in science, and the specific ways in which
particular practices standardly depart from it, have a perfectly plausible ration-
ale in cost-benefit terms. Broadly economic considerations of cost and benefit
play the determinative role throughout.
102
Knowledge and Its Problems

THE ADVANTAGES OF COOPERATION
Even people who do not much care to cooperate and collaborate with others
are well advised in terms of their own interests to suppress this inclination.
This point is brought home by considering the matter from the angle pre-
sented in Table 6.1. By hypothesis, each of the parties involved prioritized the
situation where they are trusted by the other while they themselves need not
reciprocate. And each sees as the worst case a situation where they themselves
trust without being trusted. Each, however, is willing to trust to avert being
mistrusted themselves. Relative to these suppositions, we arrive at the overall
situation of the interaction matrix exhibited in Table 6.2. (Here the entry
2/2—for example—indicates that in the particular case at issue the outcome
ranks 2 for me and 2 for you, respectively.) In this condition of affairs, mutual
trust is the best available option—the only plausible way to avert the commu-
nally unhappy result 3/3.3 In this sort of situation, cooperative behavior is ob-
viously the best policy. (We are, after all, going to end up acting alike since,
owing to the symmetry of the situation, whatever constitutes a good reason for
your to act in a certain way does so for me as well.)
It is easily seen that a skeptical presumption—one which rejects trust and
maintains a distrustful stance toward the declarations of others—would confront
us with an enormously complex (and economically infeasible) task for the project
of interpersonal communication. For suppose that, instead of treating others on
the basis of innocent until proven guilty, one were to treat them on lines of not
Trust and Cooperation in Pragmatic Perspective
103
TABLE 6.1
A Preferential Overview of Trust Situations
My Preference
Your Preference
I Trust You
You Trust Me
Ranking
Ranking


2
2


4
1


1
4


3
3
TABLE 6.2
An Interaction Matrix for Trust Situations
You Trust Me
You Do Not Trust Me
I trust you
2/2
4/1
I do not trust you
1/4
3/3

trustworthy until proven otherwise. It is clear that such a procedure would be vastly
lass economic. For we would now have to go to all sorts of lengths in independ-
ent verifications.The problems here are so formidable that we would obtain little
if any informative benefits from the communicative contributions of others.
When others tend to respond in kind to one’s present cooperativeness or unco-
operativeness, then no matter how small on deems the chances of their coopera-
tion in the present case, one it nevertheless well advised to act cooperatively. As
long as interagents react to cooperations with some tendency to reciprocation in
future situations, cooperative behavior will yield long-run benefits.
From the angle of economy there are, accordingly, substantial advantages
to collaboration in inquiry, particularly in scientific contexts. For the individual
inquirer, it decreases the chances of coming up completely empty-handed
(though at the price of having to share the credit of discovery). For the com-
munity, it augurs a more rational division of labor through greater efficiency by
reducing the duplication of effort.
BUILDING UP TRUST: AN ECONOMIC APPROACH
The process through which mutual trust in matters of information development
and management is built up among people cries out for explanation by means of
an economic analogy that trades on the dual meaning of the idea of credit. For we
proceed in cognitive matters in much the same way that banks proceed in finan-
cial matters.We extend credit to others, doing so at first to only a relatively mod-
est extent. When and if they comport themselves in a manner that shows that
this credit was well deserved and warranted, we proceed to give them more credit
and extend their credit limit, as it were. By responding to trust in a responsible
way, one improves one’s credit rating in cognitive contexts much as in financial
contexts. The same sort of mechanism is at work in both cases: recognition of
credit worthiness engenders a reputation on which further credit can be based;
earned credit is like money in the bank, well worth the measures needed for its
maintenance and for preserving the good name that is now at stake.
And this situation obtains not just in the management of information in
natural science but in many other settings as well, preeminently including the
information we use in everyday-life situations. For example, we constantly
rely on experts in a plethora of situations, continually placing reliance on doc-
tors, lawyers, architects, and other professionals. They too must so perform as
to establish credit, not just as individuals but, even more crucially, for their
profession as a whole.4
Much the same holds for other sources of information. The example of our
senses is a particularly important case in point. Consider the contrast between our
reaction to the data obtained in sight and dreams. Dreams, too, are impressive
and seemingly significant data. Why then do we accept sight as a reliable cogni-
104
Knowledge and Its Problems

tive source but not dreams—as people were initially minded to do? Surely not be-
cause of any such substantive advantages as vividness, expressiveness, or memo-
rability. The predisposition to an interest in dreams is clearly attested by their
prominence in myth and literature. Our confident reliance on sight is not a con-
sequence of its intrinsic preferability but is preeminently a result of its success in
building up credit in just the way we have been considering. We no longer base
our conduct of affairs on dreams simply because it does not pay all that well.
Again, a not dissimilar story holds for our information-generating tech-
nology—for telescopes, microscopes, computing machinery, and so on. We ini-
tially extend some credit because we simply must, since they are our only means
for a close look at the moon, at microbes, and so on. But subsequently we in-
crease their credit limit (after beginning with blind trust) because we eventually
learn, with the wisdom of hindsight, that it was quite appropriate for us to pro-
ceed in this way in the first place. As we proceed, the course of experience in-
dicates, retrospectively as it were, that we were justified in deeming them
creditworthy. And in this regard the trustworthiness of people and the reliabil-
ity of instrumental resources are closely analogous matters.
Trust is, of course, something that we can have not only in people but in
cognitive sources at large. For a not dissimilar story holds for our information-
generating technology—for telescopes, microscopes, computing machinery,
and so on. We initially extend some credit because we simply must, since they
are our only means for a close look at the moon, at microbes, and so on. But
subsequently we increase their credit limit (after beginning with blind trust) be-
cause we eventually learn, with the wisdom of hindsight, that it was quite ap-
propriate for us to proceed in this way in the first place. As we proceed, the
course of experience indicates, retrospectively as it were, that we were justified
in deeming them creditworthy.
To be sure, the risk of deception and error is present throughout our in-
quiries: our cognitive instruments, like all other instruments, are never fail-
proof. Still, a general policy of judicious trust is eminently cost effective. In
inquiring, we cannot investigate everything; we have to start somewhere and
invest credence in something. But of course our trust need not be blind. Ini-
tially bestowed on a basis of mere hunch or inclination, it can eventually be
tested, and can come to be justified with the wisdom of hindsight. And this
process of testing can in due course put the comforting reassurance of retro-
spective validation at our disposal.
In trusting the senses, in relying on other people, and even in being rational,
we always run a risk. Whenever in life we place our faith in something, we run a
risk of being let down and disappointed. Nevertheless, it seems perfectly reason-
able to bet on the general trustworthiness of the senses, the general reliability of
our fellow men, and the general utility of reason. In such matters, no absolute
guarantees can be had. But, one may as well venture, for, if venturing fails, the
cause is lost anyhow—we have no more promising alternative to turn to. There
Trust and Cooperation in Pragmatic Perspective
105

is little choice about the matter: it is a case of “this or nothing.” If we want an-
swers to factual questions, we have no real alternative but to trust in the cogni-
tively cooperative disposition of the natural order of things. We cannot
preestablish the appropriateness of this trust by somehow demonstrating, in ad-
vance of events, that it is actually warranted. Rather, its rationale is that without
it we remove the basis on which alone creatures such as ourselves can confidently
live a life of effective thought and action. In such cases, pragmatic rationality
urges us to gamble on trust in reason, not because it cannot fail us, but because in
so doing little is to be lost and much to be gained. A general policy of judicious
trust is eminently cost-effective in yielding good results in matters of cognition.
It is sometimes said that an epistemology based on trust is contrastive to
and distinct from one that is based on evidence.5 But this is a very questionable
standpoint. For trustworthiness is something we may initially presume but
must eventually evidentiate through experience. Ongoing trust is only appro-
priate in the case of trustworthy sources and trust must be earned through the
evidentiation of trustworthiness. When a factual claim is based on trust in a
source we may not have any (independent) evidentiation of that fact but we
should and do require evidence for the reliability of the source.
To be sure, the risk of deception and error is present throughout our in-
quiries: our cognitive instruments, like all other instruments, are never fail-
proof. Still, a general policy of judicious trust in eminently cost effective. In
inquiring, we cannot investigate everything; we have to start somewhere and
invest credence in something. But of course our trust need not be blind. Ini-
tially bestowed on a basis of mere hunch or inclination, it can eventually be
tested, and can come to be justified with the wisdom of hindsight. And this
process of testing can in due course put the comforting reassurance of retro-
spective validation at our disposal.
With trust, matters can of course turn out badly. In being trustful, we take
our chances (though of course initially in a cautious way). But one must always
look to the other side of the coin as well. A play-safe policy of total security
calls for not accepting anything, not trusting anyone. But then we are left alto-
gether empty-handed. The quest for absolute security exacts a terrible price in
terms of missed opportunities, forgone benefits, and lost chances. What rec-
ommends those inherently risky cognitive policies of credit extension and ini-
tial trust to us is not that they offer risk-free sure bets but that, relative to the
alternatives, they offer a better balance of potential benefits over potential costs.
It is the fundamentally economic rationality of such cognitive practices that is
their ultimate surety and warrant.
TRUST AND PRESUMPTION
We know that various highly convenient principles of knowledge production
are simply false:
106
Knowledge and Its Problems

•
What seems to be, is.
•
What people say is true.
•
The simplest patterns that fit the data are actually correct,
•
The most adequate currently available theory will work out.
We realize full well that such generalizations do not hold, however nice it
would be if they did. Nevertheless we accept the theses at issue as principles of
presumption. We follow the metarule: In the absence of concrete indications to
the contrary, proceed as though such principles were true. Such principles of
presumption characterize the way in which rational agents transact their cog-
nitive business. Yet we adopt such practices not because we can somehow es-
tablish their validity, but because the cost-benefit advantage of adopting them
is so substantial. The justification of trust in our senses, in our fellow inquirers,
and in our cognitive mechanisms ultimately rests on considerations of eco-
nomic rationality. And this sort of situation prevails in many other contexts. For
example, the rationale of reputations for ability, as well as those for reliability,
lies in the cost effectiveness of this resource in contexts of hiring, allocating
one’s reading time, and so on.6
Our standard cognitive practices incorporate a host of fundamental pre-
sumptions of initial credibility, in the absence of concrete evidence to the
contrary:
•
Believe in your own senses.
•
Accept at face value the declarations of other people (in the absence
of any counterindications and in the absence of any specific evidence
undermining their generic trustworthiness).
•
Trust in the reliability of established cognitive aids and instruments
(telescopes, calculating machines, reference works, logarithmic tables,
etc.) in the absence of any specific indications to the contrary.
•
Accept the declarations of established experts and authorities within
the area of their expertise (again, absent counterindications).
The justification of these presumptions is not the factual one of the substantive
generalization, In proceeding in this way, you will come at correct information
and will not fall into error. Rather, it is methodological justification. In proceed-
ing in this way, you will efficiently foster the interests of the cognitive enterprise;
the gains and benefits will, on the whole, outweigh the losses and costs.
It is clear that all such cognitive practices have a fundamentally economic
rationale. They are all cost effective within the setting of the project of inquiry
to which we stand committed by our place in the world’s scheme of things.
They are characteristics of the cheapest (most convenient) way for us to secure
the data needed to resolve our cognitive problems—to secure answers to our
questions about the world we live in. Accordingly, we can make ready sense of
many of the established rules of information development and management on
Trust and Cooperation in Pragmatic Perspective
107

economic grounds. By and large, they prevail because this is maximally cost
effective in comparison with the available alternatives.
A COMMUNITY OF INQUIRERS
Only through cooperation based on mutual trust can we address issues whose
effective resolution makes demands that are too great for any one of us alone.
In the development and management of information, people are constantly
impelled toward a system of collaborative social practices—an operational
code of incentives and sanctions that consolidates and supports collective sol-
idarity and mutual support. In this division of labor, trust results from what is,
to all intents and purposes, a custom consolidated compact to conduct their
affairs in friendly collaboration.
If its cognitive needs and wants are strong enough, any group of mutually
communicating, rational, dedicated inquirers is fated in the end to become a com-
munity of sorts, bound together by a shared practice of trust and cooperation,
simply under the pressure of its evident advantage in the quest for knowledge.7
However, this cooperative upshot need not ensue from a moral dedication
to the good of others and care for their interests. It can emerge for reasons of
prudential self-interest alone because the relevant modes of mutually helpful
behavior—sharing, candor, and trustworthiness—are all strongly in everyone’
interest, enabling all members to draw benefit for their own purposes—the
agent himself specifically included. Cooperation emerges in such a case not
from morality but from self-interested considerations of economic advantage.
In science, in particular, the advantages of epistemic values like candor, reliabil-
ity, accuracy, and the like, are such that everyone’s interests as well served by
fostering adherence to the practices at issue.
The pursuit of knowledge in science can play a role akin to that of a pur-
suit of wealth in business transactions.The financial markets in stocks or com-
modities futures would self-destruct if the principle, my word is my bond, were
abrogated, since no one would know whether a trade had actually been made.
In just this way, too, the market in information would self-destruct if people’s
truthfulness could not be relied on. Thus in both cases, unreliable people have
to be frozen out and exiled from the community. In cognitive and economic
contexts alike, the relevant community uses incentives and sanctions (artificially
imposed costs and benefits) to put into place a system where people generally
act in a trusting and trustworthy way. Such a system is based on processes of
reciprocity that advantage virtually everyone.
It is no wonder that common practice of the scientific community involves
severe sanctions for background of trust. Strong incentives in matters of devel-
oping and exchanging information induce powerfully to the general advantage.
And on the other side, data forging, credit grabbing, plagiarism, and the like are
108
Knowledge and Its Problems

all significantly injurious to an economy of information development and ex-
change among rational agent. Strong disincentives against such practices are
clearly sensible.
Several recent studies illuminate the extent to which we actually depend on
others in our beliefs.8 The experiments of Solomon Asch have dramatized peo-
ple’s tendency to conform to erroneous public judgments on matters where they
would never make mistakes by themselves.9 His subjects had only to specify
which of three lines was closest in length to a given line. People made this judg-
ment unerringly, except when they knew that all the others who were asked the
same question concurred in giving a different answer.10 Commenting on Asch’s
experiments, Sabini and Silver report: “All (or nearly all) subject reacted with
signs of tension and confusion. Roughly one-third of the judgments subjects
made were in error. Nearly 80 percent of the subject gave the obviously wrong
answer on at least one trial.The perception that a few other people made an ab-
surd judgment of a clear, unambiguous physical matter was a very troubling ex-
perience, sufficient to cause doubt, and in some cases conformity.”11 Such
experiments actually reveal (in their own dishonest way) the extent to which
people incline to trust others. A recent study of American juries arrived at very
similar findings.12 On examining more than 250 jury deliberations, the investi-
gators found that in no case was a hung jury caused by a single dissenter. Unless
someone who disagreed with the majority found support by at least two others,
the dissenters relaxed their reservations and came around to the majority view.
And the rationale for this sort of thing is validated by sound economic consid-
erations, a trusting relationship reduces current interaction costs in return for
past investments in its buildup. Knowing whom one can trust is worth a great
deal. Outsiders who come as strangers into an established social framework gen-
erally have to pay for the benefit of learning that agents are trustworthy—and
generally find this information well worth paying for.
Such considerations militate for a universally advantageous modus
operandi, under whose aegis people can trust their fellows in a setting of com-
munal cooperation. And the harsh measures used to uphold the integrity of
science—the destruction of careers through ostracism from the community—
are thus not devoid of rational justification. Cheating is worth eliminating at
great cost, because its toleration endangers and undermines the fabric of mu-
tual trust, in whose absence the whole enterprise of collaborative inquiry be-
comes infeasible. Establishing and maintaining a community of inquirers
united in common collaboration by suitable rewards and sanctions is a mode
of operation that is highly cost effective. Individual probity and mutual help-
fulness are virtues whose cultivation pays ample dividends for the community
of inquirers. In these matters, the cold iron hand of individual and communal
interest lies behind the velvet glove of etiquette and ethics. The commodity of
information illustrates rather than contravenes the division of labor that re-
sults from Adam Smith’s putative innate human “propensity to truck, barter,
Trust and Cooperation in Pragmatic Perspective
109

and exchange.”The market in knowledge has pretty much the same nature and
the same motivation as any other sort of market—it is a general-interest
arrangement.The establishment of conditions that foster cooperation and trust
are critical to the cognitive enterprise of productive inquiry. Cooperation
evolves because what is in the interests of most is, in most cases, in the interests
of each.
As these deliberations indicate, our cognitive practices of trust and pre-
sumption are undergirded by a justificatory rationale whose nature is funda-
mentally economic. For what is at issue throughout is a system of procedure
that assures for each participant the prospect of realizing the greatest benefit for
the least cost.The commitment to impersonal standards and interpersonal gen-
erality that characterizes the cognitive enterprise is thus an inherently practical
matter. Our standard cognitive policies and procedures are validated by consid-
eration of practical reason, seeing that they are substantiated and sustained on
what is, in the end, a matter of economic rationality.13
110
Knowledge and Its Problems

Part II
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

This page intentionally left blank.

113
Chapter 7
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
SYNOPSIS
•
The most prominent and historically most influential model of cognitive
systematization is the Euclidean model of a linear, deductive exfoliation
from basic axioms.
•
Such an approach leads to foundationalism.
•
But the network model of cyclic systematization affords a prime alternative
to this traditional axiomatic approach.
•
These two different models of cognitive systematization give rise to two
rival and substantially divergent epistemic programs for the authentication
of knowledge, namely foundationalism and coherentism.
•
The inherent difficulties and limitations of the foundationalist program
indicate the advisability of a closer look at the coherentist approach.
HIERARCHICAL SYSTEMIZATION:
THE EUCLIDEAN MODEL OF KNOWLEDGE
The model of knowledge canonized by Aristotle in the Posterior Analytics saw
Euclidean geometry as the most fitting pattern for the organization of any-
thing deserving the name of a science (to put it anachronistically, since Eu-
clid himself postdates Aristotle). Such a conception of knowledge in terms of
the geometric paradigm views the organization of knowledge in the follow-
ing terms. Certain theses are to be basic or foundational: like the axioms of
geometry, they function as used for the justification of other theses without

themselves needing or receiving any intrasystematic justification. Apart from
these fundamental postulates, however, every other thesis of the system is to
receive justification of a rather definite sort. For every nonbasic thesis is to re-
ceive its justification along an essentially linear route of derivation or infer-
ence from the basic (axiomatic, unjustified) thesis. There is a step-by-step
recursive process, first of establishing certain theses by immediate derivation
from the basic theses, and then of establishing further theses by sequential der-
ivation from already established theses. In the setting of the Euclidean model
every (nonbasic) established thesis is extracted from certain basic theses by a
linear chain of sequential inferences.
On this approach to cognitive systematization, one would, with J. H. Lam-
bert, construe such a system on analogy with a building whose stones are laid,
tier by successive tier, on the ultimate support of a secure foundation.1 Accord-
ingly, the whole body of knowledge obtains the layered makeup reminiscent of
geological stratification: a bedrock of basic theses surmounted by layer after layer
of derived theses, some closer and some further removed from the bedrock, de-
pending on the length of the (smallest) chain of derivation that links this thesis
to the basic ones. In this way, the system receives what may be characterized as
its foundationalist aspect: it is analogous to a brick wall, with a solid foundation
supporting layer after successive layer. A prominent role must inevitably be allo-
cated here to the idea of “relative fundamentality” in the systematic order—and
hence also in the explanatory order of things the systematization reflects.2
In the setting of this Euclidean model of cognitive systematization, as we
shall call it, every (nonbasic) established thesis is ultimately connected to cer-
tain basic theses by a linear chain of sequential inferences.These axiomatic the-
ses are the foundation on which rests the apex of the vast inverted pyramid that
represents the total body of knowledge.
With virtual unanimity, the earlier writers on cognitive systems construed
the idea in terms of such a linear development from ultimate premisses (or “first
principles”) that are basic both in fundamentality and in intelligibility, so that
the order of exposition (or understanding) and the order of proof (or presup-
position) run parallel.3 The axiomatic development of our knowledge is seen in
terms of both a deepening and a confirming of our knowledge, subject to the
principle that clarification parallels rational grounding so that explanation
replicates derivation.4
It does not matter for the fundamental structure of this Euclidean mode of
systematization whether the inferential processes of derivation are deductive, and
necessitarian, or somehow “inductive” and less stringently compelling. In this re-
gard the label “Euclidean Model” is somewhat misleading. Nothing fundamental
is altered by permitting the steps of derivative justification to proceed by means
of probabilistic or plausibilistic nondeductive inferences.We are still left with the
same fundamental pattern of systematization: a “starter set” of basic theses that
provide the ultimate foundation for erecting the whole cognitive structure on
114
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

them by the successive accretion of inferential steps. And so while modern epis-
temologists generally depart from a traditional Euclideanism in admitting nond-
eductive (e.g., probabilistic) arguments—abandoning the idea that the only
available means of linking conclusions inferentially to premises is by means of
steps that are specifically deductive in character—they still continue for the most
part to accept at face value Aristotle’s argumentation to the following effect:
Some hold that, owing to the necessity of knowing the primary prem-
isses, there is no scientific knowledge, Others think that there is, but
that all truths are demonstrable. Neither doctrine is either true or . . .
necessary. . . .The first school, assuming that there is no way of know-
ing other than by demonstration, maintain that an infinite regress is
involved. . . . The other party agrees with them as regards knowing,
holding that it is only possible by demonstration, but they see no dif-
ficulty in holding that all truths are demonstrated, on the ground that
demonstration may be circular and reciprocal. Our own doctrine is
that not all knowledge is demonstrative; on the contrary, knowledge of
the immediate premisses is independent of demonstration. (Posterior
Analytics, I, 3; 72b5–24 (tr. W. D. Ross)
The road thus indicated by Aristotle is followed by all those later epistemol-
ogists—by now legion—who feel constrained to have recourse to cognitive
ultimates to serve as the basic, axiomatic premisses of all knowledge. Accord-
ingly, they commit themselves to a category of basic beliefs which, though
themselves unjustified—or perhaps rather self-justifying in nature—can serve
as a justifying basis for all the other, nonaxiomatic beliefs: the unmoved (or
self-moved) movers of the epistemic realm, as Roderick Chisholm has char-
acterized them.5 With these epistemologists, axiomlike foundations still play
a central role in the criteriology of truth, even when they are no longer used
to provide a rigidly deductive basis.
It is almost impossible to exaggerate the influence and historical promi-
nence this Euclidean model of cognitive systematization has exerted through-
out the intellectual history of the West. From Greek antiquity through the
eighteenth century it provided an ideal for the organization of information
whose influence was operative in every field of learning. From the time of Pap-
pus and Archimedes and Ptolemy in antiquity to that of Newton’s Principia
and well beyond into modern times the axiomatic process was regarded as the
appropriate way of organizing scientific information. And this pattern was fol-
lowed in philosophy, in science, and even in ethics—as the more geometrico
approach of Spinoza vividly illustrates. For over two millennia, the Euclidean
model has provided virtually the standard ideal for the organization of knowl-
edge. Most early theorists of cognitive systematization viewed the geometric or
Euclidean model as being so obviously appropriate that it can virtually be taken
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
115

for granted. And a rigid insistence on this linear and hierarchical aspect of cog-
nitive systems has continued to characterize the thinking of most recent writ-
ers on cognitive systematization. A particularly vivid example is the work of the
German philosopher Hugo Dingler,6 who characterized this linearity as the
principle par-excellence of systematically ordered thought (“des geordneten
Systemdenkens”) and calls it the System Principle tout court. Such a view fails
decisively to recognize that this approach characterizes only one particular
mode of systematic thought—to be sure a very important one.
Now on the basis of a Euclidean model of cognitive systematization, a
piece of knowledge must be fitted within the derivational scaffolding: it must
either be “immediate knowledge” (forms a part of the axiomatic basis), or it
must be “derived knowledge” (be justified by derivation from the axioms).
Knowledge becomes a complex structure erected on a suitable foundation of
basic facts. And even when they depart from Euclideanism in giving up the
idea that the only available means of linking conclusions inferentially to prem-
ises is by means of steps that are specifically deductive in character, modern epis-
temologists still continue for the most part to accept at face value the argument
of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics to the following effect:
Some hold that, owing to the necessity of knowing the primary prem-
isses, there is no scientific knowledge. Others think that there is. But
that all truths are demonstrable. Neither doctrine is either true or . . .
necessary. . . . The first school, assuming that there is no way of know-
ing other than by demonstration, maintain that an infinite regress is
involved. . . . The other party agrees with them as regards knowing,
holding that it is only possible by demonstration, but they see no diffi-
culty in holding that all truths are demonstrated, on the ground that
demonstration may be circular and reciprocal. Our own doctrine is that
not all knowledge is demonstrative: on the contrary: knowledge of the
immediate premisses is independent of demonstration.7
The road thus indicated by Aristotle is followed by epistemologists whose
name is by now legion, who feel constrained to have recourse to cognitive ulti-
mates to serve as the basic, axiomatic premises of all knowledge. Accordingly,
they commit themselves to a category of basic belief ’s which, though them-
selves unjustified—or perhaps rather self-justifying in nature—can serve as jus-
tifying basis for all the other, nonaxiomatic beliefs.Thus axiomlike foundations
still play a central role for these epistemologists, even when they are no longer
used to provide a rigidly deductive basis. Committed to a quest for ultimate
bedrock “givens” to provide a foundational basis on which the rest of the cog-
nitive structure can be erected, these theorists are thus generally characterized
as foundationalists. This foundationalist approach to cognitive justification
views certain theses as self-evident—or immediately self-evidencing—and then
116
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

takes these as available to provide a basis for the derivative justification of other
beliefs (which can then, of course, serve to justify still others in their turn). It is
committed to a quest for ultimate bedrock “givens” capable of providing a foun-
dational basis on which the rest of the cognitive structure can be erected.
The foundationalist approach to knowledge has it that every discursive
(i.e., reasoned) claim to truth requires truths as inputs. If a presumptively true
result is to be obtained, the premises on which it rests must themselves be true
(or assumed to be so). This foundationalist approach to epistemology is deep-
rooted throughout the Western tradition from Aristotle through Descartes to
the present day. It implements an ancient and enduring idea—based ultimately
on the Greek concept of science as a Euclidean system—that truth is a struc-
ture that must have foundations. There must be a starter set of primitive (un-
grounded, immediate, “intuitive”) truths and, outside this special category,
truths can only be established from or grounded upon other truths. We are
given an essentially recursive—stepwise reductive—picture of the epistemic
process of thesis justification.There is a special set that is the axiomatic starter-
set of truths, and a grounding process for validating certain truth-claims in
terms of others.The overall domain of truths is then to be built up by recursion.
Accordingly this foundationalist approach is subject to certain characteris-
tic commitments, as follows:
1.
There are two fundamentally distinct sorts of truths, the immediate
and the derivative.
2.
There is some privileged epistemic process which, like the cataleptic
perception of the ancient Stoics or Descartes’ clear and distinct intu-
itions of the mind, is capable of providing immediately evident truths.
These initial “givens” are wholly nondiscursive and fixed invariants,
which are sacred and nowise subject to reappraisal and revision.
3.
All discursive epistemic processes—be they inductive or deductive—
require an input of truths if truths are to be an output (which is ex-
actly why an immediate, non-discursive route to justification must
also be available.) Accordingly:
4.
Nothing whatever that happens at the epistemically later stages of
the analysis can possibly affect the starting-point of basic truths.
They are exempt from any retrospective reevaluation in the light of
new information or insights.
To a really surprising extent, modern epistemologists have, notwithstanding
massive departures from classical modes of thought, continued remarkably faith-
ful in their attachment to the central themes of the Euclidean model of cognitive
systematization. They often begin with an adherence (at however schematic a
level) to the ancient conception of knowledge as true, justified belief,8 and join to
this view the doctrine that the deductive approach to systematization affords the
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
117

appropriate means of justification needed to implement this principle.They thus
arrive at an essentially foundationalist view of the structure of knowledge.
The idea of immediate or basic or “protocol” truths of fact has a long and
distinguished philosophical history that goes back to Aristotle and beyond.
Such truths—it is held—are to be apprehended in some direct and fundamen-
tal way, typified by the immediate sensory apprehension of phenomenal colors
or odors. Within the epistemic structure of our knowledge of truth, such basic
truths are to serve as a foundation; other truths are made to rest on them, but
they rest on no others: like the axioms of a deductive system they provide the
ultimate support for the entire structure. Many epistemologists have held that
truths—nay even mere probabilities—can be maintained only on a basis of cer-
tainty. One influential twentieth-century philosopher puts it as follows:
If anything is to be probable [let alone definitely true), then something
must be certain.The data which eventually support a genuine probabil-
ity [for a warranted truth-claim], must themselves be certainties.We do
have such absolute certainties, in the sense data initiating belief.9
This essentially axiomatic concept of truth finds its formal articulation in the
Euclidean model with its pivotal reliance on a starter-set of basic truths. It un-
derlies Aristotle’s thesis that perception provides an ultimate stopping point
where the generalizations of inductive reasoning can find a secure axiomatic
foothold. It is the mainstay of the Stoic doctrine of “cataleptic” perception
which provides failproof certainty. It provides the motive for Descartes’
search—basic to the whole Cartesian program of methodological skepticism—
for a secure, Archidemean point to serve as fulcrum for the lever of knowledge
acquisition (the “clear and distinct” apprehensions of the mind). And modern
epistemologists have continued remarkably faithful in their attachment to the
central themes of the Euclidean model of cognitive systematization. It recurs
again and again in recent epistemology—in Franz Brentano, in C. I. Lewis, in
A. J. Ayer, in Roderick Chisholm and in many others.10 Foundationalism, in
sum, represents the predominant and most strikingly prominent approach to
Western epistemology.
CYCLIC SYSTEMATIZATION: THE NETWORK—
AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE EUCLIDEAN MODEL
But while the mainstream of the Western tradition in the theory of knowledge
has unquestionably cast mathematics—and, in particular, geometry—in this
paradigmatic role nevertheless there has almost from the very first there has
been a succession of rebels sniping from the sidelines and advocating discor-
dant views as to the proper systematic structure for the organization of scien-
118
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

tific knowledge regarding how things work in the world. A small but constantly
renewed succession of thinkers have steadfastly maintained that the traditional
geometric model is not of sufficiently general applicability, and insisted that we
must seek elsewhere for our governing paradigm of scientific systematization.
The major alternatives to the Euclidean model that have been supported
most prominently have certain general features in common. The present dis-
cussion will focus on these shared features to portray what might count as a
common-denominator version of these models. This common-denominator
theory will be referred to as the network model. As we shall see, its approach to
cognitive systematization also has an ancient and respectable lineage.
This network model sees a cognitive system as a family of interrelated the-
ses, not necessarily arranged in a hierarchical arrangement (as with an axiomatic
system), but rather linked among one another by an interlacing network of con-
nections.These interconnections are inferential in nature, but not necessarily de-
ductive (since the providing of “good explanatory accounts” rather than “logically
conclusive grounds” is ultimately involved). What matters is that the network
links theses in a complex pattern of relatedness by means of some (in principle
variegated) modes of probative interconnections.
Some particularly vivid illustrations of the network approach to organizing
information come from the social sciences, for example, the problem of textual
interpretation and exegesis. Here there is no limit of principle to the width of
the context of examination and the depth of analysis of detail. The whole
process is iterative and cyclical; one is constantly looking back to old points
from new perspectives, using a process of feedback to bring new elucidations to
bear on preceding analyses. What determines correctness here is the matter of
overall fit, through which every element of the whole interlocks with some oth-
ers. Nothing need be more fundamental than anything else: there are no ab-
solutely fixed pivot-points about which all else revolves. One has achieved
adequacy when everything stands in mutual coordination with everything else.
An important advantage of a network system over an axiomatic one in-
heres in the former’s accommodation of relatively self-contained subcycles,
This absence of a rigidly linear hierarchical structure is a source of strength and
security. In an axiomatic system a change anywhere ramifies into a change
everywhere—the entire structure is affected when one of its supporting layers
is removed. But with a network system that consists of an integrated organiza-
tion of relatively self-sufficient components, certain of these components can
generally be altered without dire repercussions for the whole.11
Another vivid illustration of the network approach to organizing infor-
mation comes from textual interpretation and exegesis. Here there is no rigid,
linear pattern to the sequence of consideration. The whole process is iterative
and cyclical; one is constantly looking back to old points from new perspec-
tives, using a process of feedback to bring new elucidations to bear retrospec-
tively on preceding analyses. What determines correctness here is the matter
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
119

of overall fit, through which every element of the whole interlocks with some
others. Nothing need be more fundamental or basic than anything else: there
are no absolutely fixed pivot-points about which all else revolves. One has
achieved adequacy when—through a process that is continually both forward-
and backward-looking—one has reached a juncture where everything stands
in due mutual coordination with everything else.
Again, think of explanation-patterns incorporated in a (single-language)
dictionary. Not every word of a language can be defined explicitly in that lan-
guage. Ultimately this would lead to a circle. For if one starts with any finite list
of words, by the time one comes to the last word, all the earlier words in the list
will have been “used up,” so that a circularity will have to appear in the final def-
inition (if not before). Since standard dictionaries do actually define all the words
they use in their definitions, they are guilty of circularity. (Dictionary makers at-
tempt to counteract this problem by confining circularity as much as possible to
definitions of words whose generally accepted meaning will be clear and un-
equivocal to the average reader.) Such circularity ultimately does no harm—most
readers have a partial understanding of at least some units of the cycle, and a con-
sideration of the interrelationships serves to clarify the whole series.
Two very different conceptions of explanatory procedure are thus at issue.
The Euclidean approach is geared to an underlying conception of fundamen-
tality or logical dependency in the Aristotelian sense of priority, in terms of
what is supposed to be “better understood.” Its procedure is one reduction by
derivation: reducing derivative, “client” truths to their more fundamental “mas-
ter” truths. By contrast, the network appeal is unreductive. Its mission is not ex-
planation by derivation but explanation by interrelation. It merely seeks to
coordinate the facts that are at issue.To speak figuratively, it views the structure
of facts not as akin to an organizational manual for a military or bureaucratic
organization, but to a novel that traces out a complex web of diversified mutual
interrelationships among its cast of characters. In terms of practical advice
about scientific procedure, the network model shifts the perspective from undi-
rectional dependency to reciprocal interconnection: Do not worry about dis-
cerning an ordering of fundamentality or dependency; worry about establishing
interlinkages and mutual connections. Just find relationships among your pa-
rameters, and forget about which are the dependent and which the independ-
ent variables. Bear in mind the dictum from Goethe’s “To Natural Science”:
“Natur hat weder Kern noch Schale/Alles ist sie mit einem Male.”The network the-
ory does not deny that a cognitive system must have a structure (how else could
it be a system!). But it recognizes that this structure need not be of the form of
a rank ordering—that it can provide for the more complex interrelationships
that embody a reciprocity of involvement. Its motto is Forget about establish-
ing any all-embracing order of fundamentality in your explanatory efforts. It is
no longer geared to the old hierarchical world picture that envisages a unidi-
rectional flow of causality from fundamental to derivative orders of nature.
120
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

But, of course, our present concern is with network-patterned justifications
rather than with network-patterned elucidations. A paradigmatic illustration is
afforded by the explanations at issue with the workings of a closed physical or
biological system, where every aspect of the modus operandi traces back into
some of the others. Again, the sort of explanatory justifications at issue with
solving a crossword-puzzle or breaking a code or interpreting an ancient docu-
ment afford other appropriate examples.The key operative idea is that of expla-
nation through systematization—that is, solving the puzzle by “getting all the
pieces to fit properly” so that a “comprehensive picture emerges which ‘makes
sense’ by putting everything into place.”
The most critical points of difference that separate this network model of
cognitive systematization from its Euclidean counterpart are as follows:
1.
The network model dispenses altogether with the need for a cate-
gory of basic (self-evident or self-validating) protocol theses capable
of playing the role of axiomatic supports for the entire structure.
2.
In the network model the process of justification need not proceed
along a linear path. Its mode of justification is in general nonlinear,
and can even proceed by way of (sufficiently large) cycles and circles.
3.
The structure of the arrangement of theses within the framework of
the network model need not be geological: no stratification of theses
into levels of greater or lesser fundamentality is called for. (Of
course, nothing blocks the prospect of differentiation; the point is
that this is simply not called for by the modus operandi of the model.)
4.
The network model accordingly abandons the conception of priority
or fundamentality in its arrangement of theses. It replaces such fun-
damentality by a conception of enmeshment—in terms of the multi-
plicity of linkages and the patterns of interconnectedness with other
parts of the net.
On the network-model approach to the organization of information, there
is no attempt to erect the whole structure on a foundation of basic elements, and
no necessity to move along some unidirectional path—from the basic to the de-
rivative, the simple to the complex, or the like. One may think here of the con-
trast between the essentially linear order of an expository book, especially a
textbook, and the inherently network-style ordering of an entire library or an
encyclopedia. Again, the contrast between a taxonomic science like zoology or
geology) and a deductive science (like classical celestial mechanics) can also help
to bring out the difference between the two styles of cognitive organization.
A network system does, however, dispense with one advantageous fea-
ture that characterizes Euclidean systems par excellence. Since everything in
a deductive system hinges on the axioms, these will be the only elements that
require any independent support or verification. Once they are secured, all
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
121

else is supported by them. The upshot is a substantial economy of operation:
since everything pivots about the axioms, the bulk of our epistemological at-
tention can be confined to them. A network system, of course, lacks an ax-
iomatic basis, and so lacks this convenient feature of having one delimited set
of theses to carry the burden of the whole system upon its shoulders. On the
network model, the process of justification need not proceed along a linear
path. Its mode of justification is in general nonlinear, and can even proceed
by way of (sufficiently large) cycles. To be sure, while a network system gives
up Euclideanism at the global level of its overall structure, it may still exhibit
a locally Euclidean aspect, having local neighborhoods whose systematic
structure is of such a format. Some of its theses may rest on others, and even
do so in a rigorously deductive sense. For a network system may well contain
various deductive compartments based on locally operative premisses rather
than globally operative axioms.
Notwithstanding its sharp differences from the axiomatic mode of devel-
opment, a network approach to cognitive systematization does share some im-
portant features in common with the Euclidean organization of a “body of
knowledge.”The most important of these is that a network system can also ex-
hibit the crucial facet of an axiom system in possessing more content than is
overtly explicit. Parts of the network need not be explicitly presented, but may
be demanded by systematic considerations to round out the systematic struc-
ture of otherwise available interrelationships. Like axiom systems, network sys-
tems can have both explicit and implicit components.
Moreover, neither approach is smoothly attuned to the linear narrative
order of written exposition (whose main implicit connective is “and”). Ax-
iomatic exfoliation requires constant flashbacks to a plurality of earlier stages;
network exposition requires not only this, but also attention to spiderweblike
interlinkages with heretofore unexamined elements. Both procedures invite a
recourse to diagrammatic techniques that break through the confines of verbal
sequentialism and suggest the use of mathematical structures rather than
merely literary resources.
A heavy charge can be laid against the Euclidean model on grounds of the
enormous hold it has established on philosophical and scientific thought in the
West. Its exclusion of circles and cycles on grounds of their violating the prohi-
bition of Aristotelian logic against “circular” inferences and reasonings impeded
the conceptualization of reciprocal causal models in science for over two thou-
sand years. For we know from Aristotle’s own strictures that the core idea of co-
herentism was astir in his day. He criticizes those who hold of knowledge that
it is only possible by demonstration, but they see no difficulty in hold-
ing that all truths are demonstrated, on the ground that demonstra-
tion may be circular and reciprocal. (Posterior Analytics, bk. I, ch. 3;
72b5–24)
122
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

Not until the present century have reciprocity cycles and feedback mechanisms
become prominent not only in the domain of causal explanation but in infor-
mation processing contexts as well. The growing prominence of the Network
Model is attributable in no small part to the growing prominence of such
examples of its operation in practice.
The two models indicated by the analogy of walls and networks, respectively,
represent the two principal alternative lines of strategy in the systematization of
knowledge that have been prominent in the epistemological tradition of the
West.To be sure, these strategies both lend themselves to a virtually infinite va-
riety in their detailed implementation. At the level of generality presently at
issue, we are dealing with alternative program frameworks rather than concrete
procedures. But even in their general aspect, the two programs envisage very
different lines of approach. For foundationalism finds its rival—and its oppo-
nent(in the doctrine of coherentism for which the network model of cognitive
systematization is determinative.
THE CONTRAST BETWEEN FOUNDATIONALISM
AND COHERENTISM
The coherentist program of epistemology takes as its index of acceptability the
overall fit of a presumptively acceptable thesis with the rest of what is presump-
tively acceptable. On its approach, the standard of the acceptability of theses is
not their deductive derivability from some sacrosanct basis, but their systematic
connectability with one another. For the coherentist, the network systematiz-
ability of best-fit considerations comes to provide the key testing-standard of the
acceptability of truth-claims. (After all, scientists have always in fact tended to
give weight in considering the acceptability of theories not merely to the status
of their evidential support as distinct items considered in their own right, but
also to the pattern of their connections with the rest of our knowledge.)
The two approaches to cognitive systematization are thus correlative with
two quite distinct programs of confirmatory argumentation or “inductive rea-
soning.” On the Euclidean approach, a thesis derives its evidential support from
premises to which it is linked by deductive or probabilistic inference. On the
network approach its security of probative standing is largely a matter of the
systematic enmeshment of its overall interlinkage with other elements of the
system. Very different theories of supportive reasoning are thus at issue: the one
gives exclusive recognition to the weight of supportive evidence, the other goes
beyond this in also recognizing—and indeed emphasizing—the probative effi-
cacy of systematic interconnection.
The coherentist approach is thus quite prepared to dispense with any re-
quirement for self-evident protocols to serve as the foundations of the cognitive
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
123

system. The justification of a thesis of the systems will not proceed by deriva-
tions from the axioms, but comes to obtain through the pattern of its interrela-
tionships with the rest. On a coherence approach, the truth is not seen as a
treelike structure supported by a firm-rooted trunk, as it is on the foundation-
alist theory. Rather, it appears like a multitude of tied objects thrown into
water; some of them rise to the surface themselves or are dragged there by oth-
ers, some of them sink to the bottom under their own weight or through the
pull of others.
And so, unlike foundationalism, coherentism dispenses with any appeal to
basic, foundational truths of fact, diametrically opposing the view that knowl-
edge of the actual, and even of the probable, requires a foundation of certainty.
The coherence approach maintains that truth is accessible in the extralogical
realm on the basis of best-fit considerations, without any foundation of cer-
tainty. (The qualifier “factual” occurs here because the instrumental need for the
resources of logic is, of course, conceded, seeing that they are needed as a mech-
anism for best-fit judgments, since logic must be used in determining what
does and does not “fit.”) This entire procedure goes wholly counter to the clas-
sical epistemologists’ axiomatic quest for basic or foundational truths.
Foundationalism might be caricatured as an essentially “aristocratic” view
of truth: truths as such are not equal; there are certain “master” truths on
which the other “client” truths are totally dependent. Negating the need for
any axiomatic truths, the coherence theory sets out to implement a rather
more “democratic” concept of treating all the truth-candidates not necessar-
ily as equal but at any rate as all more or less plausible. The possibilities ren-
dered available by the data at our disposal are treated with a complete
“equality of opportunity”; truthfulness is determined from them only through
a process of interaction—that is, by considerations of a best fit in terms of
mutual accord and attunement (rather than their falling into the implicative
captivity of certain basic prior truths).
The coherentist’s approach effectively inverts that of the foundationalist.
The foundationalist begins his epistemological labors with a very small initial
collection of absolutely certain truths from which he proceeds to work outward
by suitably additive procedures of supplementation to arrive at a wider domain
of truth. By contrast, the coherentist begins with a very large initial collection
of insecure pretenders to truth from which he proceeds to work inward by suit-
ably reductive procedures of elimination to arrive at a narrower domain of truth.
The expansive approach of the foundationalist is the very opposite of the con-
tractive approach of the coherentist. The foundationalist is forced to a starting
point of few but highly secure items, and immediately faces the dilemma of se-
curity vs. content.The coherentist bypasses this difficulty altogether. He begins
with too many items—far too many since “the data” generally stand in a con-
flict of logical incompatibility—but he proceeds to undo the damage of this
embarrassment of riches by suitably reductive maneuvers.This approach avoids
124
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

altogether the characteristic perplexity of foundationalist epistemology in find-
ing appropriate candidates to supply the requisitely secure foundation.
For the coherentist, knowledge is not a Baconian brick wall, with block
supporting block upon a solid foundation; rather, an item of knowledge is like
a node of a spider’s web which is linked to others by thin strands of connection,
each alone weak, but all together adequate for its support.
The essential difference between the coherence theory and any founda-
tionalist approach to acceptance-as-true lies in the fact that on the latter line of
approach every discursive (i.e., reasoned) claim to truth requires truths as in-
puts. If a (presumptively) true result is to be obtained, the premises on which it
rests must themselves be true (or assumed to be so). The only strictly origina-
tive provider of de novo truths is the process that yields the “immediate” truths
of the starter set. The decisive difference of the coherence theory is its capacity
to extract (presumptive) truths discursively from a basis that includes no con-
ceded truths whatsoever—that is, from data that are merely truth-candidates
and not truths. The foundationalist requirement for basic truths is something
that the coherence theory—proceeding as it does from a basis of data that need
be neither compatible nor true—has been designed to overcome. The analysis
seeks to provide a procedure for arriving at output truths without requiring any
input truths as an indispensable staring basis. The motto Truth without true
foundations may properly be inscribed on the banner of the coherence theory
of truth.
The contrast between a foundationalist Aufbau of the domain of truth and
the approach of the coherence analysis is set out graphically in Figure 7.1.This
diagram makes plain the basic similarities between the two approaches, but also
brings out their substantial differences, which are as follows:
1.
On the foundationalist approach there are two distinct sorts of
knowledge, the immediate and the derivative, while for the coheren-
tist all knowledge is essentially of a piece.
2.
On the foundationalist approach experience is called on to provide
basic knowledge (in the form of certain immediately evident truths),
while for the coherentist it only provides the “raw” data for knowledge.
3.
On the foundationalist approach all discursive—inductive or
deductive—processes require an input of known truths if truths are
to be an output (which is exactly why an immediate, nondiscursive
route to truth must be postulated). The coherence analysis differs
fundamentally in this regard.
4.
On the foundationalist approach the initial “givens” are wholly
nondiscursive and fixed invariants, while on the coherence approach
the “data” represent a mixture of experiential and discursive elements.
(The “raw” data are, to be sure, nondiscursive, but for the coherentist
they are only one part of the total data and are by no means fixed and
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
125

sacred but subject to a cyclic process of reappraisal and revision.) In
consequence:
5.
On the foundationalist approach nothing whatever that happens at
the epistemically later stages of the analysis can possibly affect the
starting point of basic truths, while on the coherentist approach
there is a feed-back loop through which the data themselves can be
conditioned by the outcome of a coherence analysis (in other con-
texts) and their status is subject to reevaluation in the light of new
insights regarding their plausibility.
6.
Unlike the foundationalist approach, the coherence analysis does not
require a sharp disparity in the treatment of particular and general
propositions (between “observation statements” and “laws”). Its
“data” for factual inquiry are subject to no particularity stipulations,
unlike the usual “directly evident” givens of the foundationalists.12
7.
On the foundationalist approach the body of “evidence” from which
the reasoning proceeds must be self-consistent. The coherence
analysis has no need for this unrealistic supposition.
The diagram also brings to the fore one further facet of coherentist method
that merits special emphasis. Foundationalist inductivism adopts the basically
linear systematization of reasoning typical of mathematics; here once a result is
obtained one simply passes on to other matters—there is no need ever to return
to the reappraisal or resubstantiation of something that has already been “estab-
lished.” But with coherentist inductivism the case is quite otherwise, as the feed-
126
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth
FIGURE 7.1 Foundationalism versus Coherentism in Factual Inquiry

back loop of the diagram illustrates graphically. Here there is a definite place for
a dialectical process of cyclical structure, where one returns repeatedly to an item
already “established.” For the process of confirmation is now more complex, and
a thesis might first appear on the status of a mere datum of low plausibility, later
as one of higher plausibility, and ultimately even as a validated truth.
A coherence epistemology of truth-claims recognizes that the grounding
of such claims cannot be evidential “all the way down,” because evidentiation
has to come to a stop. And it cannot be probabilistic “all the way down” because
probabilities must ultimately come to rest on some proportionately factual basis
or other. Rather, so coherentism insists, the validating process is not linear but
cyclic. And coherentism’s network conception of grounding offers a perfectly
viable alternative here. Our concern with the validation of cognitive claims is
not—or need not be—an issue of extracting “real knowledge” from “mere be-
liefs” by use of a philosopher’s stone of epistemic justification. This entire re-
ductive or extractive impetus is absent from coherentism’s preoccupation with
the rational structure of knowledge rather than with its heuristic origin. And here
the network approach is not only a possible, but an emphatically attractive
alternative to the foundationalist’s axiomatic methodology.
The prospect of alternative modes of cognitive systematization has far-
reaching implications. For only a short and easy step separates a program of
cognitive systematization (be it of the Euclidean or of the network type) from
a full-fledged criteriology of knowledge, namely that of accepting a thesis as an
item of proper knowledge if it can be accommodated in smooth systematic fit
with the remainder of our purported (or putative) knowledge. This step
amounts to what might be called “the Hegelian Inversion”—the step from the
implication claim KNOWABLE →SYSTEMATIZABLE, or its cognate [PRESUMABLY]
KNOWN →[DULY] SYSTEMATIZED, to the reverse implication claim: [DULY] SYS-
TEMATIZED →[PRESUMABLY] KNOWN. Given this inversion, the criterion for
knowledge becomes a matter of being “duly fitted into a systematization of the
candidates for cognition.” Systematicity becomes the controlling standard of
truth and its work shifts from justification to validation.
The inherent difficulty of applying approach to the systematization of fac-
tual knowledge relates to the question of the sorts of theses that are to serve as
basic (in the role of ultimate axioms). On the one hand, they must be very se-
cure (certain, “self-evident” or self-evidencing) to be qualified to dispense with
all need for further verification. But on the other hand, they will have to be
enormously content-rich, since they must carry on their back the whole struc-
ture of knowledge.These two qualifications for the axiomatic role (content and
security) clearly stand in mutual conflict with each other. This tension makes
for a weak point, an Achilles heel that critics of the Euclidean model of knowl-
edge have always exploited.
Thus consider—for the sake of illustration the sorts of theses needed for
common-life claims about the realm of everyday experience. On the one hand,
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
127

if I claim “I see a book” (say) or “I see an apple,” my claims go far beyond their
evidential warrant in sense perception. A real apple must, for example, have a
certain sort of appearance from the (yet uninspected) other side, and a certain
sort of (yet uninspected) subcutaneous makeup. And if anything goes wrong in
these respects my claim that it was an apple I saw (rather than, say, a clever sort
of apple substitute, or something done with mirrors and flashes of colored
light) must be retracted. The claim to see an apple, in short, is not sufficiently
secure. Its content extends beyond the evidence in hand in such a way that the
claim becomes vulnerable and defeasible in the face of further evidence. If, on
the other hand, one “goes for safety”—and alters the claim to “It seems to me that
I see an apple” or “I take myself to be seeing an apple”—this resultant claim in
the language of appearance is effectively immune from defect and so secure
enough. But such assertions purchase this security at the price of content. For
no amount of claims in the language of appearance—however extensively they
may reach in terms of how things “appear” to me and what I “take myself” to be
seeing, smelling, and so on—can ever issue in any theoretically guaranteeable
result regarding what is actually the case in the world. While they themselves
are safe enough, appearance-theses will fall short on the side of objective con-
tent. This dilemma of security versus content represents the Achilles heel of
foundationalist theory of factual knowledge.
In the face of such difficulties in the foundationalist program, it deserves
emphatic stress that the foundationalist approach to justification does not repre-
sent the only way of implementing the justificatory process inherent in the ap-
proach to knowledge as true, justified belief. It is important to recognize that
the coherentist network model of cognitive systematization affords a perfectly
workable alternative approach.
PROBLEMS OF FOUNDATIONALISM
The difficulty with any sort of foundationalism lies in the matter of founda-
tions. If those foundations are phenomenal (“I seem to see a steel dagger before
me,”“I deem it highly likely that he will come”) then they are in the final analy-
sis autobiographical rather than objectively factual. If on the other hand they
are factual (“There is an apple on the table”—which, of course, cannot have a
golden interior—after all, apples just don’t—even though I have not checked
this) then it is hard to see how they can be foundational, since their own status
is problematic. The foundationalist approach to factual knowledge faces a
dilemma: the sort of claims at issue in objective knowledge lack cognitively un-
problematic foundations, while cognitively unproblematic contentions do not
yield objective facts.
On the one hand, they must be very secure (certain, “self-evident” or self-
evidencing) to be qualified themselves to dispense with all need for further sub-
128
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

stantiation. But on the other hand, they will have to be enormously content-
rich, since they must carry on their back the whole structure of knowledge.
These two qualifications for the axiomatic role—fullness of content and proba-
tive security—obviously stand in mutual conflict with each other. This tension
makes for a weak point which critics of the Euclidean model of knowledge
have always exploited.
Insofar as any statement provides information about the world (e.g., “I now
see a cat there” which entails, inter alia, that a cat is there), it is not invulnerable
to a discovery of error; insofar as it is safeguarded (e.g., by some guarding-locu-
tion such as “I take it that . . .”, so that we have “It now seems to me that I see a
cat there” or “I am under the impression that I see a cat there”), the statement re-
lates to appearance instead of reality and becomes denuded of objective content.
Egocentric statements of phenomenological appearances may have the requisite
security, but are void of objective information; claims regarding impersonal real-
ity are objectively informative, but are in principle vulnerable.13 The quest for pro-
tocol statements as a foundation for empirical knowledge has always foundered
on this inherent tension between the two incompatible objectives of indubitable
certainty on the one hand and objective factual content on the other.
Coherentism sets out to resolve this problem. Rather than proceeding lin-
early, by fresh deductions from several premises, it proposes to cycle round and
round the same given family of prospects and possibilities, sorting out, refitting,
refining until a more sophisticatedly developed and more deeply elaborated
resolution is ultimately arrived at. The information-extracting process devel-
oped along these lines is one not of advance into new informative territory, but
one of a cyclic reappraisal and revision of the old, tightening the net around our
ultimate conclusion as we move round and round again, gaining a surer confi-
dence in the wake of more refined reappraisals. This cyclic process of reap-
praisal is such that one can even—in suitable circumstances—dispense with the
need for “new” data-inputs in an endeavor to squeeze more information out of
the old. It is readily observed that this repeated reappraisal of claims is in fact
closer to the processes of thought one generally employs in scientific reasoning.
The coherentist unhesitatingly endorses the traditional thesis that knowl-
edge must be justified belief, construing this as tantamount to claiming that the
known is that whose acceptance-as-true is adequately warranted through an ap-
propriate sort of systematization. However, since the systematization at issue is
viewed as being of the network type, the impact of the thesis is drastically al-
tered. For we now envisage a variant view of justification, one which radically
reorients the thesis from the direction of the foundationalists’ quest for an ulti-
mate basis for knowledge as a quasi-axiomatic structure. Now “justified” comes
to mean not “derived from basic (or axiomatic) knowledge,” but rather “appro-
priately interconnected with the rest of what is known.”
The second prime difficulty of foundationalism relates to the grounding re-
lationship which governs the derivational process. If this is to have the strength
Foundationalism versus Coherentism
129

of deductive validity, affording a failproof guarantee of the conclusion relative to
the premisses, then it will be unable to lead us beyond the logical information-
content of the premises. If, on the other hand, these inferential processes are in
any way inductive or probabilistic—if the inferential derivations at issue are to be
able (as they should be) to lead significantly beyond the information-content of
the premisses themselves—then we are hard put to validate the claims to cer-
tainty-preservation that must be established on their behalf.
In the face of such difficulties in the foundationalist program, it deserves
emphatic stress that the Euclidean approach to cognitive systematization does
not represent the only way of implementing the justificatory demands of an ap-
proach to knowledge as true, justified belief. It is important to recognize that
the network model of cognitive systematization affords the prospect of a work-
able alternative approach—one which leads straightaway to the coherentist
program of epistemology. Above all, this variant approach would relieve us of
the unhappy burden of a commitment to primary, absolutely sacrosanct propo-
sitions on the order of the “first principles” of traditional epistemology. A closer
examination of the coherentist program is accordingly very much in order.14
130
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

131
Chapter 8
The Pursuit of Truth:
Coherentist Criteriology
SYNOPSIS
•
Coherentism bases its criteriology of truth in “coherence,” that is, on cogni-
tive systematicity. But what is it that gets systematized?
•
The answer here lies in the idea of data—claims that are substantially
plausible in the epistemic circumstances at issue, not certified truths but
promising truth-candidates.
•
The ultimate validation of a coherentist approach to truth assessment lies in
the pragmatic utility of its results. For in the end it is the efficacy of its appli-
cations—alike in theoretical and practical matters—that serves as the arbiter
of our cognition—the controlling monitor of adequacy for truth-estimation.
•
The idea of truth with regard to general matters of fact as we deal with
them in science is in fact something of an idealization.
•
It is not the accomplished product of current inquiry but the hypothesized
product of idealized inquiry.The idea of truth as idealized coherence accord-
ingly provides a cogent specification for the nature of truth.
THE COHERENTIST APPROACH TO INQUIRY
Coherentism, as we have seen, views the systemic-interrelatedness of factual
theses as the criterial standard of their acceptability. But just how does such a
coherence criteriology work?

The overall stance of the theory is to be articulated in terms somewhat as
follows:
Acceptance-as-true is in general not the starting point of inquiry but
its terminus. To begin with, all that we generally have is a body of
prima facie truths, that is, presumption-geared and thereby merely
plausible propositions that qualify as potential—perhaps even as
promising—candidates for acceptance.The epistemic realities being as
they are, these candidate-truths will, in general, form a mutually in-
consistent set, and so exclude one another so as to destroy the
prospects of their being accorded in toto recognition as truths pure
and simple. The best that can be done in such circumstances is to en-
dorse those as truths that best “cohere” with the others so as to “make
the most” of the data as a whole in the epistemic circumstances at
issue. Systemic coherence thus affords the criterial validation of the
qualifications of truth-candidates for being classed as genuine truths.
Systematicity thus becomes not just the organizer but the test of truth.
A coherentist epistemology thus views the extraction of knowledge from the
plausible data by means of an analysis of best-fit considerations. Its approach is
fundamentally holistic in judging the acceptability of every purported item of
information by its capacity to contribute toward a well-ordered, systemic whole.
In general terms, the coherence criterion of truth operates as follows. One
begins with a datum-set S  {P1,P2,P3,...} of suitably “given” propositions.These
data are not necessarily true nor even consistent. They are not given as secure
truths, in a foundationalist’s manner of theses established once and for all, but
merely as presumptive or potential truths, that is, as plausible truth-candidates—
and in general as competing ones that are mutually inconsistent. The task to
which a coherentist epistemology addresses itself is that of bringing order into S
by separating the sheep from the goats, distinguishing what merits acceptance as
true from what does not.
The process at issue such a coherence analysis accordingly calls for the fol-
lowing epistemic resources:
1.
“Data”: theses that can serve as acceptance-candidates in the context
of the inquiry, plausible contentions which, at best, are merely pre-
sumptively true (like the “data of sense”). These are not certified
truths (or even probable truths) but theses that are in a position to
make some claims on us for acceptance: They are prima facie truths
in the sense that we would inline to grant them acceptance-as-true if
(and this is a very big IF) there were no countervailing considera-
tions on the scene. (The classical example of “data” in this sense are
those of perception and memory.)
132
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

2.
Plausibility ratings: comparative evaluations of our initial assessment
(in the context of issue) of the relative acceptability of the “data.”This
is a matter of their relative acceptability “at first glance” (so to speak)
and in the first analysis, prior to their systematic evaluation.The plau-
sibility-standing of truth-candidates is thus to be accorded without
any prejudgments as to how these theses will fare in the final analysis.1
The process of coherence analysis consists in first classifying those relevantly
plausible data into plausibility categories that reflect the nature of their
source or substance and then using this as a rating index of plausibility. (On
the side of substance, the various parameters of systematicity—generality,
uniformity, and so forth—can themselves serve to provide indices of plausi-
bility.) In cases of a conflict of inconsistency the next step is then a process of
“primacy” that abandons sufficiently many of the data so that that consistency
is restored, being grounded in this process by plausibility considerations in
such a way as to preserve as much plausibility as possible by sacrificing what
is less plausible to what is more so—exactly along the lines envisioned in the
earlier chapters.
The governing injunction of a plausibilistic coherentism is: Maintain as
best you can the overall fit of mutual attunement by proceeding—when nec-
essary—to make the least plausible competitors give way to the more plausi-
ble. On this approach, a truth candidate comes to make good its claims to
recognition as a truth through its consistency with as much as possible from
among the rest of the data. The situation arising here resembles the solving of
a jigsaw puzzle with superfluous pieces that cannot possibly be fitted into any
maximally orderly, systemically integrated picture representing the “correct
solution.”
Accordingly, the general strategy of the coherence theory lies in three-step
procedure:
•
To gather in all of the relevant “data” (in the present technical sense of
this term).
•
To inventory the available conflict-resolving options that represents
the alternative possibilities for achieving overall consistency.
•
To choose among these alternatives by using the guidance of plausibil-
ity considerations, subject to the principle of minimizing implausibility.
In this way, the coherence theory implements F. H. Bradley’s dictum that sys-
tem (i.e., systematicity) provides a test-criterion most appropriately fitted to
serve as arbiter of truth.
With plausible data as a starting point, the coherence analysis sets out to
sift through these truth-candidates with a view to minimizing the conflicts that
may arise. Its basic mechanism is that of best-fit considerations, which brings
The Pursuit of Truth
133

us to the second main component of coherentism, the machinery of “best fit”
analysis:
That family embracing the truth candidates which are maximally at-
tuned to one another is to count—on this criterion of over-all mutual
accommodation—as best qualified for acceptance as presumably true,
implementing the idea of compatibility screening on the basis of
“best-fit” considerations. Mutual coherence becomes the arbiter of ac-
ceptability which make the less plausible alternatives give way to those
of greater plausibility. The acceptability-determining mechanism at
issue proceeds on the principle of optimizing our admission of the
claims implicit in the data, striving to maximize our retention of the
data subject to the plausibilities of the situation.2
The process of deriving useful information from imperfect data is a key
feature of the coherence theory of truth, which faces (rather than, like standard
logic, evades) the question of the inferences appropriately to be drawn from an
inconsistent set of premises. On this approach, the coherence theory of truth
views the problem of truth-determination as a matter of bringing order into a
chaos comprised of initial “data” that mingle the secure and the infirm. It sees
the problem in transformational terms: incoherence into coherence, disorder
into system, candidate-truths into qualified truths.
The interaction of observation and theory provides an illustration. Take
grammar. Here one moves inferentially from the phenomena of actual usage to
the framework of laws by the way of a best-fit principle (an “inference to the
best systematization” as it were), and one checks that the cycle closes by mov-
ing back again to the phenomena by way of their subsumption under the in-
ferred rules. Something may well get lost en route in this process of mutual
attunement—for example, some of the observed phenomena of actual language
use may simply be dismissed (say as “slips of the tongue”). Again, the fitting of
curves to observation points in science also illustrates this sort of feedback
process of discriminating the true and the false on best-fit considerations. The
crucial point for present purposes is simply that a systematization can effec-
tively control and correct data—even (to a substantial extent) the very data on
which it itself is based.
The coherentist criterion accordingly assumes an entirely inward orienta-
tion; it does not seek to compare the truth candidates directly with “the facts”
obtaining outside the epistemic context; rather, having gathered in as much in-
formation (and this will include also misinformation) about the facts as possible,
it seeks to sift the true from the false within this body. On this approach, the
validation of an item of knowledge—the rationalization if its inclusion along-
side others within “the body of our knowledge”—proceeds by way of exhibiting
its interrelationships with the rest: they must all be linked together in a con-
134
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

nected, mutually supportive way (rather than having the form of an inferential
structure built up on a footing of rock-bottom axioms). On the coherentist’s
theory, justification is not a matter of derivation but one of systematization. We
operate, in effect, with the question: “justified”  “systematized.” The coher-
ence approach can be thought of as representing, in effect, the systems-analy-
sis approach to the criteriology of truth.
THE CENTRAL ROLE OF DATA FOR A COHERENTIST
TRUTH-CRITERIOLOGY
As coherentist methodologists see the process of inquiry, all that we generally
have to begin with is a body of data, that qualify as potential—perhaps even as
promising—candidates for truth.The epistemic realities being as they are, these
candidate-truths, will in general, form a mutually inconsistent set so as to de-
stroy their prospects of their being accorded in toto recognition as truths pure
and simple. We are accordingly well advised to make the most of the data as a
whole. Coherence thus becomes the critical test of the qualifications of truth
candidates for gaining endorsement as genuine truths.
The concept of a datum, whose role is pivotal in coherentist methodology, is
something of a technical resource.To be sure, the idea is one not entirely unrelated
to the ordinary use of that term, nor to its (somewhat different) use among
philosophers; yet it is significantly different from both. A datum is aplausible
truth-candidate, a proposition to be taken not as true, but as potentially or pre-
sumptively true. It is a prima facie truth in exactly the sense in which one speaks of
prima facie duties in ethics—a thesis that we would in the circumstances, be pre-
pared to class as true provided that no countervailing considerations are opera-
tive. A datum is thus a proposition that one is to class as true if one can, that is, if
doing so does not generate any difficulties or inconsistencies.
A datum is not established as true; it is backed only by a presumption that it
may turn out true “if all goes well.” It lays a claim to truth, but it may not be
able to make good this claim in the final analysis. (A datum is thus something
altogether different from the basic, protocol truths that serve as foundation for
an Aufbau of truth in the manner of the logical positivists.)
In taking a proposition to be a datum we propose to class it as true when-
ever possible, recognizing that this may not be possible because some data may
contradict one another, so that we must consider some of them as nontruths.3
A datum is to be carried across the line from datahood to truth automatically
whenever such a transfer is unproblematic (i.e., in no way involves a contradic-
tion), and member of a group of data that meets with no rivalry from its fellows
can immediately be accepted as true. Our stance toward data is unashamedly
that of fair-weather friends: we adhere to them when this involves no problems
whatsoever, but are prepared to abandon them in the face of difficulties—that
The Pursuit of Truth
135

is, whenever consistency maintenance so requires. But it is quite clear that such
loose attachment to a datum is by no means tantamount to no attachment at all.
The following objection might be made: How can one speak of asserting a
proposition merely as a datum but not as a truth? If one is to assert (accept, main-
tain) the proposition in any way at all, does one not thereby assert (accept, main-
tain) it to be true? The answer to be made here is simply a head-on denial. To
maintain P as a datum, as potentially or presumptively factual, is akin to maintain-
ing P as possible or as probable: in no case are these tantamount to maintaining the
proposition as true. Putting a proposition forward as “possible” or “probable”
commits one to claiming no more than that it is “possibly true” or “probably true.”
Similarly, to assert P as a datum is to say no more than that P is potentially or pre-
sumptively true—that it is a truth-candidate—but does not say that P is actually
true, that it is a truth. As with assertions of possibility or probability, a claim of
datahood definitely stops short—far short—of a claim to truth.
We in general know that data cannot be identified with truths—that some
of them must indeed be falsehoods—because they are generally incompatible
with one another. Truth-candidates—like rival candidates for public office—
can work to exclude one another: they are mutually exclusive and victory for
one spells defeat for the others. Candidate-truths are not truths pure and sim-
ple because it is of the very nature of the case that matters must so eventuate
that some of them are falsehoods.
The conception of a datum certainly does not “open the floodgates” in 
an indiscriminate way. Not everything is a datum: the concept is to have some
logicoepistemic bite.To be a datum is not just to be a proposition that could con-
ceivably be claimed to be true but to be a proposition that (under the circum-
stances) can be claimed to be true with at least some plausibility: its claim must
be well-founded. A proposition will not qualify as a datum without some ap-
propriate grounding. Data are propositions that have a proper claim on truth,
and we must distinguish between truth-claims that can reasonably be made
from those that are merely theoretically possible. (Not every human being is a
possible winner in a race but only those who are genuinely “in the running.”) A
datum is a proposition which, given the circumstances of the case, is a real
prospect for truth in terms of the availability of reasons to warrant its truth-
candidacy. A datum is not merely something that is “possibly true” or that is
“true for all I know about the matter.” To class a proposition as a datum is to
take a definite and committal position with respect to it, so as to say “I propose
to accept it as true in so far as this is permitted by analogous and possibly con-
flicting commitments elsewhere.”
Virtually all writers on the subject take the position that, as one recent au-
thority puts it, “acceptance as true is a necessary condition for acceptance as evi-
dence.”4 On this view, if something can only count as genuine and actual evidence
when it is established as true, the weaker conception of potential evidence—as
contradistinguished from evidence as such (the actual evidence)—comes closer to
136
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

our conception of the data. But although some basis is required for counting as a
datum, this basis need not be very strong by the usual epistemic standards.To be
a datum is to be a truth-candidate. And to count as such, a proposition need be
neither an actual truth, nor a probable truth: it need only be “in the running” as a
genuine candidate or a live possibility for truth. Such propositions are not truths,
but make good a claim to truth that is at best tentative and provisional; by them-
selves they do not formulate truth but at most indicate it. Historically the tenta-
tively of the experientially and mnemonically “given” has always been recognized,
and the deliverances of our senses and our memory are the traditional examples
of this circumstance of merely purported truth.
A more ambitious claim to truthfulness characterizes such a family of data
than any one member of it. No imputation of truth (as opposed to presumptive
or candidate truth) attaches to any individual datum, but there is a definite im-
plicit claim that the “logical space” spanned by the data as a whole somewhere
embraces the truth of the matter. The winner of a race must be sought among
those “in the running.” Taken individually, the data are merely truth-presump-
tive, but taken collectively as a family they are to be viewed as truth-embracing:
admitting that they do not pinpoint where the truth lies, we are committed to
the view that once we have all the relevant data in hand they surround the area
where it is to be found.
One may well ask: “How can coherence with the data yield truth if the
data themselves are not individually true? How can something so tentative
prove sufficiently determinative?”The answer can only be found in the detailed
development of the machinery; at this preliminary stage we can do no better
than give a rough analogy. Consider again the earlier example of a jigsaw puz-
zle with superfluous pieces. It is clear here that the factor of “suitably fitting in”
will be determinative of a piece’s place (or lack of place) in the correct solution.
Not the (admittedly tentative) status of the individual pieces but their mutual
relationships of systematic accord is the determinative consideration. Thus the
issue is not that of how mere truth-candidacy itself can serve to confer truth but
of how it can help to determine truth on the basis of certain systematic consid-
erations. Of course the exact nature of these considerations remains to be con-
sidered, but the key fact at this stage is that there is an important epistemic
category of claims to presumptive or provisional verisimilitude that carry truth-
indicative weight, while yet stopping well short of claims to truth as such.
Data—construed along the plausible lines as that of the preceding discus-
sion—play a pivotal role in the articulation of a coherence-based criterion of
truth. The entire drama of a coherence analysis is played out within the sphere
of propositions, in terms of the sorts of relationships they have to one another.
Now there is—in any event—enough merit in a correspondence account of
truth that an appropriate consonance must obtain between “the actual facts of
the matter” and a proposition regarding them that can qualify as true to the
criticism “Why should mere coherence imply truth?” One can and should
The Pursuit of Truth
137

reply: What is at issue here is not mere coherence, but coherence with the data.
It is not with bare coherence as such (whatever that would be) but with data-
directed coherence that a truth-making capacity enters on the scene. But, of
course, datahood only provides the building blocks for truth-determination and
not the structure itself. Coherence plays the essential role because it is to be
through the mediation of coherence considerations that we move from truth-
candidacy and presumptions of factuality to truth as such. And the procedure is
fundamentally noncircular: we need make no imputations of truth at the level
of data to arrive at truths through application of the criterial machinery in view.
The concept of the datahood is the crux of the coherence theory of truth.
It serves to provide an answer to the question “Coherent with what?” without
postulating a prior category of fundamental truth. It provides the coherence
theory with grist to its mill that need not itself be the product of some prelim-
inary determinations of truth. A reliance on data makes it possible to contem-
plate a coherence theory that produces truth not ex nihilo (which would be
impossible) but from a basis that does not itself demand any prior determina-
tions of truthfulness as such. A coherence criterion can, on this basis, furnish a
mechanism that is originative of truth—that is, it yields truths as outputs with-
out requiring that truths must also be present among the supplied inputs.
A novel or science fiction tale or indeed any other sort of made-up story
can be perfectly coherent. To say simply that a proposition coheres with certain
others is to say to little. All propositions will satisfy this condition, and so it is
quite unable to tell us anything that bears on the question of truth. It would be
quite senseless to suggest that a proposition’s truth resides in “its coherence”
alone. Its coherence is of conceptual necessity a relative rather than an absolute
characteristic. Coherence must always be coherence with something: the verb “to
cohere with” requires an object just as much as “to be larger than” does. We do
not really have a coherence theory in hand at all, until the target domain of co-
herence is specified. Once this has been done, we may very well find that the in-
herent truth-indeterminacy of abstract coherence—its potential failure to yield
a unique result—has been removed. Now it must be said in their defense that
the traditional coherence per se, but have insisted that it is specifically “coher-
ence with our experience” that is to be the standard of truth.5 The coherence
theory of the British idealists has never abandoned altogether the empiricist
tendency of the native tradition of philosophy.
What is clearly needed is a halfway house between coherence with some—
that is, any—propositions (which would be trivial) and coherence with true
propositions (which would be circular with a criterion for truth). Essentially,
what is needed is coherence with somehow “the right” propositions.The coher-
ence at issue in a coherence theory of truth must be construed as involving all in
some way appropriately qualified propositions. This line of thought poses a task
central to the construction of a workable coherence theory: that of specifying
just what propositions are at stake when one speaks of determining the truth of
138
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

a given proposition in terms of its “coherence with others.” Which others are at
issue? It was, of course, for the sake of a satisfactory answer to this question that
our approach made its crucial resort to the key concept of an experientially
grounded datum that concerned us so elaborately in the preceding section.
It is sometimes objected that coherence cannot be the standard of truth
because there we may well arrive at a multiplicity of diverse but equally coher-
ent structures, whereas truth is of its very nature conceived of as unique and
monolithic. Bertrand Russell, for example, argues in this way:
There is no reason to suppose that only one coherent body of beliefs is
possible. It may be that, with sufficient imagination, a novelist might
invent a past for the world that would perfectly fit on to what we
know, and yet be quite different from the real past. In more scientific
matters, it is certain that there are often two or more hypotheses
which account for all the known facts on some subject, and although,
in such cases, men of science endeavour to find facts which will rule
out all the hypotheses except one, there is no reason why they should
always succeed.6
One must certainly grant Russell’s central point: however the idea of co-
herence is articulated in the abstract, there is something fundamentally undis-
criminating about coherence taken by itself. Coherence may well be—nay
certainly is—a descriptive feature of the domain of truths: they cohere. But
there is nothing in this to prevent propositions other than truths from cohering
with one another: Fiction can be made as coherent as fact: truths surely have no
monopoly of coherence. Indeed “it is logically possible to have two different but
equally comprehensive sets of coherent statements between which there would
be, in the coherence theory, no way to decide which was the set of true state-
ments.”7 In consequence, coherence cannot of and by itself discriminate be-
tween truths and falsehoods. Coherence is thus seemingly disqualified as a
means for identifying truths. Any viable coherence theory of truth must make
good the claim that despite these patent facts considerations of coherence
can—somehow—be deployed to serve as an indicator of truth.
But the presently envisioned theory averts these difficulties. It looks not to
coherence in and of itself a criterion of truth, but to coherence with the date of
experience. It thus renders Russell’s objection effectively irrelevant.8
ON VALIDATING THE COHERENCE APPROACH
But how can it be shown that the specifically coherentist approach to cogni-
tive systematization meets the demands for an effective standard of quality
control? The argument here has two stages: (1) recalling our earlier thesis that
The Pursuit of Truth
139

the coherentist approach to cognitive systematization can assimilate the stan-
dard mechanisms of scientific method, and then (2) noting the dramatic effi-
cacy of science vis-à-vis any even remotely available alternative candidate as a
mechanism of prediction and control over nature. One can thus invoke on co-
herentism’s behalf the pragmatic efficacy of science, holding that coherentist
accommodation of scientific method gains to the credit of a coherentist ap-
proach the dramatic success of science in realizing its conjoint purposes of ex-
planation, prediction, and control over nature. On this perspective, the
pragmatic warrant of coherentism is seen to reside in its capacity to serve as
organon of scientific reasoning. But how can this capacity be made manifest?
It is sometimes suggested that coherentism’s picture of interlocked circles
of the theoretical and applicative validation of cognitive systems portrays the
process of system-validation in the essentially timeless terms customary in epis-
temological discussions. However, this static view of system-validation needs to
be supplemented—indeed corrected—by considering the issue in its temporal
and developmental aspect.The atemporal relationships of probative justification
must be augmented by examining the justificatory bearing of the historical dy-
namics of the matter—the evolutionary process of system development. After
all, the articulation of cognitive systems is a matter of historical dynamics of the
matter—the evolutionary process of system development. After all, the articu-
lation of cognitive systems is a matter of historical development, of repeated ef-
forts at improvements in systematizing in the light of trial and error. We are
faced with a fundamentally repetitive process of the successive revision and so-
phistication of our ventures at cognitive systematization, a process that pro-
duces by way of iterative elaboration an increasingly satisfactory system, one
that is more and more adequate in its internal articulation or effective in its ex-
ternal applicability. There are iterative cycles of tentative systematizations fol-
lowed by resystematizations in the light of the feedback provided by its
utilization for theoretical application and practical implementation.
This dynamic process is depicted in the diagram given in Figure 8.1, which
presents the cycle at issue in an historical perspective, regarding it as a develop-
mentally iterative feedback process. What is at stake is not just retrospective
reappraisal in the theoretical order of justification, but an actual revision or
improvement in the temporal order of development.
This sequential and developmental process of historical mutation and op-
timal selection assures a growing conformation between our systematizing en-
deavors and “the real world.” In the final analysis our systematized cognition
fits the world for the same reasons that our eating habits do: both are the prod-
uct of an evolutionary course of selective development. It is this evolutionary
process that assures the adaequatio ad rem of our system-based claims to knowl-
edge. The legitimating process at issue here is not only a matter of a static pat-
tern of relationships in the probative order of rational legitimation, it also
reflects a temporal and developmental process of successive cyclic iterations
140
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

where all the component elements become more and more attuned to one an-
other and pressed into smoother mutual conformation. And the pivotal feature
of the process is its concern not with the substantiation of theses or proposi-
tions themselves but rather with the validation of the methods that we use for
substantiating them.
This evolutionary development of intellectual methodologies proceeds by
rational selection. As changes come to be entertained (within the society) it
transpires that one “works out for the better” relative to another in terms of its
fitness to survive because it answers better to the socially determined purposes
of the group. Just what does “better” mean here? This carries us back to the
Darwinian perspective. Such a legitimation needs a standard of survivalistic
“fitness.” And this normative standard is provided by considerations of theoret-
ical adequacy and applicative practice, and is inherent in the use to which con-
ceptual instrumentalities are put in the rational conduct of our cognitive and
practical affairs. Our legitimation of the standard probative mechanisms of in-
quiry regarding factual matters began with the factor of pragmatic success and
subsequently transmuted this into an issue of Darwinian survival. As the dis-
cussion has already foreshadowed at many points, it is clearly the method of sci-
entific inquiry that has carried the day here. The mechanisms of scientific
reasoning clearly represent the most developed and sophisticated of our proba-
tive methods. No elaborate argumentation is necessary to establish the all-too-
evident fact that science has come out on top in the competition of rational
selection with respect to alternative processes for substantiating and explaining
our factual claims. The prominent role of the standard parameters of system-
atization in the framework of scientific thought thus reflects a crucial aspect of
their legitimation.
The methodological directives that revolve about the ideal of systematic-
ity in its regulative role (“Of otherwise co-eligible alternatives, choose the sim-
plest!,” “Whenever possible invoke a uniform principle of explanation or
prediction!,” etc.) form an essential part of the methodological framework (the
procedural organon) of a science. Experience has shown these methodologi-
cal principles to be rooted in the functional objectives of the enterprise, being
such as to conduce efficiently to its realization of its purposes. We have every
reason to think that an abandonment of these regulative principles, while not
The Pursuit of Truth
141
FIGURE 8.1 The Feedback Cycle of Legitimation

necessarily spelling an abandonment of science as such, would make hope-
lessly more difficult and problematic the realization of its traditional goals of
affording intellectual and physical control over nature. Considerations of func-
tional efficiency—of economy of thought and praxis—militate decisively on
behalf of the traditional principles of scientific systematization.
The key considerations are effectiveness and efficiency, purposive adequacy
and functional economy, acceptability of product and workability of procedure.
(And systematicity is, of course, an ideal vehicle here in its stress on simplicity,
regularity, uniformity, etc., all of which have to do with the minimizing of un-
necessary complications and the pursuit of intellectual parsimony.) A quasi-
economic dialectic of costs and benefits is operative here. And the question of
system-choice can ultimately be seen as a matter of “survival of the fittest,” with
fitness ultimately assessed in terms of the theoretical and practical objectives of
the rational enterprise. Legitimation is thus evidenced by the fact of survival
through historical vicissitudes.
To be sure, there are a variety of approaches to the problem of systematiz-
ing “how things work in the world.” The examples of such occult cognitive
frameworks as those of numerology (with its benign ratios), astrology (with its
astral influences), and black magic (with its mystic forces) indicate that alterna-
tive explanatory frameworks exist, and that these can have very diverse degrees
of merit. Thus the orthodox scientific approach to cognitive systematization is
simply one alternative among others, and it does not have an irrevocably ab-
solute foothold on the very constitution of the human intellect, nor indeed any
sort of abstract justification by purely “general principles.” Its legitimation is not
a priori and absolute, but a posteriori and experientially determined.
It is not difficult to give examples of the operation of Darwinian processes
in the domain of the instrumentalities of cognitive systematization. The intel-
lectual landscape of human history is littered with the skeletal remains of the ex-
tinct dinosaurs of this sphere. Examples of such defunct methods for the
acquisition and explanatory utilization of information include: astrology, nu-
merology, oracles, dream-interpretation, the reading of tea leaves or the entrails
of birds, animism, the teleological physics of the Presocratics, and so on. There
is nothing intrinsically absurd or contemptible about such unorthodox cognitive
programs; even the most occult of them have a long and not wholly unsuccess-
ful history. (Think, for example, of the long history of numerological explanation
from Pythagoreanism, through Platonism, to the medieval Arabs, down to Kep-
ler in the Renaissance.) But there can be no question at this historical juncture
that science has won the evolutionary struggle among various modes of methods
of cognitive procedure, and this more than anything else makes it manifest that
the inherent coherentism of the orthodox scientific approach to cognitive
systematization satisfies the requirement of pragmatic efficacy.
It makes perfectly good sense to ask: Why should our scientific deliber-
ations proceed in the usual way—with reference to the pursuit of systematic-
142
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

ity, and so on? And it is possible to answer this question along two seemingly
divergent routes:
1.
the pragmatic route: it is efficient, effective, successful, “it works,”
and so on.
2.
the theoretical route: it is rationally cogent, cognitively satisfying,
aesthetically pleasing,9 conceptually “economical,” and so forth.
But the divergence here is only seeming, for Darwinian considerations assure that
in the course of time the two maintain a condition of convergent conformity.
The merit of entrenched cognitive tools lies in their (presumably) having
established themselves in open competition with their rivals. It has come to be
shown before the tribunal of bitter experience—through the historical vagaries
of a Darwinian process of selection—that the accepted methods work out most
effectively in actual (albeit rational rather than natural selection) practice vis-
à-vis other tried alternatives.
The overall line of validation for a probative methodology of coherence
involves a double circle, combining a theory-internal cycle of theoretical self-
substantiation with a theory-external cycle of pragmatic validation—as is illus-
trated in Figure 8.2. Here Cycle I represents the theoretical/cognitive cycle of
theoretical consistency between regulative first principles and their substantive
counterparts, and Cycle II, the practical/applicative cycle of pragmatic efficacy in
implementing the substantive results of the first principles.
Accordingly, the overall legitimation of a methodology for the substantia-
tion of our factual beliefs must unite two distinctive elements: (1) an apparatus
The Pursuit of Truth
143
FIGURE 8.2 The Twofold Cycle of the Legitimation of Systematizing Methodology

of systematic coherence at the theoretical level (a coherence in which factual
presumptions and metaphysical presuppositions both will play a crucial part),
and (2) a controlling monitor of considerations of pragmatic efficacy at the
practical level. Neither can appropriately be dispensed with for the sake of an
exclusive reliance on the other. The proof of the theoretical pudding must, in
the final analysis, lie in the applicative eating, by monitoring the adequacy of
our procedures of cognitive systematization through an assessment of their
applicative success in prediction and control over nature.10
The legitimative process at issue thus relies on an appropriate fusion of con-
siderations of theory and praxis. It is a complex of two distinct but interlocked cy-
cles—the theoretical cycle of cognitive coherence and the pragmatic cycle—the
theoretical cycle of cognitive coherence and the pragmatic cycle of applicative ef-
fectiveness. Only if both of these cycles dovetail properly—in both the theoreti-
cal and the applicative sectors—can the overall process be construed as providing
a suitable rational legitimation for the cognitive principles at issue.The symbiotic
and mutually supportive nature of the enterprise is fundamental: its structure
must afford a systematic union in which both methods and theses are appropri-
ately interlinked. Legitimation once more inheres in an appropriate sort of
systematization in which both cognitive and ontological factors play a role.
On this approach, the strictly theoretical aspect of explanation and under-
standing is coordinate in important in the teleology of science with its prag-
matic aspect of “control over nature.” Indeed control—throughout the range
from prediction as minimal control (the adequate alignment of our own expec-
tations) to the more elaborately modificatory change in the course of nature
through effective interaction—comes to be seen in the pivotal role of the final
arbiter of adequacy. This aspect of the cognitive centrality of control over na-
ture leads us to an interventionist theory of knowledge, one which sees the issue
of monitoring the adequacy of our theorizing to reside ultimately on the side of
efficacy in application.11
The conformity between the regulative presumptions and other method-
ological instrumentalities of inquiry and its results is not guaranteed by a
preestablished harmony. Nor is it just a matter of contingent good luck. It is the
product of an evolutionary pressure that assures the conformation of our sys-
tematizing efforts and the real world under trial and error subject to controlling
constraint of applicative success (pragmatic efficacy). The evolutionary process
assures the due coordination of our cognitive systematizing with the “objective”
workings of a nature that is inherently indifferent to our purposes and beliefs.
It is clear that if the legitimation of the regulative principles of cognitive
systematization is construed as proceeding along such pragmatic/evolutionary
lines, then these principles come to stand on an ultimately factual footing—one
that is a posteriori and contingent. The “first principles” by whose means we
constitute our factual knowledge of nature (uniformity, simplicity, and the other
parameters of systematization that make up our guidelines to plausibility) are
themselves ultimately of an a posteriori and factual standing in point of their
144
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

controlling force. Seemingly serving merely in the role of inputs to inquiry, they
emerge in the final analysis as its products as well, and accordingly have a con-
tingent rather than necessary status. For then the legitimation of our method-
ological guidelines to cognitive systematization in the factual domain is
ultimately not a matter of abstract theoretical principle, but one of experience.
Our “first principles” of cognitive systematization have no claims to inher-
ent “necessity.” Conceivably things might have eventuated differently—even as
concerns the seemingly a priori “first principles of our knowledge.” (Why didn’t
they so eventuate? The question “Why these principles rather than something
else?” is not illegitimate—it is indeed answerable in terms of the overall double-
circle of methodological legitimation.)
Are such first principles a priori and analytic (a part of the “conceptual
schema” of our science) or are they a posteriori and synthetic (a product of sci-
entific inquiry)? This question now looks naive—for they are both.The idea of
a feedback cycle of evolutionary legitimation indicates that we are ill advised to
put the question in terms of a logically tidy yes-or-no. Such first principles are
thus “first” only in the first analysis. Their theory-internal absoluteness is de-
ceptive—it represents but a single phase within the historical dialectic of evo-
lutionary legitimation. They do not mark the dead-end of a ne plus ultra.
To be sure, all this is to say no more than that circumstances could arise in
which even those very fundamental first principles that define for us the very
idea of the intelligibility of nature might have to be given up. In a world suffi-
ciently different from ours reliance on simplicity, uniformity, etc. could con-
ceivably prove misleading and cognitively counterproductive. But to concede
the possibility is not, of course, to grant the likelihood—let alone the reality—
of the matter as regards our actual world. The first principles at issue are so in-
tegral a component of our rationality that we cannot even conceive of any
rationality that dispenses with them: we can conceive that they might have to
be abandoned, but not how.12
The very circumstance that these principles are in theory vulnerable is a
source of their strength in fact. They have been tried in the history of science—
tried long, hard, and often—and yet not found wanting. They are founded on a
solid basis of trial in the harsh court of historical reality. Forming, as they do, an
integral component of the cognitive methods that have evolved over the course
of time it can be said that for them—as for all our other strictly methodological
resources—“die Weltgeschichte ist das Weltgericht.” A quasi-Lamarckian process of
rational selection is the key to quality control in the cognitive domain.13
IDEAL COHERENCE
In general terms, a coherence epistemology of truth has it that a proposition
p is true iff it forms part of a suitably formed set of optimally coherent propo-
sitions. On such an approach, truth-recognition is accorded to generality-
The Pursuit of Truth
145

encompassing propositions regarding matters of fact propositions to reflect
simply local characteristics of their own, but an ultimately global feature of
their place in a larger context so that truth-qualification is not an isolated but
a contextual characteristic.
A common objection to the coherence theory of factual truth is that the
linkage of coherence to truth is simply too loose for coherence to provide the
definitive standard of truth. As one writer put it some years ago:
It is quite conceivable that the coherence theory is a description of
how the truth or falsehood of statements comes to be known rather
than an analysis of the meaning of “true.” . . . One might agree that a
given statement is accepted as true in virtue of standing in certain log-
ical relations to other statements; still it would not follow that in call-
ing it true one means to ascribe to it those relations.14
Here we have the oft-repeated standard reservation regarding a coherence the-
ory of truth: “Coherence may perhaps be suitable as a criterion for the true, but
certainly not as a definitional standard of truth.”15
It can, however, be shown that if one is prepared to consider coherence in
an idealized perspective—as optimal coherence with a perfected database,
rather than as a matter of manifest coherence with the actual data at our dis-
posal—then an essential link between truth and coherence emerges.
Supporters of a coherentist standard of truth must be able to establish that
this criterion is duly consonant with the definitional nature of truth. For there
ought rightfully to be a continuity of operation between our evidential criterion
of acceptability-as-true and the “truth” as definitionally specified. Any really
satisfactory criterion must be such as to yield the real thing—at any rate in suf-
ficiently favorable circumstances. Fortunately for coherentism, it is possible to
demonstrate rigorously that truth is tantamount to ideal coherence—that a
proposition’s being true is in fact equivalent to its being optimally coherent with
an ideal data base.
This circumstance has far-reaching implications. Given that “the real
truth” is guaranteed only by ideal coherence, we have no categorical assurance
of the actual correctness of our coherence-guided inquiries, which are, after all,
always incomplete and imperfect. This is amply substantiated by the history of
science, which already shows that the “discoveries” about how things work in
the world secured through scientific coherentism constantly require adjust-
ment, correction, replacement. It is only too obvious that we cannot say that our
coherence-grounded scientific theorizing furnishes us with the real (definitive)
truth, but just that it furnishes us with the best estimate of the truth that we can
achieve in the circumstances at hand.
In characterizing a claim as true, we indicate that what it states corre-
sponds to the facts, so that its assertion is in order. But while this factually
146
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

(“stating which is the case,” “corresponding to the facts”) is what truth is all
about, we cannot apply or implement it as such: it does not provide a basis on
which the truth of claims can be determined.Thus while we have the equation
to be true  to be (assertible as) factually correct
we also will have
to be determinable as true  capacity to meet certain conditions that
serve as adequate indicators of factual correctness.
But these conditions of truth-determination are in their very nature conditions
whose full realization is a matter of idealization—that is, the conditions are
such as to obtain only in ideal circumstances.
As noted above, it is of the traditional objections to coherentism in that the
coherence theory is unable to deal with the “problem of error”—to be able to
explain how it is that what is thought to be true might yet actually prove false.
But, of course, the consideration that truth is a matter of ideal —rather than
actually realized) coherence at once sweeps this difficulty aside.
Definitive knowledge—as opposed to “merely putative” knowledge—is
the fruit of perfected inquiry. Only here, at the idealized level of perfected
science, could we count on securing the real truth about the world that “cor-
responds to reality” as the traditional phrase has it. Factual knowledge at the
level of generality and precision at issue in scientific theorizing is akin to a
perfect circle. Try as we will, we cannot quite succeed in producing it. We do
our best and call the result knowledge—even as we call that carefully drawn
“circle” on the blackboard a circle. But we realize full well that what we cur-
rently call scientific knowledge is no more authentic (perfected) knowledge
than what we call a circle in a geometry diagram is an authentic (perfected)
circle. Our “knowledge” is in such cases no more than our best estimate of the
truth of things. Lacking the advantage of a God’s-eye view, we have no access
to the world’s facts save through the mediation of (inevitably incomplete and
thus always potentially flawed) inquiry. All we can do—and what must suf-
fice us because indeed it is all that we can do—is to do the best we can with
the cognitive state of the art to estimate “the correct” answers to our scientific
questions.
TRUTH AS AN IDEALIZATION
Definitive truth is realizable only by way of idealization: actual inquiry presents
us with estimates of truth, in matters of scientific theorizing, the real truth as
such is realizable only under ideal conditions.
The Pursuit of Truth
147

We have no workable alternative to presuming that our science as it stands here
and now does not present the real truth, but only estimates it. “Our truth”
in matters of scientific theorizing is not—and presumably never actually will
be—the final truth. However confidently science may affirm its conclusions, the
realization must be maintained that its declarations are provisional, tentative—
subject to revision and even to outright abandonment and replacement. But all
this is not, of course, any reason to abandon the link to truth at the teleological
level of aims, goals, and aspirations.The pursuit of scientific truth, like the pur-
suit of happiness, or for that matter any other ideal in life, is not vitiated by the
consideration that its full realization is not a matter of the practicalities of this
imperfect world.
The ideal of a state-of-the-art in science that attains definitive finality in
empirical inquiry is pie in the sky. It represents an idealization and not a mat-
ter of the practical politics of the epistemic domain. But it affords the focus
imaginarius whose pursuit canalizes and structures our actions. It represents the
ultimate objective (goal) of inquiry—the destination of an incompletable jour-
ney. The conception of capital-T Truth thus serves a negative and fundamen-
tally regulative role to mark the fact that the place we have attained falls short
of our capacity actually to realize our cognitive aspirations. It marks a funda-
mental contrast that regulates how we do and must view our claims to have got
at the truth of things. It plays a role somewhat reminiscent of the functionary
who reminded the Roman emperor of his mortality in reminding us that our
pretentions to truth are always vulnerable. Contemplation of this ideal enables
us to maintain the ever-renewed recognition of the essential ambiguity of the
human condition as suspended between the reality of imperfect achievement
and the ideal of an unattainable perfection.
We must suppose that science does not and cannot ever actually attain an
omega-condition of final perfection. The prospect of fundamental changes
lying just around the corner can never be eliminated finally and decisively.
A basic analogy obtains as per the following proportion:
putative knowledge : actual inquiry :: genuine knowledge : ideal inquiry
Rational inquiry is the pursuit of an unattainable ideal—the ideal of “the real
truth” about laws of nature as yielded by perfected science. Actual inquiry is no
more than our best effort in this direction, and the information (the putative
knowledge) it yields is no more than our best available estimate of the real truth
of things.
To abandon this conception of the truth as such—rejecting the idea of an
“ideal science” which alone can properly be claimed to afford a grasp of real-
ity—would be to abandon an idea that crucially regulates our view as to the na-
ture and status of the knowledge we lay claim to. We would then no longer be
constrained to characterize our truth as merely ostensible and purported. And
148
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

then, did our truth not exhibit any blatant inherent imperfections, we would be
tempted to view it as real, authentic and final in a manner which as we at bot-
tom realize it does not deserve.
The lesson of these deliberations is clear: “the real truth” in scientific mat-
ters is not the actual product of current inquiry, but the hypothesized product
of idealized inquiry.The conditions of objectivity and definitiveness we have in
view in relation to “the real truth” are not satisfiable in the circumstances in
which we do and unavoidably must labor. In this regard we have no realistic
alternative but to regard the truth in these matters as having an idealization.
Conceptions such as definitive knowledge and truth in matters of scientific
theorizing are idealizations geared to the idea of completed and perfected sci-
ence. And this—all too obviously—is not something we have in hand. It is no
more than a regulative ideal that guides and directs our efforts in question-
resolving inquiry.
Such an ideal is not (or should not be) something that is unhealthily unre-
alistic. It should produce not defeatism and negativity toward our efforts and
their fruits but rather a positive determination to do yet better and fill a half-
full barrel yet fuller. It should given not our expectations of realized achieve-
ment but our aspirations, and should give not our demands but our hopes.
Endowing us with a healthy skepticism toward what we actually have in hand,
it should encourage our determination to further improvements and should act
not as an obstacle but a goad.
And here, as elsewhere, we must reckon appropriately with the standard
gap between aspiration and attainment. In the practical sphere—in craftman-
ship, for example, or the cultivation of our health—we may strive for perfec-
tion, but cannot ever claim to attain it. And the situation in inquiry is exactly
parallel with what we encounter in such other domains—ethics specifically in-
cluded. The value of an ideal, even of one that is not realizable, lies not in the
benefit of its attainment (obviously and ex hypothesi!) but in the benefits that
accrue from its pursuit. The view that it is rational to pursue an aim only if we
are in a position to achieve its attainment or approximation is mistaken; it can
be perfectly valid (and entirely rational) if the indirect benefits of its pursuit
and adoption are sufficient—if in striving after it, we realize relevant advan-
tages to a substantial degree. An unattainable ideal can be enormously pro-
ductive. And so, the legitimation of the ideas of “perfected science” lies in its
facilitation of the ongoing evolution of inquiry. In this domain, we arrive at
the perhaps odd-seeming posture of an invocation of practical utility for the
validation of an ideal.
In any case, this view of truth as idealization enables us to establish a
smoothly consonant continuity between a truth-criterion based on the standards
of coherentism and the classic definitional view of the nature of truth as based
on that correspondence with fact (adaequatio ad rem) which is then assured
under altogether idealized circumstances.
The Pursuit of Truth
149

And so the defense of coherentism against traditional objections comes
clearly to view.
The objection that coherence does not determine truth—that “truth” is not
to be defined in terms of coherence—is met by accepting coherence as a crite-
rion for (rather than definition of) truth.
The objection that all sorts of fictions can be just as coherent as the truth
is to be met with the acknowledgement that what is at issue is not merely co-
herence as such but coherence with something, namely. with the plausible
data—with information that has initial credibility on the basis of its inherent
plausibility or the reliability of its sources.
The objection that alternative ways of forming what complexes is not with
an instance or construing coherence in terms of a systematization that priori-
tizes factors like economy, simplicity, uniformity, elegance, and so forth.
The objection that the parameters of systematization that determine coher-
ence must themselves be validated is met by taking a pragmatic turn toward those
methodologies and procedures that produce results that exhibit applicative ade-
quacy—ones that can be utilized effectively in matters not just of explanation but
above all in matters of prediction and operational (i.e., technological) application.
The objection that there is no binding linkage between coherence and the
truth as such is met by insisting that ideal coherence—coherence perfected
under ideal conditions—is a definitive hallmark of the truth. For the connection
at issue is not one of hermeneutics (or meaning-explication) but of criteriology.
150
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

151
Chapter 9
Cognitive Relativism 
and Contextualism
SYNOPSIS
•
Relativism is the position that any group’s standard of knowledge is on a
par with any other’s, seeing that there is no “higher,” asituational standard
from which those groups standards themselves can be assessed.
•
Actually, however, this sort of position gives a misleading interpretation of
the situation because the only standard it makes sense to apply is our own
standard—the one that we ourselves accept as the reasonable standard of
epistemic appraisal.
•
Objectivity is not a matter of a “God’s-eye view” but one of what we our-
selves can see as reasonable insofar as we try to be reasonable about it.
•
The rational primacy of our own position is—or should be—the pivot point.
•
And here as elsewhere, experience will provide us with crucial guidance if
we are willing to listen to its teachings.
•
Accordingly relativism is a profoundly unreasonable practice.
•
To be sure, we have to operate within our own context, but contextualism
is something very different from an indifferentist relativism, seeing that it
pivots on making good rational sense of what one does in context.
•
Relativism’s Achilles’ heel is that it falls afoul of considerations of functional
efficacy in relation to the aims and purposes that define the enterprise of
rational inquiry.

COGNITIVE REALISM
The fact that our knowledge, and especially our scientific knowledge, rests on
the continually growing database of ever-expanding observational horizons
means that our present claims to truth in scientific matters—where precision
and generality are paramount—involve an element of speculative hope. No
doubt “the real truth” is the aim of the cognitive enterprise, but in this real and
imperfect world of ours we have to accept the limitations of imperfection and
face the fact that different inquirers living at different times and in different cir-
cumstances do have—and are bound to have—different ideas about the nature
of things.
Relativism is the doctrine that people make their judgments by standards
and criteria that have no inherent validity or cogency because their standing
and status lies solely and wholly in the sociological fact of their acceptance by
the group.The norms of different schools of thought differ, but those different
norms are entirely on a par with one another on a basis of “to each their own.”
Beliefs are a matter of local custom, pretty much as is the case with ways of eat-
ing or greeting.
In its general form, this relativist position has two prime components:
1.
Basis Diversity. Judgments of the sort at issue—be it the true, or for
that matter the good, the right, and so on—are always made relative
to a potentially variable normative basis: a standard, criterion, or
evaluative perspective regarding acceptability that change from one
group to another.
2.
Basis Egalitarianism. Any and every basis of normative appraisal—
any and every such standard of assessment—is intrinsically as good
(valid, appropriate) as any other.
Egalitarian relativism in general holds that it is not rational to opt for one nor-
matively ratified alternative than for any of its rivals because all norms are sub-
ject to change and variation. Relativism accordingly insists that the difference
between fact and opinion may be all very nice in theory but is simply unimple-
mentable in practice. Whatever we may see as constituting “our knowledge” is
simply a matter of opinion through and through. And one set of group opin-
ions is every bit as justified as any other. It is all just a matter of what people
think. To believe anything else is no more than a recourse to the myth of the
God’s-eye point of view—a point of view which, in the very nature of things
cannot possibly be ours.
Relativism thus understood does not deny that those who have a particular
commitment (who belong to a particular school or tendency of thought) do in-
deed have a standard of judgment of some sort. But it insists that only custom
speaks for that standard—that it is nothing more than just another contingent
152
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

characteristic of the cognitive position of that particular group. It is all a matter
of the parochial allegiances of the community—there is no larger, group-tran-
scending “position of impersonal rationality” on whose basis one particular stan-
dard could reasonably and appropriately be defended as inherently superior to
any other.The cognitive relativist, in particular, insists that no actual or possible
group of inquirers whatsoever is in a privileged epistemic position. Every group’s
resolutions in this regard are final; each is its own final arbiter.There is no higher
court of appeal—no inherently cogent basis of cognitive acceptability that has
any real claim to validity.1
Over the last century, indifferentist relativism of this sort has gathered
strength from various modern intellectual projects. As the sciences of man de-
veloped in the nineteenth century—especially in historical and sociological
studies—the idea increasingly gained acceptance that every culture and every
era has its own characteristic fabric of thought and belief, each appropriate to
and cogent for its own particular context. Historicist thinkers from Wilhelm
Dilthey onward have lent the aid and comfort of their authority to cultural rel-
ativism. And the aftermath of Darwinian biology reinforced this doctrinal
tendency in giving currency to the idea that our human view of reality is for-
matively dependent on our characteristically human cognitive endowments—
as opposed to those of other possible sorts of intelligent creatures. Not only are
the data about the world that we can acquire something that comes to us cour-
tesy of the biological endowment of our senses, but the inferences we can draw
from those data will be analogously dependent on the biological endowment
of our minds. Along these lines, William James wrote:
Were we lobsters, or bees, it might be that our organization would
have led to our using quite different modes from these [actual ones] of
apprehending our experiences. It might be too (we cannot dogmati-
cally deny this) that such categories, unimaginable by us to-day, would
have proved on the whole as serviceable for handling our experiences
mentally as those we actually use.2
Different cultures and different intellectual traditions, to say nothing of or-
ganically different sorts of creatures, will, so it is contended, describe and
explain their experience—their world as they conceive it—in terms of con-
cepts and categories of understanding substantially different from ours but
in principle every bit as good. And anthropological and sociological investi-
gations militated toward relativism on similar grounds. Moreover, psychol-
ogy-inspired thinkers like F. S. C. Schiller and John Dewey were also
impelled in very much the same direction. In this way, investigations in var-
ious modern fields of inquiry have conspired to provide aid and comfort for
cognitive relativism.
All the same, it is a deeply flawed position.
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
153

WHAT’S WRONG WITH RELATIVISM
I think X, you think Y. I hold A to be correct, you opt for B. And this, as the cog-
nitive relativist sees it, is simply the end of the matter. To refute such a position
it must be shown that there is a sound basis for claiming that it is not the end of
the matter. It has to be established that it is, or can be, the case that you should
think as I do, and conversely, because certain beliefs represent the objectively
right and appropriate thing to think.
It must be emphasized from the very outset that to ask for it to be shown
that my view is the correct one is not to ask whether—and, if so, how—I can
succeed in convincing you that my view is correct. It is not necessarily you that I
need to convince here. Rather, it is the uninvolved, unprejudiced, reasonable by-
stander. It is in relation to such suitable third parties that the issue of cognitive
appropriateness must be pursued.The real question is not what you or I do think
but rather what, in the circumstances, any sensible individual ought to think.
Ought you to think as I do? At this point we will have to take a closer look
at me (and ultimately you as well). The pivotal question becomes one of how I
proceed in matters of thinking. Clearly, if I am a frivolous, careless, sloppy thinker
there is no reason why you should think as I do. And so I cannot, without further
ado, plausibly take the line, “What I accept, everyone ought to accept.” But of
course I can, if I so choose, reverse matters here.That is, I can choose to heed the
demands of objective reason by proceeding on the principle and policy of myself
accepting just exactly that which anyone and everyone ought to accept in the cir-
cumstances. I can, in sum, be reasonable about this matter of acceptance. And so
the idea “I think X, therefore you should think so too” is (or can be) sensible and
acceptable—but only if I myself am rational by proceeding on the basis of
seeking to accept only that which people-in-general ought to accept.
What is now at issue is not the cognitive egomania of the idea “Everyone
ought to think as I do” but the cognitive modesty of the idea “I ought to think as
any reasonable person would in the circumstance.” The line is not: “I think X
and so you should do so too because you ought to be guided by me.” Rather, it
is:“I think X because it’s the right think to do in the circumstances and that’s the
reason why you should think X too.” It is precisely this policy that best accom-
modates the demands of impersonal reason. And of course if I proceed on this
basis, then the approval of those who are—by hypothesis—reasonable bystanders
is (ipso facto) assured.
The most promising prospect for refuting relativism accordingly lies in the
recourse to reason. For rational acceptance carries with it an inherent claim to
universality.The rational person accepts exactly what he is convinced that every-
one ought to accept because accepting it is, in the circumstances, the rationally
appropriate thing to do.
To be sure, when I think X and am appropriately convinced that you
should think so too, I do not thereby revoke your right to think non-X. You are
a free agent and are at liberty to do as you please. But this only means that I
154
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

concede you the right to fall into error. And of course in granting you this right
(in the sense of entitlement) I do not and need not think that it is right (in the
sense of appropriate) that you should fall into error.
At this stage, an objector may well complain as follows: “The argumenta-
tion pivots on the principle ‘if it is universally reasonable to think X then every-
one should do so.’ But you have given us no way of discerning or identifying that
which it is reasonable to think. It is surely one thing to claim objective validity,
and another actually to achieve it.”
Here it must, of course, be acknowledged that we have no automatic
process—no mechanical algorithm—for achieving cognitive adequacy. But the
difficulty of attaining generality here does not mean that this desideratum is
beyond our grasp in the various particular cases that confront us. It is certainly
possible to produce examples of things every reasonable person could reason-
ably be expected to accept. Examples abound, witness Descartes’“I exist”; G. E.
Moore’s “This is a human hand”; Dr. Samuel Johnson’s “This is a stone”; C. S.
Peirce’s “This stone will fall to the ground when I let go of it.” Reasonable peo-
ple are prepared to give credit to the “normal” sources of cognition.They can be
expected to concede the ordinary presumptions of truth, and we will certainly
expect them to take the line “innocent until proven guilty” toward sources like
the testimony of the senses and the reflections of commonsense thinking.
There are certainly no guarantees that matters will always turn out for
the good—or, rather, for the true—when we do the reasonable thing in mat-
ters of belief. But experience indicates that we will then be right more often
than not in doing so. And this is not only a matter of experience but of the
inherent sense of things. For, after all, that right-indicative tendency is ex-
actly the determinative function that makes for reasonableness in matters of
belief. It simply makes no sense to take the line that any group’s standard is as
good as any others.’ For the only position that we can reasonably take is that
the only standard it makes sense to apply is that which we ourselves accept as
reasonable.
THE CIRCUMSTANTIAL CONTEXTUALISM OF REASON
Objectivity is something that pivots on what one ought to think—that which is
right and proper to think in the circumstances. And that little expression “in
the circumstances” is critical to a relativism-constraining objectivity. For that
which one ought to want in the circumstances—is exactly that which any sensi-
ble person think if they were “in one’s shoes,” that is, if the circumstances were
the same. Reason is (circumstantially) universal, and it is objectivity’s coordina-
tion with rationality that links it to universality. That which (as best one can
tell) is the sensible thing for us to do in the circumstances is thereby the rea-
sonable thing for anybody—any rational individual—to do in those circumstances.
The objectivity at issue accordingly comes down to rationality. If it is reasonable
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
155

for you to A in circumstance X, then it is so for anybody else—and conversely.
Reason is agent-indifferent.
Of course, different people are differently situated, and this is something
that rationality requires us to take into account. In cognitive matters, for exam-
ple, different people have different information at their disposal: it is only the
deeply underlying “fundamental principles” that are uniform. And so reason
plays no favorites, for while people’s circumstances differ—vastly and end-
lessly—nevertheless that which is reasonable for X in his circumstances is ipso
facto also reasonable for anyone who is (or would be) situated in circumstances
that are identical in the relevant respects.
To be sure, it must be granted to relativists that, as William James insisted,
“There is no point of view absolutely public and universal.”3 The “God’s-eye
view” on things is unavailable—at any rate to us. Whatever we can judge we
must judge from the vantage point of a position in space, time, and cultural
context. But, of course, it is not the absoluteness of an unrealizable point of
view from nowhere or from everywhere-at-once or from God’s vantage point
that is at issue with objectivity. Objectivity is a matter of how we should pro-
ceed—and how otherwise reasonable people would proceed if they were in our
shoes in the relevant regards. It is a matter of doing not what is impossibly non-
circumstantial but what is circumstantially appropriate.
The principles operative in the rational economy of things are all objective
and universal—though of course their application will bear differently on dif-
ferently situated individuals. What it was rational for Galen to believe—given
the cognitive “state of the art” of his day regarding medical matters—is in gen-
eral no longer rational for us to believe today. Obviously, what it is rational for
someone to do or to think hinges on the particular details of how this individual is
circumstanced—and the prevailing circumstances of course differ from person to
person and group to group. To be objective in one’s proceedings is to do what
any sensible person would do in one’s place and we do not all stand on the same
spot. The resolution of an issue is objective if it is arrived at without the intro-
duction of any resources (be they substantive or methodological) that would
not be deemed as acceptable in the circumstances by any rational and reasonable
individual. Accordingly, the rulings of rationality are universal, alright, but con-
ditionally universal, indeed subject to a person-relativity geared to the prevail-
ing conditions. This sort of contextualism does not engender corrosive do as
you please “relativism,” but represents a deep central fact about our procedural
situation. To reemphasize: rationality is universal alright, but it is circumstan-
tially universal—universal in its principled generality but particularized in its
specific prescriptions.
The universalized aspect of rationality turns on its being advisable by per-
son-indifferent and objectively cogent standards for anyone in those circumstances
to do the “rationally appropriate” things at issue. The standards of rational co-
gency are general in the sense that what is rational for one person is also ra-
156
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

tional for others—but here we have to add: for those others who are in his shoes.
Both aspects, the situational and the universal, are inseparable facets of ration-
ality as we standardly conceive it. But what about this “in my place” business?
What can they bring along in getting there! What those others can bring along
and what of mine are they allowed to displace? Clearly what they are bringing
along is their rationality, and reasonableness, their common sense and good
judgment. But my circumstances and conditions, my commitments and inter-
ests are things they have to leave in place. Clearly they are not to substitute
their predilections and preferences, their values and affinities for mine, their be-
liefs and desires for mine. Everything must remain as was except for those char-
acteristics that go against the dictates of reason: phobias, groundless anxieties,
delusions, senseless antipathies, and irrationalities of all sorts. These must be
erased, so to speak—and left blank. In making that suppositional transfer, one
has to factor out all those psychic aberrations that stand in the way of a person’s
being sensible or reasonable.
The circumstances of human life are such that, like it or not, we need knowl-
edge to guide our actions and to satisfy our curiosity. Without knowledge-
productive inquiry we cannot resolve the cognitive and practical problems that
confront a rational creature in making its way in this world. But in matters of
knowledge production life is too short for us to proceed on our own. We simply
cannot start at square one and do everything needful by ourselves.We must—and
do—proceed in the setting of a larger community that extends across the reaches
of time (via its cultural traditions) and space (via its social organization).This re-
quires communication, coordination, collaboration. And so even as the pursuit of
objectivity is aided by an agent’s recourse to the resources of the environing com-
munity, so conversely, is objectivity an indispensably useful instrumentality for the
creation and maintenance of intercommunicative community. For there can be no
community where people do not understand one another, and it is the fact that I
endeavor to proceed as any rational person would in my place that renders my
proceedings efficiently intelligible to others.The commonality of rational proce-
dure provides the crucial coordination mechanism that renders people under-
standable to one another. It is, accordingly, a key instrumentality that positions
each of us to benefit by a mutually advantageous commerce that is indispensable
for the cooperation and collaboration without which our cognitive enterprise—
and other social enterprises in general—would be infeasible.
But can objectivity manage to achieve a universalized impersonality? Can
we expect other cultures to conform to our standards? Do not those other cul-
tures have their own way of doing things—and thus also their own rationality?
Anthropologists, and even, alas, philosophers, often say things like “The
Wazonga tribe has a concept of rationality different from ours, seeing that they
deem it rationally appropriate (or even mandatory) to attribute human illness
to the intervention of the rock-spirits.”4 But there are big problems here; this
way of talking betokens lamentably loose thinking. For, compare:
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
157

1.
The Wazonga habitually (customarily) attribute . . .
2.
The Wazonga think it acceptable (or perhaps even necessary) to
attribute . . .
3.
The Wazonga think it rationally mandatory to attribute . . .
Now, however true and incontestable the first two contentions may be, the
third is untenable. For compare (3) with
4.
The Wazonga think is mathematically true that dogs have tails.
No matter how firmly convinced the Wazonga may be that dogs have tails, the-
sis 4, taken as a whole, remains a thesis of ours, and not of theirs! Accordingly, it
is in deep difficulty unless the (highly implausible) condition is realized that the
Wazonga have an essentially correct conception of what is, and, moreover, are
convinced that the claim that dogs have tails belongs among the appropriate
contentions of this particular realm. Analogously, one cannot appropriately
maintain (3) unless one is prepared to claim both that the Wazonga have an es-
sentially correct conception of what rationality is (correct, that is, by our lights),
and furthermore that they are convinced that the practice in question is accept-
able within the framework of this rationality project. And this concatenation is
highly implausible in the circumstances.
The fact is that different cultures do indeed implement a rational principle
like “Be in a position to substantiate your claims” very differently. (For one thing,
there are different standards as to what constitutes proper “substantiation.”) But,
they cannot simply abandon such a characterizing principle of rationality. For 
if they were to convert to “It’s all right to maintain anything that suits your
fancy” they would not have a different mode of cognitive rationality but rather, in
this respect at any rate, are simply deficient in cognitive rationality.
But this anthropological route to a relativism of rationality, is, to say the
least, highly problematic. There is no difficulty whatever about the idea of dif-
ferent belief systems, but the idea of different rationalities faces insuperable dif-
ficulties. The case is much like that of saying that the tribe whose counting
practices are based on the sequence: “one, two, many” has a different arithmetic
from ourselves. To do anything like justice to the facts one would have to say
that they do not have arithmetic at all—but just a peculiar and very rudimentary
way of counting. And similarly with the Wazonga. On the given evidence, they
do not have a different concept of rationality, but rather, their culture has not
developed to the point where they have any conception of rationality whatsoever.
Rationality is, after all, a definite sort of enterprise with a characteristic goal
structure of its own—the pursuit of appropriate ends by appropriate means. Its
defining principles make for an inevitable uniformity.
To be sure, the question “What is the rational thing to believe or to do?”
must receive the indecisive answer: “That depends.” It depends on context and
158
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

situation—on conditions and circumstances. At the level of the question
“What is rational; what is it that should be believed or done?” a many-sided
and pluralistic response is called for. The way in which people proceed to give
a rational justification of something—be it a belief, action, or evaluation—is
unquestionably variable and culture relative. We mortal men cannot speak with
the tongues of extramundane angels. The means by which we pursue our ends
in the setting of any major project—be it rationality, morality, communication,
or nourishment—are “culture dependent” and “context variable.” But the fact
remains that certain crucial uniformities are inherent in the very nature of the
projects in which we are engaged. With rationality as with swimming, different
cultures and different people may go at it differently but the object of the en-
terprise is uniformly the same, fixed by the definitive conception of what is at
issue. And the sensible way to view the issue of objectivity is that this is not a
matter of a “God’s eye view” but rather one of the view which we ourselves can
see as reasonable insofar as we are being reasonable about it.
A FOOTHOLD OF ONE’S OWN:
THE PRIMACY OF OUR OWN POSITION
Despite its fashionable pervasiveness, however, cognitive relativism accord-
ingly has serious and indeed gravely debilitating defects. And in the main,
these inhere in its commitment to basis egalitarianism.
The crucial question, however, is not Are there indeed different norms and
standards of rationality?, where the answer is an immediate and emphatic yes.
(Just as autres temps, autres moeurs, so also, other cultures, other standards.)
Rather, the salient question is: Are we well advised—perhaps even rationally
obligated—to see all those various alternative norms and standards as equally
appropriate, equally correct? Must we adopt that Principle of Basis Egalitari-
anism: All of the various standards of judgment have equivalent justifications.
Ours is on an equal footing with theirs in point of acceptability. Is it a matter of
indifference which basis we adopt—each one is every bit as good (or poor) as
the next? And here the answer is an immediate and emphatic no. There is no
good and sufficient reason to see this principle as plausible. Basis indifferentism
is daring and exciting—but also absurd. For, at this point we must turn rela-
tivism against itself by asking: Indifferent to whom? Certainly not to us! For, we
have in place our own basis of rational judgment, and it speaks loud and clear
on its own behalf. Nor yet by parity of reasoning is ours equally acceptable to
them. From just what “angle of consideration” is it that claim to merit equiva-
lency going to be made? Not from ours surely—for this, after all, is ours pre-
cisely because we deem it superior. And by parity of reasoning not from theirs
either. (From God’s? Well . . . perhaps. But he of course is not a party to the
present discussion—and if he were, then what price relativism?)
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
159

Perhaps from the point of view of the universe all experiential perspectives
are of equivalent merit; and perhaps they are equal before the World Spirit—or
even God. But we ourselves cannot assume the prerogative of these mighty po-
tencies. We humans can no more contemplate information with our minds
without having a perspectival stance than we can contemplate material objects
with our bodily eyes without having a perspectival stance. We ourselves do and
must occupy a particular position, with particular kinds of concerns and partic-
ular practical and intellectual tools for dealing with them. And for us, there
indeed is one particular set of standards for making such appraisals and adju-
dications, namely, our own—those relevantly operative in the conditions and
circumstances of our existence. (And were we to trade this set of standards in
for another, then of course that other one would automatically become ours.) 
In appraising positions we have, of course, no alternative to doing so from
the perspective of our cognitive posture—our own cognitive position and point
of view. (It wouldn’t be our point of view if we didn’t use it as such.) We cannot
cogently maintain a posture of indifference. Each thinker, each school, is bound
to take a strongly negative stand toward its competitors: belittling their con-
cerns, deploring their standards, downgrading their ideals, disliking their pre-
suppositions, scorning their contentions, and so on.
And so, in discussions about “alternative modes of rationality” we do in-
deed have a decisively “higher standpoint” available to us—namely our own.
And this is rationally justified by the consideration that no real alternative is
open to us—we have to go on from where we are. Accordingly, while one must
recognize the reality of alternative cognitive methodologies, one certainly need
not see them as equally valid with one’s own. “You have your standards and I
have mine. There are alternatives.” True enough. But this fact leaves me unaf-
fected. For, I myself have no real choice about it: I must judge matters by my
own lights. (Even if I turn to you as a consultant, I must ultimately appraise the
acceptability of your recommendations on my own terms.)
Cognitive (or evaluative or aesthetic, etc.) standard—perspectives do not
come to us ex nihilo. From the rational point of view such standards themselves
require validation. And this process—is itself something that is standard pre-
supposing. For, of course, we cannot assess the adequacy of a standard-perspec-
tive in a vacuum, it must itself be supported with reference to standards of some
sort. But in this world we are never totally bereft of such a basis: in the order of
thought as in the world’s physical order we always have a position of some sort.
By the time one gets to the point of being able to think at all, there is always a
background of available experience against which to form one’s ideas. And just
there is where one has to start. It is precisely because a standard-deploying cer-
tain position is appropriate from where we ourselves actually stand that makes this
particular position of ours appropriate for us.
The salient point is that we are entitled—indeed, rationally constrained—
to see our own criteriological basis of rational judgment as rationally superior
160
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

to the available alternatives. If we did not take this stance—if we did not deem
our cognitive posture effectively optimal—then we could not sensibly see our-
selves as rationally justified in adopting it. We cannot responsibly deem some
variant scheme as co-meritorious with our own, because (if rational) it is pre-
cisely because we deem that scheme superior that we have made it ours. It
would, of our view here different, ipso facto fail to be our real position—contrary
to hypothesis.
In the final analysis, one can and should turn the weapons of relativism
against itself. If indeed each group has its own standards against which there is
no further, external, higher appeal, then we ourselves have no viable alternative
but to see our conception of rationality as decisive for any judgments that we
conscientiously make on these matters.
If we are going to be rational we must take—and have no responsible choice
but to take—the stance that our own standards (of truth, value, and choice) are
the appropriate ones. Be it in employing or in evaluating them, we ourselves
must see our own standards as definitive because just exactly this is what it is for
them to be our own standards—their being our standards consists in our seeing
them in this light.To say that we are not entitled to view our standards as defini-
tive could be to our having standards at all. And of course, someone who denies
us this right—who says that we are not entitled to adopt those standards of
ours—does no more than insist that it is by his standards (who else’s) inappro-
priate for us to have these standards, and thus is simply pitting his standards
against ours. We have to see our standards in an absolutistic light—as the
uniquely right appropriately valid ones—because exactly this is what is at issue
in their being our standards of authentic truth, value or whatever. To insist that
we should view them with indifference is to deny us the prospects of having any
standards at all. Commitment at this level is simply unavoidable.
Recognizing that others see such matters differently from ourselves should
not and need not daunt us in attachment to our own views if we take due care in
their formation. It may give us “second thoughts”—may invite us to rethink—but
this is not to move us to admit their standards but rather to make more careful
and conscientious use of our own. Our cognitive or evaluative perspective would
not actually be our perspective did we not deem it rationally superior to others.
THE ARBITRAMENT OF EXPERIENCE
Even if one grants that different people (groups or schools of thought) have
different standards and that they can do so appropriately given their differen-
tial emplacement in the cognitive scheme of things, it certainly does not follow
from this that one should fail to prioritize his own standards (any more than it
follows from my acknowledging that your spouse to be appropriate for you con-
stitutes on my part an act of disloyalty toward my own).To concede that certain
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
161

standards make good rational sense for someone in your shoes is not to say that
they make sense for one, who is differently situated.
The stance espoused throughout the present discussion has quite emphati-
cally been that of a perspectival rationalism (or contextualism). Such a preferen-
tialist position combines a pluralistic acknowledgment of distinct alternatives
with a recognition that a group’s choice among them is not rationally indifferent,
but rather constrained by the probative indications of the experience that pro-
vides them with both the evidential basis and the evaluative criteria for effecting
a rational choice.
Of course, people’s experience differs. Even if we are pluralists and accept
a wide variety of normative positions as being (abstractly speaking) available,
still, if we have a doctrinal position at all—that is, if we are actually commit-
ted to solving our cognitive and normative problems—we have no serious al-
ternative to seeing our own position as rationally superior. Faced with various
possible answers to our questions, the sensible and appropriate course is
clearly to figure out, as best we can, which one it is that deserves our en-
dorsement. But, of course, there is—or should be—a good rational basis for
effecting such a choice, namely the normative perspective, whatever it be, that
is based on the probative indications of our own experience. For there indeed
is an objectifying impetus to avert our problem-resolutions from becoming a
mere matter of indifferent choice based on arbitrary preferences. And
throughout the sphere of rational inquiry this objectifying impetus lies in the
appropriate utilization of the lessons of experience. Empiricism is our appro-
priate and optimal policy. We have to go on from where we are and proceed
on the basis of our experiential endowment. For us, a perspectival egalitarian-
ism makes no sense in making our decisions regarding theoretical, practical,
or evaluative matters.
Different individuals, different eras, different societies all have different
bodies of experience. This being so, then whether discordant thinkers are at
issue is not their perspectival accommodation of their experience just as valid
for them as ours is for us? No doubt, the answer here has to be affirmative. But
it must be followed by an immediate What of it? The fact that others with dif-
ferent bodies of experience might resolve the matter differently is simply irrel-
evant to our own resolution of the issues. We have to go on from where we are
and proceed on the basis of our perspective. For us, a perspectival egalitarian-
ism makes no sense. Indifferentism is ruled out by the fact that it is experience
that is the determinative factor and for us, the experience at issue is our experi-
ence and cannot be someone else’s.
In matters of cognition as elsewhere, our normative orientations do not
come to us ex nihilo but emerge from experience. And in this world we are
never totally bereft of an experiential basis: in the order of thought as in the
world’s physical order we always have a position of some sort. By the time one
gets to the point of being able to think at all, there is always a background of
162
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

available experience against which to form one’s ideas. And just there is where
one has to start. It is precisely because a certain position is appropriate from
where we stand that makes this particular position of ours appropriate for us.
The posture that emerges from this way of approaching the issue is thus that of
a contextualistic rationalism:
Confronted with a pluralistic proliferation of alternative positions you
have your acceptance-determination methodology, and I have mine.
Yours leads you to endorse P; mine leads me to endorse not-P. Yours
is just as valid for you (via your methodology of validating principles)
as mine is for me. The situational differences of our contexts simply
lead to different rational resolutions. And that ‘s the end of the matter.
The fact that the cognitive venture viewed as a whole incorporates other positions
does nothing to render a firm and fervent commitment to one’s own position
somehow infeasible, let alone improper.
It is, in the eyes of some, a fatal flaw of pluralism that it supposedly under-
mines one’s commitment to one’s own position. But this is simply fallacious.
There is no good reason why a recognition that others, circumstanced as they
are, are inclined—and indeed rationally entitled in their circumstances—to hold
a position of variance with ours should be construed to mean that we, circum-
stanced as we are, need feel any rational obligation to abandon our position.
Once we have done our rational best to substantiate our position, the mere ex-
istence of alternatives need give us no pause. A pluralism of the availability of
incompatibly rival perspectives is one thing but a pluralism that maintains the
for-us appropriateness of these incompatibly rival perspectives is absurd.
Jean Paul Sartre deplored the attempt to secure rationally validated knowl-
edge, which he saw as a way of avoiding responsibility for making something of
oneself, for “choosing one’s own project,” seeing that the real truth is not some-
thing one can make up as one goes along but is something one regards as enti-
tled to one’s recognition (to a subordination of sorts on one’s part). But this
view turns the matter topsy-turvy. Not the pursuit of truth but its abandonment
represents a failure of nerve and a crisis of confidence. The avoidance of re-
sponsibility lies in an indifferentism that sees merit everywhere and validity
nowhere (or vice versa), thereby relieving us of any and all duty to investigate
the issues in a serious, workmanlike way.
Admittedly, there are cognitive postures different from ours—different
sorts of standards altogether. But what does that mean for us? What are we to
do about it? Several stances toward those various bases are in theory open to us:
1.
accept none: reject ours
2.
accept one: retain ours
3.
accept several: conjoin others with ours
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
163

4.
“rise above the conflict”: say “a plague on all your houses” and take the
path of idealization invoking the “ideal observer,” the “wise man” of
the Stoics, the “ideally rational agent” of the economists, or the like
The first option is mere petulance—a matter of stalking off in “fox-and-grapes”
fashion because we cannot have it all our own preferred way. The third option
is infeasible: different bases do not combine, they make mutually incompatible
demands, and in conjoining them we will not get something more comprehen-
sive and complete—we will get a mess. The fourth option is utopian and unre-
alistic. We have no way to get there from here. Only the second alternative
makes sense: to have the courage of our convictions and stand by our own guns.
In evaluating contentions and positions (of any sort) we just have no plausible
alternative to doing so from the perspective of our cognitive values—our own
conscientiously adopted cognitive point of view.
To obtain informative guidance from inquiry, it is not enough to contem-
plate cognitive standards—be it as historical actualities or as theoretical possi-
bilities. We must actually commit ourselves to one. We can only get viable
answers to substantive questions if we do our inquiring in the doctrinalist man-
ner—only if we are willing to “stick our necks out” and take a position that en-
dorses some answers and rejects others, to be sure, in a principled way that is in
line with standards for whose due validation we have made appropriate provi-
sions. A perspectivally grounded position is good enough for sensible individ-
uals precisely because that position-determinative perspective of ours is by
hypothesis OUR perspective.
For us, our own experience (vicarious experience included) is something
unique—and uniquely compelling. You, to be sure, are in the same position—
your experience is compelling, for you—but that’s immaterial to me. But isn’t such
an experiential absolutism just relativism by another name—is it not itself just a
relativism of a particular sort—an experiential relativism? Whatever relativity
there may be is a relativization to evidence, so that relativism’s characteristic el-
ement of indifference is lacking. It is just this, after all, that distinguishes indif-
ferentist relativism from a rationalistic contextualism. And there is nothing
corrosive about such a contribution: it does not dissolve any of our commitments.
Its absolutism lies in the fact that, for us, our own experience is bound to be
altogether compelling.
But would not such a contextualistic pluralism put everyone’s position on
a par? Does it not underwrite the view that all the alternatives ultimately lie on
the same level of acceptability? The question again is: Acceptable to whom?
Rational inquiry as such maintains a certain olympian indifference—a non-
committal neutrality. However, this certainly does not mean that my position
need be just as acceptable to you as to me. A sensible version of contextualistic
pluralism will flatly refuse to put everyone’s position on a par—save from the
unachievable olympian point of view of the community at large which is, of
164
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

course, by its very nature unavailable to any single individual. For each individ-
ual stands fully and decidedly committed to his own orientation on the basis of
his or her own experience, so that there is no question of a relativistic indiffer-
entism in acknowledging the pivotal role of a cognitive perspective. A pluralism
of contextually underwritten cognitive positions does not lend to indifferentism
precisely because a normative position is in the very nature of things something
that a sensible person cannot view with indifference.
It makes no sense to hold that all normative perspectives are equally ac-
ceptable, because where experiential bases of judgment are at issue, the pattern
of our own experience is—for us at any rate—altogether decisive. After all, ra-
tionality requires that we attune our beliefs and evaluations to the overall pat-
tern of our experience. For us, our own experience is rationally compelling. We
could not (rationally) deviate from its dictates—and it would really make no
sense for us to want to do so. We can no more separate from the indications of
our own experience than we could separate ourselves from our own shadows.
Such a position accordingly leaves no room for indifferentism. It pivots on
the idea of contextual appropriateness—appropriateness in the context that is
delimited and defined by the specific experiential circumstances of one’s situa-
tion. Recognizing that pluralism prevails—that other standards are used by
others—we nevertheless do and (appropriately) can deem our own standards of
rational cognition as appropriate for ourselves. Even when conceding the
prospect of someone’s having another position, we cannot see it as appropriate
for ourselves.
AGAINST RELATIVISM
And so, while rationally appropriate knowledge claims and rationally appropri-
ate actions and even the accepted criteria of appropriateness themselves vary
across times and cultures, the determinative principles of rationality do not.
However, this interesting circumstance does not so much reflect a fact about
different times and cultures as the fact that what counts as a “standard of ra-
tionality” at all is something that rests with us, because we are the arbiters of the
conceptual makeup of an issue within the framework of our discussions of the
matter. What sort of thing we ourselves propose to understand by “rationality,” be-
comes determinative for our own discussions of the matter. And this uniform
conception of “what rationality is” suffices to establish and render uniform
those top-level, metacriteriological standards by whose means each of us can
judge the rationality of another’s resolutions relative to that other’s own basis of
appraisal. For, those “deeper principles” of reason are inherent in the very con-
ception of what is at issue. If you “violate” certain sorts of rules then—for
merely conceptual reasons—you simply are not engaged in the evidential enter-
prise at all.The most basic principles of knifehood or evidence or rationality are
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
165

“culture dependent” only in the sense that some cultures may not pursue a par-
ticular project (the cutting project, the evidence project, the rationality project)
at all. It is not that they can pursue it in a different way—that they have learned
how to make knives without blades, to evidentiate without grounds, or make
rational deliberations without subscription to the fundamental principles we
take as definitive of what rationality is all about. In such matters we do—and
must—take our position to be pivotal.
However, the crux here is not the factual issue of what we ourselves do ac-
cept with respect to something we see as settled but the normative issue of what
we think we should accept with respect to something we see as a matter of in-
quiry. Nor are we here endeavoring to legislate for others. For we are not in-
volved here in subordinating others to ourselves, but rather in subordinating
ourselves to what we can conscientiously regard as resolution processes appro-
priate for use by anybody.
These deliberations accordingly lead to a result that might be characterized
as criteriological egocentrism. We can and indeed must see our own standards
as optimal with respect to the available alternatives. If we did not so see them,
then—insofar as we are rational—they would thereby cease to be our standards.
Indifferentist relativism insists that a choice between different bases of
judgment must, if made at all, be based on extrarational considerations—taste,
custom, fashion, or the like. But rationality simply blocks the path to this des-
tination in its demand that we attune our judgments to the structure of avail-
able experiences and its insistence that doing anything else would be irrational.
Relativism thus has its limits. The implications of our own conception of ra-
tionality, truth, and inquiry are absolutely decisive for our deliberations. We
ourselves must be the arbiters of tenability when the discussion at issue is one
that we are conducting. And so, we cannot at once maintain our own rational
commitments as such while yet ceasing to regard them as results at which all
rational inquirers who proceed appropriately also ought to arrive given the
same circumstances. In this sort of way, the claims of rationality are inherently
universal and, if you will, absolute.5
But is it not possible for someone to go out and get another normative stan-
dard? It certainly is. But on what basis would one do this? You might force me to
change standards. Or you can, perhaps, brainwash me. But you cannot rationally
persuade me. For, rational persuasion at the normative level has to proceed in
terms of norms that I accept and, by the norms I actually have, my present stan-
dards are bound to prevail, if I am rational in the first place.6 Only when the
course of experience shows that our standards conflict with our own values—that
they do not take us where we wish to go—can there be any rational pressure
toward a change of standards.
And so, even while acknowledging that other judgments regarding matters
of rationality may exist, we have no choice but to see our standards as appropri-
ate for us. (In using someone else’s with “no questions asked” we would, ipso
166
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

facto, be making them ours!) To use another standard (categorically, not hypo-
thetically) is to make it ours—to make it no longer another standard. Like “now”
and “here,” our standards follow us about no matter where we go. Of course, to
see our own standards as the appropriate ones for us to use here and now is not
to deny the prospect of a change of standards. But when this actually occurs, our
stance toward the new standards is identical to our present stance towards the
presently adopted ones. A commitment to the appropriateness of his present
standards follows the rational man about like his own shadow.
Relativity ends where charity begins—at home. For, our discourse is gov-
erned by our conceptions which are absolute at any rate for us. One care for the
concepts involved is bound to chasten any impetus to relativism by enjoining
absolutistic constraints.
To be sure, such a criteriological egocentrism can and should be tempered
by a posture of criteriological humility.The wisdom of hindsight and the school
of bitter experience teaches us the chastening lesson that our cognitive stan-
dards—and the judgments we base on them—are by no means necessarily per-
fect. All the same, we have no real alternative to using our standards—to doing
the very best we can with the means at our disposal. While we have to bear in
mind the sobering thought that our best just may not be good enough, we are
nevertheless bound to see the standards we have adopted in the pursuit of ra-
tionality as superior to the available alternatives and to regard ourselves as ra-
tionally entitled to do so here and now. (Future improvement “from within” can
of course be envisioned along the above indicated lines.) To refrain from mak-
ing this commitment is simply to opt out of the project of rational inquiry al-
together. In the pursuit of rational cognition we must, as with any other pursuit,
begin from where we are.
To acknowledge that other people hold views different form ours, and to
concede the prospect that we may, even in the end, simply be unable to win
them over by rational suasion, is emphatically not to accept an indifferentism to
the effect that their views are just as valid or correct as ours are.To acquiesce in
a situation where others think differently from oneself is neither to endorse
their views not to abandon one’s own. In many departments of life—in matters
of politics, philosophy, art, morality, and so on—we certainly do not take the
position that the correctness of our own views is somehow undermined and
their tenability compromised by the circumstance that others do not share
them. And there is no good reason why we should see matters all that differ-
ently in matters of inquiry—or even evaluation.
But how, short of megalomania, can one take the stance that one’s own view
of what is rational is right—that it ought to be binding on everyone? How can I
ask for this agreement between my position and that of “all sensible people”?
Not, surely, because I seek to impose my standard on them, but because I do—or
should!—endeavor to take account of their standards in the course of shaping
my own. Coordination is achieved not because I insist on their conforming to
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
167

me, nor yet because I supremely adjust my views to theirs, but rather because I
have made every reasonable effort to make mine only that which (as best I can
tell) ought to be everyone’s. In the end, I can thus insist that they should use the
same standard that I do because it is on this very basis of a commitment to im-
personal cogency that I have made that standard my own in the first place. One’s
commitment to one’s own rational standards is—or ought to be—produced not
by magalomania but by objectivity. It is a matter of seeking—to realize a situa-
tion where I can reasonably expect that others will see matters in the same light
as myself because I have found my light in the illumination of theirs.
Thus, nothing stands in the way of a realization that ours is not inherently
and inevitably the best conceptual scheme—a kind of ne plus ultra—and that
we can nevertheless stand rationally committed to it. Consider how cognitive
progress happens. We can admit that the scientists of the future will have a bet-
ter science, an ampler and more adequate understanding of the natural uni-
verse, and thus a better conceptual scheme—though, admittedly, we cannot
anticipate just how this is to be so. We need not take the stance that our own
conceptual scheme is somehow the last word. Our recognition that our scheme
is imperfect, though correct and appropriate in the interests of realism, is, to be
sure, of rather limited utility. A realization of the en gros deficiency of our con-
ceptual machinery unhappily affords no help toward its emendation in matters
of detail. A rational commitment to our position is just exactly a commitment
to accepting its claims to be the proper basis for accepting its rulings as proper
and appropriate. It is a matter of doing the best we can in the cause of respon-
sible truth estimation—of carrying on the business of rational inquiry as best
we can in the circumstances in which the world’s realities have emplaced us.
CONTEXTUALISTIC PLURALISM IS COMPATIBLE
WITH COMMITMENT ON PURSUING “THE TRUTH”
Regrettably, many people have—under the influence of relativism—simply
given up on the truth. The very idea of “the truth” is of small interest to various
theorists nowadays. Heidegger, for one, regarded those so-called absolute truths
as no more than “remnants of Christian theology in the problem-field of phi-
losophy.”7 Of themselves, truth and falsity, correctness and incorrectness, ade-
quacy and inadequacy, reason and unreason, sense and nonsense—approached as
issues of logic, semantic theory, or epistemological explication—simply do not
interest the hermeneuticist. He wants to know what role the ideas about these is-
sues have in the sphere of authentic human experience; he does not ask about
what these ideas mean but about what people do with them. Truth as such is
something he is eager to abandon.
And his is not alone. In stressing the pluralism of philosophizing, William
James wrote:
168
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

The Truth: what a perfect idol of the rationalistic mind! I read in an
old letter—from a gifted friend who died too young—these words: “In
everything, in science, art, morals, and religion, there must be one sys-
tem that is right and every other wrong.” How characteristic of the en-
thusiasm of a certain stage of young! At twenty-one we rise to such a
challenge and expect to find the system. It never occurs to most of us
even later that the question “What is the Truth?” is no real question
(being irrelative to all conditions) and that the whole notion of the
truth is an abstraction from the fact of truths in the plural.8
Inspired by James, various contemporary pragmatists are quite prepared to
abandon concern for truth.
But this reaction is gravely misguided. Epistemological pluralism has no
substantive consequences for the nature of truth as such. The fact that “our
truth,” the truth as we see it, is not necessarily that of others—that it is no more
than the best estimate of the real truth that we ourselves are able to make—
should not disillusion us in our inquiries and should not discourage us in “the
pursuit of truth.” In inquiry as in other departments of human endeavor we are
well advised simply to do the best we can. Realizing that there are no guaran-
tees we have little sensible choice—pro tem at least—but to deem the best we
can do as good enough.
Recognizing that others see matters differently in other settings and contexts
of inquiry need not daunt us in attachment to our own views of the matter where
we stand here and now. There is clearly no conflict between our commitment to
the truth as we see it and a recognition that the adoption of a variant probative
perspective leads others to see the truth differently. Given that we ourselves oc-
cupy our perspective, we are bound to see our truth as the truth. But we neverthe-
less can and do recognize that others who operate in different times and
conditions see matters in a different light.The circumstance that different people
see something differently does not destroy or degrade the thing as such.
An experiential pluralism of cognitive positions is no impediment to a
commitment to the pursuit of truth.There is no reason that the mere existence
of different views and positions should leave us immobilized like the ass of
Buridan between the alternatives. Nor are we left with the gray emptiness of
equilitarianism that looks to all sides with neutrality and uncommitted indif-
ference. In important matters like inquiry (or evaluation, etc.) we cannot—and
in good conscience should not—bring ourselves to view disagreement in the
light of a “mere divergence of opinion.”
We have no choice but to shape our estimate of the truth ourselves, to pur-
sue the truth by way of cultivating our truth; we have no direct access to truth un-
mediated by the epistemological resources of rational inquiry. And, given the
ground rules of rational inquiry, this means that one’s view of the truth is bound
to be linked to one’s cognitive situation. To say that this is not good enough and
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
169

to give up on our truth—to declare petulantly that if we cannot have the absolute,
capital-T Truth that of its very nature constrains everyone’s allegiance, then we
will not accept anything at all—is automatically to get nothing and to abandon
the pursuit of truth as such. It is foolishness to reject an orientation-bound posi-
tion as not worth having in a domain where a position is only to be had on this
basis. The only truth-claims worth staking are those that we deem to qualify for
acceptance as universally cogent and rational on the standards that we ourselves
endorse. And the only usable and useful contrast is not that between absolute and
relative truth, but that between what is true and what is not.
THE ACHILLES’ HEEL OF RELATIVISM
But are we really entitled—rationally entitled—to place reliance on our own
standards? Assuming that we indeed have done what reason—as best we can
understand it—demands for their substantiation (and this is a long story best
reserved for another occasion), the answer is and has to be an emphatic yes. In-
quirers should not and need not be intimidated by the fact of disagreement—
it makes perfectly good sense for a person to do the best possible toward
securing evidentiated beliefs and justifiable choices without undue worry about
whether or not others disagree.
There is nothing admirable in relativism’s inclination to noncommittal de-
tachment with its concomitant reluctance to trust one’s personal judgment in
matters of human significance. Relativism reflects a regrettable unpreparedness
to take intellectual responsibility—to say: “I’ve investigated the matter as best
I can, and this is the result at which I have arrived. Here I stand, I can do no
other. If you wish to stand with me, then welcome to you; if not, then please
show me how my position is untenable.” They represent recourse to an uncrit-
ical open-mindedness that comes down to empty-mindedness. In matters of
rational inquiry, as in politics and religion, one does well to prefer someone who
has views and sticks by them to those who reject the whole project or (equally
wrongly) try to ride off in every direction at once.
The decisive weakness of a philosophical relativism with its commitment
to basis egalitarianism in matters of cognition lies deep in the nature of the
human condition. For the characteristic stance of relativism is to insist on the
rational indifference of alternatives. Be it contentions, beliefs, doctrines, prac-
tices, customs or whatever that is at issue, the relativist insist that “it just
doesn’t matter” in point of rationality. People are led to adopt one alternative
over another by extra-rational considerations (custom, habituation, fashion,
or whatever); from the rational point of view there is nothing to choose—all
the alternatives stand on the same footing. The fatal flaw of this position
roots in the fact that our claims, beliefs, doctrines, practices, customs, all be-
long to identifiable departments of purposive human endeavor—identifiable
170
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

domains, disciplines, and the like. For all (or virtually all) human enterprises
are at bottom teleological—conducted with some sort of end or objective in
view. In particular, the cognitive enterprise of rational inquiry has the mission
of providing implementable information about our natural and artificial en-
vironments—information that we can use to orient ourselves cognitively and
practically in the world. After all, explanation, prediction, and effective inter-
vention constitute definitive enterprise-characterizing goals of science. (And
the moral enterprise is also purposive, its mission being to define, teach and
encourage modes of action that bring the behavior of individuals into align-
ment with the best overall interests of the group.) Human endeavors in gen-
eral have an inherent teleology seeing that Homo sapiens is a goal-pursuing
creature. Now in this context, the crucial fact is that some claims, beliefs, doc-
trines, practices, customs, and so forth are bound to serve the purposes of
their domain better than others. For it is pretty much inevitable that in any
goal-oriented enterprise, some alternative ways of proceeding serve better
than others with respect to the relevant range of purpose, proving themselves
more efficient and effective in point of goal-realization. And in the teleolog-
ical contexts thereby establish themselves as rationally appropriate with re-
spect to the issues. It lies in the nature of the thing that the quintessentially
rational thing to do is to give precedence and priority to those alternatives
that are more effective with respect to the range of purposes at issue.
There is no doubt that such a position qualifies as a version of “pragma-
tism.” But it is crucially important to note that it is not a version of practicalism.
It stands committed to the primacy of purpose, but it certainly does not en-
dorse the idea that the only possible (or only valid) sort of human purpose is
that of the type traditionally characterized as “practical”—that is, one that is
geared to the physical, and “material” well-being of people. Purposive enter-
prises are as diverse and varied as the whole spectrum of legitimate human en-
deavor at large, and such purposes can relate not only to the “material” but also
to the “spiritual” side of people (their knowledge, artistic sensibility, social dis-
positions, etc.). To decipher the position from the classical range of specifically
practical purposes such a pragmatism might perhaps better be characterized as
functionalism.
Such a functionalist perspective is decisive in its impetus against relativism.
For relativism with its commitment to basic egalitarianism is flatly indifferentis-
tic. Presented with alternatives of the sort at issue—be it cognitive, moral, or
whatever—the relativist insists that at bottom it just does not matter—at any rate
as far as the rationality of the issue is concerned. But once we see the issues in a
purposive perspective, this line just doesn’t work. In a purposive context, alterna-
tives are not in general portrayable as rationally indifferent. Rationality not only
permits but requires giving preference to purposively effectual alternatives over
the rest (at any rate as long as other things are anything like equal). It is quintes-
sentially rational to prefer that which—as best we can tell—actually works.
Cognitive Relativism and Contextualism
171

To the relativist one must grant a pluralism of contextualized variation—the
lack of uniformity and the availability of alternatives. But this concession does not
“give away the store” because it does not authorize irrationalistic indifferentism,
seeing that we need not—and rationally cannot—regard that plurality of alterna-
tives as equivalently valid. On the contrary, two higher-level metanorms—to wit,
conformity to one’s standards and conduciveness to one’s goals—operate so as to
assure a purchase hold for rational appropriateness at the procedural level (even
though they do not otherwise engender substantive uniformity).
As this line of reflection indicates, relativism stubs its toe against the per-
vasively purposive nature of the human situation, the fact that our proceed-
ings—be it in inquiry, interpersonal interaction, or whatever—fall within the
scope of purposive ventures that have an end in view. And the issue of what ef-
fectively serves a given purpose is never a matter of arbitrary indifference be-
cause in this context any way of proceeding is as good as any other. Nothing
could be more mistaken. The teleological aspect provides a basis for rationality
in a way that puts relativism into an altogether problematic and dubious light.
It is, accordingly, functionalism—the impetus to purposive efficacy—that bars
the way to indifferentistic relativism.9
172
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

173
Chapter 10
The Pragmatic Rationale 
of Cognitive Objectivity
SYNOPSIS
•
The circumstance that our ideas are human artifacts does not prevent them
from applying to the real world.
•
For in fact the social and communicative practice of an interactive group of
intelligent agents is bound to manifest an impetus to objectivity.
•
The problem-solving objectives that are unavoidable for a community of
intelligent agents constrain them to the objectivity that characterizes the
modus operandi of rational beings.
•
For without a commitment to objectivity rational agents cannot meet their
needs in an efficient and effective way.
•
Objectivity is an essential factor in realizing the collective self-interest of
an intelligent agent.
OBJECTIVITY AND THE CIRCUMSTANTIAL
UNIVERSALITY OF REASON
Consider the following contention: “There are no objective facts—or at least
none that we can formulate by the use of language. For the man-made charac-
ter of all our human contrivances means that everything that we can manage to
produce is a cultural artifact within the course of human history in the setting of
a particular place and time. And this is also emphatically the case with respect to

our language and whatever we produce by its means—all of our statements,
claims, and assertions included. How, then, can anything that people say possi-
bly be objectively independent of all they think and believe? If objectivity is
something impersonally factual and thought-independent, then how can we
ever get there from here?”1
It is readily seen that this sort of worry is simply a mass of confusions.
Thus take a shovel. It, too, is a cultural artifact made in the course of human
history. But it can touch and move materials that are nowise man-made (earth
and sand, say). Even so, statements are artifacts that can present and discuss
facts that are nowise man-made (mountains on the moon, for example).
Consider the following contention:
No truths or purported truths are ever actually objective in the sense
of being wholly independent of what people think or believe. Con-
sider the (presumptive) fact that “copper conducts electricity.” Clearly
if people thought differently about the meaning of words—and
specifically about the meaning of “copper,” say by letting it stand for
what we call wood—then this would no longer be true.
This argument trades on a vitiating ambiguity. Two very different items are in
play here, namely:
•
copper-1  “copper” as we ourselves actually understand it
•
copper-2  “copper” in its modified understanding on the hypothesis
at issue
However true it might be to say that copper-2 fails to conduct electricity, it
would be patently false to say that copper-1 fails to do so. Indeed the status of
copper-1 is entirely untouched by bringing copper-2 on the stage of consider-
ation. (And it is, after all, the meaning of the prevailing terminology as we ac-
tually have it and use it that is at issue in the communication we presently
conduct by its means.)
“But if facts are something independent our human thoughts and beliefs—
if they obtain irrespective of anything that we do in this mind-connected
realm—then how can human thought and belief ever succeed in managing to
consider, present, or convey them? How can thought and discourse come into
(cognitive) contact with something entirely outside itself?” To ask this is to be
obtuse. It is like asking “Since numbers are nonphysical abstractions how can
they ever be used to count sheep?” Numbers by their very nature are thought-
devised counting instruments that can be used to enumerate collections of ob-
jects. Similarly statements are thought-derived claim instruments that can be
used to characterize objective arrangements in the world. That’s simply how
things work. If numbers could not be used to count real things they would not
be what they are. And similarly if words, ideas, and concepts could not be used
174
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

to characterize objectively real things they would not be what they are and
communication would be blocked at the starting gate.
“But surely when I say or think ‘The cat is on the mat’ I am managing to
achieve no more than to indicate and avow that ‘I think/believe that the cat is
on the mat.’” Wrong! These two remarks are very different. The one is some-
thing about the world (viz., that the cat is on the mat). The other is something
about you and your thoughts (viz., that you think or believe that the cat is on
the mat). And these are very different issues. And no sort of statement specifi-
cally about you and your beliefs can ever be equivalent with a claim regarding
the you-independent arrangement of the world.
The long and short of it is that the circumstance that our ideas and the
words in which we formulate them are human artifacts does not prevent them
from applying the real world. Neither our physical nor our mental artifacts are
severed from reality in virtue of their man-made condition.
THE BASIS OF OBJECTIVITY
Our commitment to objectivity is a fundamental aspect of the cognitive proj-
ect. But it is certainly not an arbitrary commitment. For it has a rationale that
reaches deep into the regions both of our cognitive needs and our cognitive
performances.
A key problem of epistemology is that of effecting an inferential transi-
tion from subjectivity (the “inner” realm of personal experience) to objectiv-
ity (the “outer” realm of impersonal fact), from how things seem to someone
to how things actually are. Deeming oneself to be seeing a cat on the mat
may be a good reason for someone to think that this is so, but it really does
not suffice to establish that claim itself. The inferential transit from what
someone thinks remains problematic in this context. What we still require is
a reliable way to effect the transit from what one subjectively thinks and what
is objectively the case.
In the endeavor to achieve this desideratum let us consider adopting
Robert Brandom’s social-practice approach by expousing the argument: 2
Argument A
The entire social group R of people take r to be a good reason for
thinking that p.
Therefore: r indeed is a good reason for thinking that p, and thereby
a good reason for p itself.
Such argumentation could, at the level of entire groups, clearly enable us to ef-
fect the needed transit from subjectivity to objectivity. But unfortunately this is
The Pragmatic Rationale of Cognitive Objectivity
175

still problematic since neither facts nor reasons are validated simply by what
people happen to think—even though this be at the level of groups rather than
individuals.
However, that case would be very different if our group R were to consist
specifically of rational people. For such a normatively constituted group we
would arrive at:
Argument B
The entire social group R of (fully) rational people think that r is a
good reason for thinking that p.
What (fully) rational people think with respect to rationality is correct.
Therefore: r indeed is a good reason for thinking that p.
Does this argument do the job? Almost . . . but not quite. For the idea of the
group of “rational people” still operates at the level not of subjectivity but of eval-
uative objectivity. After all, the cogency of this argumentation hinges crucially on
the fact that that group R is itself constituted not descriptively but normatively.
And herein lies a tale. For the fact of it is that the idea of a community of
rational people can be construed in two ways, depending on the sort of “ration-
ality” that is at issue:
1.
Descriptively factual rationality: The group RDF consist of individu-
als who “care for reason” and always or generally “endeavor to pro-
vide what they see as cogent reasons for their beliefs.”
2.
Normatively evaluative rationality: The group RNE consists of indi-
viduals who “are rational” and always or generally “provide cogent—
that is, genuinely good reasons for their beliefs.”
The trouble with Argument B is that it rests on an equivocation in that its co-
gency hinges on construing R as RNE whereas its capacity to effect a subjectiv-
ity-to-objectivity transit hinges on R’s being RDF.
But now we can raise the question: What if in the context of Argument B’s
crucial premiss we could effect the requisite transition from
1.
The entire group RDF of DF-rational people that think that r is a
good reason for thinking that p.
to
2.
The entire group RNE of NE-rational people think that r is a good
reason for thinking that p?
176
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

If this step could be validated, then we would be home free. And so what we
clearly need here is a Bridging Thesis to enable us to effect an inferential transit
from (1) to (2). Can such a bridge be secured?
There is reason to think that it indeed can. However, the linking connec-
tion at issue is not so much logicoconceptual as sociological. For I submit we
can get what we need from the following contention:
It is determinable as a matter of empirical fact that communities of
descriptively rational people—people who care about giving and hav-
ing reasons for their beliefs—will in the course of time tend (under
the pressure of “rational selection”) increasingly to offer and require
good reasons for beliefs (i.e., reasons of a kind that will, at least by and
large, be available when and only when beliefs that are based upon
them are true).
Given that the purpose for having beliefs at all is to secure information—to ob-
tain the true beliefs required for the effective guidance of action—rational peo-
ple will, for this very reason, prefer processes that achieve this goal to those that
do not, and will, over time, tend to adopt, teach, and promulgate processes that
prove effective in this regard. In this perspective it is not only theoretically
plausible but (no less important) empirically confirmable that DF-rational
communities will gravitate toward NE-rational belief-substantiating processes.
To be sure, this argumentation will effect its requisite fact-to-nature transit
only if there are (descriptively factual) tests for good reasons—that is, reasons
that are cogent in the normative/evaluative mode. This is something that will
pivot on the idea (the “concept” if you will) of what a “good reason for a belief”
is. This is going to be something that can be spelled out along the following
lines, namely, that:“a reason for holding a belief is a good (cogent) one iff the be-
liefs substantiated by it are generally true.” It is clear that goodness of this sort
will be effectively determinable in the descriptive/factual order of deliberations.
The upshot of this line of reasoning is that we do indeed have at our dis-
posal the Bridging Thesis requisite for validating a transit in the manner of Ar-
gument B from subjective to objective rationality. And this transit is provided
by what is ultimately an empirical (factually determinable) process of social
evolution proceeding under the aegis of a rational selection that impels de facto
reason-concerned communities in the direction of a commitment to normatively
cogent reasons. The social and communicative practices of an interactive group
of intelligent agents are bound to manifest an impetus to objectivity.
THE PROBLEM OF VALIDATING OBJECTIVITY
But what is it that validates acting under the aegis of rationality and the ob-
jectivity that goes with it? Proceeding rationally is certainly not a guarantor of
The Pragmatic Rationale of Cognitive Objectivity
177

adequacy: for example, there is no way to establish on general principles that
rationally conducted inquiries will (let alone must) achieve the actual truth.
Admittedly there are no guarantees here. But nevertheless, we can say with
confidence is that proceeding rationally and objectively enables us to avert a
variety of recognizable sources of error, so that in conducting our inquiries on
objective principles it becomes less likely that we will fall into error.
However, paradoxical though it may seem, to eliminate error is not nec-
essarily to get closer to the truth (save in the case of omniscient knowers).
Where the answer to a numerical problem has to be an odd number one can
eliminate as erroneous 2, and 4, and 6, and so on ad infinitum through the
entire series of even numbers, without drawing any nearer to getting the cor-
rect result. And that, in fact, is all that cognitive objectivity ever does for us—
it eliminates various common avenues to error. Being objective—avoiding
bias, prejudice, and the like—is thus no guarantor of appropriate results in
the absence of cognitive competence. It helps us only to the extent that our
methodology of inquiry is otherwise effective. It is an aid to rational inquiry
but no magic wand.
But we live in a world without guarantees. After all, why do we endorse the
world-descriptions of the science of the day seeing how often that of the past
has gone awry? Why do we follow the medical recommendations of the physi-
cians of the day, or the policy recommendations of the economists of the day?
Because we know them to be correct—or at any rate highly likely to be true?
Not at all! We know or believe no such thing—historical experience is too
strongly counterindicative. Rather, we accept them as guides only because we
see them as more promising than any of the identifiable alternatives that we are
in a position to envision. We accept them because they afford us the greatest
available subjective probability of success—discernibly the best bet. We do not
proceed with unalloyed confidence, but rather with the resigned recognition
that we can do no better at the moment. Similarly, the recommendations of
reason afford not assurance of success, but merely what is, to all achievable ap-
pearances, the best overall chances of averting failure with respect to our goals.
We act, in short, on the basis of faute de mieux considerations: in real-world sit-
uations reason trades in courses of action whose efficacy is a matter of hope and
whose rationalization is a matter of this-or-nothing-better argumentation.
Rationality foregoes guarantees because upon recognizing their unavail-
ability it ceases to ask for the impossible. It is content to play the odds. And
specifically as regards objectivity it does so with caution. The considerations at
issue here can be posed at a very general level.
The rational person is, by definition, someone who uses intelligence to
maximize the probability—that is, the responsibly formed subjective probability—
that matters will eventuate favorably for the promotion of his real interests. Ra-
tionality calls for adopting the overall best (visible) alternative—the best that is,
in practice, available to us in the circumstances. It is thus actually rational to do
178
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

the apparently rational thing, provided that those appearances reflect the exer-
cise of due care. And it is here that the impetus to objectivity lies.
In pursuing our goals, we do well to emulate the drowning man in
clutching at the best available prospect, recognizing that even the most ra-
tionally laid scheme can misfire. In this world of imperfect inquirers reality is
not always and inevitably on the side of the strongest arguments. Heeding
the call of reason, constructive though it is, affords no categorical guarantees
of success, but only the reassurance of having made the best rational bet—of
having done as well as one could in the circumstances of the case. In this
world we have no guarantees—no means are at our disposal for preestablish-
ing that following rationality’s counsel actually pays. We have to be content
to settle for the best alternative that is available as a pathway toward realizing
our goals. The situation is such that even cognitive rationality must ultimately
be validated in the prudential order of reason.
Why be objective? Because it is the sensible, the rationally appropriate
thing to do. And why is this so? Because it is quintessentially rational to pur-
sue one’s best or real interests in the way that looks to be the most promising,
and the use of reason—which carries objectivity in its wake—is part and parcel
of this endeavor.
We do not (or need not) pursue objectivity for its own sake,3 its value
emerges in the context of ulterior purpose within the methodology of inquiry.
The merit of a commitment to objectivity is utilitarian and lies in the positive
things that it can do for us in the pursuit of normative adequacy in matters of
belief, evaluation, and practical action.
In the specifically cognitive domain, the assets of objectivity preeminently
include:
•
Robustness. Objectivity provides us with checks and balances. It facil-
itates the aims of inquiry by providing a safeguard against biases and
misimpressions. It is an instrument of verification.
•
Communication. Objectivity open up avenues of exchange that serve
productive ends. In proceeding objectively (as others would) we make
ourselves intelligible to them and lay the basis for mutual under-
standing. And not just understanding but also—
•
Community and collaboration. Objectivity facilitates an eminently use-
ful sharing of concerns. Life is too short and the self too limited; to get
pretty much anything done in this world we must proceed communally.
This last item is particularly important. No man is an island, an only by stand-
ing on ground where others too are at work are the possibilities of communi-
cation, cooperation, and (above all) collaboration available. Only by joining
with others—by shifting from I to we (and indeed even a cross generational
we!) can I manage to accepted the tasks that life in this world sets before us.
The Pragmatic Rationale of Cognitive Objectivity
179

The issue of caring about the views of others is thus rather different with
respect to an epistemic virtue such as objectivity from what it is with respect to
a moral virtue such as courtesy. For the prudential rationale of objectivity means
that there is a matter of due case for our interests while the moral aspect of
courtesy means that it is a matter of due case for their interests. With objectiv-
ity, I seek to align my proceedings with theirs in order to realize my interests;
with courtesy I do so to cater to their sensibilities—at any rate in the first analy-
sis. All the same, both modalities alike avail self-aggrandizement. Neither is a
matter of insisting that others shall do as I do, but rather one of conforming my
own proceedings to theirs.
To be sure, being objective in matters relating to the public domain affords
no failproof guarantee of success. Throughout our cognitive and practical affairs
we have to conduct our operations under conditions of risk. We have to do the
plausible thing—to “play the odds.” And so, when we do the rational thing but it
just does not pan out, we simply have to “grin and bear it.” The matter is one of
calculated risks and plausibly expectable benefits. Rationality—to reemphasize—
affords no guarantees. By the very nature of what is involved in rational proce-
dure, the determinable odds are in its favor. But that may still be cold comfort
when things go wrong. Then, all we have is the satisfaction of having done our
best. The long and short of the matter is that nothing “obliges” us to be rational
except our rationality itself. It lies in the nature of things that reason is on the side
of rationality. Admittedly, reason offers us no categorical guarantees; yet, if we
abandon reason there is no better place where we can (rationally) go.
The imperative “Act as a rational agent ought” does not come from with-
out (from parents or from society or even from God). It roots in our own self-
purported nature as rational beings—in the fact of its being an integral part of
what our reason demands of us in the context of its own cultivation. (In Kant’s
words, it is a dictamen rationis, a part of the “internal legislation of reason.”)
And this obligation to rationality carries the obligation to objectivity in its
wake, so that the validation of rationality and objectivity are of a piece. The
problem-solving objectives that are unavoidable for a community of intelligent
agents constrain them to the concern for objectivity that characterizes the
modus operandi of rational beings.
WHAT IS RIGHT WITH OBJECTIVISM
The preceding deliberations provide a clear indication of what is wrong with a
relativism that takes the line that “There’s no good reason to expect that you
should think as I do.” For when my thinking proceeds as it ought—when it is
grounded in what are standardly taken to be evidentially sound reasons—then
this very fact constitutes a good reason why you should think as I do. It is the
180
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

factor of objective cogency that constitutes the crucial coordinating principle that
links together the conclusions and acceptances of reasonable people.
But this line of thought still leaves some important open questions on the
agenda—in particular: What’s right with objectivism? Why be objective? To ask
this is to ask for cogent reasons for cognitive objectivity. But of course there is no
point in plunging into a discussion in the setting of Why-do-something? ques-
tions if one is not going to cast rationality to the winds here. So we have to con-
strue Why be objective? as: Give me a good reason—an impersonally and
objectively good reason—for being objective.This circumstance alone suffices to
show that objectivity has to be respected even by those who are, for reasons of
their own, concerned to call it into question. It itself attests the appropriateness
of objectivity.
But just what does objectivity require? How is one to understand what is in-
volved here? To achieve a reasonable approximation we shall suppose that, more
or less by definition: To be objective is to proceed as any reasonable person
would do in the circumstances at issue.
But what does their reasonableness demand of reasonable people? The an-
swer here is that reasonable persons are optimizers—individuals who do the
best they can with the means available in the prevailing circumstances, endeav-
oring to do that which is the best thing possible to do (in the circumstances).
And at this point, the answer to our initial question Why be objective? lies
before us clear and plain. For the very fact that something is the best that can be
done in this circumstance is ipso facto a good reason for doing it—for anyone.
The challenge to defend objectivity is now met in a manifestly cogent way by the
simple and straightforward answer: Because this is the rational and reasonable
way to proceed.
Rational belief, action, and evaluation are possibly only in situations where
there are cogent grounds (and not just compelling personal motives) for what one
does. And the cogency of grounds is a matter of objective standards: cogency is
not something variable and idiosyncratic. The idea of rationality is in principle
inapplicable where one is at liberty to make up one’s rules as one goes along—
effectively to have no predetermined rules at all. For a belief, action, or evalua-
tion to qualify as rational, the agent must (in theory at least) be in a position to
“give an account” of it on whose basis others can see that “it is only right and
proper” for him to resolve the issue in that way.
Objectivity thus pivots on rationality. But the rationality at issue involves
more than mere logical coherence. It is a matter of the intelligent pursuit of cir-
cumstantially appropriate objectives.4 Accordingly its demands are few in type
but elaborate in extent:
•
aligning one’s beliefs with the available evidence;
•
maintaining consistency within one’s beliefs;
The Pragmatic Rationale of Cognitive Objectivity
181

•
making reasonable efforts to ensure the adequacy of the available
evidence to the problems at hand.
But there is nothing personalistic or idiosyncratic about such principles. What
is evidence for one will have to count as evidence for another if evidence it in-
deed is. What is an authentically cogent inference with you is cogent inference
with me. And so on.
The generality of access at issue with objectivity becomes crucial here. If
something makes good rational sense, it must be possible in principle for any-
one and everyone to see that this is so.This matter of good reasons is not some-
thing subjective or idiosyncratic; it is objective and lies in the public domain.
Cogent reason is impersonal. There is no exclusively personalized rational co-
gency: what is cogent for me will and must be equally cogent for anyone in the
same circumstances. Robinson Crusoe may well proceed in a perfectly rational
way in the context of his peculiar setting. But, he can only do so by doing what
would make sense for others is similar circumstances. He must, in principle, be
in a position to persuade others to adopt his course of action by an appeal to
general principles to show them that his actions were appropriate in the cir-
cumstances. Rationality is by nature inherently general and objective in its op-
erations, endeavoring to deal with issues in an objective manner—in such a way
that anyone can see the sense of it.
We thus have the core of the solution to our initial question of what is
wrong with an objectivity dismissive relativism.The answer is that in cognitive
matters relativism violates objectivity and objectivity violations are at odds with
being reasonable. For without a commitment to objectivity rational agents can-
not expect to meet their needs in an efficient and effective way.
Let us consider some of the ramifications of this position, and in particu-
lar the question of what it is that reasonableness and rationality demands.
ABANDONING OBJECTIVITY IS
PRAGMATICALLY SELF-DEFEATING
Proceeding with a view to objectivity in its impersonal mode is thus generally
in our best interests. But is it not just advantageous but somehow obligatory?
Objectivity’s bonding to rationality shows that this is indeed the case. For in-
sofar as we reason-capable agents have an obligation to exercise this capacity—
as we indeed do—we are involved in a venture that carries the obligation to
objectivity in its wake.5 Let us see how this is so.
The subjectivity/objectivity contrast turns on the distinction between what
is accepted by me as things stand—and quite possibly by me alone—over against
that which is acceptable for us in general in suitably similar conditions. And this
issue of a range of cogency pivots on the I/we contrast. The crucial contrast is
182
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

that between what simply holds for oneself versus what is to be seen as hold-
ing for all of us. Objectivity is coordinate with generality: what is objectively so
holds independently of the vagaries, contingencies, and idiosyncrasies of par-
ticular individuals.
Consider, in particular, the objectivity of claims and contentions. An ob-
jective truth does not hold of everyone; it holds for everyone. “Bald men have
little or no hair” wears on its very sleeve the fact that it holds only of some—
namely, of bald men. But it holds for everyone, is just as true for you as for me,
irrespective of whether we are bald or not. The questions Who realizes it? or
Who has reason to believe it? certainly arise—and may well be answered by
saying that only some people do so and many others do not. But the question
Whom is it true for? simply does not arise in that form. If that contention is
true at all, it is true for everyone. Truths do not need to be thematically univer-
sal and they do not need to be evidentially universal; but they do need to be uni-
versal in point of validity. And this precisely is the basis of their objectivity. As
truths they will necessarily have that for-everyone aspect.
Objectivity keeps us on the straight and narrow path of commitments that
are binding on all rational beings alike. But cultivating objectivity is certainly
no exercise in power-projection. It is not a matter of trying to speak for others,
preempting their judgment by a high-handedness that constrains them into
alignment with oneself. Quite to the contrary, it works exactly the other way
around. The proper pursuit of cognitive objectivity calls for trying to put one’s
own judgment into alignment with what—as best one can determine it—the
judgment of those others ought to be. It is not a matter of coordination by an
imposition on others but the very reverse, one of a coordination by self-subor-
dinated submission to the modus operandi of the group on granting it the ben-
efit of the doubt in point of rationality. Such conformity is a requisite for
objectivity but the matter of how it comes about is pivotal. It is—and must
be—a matter of my conforming to them (the generality of sensible people) as
opposed to any megalomaniacal insistence that they conform to me. Objectiv-
ity is a policy not of the dictatorial but of the cognitively gregarious who seek
to be in cognitive harmony with the rest—at least insofar as they subscribe to
the standards of rationality.
The impetus to rationality accordingly has important and immediate im-
plications for our concern with objectivity. For rationality carries objectivity in
its wake: the universality and impersonality of reason validates the pursuit of
objectivity in direct consequence. Objectivity’s insistence on cogent resolutions
that prevent the course of reason from being deflected by wish and willfulness,
biases and idiosyncrasies—will for this very circumstance foster and implement
a commitment to the primacy of reason.
To proceed objectively is, accordingly, to render oneself perspicuous to oth-
ers by doing what any reasonable and normally constituted person would do in
one’s place, thereby rendering one’s proceedings intelligible to anyone. When the
The Pragmatic Rationale of Cognitive Objectivity
183

members of a group are objective, they secure great advantages thereby: they lay
the groundwork for community by paving the way for mutual understanding,
communication, collaboration. And in cognitive matters they also sideline
sources of error. For the essence of objectivity lies in its factoring out of those of
one’s idiosyncratic predilections and prejudices that would stand in the way of
other intelligent people’s reaching the same result. Objectivity follows in ratio-
nality’s wake because of its effectiveness as a means to averting both isolation
and error.
Sometimes we are told: People never really know anything really and objec-
tively: there is only what people think they know. But this contention is deeply
problematic. To assert that there are no objective facts is self-contradictory.
Whoever makes (asserts) this statement is presumably stating a matter of
objective fact: they are not saying that they merely think it to be so.
What is at issue in an overt denial of facts is not a logical inconsistency but
a practical inconsistency. For now the practice in which you are engaging be-
comes infeasible through the very nature of the way in which you are engaging in
it.That is, you are engaging in a process of communication but doing it in with a
machine that produces a monkey wrench that it inserts into its own works.
“Facts are precisely what there is not,” says Nietzsche, “only interpreta-
tions.”6 But this, insofar as true, is itself nothing but an interpretation of our
cognitive situation—and not actually a cogent one. For such an all-leveling per-
spective has its difficulties. For there are interpretations and interpretations—
interpretations that resolve problems and interpretations that create difficulties.
(If I interpret those grains of white sand as sugar and proceed accordingly I
shall assuredly encounter distinctly unpleasant consequences.)
Thoroughly practical (functional/operations) reasons thus speak on behalf
of endorsing the conception of objective truth. Specifically we require it:
1.
As a presupposition to make communication possible by way of
agreement and disagreement. To principle a commonality of focus.
2.
As a contrast conception that enables us to acknowledge our own
potential fallibility.
3.
As a regulative ideal whose pursuit stops us from resting content
with too little.
4.
As an entryway into a communicative community in which we
acknowledge that our own views are nowise decisive.
The commitment to objectivity thus affords us an effective practical instru-
mentality that facilitates communication and cognitive collaboration. It is cer-
tainly not something that we have to endorse only “on faith.” Practical
experience amply endows it with a track record of utility that constitutes a ret-
rospective justification of a commitment to objectivity. Its substantiation lies
largely in the fact that we simply could not get on without it.
184
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

To be sure, such a pragmatic/experiential validation of a particular cogni-
tive perspective nowise guarantees the categorical correctness of the beliefs that
ensue from it. All that it provides is that in following its strictures we will do as
well as we can manage to in the circumstances. By allowing our beliefs by our
experiences we do all that we can to assure their adequacy to our needs within
the setting of the situation that confronts us. As indicated above, beyond that
point—the point of having done all that we reasonably can—a certain element
of methodological optimism is called for, a rationally warranted hope that once
we have done all we can these best efforts of ours will bear fruit. In this depart-
ment of human affairs—as in others—it is only rational to proceed in the hope
and expectation that the best we can possibly do is good enough.7
The Pragmatic Rationale of Cognitive Objectivity
185

This page intentionally left blank.

187
Chapter 11
Rationality
SYNOPSIS
•
Admittedly, there is no guarantee that success will ensue when we do the
rationally appropriate thing—be it in theoretical or in practical matters.
•
This is so because what is rational in the circumstances as we actually dis-
cern them can always prove mistaken due to conditions outside the range of
our knowledge and control.
•
Accordingly, practicable rationality can and often does fall short of the ideal.
•
So why be rational? Simply because doing so offers us the best chances of get-
ting it right.
•
Accordingly even cognitive rationality has a pragmatic rationale.
•
Are there alternative modes of rationality? Assuredly none that we could ra-
tionally adopt. For if something failed to offer us the best available option by
our own lights then it would, ipso facto, fail to be the rational thing to do.
•
The self-reliance of rationality is not viciously circular because the only sort
of justification of rationality that is worth having is a rational one.
STAGE-SETTING FOR THE PROBLEM
Man is a rational animal, and presumably the only one here on earth, though
there is no reason of principle why extraterrestrial rational beings could not
exist. But beings capable of an intuitive understanding of the likes and dislikes,
attractions and aversions of others could in theory come to view one another
as rational.

Historically, rationality has been bifurcated into two compartments: prac-
tical rationality that concerns itself with what we do and theoretical (or cogni-
tive) rationality that concerns itself with what we think.This view of the matter
was disseminated by the skeptics of classical antiquity, reasserted itself in the
thought of David Hume and became permanently consolidated for modern
philosophy in the works of Immanuel Kant. It is important to recognize this
duality of rationality because it means that there is more to rationality than
“epistemic competence” alone.
For better or worse, however, this view of the matter really makes no sense.
For of course with Homo sapiens, and indeed any sort of intelligent being, action
cannot be separated from thought.Those two departments of reason are actually
aspects of one composite whole. Rationality consists in the intelligent pursuit of
appropriate objectives. Intelligence indicates cognition, pursuit action, and ap-
propriateness evaluation.With rationality these three factors are fused into a sin-
gle integrated whole. There are not different forms or versions of rationality;
rationality is a unified whole that unites them as inseparable constituents.
The road of rationality, like that of true love, does not always run smooth.
For his very rationality can lead a rational agent into difficulty. For the rational
resolution of problems is invariably contextsensitive to the information in hand,
in such a way that what is a patently sensible and appropriate resolution in a
given data-situation can cease to be so in the light of additional information—
information that does not abrogate or correct our prior data, but simply aug-
ments and enlarges it.
It is clear that this circumstance pervades all sectors of rational delibera-
tion, regardless of whether we are dealing with deductive information-extrac-
tion, inductive inference, evaluative reasoning, practical reasoning, or any other
type. The fact is that the rationally appropriate resolution of a problem on the
basis of one body of evidence or experience can always become unstuck when
that body of evidence or experience is not actually revised but merely enlarged.
The ramifications of this fact are pervasive and their implications merit closer
attention.
OPTIMUM-INSTABILITY
The rationally appropriate procedure in problem solving is to strive for
the best resolution achievable in the light of the available data.1 Rationality
enjoins us to adopt the best available option. Having surveyed the range of al-
ternatives, the rational thing to do is to resolve the choice between them in
what is, all considered, the most favorable way. What is “favorable” will of
course differ from context to context: with cognitive choices, “favorable” pri-
marily hinges on substantiation, with practical choices, on effectiveness, with
evaluative choices, on preferability. But the salient fact remains that rational-
188
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

ity is always a matter of optimization relative to constraints, of doing the best
one can in the prevailing circumstances. And this is a matter of the circum-
stances as best determinable from where he stands, and not of what the real
ones may actually happen to be. The rational thing to do in resolving an issue
is to make the best use of all the (relevant) information at our disposal. Clearly,
it is not—and cannot rationally be—required that we should use information
that we do not have and cannot obtain. (Even if, wholly unbeknownst to me,
there will be a power failure in a few moments, it is nevertheless rational for
me to take the elevator upstairs.) The rationality of our beliefs, actions, and
evaluations is clearly a matter of the information that we can secure, not one
of what might in theory be available to others who may be more favorably cir-
cumstanced than ourselves.Twentieth-century medicine is in no way deficient
in point of rationality for failing to apply twenty-first-century remedies. Ra-
tionality, like politics, is an art of the possible—a matter of doing the best
that is possible in the overall circumstances in which the agent functions—
cognitive circumstances included.
If we had “complete information,” and in particular if we knew how our de-
cisions would eventuate—how matters will actually turn out when we decide one
way or another—then rational decision-making and planning would of course be
something very different from what they are. In this world we are constrained to
decide, to operate, to plan, and to act in the light of incomplete information.
When we marry, take a job, invest our money, improve existing technology, and
so on, we have no clear idea what eventual consequences will ensue.
After all, if rationality were only possible in the light of complete informa-
tion it would perforce become totally irrelevant for us. It lies in the inevitable na-
ture of things that we must exercise our rationality amidst conditions of imperfect
information. A mode of “rationality” capable of implementation only in ideal cir-
cumstances is pointless; in this world, the real world, there is no work for it to do.
We have to be realistic in our understanding of rationality—recognizing that we
must practice this virtue in real rather than ideal circumstances. A conception of
“rationality” that asks no more of us than doing the best we possibly can is the
only one that makes sense. (In fact, one that asks for more would not itself be ra-
tional.) Clearly, if rationality is to be something that we can actually implement
then it has to be something whose demands we can meet in subideal conditions,
conditions of incomplete information as we (inevitably) confront them.
The problem, then, is that rationality is “information-sensitive”: exactly
what qualifies as the most rational resolution of a particular problem of belief,
action, or evaluation depends on the precise content of our data about the situ-
ation at issue. But, as we obtain more information we change the frame of ref-
erence relative to which optimality is determined. And then what was once the
best, most favorable resolution may well no longer continue to be so in the light
of these further developments. Optimality, in sum, is “context-sensitive” with
respect to the informational context.
Rationality
189

The history of the empirical sciences affords a familiar illustration. Be-
liefs in the luminiferous aether, the conservation of matter, and the like, were
all sensible and rational in their day. Achieving a substantial enlargement of
the data base on which we erect the structures of our theorizing generally
produces those changes of mind characterized as “scientific revolutions.”
As significantly enhanced experimental information comes to hand, people
are led to resolve their problems of optimal question-resolution in radically
different ways.
It will not do to react to this state of affairs by saying: “Delay decision until
your experience is perfected, your information altogether complete.” To post-
pone a decision until then is tantamount to preventing its ever being made. A
rationality we cannot deploy here and now, amid the realities of an imperfect
world, is altogether useless.
We thus confront the “predicament of reason” generated by the confluence
of the two considerations, that the rationality of a problem-resolution is “infor-
mation-sensitive,” and that in the real world our information is always incom-
plete. Mere additions to our information can always upset the applecart of
rational decision. Rationality is inexorably circumstantial, and that is rational in
the circumstances as we can discern them can always prove ineffective owning
to conditions outside the range of our knowledge and control.
IDEAL VERSUS PRACTICAL RATIONALITY:
THE PREDICAMENT OF REASON
This predicament of reason at issue in the irresoluble tension between the de-
mands of rationality and its practical possibilities inheres in the following
aporetic situation that we face in cognitive matters as elsewhere:
1.
We ought to do that which, as best we can determine it, is the ration-
ally appropriate thing to do.
2.
We ought to act as perfectly rational agents do.
3.
What is appropriate as best we can determine it (in our suboptimal
circumstances) will generally differ from what a perfectly rational
agent would (ipso facto) determine to be best.
Since these theses are mutually incompatible, one of them must be sacrificed, and
since 1 and 3 represent unavoidable “facts of life,” it is clearly 2 that must be aban-
doned in the interests of consistency-restoration. Neither the rationality-aban-
donment of i-rejection nor the unrealistic perfectionism of 3-abandonment are
plausible options. This circumstance that thesis 2 must be abandoned sets the
stage for the predicament inherent in the fact that rationality seems to demand
something of us that is, in the final analysis, not actually realizable.
190
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

Fortunately, the difficulty that arises here admits of a sensible resolution.
The distinction between idealized and practicable rationality offers a way out.
For we must distinguish between:
ideal rationality, which is geared to resolutions that are rationally
appropriate with (absolutely) everything relevant taken into ac-
count—that are optimal pure and simple, and 
practicable rationality, which is geared to resolutions that are rationally
appropriate with everything relevant taken into account that we
can effectively manage to take account of in the prevailing circum-
stances—that are optimal as best we can manage to tell.
This distinction softens the impact of rejecting premiss (2) of the predicament.
For, while we cannot indeed achieve the demands of ideal rationality, we clearly
should do all we can in the direction of practicable rationality. After all, ideal
rational optimality is something merely “utopian” and “pie in the sky.” For us,
the only practicable optimality is that which is realistic and achievable-opti-
mality as best we can get hold of it, which accordingly remains merely apparent
optimality (optimality as best we can determine it). All we can ever secure in
real-life situations of rational deliberation seem optima arrived at in the light of
incomplete information. We can have no assurance that they will continue to
be optimal in the light of a fuller appreciation of the circumstances. We can
only do our best.
This sort of situation obtains throughout all areas of rational deliberation:
cognitive, prudential, evaluative—right across the board. Even our optimally
evidentiated beliefs are not necessarily true; even our optimally well-advised ac-
tions are not necessarily successful; even our optimally crafted appraisals are not
necessarily correct. The fact of limitation confronts us in every direction.
The inexorable circumstance represented by the five following facts has to
be faced:
1.
The “ideally rational” thing to do is to do what is optimal.
2.
The “rationally appropriate” or, simply, the “rational” thing is for us to
do our utmost toward the ideally rational thing—to do that which as
best we can tell is the ideally rational thing to do. Accordingly, ration-
ality calls for optimization in the light of the available information.
3.
What actually is optimal, however, is what is determinable as such
(as optimal) in the light of complete information.
4.
What is optimal in the light of incomplete information may well fail
to be actually optimal and indeed may be counterproductive.
5.
The most we can ever do is to act in the light of the available infor-
mation, which generally is incomplete.
Rationality
191

It follows inexorably from these premises that, in general, the rational thing for
us to do is something which, as we must recognize full well, may actually im-
pede realization of our objectives. This constitutes what might be called the
predicament of reason: the circumstance that reason constantly calls on us to do
that which, for ought we know, may prove totally inappropriate. Rational action
in this world has to proceed in the face of the sobering recognition that while
we doubtless should do the best we can, it may nevertheless eventuate that the
seeming best we can do is quite the wrong thing. It is the course of reason (1)
to aim at the absolutely best, but (2) to settle for the best that is realistically
available. (After all, it would be unreasonable, nay irrational, to ask for more.)
But the paradox lies in our clear recognition of the tension between the two.
A paradox accordingly emerges from the fact that while the ends of ra-
tionality are achieved only under the ideal conditions of global totality, never-
theless the actual practice of rationality must inevitably be conducted at the
level of local and imperfect conditions. We can never rest complacently confi-
dent that in following reason’s directions we are not frustrating the very pur-
poses for whose sake we are calling on the guidance of reason. We have to
recognize the “fact of life” that it is rationally advisable to do the best we can,
while nevertheless realizing all the while that it may prove to be inappropriate.
“But the problem is created by mere ignorance.” True enough! But true in
a way that provides no comfort. Imperfect information is an inevitable fact of
life. A “rationality” that could not be implemented in these circumstances
would be totally pointless. Were rationality to hinge on complete information,
it would thereby manifest its irrelevance for our concerns. There is nothing
“mere” about ignorance.
Such deliberations lead into the terrain of philosophical anthropology. For,
we here confront a fundamental aspect of the human condition. With creatures
like ourselves that are of limited capacity, and whose cognitive range of refer-
ence is thus inevitably limited, no assurance can be attained that doing the best
one can to follow the dictates of rational appropriateness will produce a ration-
ally optimal resolution—that those apparent optima we can attain will actually
yield real optima. There is never any assurance that we will actually succeed by
following the best available advice. The cold and cruel reality is that (1) a deci-
sion based on incomplete information—no matter how intelligently made—
can be totally counter-productive, and (2) in this life we always have to operate
on the basis of incomplete information.
There stands before us the profound lesson of the biblical story of the Fall
of Man, that in this world there simply are no guarantees—not even for a life
conducted on principles of reason. It is this sobering situation—doubtless un-
welcome, but inevitable—that betokens the predicament of reason: the circum-
stance that rationality requires us to do “what seems best” in the full and clear
recognition that this may well fail to be, in actuality, anything like the best
thing to do.2
192
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

THE PROBLEM OF VALIDATING RATIONALITY
Why then should one be rational? In a way, this is a silly question. For, the an-
swer is only too obvious—given that the rational thing to do is (effectively, by
definition) that for which the strongest reasons speak, we ipso facto have good
reason to do it. Kurt Baier has put this point in a way difficult to improve on:
The question “Why should I follow reason?” simply does not make
sense. Asking it shows complete lack of understanding of the mean-
ing of a “why question.” “Why should I do this?” is a request to be
given the reason for saying that I should do this. It is normally asked
when someone has already said, “You should do this” and answered
by giving the reason. But since “Should I follow reason?” means “Tell
me whether doing what is supported by the best reasons is doing
what is supported by the best reasons,” there is simply no possibility
of adding “Why?” For the question now comes to this, “Tell me the
reason why doing what is supported by the best reasons is doing what
is supported by the best reasons.” It is exactly like asking, “Why is a
circle a circle?”3
In virtue of its nature as such, the rational resolution to an issue is the best solu-
tion we can manage—the one that we should adopt and would adopt if we were
to proceed intelligently. The impetus to rationality is grounded in our commit-
ment to proceeding intelligently—to “using our brains.” (“Why be rational?”
“It’s the intelligent thing to do.” “But why proceed intelligently?” “Come now;
surely you jest!”) After all, once we admit that something is the best thing to do,
what further reason could we possibly want for doing it? Once it is settled that
A is the rational thing to do which may itself take a lot of showing—then there
is no more room for any further reason for doing A, no further point to asking:
Why do A? For at this stage, the best of reasons—by hypothesis—already speak
for doing A. Once rationality is established, there are no further extra- (or supra-)
rational reasons to which we could sensibly appeal for validation. In this sense,
then, the question Why do the rational thing? is simply foolish: it is a request for
further reasons at a juncture at which, by hypothesis, all the needed reasons are
already in.
But this line of response to our question, though perfectly cogent, is a bit
too facile. The job that needs to be accomplished is actually more complicated.
Belief, action, and evaluation based on what really are—truly and actually—
the “best of reasons” must necessarily be successful. This contention is simply
circular, since those theoretically “best of reasons” are best exactly because it is
they that assure realization of the best results. But, in this world, we are not in
general in a position to proceed from the actual best as such, but only from the
visible best that is at our disposal—“the best available (or discernible) reasons.”
Rationality
193

We have to content ourselves with doing “the apparently best thing”—the best
that is determinable in the prevailing circumstances. But the fact remains that
the alternatives whose adoption we ourselves sensibly and appropriately view as
rational given the information at our disposal at the time are not necessarily ac-
tually optimal. The problem about doing the rational thing—doing that which
we sensibly suppose to be supported by the best reasons—is that our informa-
tion, being incomplete, may well point us in the wrong direction. Facing this
“predicament of reason,” we know the pitfalls, realizing full well the fragility of
these “best laid schemes.” So the problem remains: Why should we act on the
most promising visible alternative, when visibility is restricted to the limited
horizons of our own potentially inadequate vantage-point?
The answer here runs something like this: The rational person is, by defi-
nition, someone who uses intelligence to maximize the probability—that is, the
responsibly formed subjective probability—that matters will eventuate favor-
ably for the promotion of his real interests. It is just this that makes following
the path of rationality the rational course. Rationality calls for adopting the
overall best (visible) alternative—the best that is, in practice, available to us in
the circumstances. And if A indeed is the rational thing to do in this sense, then
we should expect to be worse off in doing something different from A. To be
sure, things may not come to that; we could be lucky. But this is something we
do not deserve and certainly have no grounds to expect.
After all, why do we endorse the world-descriptions of the science of the
day? Why do we follow the medical recommendations of the physicians of the
day, or the policy recommendations of the economists of the day? Because we
know them to be correct—or at any rate highly likely to be true? Not at all! We
know or believe no such thing—historical experience is too strongly coun-
terindicative. Rather, we accept them as guides only because we see them as
more promising than any of the identifiable alternatives that we are in a posi-
tion to envision. We accept them because they afford us the greatest available
subjective probability of success-discernibly the best bet. We do not proceed
with unalloyed confidence, but rather with the resigned recognition that we
can do no better at the moment. Similarly, the recommendations of reason af-
ford not assurance of success, but merely the best overall chances of reaching
our goals. We act, in short, on the basis of faute de mieux considerations, of
“this or nothing better—as far as the eye reaches.” In real-world situations rea-
son trades in courses of action whose efficacy is a matter of hope and whose
rationalization is a matter of this-or-nothing-better argumentation.
Like the drowning man, we clutch at the best available object. We recog-
nize full well that even the most rationally laid scheme can misfire. Reality is
not always and inevitably on the side of the strongest arguments. Reason af-
fords no guarantee of success, but only the reassurance of having made the best
rational bet—of having done as well as one could in the circumstances of the
case. One cannot say, flatly and unqualifiedly: “You should be rational because
194
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

rationality pays in rendering success if not certain then at any rate more proba-
ble.” Rather, we have to content ourselves with: “You should be rational because
this affords the best rationally foreseeable prospects of success—on the whole
and in the long run.”
And so, we follow reason because this makes good rational sense to do so,
seeing that this affords us with the best visible prospect for realizing our objec-
tives. One should be rational in general for just the same sort of reason as one
should be rational in the specific case of the hungry man’s choice between eat-
ing bread or sand—namely, that by all available indications this course repre-
sents the most promising prospect of attaining one’s sensible goals.4 We simply
could not endorse that course of action as being “rationally advisable in the cir-
cumstances” if we were not convinced that it enhanced the chances of a suc-
cessful issue. For it is just this that makes something into “the rational thing to
do”: its enhancing, as best we can tell, our chances of attaining success to a
greater extent than any other available alternative. We may have trouble spot-
ting “the rational thing to do” in particular circumstances. But once our mind is
made up about this, then the issue of rational advisability is closed.
Yet the fact of the matter remains that we cannot prove that rationality
pays—necessarily or even only over the probabilistic long run. We do not know
that acting rationally in the particular case at hand will actually pay off—nor
can we even claim with unalloyed assurance that it will probably do so (with
real likelihood rather than subjective probability). We can only say that, as best
we can judge the matter, it represents the most promising course at our dis-
posal. We have no guarantees—no means are at our disposal for preestablishing
that following rationality’s counsel actually pays.
Throughout our cognitive and practical affairs we have to conduct our op-
erations under conditions of risk. And so, when we do the rational thing but it
just does not pan out, we simply have to “grin and bear it.” The matter is one
of calculated risks and plausibly expectable benefits. Rationality affords no
guarantees. By the very nature of what is involved in rational procedure, the de-
terminable odds are in its favor. But that may still be cold comfort when things
go wrong. Then, all we have is the satisfaction of having done our best. The
long and short of the matter is that nothing “obliges” us to be rational except
our rationality itself.
Of course, one may somehow prefer not to be rational. With belief, I may
prefer congeniality to truth. With action, I may prefer convenience to optimal-
ity. With value, I may prefer the pleasingly base to the more austere better. On
all sides, I may willfully opt for “what I simply like,” rather than for that which
is normatively appropriate. But if I do this, I lose sight of the actual ends of the
cognitive, practical, and evaluative enterprises, to the detriment of my real (as
opposed to apparent) interests. It lies in the nature of things that reason is on
the side of rationality. To be sure, she offers us no guarantees. Yet, if we aban-
don reason there: is no place better that we can (rationally) go.
Rationality
195

THE PRAGMATIC TURN: EVEN COGNITIVE RATIONALITY
HAS A PRAGMATIC RATIONALE
To be sure, no considerations of theoretical general principle can possibly estab-
lish that what is apparently the rationally optimal course—what is so “as best one
can tell”—is actually optimal. In this matter we cannot proceed by way of cogent
inference in the evidential/cognitive order of reason, but must turn in another di-
rection altogether, to inference in the practical order of reason.The best available
justification of rationality is a practical inference along the following lines:
1.
We want and need rationally cogent answers to our questions—
answers that optimally reflect the available information.
2.
Following the path of cognitive rationality (as standardly construed)
is the, best available way to secure rationally cogent answers to our
questions.
Therefore: Following the path of standard cognitive rational-
ity in matters of inquiry (that is, in answering our questions)
is the rational thing to do: we are rationally well advised to
answer our questions in line with the standard processes of
cognitive rationality.
And as such a perspective indicates, it is appropriate to proceed rationally not be-
cause we know that by so doing we will (inevitably or probably) succeed, but be-
cause we realize that by doing so we will have done the very best we possibly can
toward producing this outcome: we will have given the matter “our best shot.”5
This practical turn is ultimately inevitable. We can do no more than to
adopt an approach that represents the best and the most that we can do. For of
course we cannot maintain: “If you form a belief rationally, then it will turn out
to be true.”This is simply not on the cards.The most we can do is to maintain:
By all the relevant indications, there is good reason to think that a
rationally formed belief is true. (That is exactly what we mean by “a
rationally formed belief.”)
The cogency of our practical argument rests on the fact that in real-life situ-
ations we simply have to do the best we can—that it would be senseless (and
irrational!) to ask for more than this.
One could—to be sure—press the issue still one step further. For one
might take the following line:
Very well—let it be granted that acceptance is necessary to the project
of rational inquiry or what you have called the “cognitive enterprise.”
196
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

So what! Why should one seek to play this “rationality game” at all?
After all, to call someone “a rational person” is just giving this individ-
ual an honorific pat on the back for comporting in intellectual affairs
in an approved manner. It leaves open the questions: Why is this “ra-
tionality” really a good thing? What point is there to being rational?
We come here to yet another aspect of the skeptic’s case against the utility of
reason. In war, victory does not always lie on the side of the big battalions. In
inquiry, truth does not always lie on the side of the stronger reasons. And here
we face the skeptic’s final challenge: What basis is there for the belief that the
real is rational (to put it in Hegelian terms)! What assurance do we have that
aligning our beliefs with the canons of the logical and the reasonable leads us
any closer to the truth.
At this more ultimate stage, or course, considerations of cognitive or theo-
retical rationality can no longer themselves be deployed successfully. To rely on
them in the defense of rationality is to move in a circle.The time is now at hand
when one must go outside the whole cognitive/theoretical sphere. One clearly
cannot marshal an ultimately adequate defense of rational cognition by an appeal
that proceeds wholly on its own ground. It becomes necessary to seek a cogni-
tion-external rationale of justification, and now, at this final stage, the aforemen-
tioned pragmatic appeal to the conditions of effective action properly come into
operation. Now the time is finally at hand for taking the pragmatic route.
Philosophers of pragmatic inclination have always stressed the ultimate in-
adequacy of any strictly theoretical defense of cognitive rationality. And their in-
stincts in this regard are surely right. One cannot marshal an ultimately
satisfactory defense of rational cognition by an appeal that proceeds wholly on its
own grounds. In providing a viable justification the time must come for stepping
outside the whole cognitive/theoretical sphere and seeking for some extracogni-
tive support for our cognitive proceedings. It is at just this stage that a pragmatic
appeal to the condition of effective action properly comes into operation.
And this pragmatic aspect of the matter has yet another side. The pivotal
role of rationality as a coordination principle must also be emphasized. The
human condition is such that the adequate cultivation of our individual inter-
est requires a coordination of effort with others and imposes the need for co-
operation and collaboration. But this is achievable only if we “understand” one
another. And here rationality becomes critical. It is a crucial resource for mutual
understanding, for rendering people comprehensible to one another, so as to
make effective communication and cooperation possible.
The following three points are crucial in this regard. (1) It is a matter of life
and death for us to live in a setting where we ourselves are in large measure pre-
dictable for others, because only on this basis of mutual predictability can we
achieve conditions essential to our own welfare. (2) The easiest way to become
predictable for others is to act in such a way that they can explain, understand,
Rationality
197

and anticipate my actions on the basis of the question What would I do if I were
in his shoes? (3) In this regard the “apparent best” is the obvious choice, not only
because of its (admittedly loose) linkage to optimality per se, but also because of
its “saliency.” The quest for “the best available” leads one to fix on that alterna-
tive at which others too could be expected to arrive in the circumstances—so
that they too can understand one’s choices.
The pursuit of optimality is accordingly a determinative factor for ration-
ality not only through its direct benefits in yielding our best apparent chances
of success, but also through its providing a principle for the guidance of action
that achieves the crucial requisite of social coordination in the most efficient re-
alizable way. (But why coordinate on what is rational, why not simply on habit
or fashion or “the done thing”? Partly, because these leave us in the lurch once
we get off the beaten track of “the usual course of things.” And partly because
they are unstable and inherently unreliable.
ALTERNATIVE MODES OF RATIONALITY?
Émile Durkheim was no doubt right in insisting that “all that constitutes rea-
son, its principles and categories, is made (by particular societies operating) in
the course of history.”6 But the fact that everyone’s standards and criteria of ra-
tional cognition (etc.) are historically and culturally conditioned—our own of
course included—certainly does not preclude their having a rationally binding
stringency for those to whom they appertain, ourselves emphatically included.
In conducting our affairs in this world—as in conducting our movements
within it—we have no choice but to go on from where we are. If we are ra-
tional, then our standards and criteria of rationality presumably came to be ours
precisely because we deem them to be (not necessarily the best possible in the-
ory, but at any rate) the best available to us in practice on the basis of those con-
siderations that we can conscientiously maintain.
But are the beliefs of primitive, prescientific cultures indeed less rational
than ours? A resounding negative is maintained in Peter Winch’s widely cited
article on “Understanding a Primitive Society,”7 which argues that Azande be-
liefs about witchcraft and oracles cannot be rejected as rationally inappropriate
despite their clear violation of the evidential canons of modern Western scien-
tific culture. But just here lies the problem. Are those beliefs of theirs rational?
differs significantly from Are those beliefs of theirs held rationally? The answer
you get depends on the question you ask. If we ask Are those beliefs they hold
rational? we, of course, mean “rational on our understanding of the matter.”
And the answer here is clearly No, seeing that by hypothesis our sort of ration-
ality does not figure in their thinking at all. The fact that they (presumably)
deem their beliefs somehow “justified” by some considerations or other that
they deem appropriate is going to cut no ice in our deliberations regarding the
198
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

cogency of those beliefs. (“Are they being “rational” by their lights?” is one thing
and “Are they being rational by our lights?” another.) When we ask about the
rational acceptability of those beliefs we mean rational for us in our circum-
stances and not rational for them in theirs—the issue to be considered from our
point of view, and not from somebody else’s!
The problems that arise at this juncture go back to the quarrel between 
E. E. Evans-Pritchard and Lucien Lévy-Bruhl. In his book on Primitive Men-
tality,8 Lévy-Bruhl maintained that primitive people have a “prelogical mental-
ity.” Against this view, Evans-Pritchard9 argued that primitive people were
perfectly “logical” all right, but simply used a logic different from ours. When,
for example, the Nuer maintain that swamp light is identical with spirit, but
deny that spirit is identical with swamp light, they are not being illogical, but
simply have in view a logic of “identity” variant from that in vogue in Western
cultures. But the obvious trouble with this sort of thing is that nothing apart
from bafflement and confusion can result from translating Nuer talk by into our
identity language if indeed it is the case that what is at issue in their thought
and discourse nowise answers to our identity conception. Instead of translating
the claim at issue as “Swamp light is identical with Spirit” and then going on to
explain that “is identical with” does not really mean what it says because the
ground rules that govern this idea are not applicable, an anthropologist would
do well to reformulate or paraphrase (if need be) the claim at issue in such a
way as to render intelligible what is actually going on. The fact that the Nuer
have different (and to us strange-seeming) beliefs about “spirits” no more
means that they have a logic different from ours than the fact that they com-
municate by drums mean that they have a telephone system different from
ours.10 To reemphasize: when we ask about logical acceptability it is logical
acceptability by our lights that is at issue.
Anthropologists do sometimes say that a certain society has a conception of
rationality that is different from ours. But that is literally nonsense. Those oth-
ers can no more have a conception of rationality that addresses an object different
form ours, than they can have a conception of iron that addresses an object differ-
ent from ours, or a conception of elephants that addresses objects different from
ours. If they are to conceive of those particular things at all, then their conception
must substantially accord with ours. In any discussion of ours, iron objects are by
definition what we take them to be; “elephant” is our word and elephant our con-
ception. If you are not talking about that, then you are not talking about ele-
phants at all. You have simply “changed the subject,” and exited from the domain
of the discussion. Similarly, if a conception of theirs (whatever it be) is not close
to what we call rationality, then it just is not a conception of rationality—it does
not address the topic that we are discussing when we put the theme of rational-
ity on the agenda. Rationality as we ourselves see it is a matter of striving intel-
ligently for appropriate resolutions—using relevant information and cogent
principles of reasoning in the resolution of one’s conjunctive and practical
Rationality
199

problems. If that is not what they are after, then it is not rationality that con-
cerns them. The issues at stake in our deliberations have to be the issues as we
construe them.
Of course, they may think that what we call pencils are chopsticks and use
them as such. Or they may think books to be doorstops and use them as such.
But that does not mean that they conceive of pencils or books differently from
us, or that they have a different conception of pencils and books. “They take
pencils to be something we do not (namely chopsticks),” is fine as a way of talk-
ing. But “They believe pencils to be chopsticks” is nonsense unless it is glossed
as: “They believe these sorts of things called ‘pencils’ to be chopsticks.” And
when this happens, then they do not conceive of pencils differently from our-
selves, they just do not conceive of pencils at all. They simply do not have the
(one and only) available conception of pencils—namely, ours. In such cases, if
they do not have our concept, then they just do not have the concept.
When social scientists say that alien cultures have a different “rationality”
from ourselves what they generally mean (strictly speaking) is (1) that they have
different objectives (e.g., that we seek to control and change our environment to
suit our purposes, while they tend to reconstitute their purposes to suit their
environment—to endeavor to come into “harmony” with nature), and/or (2)
that they use problem-solving techniques that are different from ours (e.g., that
we employ empirical investigation, evidence, and science, while they use div-
ination, omens, or oracles). But if they pursue different sorts of ends by differ-
ent sorts of means they, perhaps, have a different thought style and a different
intellectual ethos, but not a different rationality. The anthropologists’ talk of
different rationality is simply an overly dramatic (and also misleading) way of
making a valid point—namely, that they do their intellectual problem-solving
business in a way different from ours. But those different processes of theirs do
not mean that they have a different rationality any more than those blowguns
of their mean that they have a different rifle.
So, it is literally nonsense to say “The X’s have a different conception of ra-
tionality from the one we have.” For, if they do not have ours, they do not have
any. It is, after all, rationality as we conceive of it that is at issue in this discus-
sion of ours. Whatever analogue or functional equivalent there may be with
which they are working, it just is not something that we, in our language, can
call “a conception of rationality.”
There is no difficulty with the idea that “They implement and apply the con-
ception of rationality differently from ourselves.” After all, we implement and
apply the idea of a medication very differently from the ancient Greeks, using
medications they never dreamt of. But the matter stands differently with the con-
ception of a medication as such.This remains what it always has been:“a substance
used as a remedy for an ailment.” When one ceases to operate with what answers
to that conception, then (ex hypothesi) one is no longer dealing with medications
at all. The discussion has moved on to other topics. “Having a different concep-
200
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

tion” of pencils or elephants or rational actions simply means not having that con-
ception at all. If they do not have our conception of scissors, they do not have a
conception of scissors, full stop. For, when we ask about their dealings with scis-
sors it is our own conception that defines the terms of reference. If we recognize
agents as rational at all, then we ourselves can make good rational sense of what
they do! This is not because we are so talented and versatile, nor yet because the
slogan “rationality is universal” gets it quite right. It is just because we could not
and would not say that they are rational (could not and would not characterize
the phenomena in this particular way) if we could not make good rational sense
of what they do within the setting of their situation.
The pivotal fact lies in a “questioner’s prerogative.” Since the question
What is their mode of rationality? is ours, so is the “rationality” that is at stake
here. Thus, on the crucial issues—What is rationality all about?, What sorts of
considerations characterize the rationality at issue?, What is appropriately at
stake?—it is our own position that is determinative. When the questions are
ours, the concepts that figure in them are ours as well. At this stage of estab-
lishing the constitutive ground rules of appropriateness for rationality, it is our
own position that is decisive.
Gestalt switches are certainly possible, but they are just that: unpredictable
leaps. We do not reason our way into them by the use of existing standards—if
it were so it would be an implementation of the old standard that is at issue and
not, as per hypothesis, a Gestalt switch. They are only seen as rational ex post
facto, from the vantage point of the then prevailing “established” standard—that
is, the new one.
Consider the contention:
Surely there are no historically and culturally invariant principles of
rationality. People’s (altogether plausible) views about what is rational
change with changes in place and time.
The response here is: yes and no. Of course, different people in different places
and times conduct their “rational” affairs quite differently. But, at the level of ba-
sics, of first fundamentals, there is bound to be a uniformity. For, what all modes
of “rationality” have in common is precisely this—that they all qualify as “modes
of rationality” under our conception of the matter (which, after all, is what we’re
talking about). At this level of deliberation, “questioner’s prerogative” prevails,
and our own conception of the matter becomes determinative.
It is helpful to contemplate some analogies. There are many sorts of
blades for knives. But, the fundamental principle that knives have blades at all
does not depend on how people choose to make knives but on our conception of
what a “knife” is. If the given objects, whatever they might be, do not have
blades then they are not knives. It would, clearly, be the height of folly to go
about in another culture asking people “Must knives have blades?” The answer
Rationality
201

is a foregone conclusion. A negative response would not counterindicate the
thesis at issue, but would simply betoken a failure to comprehend.
Again, there are various quite different sorts of information that people
take as evidence to substantiate a claim. But “deeper” principles like “Give more
credence to that for which the evidence is stronger” or “In inquiry, endeavor to
expand and extend the evidence for your claims” do not depend on the eviden-
tial practices of people, but on our conception of what evidence is all about. If
people do not proceed in ways that conform to these evidential conceptions and
principles of ours, then their practices—whatever they might be—are not evi-
dential practices. And the same holds good for rationality as well.
After all, it is our conception of rationality that fixes the “rules of the game”
at issue when we pursue our deliberations about these matters. We have to play
the rationality game by our ground rules because it is exactly those ground rules
that define and determine what “the rationality game” is that is at issue on our
deliberations. If we were not playing the game on this basis, it would not be the
rationality game that we were engaged in—it would not be rationality that is
the subject of our concern. It is the determinative role of our own rationality
standards that makes them absolute for us.
Rationality is in this regard like communication. What communication is is
the same everywhere and for everyone—inherent in the nature of the concept
that is at issue. But, of course, it is only normal and natural that different people
in different places and times would transact their communicative business very
differently, since what is effective in one context may fail to be so in another.
Similarly, what rationality is is one thing (and one uniform thing from person to
person within the framework of a meaningful discussion of the topic); but what
is rational is something else again—something that is by no means uniform from
person to person but variable with situation and circumstance.
To be sure, what makes our own conceptions authoritatively determina-
tive in such matters is nothing special about us. Clearly, the Aristotelian cos-
mos is no longer with us—we are not the center of the world. But we certainly
and inevitably are at the center of our thought world. Our inquiries have to be
conducted within our frame of reference. We have to pose our questions in line
with our ideas, to frame our perplexities by means of our concepts, to consider
our issues in our terminology. If we ourselves are to classify someone as rational
at all (and who else’s attribution is now at issue?) then we must deem him
qualified under the aegis of rationality as we understand it. If we ask about
someone Is she tall?, we are clearly asking about her height as we conceive it.
What—if anything—she herself thinks about height is beside the point. And
exactly the same situation holds with respect to rationality. A condition 
of “questioner’s prerogative” prevails—it is the person who puts the issue on
the table who sets the frame of reference for determining what that issue
involves—it is, after all, his question. With all these questions about rational-
ity, it is of course “rationality” as we ourselves conceive of it that is operative.The
202
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

topic being ours, it is we who set the terms of reference for what is at issue. At
this point “epistemic relativism” comes to a stop.
Paradoxically, it is precisely the inevitable relativization of our questions and
concerns and puzzlements to our terms of reference that makes those particular
terms of reference absolute in our own discussions. Being framed in our termi-
nology, it is our terminology, that is decisive for the questions that we raise and
the inquiries that we conduct. If we ask if X is being rational in believing (or
doing or evaluating) a certain thing, then the issue is clearly one of its being ra-
tional on the basis of the conception of rationality as we understand it.The gov-
erning absoluteness of our conception inheres in “questioner’s prerogative”—in
the fact that the questions and issues we address in our deliberations about
rationality are in fact our own and that, since the questions are ours, it is our con-
ceptions that are determinative for what is at issue. In this regard, our commit-
ment to our own cognitive position is (or should be) unalloyed. We ourselves are
bound to see our own (rationally adopted) standards as superior to the available
alternatives—and are, presumably, rationally entitled to do so on the basis of the
cognitive values we ourselves endorse.
To qualify those of an alien culture as fully rational we must maintain both
that they are conducting their inquiries intelligently by their own rules and also
that in our sight these rules make good rational sense given their situation. It is
ultimately “intelligent comportment” and “making sense” according to our stan-
dards of appraisal that makes what is at issue rationally invariant. The fact that
we do (and must) apply our own idea of the matter is what makes for the uni-
versal element of rationality. What is universal about language use; namely, that
to accredit another culture as rational at all is to accept it as being “rational” in
our sense of the term—which may, to be sure, involve deciding whether their
actions measure up to their standards. The absoluteness of (ideal) rationality is
inherent in the very concept at issue.
THE SELF-RELIANCE OF RATIONALITY
IS NOT VICIOUSLY CIRCULAR
To be sure, there is bound to be a skeptic who comes along to press the follow-
ing objection: “Your proposed universalistic legitimation of objectivity pivots on
the appropriateness of rationality. But your legitimation of reason conforms to
the pattern: ‘You should be rational just because that is the rational thing to do!’
And this is clearly circular.” It might seem questionable to establish the juris-
diction of reason by appeal to the judgment of reason itself. But, in act, of
course, this circularity is not really vicious at all. Vicious circularity stultifies by
begging the question but virtuous circularity merely coordinates related ele-
ments in their mutual interlinkage. The former presupposes what is to be
proved, the latter simply shows how things are connected in a well-coordinated
Rationality
203

and mutually supportive interrelationship. The self-reliance of rationality
merely exemplifies this latter circumstance of an inherent coordination among
its universe components. It is not a matter of sequential validation but rather of
a legitimation process that is coordinative and coherentistic.
This practical line of argumentation may still seem to leave the situation in
an unsatisfactory state. It says (roughly): “You should be rational in resolving
your choices because it is rational to believe that the best available prospects of
optimality-attainment are effectively realized in this way.” To be sure, one
might deem it preferable if that italicized clause were wholly suppressed. A
skeptic is bound to press the following objection:
The proposed practicalistic legitimation of reason conforms to the
pattern: “You should be rational just because that is the rational thing
to do!” And this is clearly circular.
It might seem questionable to establish the jurisdiction of reason by appeal
to the judgment of reason itself. But, in fact, of course, this circularity is not re-
ally vicious at all. Vicious circularity stultifies by begging the question; virtuous
circularity merely coordinates related elements in their mutual interlinkage.
The former presupposes what is to be proved, the latter simply shows how
things are connected together in a well-coordinated and mutually supportive
interrelationship. The self-reliance of rationality merely exemplifies this latter
circumstance of an inherent coordination among its universe components.
Admittedly, the reasoning at issue has an appearance of vitiating circular-
ity because the force of the argument itself rests on an appeal to rationality. It
seems to say: “If you are going to be rational in your beliefs, then you must also
act rationally, because it is rational to believe that rational action is optimal in
point of goal attainment.” But this sort of question begging is simply unavoid-
able in the circumstances. It is exactly what we want and need. Where else
should we look for a rational validation of rationality but to reason itself? The
only reasons for being rational that it makes sense to ask for are rational rea-
sons. In this epistemic dispensation, we have no way of getting at the facts di-
rectly, without the epistemic detour of securing grounds and reasons for them.
And it is, of course, rationally cogent grounds and reasons that we want and
need. The overall justification of rationality must be reflexive and self-referen-
tial.To provide a rationale of rationality is to show that rationality stands in ap-
propriate alignment with the principles of rationality. From the angle of
justification, rationality is a cyclic process that closes in on itself, not a linear
process that ultimately rests on something outside itself.
There is accordingly no basis for any rational discontent, no room for any
dissatisfaction or complaint regarding a “circular” justification of rationality. We
would not (should not) want it otherwise. If we bother to want an answer to the
question Why be rational? at all, it is clearly a rational answer that we require.
204
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

The only sort of justification of anything—rationality included—that is worth
having at all is a rational one. That presupposition of rationality is not vitiating,
not viciously circular, but essential—an unavoidable consequence of the self-suf-
ficiency of cognitive reason. There is simply no satisfactory alternative to using
reason in its own defense. Already embarked on the sea of rationality, we want
such assurance as can now be made available that we have done the right thing.
And such reassurance can indeed be given—exactly along the lines just indi-
cated. Given the very nature of the justificatory enterprise at issue, one just can-
not avoid letting rationality sit in judgment on itself. (What is being asked for,
after all, is a rational argument for rational action, a basis for rational conviction,
and not persuasion by something probatively irrelevant like threats of force ma-
jeure.) One would expect, nay demand, that rationality be self-substantiating in
this way—that it must emerge as the best policy on its own telling.
From the justificatory point of view, rationality is and must be au-
tonomous. It can be subject to no external authority. Rationality in general is a
matter of systematization, and the justification of rationality is correspondingly
a matter of systemic self-sufficiency. Rather than indicating the defect of vi-
cious circularity, the self-referential character of a justification of rationality is a
precondition of its adequacy! It is only a rational legitimation of rationality that
we would want: any other sort would avail us nothing. And if such a rational
validation were not forthcoming this would indicate a grave defect.
And so, the predicament of reason gives no comfort to skepticism or irra-
tionalism, and yields no grounds for abandoning reason or, worse yet, for turn-
ing against it. Admittedly, this self-supportive legitimation of rationality is the
only cogent sort of validation that we are going to get. But in the final analysis it
is the only sort that it makes sense to ask for, seeing that rationality itself enjoins
us to view the best we can possibly get as good enough.11
A desperate objection yet remains: “So rationality speaks on its own behalf.
Well and good. But why should I care for rationality? Why should I set myself
to do the intelligent and appropriate thing?”
At this point there is little more to be said. If I want a reason at all, I must
want a rational reason. If I care about reasons at all, I am already within the
project of rationality. But once I am within the project, there is nothing further
external to reason that can or need be said to validate it. At that stage rational-
ity is already at hand to provide its own support—it wears its justification on its
sleeve. (The project of trying to reason with someone who stands outside the
range of rationality to convince them to come into its fold is clearly an exercise
in pointlessness and futility.)
One may of course quite appropriately ask questions like: Why should I
cultivate the truth; why should I cultivate my best (or true) interests? But in the
very act of posing these questions I am asking for reasons—that is, I am evinc-
ing my commitment to the project of rationality. Caring for the truth and for
one’s best interests are simply part and parcel of this commitment. If I do not
Rationality
205

care for these things, then there is really no point in raising these questions. For
in this event I have already taken my place outside the precincts of rationality,
beyond the reach of reason. And then. Of course, there is no reason why any
sensible person would want to follow me there.
Irrationality—wishful thinking and self-deception—may be convenient
and even, in some degree, psychologically comforting. But it is not cognitively
satisfactory. If it is a viable defense of a position that we want, it is bound to be
a rational one. The only validation of rationality that can reasonably be asked
for—and the only one worth having—must lie in considerations of the sys-
temic self-sufficiency of reason. In the final analysis, Why be rational? must be
answered with the only rationally appropriate response: Because rationality it-
self obliges us to be so. In providing a rational justification of objectivity—and
what other kind would we want?—the best we can do is to follow the essen-
tially circular (but nonviciously circular!) line of establishing that reason herself
endorses taking this course. The only validation of rationality’s recommenda-
tions that can reasonably be asked for—and the only one worth having—must
lie in considerations of the systemic self-sufficiency of reason. Reason’s self-rec-
ommendation is an important and necessary aspect of the legitimation of the ra-
tional enterprise. And in those matters where rationality counts, objectivity is
the best policy by virtue of this very fact itself.
Yet does reason’s self-reliance not open the door to skepticism? For skep-
tics have always insisted on just this point that we cannot prove in advance of
conceding reason’s cogency that we will not go wrong by trusting our reason.
And this—so we have granted—is quite correct. But, of course, what one can
do is to establish that if we reject reason we cut ourselves off from any (ra-
tionally warranted) expectation of success. There are no guarantees that our
ventures in trust are going to prove successful; whether our trust is actually
warranted in any given circumstances (trust in ourselves, in our cognitive fac-
ulties, in other people, and the like) is something we cannot in the nature of
things ascertain in advance of events. A conjunction of trust with hope and
faith is germane alike to the cognitive project, the practical project, and the
evaluative project. Throughout, we have to conduct our operations under
conditions of risk, without assured confidence in outcomes and without ad-
vance guarantees of success. In all these matters efficacy is a matter of trust-
ful hope and confidence in the best available option whose rationale is a
matter of this-or-nothing-better argumentation.12
206
Rational Inquiry and the Quest for Truth

Part III
Cognitive Progress

This page intentionally left blank.

209
Chapter 12
Scientific Progress
SYNOPSIS
•
The development of inquiry in natural science is best understood on the
analogy of exploration—to be sure, not in the geographical mode but rather
exploration in nature’s parametric space of such physical quantities as tem-
perature, pressure, and field strength.
•
The technology-mediated exploration that comes into play here involves
interactions between man and nature that become increasingly difficult
(and expensive) as we move ever farther away from the home base of the
accustomed environment of our evolutionary heritage.
•
The course of scientific progress accordingly involves a technological escala-
tion—an ascent to successively higher levels of technological sophistication
that is unavoidably required for the production of duly informative obser-
vational data.
•
Scientific inquiry seeks to develop a harmoniously systematized coordina-
tion of theorizing conjecture with the determinable data. However, this at-
tempt at data/theory equilibriation repeatedly sustains the destabilizing
shocks of ongoingly enlarged experience. Our technologically mediated entry
into new regions of parameter space confronts us with this task in ever-re-
newed forms.
•
In theory, the prospect of such ongoing “scientific revolutions” is potentially
unending. And there is certainly no warrant for a theory of convergence
that sees the innovations of theorizing science as being of constantly di-
minishing scope; with discoveries in natural science, later does not mean

lesser. However, the increasing cost of further progress is a portentous con-
sideration.
•
We may indeed stand at the center of our cognitive realm but we do not
stand at the center of the cognitive world.
•
For the advancement of cognitive progress means that we must see the sci-
ence of the future as being not just different but better.
THE EXPLORATION MODEL OF SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY
A theoretical prospect of unending scientific progress lies before us. But its prac-
tical realization is something else again. One of the most striking and important
facts about scientific research is that the ongoing resolution of significant new
questions faces increasingly high demands for the generation and cognitive ex-
ploitation of data. And in developing natural science, we humans began by ex-
ploring the world in our own locality, and not just our spatial neighborhood
but—more far-reachingly—our parametric neighborhood in the space of physi-
cal variable such as temperature, pressure, and electric charge. Near the “home
base” of the state of things in our accustomed natural environment, we can op-
erate with relative ease and freedom—thanks to the evolutionary attunement of
our sensory and cognitive apparatus—in scanning nature with the unassisted
senses for data regarding its modes of operation. But in due course we accom-
plish everything that can be managed by these straightforward means. To do
more, we have to extend our probes into nature more deeply, deploying increas-
ing technical sophistication to achieve more and more demanding levels of in-
teractive capability. We have to move ever further away from our evolutionary
home base in nature toward increasingly remote observational frontiers. From
the egocentric standpoint of our local region of parameter space, we journey ever
more distantly outward to explore nature’s various parametric dimensions in the
search for cognitively significant phenomena.
The appropriate picture is not, of course, one of geographical exploration but
rather of the physical exploration—and subsequent theoretical systematization—
of phenomena distributed over the parametric space of the physical quantities
spreading out all about us.This approach in terms of exploration provides a con-
ception of scientific research as a prospecting search for the new phenomena de-
manded by significant new scientific findings. As the range of telescopes, the
energy of particle accelerators, the effectiveness of low-temperature instrumenta-
tion, the potency of pressurization equipment, the power of vacuum-creating
contrivances, and the accuracy of measurement apparatus increases—that is, as
our capacity to move about in the parametric space of the physical world is en-
hanced—new phenomena come into view. After the major findings accessible via
the data of a given level of technological sophistication have been achieved, fur-
ther major findings become realizable only when one ascends to the next level of
sophistication in data-relevant technology. Thus the key to the great progress of
210
Cognitive Progress

contemporary physics lies in the enormous strides which an ever more sophisti-
cated scientific technology has made possible through enlarging the observational
and experimental basis of our theoretical knowledge of natural processes.1
In cultivating scientific inquiry, we scan nature for interesting phenomena
and grope about for the explanatorily useful regularities they may suggest. As a
fundamentally inductive process, scientific theorizing calls for devising the least
complex theory structure capable of accommodating the available data. At each
stage we try to embed the phenomena and their regularities within the simplest
(cognitively most efficient) explanatory structure able to answer our questions
about the world and to guide our interactions in it. But step by step as the process
advances, we are driven to further, ever greater demands that can be met only
with a yet more powerful technology of data exploration and management.
This idea of the exploration of parametric space provides a basic model for
understanding the mechanism of scientific innovation in mature natural sci-
ence. New technology increases the range of access within the parametric space
of physical processes. Such increased access brings new phenomena to light,
and the examination and theoretical accommodation of these phenomena is the
basis for growth in our scientific understanding of nature.
THE DEMAND FOR DATA ENHANCEMENT
Natural science is fundamentally empirical, and its advance is critically de-
pendent not on human ingenuity alone but on the monitoring observations to
which we can gain access only through interactions with nature. The days are
long past when useful scientific data can be had by unaided sensory observa-
tion of the ordinary course of nature. Artifice has become an indispensable
route to the acquisition and processing of scientifically useful data. The sorts
of data on which scientific discovery nowadays depends can be generated only
by technological means.
The pursuit of natural science as we know it embarks us on a literally end-
less endeavor to improve the range of effective experimental intervention, be-
cause only by operating under new and heretofore inaccessible conditions of
observational or experimental systemization—attaining extreme temperature,
pressure, particle velocity, field strength, and so on—can we realize situations
that enable us to put knowledge-expanding hypotheses and theories to the test.
The enormous power, sensitivity, and complexity deployed in present-day ex-
perimental science have not been sought for their own sake but rather because
the research frontier has moved on into an area where this sophistication is the
indispensable requisite of further progress. In science, as in war, the battles of
the present cannot be fought effectively with the armament of the past. As one
acute observer has rightly remarked: “Most critical experiment [in physics]
planned today, if they had to be constrained within the technology of even ten
years ago, would be seriously compromised.”2
Scientific Progress
211

With the enhancement of scientific technology, the size and complexity of
our body of data inevitably grows, expanding on quantity and diversifying in
kind.Technological progress constantly enlarges the window through which we
look upon nature’s parametric space. In cultivating and developing natural sci-
ence we continually enlarge our view of this space and then generalize on what
we see. But what we have here is not a homogeneous lunar landscape, where
once we have seen one sector we have seen it all, and where theory projections
from lesser data generally remain in place when further data comes our way.
Historical experience shows that there is every reason to expect that our ideas
about nature are subject to constant radical changes as we explore parametric
space more extensively. The technologically mediated entry into new regions of
parameter space constantly destabilizes the attained equilibrium between data
and theory. It is the engine that moves the frontier of progress in natural science.
TECHNOLOGICAL ESCALATION:
AN ARMS RACE AGAINST NATURE
This situation points toward the idea of a “technological level,” corresponding
to a certain state-of-the-art in the technology of inquiry in regard to data gen-
eration and processing. This technology of inquiry falls into relatively distinct
levels or stages in sophistication—correlatively with successively “later genera-
tions” of instrumentation and manipulative machinery. These levels are gener-
ally separated from one another by substantial (roughly, order-of-magnitude)
improvements in performance in regard to such information-providing param-
eters as measurement exactness, data-processing volume, detection sensitivity,
high voltages, high or low temperatures, and so on.
The perspective afforded by such a model of technologically mediated
prospecting indicates that progress in natural science has heretofore been rela-
tively easy because in this earlier explanation of our parametric neighborhood
we have been able—thanks to the evolutionary heritage of our sensory and
conceptual apparatus—to operate with relative ease and freedom in exploring
our own parametric neighborhood in the space of physical variables like tem-
perature, pressure, radiation, and so on. But scientific innovation becomes even
more difficult—and expensive as we push out further from our home base
toward the more remote frontiers.
No doubt, nature is in itself uniform as regards the distribution of its
diverse processes across the reaches of parameter space. It does not favor us by
clustering them in our accustomed parametric vicinity: significant phenomena
do not dry up outside our parochial neighborhood. But scientific innovation
becomes more and more difficult—and expensive—as we push our explo-
rations even further away from our evolutionary home base toward increasingly
remote frontiers.
212
Cognitive Progress

And phenomenological novelty is seemingly inexhaustible: we can never
be unalloyedly confident that we have got to the bottom of it. Nature always
has fresh reserves of phenomena at her disposal, hidden away in those ever
more remote regions of paramative space. Successive stages in the technologi-
cal state of the art of scientific inquiry accordingly lead us to ever-different
views about the nature of things and the character of their laws. Without an
ever-developing technology, scientific progress would soon grind to a halt.The
discoveries of today cannot be made with yesterday’s equipment and tech-
niques.To conduct new experiments, to secure new observations, and to detect
new phenomena, and ever more powerful investigative technology is needed.
Scientific progress depends crucially and unavoidably on our technical capabil-
ity to penetrate into the increasing distant—and increasingly difficult—reaches
of the spectrum of physical parameters in order to explore and to explain the
ever more remote phenomena encountered there.
The salient characteristic of this situation is that, once the major findings ac-
cessible at a given level of sophistication in data-technology level have been at-
tained, further major progress in any given problem area requires ascent to a
higher level on the technological scale. Every data-technology level is subject to
discovery saturation, but the exhaustion of prospects at a given level does not, of
course, bring progress to a stop. Once the potential of a given state-of-the-art
level has been exploited, not all our piety or wit can lure the technological fron-
tier back to yield further significant returns at this stage. Further substantive find-
ings become realizable only by ascending to the next level of sophistication in
data-relevant technology. But the exhaustion of the prospects for data extraction
at a given data-technology level does not, of course, bring progress to a stop.
Rather, the need for enhanced data forces one to look further and further from
man’s familiar “home base” in the parametric space of nature. Thus, while scien-
tific progress is in principle always possible—there being no absolute or intrinsic
limits to significant scientific discovery—the realization of this ongoing prospect
demands a continual improvement in the technological state-of-the-art of data
extraction of exploitation. And pioneering scientific research will always operate
at the technological frontier because nature inexorably exact a drastically increas-
ing effort with respect to the acquisition and processing of data for revealing her
“secrets.”This accounts for the need for ever recourse to more sophisticated tech-
nology for research in natural science.The increasing technological demands that
are requisite for scientific progress means that each step ahead gets more complex
and more expensive as those new parametric regions grow increasingly remote.
With the progress of science, nature becomes less and less yielding to the efforts
of further inquiry. We are faced with the need to push nature harder and harder
to achieve cognitively profitable interactions.The dialectic theory and experiment
carries natural science ever deeper into the range of greater costs.
We thus arrive at the phenomenon of technological escalation. The need for
new data forces us to look further and further from man’s familiar home base in
Scientific Progress
213

the parametric space of nature. Thus while scientific progress is in principle al-
ways possible—there being no absolute or intrinsic limits to significant scientific
discovery—the realization of this ongoing prospect demands a continual en-
hancement in the technological state of the art of data extraction or exploitation.
The perspective afforded by such a process of escalation indicates that
progress in natural science was at first relatively undemanding because we have
explored nature in our own parametric neighborhood.3 And seeing that the req-
uisite technology was relatively crude, economic demands were minimal at this
stage. But over time an ongoing escalation in the resource costs of significant
scientific discovery arose from the increasing technical difficulties of realizing
this objective, difficulties that are a fundamental—and an ineliminable—part of
an enterprise of empirical research, for we must here contrive ever more “far out”
interactions with nature, operating in a continually more difficult, accordingly,
sector of parametric space.
Given that we can only learn about nature by interacting with it, Newton’s
third law of countervailing action and reaction becomes a fundamental principle
of epistemology. Everything depends on just how and how hard we can push
against nature in situations of observational and detectional interaction. As Bacon
saw, nature will never tell us more than we can forcibly extract from her with the
means of interaction at our disposal. And what we can manage to extract by suc-
cessively deeper probes is bound to wear a steadily changing aspect, because we
operate in new circumstances where old conditions cannot be expected to prevail
and the old rules no longer apply.
Physicists often remark that the development of our understanding of na-
ture moves through successive layers of theoretical sophistication.4 But scientific
progress is clearly no less dependent on continual improvements in strictly tech-
nical sophistication:
Some of the most startling technological advances in our time are
closely associated with basic research. As compared with 25 years
ago, the highest vacuum readily achievable has improved more than a
thousand-fold; materials can be manufactured that are 100 times
purer; the submicroscopic world can be seen at 10 times higher mag-
nification; the detection of trace impurities is hundred of times more
sensitive; the identification of molecular species (as in various forms
of chromatography) is immeasurably advanced. These examples are
only a small sample. . . . Fundamental research in physics is crucially
dependent on advanced technology, and is becoming more so.5
Without an ever-developing technology, scientific progress would grind to a
halt. The discoveries of today cannot be advanced with yesterday’s instrumen-
tation and techniques.To secure new observations, to test new hypotheses, and
to detect new phenomena, an ever more powerful technology of inquiry is
214
Cognitive Progress

needed. Throughout the natural sciences, technological progress is a crucial
requisite for cognitive progress.
Frontier research is true pioneering: what counts is not just doing it but
doing it for the first time. Apart from the initial replication of claimed results
needed to establish the reproducibility of results, repetition in research is in gen-
eral pointless. As one acute observer has remarked, one can follow the diffusion
of scientific technology “from the research desk down to the schoolroom”:
The emanation electroscope was a device invented at the turn of the
century to measure the rate at which a gas such as thorium loses its ra-
dioactivity. For a number of years it seems to have been used only in the
research laboratory. It came into use in instructing graduate students in
the mid-1930’s, and in college courses by 1949. For the last few years a
cheap commercial model has existed and is beginning to be introduced
into high school courses. In a sense, this is a victory for good practice;
but it also summarizes the sad state of scientific education to note that
in the research laboratory itself the emanation electroscope has long
since been removed from the desk to the attic.6
In science, as in a technological arms race, one is simply never called on to
keep doing what was done before. And ever more challenging task is posed by
the constantly escalating demands of science for the enhanced data that can
only be obtained at the increasingly costly new levels of technological sophisti-
cation. One is always forced farther up the mountain, ascending to ever-higher
levels of technological performance—and of expense. As science endeavors to
extend its “mastery over nature,” it thereby comes to be involved in a technol-
ogy-intensive arms race against nature, with all of the practical and economic
implications characteristic of such process.
The enormous power, sensitivity, and complexity deployed in present-day
experimental science have not been sought for their own sake but rather be-
cause the research frontier has moved on into an area where this sophistication
is the indispensable requisite of ongoing progress. In science, as in war, the bat-
tles of the present cannot be fought effectively with the armaments of the past.
THEORIZING AS INDUCTIVE PROJECTION
Even though neither present nor future science manages to depict reality with
definitive finality, perhaps there is nevertheless a gradual convergence toward a
definitively true account of nature at the level of scientific theorizing?
Considerations of great principles indicate that this is very implausible.
Our exploration of physical parameter space is inevitably incomplete. We can
never exhaust the whole range of temperatures, pressures, particle velocities,
Scientific Progress
215

and so on. And so, we inevitably face the (very real) prospect that the regular-
ity structure of the as yet inaccessible cases will not conform to the (generally
simpler) patterns of regularity prevailing in the presently accessible cases. By
and large, future data do not accommodate themselves to present theories.
Newtonian calculations worked marvelously for predicting solar-system phe-
nomenology (eclipses, planetary conjunctions, and the rest) but this does not
show that classical physics has no need for fundamental revision.
Scientific theory-formation is, in general, a matter of spotting a local regu-
larity of phenomena in parametric space and then projecting it “across-the-
board,” maintaining it globally. The theoretical claims of science are themselves
never local—they are not spatiotemporally local and they are not parametrically
local either. They stipulate—quite ambitiously—how things are always and
everywhere. And it does not require a sophisticated knowledge of history of sci-
ence to realize that our worst fears are usually realized—that it is seldom if ever
the case that our theories survive intact in the wake of substantial extensions in
our access to sectors of parametric space. The history of science is a history of
episodes of leaping to the wrong conclusions. For (sensibly enough) the inductive
method of science as a rational process of inquiry constructs the simplest, most
economical cognitive structures to house these data comfortably. It calls for
searching out the simplest pattern of regularity that can adequately accommodate
our data regarding the issues at hand, and then projects them across the entire
spectrum of possibilities in order to answer our general questions. Accordingly,
scientific theorizing, as a fundamentally inductive process, involves the search for,
or the construction of, the least complex theory-structure capable of accommo-
dating the available body of data—proceeding under the aegis of established
principles of inductive systematization: uniformity, simplicity, harmony, and such
principles that implement the general idea of cognitive economy.
Simplicity and generality are the cornerstones of inductive systematiza-
tion. And one very important point must be stressed in this connection. Scien-
tific induction’s basic idea of a coordinative systematization of question-resolving
conjecture with the data of experience may sound like a very conservative process.
But this impression would be quite incorrect.The drive to systematization em-
bodies an imperative to broaden the range of our experience—to extend and to
expand insofar as possible the database from which our theoretical triangula-
tions proceed. In the design of cognitive systems, implicity/harmony and com-
prehensiveness/inclusiveness are two components of one whole. And the
impetus to ever ampler comprehensiveness indicates why the ever-widening
exploration of nature’s parameter space is an indispensable part of the process.
Progress in natural science is a matter of dialogue or debate between theo-
reticians and experimentalists. The experimentalists probe nature to see its re-
actions, to seek out phenomena. And the theoreticians take the resultant data
and weave a theoretical fabric about them. Seeking to devise a framework of ra-
tional understanding, they construct their explanatory models to accommodate
the findings that the experimentalists put at their disposal. But once the theo-
216
Cognitive Progress

reticians have had their say, the ball returns to the experimentalists’ court. Em-
ploying new, more powerful means for probing nature, they bring new phe-
nomena to view, new data for accommodation. Precisely because these data are
new and inherently unpredictable, they often fail to fit the old theories. The-
ory extrapolations from the old data could not encompass them; the old theo-
ries do not accommodate them. And so a disequilibrium arises between existing
theory and new data. And at this stage, the ball reenters the theoreticians’ court.
New theories must be devised to accommodate the new, nonconforming data.
And so the theoreticians set about weaving a new theoretical structure to ac-
commodate the new data. They endeavor to restore the equilibrium between
theory and data once more. And when they succeed the ball returns to the
experimentalists’ court, and the whole process starts over again.
As this analogy indicated, physical nature can exhibit a very different as-
pect when viewed from the vantage point of different levels of sophistication in
the technology of nature-investigator interaction. And thus possibility is in fact
realized. As ample experience indicates, every new stage of investigative so-
phistication brings to the fore a different order or aspect of things. What we
find in investigating nature always in some degree reflects the character of our
technology of observation. What we can detect, or find, in nature is always
something that depends on the mechanisms by which we search. And more
sophisticated searches invariably engender changes of mind.
LATER NEED NOT BE LESSER
An insidiously alluring argument arises at this point. It contends that limited
access to new phenomena does not matter for scientific progress because these
further data would in any case yield only minor corrections located more deci-
mal places out. The view that underlies such a position is that further changes
are smaller changes: that a juncture has been reached where the additional ad-
vances of science so no more than provide further minor details and readjust-
ments in a basically completed picture of how nature functions: that what we
do not yet know does not matter all that much.
One particularly interesting and well-developed statement of this point of
view is that of the biologist Gunther S. Stent, The Coming of the Golden Age: A
View of the End of Progress:
I want to consider what I believe to be intrinsic limits to the science,
limits to the accumulation of meaningful statements about the events
of the outer world. I think everyone will readily agree that there are
some scientific disciplines which, by reason of the phenomena to
which they purport to address themselves, are bounded. Geography,
for instance, is bounded because its goal of describing the features of
the Earth is clearly limited. . . . And, as I hope to have shown in the
Scientific Progress
217

preceding chapters, genetics is not only bounded, but its goal of un-
derstanding the mechanism of transmission of hereditary informa-
tion has, in fact, been all but reached. . . . [To be sure] the domain of
investigation of a bounded scientific discipline may well present a
vast and practically inexhaustible number of events for study. But the
discipline is bounded all the same because its goal is in view. . . .
There is at least one scientific discipline, however, which appears to be
openended, namely physics, or the science of matter. . . . But even to en-
counter limitations in practice . . . [for] there are purely physical lim-
its to physics because of man’s own boundaries of time and energy.
These limits render forever impossible research projects that involve
observing events in regions of the universe more than ten of fifteen
billion light-years distant, traveling very far beyond the domain of our
solar system, or generating particles with kinetic energies approaching
those of highly energetic cosmic rays.7
On such a view, natural science is approaching the end of its tether
Along these lines we also have the precedent of Charles Sanders Peirce’s
idea of convergent approximation.8 This calls for envisaging a situation where,
with the passage of time, the results we reach grow increasingly concordant. In
the face of such a course of successive changes of ever-diminishing significance,
we could proceed to maintain that the world may not really be present science
claims it to be, but rather is as the ever more clearly emerging science-in-the-
limit claims it to be. The reality of ongoing changes is now unimportant be-
cause with the passage of time those changes matter less and less. We
increasingly approximate an essentially stable picture.
This prospect is certainly a theoretically possible one. But neither histori-
cal experience not considerations of general principle provide reason to think
that it is a real possibility. Rather, one does well here to adopt the view that
Stanley Jevons articulated more than a century ago:
In the writings of some recent philosophers, especially of Auguste
Comte, and in some degree John Stuart Mill, there is erroneous and
hurtful tendency to represent our knowledge as assuming an approxi-
mately complete character. At least these and many other writers fail
to impress upon their readers a truth which cannot be too constantly
borne in mind, namely, that the utmost successes which our scientific
method can accomplish will not enable us to comprehend more than
an infinitesimal fraction of what doubtless is to comprehend.9
Nothing has happened in the interim to lead one to dissent from these strictures.
We cannot realistically expect that our science, at any given stage of its actual de-
velopment, will ever be in a position to afford us more than a very partial and in-
218
Cognitive Progress

complete access to the phenomena of nature. For, to reemphasize: in natural sci-
ence, imperfect physical control is bound to mean imperfect cognitive control.
To evaluate this prospect, it is useful to return to the previously described
“exploration model” of scientific progress as a matter of exploring our paramet-
ric neighborhood of physical variables like temperature, pressure, field strength,
and so on. We must acknowledge here that it would be bizarre indeed if signif-
icant phenomena were to dry up as we move beyond our immediate parametric
“neighborhood.” Clearly nature distributes its various processes across all the
reaches of parameter space, and does not favor us by clustering them in our
parametric vicinity. Indeed all historical experience counterindicates this.
Any theory of convergence in science, however carefully crafted, will shat-
ter under the impact of the conceptual innovation that becomes necessary to deal
with the new phenomena encountered the wake of technical escalation. Such
innovation continually brings entirely new, radically different scientific con-
cepts to the fore, carrying in its wake an ongoing wholesale revision of “estab-
lished fact.” Investigators of the physical phenomena of an earlier era an earlier
era not only did not know what the half-line of californium was, but they would
not have understood it even if this fact had been explained to them. This aspect
of the matter deserves closer attention.
“Which of the four elements (air, earth, fire, water) is the paramount
‘arche,’ the fundamental type of stuff from which the whole of physical real-
ity originates?” asked the early Milesians in pre-Socratic Greece. They con-
templated just those four alternatives—together with the fifth possibility of a
neutral, intermediate stuff. It did not occur to them that their whole inquiry
was abortive because it was based on a misguided conception of “elements.”
Nor did it appear to be a realistic prospect to all those late nineteenth-century
physicists who investigated the properties of the luminiferous aether that no
such medium for the transmission of light and electromagnetism might exist
at all.
In factual inquiry into the ways of the world we can do no better than to
pose questions and canvass the currently visible alternatives. But the questions
we can pose are limited by our conceptual horizons. And the answers we can
envision are also limited by the cognitive “state-of-the-art.” (The Greeks could
not have asked about continental drift; the Romans could not have thought of
explaining the tides through gravitation.) And, of course, the whole process of
canvassing answers can come to grief because the very question being asked is
based on untenable suppositions.
The problem with a convergentist theory of scientific progress is that with
convergence later means lesser. And in the case of science, there is no reason to
think that this will be so. Ongoing scientific progress is not simply a matter of
increasing accuracy by extending the numbers at issue in our otherwise stable
descriptions of nature out to a few more decimal places. Significant scientific
progress is genuinely revolutionary in involving a fundamental change of mind
Scientific Progress
219

about how things happen in the world. Progress of this caliber is generally a
matter not of adding further facts—on the order of filling in a crossword puzzle.
It is, rather, a matter of changing the very framework itself. And this fact blocks
the theory of convergence.
Even extraordinary accuracy with respect to the entire range of currently
manageable cases does not betoken actual correctness—it merely reflects ade-
quacy over that limited range. And no matter how far we broaden that “limited
range of ‘presently accessible’ cases,” we still achieve no assurance (or even
probability) that a theory-corpus which accommodates (perfectly well) the
range of “presently achievable outcomes” will hold across-the-board. The up-
shot is that both as regards the observable regularities of nature and the dis-
cernable constituents of nature, very different results that project very different
views of the situation can—and almost invariably do—emerge at successive
levels of the observational state-of-the-art. Almost invariably we deal at every
stage with a different order or aspect of things. And the reason why nature ex-
hibits different aspects at different levels is not that nature herself is somehow
stratified and has different levels of being or of operation but rather that (1) the
character of the available nature-investigative interactions is variable and differs
from level to level, and (2) the character of the “findings” at which one arrives
will hinge on the character of these nature-investigative interactions. For—to
reemphasize—what we detect or “find” in nature is always something that de-
pends on the mechanisms by which we search. The phenomena we detect will
depend not merely on nature’s operations alone, but on the physical and con-
ceptional instruments we use in probing them.
With any convergent process, later is lesser. But since scientific progress on
matter of fundamental importance is generally a matter of replacement rather
than mere supplementation, there is no good reason for seeing the later findings
of science as lesser the significance of their bearing within the cognitive enter-
prise—to think that nature will be cooperative in always yielding its most im-
portant secrets early on and reserving nothing but the relatively insignificant
for later on. (Nor does it seem plausible to think of nature as perverse, luring us
ever more deeply into deception as inquiry proceeds.) A very small scale effect
at the level of phenomena—even one that lies very far out along the extremes
of a “range exploration” in terms of temperature, pressure, velocity, or the like—
can force a far-reaching revolution and have a profound impact by way of major
theoretical revisions. (Think of special relativity in relation to aether-drift
experimentation, or general relativity in relation the perihelion of Mercury.)
Given that natural science progresses mainly by substitutions and replace-
ments that involve comprehensive overall revisions of our picture of the
processes at issue, it seems sensible to say that the shifts across successive sci-
entific “revolutions” maintain the same level of overall significance when taken
as a whole. At the cognitive level, a scientific innovation is simply a matter of
change. Scientific progress is neither a convergent nor a divergent process.10
Successive stages in the technological state-of-the-art of scientific inquiry lead
220
Cognitive Progress

us to different views about the nature of things and the character of their laws.
And at each level of technical sophistication we get a substantially different
overall story—with difference let by no means shrink to a vanishing point as
the process moves along. Later is not lesser; it is just different. Theoretical
progress in science is essentially a matter of substantiation. (As in politics, one
cannot replace something with nothing.)
On this basis, one arrives at a view of scientific progress as confronting us
with a situation in which every major successive stage in the evolution of sci-
ence yields innovations, and these innovations are—on the whole—of roughly
equal overall interest and importance. Accordingly, there is little alternative but
to reject convergentism as a position that lacks the support not only of consid-
erations of general principles but also of the actual realities of our experience in
the history of science.
And this situation is critically important in our present context. For if later
were indeed lesser, the ongoing cost escalation of scientific progress would not
be so deeply problematic a factor. We would then simply forget about those
very costly further purchases once a point is reached where their actual value
becomes trivial. But this is most emphatically not the case in natural science
where economic limitations confront us with a real and serious obstacle.11
COGNITIVE COPERNICANISM
The fallibility and corrigibility of our science means it cannot be viewed as pro-
viding definitive (let alone absolutely true) answers to its questions. We have no
alternative but to see our science as both incomplete and incorrect in some (oth-
erwise unidentifiable) respects. In this sense—that of its inability to deliver into
our hands something that can be certified as the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth science is certainly subject to a severe limitation. What we
proudly vaunt as “scientific knowledge is a tissue of hypotheses—of tentatively
adopted contentions, many or most of which we will ultimately come to regard
as quite untenable and in need of serious revision or perhaps even rejection.
If there is one thing we can learn from the history of science, it is that the
scientific theorizing of one day is looked on by that of the next as flawed and de-
ficient. The clearest induction from the history of science is that science is al-
ways mistaken—that at every stage of its development, its practitioners, looking
backward with the wisdom of hindsight, will view the work of their predecessors
as seriously deficient and their theories as fundamentally mistaken. And if we
adopt (as in candor we must) the modest view that we ourselves and our con-
temporaries do not occupy a privileged position in this respect, then we have no
reasonable alternative but to suppose that much or all of what we ourselves vaunt
as “scientific knowledge” is itself presumably wrong.12
No human generation can lay claim to scientific finality. We must ac-
knowledge that the transience that has characterized all scientific theories of
Scientific Progress
221

the historical past will possibly, even probably, characterize those of the pres-
ent as well. Given the historical realities, the idea that science does—or sooner
or later must—arrive at a changeless vision of “the truth of the matter” is not
plausible. We have no alternative but to reject the egocentric claim that we
ourselves occupy a pivotal position in the epistemic dispensation, and we must
recognize that there is nothing inherently sacrosanct about our own present
cognitive posture vis-à-vis that of other, later historical junctures. A kind of
intellectual humility is in order—a diffidence that abstains from the hubris of
pretentions to cognitive finality or centrality. Such a position calls for the
humbling view that just as we think our predecessors of a hundred years ago
had a fundamentally inadequate grasp on the furniture of the world, so our
successors of a hundred years hence will take the same view of our purported
knowledge of things. Realism requires us to recognize that, as concerns our
scientific understanding of the world, some of what we see as secure knowledge
is likely to prove to be no more than presently accepted error.
We must stand ready to acknowledge the fragility of our scientific knowl-
edge and must temper our claims to scientific knowledge with a Cognitive
Copernicanism. The original Copernican revolution made the point that there
is nothing ontologically privileged about our own position in space. The doc-
trine now at issue effectively holds that there is nothing cognitively privileged
about our own position in time. It urges that there is nothing epistemically privi-
leged about the present—any present, our own prominently included. Such a per-
spective indicates not only the incompleteness of “our knowledge” but its
presumptive incorrectness as well. The current state of “knowledge” is simply
one state among others, all of which stand on an imperfect footing.
To be sure, this recognition of the fallibilism of our cognitive endeavors
must emphatically not be construed as an open invitation to a skeptical aban-
donment of the cognitive enterprise. Instead, it is an incentive to do the very
best we can. In human inquiry, the cognitive ideal is correlative with the striv-
ing for optimal systematization. And this is an ideal that, like other ideals, is
worthy of pursuit, despite the fact that we must recognize that its full attain-
ment lies beyond our grasp.
The crucial consideration thus remains that science is not and presumably
never can be in a position to offer us anything that is definitive, incorrigible,
and final. Our science is and must be developed within the confines of man’s
cognitive fallibility. He who looks to science for answers that are ultimate and
absolute is destined to look in vain. We must recognize that “our science” is not
something permanent, secured for the ages, unchangeable. Our theorizing
about the nature of the real is a fallible estimation, the best that can be done at
this time, in this particular “state-of-the-art.” Our science is an historical phe-
nomenon: it is one transitory state of things in an ongoing process.
This limitation cannot, of course, be justifiedly construed as a defect of sci-
ence. It is an inevitable feature of whatever can be produced by imperfect tri-
222
Cognitive Progress

angulation from limited experience, and we must not complain of what cannot
be helped. It is not a shortcoming of science as compared with other methods
of inquiry, because other methods cannot overcome it either. (If they could, so
could science.) But it is a limitation—an inherent limitation of the enterprise as
we humans do and must conduct it.The aim or goal of science is to provide an-
swers; but answers of certified correctness, definitive and final answers, are sim-
ply not available. The complete realization of the aims of science is something
that will ever remain in the realm of aspiration and not that of achievement.
THE PROBLEM OF PROGRESS
The idea of scientific progress as the correlate of a movement through sequen-
tial stages of technological sophistication was already clearly discerned by the
astute Charles Sanders Peirce around the turn of the century:
Lamarckian evolution might, for example, take the form of perpetu-
ally modifying our opinion in the effort gradually to make that opin-
ion represent the known facts as more and more observations come to
be collected. . . . But this is not the way in which science mainly pro-
gresses. It advances by leaps; and the impulse for each leap is either
some new observational resource, or some novel way of reasoning
about the observations. Such a novel way of reasoning might, perhaps,
also be considered as a new observational means, since it draws atten-
tion to relations between facts which would previously have been
passed by unperceived.13
This circumstance has far-reaching implications for the perfectibility of
science. The impetus to augment our science demands an unremitting and un-
ending effort to enlarge the domain of effective experimental intervention. For
only by operating under new and heretofore inaccessible conditions of observa-
tional or experimental systematization—attaining ever more extreme temper-
ature, pressure, particle velocity, field strength, and so on—can we bring new
grist to our scientific mill.
To be sure, there is, on its basis, no inherent limit to the possibility of future
progress in scientific knowledge. But the exploitation of this theoretical prospect
gets ever more difficult, expensive, and demanding in terms of effort and inge-
nuity. With scientific progress we are engaged in a situation of price-inflation
where further equal-size steps become more difficult with every step we take.
New findings of equal level of significance require ever-greater aggregate efforts.
In the ongoing course of scientific progress, the earlier investigations in the var-
ious departments of inquiry are able to skim the cream, so to speak: they take the
“easy pickings,” and later achievements of comparable significance require ever
Scientific Progress
223

deeper forays into complexity and call for an ever-increasing bodies of informa-
tion. (And it is important to realize that this cost-increase is not because latter-
day workers are doing better science, but simply because it is harder to achieve
the same level of science: one must dig more deeply or search more widely to
achieve results of the same significance as before.)
The historical course of natural science is a sequence of radical changes of
mind—even about fundamentals. How, then, can science be said to progress?
How can we speak of an advance rather than a fortuitous ebb and flow? If sci-
ence neither provides nor approaches “the ultimate truth” about nature, how
can we say that it has the directionality that is essential to progress, in con-
tradistinction to mere movement?
Historians and analysts of science are often heard to complain about the
absence of any clear sense of the direction of development in the structure of
modern scientific work. As one recent writer puts it:
The blackest defect in the history of science, the cause of dullest
despair for the historian, lies in the virtual absence of any general
historical sense of the way science has been working for the last hun-
dred years.14
But any such lack of direction at once disappears when we turn from the con-
tent of scientific discovery to its tools and their mode of employment—in
short, when we turn to the technological side of the matter. For all of recent sci-
ence has a clear thrust of development—using ever more potent instruments to
press ever further outward in the exploration of physical parameter-space, forg-
ing more and more powerful physical and conceptual instrumentalities for the
identification and analysis of new phenomena.
Under the influence of Thomas Kuhn’s book on scientific revolutions15
some recent writers on the philosophy of science tend to stress the ideational
discontinuities produced by innovation in the history of science. Scientific
change, they rightly maintain, is not just a matter of marginal revisions of opin-
ion within a fixed and stable framework of concepts.The crucial developments
involve a change in the conceptual apparatus itself. When this happens, there is
a replacement of the very content of discussion, a shift in “what’s being talked
about” that renders successive positions “incommensurable.” The change from
the Newtonian to the Einsteinian concept of time exemplifies a shift of just this
sort. These discontinuities of meaning make it impossible (so it is said) to say
justifiedly that the latter stages somehow represent a “better treatment of the
same subject matter,” since the very subject has changed.16 The radical discon-
tinuity of meanings also complicates the idea of scientific progress. For if the
later stage of discussion is conceptually disjointed from the earlier, how could
one consider the later as an improvement on the earlier. The replacement of
224
Cognitive Progress

one thing by something else of a totally different sort can hardly qualify as me-
liorative. (One can improve on one’s car by getting a better car, but one cannot
improve on it by getting a computer or a dishwashing machine.)
To draw this sort of implication from the meaning-shift thesis is, however,
to be overhasty. For real progress is indeed made, through this progress does not
proceed along purely theoretical but along practical lines. Once one sees the val-
idation of science as lying ultimately in the sphere of its applications, one also
sees that the progress of science must be taken to rest on its pragmatic im-
provement: the increasing success of its applications in problem solving and
control, in predictive and physical mastery over nature.17 And the control that
lies at the root of progress in science is not something arcane, sophisticated, and
heavily theory-laden. It turns on the fact that any enhancement in control—any
growth of our technological mastery over nature—will have involvements that
are also discernible at the grosso modo level of our everyday life conceptions and
dealings. How our control is extended will generally be a very sophisticated
matter, but any fool can see that our control has been extended in innumerable
ways. Since the days of Bacon and Hobbes, it has been recognized that the con-
ception of the application of science to human ends (scientia propter potentiam)
provides a perfectly workable basis for taking the expanding horizons of tech-
nological capacity as an index of scientific progress.18
This technological dimension endows scientific change with a continuity
it lacks at the level of its ideas and concepts—a continuity that finds its expres-
sion in the persistence of problem-solving tasks in the sphere of praxis. Despite
any semantic or ideational incommensurability between a scientific theory and its
latter-day replacements, there remains the factor of the pragmatic commensura-
bility that can (by and large) be formulated in suitable extrascientific language.19
In maintaining that the successive theses of science represent not just
change but progress, one does indeed stand committed to the view that in some
fashion or other something that is strictly comparable is being improved on.
But the items at issue need not be the theory-laden substance of scientific
claims; they can revolve about the practical concerns of our commonplace af-
fairs.The comparisons need not be made at the level of scientific theorizing but
at the rudimentary level of the commonsense affairs facilitated by their techno-
logical implementation.
Issues of technological superiority are far less sophisticated, but also far more
manageable, than issues of theoretical superiority. Dominance in the technologi-
cal power to produce intended results tends to operate across the board. For the
factors determinative of technical superiority in prediction and control operate
at a grosser and more rough-and-ready level than those of theoretical content.
At the level of praxis, we can operate to a relatively large degree with the lingua
franca of everyday affairs and make our comparisons on this basis. Just as the
merest novice can detect a false note in the musical performance of a master
Scientific Progress
225

player whose activities he could not begin to emulate, so the malfunctioning of
a missile or computer can be detected by a relative amateur. The superiority of
modern over Galenic medicine requires few, if any, subtle distinctions.
Traditional theories of scientific progress join in stressing the capacity of
the “improved” theories to accommodate new facts. Agreeing with this empha-
sis on “new facts,” we must, however, recognize two distinct routes to this des-
tination: the predictive (via theory) and the productive (via technology). And it
would appear proper to allow both of these routes to count. To correct the
overly theoretical bias of traditional philosophy of science requires a more ample
recognition of the role of technology-cum-production. To say this is not, of
course, to deny that theory and technology stand in a symbiotic and mutually
supportive relationship in scientific inquiry. But the crucial fact is that the ef-
fectiveness of the technological instrumentalities of praxis can clearly be as-
sessed without appeal to the cognitive content of the theory brought to bear in
their devising.
At bottom, the progress of science manifests itself most clearly in practical
rather than theoretical regards. The progressiveness of science hinges crucially
on its applications; it resides in the pragmatic dimension of the enterprise—the
increasing success of its applications in problem solving and control, in its af-
fording not only cognitive but physical mastery over nature. A new theory need
not explain the purported facts of the old one it replaces, because these “facts”
need not remain facts: the new theory may revise or dismiss them. (The phe-
nomenon of “emission of phlogiston” disappears with the arrival of Lavoisier’s
oxydation.) But the practical successes of the old theory in enabling us to predict
occurrences or to achieve control at the unrefined level of developments de-
scribable in the language of everyday life is something relatively unproblematic,
and thus relatively secure.
From where we stand in the epistemic dispensation, there is no way of at-
taining a higher vantage point—no God’s-eye view for comparison. What we
do fortunately have as common basis across the divides of scientific change is
not a higher but rather a lower standpoint: the crude vantage point of ordinary
everyday life. No sophisticated complexities are needed to say that one stage in
the career of science is superior to another in launching rockets and curing
colds and exploding bombs. These applications operate extensively at the level
of the ordinary, everyday concepts of natural-language discourse. This level is
relatively stable and unchanging precisely because of the crudity of its concerns;
its concepts remain relatively fixed throughout the ages, and lie deep beneath
the changing surface of scientific sophistication.
Its technological and applicative dimension endows science with a theory-
era-transcending comparability that it lacks at the level of its ideas and con-
cepts,The ancient Greek physician and the modern medical practitioner might
talk of the problems of their patients in very different and conceptually incom-
mensurate ways (say, an imbalance in humors to be treated by countervailing
226
Cognitive Progress

changes in diet or regimen versus a bacterial infection to be treated by admin-
istering an antibiotic). But at the pragmatic level of practical control—that is,
at the level of removing those symptoms of their patients (pain, fever, dizziness,
etc.) that are describable in much the same terms in antiquity as today—both
are working on “the same problem.”
A later scientific theory certainly need not preserve the content of the
earlier ones; its descriptive and taxonomic innovations can make for semanti-
cal discontinuity. Nor, again, need it preserve the theoretical successes of the
earlier theories—their explanatory successes at elaborating interrelations
among their own elements (for example, answering questions about the oper-
ations of the luminiferous aether). But a later and progressively superior the-
ory must preserve and improve on the practical successes of its predecessors
when these practical issues are formulated in the rough-and-ready terms of
everyday-life discourse.
And so, notwithstanding its instability and change ability at the level of
theoretical claims, science does indeed progress not, to be sure, by way of “ap-
proaching the ultimate truth” but by providing us with increasingly powerful in-
strumentalities for prediction and control. Once due prominence is given to the
factor of control over nature in the pre- or subtheoretical construction of this idea,
the substantiation of imputations of scientific progress becomes a more manage-
able project than it could ever be on an “internal,” content-oriented basis.
Given “the facts of life” that characterize the situation in empirical inquiry,
we have neither the inclination nor the justification to claim that the world actu-
ally is just as our present science describes it to be. Nor, as we have seen, does it
make sense to identify “the real truth” with “the truth as science-in-the-limit will
eventually see it to be.” All that can be done in this direction is to say that the
world exists as ideal or perfected science describes it to be. The real, which is to
say, final and definitive truth about nature at the level of scientific generality and
precision is something we certainly cannot assume to be captured by our science
as it stands here and now (thought, of course, this fact nowise destroys the ra-
tionality of our endorsement of current beliefs). We cannot but take the stance
that scientific truth is not something in hand, but something which—so we must
suppose—is attained only in the ideal or perfected state of things. With respect
to scientific issues we thus arrive at the coordinating equation:
the real truth  the truth as ideal (perfected) science purports it to be.
To be sure, in espousing this conception, we intend to make “ideal science”
contingent on truth, rather than the reverse: the former is the independent,
the latter the dependent variable.
But what of the objection that we could not tell that we had arrived at “the
definitive truth” even if we in fact had done so? Its resolution lies in the fact
that the attainment of such an objective is simply not at issue. Yet while one can
Scientific Progress
227

never lay claim to have definitely secured “the definitive truth” in matters of sci-
entific theorizing, this notion nevertheless serves an important role in provid-
ing a contrast-conception that constitutes a useful reminder of the fragility of
our cognitive endeavors. It establishes a contrast between our present science as
we have it and a perfected “ideal science,” which alone can properly be claimed
to afford a grasp of reality, an idea that crucially regulates our view as to the na-
ture and status of the knowledge we lay claim to and thereby productively fos-
ters the conduct of inquiry.20
228
Cognitive Progress

229
Chapter 13
The Law of Logarithmic Returns 
and the Complexification of 
Natural Science
SYNOPSIS
•
Scientific progress depends crucially on securing ever enhanced information.
•
And this means that natural science itself grows ever more complex, not
withstanding its penchant for simplicity.
•
And not only does scientific progress involve ever greater complexity, it
involves ever greater costs as well.
•
Scientific knowledge does not correlate to the brute volume of scientific
information, but only to its logarithm.
•
The rationale of this circumstance roots in the way in which significant
information always lies obscured amidst a fog of insignificance. What we
thus have in science is a Law of Logarithmic Returns.
•
In consequence, the progress of knowledge involves ever escalating demands,
a circumstance bears in a fundamental and ominous way on the issue of the
growth of scientific knowledge over time.
•
In consequence, progress in botanical science is a decelerating process.
•
And so there is indeed a prospect of making some economically based predictions
about the volume of future scientific innovation,despite our inability to foresee
its content.
•
To be sure,the law of logarithmic returns pivots in a critical way on assessing
the quality of the work at issue.But of course anything deserving of the name
of scientific knowledge will be information of the highest quality level.

THE PRINCIPLE OF LEAST EFFORT AND THE
METHODOLOGICAL STATUS OF
SIMPLICITY-PREFERENCE IN SCIENCE
An eminent philosopher of science has maintained that “in cases of inductive
simplicity it is not economy which determines our choice. . . . We make the as-
sumption that the simplest theory furnishes the best predictions.This assump-
tion cannot be justified by convenience; it has a truth character and demands a
justification within the theory of probability and induction.”1 This perspective
is gravely misleading. What sort of consideration could possibly justify the sup-
position that “the simplest theory furnishes the best prediction”? Any such be-
lief is surely unwarranted and inappropriate. There is simply no cogent
rationale for firm confidence in the simplicity of nature. To claim the ontolog-
ical simplicity of the real is somewhere between hyperbolic and absurd.
The matter becomes far less problematic, however, once one approaches it
from a methodological rather than a substantive point of view. For considera-
tions of rational economy and convenience of operation obviously militate for
inductive systematicity. Seeing that the simplest answer is (eo ipso) the most
economical one to work with, rationality creates A natural pressure toward
economy—toward simplicity insofar as other things are equal. Our eminent
theorist has things upside down here: it is in fact methodology that is at issue
rather than among any factual presumption.
A century ago, Henri Poincaré saw the issue in a more plausible light:
[Even] those who do not believe that natural laws must be simple, are
still often obliged to act as if they did believe it. They cannot entirely
dispense with this necessity without making all generalization, and
therefore all science, impossible. It is clear that any fact can be gener-
alised in an infinite number of ways, and it is a question of choice. The
choice can only be guided by considerations of simplicity. . . .To sum up,
in most cases every law is held to be simple until the contrary is proved.2
These observations are wholly in the right spirit. As cognitive possibilities pro-
liferate in the course of theory-building inquiry, a principle of choice and selec-
tion becomes requisite. And here economy—along with its other systematic
congeners, simplicity, and uniformity, and the like—are the natural guideposts.
We subscribe to the inductive presumption in favor of simplicity, uniformity,
normality, not because we know or believe that matters always stand on a basis
that is simple, uniform, normal, and so on—surely we know no such thing!—
but because it is on this basis alone that we can conduct our cognitive business
in the most advantageous, the most economical way. In scientific induction we
exploit the information at hand so as to answer our questions in the most
straightforward, the most economical way.
230
Cognitive Progress

Suppose, for example, that we are asked to supply the next member of a se-
ries of the format 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . We shall straightaway respond with 5, supposing
the series to be simply that of the integers. Of course, the actual series might well
be 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 101, 102, 103, 104, . . . , with the answer thus eventu-
ating as 11 rather than 5. But while we cannot rule such possibilities out, they do
not for an instant deter our inductive proceedings. For the inductively appropri-
ate course lies with the production rule that is the simplest issue-resolving an-
swer—the simplest resolution that meets the conditions of the problem. And we
take this line not because we know a priori that this simplest resolution will prove
to be correct. (We know no such thing!) Rather we adopt this answer, provision-
ally at least, just exactly because it is the least cumbersome and most economical
way of providing a resolution that does justice to the facts and demands of the sit-
uation. We recognize that other possibilities of resolution exist but ignore them
until further notice, exactly because there is no cogent reason for giving them fa-
vorable treatment at this stage. (After all, once we leave the safe harbor of sim-
plicity behind there are always multiple possibilities for complexification, and we
lack any guidance in moving one way rather than another.)
Throughout inductive inquiry in general, and scientific inquiry in particu-
lar, we seek to provide a descriptive and explanatory account that provides the
simplest, least complex way of accommodating the data that experience (exper-
imentation and observation) has put at our disposal. When something simple
accomplishes the cognitive tasks in hand, as well as some more complex alterna-
tive, it is foolish to adopt the latter. We certainly need not presuppose that the
world somehow is systematic (simple, uniform, and the like) to validate our pen-
chant for the systematicity of our cognitive commitments. We contrive our
problem resolutions along the lines of least resistance, seeking to economize our
cognitive effort by using the most direct workable means to our ends.
Our systematizing procedures in science pivot on the injunction always to
adopt the most economical (simple, general, straightforward, etc.) solution that
meets the demands of the situation.
Whenever possible, we analogize the present case to other similar ones, be-
cause the introduction of new patterns complicates our cognitive repertoire. And
we use the least cumbersome viable formulations because they are easier to re-
member and more convenient to use. The rationale of the other-things-equal
preferability of simpler solutions over more complex ones is obvious enough.
Simpler solutions are less cumbersome to store, easier to take hold of, and less
difficult to work with. It is indeed economy and convenience that determine our
regulative predilection for simplicity and systematicity in general. Our prime
motivation is to get by with a minimum of complication, to adopt strategies of
question-resolution that enable us among other things: (1) to continue with ex-
isting solutions unless and until the epistemic circumstances compel us to intro-
duce changes (uniformity) be; (2) to make the same processes do insofar as
possible (generality), and (3) to keep to the simplest process that will do the job
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
231

(simplicity). Such a perspective combines the commonsensical precept, Try the
simplest thing first, with a principle of burden of proof: Maintain your cognitive
commitments until there is good reason to abandon them.
When other things are anything like equal, simpler theories are bound to
be operationally more advantageous. We avoid needless complications when-
ever possible, because this is the course of an economy of effort. It is the gen-
eral practice in scientific theory construction, to give preference to
•
one-dimensional rather than multidimensional modes of description,
•
quantitative rather than qualitative characterizations,
•
lower- rather than higher-order polynomials,
•
linear rather than nonlinear differential equations.
The comparatively simpler is for this very reason easier to work with. In sum,
we favor uniformity, analogy, simplicity, and the like because they ease our cog-
nitive labor. On such a perspective, simplicity is a concept of the practical order,
pivoting on being more economical to use—that is, less demanding of re-
sources. The key principle is that of the rational economy of means for the re-
alization of given cognitive ends, of getting the most effective answer we can
with the least complication. Complexities cannot be ruled out, but they must
always pay their way in terms of increased systemic adequacy! It is thus
methodology and not metaphysics that grounds our commitment to simplicity
and systematicity.
The rational economy of process is the crux here. And this methodolog-
ical commitment to rational process does not prejudge or prejudice the sub-
stantively ontological issue of the complexity of nature. Natural science is
emphatically not bound to a Principle of Simplicity in Nature. There really
are no adequate grounds for supposing the “simplicity” of the world’s makeup.
Instead, the so-called Principle of Simplicity is really a principle of complex-
ity-management: “Feel free to introduce complexity in your efforts to de-
scribe and explain nature’s ways. But only when and where it is really needed.
Insofar as possible “keep it simple!” Only introduce as much complexity as
you really need for your scientific purposes of description, explanation, pre-
diction, and control.” Such an approach is eminently sensible. But of course
such a principle is no more than a methodological rule of procedure for man-
aging our cognitive affairs. Nothing entitles us to transmute this method-
ological precept into a descriptive/ontological claim to the effect that nature
is simple—let alone of finite complexity. Accordingly, the penchant for in-
ductive systematicity reflected in the conduct of inquiry is simply a matter of
striving for rational economy. It is based on methodological considerations
that are governed by an analogue of Occam’s razor—a principle of parsimony
to the effect that needless complexity is to be avoided complicationes non mul-
tiplicandae sunt praeter necessitatem. Given that the inductive method, viewed
232
Cognitive Progress

in its practical and methodological aspect, aims at the most efficient and ef-
fective means of question-resolution, it is only natural that our inductive pre-
cepts should direct us always to begin with the most systematic, the thereby
economical, device that can actually do the job at hand.3
It clearly makes eminent sense to move onwards from the simplest (least
complex) available solution to introduce further complexities when and as—
but only when and as—they are forced on us. Simpler (more systematic) an-
swers are more easily codified, taught, learned, used, investigated, and so on.
The regulative principles of convenience and economy in learning and in-
quiry suffice to provide a rational basis for systematicity-preference. Our
preference for simplicity, uniformity, and systematicity in general, is now not
a matter of a substantive theory regarding the nature of the world, but one of
search strategy—of cognitive methodology. In sum, we opt for simplicity in
inquiry (and systematicity in general) not because it is truth-indicative, but
because it is teleologically more effective in conducing to the efficient real-
ization of the goals of inquiry. We look for the dropped coin in the lightest
spots nearby, not because this is—in the circumstances—the most probable
location but because it represents the most sensible strategy of search: if it is
not there, then we just cannot find it at all.
On such a view, inductive systematicity with its penchant for simplicity
comes to be seen as an aspect, not of reality as such, but of our procedures for
its conceptualization and accordingly of our conception of it, or, to be more pre-
cise, of our manner of conceptualizing it. Simplicity-preference (for example)
is based on the strictly method-oriented practical consideration that the sim-
ple hypotheses are the most convenient and advantageous for us to put to use
in the context of our purposes. There is thus no recourse to a substantive (or
descriptively constitutive) postulate of the simplicity of nature; it suffices to
have recourse to a regulative (or practical) precept of economy of means. And
in its turn, the pursuit of cognitive systematicity is ontologically neutral: it is a
matter of conducting our question-resolving endeavors with the greatest econ-
omy. The Principle of Least Effort is in control here—the process is one of
maximally economic means to the attainment of chosen ends.This amounts to
a theoretical defense of inductive systematicity that in fact rests on practical
considerations relating to the efficiencies of method.
Accordingly, inductive systematicity is best approached with reference, not
to reality as such—or even merely our conception of it—but to the ways and
means we employ in conceptualizing it. It is noncommittal on matters of sub-
stance, representing no more than a determination to conduct our question-re-
solving endeavors with the greatest economy. Cognitive economy, with its
balance of costs and benefits, once again comes to the forefront. For in inquiry,
as elsewhere, rationality enjoins us to employ the maximally economic means to
the attainment of chosen ends. And our commitment to simplicity in scientific
inquiry accordingly does not, in the end, prevent us from discovering whatever
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
233

complexities are actually there. And the commitment to inductive systematicity
in our account of the world remains a methodological desideratum regardless of
how complex or untidy that world may ultimately turn out to be.
COMPLEXIFICATION
Scientific theory-formation is, in general, a matter of spotting a local regularity
of phenomena in parametric space and then projecting it “across-the-board,”
maintaining it globally. But the theoretical claims of science are themselves
never small-scale and local—they are not spatiotemporally localized and they
are not parametrically localized either.They stipulate—quite ambitiously—how
things are always and everywhere. But with the enhancement of investigative
technology, the “window” through which we can look out on nature’s paramet-
ric space becomes constantly enlarged. In developing natural science we use this
window of capability to scrutinize parametric space, continually augmenting our
database and then generalizing on what we see. What we have here is not a lunar
landscape where once we have seen one sector we have seen it all, and where
theory-projections from lesser data generally remain in place when further data
comes our way. Instead it does not require a sophisticated knowledge of history
of science to realize that our worst fears are usually realized—that our theories
seldom if ever survive intact in the wake of substantial extensions in our cogni-
tive access to new sectors of the range of nature’s phenomena.The history of sci-
ence is a sequence of episodes of leaping to the wrong conclusions because new
observational findings indicate matters are not quite so simple as heretofore
thought. As ample experience indicates, our ideas about nature are subject to
constant and often radical change-demanding stresses as we “explore” paramet-
ric space more extensively.The technologically mediated entry into new regions
of parameter space constantly destabilizes the attained equilibrium between data
and theory. Physical nature can exhibit a very different aspect when viewed from
the vantage point of different levels of sophistication in the technology of na-
ture-investigator interaction. The possibility of change is ever present. The on-
going destabilization of scientific theories is the price we pay for operating a
simplicity-geared cognitive methodology in an actually complex world.
We naturally adopt throughout rational inquiry—and accordingly through-
out natural science—the methodological principle of rational economy to “Try
the simplest solutions first” and then make this do as long as it can. And this
means that historically the course of inquiry moves in the direction of ever-
increasing complexity. The developmental tendency of our intellectual enter-
prises—natural science among them—is generally in the direction of greater
complication and sophistication.
In a complex world, the natural dynamics of the cognitive process exhibits
an inherent tropism toward increasing complexity. Herbert Spencer argued long
234
Cognitive Progress

ago that evolution is characterized by von Baer’s law of development “from the
homogeneous to the heterogeneous” and thereby produces an ever-increasing
definition of detail and complexity of articulation.4 As Spencer saw it, organic
species in the course of their development confront a successive series of envi-
ronmental obstacles, and with each successful turning along the maze of devel-
opmental challenges the organism becomes selectively more highly specialized
in its biodesign, and thereby more tightly attuned to the particular features of its
ecological context.5 Now this view of the developmental process may or may not
be correct for biological evolution, but there can be little question about its hold-
ing for cognitive evolution. For rational beings will of course try simple things
first and thereafter be driven step by step toward an ever-enhanced complexifi-
cation. In the course of rational inquiry we try the simple solutions first, and
only thereafter, if and when they cease to work—when they are ruled out by fur-
ther findings (by some further influx of coordinating information)—do we move
on to the more complex.Things go along smoothly until an oversimple solution
becomes destabilized by enlarged experience. For a time we get by with the
comparatively simpler options—until the expanding information about the
world’s modus operandi made possible by enhanced new means of observation
and experimentation insists otherwise. And with the expansion of knowledge
those new accessions make ever increasing demands. And so evolution, be it nat-
ural or rational—whether of animal species or of literary genres—ongoingly
confronts us with products of greater and greater complexity.6
Man’s cognitive efforts in the development of natural science manifests a
Manichaean-style struggle between complexity and simplicity—between the im-
petus to comprehensiveness (amplitude) and the impetus to system (economy).
We want our theories to be as extensive and all-encompassing as possible and at
the same time to be elegant and economical. The first desideratum pulls in one
direction, the second in the other. And the accommodation reached here is never
actually stable. As our experience expands in the quest for greater adequacy and
comprehensiveness, the old theory structures become destabilized—the old the-
ories no longer fit the full range of available fact. And so the theoretician goes
back to the old drawing board. What he comes up with here is—and in the cir-
cumstances must be—something more elaborate, more complex than what was
able to do the job before those new complications arose (though we do, of course,
sometimes achieve local simplifications within an overall global complexifica-
tion). We make do with the simple, but only up to the point when the demands
of adequacy force additional complications on us. An inner tropism toward in-
creasing complexity is thus built into the very nature of the scientific project as we
have it.
And the same is true also for technological evolution, with cognitive tech-
nology emphatically included. Be it in cognitive or in practical matters, the
processes and resources of yesteryear are rarely, if ever, up to the demands of
the present. In consequence, the life-environment we create for ourselves
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
235

grows increasingly complex. The Occam’s Razor injunction, “Never introduce
complications unless and until you actually require them,” accordingly repre-
sents a defining principle of practical reason that is at work within the cogni-
tive project as well. And because we try the simplest solutions first, making
simple solutions do until circumstances force one to do otherwise, it transpires
that in the development of knowledge—as elsewhere in the domain of human
artifice—progress is always a matter of complexification. An inherent impetus
toward greater complexity pervades the entire realm of human creative effort.
We find it in art; we find it in technology; and we certainly find it in the cog-
nitive domain as well.7
The methodology of science thus embodies an inherent dialectic that
moves steadily from the simpler to the more complex, and the developmental
route of technology sails on the same course. We are driven in the direction of
ever greater complexity by the principle that the potential of the simple is soon
exhausted and that high capacity demands more elaborate and powerful
processes and procedures.The simpler procedures of the past are but rarely ad-
equate to the needs of the present—had they been so today’s questions would
have been resolved long ago and the issues at stake would not have survived to
figure on the present agenda. Scientific progress is of a nature that inherently
involves an inexorable tendency to complexification in both its cognitive and its
ideational dimension. What we discover in investigating nature always must in
some degree reflect the character of our technology of observation. It is always
something that depends on the mechanisms with which we search.8
Induction with respect to the history of science itself—a constant series of
errors of oversimplification—soon undermines our confidence that nature op-
erates in the way we would deem the simpler. On the contrary, the history of
science is an endlessly repetitive story of simple theories giving way to more
complicated and sophisticated ones. The Greeks had four elements; in the
nineteenth century Mendeleev had some sixty; by the 1900s this had gone to
eighty, and nowadays we have a vast series of elemental stability states. Aris-
totle’s cosmos had only spheres; Ptolemy’s added epicycles; ours has a virtually
endless proliferation of complex orbits that only supercomputers can approxi-
mate. Greek science was contained on a single shelf of books; that of the New-
tonian age required a roomful; ours requires vast storage structures filled not
only with books and journals but with photographs, tapes, floppy disks, and so
on. Of the quantities currently recognized as the fundamental constants of
physics, only one was contemplated in Newton’s physics: the universal gravita-
tional constant. A second was added in the nineteenth century, Avogadro’s con-
stant. The remaining six are all creatures of twentieth-century physics: the
speed of light (the velocity of electromagnetic radiation in free space), the ele-
mentary charge, the rest mass of the electron, the rest mass of the proton,
Planck’s constant, and Boltzmann’s constant.9 It would be naive—and quite
236
Cognitive Progress

wrong—to think that the course of scientific progress is one of increasing sim-
plicity. The very reverse is the case: scientific progress is a matter of complexi-
fication because oversimple theories invariably prove untenable in a complex
world. The natural dialectic of scientific inquiry ongoingly impels us into ever
deeper levels of sophistication.10 In this regard our commitment to simplicity
and systematicity, though methodologically necessary, is ontologically unavail-
ing. And more sophisticated searches invariably engender changes of mind
moving in the direction of an ever more complex picture of the world. Our
methodological commitment to simplicity should not and does not preclude
the substantive discovery of complexity.
The explosive growth of information of itself countervails against its ex-
ploitation for the sake of knowledge-enhancement. The problem of coping
with the proliferation of printed material affords a striking example of this phe-
nomenon. One is forced to ever higher levels of aggregation, compression, and
abstraction. In seeking for the needle in the haystack we must push our search
processes to ever greater depths.
And this ongoing refinement in the division of cognitive labor that an in-
formation explosion necessitates issues in a literal dis-integration of knowledge.
The “progress of knowledge” is marked by an ever-continuing proliferation of
ever more restructured specialties marked by the unavoidable circumstance that
the any given specialty cell cannot know exactly what is going on even next
door—let alone at the significant remove. Our understanding of matters out-
side one’s immediate bailiwick is bound to become superficial. At home base
one knows the details, nearby one has an understanding of generalities, but at
a greater remove one can be no more than an informed amateur.
This disintegration of knowledge is also manifolded vividly in the fact that
out cognitive taxonomies are bursting at the seams. Consider the example of tax-
onomic structure of physics. In the eleventh (1911) edition of the Encyclopedia
Britannica, physics is described as a discipline composed of 9 constituent
branches (e.g., “Acoustics” or “Electricity and Magnetism”) which were them-
selves partitioned into 20 further specialties (e.g., “Thermo-electricity: of “Ce-
lestial Mechanics”).The fifteenth (1974) version of the Britannica divides physics
into 12 branches whose subfields are—seemingly—too numerous for listing.
(However the 14th 1960s edition carried a special article entitled “Physics, Arti-
cles on” which surveyed more than 130 special topics in the field.) When the Na-
tional Science Foundation launched its inventory of physical specialties with the
National Register of Scientific and Technical Personnel in 1954, it divided
physics into 12 areas with 90 specialties. By 1970 these figures had increased to
16 and 210, respectively. And the process continues unabated to the point where
people are increasingly reluctant to embark on this classifying project at all.
Substantially the same story can be told for every field of science. The
emergence of new disciplines, branches, and specialties is manifest everywhere.
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
237

And as though to negate this tendency and maintain unity, one finds an ongoing
evolution of interdisciplinary syntheses—physical chemistry, astrophysics, bio-
chemistry, and so forth.The very attempt to counteract fragmentation produces
new fragments. Indeed, the phenomenology of this domain is nowadays so
complex that some writers urge that the idea of a “natural taxonomy of sci-
ence” must be abandoned altogether.11 The expansion of the scientific litera-
ture is in fact such the natural science has in recent years been disintegrating
before our very eyes. An ever larger number of ever more refined specialties
has made it ever more difficult for experts in a given branch of science to
achieve a thorough understanding about what is going on ever in the specialty
next door.
It is, of course, possible that the development of physics may eventually
carry us to theoretical unification where everything that we class among the
“laws of nature” belongs to one grand unified theory—one all-encompassing
deductive systematization integrated even more tightly than that Newton’s
Principia Mathematica.12 But the covers of this elegantly contrived “book of
nature” will have to encompass a mass of every more elaborate diversity and
variety. Like a tricky mathematical series, it will have to generate ever more
dissimilar constituents which, despite their abstract linkage are concretely as
different as can be. And the integration at issue at the principle of a pyramid
will cover further down an endlessly expansive range and encompassing the
most variegated components. It will be an abstract unity uniting a concrete
mishmash of incredible variety and diversity. The “unity of science” to which
many theorists aspire may indeed come to be realized at the level of concepts
and theories shared between different sciences—that is, at the level of
ideational overlaps. But for every conceptual commonality and shared ele-
ment there will emerge a dozen differentiations. The increasing complexity of
our world picture is a striking phenomenon throughout the development 
of modern science.
The lesson of such considerations is clear. Scientific knowledge grows not
just in extent but also in complexity, so that science presents us with a scene of
ever-increasing complexity. It is thus fair to say that modern science confronts
us with a cognitive manifold that involves an ever more extensive specialization
and division of labor. The years of apprenticeship that separate master from
novice grow ever greater. A science that moves continually from an oversimple
picture of the world to one that is more complex calls for ever more elaborate
processes for its effective cultivation. And as the scientific enterprise itself
grows more extensive, the greater elaborateness of its productions requires an
ever more intricate intellectual structure for its accommodation. The complex-
ification of scientific process and product escalate hand and hand. And the
process of complexity amplification that Charles S. Peirce took to be revealed
in nature through science is unquestionably manifested in the cognitive domain
of scientific inquiry itself.
238
Cognitive Progress

THE EXPANSION OF SCIENCE
The increasing complexity of the scientific enterprise itself is reflected in the fact
that research and development expenditures in the United States grew exponen-
tially after World War II, increasing at a rate of some 10 percent per annum. By
the mid-1960s, America was spending more on scientific research and develop-
ment than the entire Federal budget before Pearl Harbor. This growth in the
costs of science has various significant ramifications and manifestations.
Take manpower, for example, where the recent growth of the scientific
community is a particularly striking phenomenon. During most of the present
century the number of American scientists has been increasing at 6 percent to
yield an exponential growth-rate with a doubling time of roughly twelve
years.13 A startling consideration—one often but deservedly repeated—is that
well over 80 percent of ever-existing scientists (in even the oldest specialties
such as mathematics, physics, and medicine) are alive and active nowadays.14
Again, consider the growth of the scientific literature. It is by now a familiar
fact that scientific information has been growing at the (reasonably constant) ex-
ponential rate over the past several centuries. Overall, the printed literature of sci-
ence has been increasing at an average of some 5 percent annually throughout the
last two centuries, to yield an exponential growth-rate with a doubling time of
about fifteen years—an order-of-magnitude increase roughly every half century.
The result is a veritable flood of scientific literature. The Physical Review is cur-
rently divided into six parts, each of which is larger than the whole journal was a
decade or so ago. It is reliably estimated that, from the start, about 10 million sci-
entific papers have been published and that currently some 30,000 journals pub-
lish some 600,000 new papers each year. In fact, it is readily documented that the
number of books, of journals, of journal-papers has been increasing at an expo-
nential rate over the recent period.15 By 1960, some 300,000 different book titles
were being published in the world, and the two decades from 1955 and 1975 saw
the doubling of titles published in Europe from around 130,000 to over
270,000.16 And science has had its full share of this literature explosion. The
amount of scientific material in print is of a scope that puts it beyond the reach
not only of individuals but also of institutions as well. No university or institute
has a library vast enough to absorb or a faculty large enough to digest the relevant
products of the world’s printing presses.
Then too there is the massively increasing budget of science.The historic sit-
uation regarding the costs of American science was first delineated in the find-
ings of Raymond Ewell in the 1950s.17 His study of research and development
expenditures in the United States showed that growth here has also been expo-
nential; from 1776 to 1954 we spent close to $40 billion, and half of that was
spent after 1948.18 Projected at this rate, Ewell saw the total as amounting to
what he viewed as an astronomical $6.5 billion by 1965—a figure that actually
turned out to be far too conservative.
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
239

Moreover, the proliferation of scientific facilities has proceeded at an im-
pressive pace over the past hundred years. (In the early 1870s there were only
eleven physics laboratories in the British Isles; by the mid-1930s there were
more than three hundred;19 today there are several thousand.) And, of course,
the scale of activities in these laboratories has also expanded vastly. It is perhaps
unnecessary to dwell at length on the immense cost in resources of the research
equipment of contemporary science. Radiotelescopic observatories, low-tem-
perature physics, research hospitals, and lunar geology all involve outlays of a
scale that require the funding and support of national governments—sometimes
even consortia thereof. In a prophetic vein, Alvin M. Weinberg (then Director
of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory) wrote: “When history looks at the
twentieth century, she will see science and technology as its theme; she will find
in the monuments of Big Science—the huge rockets, the high-energy accelera-
tors, the high-flux research reactors—symbols of our time just as surely as she
finds in Notre Dame a symbol of the Middle Ages.”20 Of course, exponential
growth cannot of course continue indefinitely. But the fact remains that that sci-
ence has become an enormous industry that has a far-flung network of training
centers (schools, colleges, universities), and of production centers (laboratories
and research institutes).
Natural science, in sum, has become a vast and expensive business. But
what sort of relationship obtains between resource investment and returns
here? Just how productive is the science enterprise?
THE LAW OF LOGARITHMIC RETURNS
Certain evaluative distinctions and classifications have played a pivotal role in
epistemology and the theory of cognition, for example, the familiar distinctions
between the true and the false, and between the well evidentiated (probable) and
the evidentially counterindicated (improbable). But the portentous distinction
between real knowledge and mere information has been generally neglected.
And this is eminently unfortunate. After all, items of information were not cre-
ated equal. Some claims will, even if true, be insignificant and make little or no
impact on the larger cognitive scheme of things. (What difference does my per-
sonal preference for pink over purple make to anything?) And other truths will
be distinctly important—the theory of relativity for example, or Avogadro’s law
in chemistry. Few issues regarding cognition can rival this distinction in point of
its far-reaching bearing on matters of discovery, learning, understanding, and
insight—alike in scientific and in everyday contexts. And so it will be this
distinction that concerns us here.
En route to knowledge we must begin with information. How can one
measure the volume of information generated in a field of suitable or scholarly
inquiry? Various ways suggest themselves.The size of the literature of a field (as
240
Cognitive Progress

measured by the sheer bulk of publication in it) affords one possible measure.
And there are various other possibilities as well. For one can also proceed by way
of inputs rather than outputs, measuring, for example, the number of workdays
that investigators devote to the topics at issue, or the amount of resource invest-
ment in the relevant information-engendering technology. So much for the
quantitative assessment of information. But what about knowledge?
By “knowledge” in this context one must, of course, understand putative
knowledge that is not necessarily correct but merely represents a conscien-
tiously contrived best estimate of what the truth of the matter actually is.21 But
this is not all there is to it. Information is simply a collection of (supposedly
correct) beliefs or assertions, while knowledge, by contrast, is something more
select, more deeply issue-resolving. Like all usable information it must be duly
evidentiated and at least presumably correct. But there is also an additionally
evaluative aspect, seeing that knowledge is a matter of important information:
information that is significantly informative. Not every insignificant smidgeon
of information constitutes knowledge, and the person whose body of informa-
tion consists of utter trivia really knows virtually nothing.
To provide a simple illustration for this matter of significance, let us sup-
pose object-descriptive color taxonomy—for the sake of example, an oversim-
ple one based merely on Blue, Red, and Other. Then that single item of
knowledge represented by “knowing the color” of an object—namely, that it is
red—is bound up with many different items of (correct) information on the
subject (that it is not Blue, is rather similar to some shades of Other, etc.). As
such information proliferates, we confront a situation of redundancy and di-
minished productiveness. Any knowable fact is always potentially surrounded
by a vast prenumbral cloud of relevant information. And as our information
grows to be ever more extensive, those really significant facts become more dif-
ficult to discern. Knowledge certainly increases with information, but at a far
less than proportional rate.
One instructive way of measuring the volume of available information is via
the opportunities for placement in a framework for describing or classifying the
features of things. With n concepts, you can make n2 two-concept combinations.
With m facts, you can project m2 fact-connecting juxtapositions, in each of which
some sort of characteristic relationship is at issue.22 A single step in the advance-
ment of knowledge is here accompanied by a massive increase in the proliferation
of information. Extending the previous example, let us also contemplate shapes in
addition to colors, again supposing only three of them: Rectangular, Circular,
Other. Now when we combine color and shape there will be 9  3  3 possibili-
ties in the resultant (cross-) classification. So with that complex, dual-aspect piece
of knowledge (color  shape) we also launch into a vastly amplified (i.e., multi-
plied) information spectrum over that increased classification-space. In moving
cognitively from n to n  1 cognitive parameters we enlarge our knowledge
additively but expand our information field multiplicatively.
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
241

If a control mechanism can handle three items—be it in physical or in cog-
nitive management—then we can lift ourselves to higher levels of capacity by
hierarchical layering. First we can, by hypothesis, manage three base-level
items; next we can, by grouping three of these into a first-level complex, man-
age nine base level items; and thereupon by grouping three of these first-level
complexes into a second level complex we can manage twenty-seven base-level
items. Hierarchical grouping is thus clearly a pathway to enhanced managerial
capacity. But in cognitive contexts of information management it is clear that a
few items of high-level information ( knowledge) can and will correspond to
a vast range of low-level information ( mere truths). Knowing (in our illus-
tration) where we stand within each of those three levels—that is having three
pieces of knowledge—will position us in a vastly greater information space (viz.,
one of 27 compartments). And this situation is typical.The relational structure
of the domain means that a small range of knowledge (by way of specifically
high-grade information) can always serve to position one cognitively within a
vastly greater range of low-level information.
It is instructive to view this idea from a different point of view. Knowledge
commonly develops via distinctions (A vs. non-A) that are introduced with ever
greater elaboration to address the problems and difficulties that one encounters
with less sophisticated approaches. A situation obtains that is analogous to the
“Game of Twently Questions” with an exponentially exfoliating possibility
space being traced out stepwise (2, 4, 8, 16, . . . , 2n, . . .). With n descriptors one
can specify for 2n potential descriptions that specify exactly how, over all, a
given object may be characterized. When we add a new descriptor we increase
by one additional unit the amount of knowledge but double the amount of
available information. The information at hand grows with 2n, but the knowl-
edge acquired merely with n. The cognitive exploitation of information is a
matter of dramatically diminishing returns.
Again, consider an illustration of a somewhat different nature.The yield of
knowledge from information afforded by legibility-impaired manuscripts and
papyri and inscriptions in classical paleography provides an instructive instance.
If we can decipher 70 percent of the letters in such a manuscript we can recon-
struct the phrase at issue. If we can make out 70 percent of the phrases we can
pretty well figure out the sentences. If we can read 70 percent of its sentences
we can understand the message of the whole text. So some one-third of the let-
ters suffice to carry the whole message. A vast load of information stands co-
ordinate with a modest body of knowledge. From the standpoint of knowledge,
information is highly redundant, albeit unavoidably so.
A helpful perspective on this situation comes to view through the idea of
“noise,” considering that expanding bodies of information encompass so much
cognition-impeding redundancy and unhelpful irrelevancy that it takes succes-
sive many-fold increases in information to effect successive fixed-size increases
in actual knowledge. It is supposed that internal “noise” or variability in the
242
Cognitive Progress

information-system is such that the increment needed to effect a cognitive ad-
vance of a certain fixed size or significance is proportional to the magnitude of
the starting position as a whole.
Consider now the result of combining two ideas, namely that
1.
Knowledge is distinguished from mere information as such by its
significance. In fact: Knowledge is simply particularly significant
information—information whose significance exceeds some thresh-
old level (say q). (In principle there is room for variation here ac-
cording as one sets the quality level of entry qualification and the
domain higher or lower.)
2.
The significance of additional information is determined by its impact
on preexisting information. Significance in this sense is a matter of the
relative (percentage-wise) increase that the new acquisitions effect
upon the body of preexisting information (I), which may—to reiter-
ate—be estimated in the first instance by the sheer volume of the rel-
evant body of information: the literature of the subject, as it were.
Accordingly: The significance of incrementally new information can be
measured by the ratio of the increment of new information to the volume of
information already in hand: I / I .
Putting the ideas of these two principles together, we have it that a new item of
actual knowledge is one for which the ratio of information increments to pre-
existing information exceeds a fixed threshold-indicative quantity q:

I
I  q.
Thus knowledge-constituting significant information arises when the propor-
tional extent of the change effected by a new item in the preexisting situation (in-
dependently of what that preexisting situation is) exceeds a duly fixed threshold.
On the basis of these considerations, it follows that the cumulative total
amount of knowledge (K ) encompassed in an overall body of information of
size I is given by the logarithm of I. This is so because we have
K   d
I
I
.  log I  const  log cI
where K represents the volume of actual knowledge that can be extracted from
a body of bare information I,23 with the constant at issue open to treatment as a
unit-determinative parameter of the measuring scale, so that the equation at
issue can be simplified without loss to K  log I.24 In milking additional infor-
mation for significant insights it is generally the proportion of the increase that
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
243

matters: its percentage rather than its brute amount. We accordingly arrive at
the Law of Logarithmic Returns governing the extraction of significant knowl-
edge from bodies of mere information.
The ramifications of such a principle for cognitive progress are not difficult
to discern. Nature imposes increasing resistance barriers to intellectual as to phys-
ical penetration. Consider the analogy of extracting air for creating a vacuum.
The first 90 percent comes out rather easily. The next 9 percent is effectively as
difficult to extract than all that went before.The next 0.9 is just as difficult. And
so on. Each successive order-of-magnitude step involved a massive cost for lesser
progress; each successive fixed-size investment of effort yields a substantially di-
minished return. Intellectual progress is exactly the same: when we extract knowl-
edge (i.e., high-grade, nature-descriptively significant information from mere
information of the routine, common “garden variety,” the same sort of quan-
tity/quality relationship obtained. Initially a sizable proportion of the available is
high grade—but as we press further this proportion of what is cognitively signif-
icant gets ever smaller.To double knowledge we must quadruple information.
It should thus come as no surprise that knowledge coordinates with infor-
mation in multiplicative layers. With texts we have the familiar stratification: ar-
ticle/chapter, book, library, library system. Or pictographically: sign, scene 
( ordered collection of signs), cartoon ( ordered collection of scenes to make
it a story). In such layering, we have successive levels of complexity correspon-
ding to successive levels of informational combining combinations, proportional
with n, n2, n3, and so on. The logarithm of the levels—log n, 2log n, 3log n, and
so forth—reflect the amount of “knowledge” that is available through the infor-
mation we obtain about the state of affairs prevailing at each level. And this is
something that increases only one step at a time, despite the exponential increase
in information.
The general purport of such a Law of Logarithmic Returns as regards ex-
panding information is clear enough. Letting K(I) represent the quantity of
knowledge inherent in a body of information I, we begin with our fundamental
relationship: K(I )  log I. On this basis of this fundamental relationship, the
knowledge of a two-sector domain increases additively notwithstanding a mul-
tiplicative explosion in the amount of information that is now on the scene. For
if the field (F) under consideration consists of two subfields (F1 and F2), then
because of the cross-connections obtaining within the information-domains at
issue the overall information complex will take on a multiplicative size:
I  inf (F)  inf (F1)  inf (F2)  I1  I2.
With compilation, information is multiplied. But in view of the indicated log-
arithmic relationship, the knowledge associated with the body of compound
information I will stand at:
244
Cognitive Progress

K(I)  log I  log (I1  I2)  log I1  log I2  K(I1)  K(I2)
The knowledge obtained by compiling two information-domains (subfields)
into an overall aggregates will (as one would expect) consist simply in adding
the two bodies of knowledge at issue. While compilation increases information
by multiplicative leaps and bounds, the increase in knowledge is merely additive.
THE RATIONALE AND IMPLICATIONS OF THE
LAW OF LOGARITHMIC RETURNS
The Law of Logarithmic Returns present us with an epistemological analogue
of the old Weber-Fechner law of psychophysics, asserting that inputs of geo-
metrically increasing magnitude are required to yield perceptual outputs of
arithmetically increasing intensity. The presently contemplated law envisions a
parallelism of perception and conception in this regard. It stipulates that (in-
formational) inputs of geometrically increasing magnitude are needed to pro-
vide for (cognitive and thus) conceptual outputs of arithmetically increasing
magnitude. In searching for meaningful patterns, the ongoing proliferation of
data points makes contributions of rapidly diminishing value.
It is not too difficult to come by a plausible explanation for the sort of in-
formation/knowledge relationship that is represented by K  log I. The prin-
cipal reason for such a K/I imbalance may lie in the efficiency of intelligence
in securing a view of the modus operandi of a world whose law-structure is
comparatively simple. For here one can learn a disproportionate amount of
general fact from a modest amount of information. (Note that whenever an
infinite series of 0’s and 1’s, as per 01010101 . . . , is generated—as this series
indeed is—by a relatively simple law, then this circumstance can be gleaned
from a comparatively short initial segment of this series.) In rational inquiry
we try the simple solutions first, and only if and when they cease to work—
when they are ruled out by further findings (by some further influx of coor-
dinating information)—do we move on to the more complex. Things go
along smoothly until an oversimple solution becomes destabilized by en-
larged experience. We get by with the comparatively simpler options until the
expanding information about the world’s modus operandi made possible by
enhanced new means of observation and experimentation demands other-
wise. But with the expansion of knowledge new accessions set ever increasing
demands. At bottom, then, there are thus two closely interrelated reasons for
that K/I disparity:
1.
Where order exists in the world, intelligence is rather efficient in
finding it.
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
245

2.
If the world were not orderly—were not amenable to the probes of
intelligence—then intelligent beings would not and could not have
emerged in it through evolutionary mechanisms.
The implications for cognitive progress of this disparity between knowl-
edge and mere information are not difficult to discern. Nature imposes increas-
ing resistance barriers to intellectual as to physical penetration. Consider the
analogy of extracting air for creating a vacuum. The first 90 percent comes out
rather easily.The next 9 percent is effectively as difficult to extract than all that
went before.The next .9 is proportionally just as difficult. And so on. Each suc-
cessive order-of-magnitude step involves a massive cost for lesser progress; each
successive fixed-size investment of effort yields a substantially diminished re-
turn. Initially a sizable proportion of the available is high grade—but as we
press further this proportion of what is cognitively significant gets ever smaller.
To double knowledge we must quadruple information. As science progress, the
important discoveries that represent real increases in knowledge are surrounded
by an ever increasing penumbra of mere items of information. (The mathemat-
ical literature of the day yields an annual crop of over 200,000 new theorems.25)
This state of affairs clearly has the most far-reaching implications for the
progress of knowledge. This is illustrated in Table 12.1. There is an immense
K/I imbalance, with ongoingly increasing information I, the corresponding in-
crease in knowledge K, shrinks markedly.To increase knowledge by equal steps
we must amplify information by successive orders of magnitude.
Extracting knowledge from information thus requires ever greater effort.
And the matter can be viewed in another perspective. Nature imposes increas-
ing resistance barriers to intellectual as to physical penetration. Extracting
knowledge from information thus requires ever greater effort. For the greater a
body of information, the larger the patterns of order that can potentially obtain
and the greater the effort needed to bring particular orderings to light. With
two-place combinations of the letters A and B (yielding the four pairs AA, AB,
BA, and BB) we have only two possible patterns of order—namely, “The same
letter all the way through” (AA and BB), and “Alternating letters” (AB and
246
Cognitive Progress
TABLE 12.1
The Structure of the Knowledge/Information Relation
cI
I
(with c  .1)
log cI ( K)
(K)
K as % of I
100
10
1
—
1.0
.
1,000
100
2
1.
.2
.
10,000
1000
3
1.
.03 .
100,000
10,000
4
1.
.004.

BA). But as we add more letters, the possibilities proliferate massively.There is
accordingly a law of diminishing returns in operation here: each successive
fixed-size investment of effort yields a substantially diminished return. Intel-
lectual progress is exactly the same: when we extract actual knowledge (i.e.,
high-grade, nature-descriptively significant information) from mere informa-
tion of the routine, common “garden variety,” the same sort of quantity/quality
relationship obtained.
This situation is reflected in Max Planck’s appraisal of the problems of sci-
entific progress. He wrote that “with every advance [in science] the difficulty of the
task is increased; ever larger demands are made on the achievements of researchers, and
the need for a suitable division of labor becomes more pressing.”26 The Law of
Logarithmic Returns at once characterizes and explains this circumstance of why
substantial findings are thicker on the informational ground in the earlier phase
of a new discipline and become ever attenuated in the natural course of progress.
This line of thought also serves to indicate, however, why the question of
the rate of scientific progress is somewhat tricky. For this whole issue will turn
rather delicately on fundamentally evaluative considerations.Thus consider the
past once more. At the crudest—but also most basic—level, where progress is
measured simply by the growth of the scientific literature, there has for cen-
turies been astonishingly swift and sure progress: and exponential growth with
a doubling time of roughly fifteen years. At the more sophisticated, and de-
manding level of high-quality results of a suitably “important” character, there
has also been exponential growth, but only at the pace of a far longer doubling
time, perhaps thirty years, approximating the reduplication with each successive
generation envisaged by Henry Adams at the turn of this century.27 Finally, at
the maximally exacting level of the really crucial insights that fundamentally
enhance our picture of nature, our analysis has it that science has been main-
taining a merely constant pace of progress.
It is this last consideration that is crucial for present purposes and brings
us back to the point made at the very outset. For what we have been dealing
with here is an essentially seismological standard of importance. It is based on
the question, If the thesis at issue were abrogated or abandoned, how large
would the ramifications and implications of this circumstance be? How exten-
sive would be the shocks and tremors felt throughout the whole range of what
we (presumably) know?” And what is at issue is exactly a kind of cognitive
Richter Scale based on the idea of successive orders of magnitude of impact.
The crucial determinative factor for increasing importance is the extent of seis-
mic disturbance of the cognitive terrain. Would we have to abandon and/or
rewrite the entire textbook, or a whole chapter, or a section, or a paragraph, or
a sentence, or a mere footnote?
And so, while the question of the rate of scientific progress does indeed in-
volve the somewhat delicate issue of setting of an evaluative standard, our
stance here can be rough and ready—and justifiably so because the details
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
247

pretty much wash out. Viewing science as a cognitive discipline—a body of knowl-
edge whose task is the unfolding of a rational account of the modus operandi of
nature—stands correlative with its accession of really major discoveries: the
seismically significant, cartography-revising insights into nature. And here
progress has historically been sure and steady—but essentially linear. However,
this perspective lays the foundation for our present analysis—that the histori-
cal situation has been one of a constant progress of science as a cognitive disci-
pline notwithstanding its exponential growth as a productive enterprise (as
measured in terms of resources, money, manpower, publications, etc).28 If we
look at the cognitive situation of science in its quantitative aspect, the Law of
Logarithmic Returns pretty much says it all. In the struggle to achieve cogni-
tive mastery over nature, we have been confronting an enterprise of ever-esca-
lating demands, with the exponential growth in the enterprise associated with a
merely linear growth in the discipline. And this situation regarding the past has
important implications for the future. For while one cannot—as we have
seen—hope to predict the content of future science, the law does actually put us
into a position to make plausible estimates about its volume.29
THE GROWTH OF KNOWLEDGE
The Law of Logarithmic Returns also connects with—and is interestingly il-
lustrated by—the idea of a cognitive life span as expounded by the sagacious
Edward Gibbon in his Memoirs of My Life: “The proportion of a part to the
whole is the only standard by which we can measure the length of our exis-
tence. At the age of twenty, one year is a tenth perhaps of the time which has
elapsed within our consciousness and memory; at the age of fifty it is no more
than a fortieth, and this relative value continues to decrease till the last sands
are shaken out [of the hourglass measure of our life span] by the hand of
death.”30 On this basis, knowledge development is a matter of adding a given
percentage increment of what has gone before.Thus fresh experience superadds
its additional increment E to the preexisting total E in such a way that its ef-
fective import is measured by the proportion that movement bears to the total:
E/E. And cumulatively we of course have it that this comes to the logarithm
of E:  E/E  log E. On such an approach, an increment to one’s lifetime has
a cognitive value determined on strict analogy with Daniel Bernoulli’s famous
proposal to measure the utility value of incremental economic resources by
means of a logarithmic yardstick.31
The Law of Logarithmic Returns clearly has substantial implications for
the rate of scientific progress.32 In particular, it stands coordinate with a princi-
ple of a swift and steady decline in the comparative cognitive yield of additions
to our body of mere information. With the enhancement of scientific technol-
248
Cognitive Progress

ogy, the size and complexity of this body of data inevitably grows, expanding on
quantity and diversifying in kind. Technological progress constantly enlarges
the window through which we look out on nature’s parametric space. In devel-
oping natural science, we use this window to scrutinize parametric space, con-
tinually augmenting our database and then generalizing on what we see. And
what we have here is not a homogeneous lunar landscape, where once we have
seen one sector we have seen it all, and where theory projections from lesser
data generally remain in place when further data comes our way. Historical ex-
perience shows that there is every reason to expect that our ideas about nature
are subject to constant radical changes as we enhance the means of broadening
our database. But of course the expansion of knowledge proceeds at a far slower
rate than the increase of bare information.
It is illuminating to look at the implications of this state of affairs in a his-
torical perspective.The salient point is that the growth of knowledge over time
involves ever-escalating demands. Progress is always possible—there are no ab-
solute limits. But increments of the same cognitive magnitude have to be ob-
tained at an ever-increased price in point of information development and thus
of resource commitment as well. Here our basic formula that knowledge stands
proportionate to the logarithm of information (K  log I ). And this means the
increase of knowledge over time stands to the increase of information in a pro-
portion fixed by the inverse of the volume of already available information:
d
d
t
 K  d
d
t
 log I  
.1
I
.
 
.
d
d
t
.
 I.
The more knowledge we already have in hand, the slower (by vary rapid de-
cline) will be the rate at which knowledge grows with newly acquired informa-
tion. And the larger the body of information we have, the smaller will be the
proportion of this information that represents real knowledge.
In developmental perspective, there is good reason to suppose that our
body of bare information will increase more or less in proportion with our re-
source investment in information gathering. But then, if this investment grows
exponentially over time (as has historically been the case in the recent period),
we shall in consequence have it that
I(t)  c t and correspondingly also 
.
d
d
t
.
 I(t)  c t,
and accordingly,
K(t)  log I(t)  log c t  t,
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
249

and consequently,

.
d
d
t
.
 K(t)  constant.
It will follow on this basis that, since exponential growth in I is coordinated
with a merely linear growth in K, the rate of progress of science in the infor-
mation-exploding past has actually remained essentially constant.
On this basis, it is not all that difficult to find empirical substantiation of
our law of logarithmic returns (K  log I ). The phenomenology is that while
information has increased exponentially in the past (as shown by the expo-
nential increase in journals, scientists, and outlays for the instrumentalities of
research), real knowledge has expanded only linearly. Throughout modern
times the number of scientists has been increasing at roughly 5 percent per
annum.33 Thus well over 80 percent of ever-existing scientists (in even the
oldest specialties, e.g., mathematics, physics, and medicine) are alive and ac-
tive at the present time. And scientific information has also been growing at
the (reasonably constant) exponential rate over the past several centuries, so
as to produce a veritable flood of scientific literature in our time. The Physi-
cal Review is now divided into six parts, each of which is larger than the
whole journal was a decade or so ago. The total volume of scientific publica-
tion is truly staggering. It is reliably estimated that, from the start, well over 10
million scientific papers have been published and that by the mid-1970s some
30,000 journals were publishing some 600,000 new papers each year. It is
readily documented that the number of books, of journals, of journals-papers
has been increasing at an exponential rate over the recent period.34 To be pre-
cise, the printed literature of science has been increasing at some 5 percent per
annum throughout the last two centuries, to yield an exponential growth-rate
with a doubling time of about fifteen years and an order-of-magnitude in-
crease roughly every half century. And much the same story holds for the re-
cruitment of people and the expenditures on equipment—that is for resource
commitment in general.
But during this period the progress of science per se—the progress of au-
thentic scientific knowledge as measured in the sort of first-rate discoveries
of the highest level of significance has progressed at a more or less linear rate.
There is much evidence to this claim. It suffices to consider the size of ency-
clopedias and synoptic textbooks, or again, the number of awards given for
“really big contributions” (Nobel Prizes, academy memberships, honorary de-
grees), or the expansion of the classificatory taxonomy of branches of science
and problem areas of inquiry.35 All of these measures of preeminently cogni-
tive contribution conjoin to indicate that there has in fact been a comparative
constancy in year-to-year progress, the exponential growth of the scientific
enterprise notwithstanding.
250
Cognitive Progress

The Law of Logarithmic Returns reflects the fact that in any matured
branch of natural science, continually greater capabilities in terms of techno-
logical capacity are required to realize further substantial results. The purchase
price of significant new findings constantly increases; once all the significant
findings accessible at a given state-of-the-art level of investigative technology
have been realized, one must continually move on to a new, more complex (and
thus more expensive) level. Ever more accurate measurements, more extreme
temperatures, higher voltages, more intricate combinations, and so on, come to
be required. With the passage of time, the ongoing requirement for personnel
and material to sustain smooth progress has been increasing at an exponentially
increasing rate. The phenomenon of cost escalation is explained through a
combination of the finitude of the body of substantial results realizable at 
a given level of investigative technology, together with a continual and steep
increase in the resource costs of pushing from one level to the next.
We are thus embarked on a literally limitless endeavor to improve the
range of effective experimental intervention, since only by operating under new
and heretofore inaccessible conditions of observational or experimental sys-
tematization—attaining extreme temperature, pressure, particle velocity, field
strength, and so on—can we realize those circumstances that enable us to put
our hypotheses and theories to the test. As one acute observer has rightly re-
marked: “Most critical experiments [in physics] planned today, if they had to be
constrained within the technology of even ten years ago, would be seriously
compromised.”36 Observational, experimental, and information processing
technology is involved in an ever-continuing quest for substantial (order-of-
magnitude) improvements in performance. And throughout the natural sci-
ences, technological progress is a crucial requisite for cognitive progress.
And so, viewing science as a cognitive discipline—a growing body of knowl-
edge whose task is the unfolding of a rational account of the modus operandi of
nature—the progress of science stands correlative with its accession of really
major discoveries: the seismically significant, cartography-revising insights into
nature. And this perspective lays the foundation for our present analysis—that
the historical situation has been one of a constant progress of science as a cogni-
tive discipline notwithstanding its exponential growth as a productive enterprise
(as measured in terms of resources, money, manpower, publications, etc.). The
Law of Logarithmic Returns says it all.37
THE DECELERATION OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS
The limits of science are very real, but they are not inherently intellectual mat-
ters of human incapacity or deficient brainpower. They are fundamentally eco-
nomic limits imposed by the technological character of our access to the
phenomena of nature. The overoptimistic idea that we can push science ever
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
251

onward to the solution of all questions that arise shatters in the awkward real-
ity that the price of problem solving inexorably increases to a point beyond the
limits of affordability.
In theory, the prospect of progress will never be exhausted: scientific inno-
vation need never stop because ever new phenomena remain to be detected.
But since ongoing progress requires us to meet ever increasing demands, the
handwriting in on the wall. We have to accept the fact that it will—and in-
evitably must—eventually slow down. This state of affairs is particularly clear
in the context of the Law of Logarithmic Returns. If, as was argued above, sci-
entific progress has indeed been linear in the exponential growth past, than it
will obviously have to become markedly slower in the zero-growth future.
And the preceding deliberations indicate the reason why this is so. For we
accept the idea that our investment in science must reach a condition of (at best)
steady-state stability—and that correspondingly the accumulation of mere scien-
tific information will also remain constant—then we have the situation that:

.
d
d
t
.
 I(t)  constant, and accordingly: I(t)  t.
On this basis, the volume of knowledge, which by the Law of Logarithmic Re-
turns grows with the logarithm of the volume of information, will stand pro-
portionate to the logarithm of elapsed time:
K(t)  log I(t)  log t.
And consequently the rate of increase in knowledge will stand proportionate to
the inverse increase of the elapsed time:

.
d
d
t
.
 K(t)  
.1
t
.
.
The constant growth of I in a steady-state era will thus be associated with a
time-inversely proportional rate of growth of K. Where information grows lin-
early, knowledge too will grow—but at an ever-decreasing rate. And so, the
Law of Logarithmic Returns indicate that scientific progress is entering into an
era of ongoing deceleration as steady-state conditions come to obtain with re-
spect to resource investment. A zero-growth future bodes a radical and contin-
ual slowing of the pace of scientific progress.38
Thus if the general picture of an unremitting cost-escalation in the eco-
nomics of scientific progress is even partly correct, the pace of scientific advance
is destined to become markedly slower in the zero-growth era that inevitably
lies ahead. The half-millennium commencing around 1650 will eventually
252
Cognitive Progress

come to be regarded as among the great characteristic developmental transfor-
mations of human history, with the age of the Science Explosion see to be a
unique—and finite—in its own historical structure as the Bronze Age and the
Industrial Revolution.
PREDICTIVE IMPLICATIONS OF THE
INFORMATION/KNOWLEDGE RELATIONSHIP
Our earlier deliberations indicated that the science of the future is inherently im-
predictable. But here one must be careful to keep in view the distinction between
substantive issues and structural ones—between particular individual questions,
theses, and theories within science, and issues regarding the overall structure of
the discipline itself. Our strictures against the predictability of future science re-
late to the level of substantive detail: they bear on science as an investigative dis-
cipline with respect to substantive questions about the modus operandi of nature
rather than as a productive enterprise (or “industry”) that addresses such matters.
For while we cannot say what the science of the future will discover, we can make
some pretty shrewd estimates of the volume and the rate of its progress. Discov-
ery, after all, depends on effort, and the amount of human energy and resource
commitment is something that lies in the domain of plausible prediction.
At the level of generality, then, various plausible estimates regarding the fu-
ture of science can indeed be made. For we can safely predict that it will be in-
complete, that its agenda of availably open questions will be extensive, that its
rate of progress will be slower, and so on. And we can confidently predict that
future science will be more elaborate, complex, and conceptually sophisticated
than the science of the present day—that it will have greater taxonomic diversi-
fication, greater substantive complexity, further high-level unification and low-
level proliferation, increased taxonomic speciation of subject-matter specialties,
and the like.
After all, in cognitive forecasting about science at the volumetric—rather
than substantively contentual—level, a key role is played by the relationship that
the amount of significant knowledge (K ) that can be extracted from a body of
information (of size I ) is given by the relation: K  log I.39 This Law of Loga-
rithmic Returns, as it might be called, constitutes a prime predictive instrument
in the matter of volumetric forecasting about the cognitive domain. For this
principle relates investment and returns, and investment is something that is
relatively predictable and amenable to advance estimation. In particular, when
our information I increases linearly over time—a situation that will have to ob-
tain in a steady-state condition of constant resource-investment, seeing that in-
vestment and crude information are proportionate—then this relationship
yields a drastic retardation that contemplates an ever longer waiting time for
equal steps of significant scientific progress.40
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
253

But, of course, all this tells us only about the structure of future science,
and not about its substance. The difficulty is that while we can predict that the
science of the future will be more complex, cumbersome, and slower-paced in
its advance than ours, we cannot foresee how it will be so in terms of the con-
tent of its discoveries. We can safely assert that the adequate exposition of a
future science—be it physics or chemistry or whatever—will take up many
more pages than ours. It is just that we do not have a clue as to what it is that
those pages will say. At the substantive level, science prediction is a matter
less of audacity than of foolhardiness. But shape and quantity, of course, is
something else again.
THE CENTRALITY OF QUALITY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
The present deliberations also serve to indicate, however, why the question of the
rate of scientific progress is delicate and rather tricky. For this whole issue turns
rather delicately on fundamentally evaluative considerations.Thus consider once
more the development of science in the recent historic past. As we saw above, at
the crudest—but also most basic—level, where progress is measured simply by
the growth of the scientific literature, there has for centuries been the astonish-
ingly swift and sure progress of an exponential growth with a doubling time of
roughly fifteen years. And at the more sophisticated, and demanding level of high
quality results of a suitably “important” character, there has also been exponen-
tial growth—though only at the pace of a far longer doubling time, perhaps thirty
years, approximating the reduplication with each successive generation envisaged
by Henry Adams at the turn of this century.41 Finally, at the maximally exacting
level of the really crucial insights—significant scientific knowledge that funda-
mentally enhances our understanding of nature—our analysis has it that science
has been maintaining a merely constant pace of progress.
It is this last consideration that is crucial for present purposes, carrying us
back to the point made at the very outset. For what we have been dealing with
that essentially seismological standard of importance based on the question “If
a certain finding were abrogated or abandoned, how extensive would the ram-
ifications and implications of this circumstance be? How great would be the
shocks and tremors felt throughout the whole range of what we (presumably)
know?” And what is at issue is exactly a kind of cognitive Richter Scale based
on the idea of successive orders of magnitude of impact. The crucial determi-
native factor for increasing importance is the extent of seismic disturbance of
the cognitive terrain. Would we have to abandon and/or rewrite the entire
textbook, or a whole chapter, or a section, or a paragraph, or a sentence, or a
mere footnote?
And so, while the question of the rate of scientific progress does indeed in-
volve the somewhat delicate issue of the evaluative standard that is at issue, our
254
Cognitive Progress

stance here can be rough and ready—and justifiably so because the precise de-
tails do not affect the fundamental shape of the overall evaluation. Viewing sci-
ence as a cognitive discipline—a body of knowledge whose task is the unfolding
of a rational account of the modus operandi of nature—we have it that progress
stands correlative with its accession of really major discoveries: the seismically
significant, cartography-revising insights into nature. And this has historically
been growing at a rate that sure and steady—but essentially linear. However,
this perspective lays the foundation for our present analysis—that the histori-
cal situation has been one of a CONSTANT (linear) progress of science as a cogni-
tive discipline notwithstanding its EXPONENTIAL growth as a productive enterprise
(as measured in terms of resources, money, manpower, publications, etc.).
In the struggle for cognitive control over nature, we have been confronting
an enterprise of ever escalating demands. And so, while one cannot hope to
predict the content of future science, the F/I-relationship does actually put us
into a position to make plausible estimates about its volume.To be sure, there is,
on this basis, no inherent limit to the possibility of future progress in scientific
knowledge. But the exploitation of this theoretical prospect gets ever more dif-
ficult, expensive, and demanding in terms of effort and ingenuity. New findings
of equal significance require ever greater aggregate efforts. In the ongoing
course of scientific progress, the earlier investigations in the various depart-
ments of inquiry are able to skim the cream, so to speak: they take the “easy
pickings,” and later achievements of comparable significance require ever
deeper forays into complexity and call for an ever-increasing bodies of infor-
mation. (And it is important to realize that this cost increase is not because lat-
ter-day workers are doing better science, but simply because it is harder to
achieve the same level of science: one must dig deeper or search wider to achieve
results of the same significance as before.)
A mixed picture emerges. On the one hand, the course of scientific
progress is a history of the successive destabilization of theories. On the other
hand, the increasing resource requirement for digging into ever deeper layers of
complexity is such that successive triumphs in our cognitive struggles with na-
ture are only to be gained at an increasingly greater price. The world’s inherent
complexity renders the task of its cognitive penetration increasingly demanding
and difficult. The process at issue with the growth of scientific knowledge in
our complex world is one of drastically diminishing returns. This situation
means that grappling with ever vaster bodies of information in the construction
of an ever more cumbersome and complex account of the natural world is the
unavoidable requisite of scientific progress.
To be sure, we constantly seek to “simplify” science striving for an ever
smaller basis of ever more powerful explanatory principles. But in the course of
this endeavor we invariably complicate the structure of science itself. We secure
greater power (and, as it were, functional simplicity) at the price of greater com-
plexity in structural regards.42 By the time the physicists get that grand unified
The Law of Logarithmic Returns
255

theory, the physics they will have on their hands will be complex to the point to
almost defying comprehension.The mathematics gets ever more elaborate and
powerful, the training transit to the frontier ever longer. And so, despite its
quest for greater operational simplicity (economy of principles), science itself is
becoming ever more complex (in its substantive content, its reasonings, its ma-
chinery, etc.). Simplicity of process is here more than offset by complexity of
product. And the phenomenon of diminishing returns reflects the price that
this ongoing complexification exacts.43
256
Cognitive Progress

257
Chapter 14
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
(Knowledge as Boundless)
SYNOPSIS
•
Perfected science would have to realize four theoretical desiderata: (a)
erotetic completeness (including explanatory completeness), (b) pragmatic
completeness, (c) predictive completeness, and (d) temporal finality (the
ω-condition).
•
There is, as a matter of fundamental general principle, no practicable way
for us to establish that any one of these desiderata is realized. Our science
must be seen as inherently incompletable, with an ever-receding horizon
separating where we are from where we would ideally like to be.
•
For perfected science is not a realizable condition of things but an idealiza-
tion that provides a helpful goal-direction as well as a useful contrast-
conception to highlight the limited character of what we do and can attain.
•
Perfection is dispensable as a goal for natural science and we certainly need
not presuppose its potential attainability to validate the enterprise. The
motive force of scientific progress is not the a fronte pull of an unattainable
perfection but the a tergo push of removing recognized shortcomings.
CONDITIONS OF PERFECTED SCIENCE
How far can the scientific enterprise advance toward a definitive understand-
ing of reality? Might science attain a point of recognizable completion? Is the

achievement of perfected science a genuine possibility, even in theory when all
of the “merely practical” obstacles are put aside as somehow incidental?
What would perfected science be like? What sort of standards would it have
to meet? Clearly, it would have to complete in full the discharge of natural sci-
ence’s mandate or mission. Now, the goal-structure of scientific inquiry cov-
ers a good deal of ground. It is diversified and complex, spreading across both
the cognitive/theoretical and active/practical sectors. It encompasses the tra-
ditional quartet of description, explanation, prediction, and control, in line
with the following picture:
The theoretical sector concerns itself with matters of characterizing, explaining,
accounting for, and rendering intelligible—with purely intellectual and in-
formative issues, in short. By contrast, the practical sector is concerned with
guiding actions, canalizing expectations, and, in general, with achieving the
control over our environment that is required for the satisfactory conduct of our
affairs.The former sector thus deals with what science enables us to say, and the
latter with what it enables us to do. The one relates to our role as spectators of
nature, the other to our role as active participants.
It thus appears that if we are to claim that our science has attained a per-
fected condition, it would have to satisfy (at least) the four following conditions:
1.
Erotetic completeness: It must answer, in principle at any rate, all
those descriptive and explanatory questions that it itself counte-
nances as legitimately raisable, and must accordingly explain every-
thing it deems explicable.
2.
Predictive completeness: It must provide the cognitive basis for accu-
rately predicting those eventuations that are in principle predictable
(that is, those which it itself recognizes as such).
258
Cognitive Progress

3.
Pragmatic completeness: It must provide the requisite cognitive means
for doing whatever is feasible for beings like ourselves to do in the
circumstances in which we labor.
4.
Temporal finality (the omega-condition): It must leave no room for
expecting further substantial changes that destabilize the existing
state of scientific knowledge.
Each of these modes of substantive completeness deserves detailed considera-
tion. First, however, one brief preliminary remark. It is clear that any condition
of science that might qualify as “perfected” would have to meet certain formal
requirements of systemic unity. If, for example, there are different routes to one
and the same question (for instance, if both astronomy and geology can inform
us about the age of the earth), then these answers will certainly have to be con-
sistent. Perfected science will have to meet certain requirements of structural
systematicity in the manner of its articulation: it must be coherent, consistent,
consonant, uniform, harmonious, and so on. Such requirements represent
purely formal cognitive demands upon the architectonic of articulation of a
body of science that could lay any claim to perfection. Interesting and impor-
tant though they are, we shall not, however, trouble about these formal require-
ments here, our present concern being with various substantive matters at issue
in the four aforementioned items.1
THEORETICAL ADEQUACY:
ISSUES OF EROTETIC COMPLETENESS
Could we ever actually achieve erotetic completeness (Q-completeness)—the
condition of being able to resolve, in principle, all of our (legitimately posable)
questions about the world? Could we ever find ourselves in this position?2
In theory, yes. A body of science certainly could be such as to provide an-
swers to all of the questions that it allows to arise. But just how meaningful
would this mode of completeness be?
It is sobering to realize that the erotetic completeness of a state of science
does not necessarily betoken its comprehensiveness or sufficiency. It might re-
flect the paucity of the range of questions we are prepared to contemplate—
a deficiency of imagination, so to speak. When the range of our knowledge is
sufficiently restricted, then its question-resolving completeness will merely re-
flect this impoverishment rather than its intrinsic adequacy. Conceivably, if im-
probably, science might reach a purely fortuitous equilibrium between problems
and solutions. It could eventually be “completed” in the narrow erotetic sense of
providing an answer to every question that arises in the then-existing (albeit
still imperfect) state of knowledge without thereby being completed in the
larger sense of answering the questions that arise in probing more deeply. And
so, our corpus of scientific knowledge could be erotetically complete and yet
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
259

fundamentally inadequate. Thus, even if realized, this erotetic mode of com-
pleteness would not be particularly meaningful.
Any adequate theory of inquiry must recognize that the ongoing process of
science is a process of conceptual innovation that always leaves certain theses
wholly outside the cognitive range of the inquirers of any particular period.
This means that there will always be facts (or plausible candidate-facts) about
a thing that we do not know because we cannot even conceive of them. For to
grasp such a fact calls for taking a perspective of consideration that we simply
do not have, since the state of knowledge (or purported knowledge) is not yet
advanced to a point at which its entertainment is feasible. In bringing concep-
tual innovation about, cognitive progress makes it possible to consider new pos-
sibilities that were heretofore conceptually inaccessible.
The language of emergence can perhaps be deployed profitably to make
the point. But what is at issue is not an emergence of the features of things but
an emergence in our knowledge about them. The blood circulated in the
human body well before Harvey; uranium-containing substances were ra-
dioactive before Becquerel. The emergence at issue relates to our cognitive
mechanisms of conceptualization, not to the objects of our consideration in
and of themselves. Real-world objects are conceived of as antecedent to any
cognitive interaction—as being there right along, or “pregiven,” as Edmund
Husserl puts it. Any cognitive changes or innovations are to be conceptualized
as something that occurs on our side of the cognitive transaction, and not on
the side of the objects with which we deal.3
And the prospect of change can never be dismissed in this domain. The
properties of a thing are literally open-ended: we can always discover more of
them. Even if we view the world as inherently finitistic, and espouse a Principle
of Limited Variety which has it that nature can be portrayed descriptively with
the materials of a finite taxonomic scheme, there can be no a priori guarantee
that the progress of science will not engender an unending sequence of changes
of mind regarding this finite register of descriptive materials. And this conforms
exactly to our expectation in these matters. For where the real things of the
world are concerned, we not only expect to learn more about them in the course
of scientific inquiry, we expect to have to change our mind about their nature and
mode of comportment. Be it elm trees, or volcanoes, or quarks that are at issue, we
have every expectation that in the course of future scientific progress people will
come to think differently about them than we ourselves do at this juncture.
Cognitive inexhaustibility thus emerges as a definitive feature of our con-
ception of a real thing. For in claiming knowledge about them we are always
aware that the object transcends what we know about it—that yet further and
different facts concerning it can always come to light, and that all that we do say
about it does not exhaust all that can be said about it.
The preceding considerations illustrate a more general circumstance. Any
claim to the realization of a theoretically complete science of physics would be
260
Cognitive Progress

one that affords “a complete, consistent, and unified theory of physical interac-
tion that would describe all possible observations.”4 But to check that the state
of physics on hand actually meets this condition, we would need to know ex-
actly what physical interactions are indeed possible. And to warrant us in using
the state of physics on hand as a basis for answering this question, we would al-
ready have to be assured that its view of the possibilities is correct—and thus al-
ready have preestablished its completeness. The idea of a consolidated erotetic
completeness shipwrecks on the infeasibility of finding a meaningful way to
monitor its attainment.
After all, any judgment we can make about the laws of nature—any model
we can contrive regarding how things work in the world—is a matter of theo-
retical triangulation from the data at our disposal. And we should never have
unalloyed confidence in the definitiveness of our data base or in the adequacy
of our exploitation of it. Observation can never settle decisively just what the
laws of nature are. In principle, different law-systems can always yield the same
observational output: as philosophers of science are want to insist, observations
underdetermine laws. To be sure, this worries working scientists less than
philosophers, because they deploy powerful regulative principles—simplicity,
economy, uniformity, homogeneity, and so on—to constrain uniqueness. But
neither these principles themselves nor the uses to which they are put are un-
problematic. No matter how comprehensive our data or how great our confi-
dence in the inductions we base on them, the potential inadequacy of our
claims cannot be averted. One can never feel secure in writing finis on the basis
of purely theoretical considerations.
We can reliably estimate the amount of gold or oil yet to be discovered, be-
cause we know a priori the earth’s extent and can thus establish a proportion
between what we know and what we do not. But we cannot comparably esti-
mate the amount of knowledge yet to be discovered, because we have and can
have no way of relating what we know to what we do not. At best, we can con-
sider the proportion of available questions we can in fact resolve; and this is an
unsatisfactory procedure.The very idea of cognitive limits has a paradoxical air.
It suggests that we claim knowledge about something outside knowledge. But
(to hark back to Hegel), with respect to the realm of knowledge, we are not in
a position to draw a line between what lies inside and what lies outside—
seeing that, ex hypothesi we have no cognitive access to that latter. One cannot
make a survey of the relative extent of knowledge or ignorance about nature ex-
cept by basing it on some picture of nature that is already in hand—that is, un-
less one is prepared to take at face value the deliverances of existing science.
This process of judging the adequacy of our science on its own telling is the
best we can do, but it remains an essentially circular and consequently incon-
clusive way of proceeding. The long and short of it is that there is no cogni-
tively adequate basis for maintaining the completeness of science in a rationally
satisfactory way.
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
261

To monitor the theoretical completeness of science, we accordingly need
some theory-external control on the adequacy of our theorizing, some theory-
external reality-principle to serve as a standard of adequacy. We are thus driven
to abandoning the road of pure theory and proceeding along that of the practi-
cal goals of the enterprise. This gives special importance and urgency to the
pragmatic sector.
PRAGMATIC COMPLETENESS
The arbitrament of praxis—not theoretical merit but practical capability—
affords the best standard of adequacy for our scientific proceedings that is
available. But could we ever be in a position to claim that science has been
completed on the basis of the success of its practical applications? On this
basis, the perfection of science would have to manifest itself in the perfecting
of control—in achieving a perfected technology. But just how are we to pro-
ceed here? Could our natural science achieve manifest perfection on the side
of control over nature? Could it ever underwrite a recognizably perfected
technology?
The issue of “control over nature” involves much more complexity than
may appear on first view. For just how is this conception to be understood?
Clearly, in terms of bending the course of events to our will, of attaining our
ends within nature. But this involvement of “our ends” brings to light the
prominence of our own contribution. For example, if we are inordinately
modest in our demands (or very unimaginative), we may even achieve “com-
plete control over nature” in the sense of being in a position to do whatever
we want to do, but yet attain this happy condition in a way that betokens very
little real capability.
One might, to be sure, involve the idea of omnipotence, and construe a
“perfected” technology as one that would enable us to do literally anything. But
this approach would at once run into the old difficulties already familiar to the
medieval scholastics. They were faced with the challenge: “If God is omnipo-
tent, can he annihilate himself (contra his nature as a necessary being), or can
he do evil deeds (contra his nature as a perfect being), or can he make triangles
have four angles (contrary to their definitive nature)?” Sensibly enough, the
scholastics inclined to solve these difficulties by maintaining that an omnipo-
tent God need not be in a position to do literally anything but rather simply
anything that it is possible for him to do. Similarly, we cannot explicate the idea
of technological omnipotence in terms of a capacity to produce and result,
wholly without qualification. We cannot ask for the production of a perpetuum
mobile, for spaceships with “hyperdrive” enabling them to attain transluminar
velocities, for devices that predict essentially stochastic processes such as the
disintegrations of transuranic atoms, or for piston devices that enable us to set
262
Cognitive Progress

independently the values for the pressure, temperature, and volume of a body of
gas. We cannot, in sum, as of a “perfected” technology that it should enable 
us to do anything that we might take it into our heads to do, no matter how
“unrealistic” this might be.
All that we can reasonably ask of it is that perfected technology should en-
able us to do anything that it is possible for us to do—and not just what we might
think we can do but what we really and truly can do. A perfected technology
would be one that enabled us to do anything that can possibly be done by crea-
tures circumstanced as we are. But how can we deal with the pivotal conception
of “can” that is at issue here? Clearly, only science—real, true, correct, and in
sum perfected science—could tell us what in fact is realistically possible and
what circumstances are indeed inescapable. Whenever our “knowledge” falls
short of this, we may well “ask the impossible” by way of accomplishment (e.g.,
spaceships in “hyperdrive”), and thus complain of incapacity to achieve control
in ways that put unfair burdens on this conception.
Power is a matter of the “effecting of things possible”—of achieving con-
trol—and it is clearly cognitive state-of-the-art in science which, in teaching
us about the limits of the possible, is itself the agent that must shape our con-
ception of this issue. Every law of nature serves to set the boundary between
what is genuinely possible and what is not, between what can be done and
what cannot, between which questions we can properly ask and which we
cannot. We cannot satisfactorily monitor the adequacy and completeness of
our science by its ability to effect “all things possible,” because science alone
can inform us about what is possible. As science grows and develops, it poses
new issues of power and control, reformulating and reshaping those demands
whose realization represents “control over nature.” For science itself brings
new possibilities to light. (At a suitable stage, the idea of “splitting the atom”
will no longer seem a contradiction in terms.) To see if a given state of tech-
nology meets the condition of perfection, we must already have a body of per-
fected science in hand to tell us what is indeed possible. To validate the claim
that our technology is perfected, we need to preestablish the completeness of
our science. The idea works in such a way that claims to perfected control can
rest only on perfected science.
In attempting to travel the practicalist route to cognitive completeness, we
are thus trapped in a circle. Short of having supposedly perfected science in
hand, we could not say what a perfected technology would be like, and thus we
could not possibly monitor the perfection of science in terms of the technology
that it underwrites.
Moreover, even if (per impossible) a “pragmatic equilibrium” between what
we can and what we wish to do in science were to be realized, we could not be
warrantedly confident that this condition will remain unchanged.The possibil-
ity that “just around the corner things will become unstuck can never be elim-
inated. Even if we “achieve control,” for all intents and purposes, we cannot be
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
263

sure of not losing our grip on it—not because of a loss of power but because of
cognitive changes that produce a broadening of the imagination and a widened
apprehension as to what “having control” involves.
Accordingly, the project of achieving practical mastery can never be per-
fected in a satisfactory way. The point is that control hinges on what we want,
and what we want is conditioned by what we think possible, and this is some-
thing that hinges crucially on theory—on our beliefs about how things work in
this world. And so control is something deeply theory-infected. We can never
safely move from apparent to real adequacy in this regard. We cannot ade-
quately assure that seeming perfection is more than just that. We thus have no
alternative but to presume that our knowledge (i.e., our purported knowledge) is
inadequate at this and indeed at any other particular stage of the game of cog-
nitive completeness.
One important point about control must, however, be noted with care. Our
preceding negative strictures all relate to attainment of perfect control—of being
in a position to do everything possible. But no such problems affect the issue of
amelioration—of doing some things better and improving our control over what
it was. It makes perfectly good sense to use its technological applications as stan-
dards of scientific advancement. (Indeed, we have no real alternative to using
pragmatic standards at this level, because reliance on theory alone is, in the end,
going to be circular.) While control does not help us with perfection, it is crucial
for monitoring progress. Standards of assessment and evaluation are such that we
can implement the idea of improvements (progress), but not that of completion
(realized perfection). We can determine when we have managed to enlarge our
technological mastery, but we cannot meaningfully say what it would be to per-
fect it. (Our conception of the doable keeps changing with changes in the cogni-
tive state-of-the-art, a fact that does not, of course, alter our view of what already
has been done in the practical sphere.)
With regard to technical perfectibility, we must recognize that (1) there is
no reason to expect that its realization is possible, even in principle, and (2) it is
not monitorable: even if we had achieved it, we would not be able to claim suc-
cess with warranted confidence. In the final analysis, them, we cannot regard
the realization of “completed science” as a meaningful prospect—we cannot re-
ally say what it is that we are asking for. (To be sure, what is meaningless here
is not the idea of perfected science as such but the idea of achieving it.) These
deliberations further substantiate the idea that we must always presume our
knowledge to be incomplete in the domain of natural science.
PREDICTIVE COMPLETENESS
Predictive completeness rests on the idea of being able to predict everything
that occurs. It represents a forlorn hope. For predictors are—of necessity!—
264
Cognitive Progress

bound to fail even in much simpler self-predictive matters. Thus consider
confronting a predictor with the problem posed by the question:
P1: When next you answer a question, will the answer be negative?
This is a question which—for reasons of general principle—no predictor can
ever answer satisfactorily.5 For consider the available possibilities:
Actually
Answer given
correct answer?
Agreement?
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
NO
CAN’T SAY
NO
NO
On this question, there just is no way in which a predictor’s response could
possibly agree with the actual fact of the matter. Even the seemingly plausi-
ble response “I can’t say” automatically constitutes a self-falsifying answer,
since in giving this answer the predictor would automatically make “No” into
the response called for by the proprieties of the situation.
Of course, the problem poses a perfectly meaningful question to which an-
other predictor could give a putatively correct answer—namely, by saying:“No—
that predictor cannot answer this question at all; the question will condemn a
predictor to baffled silence.” However, while the question posed in P1 will be ir-
resolvable by a particular computer, it could—in theory—be answered by other
predictors and so is not predictively intractable flat-out. But there are other
questions that indeed are computer insolubilia for computers-at-large. One of
them is:
P2: What is an example of a predictive question that no predictor will
ever state?
In answering this question the predictor would have to stake a claim of the
form: “Q is an example of a predictive question that no predictor will ever
state.” And in the very making of this claim the predictor would falsify it. It is
thus automatically unable to effect a satisfactory resolution. However, the ques-
tion is neither meaningless nor irresolvable. A noncomputer problem solver
could in theory answer it correctly. All the same, its presupposition, “There is a
predictive question that no predictor will ever consider” is beyond doubt true.
What we thus have in P2 is an example of an in-principle solvable—and thus
“meaningful”—question which, as a matter of necessity in the logical scheme of
things, no predictor can ever resolve satisfactorily.
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
265

The difficulties encountered in using physical control as a standard of
“perfection” in science all also hold with respect to prediction, which, after all, is
simply a mode of cognitive control.
Suppose someone asks:“Are you really still going to persist in plaints regard-
ing the incompleteness of scientific knowledge when science can predict every-
thing?” The reply is simply that science will never be able to predict literally
everything: the very idea of predicting everything is simply unworkable. For then,
whenever we predict something, we would have to predict also the effects of
making those predictions, and then the ramification of those predictions, and so
on ad indefinitum. The very most that can be asked is that science put us into a
position to predict, not everything, but rather anything that we might choose to be
interested in and to inquire about. And here it must be recognized that our imag-
inative perception of the possibilities might be much too narrow. We can only
make predictions about matters that lie, at least broadly speaking, within our cog-
nitive horizons. Newton could not have predicted findings in quantum theory
any more than he could have predicted the outcome of American presidential
elections. One can only make predictions about what one is cognizant of, takes
note of, deems worthy of consideration. In this regard, one can be myopic either
by not noting or by losing sight of significant sectors of natural phenomena.
Another important point must be made regarding this matter of unpre-
dictability. Great care must be taken to distinguish the ontological and the epis-
temological dimensions, to keep the entries of these two columns apart:
unexplainable
not (yet) explained
by chance
by some cause we do not know of
spontaneous
caused in a way we cannot identify
random
lawful in ways we cannot
characterize
by whim
for reasons not apparent to us
It is tempting to slide from epistemic incapacity to ontological lawfulness. But
we must resist this temptation and distinguish what is inherently uncognizable
from what we just do not happen to cognize. The nature of scientific change
makes it inevitably problematic to slide from present to future incapacity.
Sometimes, to be sure, talk in the ontological mode is indeed warranted.
The world no doubt contains situations of randomness and chance, situations
in which genuinely stochastic processes are at work in a ways that “engenders
unknowability.” But these ontological claims must root in knowledge rather
than ignorance.They can only be claimed appropriately in those cases in which
(as in quantum theory) we can explain inexplicability—that is, in which we can
account for the inability to predict/explain/control within the framework of a
266
Cognitive Progress

positive account of why the item at issue is actually unpredictable/unexplain-
able/unsolvable.
Accordingly, these ontological based incapacities do not introduce matters
that “lie beyond the limits of knowledge.” On the contrary, positive information
is the pivot point. The only viable limits to knowability are those that root in
knowledge—that is, in a model of nature that entails that certain sorts of things
are unknowable. It is not a matter of an incapacity to answer appropriate ques-
tions (“We ‘just don’t know’ why that stochastic process eventuated as it did”).
Rather, in the prevailing state of knowledge, these question are improper; they
just do not arise.
Science itself sets the limits to predictability—insisting that some phenom-
ena (the stochastic processes encountered in quantum physics, for example) are
inherently unpredictable. And this is always to some degree problematic. The
most that science can reasonably be asked to do is to predict what it itself sees
as in principle predictable—to answer every predictive question that it itself
countenances as proper.Thus if quantum theory is right, the position and veloc-
ity of certain particles cannot be pinpointed conjointly. This renders the ques-
tion “What will the exact position and velocity of particle X be at the exact time
t?” not insoluble but illegitimate. Question-illegitimacy represents a limit that
grows out of science itself—a limit on appropriate questions rather than on
available solutions.
And in any case the idea that science might one day be a position to pre-
dict everything is simply unworkable. To achieve this, it would be necessary,
whenever we predict something, to predict also the effects of making those pre-
dictions, and then the ramifications of those predictions, and so on ad indefini-
tum. The very most that can be asked is that science puts us into a position to
predict, not everything, but rather anything that we might choose to be inter-
ested in and to inquire about.
TEMPORAL FINALITY
Scientists from time to time indulge in eschatological musings and tell us that
the scientific venture is approaching its end.6 And it is, of course, entirely con-
ceivable that natural science will come to a stop, and will do so not in conse-
quence of a cessation of intelligent life but in C. S. Peirce’s more interesting
sense of completion of the project: of eventually reaching a condition after
which even indefinitely ongoing inquiry will not—and indeed in the very na-
ture of things cannot—produce any significant change, because inquiry has
come to “the end of the road.” The situation would be analogous to that envis-
aged in the apocryphal story in vogue during the middle 1800s regarding the
Commissioner of the United States Patents who resigned his post because
there was nothing left to invent.7
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
267

Such a position is in theory possible. But here, too, we can never determine
that it is actual.
There is no practicable way in which the claim that science has achieved
temporal finality can be validated.The question “Is the current state of science,
S, final?” is one for which we can never legitimate an affirmative answer. For
the prospect of future changes of S can never be precluded. One cannot plausi-
bly move beyond “We have (in S) no good reason to think that S will ever
change” to obtain “We have (in S) good reason to think that S will never
change.” To take this posture toward S is to presuppose its completeness.8 It is not
simply to take the natural and relatively unproblematic stance that that for
which S vouches is to be taken as true but to go beyond this to insist that what-
ever is true finds a rationalization within S.This argument accordingly embeds
finality in completeness, and in doing so jumps from the frying pan into the fire.
For it shifts from what is difficult to what is yet more so. To hold that if some-
thing is so at all, then S affords a good reason for it is to take so blatantly am-
bitious (even megalomaniacal) a view of S that the issue of finality seems
almost a harmless appendage.
Moreover, just as the appearance of erotetic and pragmatic equilibrium can
be a product of narrowness and weakness, so can temporal finality. We may
think that science is unchangeable simply because we have been unable to
change it. But that’s just not good enough. Were science ever to come to a seem-
ing stop, we could never be sure that is had done so not because it is at “the end
of the road” but because we are at the end of our tether. We can never ascertain
that science has attained the ω-condition of final completion, since from our
point of view the possibility of further change lying “just around the corner” can
never be ruled out finally and decisively. No matter how final a position we ap-
pear to have reached, the prospects of its coming unstuck cannot be precluded.
As we have seen, future science is inscrutable. We can never claim with assur-
ance that the position we espouse in immune to change under the impact of fur-
ther data—that the oscillations are dying out and we are approaching a final
limit. In its very nature, science “in the limit” related to what happens in the long
run, and this is something about which we in principle cannot gather informa-
tion: any information we can actually gather inevitably pertains to the short run
and not the long run. We can never achieve adequate assurance that apparent de-
finitiveness is real. We can never consolidate the claim that science has settled
into a frozen, changeless pattern.The situation in natural science is such that our
knowledge of nature must ever be presumed to be incomplete.
The idea of achieving a state of recognizably completed science is totally
unrealistic. Even as widely variant modes of behavior by three-dimensional ob-
jects could produce exactly the same two-dimensional shadow-projections, so
very different law-systems could in principle engender exactly the same phe-
nomena. We cannot make any definitive inferences from phenomena to the
nature of the real. The prospect of perfected science is bound to elude us.
268
Cognitive Progress

One is thus brought back to the stance of the great Idealist philosophers
(Plato, Spinoza, Hegel, Bradley, Royce) that human knowledge inevitably falls
short of recognizably “perfected science” (the Ideas, the Absolute), and must
accordingly be looked on as incomplete. We have no alternative but to proceed
on the assumption that the era of innovation is not over—that future science
can and will prove to be different science.
As these deliberations indicate, the conditions of perfected science in point
of description, explanation, prediction, and control are all unrealizable. Our in-
formation will inevitably prove inconclusive. We have no reasonable alternative
to seeing our present-day science as suboptimal, regardless of the question of
what date the calendar shows.
But what about completeness in point of discovery nature’s laws? Even a
system that is finitely complex both in its physical makeup and in its functional
laws might nevertheless be infinitely complex in the phenomena that it mani-
fests over time. For the operations of a structurally and lawfully finite system
can yet exhibit an infinite intricacy in productive complexity, manifesting this
limitless diversity in the working our of its processes rather than as regards its
spatiostructural composition or the nomic comportment of its basic compo-
nents. Even it the number of constituents of nature were small, the ways in
which they can be combined to yield phenomena in space-time might yet be
infinite.Think here of the examples of letters, syllables, words, sentences, para-
graphs, books, genres (novels, reference books, etc.) libraries, library systems.
Even a finite nature can, like a typewriter with a limited an operationally sim-
ple keyboard, yield an endlessly varied test. It can produce a steady stream of
new products–“new” not necessarily in kind but in their functional interrela-
tionships and thus in their theoretical implications. And on this basis our
knowledge of nature’s workings can be endlessly enhanced and deepened by
contemplating an unending proliferation of phenomena.
Moreover, there is no need to assume a ceiling to such a sequence of levels
of integrative complexity of phenomenal diversity. The different levels each ex-
hibit an order of their own.The phenomena we attain in the n-th level can have
features whose investigation takes us to the (n  1) level. New phenomena and
new laws presumably arise at every level of integrative order. The diverse facets
of nature can generate conceptually new strata of operation that yield a poten-
tially unending sequence of levels, each giving rise to its own characteristic prin-
ciples of organizations, themselves quite unpredictable from the standpoint of
the other levels. In this way, even a relatively simple world as regards its basic op-
erations can come to have an effectively infinite cognitive depth, once the notion
of a natural phenomenon is broadened to include not just the processes them-
selves and the products they produce but also the relationship among them.
Consider, for example, some repeatedly exemplified physical feature and
contemplate the sequence of 0’s and 1’s projected according to the rule that the
i-th entry in the sequence is 1 if this feature is exemplified on occasion number
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
269

i, and 0 if not. Whenever two such feature-concepts, say C and C', generate such
sequences in the manner of
C:
0100110100 . . .
C': 1001011010 . . . ,
then we can introduce the corresponding matching sequence for C and C',
0010010001 . . . , which is such that its i-th position is 1 if the two base sequences
agree at their respective i-th positions, and 0 if they disagree. Such matching se-
quences will have a life of their own. For example, even if two base sequences are
random, their matching sequences need not be—for example, when those base
sequences simply exchange 0s and 1s. (Even random phenomena can be related
by laws of coordination.)
Note that the present discussion does not propound the ontological theses
that natural science cannot be pragmatically complete or even ω-definitive, but
the epistemological thesis that science cannot ever be known to be so. The point is
not that the requirements of definitive knowledge cannot in the nature of things
be satisfied but that they cannot be implemented (i.e., be shown to be satisfied).
The upshot is that science must always be presumed to be incomplete, not that
it necessarily always is so. No doubt this is also true. It cannot, however, be
demonstrated on the basis of epistemological general principles.
The prospect of change can never be dismissed in this domain. The
properties of a thing are literally open-ended: we can always discover more of
them. For where the real things of the world are concerned, we not only ex-
pect to learn more about them in the course of scientific inquiry, we expect to
have to change our mind about their nature and mode of comportment. Be it elm
trees, or volcanoes, or quarks that are at issue, we have every expectation that
in the course of future scientific progress people will come to think differ-
ently about them than we ourselves do at this juncture. And any cognitive
changes or innovations are to be conceptualized as something that occurs on
our side of the cognitive transaction, and not on the side of the objects with
which we deal.9
Cognitive inexhaustibility thus emerges as a definitive feature of our con-
ception of a real thing. In claiming knowledge about such things, we are always
aware that the object transcends what we know about it—that yet further and
different facts concerning it can always come to light, and that all that we do say
about it does not exhaust all that can be said about it. With science there is al-
ways more to be done, the doing of it becomes increasingly difficult. And man’s
material resources are limited. These limits inexorably circumscribe our cogni-
tive access to the real world. There will always be interactions with nature of
such a scale (as measured in energy, pressure, temperature, particle-velocities,
etc.) that their realization would require the concurrent deployment of re-
sources of so vast a scope that we can never realize them. If there are interac-
270
Cognitive Progress

tions to which we have no access, then there are (presumably) phenomena that
we cannot discern. It would be very unreasonable to expect nature to confine
the distribution of cognitively significant phenomena to those ranges that lie
within our reach.
The world’s furnishings are cognitively opaque; we cannot see to the bot-
tom of them. Knowledge can become more extensive without thereby becom-
ing more complete. And this view of the situation is rather supported than
impeded if we abandon a cumulativist/preservationist view of knowledge or
purported knowledge for the view that new discoveries need not supplement
but can displace old ones.10
Were science ever to come to a seeming stop, we could never be sure that
is had done so not because it is at “the end of the road” but because we are at
the end of our tether. We can never ascertain that science has attained the 
ω-condition of final completion, since from our point of view the possibility of
further change lying “just around the corner” can never be ruled out finally and
decisively. The reality of natural science is such that our knowledge of nature
must ever be presumed to be incomplete.
We have no alternative but to proceed on the assumption that the era of
innovation is not over—that future science can and will prove to be different sci-
ence. But of course while we can securely forecast that this will be so we will
not(cannot(be specific regarding the details of how it will be so.
“PERFECTED SCIENCE” AS AN IDEALIZATION THAT
AFFORDS A USEFUL CONTRAST CONCEPTION
Reasons of general principle block us from ever achieving a position from
which we can make good the claim that the several goals of science have actu-
ally been reached. Perfection is simply no a goal or telos of the scientific enter-
prise. It is not a realizable condition of things but at best a useful contrast
conception that keeps actual science in its place and helps to sensitize us to its
imperfections. The validation of this idealization lies not in its future achiev-
ability but in its ongoing utility as a regulative ideal that affords a contrast to
what we do actually attain—so as to highlight its salient limitations.
With respect to the moral aspirations of man’s will, Kant wrote:
Perfection [of the moral will] is a thing of which no rational being in
the world of sense is at any time capable. But since it is required [of
us] as practically necessary, it can be found only in an endless progress
to that complete fitness; on principles of pure practical reason, it is
necessary to assume such a practical progress as the real object of our
will. . . . Only endless progress from lower to higher stages of moral
perfection is possible to a rational but finite being.11
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
271

Much the same story surely holds on the side of the cognitive perfecting of man’s
knowledge. Here, comparable regulative demands are a work governing the prac-
tical venture of inquiry, urging us to the ever fuller realization of the potentialities
of the human intellect.The discontent of reason is a noble discontent.The scien-
tific project is a venture in self-transcendence; one of the strongest motivations of
scientific work is the urge to go beyond present science—to “advance the fron-
tiers.” Man’s commitment to an ideal of reason in his pursuit of an unattainable
systematic completeness is the epistemic counterpart of our commitment to
moral ideals. It reflects a striving toward the rational that is all the more noble
because it is not finally attainable. If the work of inquiring reason in the sphere of
natural science were completable, this would be something utterly tragic for us.
Ideal science is not something we have in hand here and now. Nor is it
something toward which we are moving along the asymptotic and approxima-
tive lines envisaged by Peirce.12 Existing science does not and never will embody
perfection. The cognitive ideals of completeness, unity, consistency, and defini-
tive finality represent an aspiration rather than a coming reality, an idealized telos
rather than a realizable condition of things. Perfected science lies outside history
as a useful contrast-case that cannot be secured in this imperfect world.
The idea of “perfected science” is that focus imaginarius whose pursuit
canalizes and structures out inquiry. It represents the ultimate telos of inquiry,
the idealized destination of a journey in which we are still and indeed are ever
engaged, a grail of sorts that we can pursue but not possess. The ideal of per-
fection thus serves a fundamentally regulative role to mark the fact that actual-
ity falls short of our cognitive aspirations. It marks a contrast that regulates how
we do and must view our claims, playing a rile akin to that of the functionary
who reminded the Roman emperor of his mortality in reminding us that our
pretensions are always vulnerable. Contemplation of this idea reminds us that
the human condition is suspended between the reality of imperfect achieve-
ment and the ideal of an unattainable perfection. In abandoning this concep-
tion—in rejecting the idea of an “ideal science” that alone can properly be
claimed to afford a definitive grasp of reality—we would abandon an idea that
crucially regulates our view regarding the nature and status of the knowledge to
which we lay claim. We would then no longer be constrained to characterize
our view of things as merely ostensible and purported. We would be tempted to
regard our picture of nature as real, authentic, and final in a manner that we at
bottom realize it does not deserve.
What is being maintained here is not the “completed/perfected science” is
a senseless idea as such but that the idea of attaining it is senseless. It represents
a theoretically realizable state whose actual realization we can never achieve.
What is unrealizable is not perfection as such but the epistemic condition of rec-
ognizing its attainment. (Even if we arrive, we can never tell that we’re there!)
Does this situation not destroy “the pursuit of perfection” as a meaningful
endeavor? Here it is useful to heed the distinction between a goal and an ideal.
272
Cognitive Progress

A goal is something that we hope and expect to achieve. An ideal is merely a
wistful inkling, a “wouldn’t it be nice if ”—something that figures in the mode
of aspiration rather than expectation. A goal motivates us in striving for its at-
tainment; an ideal stimulates and encourages. And ideal does not provide us
with a destination that we have any expectation of reaching; it is something for
whose actual attainment we do not even hope. It is in this sense that “perfected
science” is an ideal.
Perfected science is not something that exists here and how, nor is it some-
thing that lies ahead at some eventual offing in the remote future. It is not a real
thing to be met with in this world. It is an idealization that exists “outside
time”—that is, which cannot actually come to realization at all. It lies outside
history as a useful contrast-case that cannot be numbered among the achieved
realities of this imperfect world. Existing science does not and presumably never
will embody to perfection cognitive ideals of completeness, unity, consistency,
and so on. These factors represent an aspiration rather than a coming reality: a
telos, not a realizable condition of things—a hypothetical condition from which
any and all of the negativities of the realized actual positions have been removed.
The concept of science perfected—of an ideal and completed science that
captures the real truth of things and satisfies all of our cognitive ideals (defini-
tiveness, completeness, unity, consistency, etc.)—is at best a useful fiction, a
creature of the fictive imagination and not the secured product of inquiring rea-
son. This “ideal science” is, as the very name suggests, an idealization, some-
thing that involves the removal in thought of limitations that obtain in fact. It
involves the use of mind to move from a concern with the order of things as
they are into the order of things as they ought to be.
Here, as elsewhere, we must reckon appropriately with the standard gap
between aspiration and attainment. In the practical sphere—in craftsmanship,
for example, or the cultivation of our health—we may strive for perfection, but
cannot ever claim to attain it. And the situation in inquiry is exactly parallel
with what we encounter in such other domains—ethics specifically included.
The value of an ideal, even of one that is not realizable, lies not in the benefit of
its attainment (obviously and ex hypothesi!) but in the benefits that accrue from
its pursuit.The view that it is rational to pursue an aim only if we are in a posi-
tion to achieve its attainment or approximation is mistaken; it can be perfectly
valid (and entirely rational) if the indirect benefits of its pursuit and adoption
are sufficient—if in striving after it, we realize relevant advantages to a sub-
stantial degree. An unattainable ideal can be enormously productive.
In sum, perfected science is not a realizable condition of things but an ide-
alization that provides a useful contrast-conception to highlight the limited
character of what we do and can attain. And so, the legitimation of the ideas of
“perfected science” lies in its facilitation of the ongoing evolution of inquiry. In
this domain, we arrive at the perhaps odd-seeming posture of an invocation of
practical utility for the validation of an ideal.
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
273

THE DISPENSABILITY OF PERFECTION
The cognitive situation of natural science is such as to invite description in the-
ological terms. For the ambiguity of the human condition is only too manifest
here. We cannot expect ever to reach a position of definitive finality in this im-
perfect dispensation: we do have “knowledge” of all sorts, but it is manifestly
imperfect. Expelled from the garden of Eden, we are deprived of access to “the
God’s-eye point of view.” Definitive and comprehensive adequacy is denied us:
we have no basis for claiming to know “the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth” in scientific matters. We yearn for absolutes, but have to settle for
plausiblities; we desire what is definitively correct, but have to settle for conjec-
tures and estimates.
In this imperfect epistemic dispensation, we have to reckon with the real-
ities of the human condition. Age disagrees with age; different states-of-the-art
involve naturally discordant conceptions and incommensurate positions. The
moral of the story of the Tower of Babel applies. The absolutes for which we
yearn represent an ideal that lies beyond the range of practicable realizability.
We simply have to do the best we can with the means at our disposal.To aspire
to absolutes—for definitive comprehensiveness—is simply unrealistic.
It is sometimes maintained that such a fallibilist and imperfectionist view
of science is unacceptable. To think of science as inevitably incomplete and to
think of “the definitive answers” in scientific matters as perpetually unattainable
is, we are told, to write science off as a meaningful project.
But in science as ins the moral life, we can operate perfectly well in the re-
alization that perfection is unattainable. No doubt here and there some scien-
tists nurse the secret hope of attaining some fixed and final definitive result that
will stand, untouchable and changeless, through all subsequent ages. But unre-
alistic aspirations are surely by no means essential to the scientific enterprise as
such. In science as in other domains of human endeavor, it is a matter of doing
the best we can with the tools that come to hand. After all, the fact that perfec-
tion is unattainable does nothing to countervail against the no less real fact that
improvement is realizable. And this undeniable prospect of realizable progress—
of overcoming genuine defect and deficiencies that we find in the work of our
predecessors—affords ample impetus to scientific innovation.
We can understand “progress” in two senses. On the one hand, there is 
O-progress, defined in terms of increasing distance from the starting point (the
“origin”). On the other hand, there is D-progress, defined in terms of decreas-
ing distance from the goal (the “destination”). Consider the picture:
274
Cognitive Progress

Ordinarily, the two modes of progress are entirely equivalent: we increase the
distance traveled from O by exactly the same amount as we decrease the dis-
tance remained to D. But if the situation departs from the indicated picture
in that there is no attainable destination—if we are engaged on a journey
that, for all we know, is literally endless and has no determinable destination,
or only one that is “infinitely distant”—then we just cannot manage to de-
crease our distance from it.
The fact of it is that scientific progress is not generated a fronte by the pull
of an unattainable ideal; it is stimulated a tergo by the push of dissatisfaction with
the deficiencies of achieved positions. The labors of science are not pulled for-
ward by the mirage of (unattainable) perfection. We are pushed onward by the
(perfectly realizable) wish to do better than our predecessors in the enterprise.
Seeing that in natural science we are embarked on a journey that is literally
endless, it is only O-progress that can be achieved, and no D-progress. We can
gauge our progress only in terms of how far we have come, and not in terms of
how far we have to go. Embarked on a journey that is in principle endless, we
simply cannot say that we are nearing the goal.
The upshot is straightforward. The idea of improving our science can be
implemented without difficulty, since we can clearly improve our performance
as regards its goals of prediction, control, and the rest. But the idea of perfecting
our science cannot be implemented. 13
The Imperfectability of Knowledge
275

This page intentionally left blank.

Part IV
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

This page intentionally left blank.

279
Chapter 15
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
SYNOPSIS
•
Eminent authorities have repeatedly characterized it as a miracle that
nature is intelligible to us humans.
•
But this ability of mind to come to terms with nature is a two sided one. On
our side, it roots in the fact that we ourselves are a part of nature, a species
evolved as intelligent beings within its ambit.
•
And, on nature’s side, it lies in the very fact of its affording a setting within
which the evolution of intelligent beings is possible.
•
Thus while nature’s nature may itself be a mystery, the fact that intelligent
being evolved within it can come to comprehend various aspects of its
workings is only natural and to be expected.
•
On the other hand, such argumentation certainly does not support the un-
realistic conclusion that our understanding of nature is somehow complete
or perfect.
EXPLAINING THE POSSIBILITY OF NATURAL SCIENCE
How is natural science—and, in particular, physics—possible at all? How is it
that we insignificant humans, inhabitants of a minor satelite of a minor star
in one of the worlds myriad galaxies, can manage to unlock nature’s secrets
and gain access to her laws? And how can our mathematics—seemingly a free
creative invention of the human imagination—be used to characterize the
workings of nature with such uncanny effectiveness and accuracy? Why is it

that the majestic lawful order of nature is intelligible to us humans in our own
conceptual terms?
This issue remained unproblematic as long as people thought of the world
as the product of the creative activity of mathematicizing intelligence—as the
work of a creator who proceeds on mathematical principles (more mathematico,
in Spinoza’s expression) in designing nature. For then one could take the line
that God endows nature with a mathematically intelligible order and mind
with a duly consonant mathematicizing intelligence. There is thus no problem
about how the two get together—God simply arranged it that way. But, of
course, if this is to be the canonical rationale for mind’s grasp on nature’s laws,
then in foregoing explanatory recourse to God, we also—to all appearances—
lose our grip on the intelligibility of nature.
Some of the deepest intellects of the day accordingly think that this possi-
bility is gone for ever, confidently affirming that there just is no way to solve
this puzzle of nature’s being intelligible in a mathematically lawful manner. In
classic treatise Erwin Schroedinger characterizes the circumstance that man
can discover the laws of nature as “a miracle that may well be beyond human
understanding.”1 Eugene Wigner asserts that “the enormous usefulness of
mathematics in the natural sciences is something bordering on the mysterious,
and there is no rational explanation for it”2 and he goes on to wax surprisingly
lyrical in maintaining that:
The miracle of the appropriateness of the language of mathematics for
the formulation of the laws of physics is a wonderful gift which we
neither understand nor deserve.3
Even Albert Einstein stood in awe before this problem. In a letter written in
1952 to an old friend of his Berne days, Maurice Solovine, he wrote:
You find it curious that I regard the intelligibility of the world (in the
measure that we are authorized to speak of such an intelligibility) as a
miracle or an eternal mystery. Well, a priori one should expect that the
world can be rendered lawful only to the extent that we intervene with
our ordering intelligence . . . [But] the kind of order, on the contrary,
created, for example, by Newton’s theory of gravitation, is of an al-
together different character. Even if the axioms of the theory are set by
men, the success of such an endeavor presupposes in the objective
world a high degree of order that we were a priori in no way author-
ized to expect. This is the “miracle” that is strengthened more and
more with the development of our knowledge. . . . The curious thing
is that we have to content ourselves with recognizing the “miracle”
without having a legitimate way of going beyond it.4
280
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

According to all these eminent physicists we are confronted with a profound
mystery. As they see it, we have to acknowledge that nature is intelligible, but
have no prospect of understanding why this is so. The problem of nature’s in-
telligibility by means of our mathematical resources is seen as intractable, unre-
solvable, hopeless. All three of these distinguished Nobel laureates in physics
unblushingly employ the word miracle in this connection.
Perhaps, however, the very question is illegitimate and should not be raised
at all. Perhaps the issue of nature’s intelligibility is not just intractable, but ac-
tually inappropriate and improperly based on a false presupposition. For to ask
for an explanation of why scientific inquiry is successful presupposes that there
indeed is an explanatory rationale for this fact. But if this circumstance is some-
thing fortuitous and accidental, then of course no such rationale will exist at all.
Just this position is advocated by various philosophers—for example, by Karl
Popper, who wrote:
[Traditional treatments of induction] all assume not only that our
quest for [scientific] knowledge has been successful, but also that we
should be able to explain why it is successful. However, even on the
assumption (which I share) that our quest for knowledge has been
very successful so far, and that we now know something of our uni-
verse, this success becomes [i.e., remains] miraculously improbable,
and therefore inexplicable; for an appeal to an endless series of im-
probable accidents is not an explanation. (The best we can do, I sup-
pose, is to investigate the almost incredible evolutionary history of
these accidents . . .).5
Mary Hesse, too, thinks that it is inappropriate to ask for an explanation of the
success of science “because science might, after all, be a miracle.”6
And so, on this grand question of how the success of natural science is
possible at all, some of the shrewdest scientific intellects of the day avow
themselves baffled, and unhesitatingly enshroud the issue in mystery or mira-
cle. On this sort of view, the question of the intelligibility of nature becomes
an illegitimate pseudoproblem—a forbidden fruit at which sensible minds
should not presume to nibble. We must simply rest content with the fact itself
acknowledging that any attempt to explain it is foredoomed to failure because
of the inappropriateness of the very project.
Surely, however, such an approach has very questionable merit. Eminent
authorities to the contrary notwithstanding, the question of nature’s intelligi-
bility through natural science is not only interesting and important, but is also
surely one that we should, in principle, hope and expect to answer in a more or
less sensible way. Clearly, this important issue needs and deserves a strong dose
of demystification.
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
281

How is it that we can make effective use of mathematical machinery 
to characterize the modus operandi of nature? The pure logical theorist seems
to have a ready answer. He says: “Mathematics must characterize reality.
Mathematical propositions are purely abstract truths whose validation turns
on conceptual issues alone. Accordingly, they hold of this world because they
hold of every possible world.”
But this response misses the point of present concerns. Admittedly, the
truths of pure mathematics obtain in and of every possible world. But they do
so only in virtue of the fact that they are strictly hypothetical and descrip-
tively empty—wholly uncommitted regarding the substantive issues of the
world’s operations. Their very conceptual status means that the theses of pure
mathematics are beside the point of our present purposes. It is not the a pri-
ori truth of pure mathematics that concerns us, its ability to afford truths of
reason. Rather, what is at issue is the empirical applicability of mathematics, its
pivotal role in framing the a posteriori, contingent truths of lawful fact that
render nature’s ways amenable to reason.
After all, the circumstance that pure mathematics holds true in a world
does not mean that this world’s laws have to be characterizable in relatively
straightforward mathematical terms. It does not mean that nature’s operations
have to be congenial to mathematics and graspable in terms of simple, neat, el-
egant, and rationally accessible formulas. In short, it does not mean that the
world must be mathematically tractable and “mathematophile” in admitting to
the sort of concise descriptive treatment it receives in mathematical physics.
How, then, are we to account for the fact that the world appears to us to be
so eminently intelligible in the mathematical terms of our natural science?
The answer to this question of the cognitive accessibility of nature to
mathematicizing intelligence has to lie in a somewhat complex, two-sided story
in which both sides, intelligence and nature, must be expected to have a part.
After all, when two things fit together, each must accommodate the other. Let
us trace out this line of thought—one step at a time.
“OUR” SIDE
Our human side of this bilateral story is relatively straightforward. After all,
Homo sapiens is an integral part of nature. We are connected into nature’s
scheme of things as an intrinsic component thereof—courtesy of the processes
of evolution. Our experience is thus inevitably an experience of nature. (That
after all is what “experience” is—our intelligence-mediated reaction to the
world’s stimulating impacts on us.) So the kind of mathematics—the kind of
theory of periodicity and structure—that we devise in the light of this experi-
ence is the kind that is in principle applicable to nature as we can experience it.
As C. S. Peirce insisted, evolutionary pressures conform our intellectual
282
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

processes to the modus operandi of nature. For nature not only teaches us (when
we chose to study it) but also forms us (whether or not we chose to study it).
And it proceeds in doing the latter in a way that is not, and cannot be, without
implications for the former.
Our mathematics is destined to be attuned to nature because it itself is a
natural product as a thought-instrument of ours: it fits nature because it reflects
the way we ourselves are emplaced within nature as integral constituents
thereof. Our intellectual mechanisms—mathematics included—fit nature be-
cause they are themselves a product of nature’s operations as mediated through
the cognitive processes of an intelligent creature that uses its intelligence to
guide its interaction with a nature into which it is itself fitted in a particular sort
of way.
The very selfsame forces that are at work in shaping the physical world are
also at work in shaping our bodies and brains and in providing the stimuli that
impinge on our senses and our minds. It is these interactions between thought
and world that condition our sense of order and beauty—of regularity, symmetry,
economy, elegance. Evolutionary pressure coordinates the mind with its environ-
ment. Even as we are destined to find healthy foods palatable and reproductively
advantageous activities pleasant, so nature’s inherent order and structure are
bound to prove congenial to our mathematical sense of elegance and beauty.
The modes of order that attract the attention of mathematical theorists in-
terested in structures—and that underlie their ideas of beautiful theories—are
thus, unsurprisingly, also at work in the nature within which these conceptualiza-
tions arise. The mathematical mechanisms we employ for understanding the
standard features of things themselves reflect the structure of our experience. In
particular, the mathematics of an astronomically remote civilization whose expe-
riential resources differ from ours might well be substantially different from
mathematics as we ourselves know it. Their dealings with collective manifolds
might be entirely anumerical—purely comparative, for example, rather than
quantitative. Especially if their environment is not amply endowed with solid ob-
jects or stable structures congenial to measurement—if, for example, they were
jellyfish-like creatures swimming about in a soupy sea—their “geometry” could be
something rather strange, largely topological, say, and geared to flexible structures
rather than fixed sizes or shapes. Digital thinking might go undeveloped while
certain sorts of analogue reasoning might be highly refined. For example, if the
intelligent aliens were a diffuse assemblage of units that constitute wholes in ways
permitting overlap, then social concepts might become so paramount in their
thinking that nature would throughout be viewed in fundamentally social cate-
gories, with those aggregates we think of as physical structures contemplated by
them in social terms. Communicating by some sort of “telepathy” based on vari-
able odors or otherwise “exotic” signals, they might, for example, devise a complex
theory of empathetic thought-wave transmittal through an ideaferous aether.The
processes that underlie their mathematicizing might be very different indeed.
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
283

Admittedly mathematics is not a natural science but a theory of hypotheti-
cal possibilities. Nevertheless these possibilities are possibilities as conceived by
beings who do their possibility-conceiving with a nature-evolved and nature-
implanted mind. It is thus not surprising that the sort of mathematics we contrive
is the sort of mathematics we find applicable to the conceptualization of nature.
After all, the intellectual mechanisms we devise in coming to grips with the
world—in transmuting sensory interaction with nature into intelligible experi-
ence—have themselves the aspect (among many other aspects) of being nature’s
contrivances in adjusting to its ways a creature it holds at its mercy.
It is no more a miracle that the human mind can understand the world
through its intellectual resources than that the human eye can see it through its
physiological resources. The critical step is to recognize that the question “Why
do our conceptual methods and mechanisms fit ‘the real world’ with which we in-
teract intellectually?” is to be answered in basically the same way as the question:
“Why do our bodily processes and mechanisms fit the world with which we in-
teract physically?” In neither case can we proceed on the basis of purely theoreti-
cal grounds of general principle. Both issues are alike to be resolved in essentially
evolutionary terms. It is no more surprising that our minds can grasp nature’s
ways than it surprising that our eyes can accommodate nature’s rays or own stom-
achs nature’s food. As we have noted from the outset, evolutionary pressure can
take credit for the lot: they are part and parcel of what is mandated by attainment
to our niche in nature’s scheme of things.There is nothing “miraculous” or “lucky”
in our possession of efficient cognitive faculties and processes—effective “hard-
ware” and “software” for productive inquiry. If we did not, we just would not be
here as inquiring creatures emplaced in nature thanks to evolutionary processes.
Nevertheless, it could perhaps be the case that we succeed in mathemati-
cizing nature only as regards the immediate local microenvironment that de-
fines our particular limited ecological niche. The possibility still remains open
that we secure a cognitive hold on only a small and peripheral part of a large
and impenetrable whole. And so, man’s own one-sided contribution to the mat-
ter of nature’s intelligibility cannot be the whole story regarding the success of
science. For even if we do reasonably well in regard to our own immediate evo-
lutionary requirements, this might still be very inadequate in the larger scheme
of things. Nature’s receptiveness to our cognitive efforts remains to be ac-
counted for—the fact that nature is substantially amenable to reason and not
just somewhat (and perhaps only very marginally) so.
To clarify this issue we must therefore move on to consider nature’s contri-
bution to the bilateral mind/nature relationship.
NATURE’S SIDE
What needs to be explained for present purposes is not just why mathematics
is merely of some utility in understanding the world, but why it is actually of
284
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

very substantial utility in that its employment can provide intelligent inquirers
with an impressively adequate and accurate grasp of nature’s ways. We must
thus probe more deeply into the issue of nature’s amenability to inquiry and its
accessibility to the probes of intelligence.
To be sure, the effective applicability of mathematics to the description of
nature is in no small part due to the fact that we actually devise our mathematics
to fit nature through the mediation of experience. But how can one get beyond
this to establish that nature simply “must” have a fairly straightforward law struc-
ture? Are there any fundamental reasons why the world that we investigate by 
the use of our mathematically informed intelligence should operate on relatively
simple principles that are readily amenable to mathematical characterization?
There are indeed. For a world in which intelligence emerges by anything
like standard evolutionary processes has to be pervaded by regularities and pe-
riodicities in the organism-nature interaction that produces and perpetuates
organic species. And this means that nature must be cooperative in a certain
very particular way—it must be stable enough and regular enough and struc-
tured enough for there to be appropriate responses to natural events that can
be “learned” by creatures. If such “appropriate responses” are to develop, nature
must provide suitable stimuli in a duly structured way. An organically viable
environment—to say nothing of a knowable one—must incorporate experien-
tiable structures. There must be regular patterns of occurrence in nature that
even simple, single-celled creatures can embody in their makeup and reflect in
their modus operandi. Even the humblest organisms, snails, say, and even algae,
must so operate that certain types of stimuli (patterns of recurrently discernible
impacts) call forth appropriately corresponding types of response—that such or-
ganisms can “detect” a structured pattern in their natural environment and
react to it in a way that proves to their advantage in evolutionary terms. Even
its simplest creatures can maintain themselves in existence only by swimming
in a sea of detectable regularities of a sort that will be readily accessible to in-
telligence. Their world must encapsulate straightforwardly “learnable” pat-
terns and periodicities of occurrence in its operations—relatively simply laws,
in other words.
Let us suppse an inquiring being emplaced by evolution within nature that
forms its mathematicized conceptions and beliefs about this nature on the basis
of physical interaction with it. Clearly, if such a being is to achieve a reasonably
appropriate grasp of the world’s workings, then nature too must “do its part” in
being duly cooperative. Given the antecedent supposition, nature must, obvi-
ously, permit the evolution of inquiring beings. And to do this, it must present
them with an environment that affords sufficiently stable patterns to make co-
herent “experience” possible, enabling them to derive appropriate information
from those structured interactions that prevail in nature at large. Nature’s own
contribution to solving the problem of its mathematical intelligibility must ac-
cordingly be the possession of a relatively simple and uniform law structure—
one that deploys so uncomplicated a set of regularities that even a community
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
285

of inquirers possessed of only rather moderate capabilities can be expected to
achieve a fairly good grasp of the processes at work in their environment.
Accordingly, a world in which intelligence can develop by evolutionary
processes also must—on this very basis—be a world amenable to understanding
in mathematical terms.7 It must be a world whose cognizing beings will find
much grist to their mill in endeavoring to “understand” the world. Galileo long
ago hit close to the mark when he wrote in his Dialogues that: “Nature initially
arranged things her own way and subsequently so constructed the human intel-
lect as to be able to understand her.”8 And of course nature’s construction of
mathematicizing mind has proceeded by evolutionary processes.
The development of life and, thereafter of intelligence in the world may or
may not be inevitable; the emergence of intelligent creatures on the world’s
stage may or may not be surprising in itself and as such. But once they are
there, and once we realize that they got there thanks to evolutionary processes,
it can no longer be seen as surprising that their efforts at characterizing the
world in mathematical terms should be substantially successful. A world in
which intelligent creatures emerge through the operation of evolutionary processes
must be an intelligible world.
On this line of deliberation, then, nature admits of mathematical depiction
not just because it has laws—is a cosmos—but because as an evolution-permitting
world it must have many relatively simple laws. And those relatively simple laws
must be there because if they were not, then nature just would not afford the sort
of environment requisite for the evolutionary development of intelligent life. An
intelligence-containing world whose intelligent creatures came by this intelli-
gence through evolutionary means must be substantially intelligible in mathe-
matical terms.9
The apparent success of human mathematics in characterizing nature is
thus nowise amazing. It may or may not call for wonder that intelligent crea-
tures should evolve at all. But thereupon, once they have safely arrived on the
scene through evolutionary means, it is only natural and to be expected that
they should be able to achieve success in the project of understanding nature in
mathematical terms. A mathematicizing intelligence arrived at through evolu-
tion must for this very reason prove to be substantially successful in achieving
adequation to the world’s ways.
The strictly hypothetical and conditional character of this general line of rea-
soning must be recognized. It does not maintain that by virtue of some sort of
transcendental necessity the world has to be simple enough for its mode of oper-
ation to admit of elegant mathematical representation. Rather, what it maintains
is the purely conditional thesis that if intelligent creatures are going to emerge in
the world by evolutionary processes, then the world must be mathematophile,
with various of its processes amenable to mathematical representation.
It must be stressed, however, that this merely conditional fact is quite suf-
ficient for present purposes. For the question we face is why we intelligent
286
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

creatures present on the world’s stage should be able to understand its opera-
tions in terms of our mathematics. The conditional story at issue fully suffices
to accomplish this particular job.
One brief digression to avert a possible misunderstanding is in order. Noth-
ing whatever in the present argumentation can properly be construed to claim
that the development of mathematics is an evolutionary requirement or desider-
atum as such—that creatures are somehow impelled to develop mathematics be-
cause it advantages them in the struggle for existence. (This idea would be a
foolish anachronism, seeing that evolution produced us long before we produced
mathematics.) To say that intelligence, the precondition of mathematics, is of evo-
lutionary advantage, is not to claim that this is the case with mathematics itself.
All that is being maintained is: (1) that intelligence is (in certain circumstances)
of evolutionary advantage, (2) that any sufficiently intelligent creature can develop
a mathematics (a theory of structure), and (3) that any sufficiently intelligent
creature must be able to develop an effectively applicable “mathematics” in any
world able to give rise to it through evolutionary means.
SYNTHESIS
The preceding deliberations maintains that the overall question of the intelli-
gibility of nature has two sides:
1.
Why is mind so well attuned to nature?
2.
Why is nature so well attuned to mind?
And it is further maintained that the answers to these questions are not all that
complicated—at least at the level of schematic essentials. The crux is simply
this: Mind must be attuned to nature since intelligence is a generalized guide to
conduct that has evolved as a natural product of nature’s operations. And nature
must be substantially accessible to mind if intelligence manages to evolve
within nature by a specifically evolutionary route.
For nature to be intelligible, then, there must be an alignment that requires
cooperation on both sides. The analogy of cryptanalysis is suggestive. If A is to
break B’s code, there must be due reciprocal alignment. If A’s methods are too
crude, too hit and miss, then A can get nowhere. But even if A is quite intelligent
and resourceful success is precluded if B’s procedures are simply beyond A’s pow-
ers. (The cryptanalysts of the seventeenth century, clever though they were, could
get absolutely nowhere in applying their investigative instrumentalities to a high-
level naval code of World War II vintage.) Analogously, if mind and nature were
too far out of alignment—if mind were too “unintelligent” for the complexities of
nature or nature too complex for the capacities of mind—the two just could not
get into step. It would be like trying to rewrite Shakespeare in a pidgin English
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
287

with a 500-world vocabulary or like trying to monitor the workings of a system
with ten degrees of freedom by using a cognitive mechanism capable of keeping
track of four of them. If something like this were the case, mind could not ac-
complish its evolutionary mission. It would then be better to adopt an alignment
process that does not take the cognitive route to the guidance of action. Just as
any creature that evolves in nature must find due physical accommodation
within it (a due harmonization of its bodily operations with its physical envi-
rons), so any mind that evolves in nature must find due intellectual accommo-
dation within it (a due harmonization of its intellectual operations with its
structural environs). In consequence, there must be a due equilibration between
the mind’s mathematizing operations and the world’s mathematical structure.
The solution of our problem thus roots in the combination of two consider-
ations: (1) a world that admits of the evolutionary emergence of intelligence must
be sufficiently regular and simple—that is, it must be mathematophile, and (2) a
sufficiently powerful intelligence must be able effectively to comprehend in
mathematical terms any world in which it gains its foothold by evolutionary
means. The possibility of a mathematical science of nature is accordingly to be
explained by the fact that, in the light of evolution, intelligence and intelligibility
must stand in mutual coordination.
Two points are accordingly paramount here:
1.
Once intelligent creatures evolve, their cognitive efforts are bound to
have some degree of adequacy because evolutionary pressures align
them with nature’s ways.
2.
It should not be surprising that this alignment can eventually produce
a substantially effective mathematical physics, because the structure of
the operations of a nature that engenders intelligence by an evolution-
ary route is bound to be relatively accessible to this intelligence.
No doubt, this somewhat schematic account requires much amplification and
concretization. A long and complex tale must be told about physical and cog-
nitive evolution to fill in the details needed to put such an account into a prop-
erly compelling form. But there is surely good reason to hope and expect that a
tale of this sort can ultimately be told.
And this is the pivotal point. Even if one has doubts about the particular
outlines of the evolutionary story we have sketched, it must be acknowledged
that some such story can provide a perfectly workable answer to the question of
why nature’s ways are intelligible to us humans in terms of our mathematical in-
strumentalities.The mere fact that such an account is in principle possible shows
that the issue need not be painted in the black on black of impenetrable mystery.
There may indeed be mysteries in this general area. (Questions like Why
should it be that life evolves in the world? and—even more fundamentally—Why
should it be that the world exists at all? may plausibly be proposed as candidates.)
288
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

But be that as it may, the presently deliberated issue of why nature is intelligible
to us, and why this intelligibility should incorporate a mathematically articulable
physics, does not qualify as all that mysterious, let alone miraculous.
There is simply no need to join Einstein, Schroedinger, and Company in
regarding the intelligibility of nature as a miracle or a mystery that passes all
human understanding. If we are willing to learn from science itself how nature
operates and how people go about conducting their inquiries into its workings,
then we should be able increasingly to remove the shadow of incomprehension
from the problem of how it is that a being of this particular sort, probing an en-
vironment of that particular type, and doing so by means of those particular evo-
lutionarily developed cognitive and physical instrumentalities, manages to arrive
at a relatively workable account of how things work in the world. We should
eventually be able to see it as only plausible and to be expected that inquiring be-
ings should emerge in nature and get themselves into a position to make a rela-
tively good job of coming to comprehend it. We can thus look to science itself for
the materials that enable us to understand how natural science is possible. And
there is no good reason to expect that it will let us down in this regard.
Admittedly, any such scientifically informed account of science’s ability to
understand the world is in a way circular. It explains the possibility of our
knowledge of nature on the basis of what we know of nature’s ways. Its ex-
planatory strategy uses the deliverances of natural science retrospectively to
provide an account of how an effective natural science is possible. Such a pro-
cedure is not, however, a matter of vitiating circularity, but one of the healthy
and virtuous self-sufficiency of our knowledge that is in fact an essential part of
its claims to adequacy.10 Any scientific world-picture that does not provide ma-
terials for explaining the success of science itself would thereby manifest a fail-
ing in its grasp of the phenomena of nature that betokens its own inadequacy.
IMPLICATIONS
But does such a scientific explanation of the success of science not explain too
much? Will its account of the pervasiveness of mathematical exactness in science
not lead to the (obviously problematic) consequence that “science gets it
right”—a result that would fly in the face of our historical experience of science’s
fallibilism?
By no means! It is fortunate (and evolutionarily most relevant) that we are
so positioned within nature that many “wrong” paths lead to the “right” desti-
nation—that flawed means often lead us to cognitively satisfactory ends. If na-
ture were a combination lock where we simply “had to get it right”—and exactly
right—to achieve success in implementing our beliefs, then we just would not
be here. Evolution accordingly does not provide an argument that speaks un-
equivocally for the adequacy of our cognitive efforts. On the contrary, properly
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
289

construed it is an indicator of our capacity to err and “get away with it.” Ad-
mittedly, applicative success calls for some alignment of thought-governed ac-
tion with “the real nature of things”—but only enough to get by without
incurring overly serious penalties in failure.
The success of science should be understood somewhat on analogy with
the success of the thirsty man who drank white grape juice, mistaking it for
lemonade. It is not that he was roughly right—that such grape juice is “approx-
imately” lemonade. It is just that his beliefs are not wrong in ways that lead us
to his being baffled in his present purposes—that such defects as they have do
not matter for the issues currently in hand. The fact is that we simply cannot,
in the circumstances, help laboring under the impression that our science is
highly successful, even though subsequent experience repeatedly disillusions us
in this regard. It follows that intelligence and the “science” it devises must pay
off in terms of applicative success—irrespective of whether it manages to get
things substantially right or not. It is not that there are no mistakes, but that
the mistakes at issue lie below the radar screen of current detectability.
We thus arrive at the picture of nature as an error-tolerant system. For con-
sider the hypothetical situation of a species of behaviorally belief-guided creatures
living in an environment that invariably exacts a great penalty for “getting it
wrong.” Whenever the creature makes the smallest mistake—the least little cog-
nitive misstep—bang, it’s dead! Our hypothesis is not viable: any such creature
would long ago have become extinct. It could not even manage to survive and re-
produce long enough to learn about its environment by trial and error. If the
world is to be a home for intelligent beings who develop in it though evolution,
then it has to be benign—it has to be error-tolerant. If seeming success in intel-
lectually governed operations could not attend even substantially erroneous be-
liefs, then we cognizing beings who have to learn by experience—by trial and
error—just could not have made our way along the corridor of time. For if nature
were not error-forgiving, then a process of evolutionary trial and error could not
work in matters of cognition, and intelligent organisms could not emerge at all.11
Accordingly, the applicative success of our science is not to be explained on
the basis of its actually getting at the real truth, but rather in terms of its being the
work of a cognitive being who operates within an error-tolerant environment—
a world setting where applicative success may attend even theories that are sub-
stantially “off the mark.”The applicative efficacy of science undoubtedly requires
some degree of alignment between our world-picture and the world’s actual
arrangements—but only just enough to yield the particular successes at issue. No
claims to finality or perfection can therefore be substantiated for our science as it
stands here and now.
Evolution is indeed the guarantor of the reciprocal attunement of mind
and nature envisioned by classical idealism. But it by no means requires that
this attunement be of a very high grade by any absolute standard. It is one thing
to be right and another to be so badly wrong that one is baffled of one’s pur-
290
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

poses. And this sort of functional adequacy is something very different from
truth. Such a perspective indicates that the success of the applications of our
current science does not betoken its actual truth, but merely means that those
ways (whatever they be) in which it fails to be true are immaterial to the
achievement of success—that in the context of the particular applications at
issue its inadequacies and incorrectnesses lie beneath the penalty threshold 
of failure. This critical fact that evolution requires an error-tolerant environ-
ment means that we can explain the impressive successes of mathematicizing
natural science without needing to stake untenable claims as to its definitive
correctness.
Such evolutionary ruminations indicate that the capacity to develop an ef-
fective natural science, and also the motivation to pursue this cognitive project
of inquiry, form a natural part of humanity’s evolutionary developed natural
heritage. But, at the same time, they suggest that the scope, scale, and nature of
such a science is bound to be essentially conditioned by the cognitive resources
and interests that we humans bring to bear on its development.The conceptual
mechanisms we deploy in studying the world’s ways are instrumentalities of our
own devising, and in this case as in others, the sorts of tools we use conditions
the sorts of artifacts we can create. We are constrained to depict the world in
terms of concepts, categories, and schematism to whose formation we ourselves
make a decisive contribution.This consideration harks back to the classical ide-
alist theme of the formative contribution of the knower to the character of the
known, and raises it important issues that deserve closer consideration.12
The Rational Intelligibility of Nature
291

This page intentionally left blank.

293
Chapter 16
Human Science as 
Characteristically Human
SYNOPSIS
•
In theory, very different versions of “natural science” are possible in a uni-
verse where very different sorts of extraterrestrial beings might possibly
exist.
•
The reasoning that there must be one single science because there is one sin-
gle world is gravely defective.
•
However, quantitative analysis of the situation indicates that our particu-
lar human version of natural science may well be something unique to our
particular situation.
•
Moreover, it is quite wrong to think that potentially different versions of
science are all positioned along one single developmental route.
•
Natural science as we know it may well be—indeed presumably is—a
characteristically human enterprise, specifically reflecting our particular
manner of exploiting the material and intellectual resources at our disposal.
THE POTENTIAL DIVERSITY OF “SCIENCE”
To what extent does the involvement of our specifically human effort and ac-
tion condition the character of our natural science? Does our science as a prod-
uct reflect our particular modus operandi? It is instructive to consider this issue
through the perspective of the questions whether an astronomically remote

civilization might be scientifically more advanced than ourselves. For the seem-
ingly straightforward question about the possibility of scientifically more ad-
vanced aliens turns out on closer inspection to involve considerable complexity.
And this complexity relates not only to the actual or possible facts of the situa-
tion, but also—and crucially—to theoretical questions about the very ideas or
concepts that are at issue here.
To begin we must confront the problem of just what it is for there to be an-
other science-possessing civilization. Note that this is a question that we are
putting—a question posed in terms of the applicability of our term “science.” It
pivots on the issue of whether we would be prepared to call certain of their ac-
tivities—once we came to understood them—as engaging in scientific inquiry,
and whether we would be prepared to recognize the product of these activities
as constituting a state of science—or a branch thereof.
A scientific civilization is not merely one that possess intelligence and so-
cial organization, but one that puts these resources to work in a certain very
particular sort of way. This consideration opens up the rather subtle issue of
priority in regard to process versus product. We must decide whether what
counts for a civilization’s “having a science” is primarily a matter of the sub-
stantive content of their doctrines (their belief structures and theory complexes)
or is primarily a matter of process, and thus of the aims and purposes with which
their doctrines are formed.
As regards content, this turns on the issue of how similar their scientific
beliefs are to ours. And a look at our own historical evolution indicates that
this is clearly something on which we would be ill advised to put much em-
phasis at the very outset. After all, the speculations of the nature-theorists of
pre-Socratic Greece, our ultimate ancestor in the scientific enterprise, bear
precious little resemblance to our present-day sciences; neither does contem-
porary physics bear all that much doctrinal resemblance to that of Newton. So
it emerges as clearly more appropriate to give prime emphasis to matters of
process and purpose.
Accordingly, the question of these aliens “having a science” is to be re-
garded as turning not on the extent to which their substantive findings resem-
ble ours, but on the extent to which their purposive project resembles ours—of
determining that we are engaged in the same sort of inquiry in terms of the
sorts of issues being addressed and the ways in which they are going about ad-
dressing them. The issue accordingly is at bottom not one of the substantive
similarity of their scientifically formed beliefs to ours, but one of the functional
equivalency of the projects at issue in terms of the quintessential goals that de-
fine the scientific enterprise as what it is: explanation, prediction, and control
over nature. It is this issue of teleology that ultimately defines what it is for
those aliens to have a science.
This perspective enjoins the pivotal question: To what extent would the
functional equivalent of natural science built up by the inquiring intelligences of
294
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

an astronomically remote civilization be bound to resemble our science in sub-
stantive content-oriented regards? In considering this issue, one soon comes to
realize that there is an enormous potential for diversity here.
To begin with, the machinery of formulation used by an alien civilization in
expressing their science might be altogether different. In particular, their math-
ematics might be very unlike ours. Their “arithmetic” could be anumerical—
purely comparative, for example, rather than quantitative. They might thus
have topology without analysis. And so, when the mathematical mechanisms at
their disposal are very different from ours, it is clear that their description of na-
ture in mathematical terms could also be very different (though not necessarily
truer of falser.)
Second, the orientation of the science of an alien civilization might be very
different. All their efforts might conceivably be directed at social intersec-
tions—to developing highly sophisticated analyses of intersecting agents and
the economics of exchanges sociology, for example. Again, their approach to
natural science might also be very different. Communicating by some sort of
“telepathy” based on variable odors or otherwise “exotic” signals, they might de-
vise a complex theory of thought-wave transmittal through an ideaferous
aether. Electromagnetic phenomena might lie altogether outside their ken; if
their environment does not afford them loadstones and electrical storms, and so
on, the occasion to theorize about electromagnetic processes might never arise.
The course of scientific development tends to flow in the channel of practical
interests. A society of porpoises might lack crystallography but develop a very
sophisticated hydrodynamics; one comprised of molelike creatures might never
dream of developing optics. The science of a different civilization would pre-
sumably be closely geared to the particular pattern of their interaction with na-
ture as funneled through the particular course of their evolutionary adjustment
to their specific environment. Alien civilizations might scan nature very differ-
ently. The direct chemical analysis of environmental materials might prove
highly useful to them, with bioanalytic techniques akin to our sense of taste and
smell highly developed so as to provide the basis for a science of a very differ-
ent sort. Acoustics might mean very little to them, while other sorts of pressure
phenomena—say the theory of turbulence in gases—might be the subject of in-
tense and exhaustive investigation. Rather than sending signals by radiowaves
or heat radiation signals, they might propel gravity-waves through space. After
all, a comparison of the “science” of different civilizations here on earth suggests
that it is not an outlandish hypothesis to suppose that the very topics of an alien
science might differ radically from those of ours. In our own case, for example,
the fact that we live on the surface of our planet (unlike whales or porpoises),
the fact we have eyes (unlike worms or moles) and thus can see the heavens, the
fact that we are so situated that the seasonal positions of heavenly bodies are in-
tricately connected without biological needs through the agricultural route to
food supply, are all clearly connected with the development of astronomy.
Human Science as Characteristically Human
295

Accordingly, the constitution of the alien inquirers—physical, biological, and
social—emerges as a crucial element here. It serves to determine the agenda of
questions and the instrumentalities for their resolution—to fix what counts as
interesting, important, relevant, significant. In determining what is seen as an
appropriate question and what is judged as an admissible solution, the cogni-
tive posture of the inquirers must be expected to play a crucial role in shaping
and determining the course of scientific inquiry itself.
Third, the conceptualization of an alien science might be very different.
We must reckon with the theoretical possibility that a remote civilization
might operate with a radically different system of concepts in its cognitive
dealings with nature. To motivate this idea of a conceptually different science,
it helps to cast the issue in temporal rather than spatial terms. The descriptive
characterization of alien science is a project rather akin in its difficulty to that
of describing our own future science. After all, it is effectively impossible to
predict not only the answers but even the questions that lie on the agenda of
future science, because these questions will grow out of the answers we obtain
at yet unattained stages of the game. And the situation of an alien science
could be much the same. As with the science of the remote future, the science
of the remotely distant must be presumed to be of such a nature that we re-
ally could not achieve intellectual access to it on the basis of our own position
in the cognitive scheme of things. Just as the technology of a another highly
advanced civilization would most likely strike us as magic, so its science
would most likely strike us as incomprehensible gibberish—until we had
learned it “from the ground up.” They might (just barely) be able to teach it to
us, but they almost certainly could not explain it to us. After all, the most
characteristic and significant sort of difference between variant conceptual
schemes arises when the one scheme is committed to something the other
does not envisage at all—something that lies outside the conceptual range of
the other. The “science” of different civilizations, may well, like Galenic and
Pasteurian medicine, in key respects simply change the subject so as no longer
“to talk about the same things,” but treat things (e.g., humors and bacteria,
respectively) of which the other takes little or no cognizance at all. If, for ex-
ample, certain intelligent aliens should prove a diffuse and complex aggregate
mass of units comprising wholes in ways that allow of overlap, then the role
of social concepts might become so paramount that nature as a whole comes
to be viewed in these terms. The result would be something very difficult for
us to grasp, seeing that they are based on a mode of “shared experience” with
which we have no contact.
It is only reasonable to presume that the conceptual character of the (func-
tionally understood) “science” of an alien civilization is so radically different
from ours in substantive regards as to orient their thought about “the nature of
things” in altogether different directions. Their approach to classification and
structurization, explanatory mechanisms, their predictive concerns, and their
296
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

modes of control over nature might all be very different. In all these regards they
might have procedures and interests that depart significantly from our own.
Natural science—broadly construed as inquiry into the ways of nature—is
something that is in principle almost infinitely plastic. Its development will
trace out a historical course that is bound to be closely geared to the specific ca-
pacities, interests, environment, and opportunities of the creatures that develop
it. We are deeply mistaken if we think of it as a process that must follow a route
roughly parallel to ours and issue in a comparable product. It would be grossly
unimaginative to think that either the journey or the destination must be the
same—or even substantially similar.
THE ONE WORLD, ONE SCIENCE ARGUMENT
One recent writer raises the question “What can we talk about with our remote
friends?,” and answers it with the remark: “We have a lot in common. We have
mathematics in common, and physics, and astronomy.”1 This line of thought
begs some very big questions.
Our alien colleagues would have to scan nature for regularities using (at
any rate to begin with) the sensors provided them by their evolutionary her-
itage. And they will note, record, and transmit those regularities that they
found to be intellectually interesting or pragmatically useful. Their inquiries
will have to develop by theoretical triangulation that proceeds from the lines
indicated by these resources. Now this is clearly going to make for a course of
development that closely gears their science to their particular situation—their
biological endowment (“their sensors”), their cultural heritage (“what is inter-
esting”), their environmental niche (“What is pragmatically useful”). Where
these key parameters differ, there too we must expect that the course of scien-
tific development will differ as well.
Admittedly there is only one universe and its laws, as best we can tell, are
everywhere the same. And so if intelligent aliens investigate nature at all, they
will investigate the same nature we ourselves do. But the sameness of the object
of contemplation does nothing to guarantee the sameness of the ideas about it.
It is all too familiar a fact that even where human (and thus homogeneous) ob-
servers are at issue, different constructions are often placed on “the same” oc-
currences. Primitive peoples thought the sun a god and the most sophisticated
among the ancient peoples thought it a large mass of fire. We think of it as a
large thermonuclear reactor, and heaven only knows how our successors will
think of it in the year 3000. As the course of human history clearly shows, there
need be little uniformity in the conceptions held about one selfsame object by
differently situated groups of thinkers.
It would certainly be naive to think that because one selfsame object is in
question, its description must issue in one selfsame result.This view ignores the
Human Science as Characteristically Human
297

crucial matter of one’s intellectual orientation. One selfsame piece of driftwood
is viewed very differently indeed by the botanist, the painter, the interior deco-
rator, the chemist, the woodcarver, and so forth. The critical issue is that of the
particular “aspect” of the item being focused on as important or interesting.
With science, as with any productive enterprise, it is not only the raw material
but also the mode of productive processing that serves to determine the nature
of the outcome. Minds with different sorts of concerns and interests and dif-
ferent backgrounds of information can deal with mutually common items in
ways the yield wholly disjoint and disparate results because altogether different
features of the thing are being addressed. It is notorious that observers are “pris-
oners” (so to speak) of their cognitive preparation, interests, and predisposi-
tions—seeing only what their preestablished cognitive resources enable them to
see and blind to that for which they are cognitively unprepared.
Accordingly, the sameness of nature and its laws by no means settles the
issue of scientific uniformity. For a science is always the result of inquiry into
some sector of nature and this is inevitably a matter of a transaction or interac-
tion in which nature is but one party and the inquiring beings another. The re-
sult of such an interaction depends crucially on the contribution form both
sides—from nature and from the intelligences that interact with it. A kind of
“chemistry” is at issue, where nature provides only one input and the inquirers
themselves provide another—one that can massively and dramatically affect the
outcome in such a way that we cannot disentangle the respective contributions
of the two parties, nature and the inquirer.
Each inquiring civilization must be thought of as producing its own, itself
ever-changing cognitive product—all more of less adequate in theirs own
ways—but with little if any actual overlap in conceptual content. Human or-
ganisms are essentially similar, but there is not much similarity between the
medicine of the ancient Hindus and that of the ancient Greeks. There is every
reason to think that the natural science of different astronomically remote civ-
ilizations should be highly diversified. Even as different creatures can have a
vast variety of lifestyles for adjustment within one selfsame physical environ-
ment like this earth, so they can have a vast variety of thought-styles for cog-
nitive adjustment within one selfsame world.
After all, throughout the earlier stages of man’s intellectual history, differ-
ent human civilizations have developed their “natural sciences” in a substan-
tially different way. And the shift to an extraterrestrial perspective is bound to
amplify such cultural differences. Perhaps reluctantly, we must face the fact
that on a cosmic scale the “hard” physical sciences have something of the same
cultural relativity to which we are accustomed with the material of the “softer”
social sciences.
It seems reasonable to argue: “Common problems constrain common solu-
tions. Intelligent alien civilizations have in common with us the problem of cog-
nitive accommodation to a shared world. Natural science as we know it is our
solution of this problem. Ergo it is likely to be theirs as well.” But this tempting
298
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

argument founders on its second premise. Their problem is not common with
ours because their situation must be presumed substantially different, seeing that
they live in a significantly different environment and come equipped with sig-
nificantly different resources.To presuppose a common problem is in fact to beg
the question.
There is no quarrel here with “the principle of the uniformity of nature.”
But this principle merely tells us that when exactly the same question is put to
nature, exactly the same answer will be forthcoming. However, the develop-
ment of a science hinges crucially on this matter of questions—to the sorts of
issues that are addressed and the sequential order in which they are posed. And
here the prospect of variation arises: We must expect alien beings to question
nature in ways very different from our own. On the basis of an interactionist
model, there is no reason to think that the sciences of different civilizations will
exhibit anything more than the roughest sorts of family resemblance.
Our human science reflects not only our interests but also our capacities. It
addresses a range of issues that are correlative with our specific modes of physi-
cal interaction with nature, the specific ways in which we monitor its processes.
It is highly selective—the science of a being that secures its most crucial infor-
mation through sight, monitoring developments along the spectrum of electro-
magnetic radiation, rather than, say, monitoring variations of pressure or
temperature. A different sort of creature would have different interests and con-
cerns. Ours is certainly not a phenomenalistic science geared to the feel of things
or the taste of things. All the same, the science we have developed reflects our
capacities and needs, our evolutionary heritage as a being inserted into the orbit
or natural phenomena in a certain particular way.
The fact is that all such factors as capacities, requirements, interests, and
course of development affect the shape and substance of the science and tech-
nology of any particular place and time. Unless we narrow our intellectual hori-
zons in a parochially anthropomorphic way, we must be prepared to recognize
the great likelihood that the “science” and “technology” of another civilization
will be something very different from science and technology as we know it.
We are led to view that our human sort of natural science may well be sui
generis, adjusted to and coordinate with a being of our physical constitution, in-
serted into the orbit of the world’s processes and history in our sort of way. It
seems that in science as in other areas of human endeavor we are emplaced
within the thought-world that our biological and social and intellectual her-
itage affords us.
A QUANTITATIVE PERSPECTIVE
Let us attempt to give some quantitative structure to the preceding qualita-
tive deliberations by bringing some rough order-of-magnitude estimates on
the scene.
Human Science as Characteristically Human
299

First, there is have the problem of estimating H, the number of habitable
planets in the universe.This assessment can be formed by means of the following
quantities, themselves represented merely as order-of-magnitude specifications:
n1  number of galaxies in the observable universe (1011).
n2  average number of star systems per galaxy (1011).
x1  fraction of star systems having suitably large and stable planets
(1/10).
n3  average number of such planets in the temperature zone of a
suitably benign solar system, where it is neither too hot nor too
cold for life (1).
x2  fraction of temperature planets equipped with a surface chemistry
capable of supporting life (1/10).
These figures—borrowed in the main from Dole and Sagan—can be subject
to skepticism.2 They, and those that are to follow, must be viewed realisti-
cally. They are not graven in stone for all the ages, but represent conjectural
“best estimates” in the present state of the art. The important point, as will
emerge below, is that the overall tendency of our discussion is not acutely
sensitive to precision in this respect. Accordingly one should look on the cal-
culations that are to follow as rather suggestive than in any sense conclusive.
Their function is to indicate a general line of thought, and not to establish a
definitive conclusion.
Given the preceding estimates, the sought-for number of habitable planets
will be the product of these quantities:
H  1020.
This, of course, is a prodigiously large number, providing for some thousand
million habitable planets per galaxy. We here confront a truly impressive mag-
nitude. But it is only the start of the story.
A planet capable of supporting life might well have no life to support, let
alone intelligent life. The point is that the physics, chemistry, and biology must
all work out just right. The physical, chemical, and biological environments
must all be duly auspicious and exactly the right course of triggering processes
must unfold for the evolution of intelligence to run a successful course. Our
next task is thus to estimate I, the number of planets on which intelligent life
evolves. Let us proceed here via the following (again admittedly rough and
ready) quantities:
r1  fraction of habitable planets on which life—that is, some sort of
self-reproducing biological system—actually arises (1/100).
300
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

r2  fraction of these on which highly complex life-forms evolve,
possessed of something akin to a central nervous system and thus
capable of complex (though yet instinctively programmed) behavior
forms (1/100).
r3  fraction of these on which intelligent and sociable beings evolve—
beings who can acquire, process, and exchange factual information
with relative sophistication—who can observe, remember, reason,
and communicate (1/100).
As these fractions indicate, the evolutionary process that begins with the in-
auguration of life and moves on to the development of intelligence is certainly not
an inexorable sequence, but one which could, given suitably inauspicious condi-
tions, abort in a stabilization that freezes the whole course of development at
some plateau along the way. Note that r3 in particular involves problems. Con-
scious and indeed even intelligent creatures are readily conceivable who yet lack
that orientation toward their environment needed to acquire, store, transmit, and
process the factual information necessary to science. Where such conceptions as
space, time, process, unit, function, and order are missing, it is difficult to see how
anything deserving of the name “science” could exist. An intelligence unswerv-
ingly directed at the aesthetic appreciation of particular phenomena rather than
their generally lawful structure is going to miss out on the scientific dimension.
And so, when we put the fractions of the preceding series to work, we
arrive at
I  1014.
This unquestionably still indicates an impressively large number of intelli-
gence-bearing planets. It would, in fact, yield a quota of some thousand per
galaxy (a figure which, if, correct, would cast a shadow over the prospect of our
ever establishing contact with extraterrestrial intelligence, since it would indi-
cate its nearest locale to be some 1,000 light-years away).
As regards this figure, one can say that it would certainly be possible to
take a more rosy view of the matter. One could suppose that nature has pen-
chant for life—that a kind of Bergsonian élan vital is operative, so that life
springs forth wherever it can possibly get a foothold. Something of this attitude
certainly underlies J. P.T. Pearman’s contention that the probability is 1 that life
will develop on a planet with a suitable environment3—a stance in which most
recent writers on the subject are concerned. One theorist cuts the Gordian
Knot with a curious bit of reasoning:
Biological evolution proceeds by the purely random process of mu-
tation. . . . Since the process is a random one, the laws of probability
Human Science as Characteristically Human
301

suggest that the time-scale of evolution on earth should resemble
the average time-scale for the development of higher forms of life
anywhere.4
But this blatantly ignores the crucially differentiating role of initial conditions
in determining the outcome of random processes. After all, the terrain through
which a random walk proceeds is going to make a lot of difference to its desti-
nation. The transition from habitability to habitation—from the possibility of
life to its actuality—is surely not all that simple. Sir Arthur Eddington did well
to remind us in this context of the prodigality of nature when he asked how
many acorns are scattered for any one that grows into an oak.5
One could perhaps go on to suppose that nature incorporated a predisposi-
tion for intelligence—that there is a Teilhard-de-Chardin-reminiscent impetus
toward nous, so that intelligence develops wherever there is life. Indeed the sug-
gestion is sometimes made in this vein that “the adaptive value of intelligence . . .
is so great . . . that if it is genetically feasible, natural selection seems likely to bring
it forth.”6 But this argument from utility to evolutionary probability clearly has its
limitation. (“[T]here are no organisms on Earth which have developed tractor
treads for locomotion, despite the usefulness of tractor treads in some environ-
ments.”7) Moreover, this suggestion seems implausibly anthropocentric. To all
appearances the termite has a securer foothold on the evolutionary ladder than
man; and the coelacanth can afford to smile when the survival advantages of in-
telligence are touted by a johnny-come-lately creature whose self-inflicted threats
to long-term survival are a cause of general concern. As J. P. T. Pearman has
rightly noted, “the successful persistence of a multitude of simpler organisms
from ancient times argues that intelligence may confer no unique benefits for sur-
vival in an environment similar to that of earth.”8 After all, it will prove survival-
conductive mainly for a being of a particularly restless disposition, a creature like
man, who refuses to settle down in a secured ecological niche, but shifts rest-
lessly from environment to environment needing continually to readjust to self-
imposed changes. The value of intelligence, one might say, is not absolute but
remedial—as an aid to offsetting the problems of a particular sort of lifestyle.We
would do well to think of the emergence of intelligence as a long series of fortu-
itous twists and turnings rather than an inexorable push toward a foreordained
result. It would be glib in the extreme to assume that once life arises its subse-
quent development would proceed in much the same way as here on earth.9
The indicated figures accordingly seem plausibly middle-roadish between
undue pessimism and an intelligence-favoring optimism that seems unwar-
ranted at this particular stage of the scientific game. Even so, it is clear that the
proposed specification of I represents a strikingly substantial magnitude—
one which contemplates many thousand of millions of planets equipped with
intelligent creatures scattered throughout the universe.
Intelligence, however, is not yet the end of the line. (After all, dolphins
and apes are presumably intelligent, but they do not have, and are unlikely to
302
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

develop, a “science.”) Many further steps are needed to estimate S, the number
of planets throughout the universe in which scientific civilizations arise. The
developmental path from intelligence to science is a road strewn with sub-
stantial obstacles. Here matters must be propitious not just as regards the
physics and chemistry and biochemistry and evolutionary biology and cogni-
tive psychology of the situation.The social-science requisites for the evolution
of science as the cultural artifact of a multifocal civilization must also be met.
Economic conditions, social organization, and cultural orientation must all be
properly adjusted before the move from intelligence to science can be accom-
plished. For scientific inquiry to evolve and flourish there must, in the first
place, be cultural institutions whose development requires economic condi-
tions and a favorable social organization. And terrestrial experience suggests
that such conditions for the social evolution of a developed culture are by no
means always present where intelligence is. We do well to recall that of the
myriad human civilizations evolved here on earth only one, the Mediter-
ranean/European, managed to develop natural science in a form that is now-
adays unproblematically recognizable as such by all advanced civilizations.The
successful transit from intelligence to science is certainly not a sure thing.
Let us once more look at the matter quantitatively:
p1  probability that intelligent beings will (unlike dolphins) also pos-
sess developed manipulative abilities and will (unlike the higher
apes) combine intelligence with manipulative ability to as to de-
velop a technology that can be passed on as a social heritage across
the generations. (.01)
p2  probability that technologically competent intelligent beings will
group themselves in organized societies of substantial complexity—
a transition that stone-age man, for example, never managed to
make. (.1)
p3  probability that an organized society will not only acquire the
means for transmitting across successive generation the political
and pragmatic know-how indispensable to an “organized society”
as such, but will also (unlike the ancient Egyptians) develop insti-
tutions of learning and culture for accumulating, refining, system-
atizing, and perpetuating factual information. (.1)
p4  probability that society with cultural institutions will develop an
unstable (i.e., continually developing and dynamic) technology—
in the way the ancient Greeks and the old Chinese mandarins, for
example, never did—so as to create a technologically progressive
civilization. (.01)
p5  probability that a technologically progressive civilization will de-
velop and maintain an articulated “science” and concern itself
with the theoretical study of nature at a level of high generality
and precision. (.1)
Human Science as Characteristically Human
303

However firm the physical quantities with which we began, we are by now
skating on very thin ice indeed. These latter issues of sociology and cogni-
tive psychology can only be quantified in the most tentative and cautious
way. But the one thing that is clear is that a good many conditions of this
sort have to be met and that each involves a likelihood of relatively modest
proportions.
The issue of technology reflected in p1 and p4 is particularly critical here.
The urge to an ever aggressive technological extension of self is certainly not
felt by every intelligent life-form. It is a part of Western man’s peculiar lifestyle
to impatiently cultivate the active modification of nature in the pursuit of
human convenience so as to create an artificial environment of ultra-low en-
tropy. Even in human terms this is not a uniquely constrained solution to the
problem of evolutionary adaptation. Many human societies seem to have re-
mained perfectly content with the status quo for countless generations and very
sophisticated cultural projects—literary criticism, for example—have devel-
oped in directions very different from the scientific. After all, a culture can
easily settle comfortably into frozen traditionary pattern with respect to tech-
nology. (If their attention span is long enough, our aliens might cultivate
scholastic theology ad indefinitum.) Moreover, unless their oral lore is some-
thing very different from ours, it is hard to see how an alien civilization could
develop science without writing—a skill which even many human communi-
ties did not manage to develop. The salient point is that for “science” to
emerge in a distant planet it is not enough for there to be life and intelligence;
there must also be culture and progressive technology and explanatory interest
and theorizing competency.
The product of the preceding sequence of probability estimates is 107.
Multiplying this by I we would obtain the following expected-value estimate of
the number of “science”-possessing planetary civilizations:
S  107  10,000,000.
This, of course, is still a large number, albeit now one that is rather modest on
a cosmic scale, implying a chance of only some .01% that a given galaxy actu-
ally provides the home for a “science.” (Note too that we ignore the temporal
dimension—the scientific civilizations at issue may have been destroyed long
ago, or perhaps simply have lost interest in doing science.) A more conserva-
tive appraisal of the sociological parameters has thus led us to a figure that is
more modest by many orders of magnitude than the estimate by Shklovskii
and Sagan (op. cit.) that some 1051 scientifically sophisticated civilizations
exist in our galaxy alone. Nevertheless even this modest ten million is still a
sizable number.
304
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

COMPARABILITY AND JUDGMENTS OF
RELATIVE ADVANCEMENT OR BACKWARDNESS
Let us now come to grips with the crux of our present concerns—the issue of
scientific advancement. Earlier we defined “science” in terms of a rather generic
sort of functional equivalency.The question, however, from which we began was
not whether a remote civilization has a “science” of some sort, but wether it is
scientifically more advanced than ourselves. But if advancement is to be at issue,
and the question is to be one of relative aspects of intelligence as such—with
data processing in volumetric terms—but with the quality of the orientation of
intelligence to substantive issues. If another science is to represent an advance
over ours, we must clearly construe it as our sort of science in much more par-
ticularized and substantive terms. And given the immense diversity to be ex-
pected among the various modes of “science” and “technology,” the number of
extraterrestrial civilizations possessing a science and technology that is duly
consonant and contiguous with ours—and in particular, heavily geared toward
the mathematical laws of the electromagnetic spectrum—must be judged to be
very small indeed.
We have come to recognize that sciences can vary (1) in their formal
mechanisms of formulation—their “mathematics,” (2) in their conceptualization,
that is, in the kinds of explanatory and descriptive concepts they bring to bear,
and (3) in their orientation toward the manifold pressures of nature, reflecting
the varying “interest”-directions of their developers. While “science” as such is
clearly not anthropocentric, science as we have it is—the only “science” that we
ourselves know—is a specifically human artifact that must be expected to re-
flect in significant degree the particular characteristics of its makers. Conse-
quently, the prospect that an alien “science”-possessing civilization has a science
that we would acknowledge (if sufficiently informed) as representing the same
general line of inquiry as that in which we ourselves are engaged seems ex-
tremely implausible.The possibility that their science-and-technology is “suffi-
ciently similar” in orientation and character to substantively proximate to ours
must be viewed as extremely remote. We clearly cannot estimate this as repre-
senting something other than a very long shot indeed—certainly no better than
one in many thousands.
Just such comparability with “our sort of science” is, however, the indis-
pensable precondition for judgments of relative advancement or backwardness
vis-à-vis ourselves. The idea of their being scientifically “more advanced” is
predicated on the uniformity of the enterprises—doing better and more effec-
tively the kinds of things that we want science and technology to do. Any talk
of advancement and progress is predicated on the sameness of the direction of
movement: only if others are traveling along the same route as we can they be
said to be ahead of behind us. The issue of relative advancement is linked in-
separably to the idea of doing the same sort of thing better or more fully. And
Human Science as Characteristically Human
305

this falls apart when “this sort of thing” is not substantially the same. One can
say that a child’s expository writing is more primitive than an adult’s, or that the
novice’s performance at arithmetic or piano playing is less developed than that
of the expert. But we can scarcely say that Chinese cookery is more or less
advanced than Roman, or Greek pottery than Renaissance glassblowing. The
salient point for present purposes is simply that where the enterprises are
sufficiently diverse, the ideas of comparative advancement and progress are
inapplicable for lack of a sine qua non condition.
Claiming scientific superiority is not as simple as may seem at first sight.
To begin with, it would not automatically emerge from their capacity to make
many splendidly successful predictions. For this could be the result of precog-
nition or empathetic attunement to nature or such-like. Again, what is wanted
is not just a matter of correct, but of cognitively underwritten, and thus science-
guided prediction—predictions guided by insight based on understanding and
not mere lucky guesswork. And that is just exactly what is to be proved.
It clearly is not enough for establishing their being scientifically more ad-
vanced than ourselves that the aliens should perform “technological won-
ders”—that they should be able to do all sorts of things we would like to do but
cannot. After all, bees can do that. The technology at issue must clear be the
product of intelligent contrivance rather than evolutionary trial and error. What
is needed for advancement is that their performatory wonders issue from supe-
rior theoretical knowledge—that is, from superior science. And then we are
back in the circle.
Nor would the matter be settled by the consideration that an extraterres-
trial species might be more “intelligent” then we in having a greater capacity for
the timely and comprehensive monitoring and processing of information. After
all, whale or porpoises, with their larger brains, may (for all we know) have to
manipulate relatively larger quantities of sheer data than ourselves to maintain
effective adaptation within the highly changeable environment. What clearly
counts for scientific knowledge is not the quantity of intelligence in sheer vol-
umetric terms but its quality in substantive, issue-oriented terms. Information
handling does not assure scientific development. Libraries of information (or
misinformation) can be generated about trivia—or dedicated to matters very
different from science as we know it.
It is perhaps too tempting for humans to reckon cognitive superiority by
the law of the jungle—judging as superior those who do or would come out on
top in outright conflict. But surely the Mongols were not possessors of a civi-
lization superior to that of the New Eastern cultures they overran. Again, we
earthlings might easily be eliminated by not very knowledgeable creatures able
to produce at will—perhaps by using natural secretions—a biological or chem-
ical agent capable to killing us off.
The key point then, is that if they are to effect an advance on our science,
they must both (1) be engaged in doing roughly our sort of thing in roughly our
306
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

sort of way, and (2) do it significantly better. In speaking of the “science” of an-
other civilization as “more advanced” than our own, we contemplate the prospect
that they have developed science (our sort of science—“science” as we know it) fur-
ther than we have ourselves. And this is implausible. Even assuming that “they”
develop a “science” at all—that is, a functional equivalent of our science—it seems
unduly parochial to suppose that they are at work constructing our sort of science
in substantive, content-oriented terms. Diverse life-modes have diverse interests;
diverse interests engender diverse technologies; diverse technologies make for di-
verse modes of science. And where the parties concerned are going in different
directions, it makes no sense to say that one is ahead of or behind the other.
If a civilization of intelligent aliens develops a science at all, it seem plau-
sible to expect that they will develop it in another direction altogether and pro-
duce something that we, if we could come to understand it at all, would regard
as simply detached in a content-orientation—though perhaps not in intent—
from the scientific enterprise as we ourselves cultivate it. (Think of the attitude
of orthodox sciences to “exotic” phenomena like hypnotism, or acupuncture, let
alone to parapsychology.)
The crucial consideration is that there just is not single-track itinerary of
scientific/technological development that different civilizations travel in com-
mon with mere differences in speed or in staying power (not withstanding the
penchant of astrophysics for the neat plotting of numerical “degrees of develop-
ment” against time in the evolution of planetary civilizations—cf. J.A. Ball,
American Scientist, vol. 68, 1980, p. 58). In cognition and even in “scientific” evo-
lution we are not dealing with a single-track railway, but with a complex net-
work leading to many mutually remote destinations. Even as cosmic evolution
involves a red shift that carries different star systems ever farther from each other
in space, so cognitive evolution may well involve a red shift that carries different
civilizations even farther from each other into mutually remote thought-worlds.
The prospect that an alien civilization is going about the job of doing our
science—a “science” that reflects the sorts of interests and involvement that we
have in nature—better than we do ourselves must accordingly be adjudged as
extremely far-fetched. Specifically two conditions would have to be met for the
science of an intelligent civilization to be in a position to count as comparable
to ours.
1.
That, given that they have a “science” and a developing “technol-
ogy,” they have managed to couple the two and have proceeded to
develop (unlike the ancient Greeks and Chinese and Byzantines) 
a science-guided technology. (Probability p6.)
2.
That their science-guided technology is sufficiently oriented toward
issues regarding natural processes sufficiently close to those at which
our science-guided technology is oriented that a comparison can
reasonably be made between them. (Probability p7.)
Human Science as Characteristically Human
307

To judge by terrestrial experience, it seems rather optimistic to estimate p6
to be even so large as one in a thousand (with p6  .001). And p7 must also be
adjudged as quite small. As we have seen science-guided technology could be
oriented in very different directions. The potential diversity of different modes
of “science” is encrimous, so that there is little choice but to see p7 as an even-
tuation whose chances are no better than, say, one in ten thousand (so p7 
.0001). If our alien scientists are differently constructed (if they are silicon-
based creatures, for example), of it their natural environment is very different,
their practical interests and its accordant technology will be oriented in very
different directions from ours. For example, their technology might be wholly
independent of “hardware,” oriented not toward physical machinery, but to-
ward the software of mind-state manipulation, telepathy, hypnotism, autosug-
gestion, or the like. (Ray Bradbury’s Martians destroy an expedition from earth
armed with atomic weapons by thought control.) And we must not keep our
imagination on a short leash in this regard. Given the diversity of different
modes of “science” and the enormous spectrum of possible issues and purposes
in principle available to extraterrestrial aliens, the prospect must be recognized
that the direction of their science-guided technology might be vastly different
from ours.
Accordingly we have it that
p6  p7  107.
Now the product of this quantity with the previously estimated quantity S, the
number of civilizations that possess a technologized science as we comprehend
it, is clearly not going to be very substantial—it is, in fact, going to be strikingly
close to 1.
If “being there” in scientific regards means having our sort of scientifically
guided technology and our sort of technologically channeled science, then it
does not seem all that far-fetched to suppose that as regards science as we have
it we might be there alone—even in a universe amply furnished with other intel-
ligent civilizations.The prospect that somebody else could do “our sort of thing”
in the scientific sphere better than we can do it ourselves seems very remote.
BASIC PRINCIPLES
The overall structure of our analysis thus emerges in the picture of Table 16.1.
Its figures interestingly embody the familiar situation that as one moves along
a nested hierarchy of increasing complexity one encounters a greater scope for
diversity—that the further layers of system complexity provide for an ever-
widening spectrum of possible state and conditions. (The more fundamental
308
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

that system, and narrow its correlative range of alternatives, the more complex,
the wider.) If each unit (“letter,” “cell,” “atom”) can be configurated in ten ways,
then each ordered group of ten such units (“word,” “organ,” “molecule”) can 
be configurated in 1010, and each complex of ten such groups (“sentences,”
“organisms,” “objects”) in (1010)10  10100 ways. Thus even if only a small frac-
tion of what is realizable in theory is realizable in nature, any increase in orga-
nizational complexity will nevertheless be accompanied by an enormous
amplification of possibilities.
To be sure, the numerical particulars that constitute the quantitative thread
of the discussion cannot be given much credence. But their general tendency
nevertheless conveys an important lesson. For people frequently seem inclined
to reason as follows:
There are after all, an immense number of planetary objects running
about in the heavens. And proper humility requires us to recognize
that there is nothing at all that special about the Earth. If it can evolve
life and intelligence and civilization and science, then so can other
planets, and given that there are so many other runners in the race we
must assume that—even though we cannot see them in the cosmic
darkness—some of them have got ahead of us in the race.
As one recent writer formulates this familiar argumentation, “Since man’s
existence on the earth occupies but an instant in cosmic time, surely intelli-
gent life has progressed far beyond our level on some of these 100,000,000
(habitable) planets (in our galaxy).”10 But such plausible-sounding argumen-
tation overlooks the numerical complexities. Even though there are an
Human Science as Characteristically Human
309
TABLE 16.1
Conditions for the Development of Science
Planets of sufficient size for potential habitation
1022
fraction thereof with affording:
temperate location for
101
chemistry for life-support
101
biochemistry for the actual emergence of life
102
biology and psychology for the evolution of intelligence
104
sociology for developing a culture with a “technology” and
a “science”
107
epistemology for developing science as we know it
107

immense number of solar systems, and thus a staggering number of planets
(some 1022 in our estimate), nevertheless, a substantial number of conditions
must be met for “science” (as we understand it) to arise. The astrophysical,
physical, chemical, biological, psychological, sociological, and epistemolog-
ical parameters must all be in proper adjustment. There must be habitability,
and life, and intelligence, and culture, and technology, and a “science” cou-
pled to technology, and an appropriate subject-matter orientation of this in-
tellectual product, and so on. A great many turnings must go aright en route
to science of a quality comparable to ours. Each step along the way is one of
finite (and often smallish) probability. And to reach the final destination, all
these probabilities must be multiplied together, yielding a quantity that
might be very small indeed. Even if there were only twelve turning points
along this developmental route, each involving a chance of successful even-
tuation that is, on average, no worse than a one-in-a-hundred, the chance of
an overall success would be immensely small, corresponding to an aggregate
success-probability of merely 1024.
It is tempting to say “The Universe is a big place; surely we must expect
that what happens in one locality will be repeated someplace else.” But this
overlooks the issue of probability. Admittedly cosmic locales are very numer-
ous. But probabilities can get to be very small: No matter how massive N may
be, there is that diminutive 1/N that can countervail against it.
The workings of evolution—be it of life or intelligence or culture of tech-
nology or science—are always the product of a great number of individually un-
likely events. Things can eventuate very differently at many junctures. The
unfolding of developments involves putting to nature a series of questions whose
successive resolution produces a process reminiscent of the game Twenty Ques-
tions, sweeping over a possibility-spectrum of awesomely large proportions.The
result eventually reached lies along a route that traces our one particular contin-
gent path within a space of alternatives that provides for an ever divergent fan-
ning out of alternative as each step opens up yet further possibilities. And
evolutionary process is a very iffy proposition—a complex labyrinth where a
great many twists and turns in the road must be taken aright for matters to end
up as they do.
Of course, it all looks easy with the wisdom of hindsight. If things had not
turned out appropriately at every stage, we would not be here to tell the tale.
The many contingencies on the long route of cosmic, galactic, solar-systemic,
biochemical, biological, social, cultural, and cognitive evolution have all turned
out aright—the innumerable obstacles have all been surmounted. In retrospect
it all looks easy and inevitable.The innumerable possibilities of variation along
the way are easily kept out of sight and out of mind. The wisdom of hindsight
makes it look very easy. It is so easy, so tempting to say that a planet on which
there is life will of course evolve a species with the technical capacity for inter-
stellar communication.11 It is tempting, but it is also nonsense.
310
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

The ancient Greek atomists’ theory of possibility afford an interesting
object-lesson in this connection. Adopting a Euclideanly infinitistic view of
space, the atomist taught that every (suitably general) possibility is realized in
fact someplace or other. Confronting the question of Why do dogs not have
horns: just why is the theoretical possibility that dogs be horned not actually
realized? the atomists replied that it indeed is realized by just elsewhere—in
another region of space. Somewhere within infinite space there is another world
just like ours in every respect save one, that its dogs have horns. For the cir-
cumstance that dogs lack horns is simply a parochial idiosyncrasy of the par-
ticular local world in which we interlocutors happen to find ourselves. Reality
accommodates all possibilities of worlds alternative to this through spatial
distribution: as the atomists saw it, all alternative possibilities are in fact
actualized in the various subworlds embraced within one spatially infinite
superworld.
This theory of virtually open-ended possibilities was shut off by they
closed cosmos of the Aristotelian world picture, which dominated European
cosmological thought for almost two millennia. The breakup of the Aris-
totelian model in the Renaissance and its replacement by the “Newtonian”
model is one of the great turning points of the intellectual tradition of the
West—elegantly portrayed in Alexandre Koyré’s book of the splendid title
“From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe” (New York, 1957). Strangely
enough, the refinitization of the universe effected by Einstein’s general relativ-
ity in one of its principal interpretations produced scarcely a ripple in philo-
sophical or theoretical circles, despite the immense stir caused by other aspects
of the Einstein revolution. (Einsteinian space-time is after all, even more radi-
cally finitistic than the Aristotelian world-picture, which left open at any rate
the prospect of an infinite future, with respect to time.)
To be sure, it might well seem that the finitude in question is not terribly
significant because the distances and times involved in modern cosmology are so
enormous. But this view is rather naive. The difference between the finite the
the infinite is as big as differences can get to be. and it represents a difference
that is—in this present context—of the most far-reaching significance. For this
means that we have no alternative to supposing that a highly improbable set of
eventuations is not going to be realized in very many places, and that something
sufficiently improbable may well not be realized at all.The decisive philosophical
importance of the Einsteinean finitization of space-time is that it means that an
eventuation that is sufficiently improbable may well not be realized at all. A fi-
nite universe must “make up its mind” about its contents in a far more radical
sense than an infinite one. And this is particularly manifest in the context of
low-probability possibilities. In a finite world—unlike an infinite one—we can-
not avoid supposing that a prospect that is sufficiently unlikely is simply not
going to be realized at all, that in piling improbability on improbability we even-
tually outrun the reach of the actual. It is, accordingly, quite conceivable that our
Human Science as Characteristically Human
311

science represents a solution of the problem of cognitive accommodation that is
terrestrially locale-specific.
Here lies a deep question. Is the mission of intelligence uniform or diver-
sified? Two fundamentally opposed philosophical positions are possible with
respect to cognitive evolution in its cosmic perspective. The one is a uniformi-
tarian monism that sees the universal mission of intelligence in terms of a cer-
tain shared destination, a common cosmic “position of reason as such.” The
other is a particularistic pluralism that allows each solar civilization to forge its
own characteristic cognitive destiny, and sees the mission of intelligence as such
in terms of spanning a wide spectrum of alternatives and realizing a vastly di-
versified variety of possibilities, with each thought-form realizing its own pe-
culiar destiny in separation from all the rest. The conflict between these
doctrines must in the final analysis be settled not by armchair speculation for
general principles, but by rational triangulation from the empirical data. This
said, it must be observed that the whole tendency of these present deliberation
is toward the pluralistic side.
In many mind there is, no doubt, a certain charm to the idea of compan-
ionship. It would be comforting to think that however estranged we are in
other ways, those alien minds and ourselves share science at any rate—that we
are fellow travelers on a common journey of inquiry. Mythology and scientific
speculation alike manifest our yearning for companionship and contact. (Pascal
was not the only one frightened by the eternal silence of infinite spaces.) It
would be pleasant to think ourselves not only colleagues but junior collabora-
tors whom other, wiser minds might be able to help along the way. Even as
many in sixteenth-century Europe looked to those strange pure men of the In-
dies (East or West) who might serve as moral exemplars for sinful European
man, so we are tempted to look to alien inquirers who surpass us in scientific
wisdom and might assist us in overcoming our cognitive deficiencies. The idea
is appealing, but it is also, alas, very unrealistic.
In the late 1600s Christian Huygens wrote:
For ’tis a very ridiculous opinion that the common people have got
among them, that it is impossible a rational Soul should dwell in any
other shape than ours . . .This can proceed from nothing but the Weak-
ness, Ignorance, and Prejudice of Men, as well as the humane Figure
being the handsomest and most excellent of all others, when indeed it’s
nothing but a being accustomed to that figure that makes me think so,
and a conceit . . . that no shape or color can be so good as our own.12
What is here said about people’s tendency to emplace all rational minds into
a physical structure akin to their own familiar one is paralleled by a tendency
to emplace all rational knowledge into a cognitive structure akin to their own
familiar one.
312
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

With respect to biological evolution it seem perfectly sensible to reason as
follows:
What can we say about the forms of life evolving on these other
worlds? . . . [I]t is clear that subsequent evolution by natural selection
would lead to an immense variety of organisms; compared to them, all
organisms on Earth, from molds to men, are very close relations.
(Shklovskii and Sagan, op. cit., p. 350)
It is plausible that much the same situation should obtain with respect to cog-
nitive evolution: that the “sciences” produced by different civilizations here on
earth—the ancient Chinese, Indians, and Greeks, for example—should exhibit
immensely greater points of similarity than obtains between our present-day
science and anything devised by astronomically remote civilizations. And where
movement in altogether different directions is at issue, the idea of a comparison
in terms of “advance” or “backwardness” would simply be inapplicable.
The chapter’s deliberations accordingly convey two principal lessons. The
first is that the prospect that some astronomically remote civilization is “scien-
tifically more advanced” than ourselves—that somebody else is doing “our sort
of science” better than we ourselves—requires in the first instance that they be
doing our sort of science at all. And this deeply anthropomorphic supposition
is extremely unlikely.
Moreover, a second main lesson follows from the consideration that natu-
ral science as we know it is to all visible intents and purposes a characteristically
human enterprise—a circumstance that endows science with an inexorably eco-
nomic dimension. For this means that the sorts of results of scientific inquiry
that we are able to achieve will hinge crucially on the way in which we deploy
resources in cultivating our scientific work as well as on the extent to which we
do so. Accordingly, our knowledge is limited by the simple fact that it is ours.13
Human Science as Characteristically Human
313

This page intentionally left blank.

315
Chapter 17
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and 
the Limits of Knowledge
SYNOPSIS
•
Knowledge about our own ignorance is bound to be very limited.
•
We can identify questions that we cannot answer but never facts that we do
not know.
•
Paradoxical though it may seem, even an omniscient God may fail to know
some sorts of temporally perspectival knowledge.
•
The temporal constitution of our knowledge is one of its crucial aspects.
•
It means that later knowledge develops out of earlier knowledge doing so in
ways envisioned long ago by Kant.
•
Its developmental nature can block the way to knowledge about knowledge.
•
The idea of unanswerable questions—insolubilia—is old and well-
established.
•
And there is good reason to think that our cognitive limits can readily
engender such insolubilia.
•
Indeed some of this can actually be identified.
•
However, the extent of our ignorance is something that cannot be reliably
assessed.
•
The impredictability of knowledge means that the universe too is to some
extent impredictable.

CONCRETE VERSUS GENERIC KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE
One of the most critical but yet problematic areas of inquiry relates to knowl-
edge regarding our own cognitive shortcomings. It is next to impossible to get
a clear fix on our own ignorance, because in order to know that there is a cer-
tain fact that we do not know, we would have to know the item at issue to be a
fact, and just this is, by hypothesis, something we do not know.1 And it is even
difficult to obtain a taxonomy of ignorance. For the realm of ignorance is every
bit as vast, complex, and many-faceted as that of knowledge itself. Whatever
someone can know that they can also be ignorant about—arguably exempting
with a handful of Cartesian exceptions such as the fact that knowers are pretty
much bound ex officio realize that they themselves exist and can think.
In this connection it is instructive to note some relatively simple but nev-
ertheless far-reaching considerations regarding the project of rational inquiry
and the limits of knowledge. Let Kxp as usual abbreviate “x knows that p.” And
now note the contrast between the contentions:
“x knows that something has the property F ”: Kx(∃u)Fy
and
“x knows of something that it has the property F ”: (∃y)KxFu.
The variant placement of the quantifier means that there is a crucial different
here, since in the second case, unlike the first, the knower in question is in a po-
sition specifically to identify the item at issue. Here in this second case our
knower not merely knows generally and indefinitely that something has F, but
knows concretely and specifically what it is that has F. The two cognitive situ-
ations are clearly very different. To know that someone is currently in the Li-
brary of Congress is one thing and to know who is there is quite another.
And this has wider ramifications. For the reality of it is that there is a
world of difference between saying “I don’t know whether p is a fact” and say-
ing “p is a fact that I don’t know.” The former comes down to maintaining :
~Kip & ~Ki~p
(i  oneself).
No problem there: I neither know that p nor that not-p. However, the second
statement, to the effect that p is a fact that one does not know to be so, comes
down to maintaining: p & ~Kip. But in claiming to know this, namely
Ki(p & ~Kip).
316
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

I claim to know (among other things) both that p is true and that I do not
know this. And such a claim is self-contradictory.2
And correspondingly we must recognize that there is a crucial difference be-
tween the indefinite “I know that there is some fact that I do not know” and the
specific “Such and such is a fact of which I know that I do not know it.”The first
is unproblematic but the second not, seeing that to know of something that it is
a fact I must know it as such so that what is at issue is effectively a contradiction
in terms. I can know about my ignorance only sub ratione generalitatis at the level
of indefiniteness, but I cannot know it in concrete detail. I can meaningfully hold
that two and two equals four is a claim (or a purported fact) that I do not know to
be the case, but cannot meaningfully maintain that two and two equals four is an
actual fact that I do not know to be the case.To maintain a fact as fact is to assert
knowledge of it: in maintaining p as a fact one claims to know that p.
And so it lies in the nature of things that my ignorance about facts is
something regarding what one can have only generic and not concrete knowl-
edge. One can know that that one does not know various truths, but I am not
in a position to identify any of the specific truths I do not know. In sum, I can
have general but not specific knowledge about my ignorance, although my
knowledge about your ignorance is unproblematic in this regard.3
EROTETIC INCAPACITY
It is helpful to take an erotetic—that is, question-oriented—view of knowledge
and ignorance. After all, x knows that p iff x can cogently give a correct answer
to the question: Is p the case? Here an answer is cogently given if the giver has
a satisfactory rationale for giving it.
The general distinction between the concrete and the generic also applies
in the case of questions. Thus let AxQ abbreviate “x can (correctly) answer the
question Q.”Then we can contrast two possibilities for ignorance, the one gen-
eral and nonspecific
•
Generic question-resolving incapacity
“There is a question Q that I cannot answer” (∃Q)(~AiQ)
and the other particular and specific:
•
Concrete question-resolving incapacity
“Q0 is a (specific) question that I cannot answer” ~AiQ0.
Here we encounter the same dichotomy between generic and specific incapacity
as before. The former does not imply the latter since the second case—unlike
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
317

the first—is a matter of concretely identifying the item at issue. Even as there 
is concrete and indefinite knowledge there is concrete and generic ignorance 
as well.
There is, however, a crucial difference here. For in the case of questions—un-
like factual knowledge—we can be concretely specific regarding about our inca-
pacity. We cannot coherently say “p is a specific truth (fact) I do not know.” But
saying “Q is a specific question I cannot answer”is perfectly unproblematic.When
we look at cognition from the angle of questions rather than that of knowledge,ig-
norance becomes identifiable.Erotetic ignorance—inability to answer questions—
is accordingly something quite different from propositional ignorance: the failure
to know truths. For with erotetic ignorance we can hope to get beyond generali-
ties to identify questions that we cannot answer. But this sort of specificity is
something that we cannot manage in the realm of propositional knowledge.
DIVINE VERSUS MUNDANE KNOWLEDGE
Let us begin here with a somewhat extreme case. A knower is unrestrictedly om-
niscient iff whenever there is something to be known, this knower knows it. In
other words, whenever p is a true matter of fact, the knower knows that it is so.
Thus x is omniscient in this sense if we have:
(	p)(p ⇒Kxp)
Such a knower knows everything that is knowable.This knower’s knowledge is
literally unlimited: something is a truth if, and only if, our omniscient being x
knows it.
By contrast, a knower is restrictedly omniscient iff this knower knows
everything that is known. That is, whenever anyone knows something, this
knower knows it as well: Thus x is omniscient in this weaker sense if we have:
(	p)(∃yKyp ⇒Kxp)
The difference between the two modes of omniscience can come into operation
only when there are unknowns, that is, truths which nobody knows at all. For
when we have
p & ~(∃y)Kxp
then the antecedent at issue with unrestricted omniscience is satisfied, while
that at issue with restricted omniscience is not.
318
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

How do I know that I am not omniscient? Certainly not because I can
specify particular facts that I do not know. Rather, it is because there are ques-
tions I cannot answer. And specifically because I realize full well at the level of
generality that there are truth-determinate propositions whose truth-status I
cannot decide, perfectly meaningful propositions about authentic matters of
fact that I neither know to be true nor to be false, even though I do know that
they have to be one or the other. That George Washington wondered if
Martha was suitably dressed for the occasion of his first inauguration would
seem to be a good example. But what of others?
Of course, we know from Kurt Gödel’s work that in systems of axiomatic
arithmetic there will be (formal) truths that are unprovable (indemonstrable).
Accordingly, one can identify undecidable questions in formal systems of arith-
metic. But—are there specifiable substantive questions about the world’s con-
tingent facts that are comparably undecidable? Are there also factual rather
than merely formal insolubilia—questions with respect to matters of fact that
are not answerable thanks not merely to some fortuitous lack of information
but for deeper and more fundamental reasons?
ISSUES OF TEMPORALIZED KNOWLEDGE
Let us consider why—and how—the answer to this question is affirmative.
The philosophical theologians of the middle ages, who loved puzzles,
were wont to exercise their ingenuity regarding the question: If he is omnis-
cient, does God know what is happening now? And they inclined to answer
this question with the response: yes and no. Clearly an unrestrictedly omnis-
cient God will know everything that happens in the world. And this means
that he knows whatever is happening concurrently with the calendar’s read-
ing 13 January 2001 and the clock’s reading 3:15 P.M. But this is B-series
knowledge in McTaggert’s terminology—knowledge of events in the man-
ner of before/concurrent/after. However, as a being who does not occupy a
place within the manifold of space and time—who, being extramundane,
lacks the world-internal perspective required for indexicals like here and
now—God cannot operate with the correlative concepts and so in that sense,
the sense natural to us as mundane world-emplaced creatures who occupy a
spatiotemporally qualified position in the world’s scheme of things, God
does not know what is going on now. He does not have temporal knowledge
in the English philosopher J. M. E. McTaggart’s A-series mode of matters in
the range of past/present/future. In this regard (as in many others) God is
quite unlike ourselves. We finite world-emplaced being who exist within
space-time can ask and answer questions about temporal matters from a
time-internal perspective.
And this has significant implications for us because our knowledge—unlike
God’s—is something that both has to arise within and be concerned about the
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
319

temporal domain in the manner of the time-interval perspective of A-series tem-
porality. It is, in fact, here that the root source of our cognitive imperfection lies.
This temporal and developmental aspect of knowledge has portentous
ramifications. For one thing, it means that we are evidentially incapacitated in
comparison with other knowers. Thus consider the yes-or-no question:
“When next you yourself (Jones) answer a questions, will you do so in the
negative?” Whichever way poor Jones replies, he is plunged into error. The
best he can do is to plead incapacity and respond “can’t say.” But, of course,
third parties are differently circumstanced. Another knower—one different
from Jones himself—can answer the question by saying “No, Jones won’t do
so,” and manage to be entirely correct. But this is something that Jones cannot
coherently say on his own account.
And so one thing that follows here is that not only are finite knowers not
unrestrictedly omniscient, they are not restrictedly omniscient either—in the
sense of being able to answer correctly every question that another knower can
so answer.
But the temporal aspect of the knowledge of finite beings has other, even
more portentous aspects.
In particular it means that our knowledge is developmental in nature: that
it admits of learning and of discoveries: that there are things (facts) that we do
not and cannot know at one temporal juncture that we can and do manage to
get to know at another. Knowledge does not come to us from on high, per-
fected and completed like Athena springing from the head of Zeus. It is the
product of a process of inquiry unfolding over time—a process from which the
possibilities of error of omission and commission can never be excluded. And
this means that problems are bound to arise as our thought contemplates 
the future.
Our “picture” of the world—our worldview, as one usually calls it—is an
epistemic construction built up from our personal and vicarious experience-
based knowledge. And like any construction it is made over time from preex-
isting materials—in this case the information at our disposal. We can select
these materials—but only to a limited extent. In the main they force them-
selves on us through the channels of our experience. The puzzle question that
inevitably arises in this context is that of the accuracy or correctness of our
world picture. And it is here that the temporally emplaced aspect of things
comes into play.
Perhaps the best way to get a good grip on this issue is by asking how we
are to relate the following four items:
1.
presently purported truth: the truth as we ourselves see it, here and
now.
2.
futured truth: the truth as we will come to see it when we push our
inquiries further and deeper.
320
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

3.
completed truth: the truth as we would see it when and if—per im-
possible—our inquiries were pushed through to the point of ulti-
mate completion.
4.
perfected truth: the truth as we ought to come to see it if we con-
ducted our inquiries in a manner definitively appropriate and correct.
Presumably we can identify 3 and 4 and regard the result of achieving ideal cor-
rectness and completeness as being substantially one and the same. We could
thus simply speak here of “the real truth” as realized through the perfecting and
completing of inquiry.
However, the real problem is how this authentic truth as per 3 and 4 is to
be related to that which we actually have as per 1: our purported truth as it
stands here and now.
The few things that can be said here must be said with care and caution.
Indeed, we must here proceed by way of a via negativa exactly because we have
no possible way of telling now exactly what sort of improvements in our
presently purported knowledge the future progress of inquiry will demand.
KANT’S PRINCIPLE OF QUESTION EXFOLIATION
New knowledge that emerges from the progress of science can have a very dif-
ferent bearing on the matter of questions. Specifically, we can discover:
1.
New (that is, different) answers to old questions.
2.
New questions.
3.
The inappropriateness or illegitimacy of old questions.
With (1) we learn that the wrong answer has been given to an old question: We
uncover an error of commission in our previous question-answering endeavors.
With (2) we discover that there are certain questions that have not heretofore
been posed at all: We uncover an error of omission in our former question-asking
endeavors. Finally, with (3) we find that one has asked the wrong question alto-
gether: We uncover an error of commission in our former question-asking en-
deavors, which are now seen to rest on incorrect presuppositions (and are thus
generally bound up with type (1) discoveries).Three rather different sorts of cog-
nitive progress are thus involved here—different from one another and from the
traditional view of cognitive progress in terms of a straightforward “accretion of
further knowledge.”
The coming to be and passing away of questions is a phenomenon that can
be mooted on this basis. A question arises at the time t if it then can meaning-
fully be posed because all its presuppositions are then taken to be true. And a
question dissolves at t if one or another of its previously accepted presuppositions
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
321

is no longer accepted. Any state of science will remove certain questions from
the agenda and dismiss them as inappropriate. Newtonian dynamics dismissed
the question What cause is operative to keep a body in movement (with a uni-
form velocity in a straight line) once an impressed force has set it into motion?
Modern quantum theory does not allow us to ask What caused this atom on cal-
ifornium to disintegrate after exactly 32.53 days, rather than, say, a day or two
later? Scientific questions should thus be regarded as arising in an historical set-
ting. They arise at some juncture and not at others; they can be born and then
die away.
A change of mind about the appropriate answer to some question will un-
ravel the entire fabric of questions that presupposed this earlier answer. For if
we change our mind regarding the correct answer to one member of a chain of
questions, then the whole of a subsequent course of questioning may well col-
lapse. If we abandon the luminiferous ether as a vehicle for electromagnetic ra-
diation, then we lose at one stroke the whole host of questions about its
composition, structure, mode of operation, origin, and so on.
Epistemic change over time thus relates not only to what is “known” but
also to what can be asked. The accession of “new knowledge” opens up new
questions. And when the epistemic status of a presupposition changes from ac-
ceptance to abandonment or rejection, we witness the disappearance of various
old ones through dissolution. Questions regarding the modus operandi of phlo-
giston, the behavior of caloric fluid, the structure of the luminiferous ether, and
the character of faster-than-light transmissions are all questions that have be-
come lost to modern science because they involve presuppositions that have
been abandoned.
And this brings us to the theme of fallibilism once more. A body of knowl-
edge may well answer a question only provisionally, in a tone of voice so tenta-
tive or indecisive as to indicate that further information is actually needed to
enable us settle the matter with confidence. But even if it does firmly and un-
qualifiedly support a certain resolution, this circumstance can never be viewed
as absolutely final. What is seen as the correct answer to a question at one stage
of the cognitive venture, may, of course, cease to be so regarded at another, later
stage.4 Given that a particular state of science S sees a certain answer as appro-
priate to a question Q, we can never preclude the prospect that some superior
successor to S will eventually come about that endorses some different an-
swer—one that is actually inconsistent with the earlier one.
The second of these modes of erotetic discovery is particularly significant.
The phenomenon of the ever-continuing “birth” of new questions was first em-
phasized by Immanuel Kant, who saw the development of natural science in
terms of a continually evolving cycle of questions and answers, where, “every
answer given on principles of experience begets a fresh question, which likewise re-
quires its answer and thereby clearly shows the insufficiency of all scientific
modes of explanation to satisfy reason.”5 This claim suggests the following
322
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

Principle of Question Propagation—Kant’s Principle, as we shall call it: “The
answering of our factual (scientific) questions always paves the way to further
as yet unanswered questions.”
COGNITIVE INCAPACITY
What we have here is, in effect, a sort of Cognitive Heracliteanism. Heraclitus
said that the world is ever changing that we cannot step into the same river twice.
And epistemic counterpart: the world of knowledge is ever changing. In the
course of cognitive progress we do not—cannot—confront the same question
agenda twice.
Thus one way in which the question-resolving capacity of our knowledge
can be limited is by way of the mode of the situation described in the follow-
ing thesis:
Weak-Limitation (The Permanence of Unsolved Questions).There are al-
ways, at every temporal stage,6 questions to which no answer is in
hand. At every juncture of cognitive history there exist then-unan-
swerable questions for whose resolution then-current science is inad-
equate (yet which may well be answerable at some later state).
Now if Immanuel Kant was right, and every state of knowledge generates fur-
ther new and yet unanswered questions, then we will clearly never reach a po-
sition where all questions are resolved. Thus given Kant’s Principle of
Question Propagation, such a condition of weak limitation inexorably charac-
terizes our knowledge, seeing that of the permanence of unsolved questions is
at once assured.
However, while Kant’s principle assures us that new questions will emerge
from the answers we presently give to our questions it provides no detailed in-
formation about what these questions will be—nor about when they will arise.
Accordingly, we realize at the level of nonspecific generality that various ques-
tions will arise tomorrow that we cannot as yet identify today. But since one can-
not possibly identify the question that will arise tomorrow, it follow that one
cannot possibly say whether all of the questions that will arise belong to the
family of those for which one can provide satisfactory answers.
But now consider the proposition:
(P)
A new question that I cannot answer within one year will arise
tomorrow.
This thesis—somewhat reminiscent of a halting problem in computation
theory—is clearly a proposition whose truth I am unable to determine one
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
323

way or the other. Accordingly the question “Is (P) true or not?” is for all intents
and purposes an undecidable question: is as firm a fact as can be that I am un-
able to determine the truth-status of (P) one way or the other. We therefore
now have before us a specific, example—namely, Is (P) true?—that instances a
concrete and perfectly meaningful question I cannot answer. But, of course, all
this only bears on the issue of what I myself can or cannot do and does not ad-
dress that of what can or cannot be done within the unbounded community of
inquirers at large—now or ever. To address this issue we must dig deeper.
INSOLUBILIA THEN AND NOW
A medieval insolubilium was represented by a question that cannot be an-
swered satisfactorily one way or another because every possible answer is un-
available on grounds of a logical insufficiency of inherent coherence. Such an
insolubilium poses a paradox. By contrast, a modern insolubilium poses a puz-
zle. It is represented by a question that cannot be answered satisfactorily one
way or anther because every possible answer is unavailable on grounds of an
evidential insufficiency of accessible information.
An example of the former (medieval) sort of logical insolubilium is posed by
the self-referential statement: “This sentence is false.” Is this statement true or
not? Whatever answer we give, be it yes or no, we are in deep trouble either way.7
But what about factual insolubilia of the modern type—informatively
unanswerable questions?
Consider some possible examples of this phenomenon. In 1880 the German
physiologist, philosopher, and historian of science Emil de Bois-Reymond pub-
lished a widely discussed lecture of The Seven Riddles of the Universe (Die sieben
Welträtsel),8 in which he maintained that some of the most fundamental prob-
lems regarding the workings of the world were irresolvable. Reymond was a rig-
orous mechanist. On his view, nonmechanical modes of inquiry cannot produce
adequate results, and the limit of our secure knowledge of the world is confined
to the range where purely mechanical principles can be applied. As for all else, we
not only do not have but cannot in principle obtain reliable knowledge. Under the
banner of the slogan Ignoramus et ignorabimus (We do not know and shall never
know), Reymond maintained a skeptically agnostic position with respect to basic
issues in physics (the nature of matter and of force, and the ultimate source of
motion) and psychology (the origin of sensation and of consciousness).These is-
sues are simply insolubilia which transcend man’s scientific capabilities. Certain
fundamental biological problems he regarded as unsolved, but perhaps in princi-
ple soluble (though very difficult): the origin of life, the adaptiveness of organ-
isms, and the development of language and reason. And as regards the seventh
riddle—the problem of freedom of the will—he was undecided.
The position of du Bois-Reymond was swiftly and sharply contested by the
zoologist Ernest Haeckel in a book Die Welträtsel published in 1889,9 which
324
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

soon attained a great popularity. Far from being intractable or even insoluble—
so Haeckel maintained—the riddles of du Bois-Reymond had all virtually been
solved. Dismissing the problem of free will as a pseudoproblem—since free will
“is a pure dogma [which] rests on mere illusion and in reality does not exist at
all”—Haeckel turned with relish to the remaining riddles. Problems of the ori-
gin of life, of sensation, and of consciousness Haeckel regarded as solved—or
solvable—by appeal to the theory of evolution. Questions of the nature of mat-
ter and force, he regarded as solved by modern physics except for one residue:
the problem (perhaps less scientific than metaphysical) of the ultimate origin of
matter and its laws. This “problem of substance” was the only remaining riddle
recognized by Haeckel, and it was not really a problem of science: in discovering
the “fundamental law of the conservation of matter and force” science had done
pretty much what it could do with respect to this problem—the rest that re-
mained was metaphysics with which the scientist had no proper concern.
Haeckel summarized his position as follows:
The number of world-riddles has been continually diminishing in the
course of the nineteenth century through the aforesaid progress of a
true knowledge of nature. Only one comprehensive riddle of the uni-
verse now remains—the problem of substance. . . . [But now] we have
the great, comprehensive “law of substance,” the fundamental law of
the constancy of matter and force. The fact that substance is every-
where subject to eternal movement and transformation gives it the
character also of the universal law of evolution. As this supreme law
has been firmly established, and all others are subordinate to it, we ar-
rive at a conviction of the universal unity of nature and the eternal va-
lidity of its laws. From the gloomy problem of substance we have
evolved the clear law of substance.10
The basic structure of Haeckel’s teaching is clear: science is rapidly nearing a
state where all the big problems have been solved. What remains unresolved is
not so much a scientific as a metaphysical problem. In science itself, the big bat-
tle is virtually at an end, and the work that remains to be done is pretty much a
matter of mopping-up operations.
But is this rather optimistic position tenable? Can we really dismiss the
prospect of factual insolubilia? Let us explore this issue more closely.
COGNITIVE LIMITS
To begin with there is the prospect of what might be called the weak limitation
inherent in the circumstance that there are certain issues on its agenda that sci-
ence cannot resolve now. However, this condition of weak limitation is per-
fectly compatible with the circumstance that every question raisable at this
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
325

stage will eventually be answered at such future juncture. And so, a contrasting
way in which the question-resolving capacity of our knowledge may be limited
can envisage the following, more drastic situation:
Strong-Limitation (The Existence of Insolubilia).There will (as of some
juncture) be then-posable questions which will never obtain answer,
meaningful questions whose resolution lies beyond the reach of sci-
ence altogether—questions that will remain ever unsolved on the
cognitive agenda.
Such strong limitation the existence of immoral questions—permanently
unanswerable questions (general insolubilia) that admit of no resolution within
any cognitive corpus we are able to bring to realization.
However, for there to be insolubilia it is certainly not necessary that any-
thing be said about the current availability of the insoluble question. The
prospect of its actual identification at this or indeed any other particular pre-
specified historical juncture is wholly untouched. Even a position that holds that
there indeed are insolubilia certainly need not regard them as being identifi-
able at the present state-of-the-are of scientific development. One can ac-
cordingly also move beyond the two preceding theses to the yet stronger
principle of
Hyperlimitation (The Existence of IDENTIFIABLE insolubilia). Our pres-
ent-day cognitive agenda includes certain here-and-now specifiable
and scientifically meaningful questions whose resolution lies beyond
the reach of science altogether.
Awkwardly, however, a claim to identify insolubilia by pinpointing here
and now issues that future inquiry will never resolve can readily go awry.
Charles S. Peirce has put the key point trenchantly:
For my part, I cannot admit the proposition of Kant—that there are
certain impassable bounds to human knowledge. . . . The history of
science affords illustrations enough of the folly of saying that this,
that, or the other can never be found out. Auguste Comte said that
it was clearly impossible for man ever to learn anything of the
chemical constitution of the fixed stars, but before his book had
reached its readers the discovery which he had announced as im-
possible had been made. Legendre said of a certain proposition in
the theory of numbers that, while it appeared to be true, it was most
likely beyond the powers of the human mind to prove it; yet the
next writer on the subject gave six independent demonstrations of
the theorem.11
326
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

To identify an insoluble problem, we would have to show that a certain inher-
ently appropriate question is such that its resolution lies beyond every (possible
or imaginable) state of future science. This task is clearly a rather tall order. Its
realization is clearly difficult. But not in principle impossible.
Observe, to begin with, that even if we agree with Peirce that science is en
route to a completion we may well always—at any given time—remain at a re-
move from ultimacy. For as long as the body of knowledge continues to grow
there will still remain scope for the possibility of insolubilia. Even an asymp-
totically completeable science can accommodate a fixed region of unresolv-
ability, as long as the scope of that science itself is growing.That is, even if the
fraction of unresolved questions converges asymptotically to zero, the number
of unresolved questions may be ever-growing in the context of an expanding
science. For consider
No. of questions on the agenda
100
1000
10,000
10k
Fraction of unresolved questions
.1
2
.

.1
4
.

.1
8
.

.1
2
.

k1
No. of unresolved questions
50
250
1250
10k .1
2
.

k1
These figures indicate that there is room for insolubilia even within a science
that is ever-improving so as to approach asymptotic completeness. And this
points toward a prospect that is well worth exploring.
IDENTIFYING INSOLUBILIA
To elucidate the prospect of identifying scientific insolubilia, let us resume the
theme of the progressive nature of knowledge, and continue the earlier consid-
erations of second-order questions about future knowledge. Specifically, let us
focus even more closely on the historicity of knowledge development.
It lies in the very nature of the situation that the detailed nature of our ig-
norance is—for us at least—hidden away in an impenetrable fog of obscurity.
The limits of one’s information set unavoidable limits to one’s predictive ca-
pacities. In particular, we cannot foresee what we cannot conceive. Our ques-
tions—let alone answers—cannot outreach the limited horizons of our
concepts. Having never contemplated electronic computing machines as such,
the ancient Romans could also venture no predictions about their impact on
the social and economic life of the twenty-first century. Clever though he un-
questionably was, Aristotle could not have pondered the issues of quantum
electrodynamics. The scientific questions of the future are—at least in part—
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
327

bound to be conceptually inaccessible to the inquirers of the present. The
question of just how the cognitive agenda of some future date will be consti-
tuted is clearly irresolvable for us now. Not only can we not anticipate future
discoveries now, we cannot even prediscern the questions that will arise as
time moves on and cognitive progress with it.12 We are cognitively myopic
with respect to future knowledge. It is in principle infeasible for us to say now
what questions will figure in the erotetic agenda of the future, let alone what
answers they will engender.
But, of course, all of these are, by hypothesis, issues that will resolve them-
selves in the fullness of time. We have not as yet identified an insolubilia that
can never be satisfactorily resolved.
To address this question, consider, however, the thesis:
(T)
It will always be the case that there will come a time when all of
the ever-resolved questions then on the agenda will be resolved within
100 years.
And now let Q* be the question: Is T true or not? It is clear that to answer
this question Q* one way or the other we would need to have cognitive mastery
over the question agenda of all future times. And, as emphasized above, just this
is something that we cannot manage to achieve. By their very nature as such,
the discoveries of the future are unavailable at present. Thus Q* illustrates the
sort of case we are looking for: it affords an example of a specific and perfectly
meaningful question that we are in effect always and ever unable to resolve con-
vincingly—irrespective of what the date on the calendar happens to read.
And we can move even further in this direction. For, after all, scientific in-
quiry is a venture in innovation. Present science can never speak decisively for
future science, and present science cannot predict the specific discoveries of fu-
ture inquiry. Accordingly, claims about what someone will achieve over all—
and thus just where it will be going in the long run—are beyond the reach of
attainable knowledge at this or any other particular stage of the scientific “state
of the art.” And on this basis the thesis “There are non-decidable questions that
science will never resolve—even were it to continue ad indefinitum”—the In-
solubilia Thesis as we may call it—is something whose truth-status can never
be settled in a decisive way. And since this is so we have it that this question it-
self is self-instantiating: it is a question regarding an aspect of reality (of which
of course science itself is a part) that scientific inquiry will never—at any spe-
cific state of the art—be in a position to settle decisively.
It should be noted that this issue cannot be settled by supposing a mad sci-
entists who explodes the superbomb that blows the earth to smithereens and
extinguishes all organic life as we know it. For the prospect cannot be precluded
that intelligent life will evolve elsewhere. And even if we contemplate the
prospect of a “big crunch” that is a reverse “big bang” and implodes our universe
328
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

into an end, the project can never be precluded that at the other end of the big
crunch, so to speak, another era of cosmic development awaits.
Of course, someone may possibly be of a mind to complain as follows:
You are not giving me what I want. For let us distinguish between a
base-level question in which no (essential) inference to questions and
question agendas is made and a meta-level question in which there is
an uneliminable reference to questions and question agendas. What I
want is an example—a definitively specified instance—of an insolu-
bilium at the base-level of substantive questions about the real world.
To such a complainer one can respond as follows:
In its own way, your complaint is well taken; and indeed it seems to be
pretty much in the spirit of Peirce’s telling observation just quoted
above. But it is worthwhile to look in a somewhat different light at
this very question that you have just raised, viz. “Are there any base-
level factual insolubilia.”The reality of it is that it is somewhat beyond
difficult and impossible to imagine that this is an issue that could be
settled convincingly one way or the other in any state of actually avail-
able information. And so this question itself is a pretty good candidate
for an insolubilium—though, to be sure, not at the base level.
Clearly that complaint cannot accomplish its intended mission.
RELATING KNOWLEDGE TO IGNORANCE
In any event, however, while there indeed are scientific insolubilia—and we can
actually identify some of them—the fact remains that detailed knowledge
about the extent of our ignorance is unavailable to us. For what is at stake with
this issue of extent is the ratio of the manifold of what one does know to the
manifold of that what one does not. And it is impossible in the nature of things
for me to get a clear fix on the latter. For the actual situation is not that of a
crossword puzzle—or of geographic exploration—where the size of the terra
incognita can be somehow measured in advance of securing the details that are
going to be filled in. We can form no sensible estimate of the imponderable do-
main of what can be known but is not known. To be sure, we can manage to
compare what one person or group knows with what some other person or
group knows. But mapping the realm of what is knowable as such is something
that inevitably reaches beyond our powers. And for this reason any questions
about the cognitive completeness of our present knowledge is and will remain
inexorably unresolvable.
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
329

There are, of course, finite fields of knowledge. There is only so much you
can know (nonrelationally, at least) about the content of Boston’s 1995 tele-
phone directory, namely the totality of what is in its pages. But that is only the
case because here “what can be known” and “what is known” actually coincide.
But this sort of thing is the case only in very special circumstances and never
with respect to areas of natural science such as medicine or physics that deal
with the products of nature at a level of generic generality.
Yet although ignorance lies at the core of the present discussion, it is not an
exercise in radical skepticism. It does not propose to take the pessimistic line of
a cognitive negativism to the effect that knowledge about the world is unavail-
able to us. Instead, what is being contemplated here is (1) that despite whatever
we may come to know there are some matters on which we are destined to re-
main ignorant, and (2) that among the things that we can get to know about are
various facts about the nature and extent of our own ignorance.
That our knowledge is sufficient for our immediate purposes—specifically
by enabling us to answer the questions we then and there have before us—is
something that is in principle readily determinable. But that it is theoretically
adequate to answer not just our present questions but those that will grow out
of them the future is something we can never manage to establish. For it is clear
that the sensible management of ignorance is something that requires us to op-
erate in the realm of practical considerations exactly because the knowledge re-
quired for theoretical adequacy on this subject is—by hypothesis—not at our
disposal. We have no cogently rational alternative to proceed, here as elsewhere,
subject to the basic pragmatic principle of having to accept the best that we can
do as good enough.
And so we return to the point made at the very outset: the ironic, though in
some ways fortunate fact is that one of the things about which we are most de-
cidedly ignorant is the detailed nature of our ignorance itself. We simply cannot
make a reliable assessment of the extent of our ignorance.
POSTSCRIPT: A COGNITIVELY INDETERMINATE UNIVERSE
One further consequence of these deliberations warrants being noted by way of
postscript, as it were, to our discussion of the unpredictability of future knowl-
edge. It is that our cognitive imperfection means that the universe itself is un-
predictable. For a world in which it transpires that the future knowledge and
thereby the future thoughts of intelligent beings are impredictable (at least in
part) as a matter of fundamental principle is one in which the correlative phys-
ical phenomena are impredictable as well. As long as intelligent agents continue
to exists within it a world is—and is bound to be—in part unpredictable since
what intelligent beings do will always in some ways reflect the state of their
knowledge, alike in its positive and its negative composition. For since mind
330
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

and its operations are themselves an integral component of nature, a mental un-
predictability cannot but constitute a form of natural or physical unpredictabil-
ity as well. The extinction of intelligent agents would be required to make the
world predictable: as long as intelligent life continues the world will continue
to be impredictable.
Put in a nutshell, the position of affairs is this. Since all of the doings—
actual and potential—of intelligent agents are themselves part or aspect of the
constitution of the universe, then insofar as our cognitive doings are inherently
impredictable, so also will this be the case with the correlative aspects of phys-
ical nature itself. To be sure, if our cognitive efforts stood outside nature,
things might be different in this regard, since physical predictability might
then be combined with a “merely epistemic” mental unpredictability. But this,
of course, is a prospect that is implausible in the extreme.13
On Ignorance, Insolubilia, and the Limits of Knowledge
331

This page intentionally left blank.

333
Chapter 18
Cognitive Realism
SYNOPSIS
•
To exist is to play a role in some realm of identifiable items.
•
Actual identification by us humans is not crucial here; our own powers are
not determinative.
•
Indeed our knowledge regarding actual existence is bound to be incom-
plete.
•
As far as we are concerned, the world’s real things are cognitively inex-
haustible.
•
Our conception of things are always corrigible,
•
incomplete, and
•
changeable.
•
The reality of things outruns our conceptions of them.
•
This hidden depth of real things is not a basis for slepticism but rather a
prime impetus of realism.
•
Such a realism has a pragmatic basis as serving to override the essential
conceptual underpinnings for communication and discourse.
•
Such a view of the matter gives an idealistic cast to realism.
•
In particular it does not permit an actual-science realism holding that re-
ality is as the science of our day describes it to be, but rather an aspirational
science-realism that sees depicting reality as a regulative goal that science
aspires to actualize.

EXISTENCE
To exist (in the broadest sense of this term) is to function as a constituent of a
realm, to play a role in a domain of identifiable items of some sort. In principle
there are thus as many modes of existence as there are types of interrelated items,
and to exist is to exist as an item of the correlative kind. There is physical exis-
tence in space and time, mathematical existence in the realm of quantities or
structures, sensory existence in the spectrum of colors or the catalog of odors, and
so on. This means that existence is realm-correlative and thus contextualized.
Strictly considered, we should not speak of existence categorically and without
qualifications. It is always a matter of existence-as: as a physical object, as a num-
ber, as a character in a Shakespeare play, or the like. Existence is accordingly not
homogenous but categorially differentiated: different kinds of existing things
exist in their own characteristic way.To attribute to numbers the same kind of ex-
istence that colors or that mammals have is to commit a serious category mistake.
All the same, when philosophers talk of existence they generally mean
physical existence in the natural world. And here the term admits both a nar-
rower and a broader construction. In its narrower construction to exist physi-
cally is to be an object in the space and time: to occupying a place here in the
manner in which cats and trees and water molecules do. But to exist physically
in the broader sense of the term is to play a role in the causal commerce of such
things—to exist in the manner in which droughts and headaches or human de-
sires do, and thereby to figure as part of the world’s processual development. It
is such actual, real-world existence—narrow and broad alike—that will be our
principal object of concern here. And the overall range of such existences can
be specified in an essentially recursive manner as follows:
1.
the things we experience with our internal and external senses exist.
2.
the things whose existence we need to postulate in order to realize an
adequate causal explanation of things that exist also exist.
This view really takes the approach of a causal realism, a theory maintain-
ing that to be a real existent is to be part of the world’s causal commerce. Such
a definition is essentially recursive—ordinary material objects are existentially
real, and so is anything whatsoever that is bound up with them by linkages of
cause and effect.
Accordingly, “to exist” in the physical mode is to feature as a component or
aspect of the causal commerce real world. And some jargon-expression such as
“to subsist” needs to be coined for contextualized existence within a framework of
supposition at issue with fictions or hypotheses. Thus merely possible objects—
or possibilia, for short—are things that merely “exist” in the sense of subsistence
within a hypothetical realm on a fictional make-believe world.They are not part
of the real world’s actual furnishings.
334
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

HOMO MENSURA?
But how is this causal view of reality related to the issue of knowledge? Clearly,
whatever can be known by us humans to be real must of course, for that very
reason, actually be real. But does the converse hold? Is the real for that very rea-
son also automatically knowable? Is it appropriate to join C. S. Peirce who, in
rejecting “incognizables,” insisted that whatever is real must be accessible to
cognition—and indeed must ultimately become known?
Is humanly cognizable reality the only sort of reality there is? Some
philosophers certainly say so, maintaining that there actually is a fact of the
matter only when “we [humans] could in finite time bring ourselves into a
position in which we were justified either in asserting or in denying [it].”1 On
such a view all reality is inevitably our reality. What we humans are not in a
position to domesticate cognitively—what cannot be brought home to us by
(finite!) cognitive effort—simply does not exist as a part of reality at all.
Where we have no cognitive access, there just is nothing to be accessed. On
such a perspective we are led back to the homo mensura doctrine of Protago-
ras: “Man is the measure of all things, of what is, that it is, of what is not, that
it is not.”
However, in reflecting on the issue in a modest mood, one is tempted to
ask: “Just who has appointed us to this exalted role? How is it that we humans
qualify as the ultimate arbiters of reality as such?”
Regarding this doctrine that what is real must be knowable, traditional
realism takes an appropriately modest line. It insists on preserving, insofar as
possible, a boundary-line of separation between ontology and epistemology;
between fact and knowledge of fact, between truth-status possession and
truth-status decidability with respect to propositions and between entity 
and observability with respect to individual things. As the realist sees it, real-
ity can safely be presumed to have depths that cognition may well be unable
to plumb.
To be sure, it is possible to reduce the gap between personal and objective
cognition by liberalizing the idea of what is at issue with cognizers. Consider
the following series of metaphysical theses: For something to be real in the mode
of cognitive accessibility it is necessary for it to be experientiable by:
1.
Oneself.
2.
One’s contemporary (human) fellow inquirers.
3.
Us humans (at large and in the long run).
4.
Some actual species of intelligent creatures.
5.
Some physically realizable (though not necessarily actual) type of intelli-
gent being—creatures conceivably endowed with cognitive resources far
beyond our feeble human powers.
6.
An omniscient being (i.e., God).
Cognitive Realism
335

This ladder of potential knowers is critically important for construing the idea
that to be is to be knowable. For here the question “By whom?” cannot really
be evaded.
The idea of an experiential idealism that equates reality with experientiality
is one that can accordingly be operated on rather different levels. Specifically, the
“i-th level” idealist maintains—and the “i-th level” realist denies—such a thesis
at stage number i of the preceding six-entry series. On this approach, the ideal-
ist emerges as the exponent of a experientiability theory of reality, equating truth
and reality with what is experientially accessible to by “us”—with different, and
potentially increasingly liberal, constructions of just who is to figure in that “us
group” of qualified cognizers. But of course no sensible idealist maintains a posi-
tion as strong as the egocentrism of the first entry on the list. Equally it is pre-
sumably the case that no sensible realist denies a position as weak as the
deocentrism of the last. The salient question is just where to draw the line in
determining what is a viable “realistic/idealistic” position.
Let us focus for the moment on the third entry of the above listing, the
“man is the measure,” homo mensura doctrine. By this standard, both Peirce
and the Dummett of the preceding quotation are clearly homo mensura real-
ists, seeing that both confine the real to what we humans can come to know.
But this is strange stuff. Of course, what people can know to be real consti-
tutes (ex hypothesi) a part or aspect of reality-at-large. That much is not in
question. But the bone of contention between homo mensura realism and a
sensible idealism is the question of a surplus—of whether reality may have
parts or aspects that outrun altogether the reach of human cognition. And on
this basis the homo mensura doctrine is surely problematic. For in the end,
what we humans can know cannot plausibly be seen as decisive for what can
(unqualifiedly) be known.
Undoubtedly, a mind that evolves in the world by natural selection has a
link to reality sufficiently close to enable it to secure some knowledge of the real.
But the converse is decidedly questionable. It is a dubious proposition that the
linkage should be so close that only what is knowable for some species of actual
being should be real—that reality has no hidden reserves of fact that are not
domesticable within the cognitive resources of existing creatures—let alone one
particular species thereof. Accordingly, it seems sensible to adopt the “idealis-
tic” line only at the penultimate level of the above listing and to be a realist
short of that. Essentially this is the position of the casual commerce realism es-
poused at the outset of the present discussion. As such a position sees it, the
most plausible form of idealism is geared to that next-to-last position which
takes the line that “to be real is to be causally active—to be a part of the world’s
causal commerce.” For since one can always hypothesize a creature that detects
a given sort of causal process, we need not hesitate to equate reality with expe-
rientiability in principle. We thus arrive at an idealism which achieves its via-
bility and plausibility through its comparative weakness in operating at the
next-to-last level, while at all of the earlier, more substantive levels our position
336
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

is effectively realistic. The result is a doctrinal position that is a halfway-house
compromise that combines an idealism of sorts with a realism of sorts.
A conservative idealism of this description holds that what is so as a “mat-
ter of fact” is not necessarily cognizable by “us” no matter how far—short of
God!—we extend the boundaries of that “us-community” of inquiring intelli-
gences. On the other hand, one cannot make plausible sense of “such-and-
such a feature of nature is real but no possible sort of intelligent being could
possibly discern it.” To be real is to be in a position to make an impact some-
where on something of such a sort that a suitably equipped mind-endowed in-
telligent creature could detect it. What is real in the world must make some
difference to it, that is in principle detectable. Existence-in-this-world is coor-
dinated with perceivability-in-principle. And so, at this point, there is a con-
cession to idealism—albeit one that is relatively weak. Since to be physically
real is to be part of the world’s causal commerce, it is always in principle pos-
sible for an intelligent sentient being of a suitable sort to enter into this causal
situation so as to be able to monitor what is going on. Accordingly being and
being knowable-in-principle can plausibly be identified.
But in any case, traditional homo mensura realism is untenable. There is no
good reason to indulge a hubris that sees our human reality as definitive on
grounds of being the only one there is. Neither astronomically nor otherwise
are we the center around which all things revolve. After all, humans have the
capacity not only for knowledge but also for imagination. And it is simply too
easy for us to imagine a realm of things and states of things of which we can
obtain no knowledge because “we have no way to get there from here,” lacking
the essential means for securing information in such a case.
REALISM AND INCAPACITY
Charles Sanders Peirce located the impetus to realism in the limitations of
man’s will—in the fact that we can exert no control over our experience and, try
as we will, cannot affect what we see and sense. Peirce’s celebrated “Harvard
Experiment” of the Lowell Lectures of 1903 makes the point forcibly:
I know that this stone will fall if it is let go, because experience has
convinced me that objects of this kind always do fall; and if anyone
has any doubt on the subject, I should be happy to try the experiment,
and I will bet him a hundred to one on the result . . . [I know this be-
cause of an unshakable conviction that] the uniformity with which
stones have fallen has been due to some active general principle [of na-
ture]. . . . Of course, every sane man will adopt the latter hypothesis. If
he could doubt it in the case of the stone—which he can’t—and I may
as well drop the stone once and for all—I told you so!—if anybody
doubt this still, a thousand other such inductive predictions are getting
Cognitive Realism
337

verified every day, and he will have to suppose every one of them to be
merely fortuitous in order reasonably to escape the conclusion that
general principles are really operative in nature. That is the doctrine of
scholastic realism.2
In this context, however, it is important to distinguish between mental depend-
ency and mental control. Peirce is clearly right in saying that we cannot control
our conviction that the stone will fall that do what we will, it will remain. Nev-
ertheless, this circumstance could conceivably still be something that depends on
us—exactly as with the fearsomeness of heights for the man with vertigo. If the
unconscious sphere of mind actually dictates how I must “see” something (as, for
example, in an optical illusion of the Mueller-Leyer variety), then I evidently
have no control. But that does not in itself refute mind-dependency—even of a
very strong sort. There is always the prospect that we are deluding ourselves in
these matters—that the limitations at issue appertain only to our conscious pow-
ers, and not to our mental powers as such.3
This prospect blocks Peirce’s argument in the way already foreseen by
Descartes in the Meditations:
I found by experience that these [sensory] ideas presented themselves
to me without my consent being requisite, so that I could not perceive
any object, however desirous I might be, unless it were present . . . But
although the ideas which I receive by the senses do not depend on my
will I do not think that one should for that reason conclude that they
proceed from things different from myself, since possible some facility
might be discovered in me—though different from those yet known
to me—which produced them.4
The fact of it is that we may simply delude ourselves about the range of the
mind’s powers: lack of control notwithstanding, dependency may yet lie with
the “unconscious” sector of mind. The traditional case for realism based on the
limits of causal control through human agency thus fails to provide a really pow-
erful argument for mind-independence.
However, a far more effective impetus to realism lies in the limitations of
man’s intellect, pivoting on the circumstances that the features of real things in-
evitably outrun our cognitive reach. In placing some crucial aspects of the real to-
gether outside the effective range of mind, it speaks for a position that sees
mind-independence as a salient feature of the real.The very fact of fallibilism and
limitedness—of our absolute confidence that our putative knowledge does not
and cannot do full justice to the real truth of what reality is actually like—is surely
one of the best arguments for a realism that turns on the basic idea that there is
more to reality than we humans do or can know.Traditional scientific realists see
the basis for realism in the accuracy and extent of out scientific knowledge; the
338
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

present metaphysical realism, by contrast, sees its basis in our realization of the
inevitable shortcomings of our knowledge—scientific knowledge included.
Such an epistemic approach accordingly preempts the preceding sort of
objection. If we are mistaken about the reach of our cognitive powers—if they
do not adequately grasp, “the way things really are”—then this very circum-
stance itself clearly bolsters the case for the sort of realism now at issue. The
cognitive intractability of things is something about which, in principle, we
cannot delude ourselves altogether, since such delusion would illustrate rather
than abrogate the fact of a reality independent of ourselves. The very inade-
quacy of our knowledge is one of the most salient tokens there is of a reality
out there that lies beyond the inadequate gropings of mind. It is the very lim-
itation of our knowledge of things—our recognition that reality extends be-
yond the horizons of what we can possible know or even conjecture about
it—that betokens the mind-independence of the real.
But a qualification is in order here. One must be careful about what the
presently contemplated sort of argument for realism actually manages to estab-
lish. For it does not establish outright that a stone—be it Peirce’s or Dr. Johnson’s
or the geologist’s—is something mind-independently real. Rather, what it shows
is that our conception of a “stone”—indeed our conception of any physical ob-
ject—is the conception of something that is mind-independently real, possessed
of a nature extending beyond the realm of our minds. And so the realism under-
written by these deliberations is not in fact a squarely ontological doctrine, but a
realism nevertheless geared to our conceptual scheme for thinking about things.
As indicated above, the present position is a halfway-house compromise: a meta-
physical realism that is unproblematically compatible with an idealism of sorts.
THE COGNITIVE OPACITY OF REAL THINGS
It is worthwhile to examine somewhat more closely the considerations that
indicate the inherent imperfection of our knowledge of things.5
To begin with, it is clear that, as we standardly think about things within
the conceptual framework of our fact-oriented thought and discourse, any real
physical object has more facets than it will ever actually manifest in experi-
ence. For every objective property of a real thing has consequences of a dispo-
sitional character and these are never surveyable in tote because the
dispositions which particular concrete things inevitably have endow them with
an infinitistic aspect that cannot be comprehended within experience.6 This
desk, for example, has a limitless manifold of phenomenal features of the type:
“having a certain appearance from a particular point of view.” It is perfectly
clear that most of these will never be actualized in experience. Moreover, a
thing is what it does: entity and lawfulness are coordinated correlates—a good
Kantian point. And this fact that things demand lawful comportment means
Cognitive Realism
339

that the finitude of experience precludes any prospect of the exhaustive man-
ifestation of the descriptive facets of any real things.7
Physical things not only have more properties than they ever will overtly
manifest, but they have more than they can possibly ever actually manifest.
This is so because the dispositional properties of things always involve what
might be characterized as mutually preemptive conditions of realization. This
cube of sugar, for example, has the dispositional property of reacting in a par-
ticular way if subjected to a temperature of 10 000°C and of reacting in a cer-
tain way if emplaced for one hundred hours in a large, turbulent body of water.
But if either of these conditions is ever realized, it will destroy the lump of
sugar as a lump of sugar, and thus block the prospect of its ever bringing the
other property to manifestation. The perfectly possible realization of various
dispositions may fail to be mutually compossible, and so the dispositional prop-
erties of a thing cannot ever be manifested completely—not just in practice, but
in principle. Our objective claims about real things always commit us to more
than we can actually ever determine about them.
The existence of this latent (hidden, occult) sector is a crucial feature of our
conception of a real thing. Neither in fact nor in thought can we ever simply
put it away. To say of the apple that its only features are those it actually mani-
fests is to run afoul of our conception of an apple. To deny—or even merely to
refuse to be committed to the claim—that would manifest particular features if
certain conditions came about (e.g., that it would have such-and-such a taste if
eaten) is to be driven to withdrawing the claim that it is an apple. The process
(corroborating the implicit contents of our objective factual claims about some-
thing real is potentially endless, and such judgments are the “nonterminating”
in C. I. Lewis’ sense.8 This cognitive depth of objective factual claims inherent
in the fact that their content will always outrun the evidence for making them
means that the endorsement; any such claim always involves some element of
evidence-transcending conjecture.
The concepts at issue (viz., “experience” and “manifestation”) are such that
we can only ever experience those features of a real thing that it actually mani-
fests. But the preceding considerations show that real things always have more
experientially manifestable properties that they can ever actually manifest in ex-
perience.The experienced portion of a thing is similar to the part of the iceberg
that shows above water. All real things are necessarily thought of as having hid-
den depths that extend beyond the limits, not only of experience, but also of ex-
perientiability. To say of something that it is an apple or a stone or a tree is to
become committed to claims about it that go beyond the data we have—and
even beyond those which we can, in the nature of things, eve actually acquire.
The “meaning” inherent in the assertoric commitments of our factual state-
ments is never exhausted by its verification real things are cognitively opaque—
we cannot see to the bottom o them. Our knowledge of such things can thus
become more extensive without thereby becoming more complete.
340
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

In this regard, however, real things differ in an interesting and important
way from their fictional cousins. To make this difference plain, it is useful to
distinguish between two types of information about a thing, namely that
which is generic and that which is not. Generic information tells about those
features of a thing that it has in common with everything else of its kind or
type. For example, a particular snowflake will share with all others certain facts
about its structure, its hexagonal form, its chemical composition, its melting
point, and so forth. On the other hand, it will also have various properties that
it does not share with other members of its own “lowest species” in the classi-
ficatory order—its particular shape, for example, or the angular momentum of
its descent. These are its nongeneric features.
Now a key fact about fictional particulars is that they are of finite cognitive
depth. In discoursing about them we shall ultimately run out of steam as re-
gards their nongeneric features. A point will always be reached when one can-
not say anything further that is characteristically new about them—presenting
non-generic information that is not inferentially implicit in what has already
been said. New generic information can, of course, always be forthcoming
through the progress of science. When we learn more about coal-in-general
then we know more about the coal in Sherlock Holmes’s grate. But the finite-
ness of their cognitive depth means that the presentation of ampliatively novel
nongeneric information must by the very nature of the case come to a stop
when fictional things are at issue.
With real things, on the other hand, there is no reason of principle why the
availability of new, nongenerically idiosyncratic information need ever come to an
end. On the contrary, we have every reason to presume these things to be cogni-
tively inexhaustible. A precommitment to description-transcending features—no
matter how far description is pushed—is essential to our conception of a real
thing. Something whose character was exhaustible by linguistic characterization
would thereby be marked as fictional rather than real.9
THE COGNITIVE INEXHAUSTIBILITY OF THINGS
As the preceding deliberations indicate, one of the most fundamental aspects of
our concept of a real thing is that our knowledge of it is inevitably imperfect—
that reality is such as to transcend what we can know of it. The number of true
descriptive remarks that can be made about a thing—about any actual physical
object—is theoretically inexhaustible. For example, take a stone. Consider its
physical features: its shape, its surface texture, its chemistry, and so on. And then
consider its causal background: its subsequent genesis and history.Then consider
its functional aspects as relevant to its uses by the stonemason, or the architect,
or the landscape decorator, and so forth. There is, in principle, no theoretical
limit to the different lines of consideration available for articulating descriptive
Cognitive Realism
341

information about a thing, so that the totality of potentially available facts about
a thing—about any real thing whatever—is in principle inexhaustible.
Our thought about the real things of this world pushes them beyond any fi-
nite limits. From finitely many axioms, reason can generate a potential infinity of
theorems; from finitely many words, thought can exfoliate a potential infinity 
of sentences; from finitely many data, reflection can extract a potential infinity of
items of information. Even with respect to a world of finitely many objects, the
process of reflecting on these objects can, in principle, go on unendingly. One can
inquire about their features, the features of these features, and so on. Or again,
one can consider their relations, the relations among those relations, and so forth.
Thought—abstraction, reflection, analysis—is an inherently ampliative process.
As in physical reflection mirror images can reflect one another indefinitely, so
mental reflection can go on and on. Given a start, however modest, thought 
can advance ad indefinitum into new conceptual domains. The circumstance of 
its starting out from a finite basis does not mean that it need ever run out of
impetus (as the example of Shakespearean scholarship seems to illustrate).
It is helpful to introduce a distinction at this stage. On anything like the
standard conception of the matter, a “truth” is something to be understood in lin-
guistic terms—the representation of a fact through its statement in some actual
language. Any correct statement in some actual language formulates a truth.
(And the converse obtains as well: a truth must be encapsulated in a statement,
and cannot exist without linguistic embodiment.) A fact, on the other hand, is not
a linguistic entity at all, but an actual circumstance or state of affairs. Anything
that is correctly statable in some possible language will present a fact.10
Every truth must state a fact, but in principle it is possible that there will be
facts that cannot be stated in any actually available language and thus fail to be
captured as truths. Facts afford potential truths whose actualization as such hinges
on there being given a linguistic formulation. Truths involve a one-parameter
possibilization: they include whatever can be stated truly in some actual language.
Facts, on the other hand, involve a two-parameter possibilization—they include
whatever can be stated truly in some possible language. Truths are actualistically
language-correlative, while facts are possibilistically language-correlative.11 Ac-
cordingly, it must be presumed that there are facts that will never be formulated
as truths, though it will obviously be impossible to give concrete examples of this
phenomenon.12
Now propositional knowledge regarding matters of actual fact—and even
belief and conjecture regarding supposed fact—is always a matter of truth-
recognition and thereby of linguistically formulable information. But we have
no alternative to supposing that the realm of facts regarding this world is larger
than the attainable body of knowledge about them—regardless of whether that
“we” is construed distributively or collectively. And is not very difficult to see
why this is and must be so.
As long as we are concerned with information formulated in languages of
the standard (recursively developed) sort, the number of actually articulated
342
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

items of information (truths or purported truths) about a thing is always, at any
historical juncture, finite. And it remains denumerably infinite even over a the-
oretically endless long run.13 The domain of truth is therefore enumerable: but
that of fact is not comparably manageable because no finite list of truths about
a real object exhausts the totality of true facts about it since old facts always
combine to give rise to new ones.
THE CORRIGIBILITY OF CONCEPTIONS
It must be stressed that these deliberations regarding cognitive inadequacy are
less concerned with the correctness of our particular claims about real things
than with our characterizing conceptions of them. And in this connection it
deserves stressing that there is a significant and substantial difference between
a true or correct statement or contention, on the one hand, and a true or correct
conception, on the other hand.To make a true contention about a thing, on the
one hand, we merely need to get one particular fact about it straight. To have a
true conception of the thing, on the other hand, we must get all of the impor-
tant facts about it straight. And it is clear that this involves a certain normative
element—namely, what the “important” or “essential” facets of something are.
Anaximander of Miletus presumably made many correct contentions
about the sun in the fifth century B.C.—for example, that its light is brighter
than that of the moon. But Anaximander’s conception of the sun (as the flam-
ing spoke of a great wheel of fire encircling the earth) was totally wrong.
To assure the correctness of our conception of a thing we would have to be
sure—as we very seldom are—that nothing further can possibly come along to
upset our view of just what its important features are and just what their char-
acter is. Thus, the qualifying conditions for true conceptions are far more de-
manding than those for true claims. With a correct contention about a thing,
all is well if we get the single relevant aspect of it right, but with a correct con-
ception of it we must gel the essentials right—we must have an overall picture
that is basically correct. And this is something we generally cannot ascertain,
if only because we cannot say with secure confidence what actually is really
important or essential before the end of the proverbial day.
With conceptions—unlike propositions or contentions—incompleteness
means incorrectness, or at any rate presumptive incorrectness. Having a cor-
rect or adequate conception of something as the object it is requires that we
have all the important facts about it right. But since the prospect of discover-
ing further important facts can never be eliminated, the possibility can never
be eliminated that matters may so eventuate that we may ultimately (with the
wisdom of hindsight) acknowledge the insufficiency or even inappropriateness
of our earlier conceptions. A conception based on incomplete data must be
assumed to be at least partially incorrect. If we can decipher only half an in-
scription, our conception of its overall content must be largely conjectural—
Cognitive Realism
343

and thus must be presumed to contain an admixture of error. When our infor-
mation about something is incomplete, obtaining an overall picture of the
thing at issue becomes a matter of theorizing, or guesswork, however sophis-
ticatedly executed. And then we have no alternative but to suppose that this
overall picture falls short of being wholly correct in various (unspecifiable)
ways. With conceptions, falsity can thus emerge from errors of omission as
well as those of commission, resulting from the circumstance that the infor-
mation at our disposal is merely incomplete, rather than actually false (as
would have to be the case with contentions).
To be sure, an inadequate or incomplete description of something is not
thereby false—the statements we make about it may be perfectly true as far as
they go. But an inadequate or incomplete conception of a thing is ipso facto one
that we have no choice but to presume to be incorrect as well,14 seeing that
where there is incompleteness we cannot justifiably take the stance that it re-
lates only to inconsequential matters and touches nothing important. Accord-
ingly, our conceptions of particular things are always to be viewed not just as
cognitively open-ended but as corrigible as well.
We are led back to the thesis of the great idealist philosophers (Spinoza,
Hegel, Bradley, Royce) that human knowledge inevitably falls short of “per-
fected science” (the Idea, the Absolute), and must be presumed deficient both
in its completeness and its correctness.15
COGNITIVE PROGRESS
From finitely many axioms, reason can generate a potential infinity of theo-
rems; from finitely many words, thought can exfoliate a potential infinity of
sentences; from finitely many data, reflection can extract a potential infinity of
items of information. Even with respect to a world of finitely many objects,
the process of reflecting on these objects can, in principle, go on unendingly.
One can inquire about their features, the features of these features, and so on.
Or again, one can consider their relations, the relations among those relations,
and so on. Thought—abstraction, reflection, analysis—is an inherently am-
pliative process. As in physical reflection mirror-images can reflect one an-
other indefinitely, so mental reflection can go on and on. Given a start,
however modest, thought can advance ad indefinitum into new conceptual
domains. The circumstance of its starting out from a finite basis does not
mean that it need ever run out of impetus (as the example of Shakespearean
scholarship seems to illustrate).
The number of true descriptive remarks that can be made about a thing—
about any actual physical object—is theoretically inexhaustible. For example,
take a stone. Consider its physical features: its shape, its surface texture, its
chemistry, and so on. And then consider its causal background: its subsequent
344
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

genesis and history. Then consider its functional aspects as relevant to its uses
by the stonemason, or the architect, or the landscape decorator, and so forth.
There is, in principle, no theoretical limit to the different lines of consideration
available to yield descriptive truths about a thing.
It follows from such lines of thought that we cannot possibly articulate,
and thus come to know explicitly, “the whole truth” about a thing. The domain
of fact inevitably transcends the limits of our capacity to express it, and a for-
tiori those of our capacity to canvass it in overt detail. There are always bound
to be more facts than we are able to capture in our linguistic terminology.
It might be possible, however, to have latent or implicit knowledge of an
infinite domain through deductive systematization. After all, the finite set of
axioms of a formal system will yield infinitely many theorems. And so, it might
seem that when we shift from overt or explicit to implicit or tacit knowledge,
we secure the prospect of capturing an infinitely diverse implicit knowledge-
content within a finite, explicit linguistic basis through recourse to deductive
systematization.
The matter is not, however, quite so convenient. The totality of the deduc-
tive consequences that can be obtained from any finite set of axioms is itself al-
ways denumerable. The most we can ever hope to encompass by any sort of
deductively implicit containment within a finite basis of truths is a denumerably
infinite manifold of truths. And thus as long as implicit containment remains a
recursive process, it too can never hope to transcend the range of the denumer-
ables, and so cannot hope to encompass the whole of the transdenumerable
range of descriptive facts about a thing. (Moreover, even within the denumerable
realm, our attempt at deductive systematization runs into difficulties: as is
known from Kurt Goedel’s work, one cannot even hope to systematize—by any
recursive, axiomatic process—all of the inherently denumerable truths of arith-
metic. It is one of the deepest lessons of modern mathematics that we cannot
take the stance that if there is a fact of the matter in this domain, then we can
encompass it within the deductive means at our disposal.)
COGNITIVE DYNAMICS
But there is yet another way of substantiating our point. For the preceding
considerations related to the limits of knowledge that can be rationalized on a
fixed and given conceptual basis—a full-formed, developed language. But, in
real life, languages are never full-formed and a conceptual basis is never “fixed
and given.” Even with such familiar things as birds, trees, and clouds, we are
involved in a constant reconceptualization in the course of progress in genet-
ics, evolutionary theory, and thermodynamics. Our conceptions of things al-
ways present a moving rather than a fixed object of scrutiny and this historical
dimension must also be reckoned with.
Cognitive Realism
345

Any adequate theory of inquiry must recognize that the ongoing process of
information acquisition at issue in science is a process of conceptual innovation,
which always leaves certain facts about things wholly outside the cognitive
range of the inquirers of any particular period. Caesar did not know—and in
the then extant state of the cognitive arts could not have known—that his
sword contained tungsten and carbon. There will always be facts (or plausible
candidate facts) about a thing that we do not know because we cannot even
conceive of them in the prevailing order of things. To grasp such a fact means
taking a perspective of consideration that as yet we simply do not have, since
the state of knowledge (or purported knowledge) is not yet advanced to a point
at which such a consideration is feasible. Any adequate worldview must recog-
nize that the ongoing progress of scientific inquiry is s process of conceptual
innovation that always leaves various facts about the things of this world wholly
outside the cognitive range of the inquirers of any particular period.
The language of emergence can perhaps be deployed usefully to make the
point. But what is at issue is not an emergence of the features of things, but an
emergence in our knowledge about them. Blood circulated in the human body
well before Harvey; substances containing uranium were radioactive before
Becquerel.The emergence at issue relates to our cognitive mechanisms of con-
ceptualization, not to the objects of our consideration in and of themselves.
Real-world objects must be conceived of as antecedent to any cognitive inter-
action—as being there right along, “pregiven” as Edmund Husserl put it. Any
cognitive changes or innovations are to be conceptualized as something that
occurs on our side of the cognitive transaction, and not on the side of the
objects with which we deal.16
The prospect of substantive change can never be eliminated in this do-
main. The properties of any real are literally open-ended: we can always dis-
cover more of them. Even if we were (surely mistakenly) to view the world as
inherently finitistic—espousing a Keynesian principle of “limited variety” to the
effect that nature can be portrayed descriptively with the materials of a finite
taxonomic scheme—there will still be no a priori guarantee that the progress of
science will not lead ad indefinitum to changes of mind regarding this finite
register of descriptive materials. And this conforms exactly to our expectation
in these matters. For where the real things of the world are concerned, we not
only expect to learn more about them in the course of scientific inquiry, we ex-
pect to have to change our minds about their nature and modes of comportment. Be
the items at issue elm trees, or volcanoes, or quarks, we have every expectation
that in the course of future scientific progress people will come to think about
their origin and their properties differently from the way we do at this juncture.
This cognitive opacity of real things means that we are not—and will never
be—in a position to evade or abolish the contrast between “things as we think
them to be” and “things as they actually and truly are.” Their susceptibility to
further elaborative detail—and to changes of mind regarding this further
346
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

detail—is built into our very conception of a “real thing.”To be a real thing is to
be something regarding which we can always, in principle, acquire more and
possibly discordant information. This view of the situation is supported rather
than impeded once we abandon the naive cumulativist/preservationist view of
knowledge acquisition for the view that new discoveries need not supplement
but can displace old ones. We realize that people will come to think differently
about things from the way we do—even when thoroughly familiar things are at
issue—recognizing that scientific progress generally entails fundamental
changes of mind about how things work in the world.
In view of the cognitive opacity of real things, we must never pretend to a
cognitive monopoly or cognitive finality.This recognition of incomplete infor-
mation is inherent in the very nature of our conception of a “real thing.” It is a
crucial facet of our epistemic stance toward the Real world to recognize that
every part and parcel of it has features lying beyond our present cognitive
reach—at any “present” whatsoever.
Much the same story holds when our concern is not with physical things,
but with types of such things.To say that something is copper or magnetic is to
say more than that it has the properties we think copper or magnetic things
have, and to say more than that it meets our test conditions for being copper (or
being magnetic). It is to say that this thing is copper or magnetic. And this is an
issue regarding which we are prepared at least to contemplate the prospect that
we have got it wrong.
Certainly, it is imaginable that natural science will come to a stop, not in
the trivial sense of a cessation of intelligent life, but in Charles Sanders Peirce’s
more interesting sense of eventually reaching a condition after which even in-
definitely ongoing effort at inquiry will not—and indeed actually cannot—
produce any significant change. Such a position is, in theory, possible. But we
can never know—be it in practice or in principle—that it is actually realized.
We can never establish that science has attained such an omega-condition of
final completion: the possibility of further change lying “just around the cor-
ner” can never be ruled out finally and decisively. Thus, we have no alternative
but to presume that our science is still imperfect and incomplete, that no mat-
ter how far we have pushed our inquiries in any direction, regions of terra
incognita yet lie beyond.
CONCEPTUAL BASIS OF REALISM AS A POSTULATE
The skeptical tendency of these remarks is of a very restricted sort, however. It
is not a fact-skepticism but a concept-skepticism. For to tell the truth is one
thing, to tell the whole truth another. And the former is certainly possible
without the latter. The fact that our knowledge of the world is incomplete
clearly does not mean that it is incorrect.
Cognitive Realism
347

But in this regard it is important to distinguish between a true statement and
a true conception. The informative incompleteness of a statement does not pre-
clude its truth. If the only thing I know about you is that you dislike peaches, so
be it—I am still in possession of a fact about you and the statement at issue is a
genuine truth. However, having a true conception of something is far more de-
manding. On the positive side it requires that we have all of the important facts
about you straight—that we know all of the important truths that are relevant
here. And on the negate side it means that the things that we accept about
you—important or not—are all true.
Accordingly, while immediate information about something is perfectly
compatible with knowing a true fact about it, it is not compatible—or not likely
to be compatible with knowing a true conception of it, seeing that the things
we do not know may well include some important details.
The fact is that as long as our information about something is incomplete
we can never know that our conception of it is correct. For to know this would
require that none of the unknown facts about it are important, that what we do
not know does not matter substantially for the correctness of our conception—
its adequacy overall. And this sort of knowledge about what we do not know is
in principle unavailable.
The concept-skepticism at issue here is closely bound up with a realism.
Metaphysical realism is the doctrine that the world exists in a way that is
substantially independent of the thinking beings it contains that can inquire
into it, and that its nature—its having whatever characteristics it does actually
have—is also comparably knowledge-transcending. In saying of something that
it is “a real thing,” an object existing as part of the world’s furniture, we commit
ourselves to various (obviously interrelated) points:
1.
Self-subsistence. Being a “something” (an entity or process) with its
own unity of being. Having an enduring identity of its own.
2.
Physicality or reality. Existing within the causal order of things. Hav-
ing a place on the world’s physical scene as a participant of some sort.
3.
Publicity or multilateral accessibility. Admitting universality of access.
Being something that different investigators proceeding from differ-
ent points of departure can get hold of.
4.
Autonomy or independence. Being independent of mind. Being some-
thing that observers find and learn about rather than create make up
in the course of their cognitive endeavors.
In natural science we try to get at the objective matters of fact regarding phys-
ical reality in ways that are accessible to all observers alike. (The “repeatability
of experiments” is crucial.) And the salient factor enters in with that fourth and
final issue—autonomy. The very idea of a thing so functions in our conceptual
scheme that real things are thought of as having an identity, a nature, and a
348
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

mode of comportment wholly indifferent to and independent of the cognitive
state-of-the-art regarding them—and potentially even very different from our
own current conceptions of the matter.
The conception of a thing that underlies our discourse about the things of
this world inherently involves tentatively and fallibilism—the implicit recogni-
tion that our own personal or even communal conception of particular things
may, in general, be wrong, and is in any case inadequate. At the back of our
thought about things there is always a certain wary skepticism that recognizes
the possibility of error. The objectivity of real existents projects beyond the
reaches of our subjectively conditioned information.There is wisdom in Ham-
let’s dictum: “There are more things in heaven and on earth, Horatio . . .” The
limits of our knowledge may be the limits of our world, but they are not the
limits of the world. We do and must recognize the limitations of our cognition.
The fundamental idea of realism is that the existence and nature of the
world are matters distinct from anyone’s thinking about it: that—minds them-
selves and their works aside—the world is what it is without any reference to
our cognitive endeavors and that the constituents of nature are themselves im-
pervious, as it were, to the state of our knowledge or belief regarding them. As
one expositor puts it: “Even if there were no human thought, even if there were
no human beings, whatever there is other than human thought (and what de-
pends on that, causally or logically) would still be just what it actually is.”17
Such a realism is based on a commitment to the notion that human inquiry ad-
dresses itself to what really and truly is the condition of things whose existence
and character are altogether independent of our cognitive activities. Reality is
not subordinate to the operations of the human mind; on the contrary, man’s
mind and its dealings are but a minuscule part of reality. The nature of things
reaches beyond what we—or any other sort of finite being—happen to know or
think. We cannot justifiably equate reality with what in known to us, nor equate
reality with what is expressible in our language. And what is true here for our
sort of mind is true for any other sort of finite mind as well. It is inherent in our
conception of physical reality that any physically realizable sort of cognizing
being can only know a part or aspect of the real.
This “objectivity” in the sense of mind-transcendence is pivotal for realism.
A fact is objective in this mode through obtaining independently of whatever
thinkers may think about relevant issues, so that changes merely in what is
thought by the world’s intelligences would leave it unaffected. With objective
facts (unlike those which are merely a matter of intersubjective agreement),
what thinkers think is never something determinative: they are thought-invari-
ant or thought-insensitive.18
Realism accordingly has two indispensable and inseparable constituents—
the one existential and ontological, and the other cognitive and epistemic. The
former maintains that there indeed is a real world—a realm of thought-
transcendent objective physical reality. The latter maintains that we can to
Cognitive Realism
349

some extent secure adequate descriptive information about this mind-inde-
pendent realm. This second contention obviously presupposes the first. But
how can that first, ontological thesis be secured?
Metaphysical realism is clearly not an inductive inference secured through
the scientific systematization of our observations. Rather it represents a regula-
tive presupposition that makes science possible in the first place. If we did not
assume from the very outset that our sensations somehow relate to an extra-
mental reality, we could clearly make no use of them to draw any inference
whatever about “the real world.” The realm of mind-independent reality is
something we cannot discover—we do not learn that it exists as a result of in-
quiry and investigation. How could we ever learn from our observations that
our mental experience is itself largely the causal product of the machinations of
a mind-independent matrix, that all those phenomenal appearances are causally
rooted in a physical reality? This is obviously something we have to suppose
from the very outset. What is at issue is, all too clearly, a precondition for em-
pirical inquiry—a presupposition for the usability of observational data as
sources of objective information.That experience is indeed objective, that what
we take to be evidence is evidence, that our sensations yield information about
an order of existence outside the experiential realm itself, and that this experi-
ence constitutes not just a mere phenomenon but an appearance of something
extramental belonging to an objectively self-subsisting order, all this is some-
thing that we must always presuppose in using experiential data as “evidence” for
how things stand in the world.
The fact is that we do not learn or discover that there is a mind-independ-
ent physical reality; we have no alternative but to presume or postulate it. Real-
ism represents a postulation made on functional (rather than evidential)
grounds: we endorse it in order to be in a position to learn by experience at all.
As Kant clearly saw, objective experience is possible only if the existence of such
a real, objective world is presupposed from the outset rather than being seen as a
matter of ex post facto discovery about the nature of things.19
To be sure, once we have made a start by accepting an objective reality and
its concomitant causal aspect, more or less by sheer postulation, then principles
of inductive systematization, of explanatory economy, and of common cause
consilience can work wonders in exploiting the phenomena of experience to
provide the basis for plausible claims about the nature of the real. But we indis-
pensably need that initial existential presupposition to make a start. Without a
commitment from the very outset to a reality to serve as ground and object of
our experience, its cognitive import will be lost. Only on this basis can we pro-
ceed evidentially with the exploration of the interpersonally public and objec-
tive domain of a physical world-order that we share in common.
Of course, that second, descriptive (epistemic) component of realism
stands on a very different footing. Unlike its existence, reality’s nature is some-
thing about which we can only make warranted claims through examining it.
350
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

Substantive information must come through inquiry—through evidential vali-
dation. Once we are willing to credit our observational data with objectivity,
and thus with evidential bearing, then we can, of course, make use of them to
inform ourselves as to the nature of the real. But that initial presumption has to
be there from the start.
Let us examine this basic reality postulate somewhat more closely. Our
standard conception of inquiry involves recognition of the following facts: (1)
The world (the realm of physical existence) has a nature whose characterization
in point of description, explanation, and prediction is the object of empirical in-
quiry. (2) The real nature of the world is in the main independent of the process
of inquiry that the real world canalizes or conditions. (3) In virtue of these con-
siderations, we can stake neither total nor final claims for our purported knowl-
edge of reality. Our knowledge of the world must be presumed incomplete,
incorrect, and imperfect, with the consequence that “our reality” must be con-
sidered to afford an inadequate characterization of “reality itself.”
Our commitment to realism thus centers on a certain practical modus
operandi, encapsulated in the precept: “Proceed in matters of inquiry and com-
munication on the basis that you are dealing with an objective realm, existing
quite independently of the doings and dealings of minds.” Accordingly, we
standardly operate on the basis of the “presumption of objectivity” reflected in
the guiding precept: “Unless you have good reason to think otherwise (i.e., as
long as nihil obstat), treat the materials of inquiry and communication as veridi-
cal—as representing the nature of the real.” The ideal of objective reality is the
focus of a family of effectively indispensable regulative principles—a function-
ally useful instrumentality that enables us to transact our cognitive business in
the most satisfactory and effective way.
And so the foundations of objectivity are not provided by the findings of
science. They precede and underlie science, which would itself not be possible
without a precommitment to the capacity of our senses to warrant claims about
an objective world order. Mind transcendence is not a product of inquiry; we
must precommit ourselves to it to make inquiry as we understand it possible. It
is a necessary (a priori) input into the cognitive project and not a contingent (a
posteriori) output thereof.The objective bearing of experience is not something
we can preestablish; it is something we must presuppose in the interest of hon-
oring Peirce’s pivotal injunction never to bar the path of inquiry.
What we learn from science is not that an unobservable order of physical
existence causally undergirds nature as we observe it, but rather what these un-
derlying structures are like. Science does not (cannot) teach us that the observ-
able order is explicable in terms of underlying causes and that the phenomena
of observation are signs or symptoms of this extra- and subphenomenal order
of existence; we must acknowledge this prior to any venture in developing an
empirical science. It is something we must accept a priori to hold of any world
in which observation as we understand it can transpire. (After all, observations
Cognitive Realism
351

are, by their very nature, the results of interactions.) And what science does
teach us (and metaphysics cannot) is what the descriptive character of this
extraphenomenal order can reasonably be supposed to be in the light of our
experience of it.
HIDDEN DEPTHS: THE IMPETUS TO REALISM
The fact that we do and should always think of real things as having hidden
depths inaccessible to us finite knowers—that they are always cognitively
opaque to us to some extent—has important ramifications that reach to the
very heart of the theory of communication.
Any particular thing—the moon, for example—is such that two related
but critically different versions can be contemplated:
1.
the moon, the actual moon as it “really” is 
and
2.
the moon as somebody (you or I or the Babylonians) conceives of it.
The crucial fact to note in this connection is that it is virtually always the for-
mer item—the thing itself—that we intend to communicate or think ( self-
communicate) about, the thing as it is, and not the thing as somebody conceives of
it. Yet we cannot but recognize the justice of Kant’s teaching that the “I think”
(I maintain, assert, etc.) is an ever-present implicit accompaniment of every
claim or contention that we make. This factor of attributability dogs our every
assertion and opens up the unavoidable prospect of “getting it wrong.”
However, this fundamental objectivity-intent—the determination to dis-
cuss “the moon itself” (the real moon) regardless of how untenable one’s own
ideas about it may eventually prove to be—is a basic precondition of the very
possibility of communication. It is crucial to the communicative enterprise to
take the egocentrism-avoiding stance of an epistemological Copernicanism that
rejects all claims to a privileged status for our own conception of things. Such a
conviction roots in the fact that we are prepared to “discount any misconcep-
tions” (our own included) about things over a very wide-range indeed—that we
are committed to the stance that factual disagreements as to the character of
things are communicatively irrelevant within enormously broad limits.
We are able to say something about the (real) Sphinx thanks to our sub-
scription to a fundamental communicative convention or “social contract”: to
the effect that we intend (“mean”) to talk about it—the very thing itself as it “re-
ally” is—our own private conception of it notwithstanding. We arrive at the
standard policy that prevails with respect to all communicative convention or
352
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

“social contract” to the effect that we intend (“mean”) to talk about it—the very
thing itself as it “really” is—our own private conception of it notwithstanding.
We arrive at the standard policy that prevails with respect to all communicative
discourse of letting “the language we use,” rather than whatever specific in-
formative aims we may actually “have in mind” on particular occasions, be the
decisive factor with regard to the things at issue in our discourse. When I speak
about the Sphinx—even though I do so on the basis of my own conception of
what is involved here—I will nevertheless be taken to be discussing “the real
Sphinx” in virtue of the basic conventionalized intention at issue with regard to
the operation of referring terms.
Communication requires not only common concepts but common topics—
shared items of discussion, a common world of self-subsistently real, “an sich”
objects basic to shared experience. The factor of objectivity reflects our basic
commitment of a shared world as the common property of communicators.
Such a commitment involves more than merely de facto intersubjective agree-
ment. For such agreement is a matter of a posteriori discovery, while our view of
the nature of things puts “the real world” on a necessary and a priori basis. This
stance roots in the fundamental convention of a socially shared insistence on
communicating—the commitment to an objective world of real things affording
the crucially requisite common focus needed for any genuine communication.
Any pretentions to the predominance, let alone the correctness of our own
potentially idiosyncratic conceptions about things, must be put aside in the
context of communication. The fundamental intention to deal with the objec-
tive order of this “real world” is crucial. If our assertoric commitments did not
transcend the information we ourselves have on hand, we would never be able
to “get in touch” with others about a shared objective world. No claim is made
for the primacy of our conceptions, or for the correctness of our conceptions, or
even for the mere agreement of our conceptions with those of others. The fun-
damental intention to discuss “the thing itself” predominates and overrides any
mere dealing with the thing as we ourselves conceive of it.
To be sure, someone might object:
But surely we can get by on the basis of personal conceptions alone,
without invoking the notion of “a thing itself.” My conception of a
thing is something I can convey to you, given enough time. Cannot
communication proceed by correlating and matching personal con-
ceptions, without appeal to the intermediation of “the thing itself.”
But think here of the concrete practicalities. What is “enough time”? When is
the match “sufficient” to underwrite out right identification? The cash value of
our commitment to the thing itself is that it enables us to make this identifica-
tion straightaway by imputation, by fiat on the basis of modest indicators, rather
than on the basis of an appeal to the inductive weight of a body of evidence that
Cognitive Realism
353

is always bound to be problematic. Communication is something we set out to
do, not something we ultimately discern, with the wisdom of eventual hindsight,
to have accomplished retrospectively.
The objectifying imputation at issue here lies at the very heart of our cog-
nitive stance that we live and operate in a world of real and objective things.
This commitment to the idea of a shared real world is crucial for communica-
tion. Its status is a priori: its existence is not something we learn of through ex-
perience. As Kant clearly saw, objective experience is possible only if the
existence of such a real, objective world is presupposed at the onset rather than
seen as a matter of ex post facto discovery about the nature of things.
The information that we may have about a thing—be it real or presump-
tive information—is always just that, namely, information that we lay claim 
to. We cannot but recognize that it is person-relative and in general person-
differentiated. Our attempts at communication and inquiry are thus under-
girded by an information-transcending stance—the stance that we communally
inhabit a shared world of objectively existing things—a world of “real things”
among which we live and into which we inquire but about that we do and must
presume ourselves to have only imperfect information at any and every partic-
ular stage of the cognitive venture. This is not something we learn. The “facts
of experience” can never reveal it to us. It is something we postulate or presup-
pose to be able to put experience to cognitive use. Its epistemic status is not that
of an empirical discovery, but that of a presupposition that is a product of a tran-
scendental argument for the very possibility of communication or inquiry as we
standardly conceive of them.
And so, what is at issue here is not a matter of discovery, but one of impu-
tation.The element of community, of identity of focus is not a matter of ex post
facto learning from experience, but of an a priori predetermination inherent in
our approach to language-use. We do not infer things as being real and objec-
tive from our phenomenal data, but establish our perception as authentic per-
ception of genuine objects through the fact that these objects are given—or
rather, taken—as real and objectively existing things from the first.20 Objectiv-
ity is not deduced but imputed. We do, no doubt, purport our conceptions to be
objectively correct, but whether this is indeed so is something we cannot tell
with assurance until “all the returns are in”—that is, never. This fact renders it
critically important that (and understandable why) conceptions are commu-
nicatively irrelevant. Our discourse reflects our conceptions and perhaps conveys
them, but it is not in general substantively about them but rather about the
things in which they actually or supposedly bear.
We thus reach an important conjuncture of ideas. The ontological inde-
pendence of things—their objectivity and autonomy of the machinations of
mind—is a crucial aspect of realism. And the fact that it lies at the very core of
our conception of a real thing that such items project beyond the cognitive
reach of mind betokens a conceptual-scheme fundamentally committed to
354
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

objectivity.The only plausible sort of ontology is one that contemplates a realm
of reality that outruns the range of knowledge (and indeed even of language),
adopting the stance that character goes beyond the limits of characterization. It
is a salient aspect of the mind-independent status of the objectively real that the
features of something real always transcend what we know about it. Indeed, yet
further or different facts concerning a real thing can always come to light, and
all that we do say about it does not exhaust all that can and should be said about
it. In this light, objectivity is crucial to realism and the cognitive inexhaustibil-
ity of things is a certain token of their objectivity.
As these deliberations indicates, authentic realism can only exist in a state
of tension. The only reality worth having is one that is in some degree know-
able. But it is the very limitation of our knowledge—our recognition that there
is more to reality than what we do and can know or ever conjecture about it—
that speaks for the mind-independence of the real. It is important to stress
against the skeptic that the human mind is sufficiently well attuned reality that
some knowledge of it is possible. But it is no less important to join with real-
ists in stressing the independent character of reality acknowledging that reality
has a depth and complexity of makeup that outruns the reach of the cognitive
efforts of mind.
THE PRAGMATIC FOUNDATION OF REALISM AS A BASIS
FOR COMMUNICATION AND DISCOURSE
But what is it—brute necessity aside—that validates those communicative pre-
suppositions and postulations of ours? The prime factor at work here is simply
our commitment to utility. Given that the existence of an objective domain of
impersonally real existence is not a product of but a precondition for empirical in-
quiry, its acceptance has to be validated in the manner appropriate for postulates
and prejudgments of any sort—namely in terms of its ultimate utility. Bearing
this pragmatic perspective in mind, let us take a closer look at this issue of util-
ity and ask: What can this postulation of a mind-independent reality actually do
for us?
The answer is straightforward.The assumption of a mind-independent re-
ality is essential to the whole of our standard conceptual scheme relating to in-
quiry and communications. Without it, both the actual conduct and the rational
legitimation of our communicative and investigative (evidential) practice would
be destroyed. Nothing that we do in this cognitive domain would make sense if
we did not subscribe to the conception of a mind-independent reality.
To begin with, we indispensably require the notion of reality to operate the
classical concept of truth as “agreement with reality” (adaequatio ad rem). Once
we abandon the concept of reality, the idea that in accepting a factual claim as
true we become committed to how matters actually stand—“how it really is”—
Cognitive Realism
355

would also go by the board. The very semantics of our discourse constrain its
commitment to realism; we have no alternative but to regard as real those states
of affairs claimed by the contentions we are prepared to accept. Once we put a
contention forward by way of serious assertion, we must view as real the states
of affairs it purports, and must see its claims as facts. We need the notion of re-
ality to operate the conception of truth. A factual statement on the order of
“There are pi mesons” is true if and only if the world is such that pi mesons
exist within it. By virtue of their very nature as truths, true statements must
state facts: they state what really is so, which is exactly what it is to “character-
ize reality.” The conception of truth and of reality come together in the notion
of adaequatio ad rem—the venerable principle that to speak truly is to say how
matters stand in reality, in that things actually are as we have said them to be.
In the second place, the nihilistic denial that there is such a thing as real-
ity would destroy once and for all the crucial Parmenidean divide between ap-
pearance and reality. And this would exact a fearful price from us: we would be
reduced to talking only of what we (I, you, many of us) think to be so.The cru-
cial contrast notion of the real truth would no longer be available: we would
only be able to contrast our putative truths with those of others, but could no
longer operate the classical distinction between the putative and the actual, be-
tween what people merely think to be so and what actually is so. We could not
take the stance that, as the Aristotelian commentator Themistius put it, “that
which exists does not conform to various opinions, but rather the correct opin-
ions conform to that which exists.”21
The third point is the issue of cognitive coordination. Communication and
inquiry, as we actually carry them on, are predicated on the fundamental idea of
a real world of objective things, existing and functioning “in themselves,” with-
out specific dependence on us and so equally accessible to others. Intersubjec-
tively valid communication can only be based on common access to an objective
order of things. The whole communicative project is predicated on a commit-
ment to the idea that there is a realm of shared objects about which we as a
community share questions and beliefs, and about which we ourselves as indi-
viduals presumably have only imperfect information that can be criticized and
augmented by the efforts of others.
This points to a fourth important consideration. Only through reference
to the real world as a common object and shared focus of our diverse and im-
perfect epistemic strivings are we able to effect communicative contact with
one another. Inquiry and communication alike are geared to the conception of
an objective world: a communally shared realm of things that exist strictly “on
their own” comprising an enduring and independent realm within which and,
more important, with reference to which inquiry proceeds. We could not pro-
ceed on the basis of the notion that inquiry estimates the character of the real
if we were not prepared to presume or postulate a reality for these estimates to
be estimates of. It would clearly be pointless to devise our characterizations of
356
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

reality if we did not stand committed to the proposition that there is a reality
to be characterized.
The fifth item is a recourse to mind-independent reality that makes pos-
sible a “realistic” view of our knowledge as potentially flawed. A rejection of this
commitment to reality an sich (or to the actual truth about it) exacts an unac-
ceptable price. For in abandoning this commitment we also lost those regula-
tive contrasts that canalize and condition our view of the nature of inquiry (and
indeed shape our conception of this process as it stands within the framework
of our conceptual scheme). We could no longer assert: “What we have there is
good enough as far as it goes, but it is presumably not ‘the whole real truth’ of
the matter.” The very idea of inquiry as we conceive it would have to be aban-
doned if the contract conceptions of “actual reality” and “the real truth” were no
longer available. Without the conception of reality we could not think of our
knowledge in the fallibilistic mode we actually use—as having provisional, ten-
tative, improvable features that constitute a crucial part of the conceptual
scheme within whose orbit we operate our concept of inquiry.
Reality (on the traditional metaphysicians’ construction of the concept)
is the condition of things answering to “the real truth”; it is the realm of what
really is as it really is. The pivotal contrast is between “mere appearance” and
“reality as such,” between “our picture of reality” and “reality itself,” between
what actually is and what we merely think (believe, suppose, etc.) to be. And
our allegiance to the conception of reality, and to this contrast that pivots on it,
root in the fallibilistic recognition that at the level of the detailed specifics of
scientific theory, anything we presently hold to be the case may well turn out
otherwise—indeed, certainly will do so if past experience gives any auguries for
the future.
Our commitment to the mind-independent reality of “the real world”
stand together with our acknowledgment that, in principle, any or all of our
present scientific ideas as to how things work in the world, at any present, may
well prove to be untenable. Our conviction in a reality that lies beyond our im-
perfect understanding of it (in all the various senses of “lying beyond”) roots in
our sense of the imperfections of our scientific world-picture—its tentativity
and potential fallibility. In abandoning our commitment to a mind-independ-
ent reality, we would lose the impetus of inquiry.
Sixth and finally, we need the conception of reality in order to operate the
causal model of inquiry about the real world. Our standard picture of man’s
place in the scheme of things is predicated on the fundamental idea that there
is a real world (however imperfectly our inquiry may characterize it) whose
causal operations produce inter alia causal impacts on us, providing the basis of
our world-picture. Reality is viewed as the causal source and basis of the ap-
pearances, the originator and determiner of the phenomena of our cognitively
relevant experience. “The real world” is seen as causally operative both in serv-
ing as the external molder of thought and as constituting the ultimate arbiter of
Cognitive Realism
357

the adequacy of our theorizing. (Think here again of C. S. Peirce’s “Harvard
experiment.”)
In summary, then, we need that postulate of an objective order of mind-
independent reality for at least six important reasons.
1.
To preserve the distinction between true and false with respect to fac-
tual matters and to operate the idea of truth as agreement with reality.
2.
To preserve the distinction between appearance and reality, between
our picture of reality and reality itself.
3.
To serve as a basis for intersubjective communication.
4.
To furnish the basis for a shared project of communal inquiry.
5.
To provide for the fallibilistic view of human knowledge.
6.
To sustain the causal mode of learning and inquiry and to serve as
basis for the objectivity of experience.
The conception of a mind-independent reality accordingly plays a central and
indispensable role in our thinking about communication and cognition. In both
areas alike we seek to offer answers to our questions about how matters stand in
this “objective realm” and the contrast between “the real” and its “merely phe-
nomenal” appearances is crucial here. Moreover, this is also seen as the target
and telos of the truth-estimation process at issue in inquiry, providing for a
common focus in communication and communal inquiry.The “real world” thus
constitutes the “object” of our cognitive endeavors in both senses of this term—
the objective at which they are directed and the purpose for which they are ex-
erted. And reality is seen as pivotal here, affording the existential matrix in
which we move and have our being, and whose impact on us is the prime mover
for our cognitive efforts. All of these facets of the concept of reality are inte-
grated and unified in the classical doctrine of truth as it corresponds to fact
(adaequatio ad rem), a doctrine that only makes sense in the setting of a com-
mitment to mind-independent reality.
Accordingly, the justification for this fundamental presupposition of ob-
jectivity is not evidential at all; postulates are not based on evidence. Rather, it
is functional. We need this postulate to operate our conceptual scheme.The jus-
tification of this postulate accordingly lies in its utility. We could not form our
existing conceptions of truth, fact, inquiry, and communication without pre-
supposing the independent reality of an external world. We simply could not
think of experience and inquiry as we do. (What we have here is a “transcen-
dental argument” of sorts from the character of our conceptual scheme to the
acceptability of its inherent presuppositions.) The primary validation of that
crucial objectivity postulate lies in its basic functional utility in relation to our
cognitive aims.
It is worthwhile to explore the implications of this foundationalism
more fully.
358
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

The commitment to an objective reality that lies behind the data that peo-
ple secure is indispensably demanded by any step into that domain of the pub-
licly accessible objects that is essential to communal inquiry and interpersonal
communication about a shared world. We do—and must—adopt the standard
policy that prevails with respect to all communicative discourse of letting the
language we use, rather than whatever specific informative aims we may actu-
ally have in mind on particular occasions, be the decisive factor with regard to
the things at issue in our discourse. For if we were to set up our own conception
of things as somehow definitive and decisive, we would at once erect a barrier
not only to further inquiry but also—no less important—to the prospect of suc-
cessful communication with one another. Communication requires not only
common concepts but common topics, interpersonally shared items of discussion,
a common world constituted by the self-subsistently real objects basic to shared
experience. The factor of objectivity reflects our basic commitment to a com-
munally available world as the common property of communicators. Such a
commitment involves more than merely de facto intersubjective agreement.
Such agreement is a matter of a posteriori discovery, while our view of the na-
ture of things puts “the real world” on a necessary and a priori basis.This stance
roots in the fundamental convention of a shared social instance on communi-
cation. What links my discourse with that of my interlocutor is our common
subscription to the governing presumption (a defensible presumption, to be
sure) that we are both talking about the shared thing, our own possible mis-
conceptions of it notwithstanding. This means that no matter how extensively
we may change our minds about the nature of a thing or type of thing, we are
still dealing with exactly the same thing or sort of thing. It assures reidentifica-
tion across discordant theories and belief systems.
Our concept of a real thing is such that it provides a fixed point, a stable
center around which communication revolves, an invariant focus of potentially
diverse conceptions. What is to be determinative, decisive, definitive, and so on,
of the things at issue in my discourse is not my conception, or yours, or indeed
anyone’s conception at all.The conventionalized intention discussed means that
a coordination of conceptions is not decisive for the possibility of communica-
tion. Your statements about a thing may well convey something to me even if my
conception of it is altogether different from yours.To communicate we need not
take ourselves to share views of the world, but only take the stance that we share
the world being discussed. This commitment to an objective reality that under-
lies the data at hand is indispensably demanded by any step into the domain of
the publicly accessible objects essential to communal inquiry and interpersonal
communication about a shared world. We could not establish communicative
contact about a common objective item of discussion if our discourse were
geared to the substance of our own idiosyncratic ideas and conceptions.
And so an important lesson emerges. The rationale of a commitment to
ontological objectivity is in the final analysis functionally or pragmatically
Cognitive Realism
359

driven. Without a presuppositional commitment to objectivity, with its accept-
ance of a real world independent of ourselves that we share in common, inter-
personal communication would become impracticable. Objectivity is an
integral part of the sine qua non presuppositional basis of the project of mean-
ingful communication. To reemphasize, if our own subjective conceptions of
things were to be determinative, informative communication about a world of
shared objects and processes would be rendered unachievable.
THE IDEALISTIC ASPECT OF METAPHYSICAL REALISM
Realism, then, is a position to which we are constrained not by the push of ev-
idence but by the pull of purpose. Initially, at any rate, a commitment to realism
is an input into our investigation of nature rather than an output thereof. At
bottom, it does not represent a discovered fact, but a methodological presuppo-
sition of our praxis of inquiry; its status is not constitutive (fact-descriptive) but
regulative (praxis-facilitating). Realism is not a factual discovery, but a practical
postulate justified by its utility or serviceability in the context of our aims and
purposes, seeing that if we did not take our experience to serve as an indication
of facts about an objective order we would not be able to validate any objective
claims whatsoever. (To be sure, what we can—and do—ultimately discover is
that by taking this realistic stance we are able to develop a praxis of inquiry and
communication that proves effective in the conduct of our affairs.)
The ontological thesis that there is a mind-independent physical reality to
which our inquiries address themselves more or less adequately—and always
imperfectly—is the key contention of realism. But on the telling of the pre-
senting analysis, this basic thesis has the epistemic status of a presuppositional
postulate that is initially validated by its pragmatic utility and ultimately
retrovalidated by the satisfactory results of its implementation (in both practi-
cal and theoretical respects). Our commitment to realism is, on this account,
initially not a product of our inquiries about the world, but rather reflects a facet
of how we conceive the world. The sort of realism contemplated here is accord-
ingly one that pivots on the fact that we think of being real in a certain sort of
way, and that in fact the very conception of the real is something we employ
because doing so merits our ends and purposes.
Now insofar as realism ultimately rests on a pragmatic basis, it is not based
on considerations of independent substantiating evidence about how things ac-
tually stand in the world, but rather on considering, as a matter of practical rea-
soning, how we do (and must) think about the world within the context of the
projects to which we stand committed. In this way, the commitment to a mind-
independent reality plays an essentially utilitarian role as providing a functional
requisite for our intellectual resources (specifically for our conceptual scheme in
relation to communication and inquiry). Realism thus harks back to the salient
360
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

contention of classical idealism that values and purposes play a pivotal role in
our understanding of the nature of things. And we return also to the character-
istic theme of idealism—the active role of the knower not only in the consti-
tuting but also in the constitution of what is known.
To be sure, this sort of idealism is not substantive but methodological. It
is not a rejection of real objects that exist independently of mind and as such
are causally responsible for our objective experience; quite the reverse, it is de-
signed to facilitate their acceptance. But it insists that the justificatory ra-
tionale for this acceptance lies in a framework of mind-supplied purpose. For
our commitment to a mind-independent reality is seen to arise not from ex-
perience but for it—for the sake of putting us into a position to exploit our
experience as a basis for validating inquiry and communication with respect
to the objectively real.
“Reality as such” is no doubt independent of our beliefs and desires, but
what can alone concern us is reality as we view it. And the only view of reality
that is available to us is one that is devised by us under the aegis of principles of
acceptability that we subscribe to because doing so serves our purposes.
A position of this sort is in business as a realism all right. But seeing that it
pivots on the character of our concepts and their modus operandi, it transpires
that the business premises it occupies are actually mortgaged to idealism. The
fact that objectivity is the fruit of communicative purpose allows idealism to
infiltrate into the realist’s domain.
And the idealism at issue cuts deeper yet. No doubt, we are firmly and ir-
revocably committed to the idea that there is a physical realm out there that all
scientific inquirers inhabit and examine alike. We hold to a single, uniform
physical reality, insisting that all investigations exist within and investigate it:
this one single shared realism, this one single manifold of physical objects and
laws. But this very idea of a single, uniform, domain of physical object and laws
represents just exactly that—an idea of ours. And the idea is itself a matter of
how we find it convenient and efficient to think about things: it is no more—
though also no less—than the projection of a theory devised to sort the needs
and conveniences of our intellectual situation.
This approach endorses an object-level realism that rests on a presupposi-
tional idealism at the justificatory infralevel. We arrive, paradoxical as it may
seem, at a realism that is founded, initially at least, on a fundamentally idealis-
tic basis—a realism whose ultimate justificatory basis is ideal.
SCIENCE AND REALITY
How is our scientific knowledge related to our everyday knowledge of things?
What is the relationship between nature as science sees it and as it figures in
the experience and discourse of everyday life?
Cognitive Realism
361

Much of the thought of recent epistemologists takes its starting point in
the famous two-tables discussion of the British physicist-astronomer Sir
Arthur Eddington, who contrasts the solid table of everyday experience with
the physicists’ table of a manifold of electromagnetic oscillations in mainly
empty space. He then maintains that the later is the real table as it exists in na-
ture, and that (1) is merely an appearance, a delusion—a mirage, as it were—
existing in people’s minds. Our ordinary life view of the world is a matter of
mental (rather than optical) illusion.
In principle one could, the same, also take the opposite line. It is the table of
ordinary experience that is alone real (it would then be said). What that physicist
has done is not to give us a different view of that table, but simply to abolish it.
With all the physicists talk of alone and their spatial distribution and interaction
there is nothing left of that table. It is abolished; it no longer figures on the
agenda of concern; we have completely changed the subject. Science does not il-
lustrate the world of everyday experience, it puts it aside in its concern with other
matters—hypothetical and theoretical objects and entities that might explain ex-
perience but do not figure on it. Authentic reality is human reality—reality as we
experience it.The objects of physical science are something altogether different.
The sensible course with respect to this seeming conflict between the
world-picture of common life and the world-picture of natural science is to see
the issue not in terms of opposition but in terms of collaboration.
To be sure the discourses of science and everyday life are different and em-
ploy different languages.The one is concerned with our observational and inter-
personally communicative experience, the other is concerned with the taxonomy
and modus operandi of the underlying causal process that makes the world go
round.They are functionally different enterprises with purposes and concepts of
their own. To be sure, they have interrelationships. Natural science can explain
the underlying causality of common life presentation and thought. Common life
phenomenology is needed not only to use but even to make the observational
and experimental mechanisms by which alone science can do its work.
Reality is not uniform but functionally diversified. One and the same land-
scape can figure in the concerns of the agronomist, the landscape architect, and
the military engineer. All of them look to different things and have different
orientations of factual concern. They raise different issues and pose different
questions and the stories they tell accordingly do not disagree or conflict they
simply “talk past each other.” The processes of “food preparation” by baking
and cooking and so forth can be analyzed both in the language of chemistry
and in that of gastronomy. But they deal with altogether different matters.
And so, the phenomenology of human experience and the causal com-
merce of natural processes involve different and noncompetitive issues. In
speaking of sunrises and insects there is nothing we say or intent that is at vari-
ance with a Copernicanism that positions the sun at the center of the solar sys-
tem. In both cases we are dealing with the selfsame world—the selfsame
362
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

“nature.” But we are dealing with it via the concept manifold of entirely differ-
ent but uncompetitive enterprises. There is no conflict because we are dealing
with different projects and different issues. These enterprises are functionally
and purposively different.They involve different issues and raise different ques-
tions, and different questions have different—and generally nonconflicting—
answers. The world descriptions of science and common life are accordingly
not competitive and conflicting but complementary.
A crucial question yet remains. How close a relationship can we reasonably
claim to exist between the answers we give to our factual questions at the level
of scientific generality and precision and the reality they purport to depict?
Scientific realism is the doctrine that science describes the real world: that
the world actually is as science takes it to be, and that its furnishings are as
science envisages them to be.22 If we want to know about the existence and
the nature of heavy water or quarks, of man-eating mollusks or a luminifer-
ous ether, we are referred to the natural sciences for the answers. On this re-
alistic construction of scientific theorizing, the theoretical terms of natural
science refer to real physical entities and describe their attributes and com-
portments. For example, the “electron spin” of atomic physics refers to a be-
havioral characteristic of a real, albeit unobservable, object—and electron.
According to this currently fashionable theory, the declarations of science
are—or will eventually become—factually true generalizations about the ac-
tual behavior of objects that exist in the world. Is this “convergent realism” a
tenable position?
It is quite clear that it is not. There is clearly insufficient warrant for and
little plausibility to the claim that the world indeed is as our science claims it to
be—that we have got matters altogether right, so that our science is correct sci-
ence and offers the definitive “last word” on the issues. We really cannot rea-
sonably suppose that science as it now stands affords the real truth as regards its
creatures-of-theory.
One of the clearest lessons of the history of science is that where scientific
knowledge is concerned, further discovery does not just supplement but gener-
ally emends our prior information. Accordingly, we have little alternative but to
take the humbling view that the incompleteness of our purported knowledge
about the world entails its potential incorrectness as well. It is now a matter not
simply of gaps in the structure of our knowledge, or errors of omission. There
is no realistic alternative but to suppose that we face a situation of real flaws as
well, of errors of commission.This aspect of the matter endows incompleteness
with an import far graver than meets the eye on first view.
Realism equates the paraphernalia of natural science with the domain of
what actually exists. But this equation would work only if science, as it stands,
has actually “got it right.” And this is something we are surely not inclined—
and certainly no entitled—to claim. We must recognize that the deliverances of
science are bound to a methodology of theoretical triangulations from the data
Cognitive Realism
363

that binds them inseparably to the “state of the art” of technological sophisti-
cation in data acquisition and handling.
The supposition that the theoretical commitments of our science actually
describes the world is viable only if made provisionally, in the spirit of “doing
the best we can now do, in the current state-of-the-art” and giving our best es-
timate of the matter. The step of reification is always to be taken qualifiedly,
subject to a mental reservation of presumptive revisability. We do and must rec-
ognize that we cannot blithely equate our theories with the truth. We do and
must realize that the declarations of science are inherently fallible and that we
can only “accept” them with a certain tentativeness, subject to a clear realization
that they may need to be corrected or even abandoned.
These considerations must inevitably constrain and condition our attitude
toward the natural mechanisms envisaged in the science of the day. We cer-
tainly do not—or should not—want to reify (hypostasize) the “theoretical en-
tities” of current science, to say flatly and unqualifiedly that the contrivances of
our present-day science correctly depict the furniture of the real world. We do
not—or at any rate, given the realities of the case, should not—want to adopt
categorically the ontological implications of scientific theorizing in just exactly
the state-of-the-art configurations presently in hand. Scientific fallibilism pre-
cludes the claim that what we purport to be scientific knowledge is in fact real
knowledge, and accordingly blocks the path to a scientific realism that main-
tains that the furnishings of the real world are exactly as our science states them
to be. Scientific theorizing is always inconclusive.
Convergent scientific realism of the Peircean type, which pivots on the as-
sumption of an ultimately complete and correct scientific theory (let alone
those stronger versions of such realism that hinge on our ability to arrive at
recognizably true scientific theories), is in deep difficulty. For we have little
choice but to deem science’s grasps or “the real truth of things” as both tentative
and imperfect.
According to one expositor, the scientific realist “maintains that if a theory
has scientific merit, then we are thereby justified in concluding that . . . the the-
oretical entities characterized by the theory really do exist.”23 But this sort of
position encounters insuperable difficulties. Phlogiston, caloric, and the lu-
miniferous ether all had scientific merit in their day, but this did not establish
their existence. Why, then, should things be all that different with us? Why
should our “scientific merit” now suddenly assure actual existence? What mat-
ters for real existence is clearly (and only) the issue of truth itself, and not the
issue of what is thought to be true at some particular stage of scientific history.
And here problems arise. For its changeability is a fact about science that is as
inductively well-established as any theory of science itself. Science is not a static
system but a dynamic process.
We must accordingly maintain a clear distinction between our conception of
reality and reality as it really is. Given the equation,
364
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

Our (conception of) reality  the condition of things as seen from the
standpoint of “our putative truth” ( the truth as we see it from the
vantage point of the science of the day)
we realize full well that there is little justification for holding that our present-
day science indeed describes reality and depicts the world as it really is. In our
heart of hearts, then, our attitude toward our science is one of guarded affirma-
tion. We realize that there is a decisive difference between what science accom-
plishes and what it endeavors to accomplish.
The world that we describe is one thing, the world, as we describe it is an-
other, and they would coincide only if our descriptions were totally correct—
something that we are certainly not in a position to claim.The world-as-known
is a thing of our contrivance, and artifact we devise on our own terms. Even if
the “data” uniquely determined a corresponding picture of reality, and did not
underdetermine the theoretical constructions we base on them (as they always
do), the fact remains that altered circumstances lead to altered bodies of “data.”
Our recognition of the fact that the world-picture of science is ever-changing
blocks our taking the view that it is ever correct.
Accordingly, we cannot say that the world is such that the paraphernalia of
our science actually exist as such—that is, exactly as our science characterizes
them. Given the necessity of recognizing the claims of our science to be tenta-
tive and provisional, one cannot justifiably take the stance the it depicts reality.
At best, one can say that it affords an estimate of it, an estimate that will pre-
sumably stand in need of eventual revision and whose creatures-of-theory may
in the final analysis not be real at all. This feature of science must crucially con-
strain our attitude toward its deliverances. Depiction is in this regard a matter of
intent rather than one of accomplishment. Correctness in the characterization of
nature is achieved not by our science but only by perfected or ideal science—only
by that (ineradicably hypothetical!) state of science in which the cognitive goals
of the scientific enterprise are fully and definitively realized. There is no plausi-
ble alternative to the view that reality is depicted by ideal (or perfected or “com-
plete”) science, and not by the real science of the day. But, of course, it is this
latter science that is the only one we have actually got—now or ever.
A viable scientific realism must therefore turn not on what our science
takes the world to be like but on what ideal or perfected science takes the world
to be like. The thesis that “science describes the real world” must be looked on
as a matter of intent rather than as an accomplished fact, of aspiration rather
than achievement, of the ideal rather than the real state of things. Scientific re-
alism is a viable position only with respect to that idealized science which, as we
full well realize, we do not now have—regardless of the “now” at issue. We can-
not justifiably be scientific realists. Or rather, ironically, we can be so only in an
idealistic manner—namely, with respect to an “ideal science” that we can never
actually claim to possess.
Cognitive Realism
365

The posture of scientific realism—at any rate, or a duly qualified sort—is
nevertheless built into the very goal-structure of science. The characteristic task
of science, the definitive mission of the enterprise, is to respond to our basic in-
terest in getting the best answers we can to our questions about the world. On the
traditional view of the matter, its question-resolving concern is the raison d’être of
the project—to celebrate any final victories. It is thus useful to draw a clear dis-
tinction between a realism of intent and a realism of achievement. We are certainly
not in a position to claim that science as we have it achieves a characterization of
reality. Still, science remains unabashedly realistic in intent or aspiration. Its aim is
unquestionably to answer our questions about the world correctly and to describe
the world “as it actually is.” The orientation of science is factual and objective: it
is concerned with establishing the true facts about the real world.The theories of
physics purport to describe the actual operation of real entities; those Nobel
prizes awarded for discovering the electron, the neutron, the pi meson, and an-
tiproton, the quark, and so on, we intended to recognize an enlargement of our
understanding of nature, not to reward the contriving of plausible fictions or the
devising of clever ways of relating observations.
The language of science is descriptively committal. At the semantical level
of the content of its assertions, science makes firm claims as to how things
stand in the world. A realism of intent or aspiration is built into science because
of the genesis of its questions.The factually descriptive status of science is ulti-
mately grounded in just this erotetic continuity of its issues with those of “pre-
scientific” everyday life. We begin at the prescientific level of the paradigmatic
realities of our prosaic everyday-life experience—the things, occurrences, and
processes of our everyday world. The very reason for being of our scientific
paraphernalia is to resolve our questions about this real world of our everyday-
life experience. Given that the teleology of the scientific enterprise roots in the
“real world” that provides the stage of our being and action, we are committed
within its framework, to take the realistic view of its mechanisms. Natural sci-
ence does not address itself to some world-abstracted realm of its own. Its con-
cern is with this familiar “real world” of ours in which we live and breathe and
have our being—however differently science may characterize it. While science
may fall short in performance, nevertheless in aspiration and endeavor it is un-
equivocally committed to the project of modeling “the real world,” for in this
way alone could it realize its constituting mandate of answering our questions
as to how things work in the world.
Scientific realism skates along a thin border between patent falsity and
triviality. Viewed as the doctrine that science indeed describes reality, it is utterly
untenable; but viewed as the doctrine that science seeks to describe reality, it is
virtually a truism. For there is no way of sidestepping the conditional thesis:
If a scientific theory regarding heavy water or electrons of quarks or
whatever is correct—if it were indeed to be true—then its subject
366
Cognitive Limits and the Quest for Truth

materials would exist in the manner the theory envisages and would
have the properties the theory attributes to them: the theory, that is,
would afford descriptively correct information about the world.
But this conditional relationship reflects what is, in the final analysis, less a pro-
found fact about the nature of science than a near truism about the nature of
truth as adequation ad rem. The fact remains that “our reality”—reality as we
conceive it to be—goes no further than to represent our best estimate of what
reality is like.
When we look to what science declares, to the aggregate content and sub-
stance of its declarations, we see that these declarations are realistic in intent,
that they purport to describe the world as it really is. But when we look to how
science makes its declarations and note the tentativity and provisionally with
which they are offered and accepted, we recognize that this realism is on an
abridged and qualified sort—that we are not prepared to claim that this is how
matters actually stand in the real world. At the level of generality and precision
at issue in the themes of natural science, we are not now—or ever—entitled to
lay claim to the scientific truth as such but only to the scientific truth as we and
our contemporaries see it. Realism prevails with respect to the language of sci-
ence (i.e., the asserted content of its declarations); but it should be abandoned
with respect to the status of science (i.e., the ultimate tenability or correctness
of these assertions). What science says is descriptively committal in making
claims regarding “the real world,” but the tone of voice in which it proffers
these claims is (or should be) provisional and tentative.
The resultant position is one not of skepticism but of realism—in two
senses: (1) it is realistic about our capabilities of recognizing that here, as else-
where, we are dealing with the efforts of an imperfect creature to do the best it
can in the circumstances; and (2) it recognizes the mind-transcendent reality of
a “real world” that our own best efforts in the cognitive sphere can only manage
to domesticate rather imperfectly. We do, and always must, recognize that no
matter how far we manage to extend the frontiers of natural science, there is
more to be done. Within a setting of vast complexity, reality outruns our cog-
nitive reach; there is more to this complex world of ours than lies—now or
ever—within our ken.24
Cognitive Realism
367

This page intentionally left blank.

369
Notes
NOTES TO INTRODUCTION
1. William James, “The Sentiment of Rationality,” in The Will to Believe and
Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (New York and London: Longmans Green & Co.,
1897), pp. 78–79.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 1
1. This view harks back to the Theaetetus of Plato’s dialogue of that name, who
held that knowledge is a matter of true belief equipped with a suitable rationale
(logos), Plato Theaetetus 201C–210D. For modern discussions see Edmund Gettier,
“Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis, vol. 24 (1963), pp. 121–23. The prob-
lem at issue has generated a very substantial literature. The following publications give
a good indication of its scope and nature: William P. Alston, Epistemic Justification
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989); Roderick Chisholm, Theory of Knowl-
edge (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966; 2nd ed. 1977; 3rd ed. 1989); Edward
Craig, Knowledge and the State of Nature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990); Alvin
Goldman, “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), pp.
357–72; Alvin Goldman, Epistemology and Cognition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1986); Keith Lehrer, Theory of Knowledge (Boulder, CO: Westview Press,
1990); Paul K. Moser, Knowledge and Evidence (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1989); Alvin Plantinga, Warrant and Proper Function (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1993); John Pollock, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge (Totowa, NJ:
Rowman and Littlefield, 1986); M. D. Roth and L. Galis (eds), Knowing: Essays in the
Analysis of Knowledge (New York: Random House, 1970); Robert K. Shope, The
Analysis of Knowing (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983); Ernest Sosa,
Knowledge in Perspective: Selected Essays in Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1991), Part 1; and Linda Trinkhaus Zagzebski, Virtues of the Mind: An
Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue and the Ethical Foundations of Knowledge (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1996).

2. This is why it makes no sense to say: “You know that p but I don’t.”
3. The practical aspect of presumption and its justification will be examined more
fully in chapter 5.
4. Acceptance is not quite the same as belief. For belief is episodic and psycho-
logical, whereas acceptance is nontransitory and epistemological; moreover acceptance
is a matter of choice while belief is involuntary.
5. Indeed we cannot even say the more guarded “x thinks he knows that p, but
does not accept it.” On the other hand, knowledge-avoiding locutions like “x says that p,
but he really knows better” are unproblematic.
6. We are not concerned here with “the language as she is spoke,” but with the
careful usage of conscientious speakers—with what used to be called “correct” usage in the
old normative days of grammatical theory.
7. For example, D. M. Armstrong, Belief, Truth and Knowledge (Cambridge,
1973), p. 189.
8. It is worth distinguishing between objective grounding (“there are good
grounds for accepting that p”), which reflects an altogether impersonal aspect of the epis-
temic situation, and subjective grounding (“x has good grounds for accepting that p”). For
the person whose knowledge is incomplete may well have good grounds for accepting
something whose grounding in itself (taken as a whole) is objectively insufficient. Thus
someone can have good grounds for p when (unbeknownst to him) decisive grounds for
not-p in fact exist. However, with the conclusive grounding at issue in knowledge the dis-
tinction between the objective and the subjective disappears. One can only have conclu-
sive grounds when whatever grounds that one has are in themselves conclusive.
9. G. E. Moore, Some Main Problems of Philosophy (London: Allen and Unwyn,
1953).
10. Actually, it is immaterial for these principles whether or not the same knower
is at issue in the two cases. Not only must a person’s knowledge be consistent, but the
whole body of what is known (by someone or other) as well.
11. This tactic is, of course, of no use to a skeptic.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 2
1. On this issue see the author’s Scientific Progress (Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
1978). As the discussion there makes clear, what is at issue is not just an induction from
the history of science; there are also reasons of fundamental general principle why the
scientific investigations of the future are pretty much foreordained to destabilize the
findings that result from the investigations of the past.
2. On these and related issues see Roy A. Sorensen, Blindspots (Oxford, 1988).
370
Notes to Pages 3–18

3. For substantiation see R. G. Winkler and S. Makridakis, Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, 146 (1983): 150–57.
4. On the Preface Paradox see A. N. Prior, “On a Family of Paradoxes,” Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 2 (1961): 26–32; D. C. Makinson, “The Paradox of the
Preface,” Analysis, 25 (1965): 205–7.
5. For relevant considerations see also the author’s The Limits of Science (Berkeley
and Los Angeles, 1985).
6. “Pour juger des apparances que nous recevons des subjects, il nous faudroit un
instrument judicatoire; por vérificer cet instrument, il nous fault de la démonstration;
pour vérifier la démonstration, un instrument: nous voilà au rouet.” Essaies, bk. II, ch. 12
(“An Apologie of Raymond Sebond”); p. 544 of the Modern Library edition of The Es-
says of Montaigne (New York, 1933). Francis Bacon, with the characteristic shrewdness
of a lawyer, even managed to turn the diallelus into a dialectical weapon against his
methodological opponents: “no judgement can be rightly formed either of my method,
or of the discoveries to which it leads, by means of . . . the reasoning which is now in use,
since one cannot postulate due jurisdiction for a tribunal which is itself on trial.” (Novum
Organon, bk I, sect. 33).
7. Outlines of Pyrrhonism, bk., II, sect. 20 (tr. R. G. Bury); compare bk. I, sects.
114–17. See also the article on Pyrro in Bayle’s Dictionary.
8. See however the author’s Philosophical Standardism (Pittsburgh, 1994) for the
elaboration of a version of this approach.
9. For example in the work of Richard Sylvan. And see also Nicholas Rescher
and Robert Brandom, The Logic of Inconsistency (Oxford, 1979).
10. Effectively subject to the rule that when there is a conflict the members of
K must give way to those of K+. On those matters see the author’s Plausible Reasoning
(Assen-Amsterdam, 1976).
11. See, for example, N. Rescher and R. Brandom The Logic of Inconsistency
(Oxford, 1979).
12. On this issue see the author’s Scientific Realism (Dordrecht, 1987).
13. For further details see the author’s The Limits of Science (Berkeley and Los
Angeles, 1984).
14. A. Conan Doyle, “The Sign of Four” (1890).
15. Fallibilism as a philosophical doctrine is principally due to C. S. Peirce, though
the position has its precursors in the sceptical tradition from the days of the Academic
sceptics of Greek antiquity onward. For modern expositions of cognate positions see 
K. R. Popper Conjectures and Refutations (London: Publisher, 1963; 2nd ed. 1969), esp.
chapter 10 “Truth Rationality and the Growth of Scientific Knowledge.” See also Hans
Albert, Traktat über kritische Vernunft (Tübingen: Mohr, 1975), and Robert Almeder,
Blind Realism (Savage, MD : Rowman & Littlefield, 1992).
Notes to Pages 18–30
371

16. Larry Laudan, as cited in Ilkka Niiniluoto, “Scientific Progress,” Synthese, vol.
45 (1980), p. 446. Rejection of the idea that science gets at the truth of things goes back
to Karl Popper.
17. See the author’s Induction (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980).
18. Michael E. Levin, “On Theory Change and Meaning Change,” Philosophy of
Science, vol. 46 (1979), p. 418.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 3
1. His clear awareness of this made it possible for the Platonic Academy to en-
dorse skepticism throughout the middle phase of its development in classical antiquity.
2. Thus one acute thinker has written:
[W]hat are my grounds for thinking that I, in my own particular case, shall
die. I am as certain of it in my innermost mind, as I am that 1 now live; but
what is the distinct evidence on which I allow myself to be certain? How
would I tell it in a court of justice? How should I fare under a cross-examina-
tion upon the grounds of my certitude? Demonstration of course I cannot
have of a future event. . . . [J. H. Newman, A Grammar of Assent [London and
New York: Longmans, Green, 1913], chap. 8, pt. 2, sect. I.)
3. Bertrand Russell, Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1912), p. 35.
4. It must be realized that the “certainty” at issue in these discussions is not the
subjective psychological stare of a feeling of certainly at issue in locutions like “I feel cer-
tain that p.” Rather it is a matter of the objective epistemic circumstances, and the rele-
vant locutions are of the impersonal character of “It is certain that p”. This is crucial to
the skeptic’s case, “And once we have noticed this distinction, we are forced to allow
what we are certain of very much less than we should have said otherwise.” (H. A.
Pritchard, Knowledge and Perception [Oxford, 1930], p. 97.)
5. As Keith Lehrer has put it:
[I]t should also be clear why it is that ordinary men commonly, though incor-
rectly, believe that they know for certain that some contingent statements are
true. They believe that there is no chance whatever that they are wrong in
thinking some contingent statements are true and thus feel sure they know for
certain that those statements are true. One reason they feel sure is that they
have not reflected upon the ubiquity of . . . change in all human thought.
Once these matters are brought into focus. We may reasonably conclude that
no man knows for certain that any contingent statement is true. (“Scepticism
and Conceptual Change,” in R. M. Chisholm and R. J. Swartz [eds.], Empir-
372
Notes to Pages 38–39

ical Knowledge [Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1973], pp. 47–58 [see 
p. 53].) In a similar vein, L. S. Carrier has recently argued, in effect, that since
belief concerning material objects can in theory turn out to be mistaken, no
one ever knows that he knows such a belief to be true. See his “Scepticism
Made Certain,” The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 71 (1974), pp. 140–50.
6. For skepticism and its critique see Robert Audi, Belief, Justification, and Knowl-
edge (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1988); A. I., Goldman, Epistemology and Cognition
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986); Peter Klein, Certainty: A Refutation
of Scepticism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1081); Keith Lehrer, Knowl-
edge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974); Robert Nozick, Philosophical Explanations
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981); and Peter Unger, Ignorance: A Case
for Scepticism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975) as well as the author’s Scepticism (Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1980), which gives extensive references to the literature.
7. For examples, we need not—in the usual course of things—be in a position to
rule out the imaginative skeptic’s recourse to uncannily real dreams, deceitful demons,
and so on.
8. The “problem of knowledge” that figures in much of the epistemological liter-
ature is thus a creation of those philosophers who endow our knowledge claims with a
hyperbolic absoluteness never envisaged in or countenanced by out ordinary usage of
knowledge-terminology. Having initially created difficulties by distorting our usage,
philosophers are then at great pains to try to revalidate it. This whole project gives an
aura of unrealism to much of epistemological discussion. For an interesting discussion of
relevant issues see Oliver A. Johnson. The Problem of Knowledge (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1974).
9. On this issue see J. L. Austin on “Other Minds” (1946), reprinted in his Philo-
sophical Papers (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1961), pp. 44–84. To be sure, the operation of
the distinction between realistic and hyperbolic possibilities of error will to some extent
depend on “the state of ‘knowledge’ of the day.” But this simply carries us back to the
truism that what people reasonably accept as known is state-of-knowledge dependent
and that the plausibly purported knowledge of one era may turn out to be the error of
another.
10. Compare Norman Malcolm’s right-minded complaint:
Lewis and Carnap . . . make the mistake of identifying . . . absolute certainly
with “theoretical certainty.” Lewis, for example, uses the expression “absolutely
certain” and “theoretically certain” interchangeably. . . . In what circumstances,
supposing that such circumstances cold exist, would it be “theoretically cer-
tain” that a given statement is true? The answer is clear from the context of
their arguments. It would be “theoretically certain” that a given statement is
true only if an infinite number of “tests” or “acts or verification” had been per-
formed. It is, of course, a contradiction to say that an infinite number of “tests”
or acts of any sort have been performed by anyone. It is not that it is merely
impossible in practice for anyone to perform an infinite number of acts. It is
Notes to Pages 39–42
373

impossible in theory. Therefore these philosophers misuse the expression “the-
oretically certain.” What they call “theoretical certainly” cannot be attained
even in theory. But this misusage of an expression is in itself of slight impor-
tance. What is very important is that they identify what they mean by “theo-
retically certain: with what is ordinarily meant by “absolutely certain” would be
contradictory. (“The Verification Argument” in Max Black (ed.), Philosophical
Analysis [Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentic Hall, 1950], p. 278–79).
11. Compare Harry G. Frankfurt, “Philosophical Certainty,” The Philosophical Re-
view, vol. 71 (1962), pp. 303–27. However, the philosopher (unlike the natural scientist)
is simply not free to switch over to “technical terms.” His task is to elucidate the con-
cepts we actually work with and in replacing them by technical reconstructions he
merely changes the subject.
12. On this issue one should consult J. L. Austin’s analysis of “I know” as a perfor-
mative utterance that extends a guarantee in that the man who makes this claim stakes
his reputation and binds himself to others. See “Other Minds” (op. cit.)
13. Keith Lehrer, Knowledge (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), p. 239.
14. As William James said: “[Someone] who says ‘Better to go without belief for-
ever than believe a lie!’ merely shows his own preponderant private horror of becoming
a dupe . . . But I can believe that worse things than being duped may happen to a many
in this world” (The Will to Believe (New York/London and Bombay, Longmans, Green,
and Co., 1897), pp. 18–19).
15. “What I mean is this: that my not having been on the moon is as sure a thing
for me as any grounds I could give for it.” (Ludwig Wittgenstein, On Certainty [Oxford:
Blackwell, 1961], sect. 111; cf. also sect. 516.)
16. In its fully developed form the argument goes back to the Academic Skeptic
Carneades (c. 213–c. 128 B.C.) who headed the Platonic Academy; but its essentials are
present in Pyrrho (c. 360–c. 270 B.C.), founder of the Skeptical school.
17. The skeptic might also hold that factual knowledge is not needed for praxis,
since—so he could argue—mere probability suffices as a “guide to life.”
18. On Peirce’s project on economy of research, see the author’s Peirce’s Philosophy of
Science (Notre Dame and London, 1976), as well as C. F. Delaney, “Peirce on ‘Simplicity’
and the Conditions of the Possibility of Science,” in L. J. Thro, ed., History of Philosophy
in the Making (Washington, DC: University Press of America, 1982), pp. 177–94.
19. Fridtjof Nansen as quoted in Roland Huntford, The Last Place on Earth (New
York: Atheneum, 1985), p. 200.
20. William James, “The Sentiment of Rationality,” in The Will to Believe and
Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (New York/London and Bombay, Longmans, Green,
and Co., 1897), pp. 78–9.
21. C. S. Peirce, Collected Papers, vol. II (Cambridge, MA, Harvard University
Press, 1931), sect. 2.112.
374
Notes to Pages 42–57

22. Peter Unger suggests a “reformation” of language in the interests of skepticism:
We want linguistic institutions and practices where our (universal) ignorance will not
enjoin silence” (Ignorance [Oxford, 1975], p. 271). But, he offers no concrete proposals
along these lines, and this is very understandable. It is difficult to see how a language
could be formed, taught, and above all used in which assertion played no role and decla-
ration carried with it no claims to veracity. And even if (per impossible) one had such a
“language,” what would be the point of using it in communicative contexts?
23. Further discussion of some of this chapter’s themes is presented in the author’s
Scepticism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 4
1. As standardly used, the claim “I see a cat” is amphibious and moves in both
regions, seeing that it conjoins the subjective “I take myself to be seeing a cat” with the
objective “There is a cat there that I actually see.”
2. See, for example, Ernest Sosa “Mythology of the Given,” History of Philosophy
Quarterly, vol. 14 (1997), pp. 275–96.
3. In theory we can certainly have K(∃f )(f is a causal factor of an epistemically
appropriate sort) without having (∃f )K(f is a causal factor of an epistemically appropri-
ate sort). It is just that in matters of concrete fact there is no epistemically effective way
to get at the former without getting there via the latter.
4. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A532–B560.
5. Donald Davidson, “A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge,” in Ernest
La Pore (ed.), Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), pp. 313–14.
6. Ibid., p. 310.
7. To rely on evolution in this way is not to turn epistemology into an empirical
science of contingent fact. For the point here is not that “what is a good reason is” is con-
tingent, but that “what a good reason” may be contingent and depend on the empirically
determinable conditions. (That “something bad for you should be avoided” is conceptual
and noncontingent, but that “smoking is bad for you and should therefore be avoided” is
contingent.)
8. See, for example, P. M. Churchland, Matter and Consciousness (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1984) and P. S. Churchland, Neurophysiology:Towards a Unified Science
for the Mind-Brain (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986).
9. No recent writer has stressed more emphatically than F. A. Hayek the deep in-
herent rationality of historical processes in contrast to the shallower calculations of a cal-
culating intelligence that restricts its view to the agenda of the recent day. See especially
his book, The Political Order of a Free People (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1979), vol. 3 of “Law, Liberty, and Civilization.”
Notes to Pages 62–70
375

10. The French school of sociology of knowledge has envisioned a competition
among and ultimately rational selection of culturally diverse modes of procedure in ac-
counting for the evolution of logical and scientific thought. Compare Louis Rougier,
Traité de la Connaisance (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1955), esp. pp. 426–28.
11. C. S. Peirce, Collected Papers, vol. V (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1934), sect. 5.366.
12. “Im Anfang war die Tat” (In the beginning was the act) as Goethe’s Faust
puts it.
13. The position maintained here is closely akin to John McDowell’s argumenta-
tion against Hilary Putnam (as discussed in Putnam’s Pragmatism: An Open Question
[Oxford: Blackwell, 1995], pp. 67–78). McDowell holds that “Once we think of [obvi-
ously mental achievement such as] hearing and seeing as accessing information from the
environment—something with full right to be regarded as a rational accomplishment—
there is no reason to accept the dictum that a perception can only cause (and not justify)
a verbalized thought.” But my position was arrived at independently of McDowell. Al-
ready in my 1971 Oxford lectures I argued at length against “an essentially linear model
of understanding” and insisted on this coordinate synthesis of the causal and the rational
order in the cognitive sphere, insisting that “these two orders must be grasped together
in their systematic unity.” (On the character and interrelationship of the mental and
physical orders of concepts see the author’s Conceptual Idealism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
1973), especially, pp. 184 ff; the quote is from pp. 191–91). Based on lectures given in
Oxford in 1971, these deliberations antedate Davidson’s John Locke lectures (let alone
McDowell’s response to Davidson in Mind and World [Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1994]).
14. Examples of this sort illustrate why philosophers are so reluctant to identify
knowledge with true belief.
15. The epistemological program this essay sketches out combines ideas set out in
considerable detail in several of the author’s publications: The Coherence Theory of Truth
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973), Plausible Reasoning (Assen: Van Gorcum,
1976), Scepticism (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980), Human Knowledge in Idealistic Perspective
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991), A Useful Inheritance (Pittsburgh: Univer-
sity of Pittsburgh Press, 1994). The discussion has benefited from constructive com-
ments by Alexander Pruss.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 5
1. “Consequences drawn by the law or the magistrate from a known to an unknown
fact.” Code Civil, bk. III, pt. iii, sect, art. 1349.
2. Sir Courtenay Ilbert, “Evidence,” Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed., vol. 10,
pp. 11–21 (see p. 15).
3. Richard A. Epstein, “Pleadings and Presumptions,” The University of Chicago
Law Review, vol. 40 (1973/4), pp. 556–82 (see pp. 558–59). As Lalande’s philosophical
376
Notes to Pages 83–84

dictionary puts it: “La présomption est proprement et d’une manière plus précise une
anticipation sur ce qui n’est pas prouvé.” (A. Lalande, Vocabulaire de la philosophie, 9th ed.
[Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1962], s.v. “présomption.”)
4. The modern philosophical literature on presumption is not extensive. Some
years ago, when I wrote Dialectics (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1977)
there was little apart from Roland Hall’s “Presuming,” Philosophical Quarterly, col. 11
(1961), pp. 10–22. A most useful overview of more recent development is Douglas N.
Wallon, Argumentation: Schemes for Presumptive Reasoning (Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum
Assoc., 1996). I am also grateful to Sigmund Bonk for sending me his unpublished
study “Vom Vorurteil zum Vorausurteil.”
5. C. S. Peirce put the case for presumptions in a somewhat different way—
as crucial to maintaining the line between sense and foolishness:
There are minds to whom every prejudice, every presumption, seems unfair. It
is easy to say what minds these are.They are those who never have known what
it is to draw a well-grounded induction, and who imagine that other people’s
knowledge is as nebulous as their own.That all science rolls upon presumption
(not of a formal hut of a real kind) is no argument with them, because they
cannot imagine that there is anything solid in human knowledge.These are the
people who waste their time and money upon perpetual motions and other
such rubbish. (Collected Papers, vol. VI, ed. by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss
[Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1935], sect. 6.423; compare vol.
II, sect. 2.776–7)
Peirce is very emphatic regarding the role of presumptions in scientific argumentation
and adduces various examples, for example, that the laws of nature operate in the un-
known parts of space and time as in the known or that the universe is inherently indif-
ferent to human values and does not on its own workings manifest any inclination
toward being benevolent, just, wise, and so forth. As the above quotation shows, Peirce
saw one key aspect of presumption to revolve about considerations regarding the eco-
nomics of inquiry—that is, as instruments of efficiency in saving time and money. On
this sector of his thought, see the author’s paper “Peirce and the Economy of Research,”
Philosophy of Science, vol. 43 (1976), pp. 71–98.
6. R. A. Epstein, “Pleading and Presumptions,” pp. 558–59.
7. Richard Whately, Elements of Rhetoric (London and Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1828), pt. I, ch. III, sect. 2.
8. As I. Scheffler puts a similar point in the temporal context of a change of mind
in the light of new information: “That a sentence may be given up at a later time does
not mean that its present claim upon us may be blithely disregarded.The idea that once
a statement is acknowledged as theoretically revisable, it can carry no cognitive weight
at all, is no more plausible then the suggestion that a man losses his vote as soon as it is
seen that the rules make it possible for him to be outvoted” (Science and Subjectivity
[Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill, 1967], p. 118).
9. The next chapter will examine the idea of presumption in greater detail.
Notes to Pages 84–87
377

10. Historically this goes back to the conception of “the reasonable” (to eulongon),
as discussed in Greek antiquity by the Academic Skeptics. Carneades (c. 213–c. 128
B.C.) for one worked out a rather well-developed (nonprobabilistic) theory of plausibil-
ity as it relates to the deliverances of the senses, the testimony of witnesses, and so on.
For a helpful discussion of the relevant issues, see Charlotte L. Stough, Greek Skepticism
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1969).
11. For an interesting analysis of presumptive and plausibilistic reasoning in math-
ematics and (to a lesser extent) the natural sciences, see George Polya’s books Introduc-
tion and Analogy in Mathematics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1954) and
Patterns of Plausible Inference (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1954). Polya re-
gards the patterns of plausible argumentation as defining the “rules of admissibility in
scientific discussion” on strict analogy with the legal case, regarding such rules as needed
because it is plain that not anything can qualify for introduction as probatively relevant.
12. This view of plausibility in terms of general acceptance either by the consensus
genium or by the experts (“the wise”) was prominent in Aristotle’s construction of the
plausible (endoxa) in book I of the Topics.
13. All this, of course, does not deal with question of the status of this rule itself
and of the nature of its own justification. It is important in the present context to stress
the regulative role of plausibilistic considerations. This now becomes a matter of epis-
temic policy (“Given priority to contentions which treat like cases alike”) and not a meta-
physcially laden contention regarding the ontology of nature (as with the—blatantly
false—descriptive claim “Nature is uniform”).The plausibilistic theory of inductive rea-
soning sees uniformity as a regulative principle of epistemic policy in grounding our
choices, not as a constitutive principle of ontology. As a “regulative principle of epistemic
policy” its status is methodological—and thus its justification is in the final analysis prag-
matic. See the author’s Methodological Pragmatism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1976).
14. See Gerdinand Gonseth, “La Notion du normal,” Dialectics, vol. 3 (1947),
pp. 243–52. More generally, on the principles of plausible reasoning in the natural sciences
see Norwood R. Hanson, Patterns of Discovery (Cambridge, 1958), and his influential
1961 paper,“Is There a Logic of Discovery,” in H. Feigl and G. Maxwell (eds.), Current Is-
sues in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. I (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1961).The
work of Herbert A. Simon is an important development in this area: “Thinking by Com-
puters” and “Scientific Discovery and the Psychology of Problem Solving,” in R. G.,
Colodny (ed.), Mind and Cosmos (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1966).
15. All three of these principles of plausibility were operative in the protoconcep-
tion of plausibility represented by Aristotle’s theory of endoxa as developed in book I of
the Topics. For this embraced: (1) general acceptance by men at large or by the experts
(“the wise”), (2) theses similar to these (or opposed to what is contrary to them, and (3)
theses that have become established in cognitive disciplines (kata technas).
16. For a closer study of the notion of plausibility and its function in rational
argumentation see the author’s Plausible Reasoning (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1976).
17. The lottery paradox was originally formulated by H. K. Kyburg, Jr., Probabil-
ity and the Logic of Rational Relief (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1961).
378
Notes to Pages 87–90

For an analysis of its wider implications for inductive logic see R. Hilpinen, Rules of Ac-
ceptances and Inductive Logic (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1968;
Acta Philosophica Fennica, fasc. 22), pp. 39–49.
18. Cf. also I. Levi, Gambling with Truth (New York: Knopf, 1967), chaps. 2 and 6.
19. See Rudolf Carnap, Logical Foundations of Probability (Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press, 1950; 2d ed., 1960), sec. 50, and P. A. Schilpp, ed., The Philosophy of
Rudolf Carnap (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1963): pp. 972–73. Carnap’s position is fol-
lowed by Richard Jeffrey. See his “Valuation and Acceptance of Scientific Hypotheses,”
Philosophy of Science, vol. 23 (1956), pp. 237–46.
20. For further details regarding the important role of presumptions in the philo-
sophical theory of knowledge, see the author’s Methodological Pragmatism (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1976).
21. On the strictly empirical side, it is difficult to exaggerate the extent to which
our processes of thought, communication, and argumentation in everyday life are sub-
ject to established presumptions and accepted plausibilities. This is an area chat is only
beginning to be subjected to sociological exploration. (See, for example, Harold
Garfinkel, Studies in Ethnomethodology [Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice Hall, I967].)
The pioneer work in the field is chat of Alfred Schutz, Der sinnhafte Aufbau der
sozialen Welt (Wien, 1932).
22. For further discussion of this issue and for references to the literature, see the
author’s book on The Coherence Theory of Truth (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973).
23. See the author’s Methodological Pragmatism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1976) for
a fuller development of this line of thought.
24. This is why adherence to custom is a cardinal principle of cognitive as well as
practical rationality. Cf. William James, “The Sentiment of Rationality,” in The Will to
Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (New York, London and Bombay: Long-
mans, Green, and Co., 1897).
25. See the author’s Methodological Pragmatism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1976) for
a fuller development of this line of thought.
26. Further detail regarding presumptions and their epistemic role is given in the
author’s Dialectic’s (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1977). The economic
aspect of cognition is examined in his Cognitive Economy (Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1989).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 6
1. On priority conflicts, see R. K. Merton, “Priorities in Scientific Discovery,”
American Sociological Review, vol. 22 (1957), pp. 635–59.
2. The founding of the Royal Society in London, chartered in 1666, was a 
small but significant step toward openness. For an interesting analysis of the historical
Notes to Pages 90–102
379

situation, see Jerome R. Ravetz, Scientific Knowledge and Its Social Problems (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1971). Ravet’s presentation makes it clear that a considerable trans-
formation was involved because “a significant proportion of the great ‘scientists’ of that
age [sixteenth to seventeenth century] were even more concerned for the protection of
their intellectual property, than for an immediate realization of its value through the
prestige resulting from publication” (p. 249).
3. The situation is one of the sort called prisoner’s dilemma by game theorists.
For a good account, see Morton D. Davis, Game Theory (New York: Basic Books, 1970),
pp. 92–103. See also A. Rappoport and A. M. Chammah, Prisoner’s Dilemma: A Study in
Conflict and Cooperation (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1965); Anatol
Rapoport, “Escape from Paradox,” American Scientist 217 (1967), pp. 50–56; and Rich-
mond Campbell and Lanning Sowden (eds.), Paradoxes of Rationality and Cooperation
(Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia Press, 1985).
4. Compare H. M. Vollmer and D. L. Mills, eds., Professionalization (Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1966).This credit, once earned, is generally safeguarded and main-
tained by institutional means: licensing procedures, training qualifications, professional
societies, codes of professional practice, and the like.
5. See John Hardwig, “The Role of Trust in Knowledge,” The Journal of Philoso-
phy, vol. 88 (1991), pp. 693–708.
6. On this matter, see Thomas Sowell, Knowledge and Decisions (New York: Basic
Books, 1980), especially the discussion of “Informal Relationships,” on pp. 23–30.
7. The literature on theoretical issues of trust and cooperation in contexts of in-
quiry is virtually nonexistent. However regard to morality in general this is not so. See,
for example, Robert Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Basic Books,
1984); David Gauthier, Morals by Agreement (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986);
Raimo Tuomela, Cooperation (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2000); and Nicholas Rescher, Fairness
(New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Press, 2001).
8. For a penetrating study of these and similar issues, see John Sabini and Maury
Silver, Moralities of Everyday Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982), especially chap. 4.
9. Specifically, Solomon Asch found that in certain situations of interactive esti-
mation, “whereas the judgments were virtually free of error under control conditions,
one-third of the minority estimates were distorted toward the majority.” See his “Stud-
ies of Independence and Conformity: I. A Minority of One Against a Unanimous
Majority,” Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, no. 70 (1956).
10. Ibid, p. 69.
11. John Sabini and Maury Silver, Moralities of Everyday Life, pp. 84–85.
12. Harry Kalven, Jr., and Hans Zeisel, The American Jury (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1966).
13. Further discussion of some of this chapter’s themes can be found in the
author’s Cognitive Economy (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989).
380
Notes to Pages 102–110

NOTES TO CHAPTER 7
1. J. H. Lambert, Fragment einer Systematologie in J. Bernouilli (ed.), Johann
Heinrich Lambert: Heinrich: Philosophische Schriften (2 vols; reprinted Hildesheim,
1967).
2. Think here of Aristotle’s extensive concern with “priority” in the order of jus-
tification, and his requirement that in adequate explanations the premises must be “bet-
ter known than and prior to” the conclusion.
3. Thus Lambert wrote: “Grundregel des Systems: Das vohrgehende soll das fol-
gende klar machen, in Absicht auf den Verstand, gewiss in Absicht auf die Vernunft . . .”
(“Theorie des Systems,” in Philosophische Schriften, vol. II [op. cit.], p. 510.)
4. Compare David Hilbert’s view that successful axiomatization affords a
“Tieferlegung der Fundamente der einzelnen Wissensgebiete,” which renders the held
at once more intelligible and more secure. “Axiomatisches Denken” (1918), reprinted in
David Hilbert, Hilbertiana (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1964).
5. R. M. Chisholm, The Theory of Knowledge, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs: Pren-
tice Hall, 1977).
6. See especially Hugo Dingler, Das System (Munich: E. Reinhardt, 1930),
pp. 19–20.
7. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, I, 3; 72b5–24 (tr. W. D. Ross; Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1975).
8. The theory is to be met with in Plato’s Theaetetus (200 D ff.) where the ele-
ment added to truth and belief is the existence of a rationale or account (logos). Since
this factor is essentially discursive, the theory is there criticized as conflicting with a
foundationalism that admits of basic elements.
9. C. I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation (Lasalle, IL: Open Court
Press, 1946), p. 186.
10. See Franz Brentano, Wahrheit und Evidenz (ed. O. Kraus, Leipzig: F. Meiner,
1930). The most influential present-day advocate of an epistemological position along
Brentano-esque lines is R. M. Chisholm (see his Theory of Knowledge [Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1966]). Compare also Roderick Firth, “Ultimate Evidence.”
The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 53 (1956), pp. 732–38; reprinted in A. J. Swartz (ed.), Per-
ceiving, Sensing, and Knowing (Garden City, NY, Anchor Books, 1965), pp. 486–96. For
an informative general survey and critique of present-day foundationalism sec Anthony
Quinton, “The Foundations of Knowledge” in B. Williams and A. Montefiore (eds.),
British Analytical Philosophy (New York, Humanities Press, 1966), pp. 55–86.
11. Compare Herbert Simon, “The Architecture of Complexity,” General Systems,
vol. 10 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1965), pp. 63–76.
12. Compare R. M. Chisholm, The Theory of Knowledge, 2nd ed. (Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1977).
Notes to Pages 114–126
381

13. Recognition of these and other weaknesses of foundationalism has in recent
times not been spearheaded by coherentists—the idealistic advocates were ineffectual,
the positivist advocates (i.e., Neurath and his sympathizers) were unsuccessful.The only
effective opposition has centered about the refutationism of K. R. Popper’s Logik der
Forschung (Wien: J. Springer, 1935: tr. as The Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York:
Basic Books, 1959).
14. Some of this chapter’s themes are also touched on in the author’s “Founda-
tionalism, Coherentism, and the Idea of Cognitive Systematization,” The Journal of Phi-
losophy, vol. 71 (1974), pp. 695–708.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 8
1. This consideration more than any other differentiates coherentism from relia-
bilism and data from reliably confined propositions.
2. The formal mechanism of best-fit analysis is described more fully in the au-
thor’s books The Coherence Theory of Truth (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973) and Plau-
sible Reasoning (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1976).
3. The epistemic problem with data is thus not just some of them are uncertain,
but that, in general being collectively consistent, we know a priori that some of them
must be false.
4. I. Levi, Gambling with Truth (New York: Knopf, 1967), p. 28. “To accept H as
evidence is not merely to accept H as true but to regard as pointless further evidence col-
lection in order to check on H” (ibid., p. 149).
5. See A. C. Ewing, Idealism: A Critical Survey (London: MacMillan, 1934), p.
238, as well as his later essay on “The Correspondence Theory of Truth,” where he
writes: “that coherence is the test of truth can only be made plausible if coherence is in-
terpreted not as mere internal coherence but as coherence with our experience” (Non-
Linguistic Philosophy (London, 1968), pp. 203–4). For an author of the earlier period see
H. H. Joachim who writes: “Truth, we said, was the systematic coherence which char-
acterized a significant whole. And we proceeded to identify a significant whole with ‘an
organized individual experience, self-filling and self-fulfilled’” (The Nature of Truth
[Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1906], p. 78).
6. B. Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (London: H. Holt, 1912), p. 191. Or com-
pare M. Schlick’s formulation of this point: “Since no one dreams of holding the state-
ments of a story book true and those of a text of physics false, the coherence view fails
utterly. Something more, that is, must be added to coherence, namely, a principle in terms
of which the compatibility is to be established [sc. as factual], and this would alone then
be the actual criterion” (M. Schlick, “The Foundation of Knowledge,” in A. J. Ayer [ed.],
Logical Positivism [Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1959], pp. 209–27 [see p. 216]).
7. A. R. White, “Coherence Theory of Truth,” in P. Edward (ed.), The Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy, vol. 2 (1967), pp. 130–3 (see p. 131). One critic of the coherence the-
ory elaborates this important point with demonstrative clarity as follows:
382
Notes to Pages 129–139

That in the end only one sufficiently comprehensive system of statements
would be found consistent, is a suggestion which runs counter to obvious
facts about the nature of consistency and of systems; probably it strikes us as
plausible because we are such poor liars, and are fairly certain to become en-
tangled in inconsistencies sooner or later, once we depart from the truth. A
sufficiently magnificent liar, however, or one who was given time and pa-
tiently followed a few simple rules of logic, could eventually present us with
any number of systems, as comprehensive as you please, and all of them in-
cluding falsehoods. Insofar as it is possible to deal with any such notion as
“the whole of the truth,” it is the Leibnizian conception of an infinite plural-
ity of possible worlds which is justified, and not the conception of the his-
torical coherence theory that there is just one all-comprehensive system,
uniquely determined to be true by its complete consistency. . . . Thus if we
start with any empirical [i.e., contingent] belief or statement “P,” we shall
find that one or other of every pair of further empirical statements, “Q” and
“not-Q,” “R” and “not-R,” and so on, can be conjoined with “P” to form a
self-consistent set. And exactly the same will likewise be true of its contra-
dictory “not-P.” Every empirical supposition, being a contingent statement, is
contained in some self-consistent system which is as comprehensive as you please.
And as between the truth of any empirical belief or statement “P” and the
falsity of it (the truth of “not-P”) consistency with other possible beliefs or
statements, or inclusion in comprehensive and self-consistent systems, pro-
vides no clue or basis of decision. (C. I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge and
Valuation (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1962), pp. 340–41).
8. On coherentism see R. Audi, Belief Justification and Knowledge (Belmont:
Wadsworth, 1988); J. Bender (ed.), The Current State of the Coherence Theory (Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 1989); L. BonJour, The Structure of Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1985); R. M. Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, 3rd ed. (Engle-
wood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1989); A. Goldman, Empirical Knowledge (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1988); G. Harman, Thought (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1973); K. Lehrer, Theory of Knowledge (Boulder: Westview, 1990), W. G. Lycan,
Judgement and Justification (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988); J. Pollock,
Contemporary Theories of Knowledge (Totowa: Rowman & Littlefield, 1986), W. V. O.
Quine and Joseph Ullian, The Web of Belief (McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 1979);
N. Rescher, The Coherence Theory of Truth (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973);
J. Rosenberg, One World and Our Knowledge of It (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980).
9. On this term compare Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge; Towards a Post-
critical Philosophy (New York: Harper & Row, 1964).
10. The question “Why should pragmatic success of the applications of the prod-
ucts of a cognitive method count as an index of its cognitive adequacy?,” though seem-
ingly straightforward, in fact plumbs hidden metaphysical depths. The complex issues
that arise here are examined at considerable length in the author’s Methodological Prag-
matism (Oxford, 1976), where other considerations relevant to the present discussion are
also set out at greater length.
Notes to Pages 139–144
383

11. It is worth stressing an important aspect of the pivotal role of pragmatic effi-
cacy in the quality-control of cognitive systematization. Most of the theoretical param-
eters of systematizing adequacy (unity, uniformity, cohesiveness, etc.) exert an impetus
in the direction of simplicity (economy austerity). Their operation would never in itself
induce us to move from a system in hand that is relatively simple to one that is more
complex. But the pursuit of applicative adequacy can reinforce the operation of com-
pleteness and comprehensiveness in counteracting the simplicity-oriented tendency of
those parameters.
12. On this fact-ladenness of the fundamental ideas by which our very conception
of nature is itself framed see Chapter VI, “A Critique of Pure Analysis” of the author’s
The Primacy of Practice (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1973).
13. Some of the key themes of this chapter are treated in author’s The Coherence
Theory of Truth (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973) and A Useful Inheritance: (Savage: Row-
man & Littlefield, 1990). And some of its key concepts are further developed elsewhere:
plausibility—Plausible Reasoning (Assen; Van Gorcum, 1976); systematicity—Cognitive
Systematization (Oxford: Blackwell, 1979); retrospective justification—Methodological
Pragmatism (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1977); cognitive efficiency—Cognitive Economy
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, l989).
14. Arthur Pap, Elements of Analytic Philosophy (New York: Macmillan Co., 1949),
p. 356. Compare H. H. Joachim, Logical Studies (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1948).
15. The definition versus criterion dichotomy was the starting point of the au-
thor’s The Coherence Theory of Truth (Oxford, 1973). It also provided the pivot for the
critique of the coherentism of Blanshard’s The Nature of Thought in his contribution to
R. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy of Brand Blanshard (LaSalle: Open Court, 1980).
Several subsequent publications have kept the pot boiling, in particular Scott D. Palmer,
“Blanchard, Rescher, and the Coherence Theory of Truth, “Idealistic Studies, vol. 12
(1982) pp. 211–30, and Robert Tad Lehe, “Coherence: Criterion and Nature of Truth,”
ibid., vol. 13 (1983), pp. 177–89.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 9
1. The many good anthologies on the subject of relativism include: Martin Hol-
lis and Steven Lukes (eds.), Rationality and Relativism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982);
Michael Krausz and Jack W. Meiland (eds.), Relativism: Cognitive and Moral (Notre
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1982); J. Margolis, M. Krausz, and R. M.
Burian (eds.), Rationality, Relativism, and the Human Sciences (Dordrecht, Kluwer,
1986); Michael Krausz (ed.) Relativism: Interpretation and Confrontation (Notre Dame,
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1989); Geoffrey Sayre McCord (ed.), Essays on
Moral Relativism (Ithaca, NY.: Cornell University Press, 1994). See also: Herbert
Speigelberg, Antirelativismus (Zürich, Leipzig: M. Niehans, 1935); Johannes Thyssen,
Der philosophische Relativismus (Bonn: L. Röhrscheid, 1941); Nancy L. Gifford, When in
Rome: And Introduction to Relativism and Knowledge (Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1983); Peter Unger, Philosophical Relativity (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1984);
384
Notes to Pages 144–153

Joseph Margolis, The Truth About Relativism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991);
H. Siegel, Relativism Refuted (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1987); Larry Laudan, Science and Rel-
ativism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990); Richard Rorty, Objectivity, Rela-
tivism, and Truth (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991); J. F.
Harris, Against Relativism (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1992).
2. William James, Pragmatism (New York: Appleton, 1907), p. 171. The basic
line of thought goes back to the ancient skeptics. Compare Sextus Empiricus, Outlines
of Pyrrhonism, I, 54, 59–60, 97, et passim.
3. William James, Talks to Teachers on Psychology (New York: Henry Holt,
1899), p. 4.
4. On “alternative standards of rationality” see Peter Winch, “Understanding a
Primitive Society,” American Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 1 (1964), pp. 307–24.
5. For an interesting critique of cognitive relativism that is akin in spirit though
different in orientation from that of the present section see Lenn E. Goodman, “Six
Dogmas of Relativism,” in Marcello Dascal (ed.), Cultural Relativism and Philosophy
(Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), pp. 77–102.
6. To be sure, someone could convince me that my understanding of the impli-
cations of my standards is incomplete and lead me to an internally motivated revision of
my rational proceedings, amending those standards from within with a view to greater
systemic coherence.
7. “Reste von christlicher Theologie innerhalb der philosophischen Problematik”
(Martin Heidegger, Sein and Zeit [Halle a. d. S.: Niemeyer, 1931], p. 230).
8. William James, “Pragmatism and Humanism,” in F. H. Burkhardt et al. (eds.),
Pragmatism (Lecture VIII), The Works of William James (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1975), p. 115.
9. Further discussion of some of this chapter’s themes are presented in the
author’s Objectivity (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1997).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 10
1. Two recent anthologies offer informative discussions of objectivity. S. C.
Brown (ed.), Objectivity and Cultural Divergence (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1984), and Alan McGill, Rethinking Objectivity (Durham NC: Duke University
Press, 1994). Recent books on the subject include Richard J. Benstein, Beyond Objec-
tivism and Relativism (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1983); Hilary
Putnam, Realism with a Human Face (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1990), Nicholas Rescher, Objectivity (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press,
1997); and Richard Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism and Truth (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1991).
2. See Robert Brandom, “Knowledge and the Social Articulation of the Space of
Reasons,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, vol. 55 (1995), pp. 895–908.
Notes to Pages 153–175
385

3. This is why it seems mistaken to characterize objectivity a fundamental epis-
temic value as Brian Ellis does in his Truth and Objectivity (Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
1990; pp. 228–31).The value of objectivity is not fundamental but instrumental and lies
in its auspicity to facilitate the achievement of other, ulterior goal.
4. For an elaborate development of this position see the author’s Rationality: A
Philosophical Inquiry into the Nature and the Rationale of Reason (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1988).
5. On our duty toward the cultivation of rationality see also pp. 204–9 of the
author’s Rationality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988).
6. See Friedrich Nietzsche, The Will to Power, tr. by Walter Kaufmann and R. J.
Hollingdale (New York: Vintage Books, 1968), p. 481.
7. Further discussion of some themes of this chapter can be found in the author’s
Objectivity (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1997).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 11
1. In some situations (e.g., negotiations, games, and warfare) the intelligent thing
at the level of policy or strategy may be occasionally to do a “stupid” thing at the level of
particular acts or tactics. It is sometimes advantageous “to keep your opponent guessing”
by not being too predictable and occasionally doing something unexpected—even
though this is a “stupid” thing to do in the circumstances—as part of a deeper cunning.
Nothing said here about rational procedure is intended to contradict the prospect of
such wise “foolishness.”
2. Some recent anthologies on rationality are: Stanley I. Benn and G. W. Morti-
more, Rationality and the Social Sciences (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1976);
K. I. Manktelow and D. E. Over, Rationality (London: Routledge, 1993); and Paul K.
Moser, Rationality in Action (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). Recent
book on the topic include: Jonathan Bennett, Rationality: An Essay Toward Analysis
(London: Routledge & K. Paul, 1964); Christopher Cherniak, Minimal Rationality
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986); Stephen L. Darwall, Impartial Reason (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1983); Stephan Nathanson, The Ideal of Rationality (At-
lantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1985); David Pears, Motivated Individuality
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984); Frederick Schick, Having Reasons (Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 1984); and Herbert Simon, Reason in Human Affairs (Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press, 1983).
3. Kurt Baier, The Moral Point of View (New York: Random House, 1965; abr.
edn.) 160–1.
4. Compare René Descartes, Discourse on Method, sect. iii, maxim 2.
5. In his interesting book on A Justification of Rationality (Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 1976), John Kekes argues that “The justification of ration-
ality is . . . [as] a device for problem-solving and it should be employed because
386
Notes to Pages 179–196

everybody has problems, because it is in everybody’s interest to solve his problems, and
because rationality is the most promising way of doing so” (p. 168). This traditionally
pragmatic view is very close to our own position except that it pivots rationality’s justi-
fication on effectiveness in problem solving, while our own position is somewhat more
cautious. It does not contend that the course of reason actually is our best recourse in
problem solving, but only that it is so as best we can (rationally) judge. The present ar-
gumentation thus brings the aspect of reason’s self-reliance to the fore as a critical aspect
of the justification of rationality, and accordingly is not a pure pragmatism.
6. This view has become axiomatic for the entire “sociology of knowledge.”
7. Peter Winch, “Understanding a Primitive Society,” American Philosophical
Quarterly, vol. 1 (1964), pp. 307–24; reprinted in B. R. Wilson (ed.), Rationality (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1970).
8. Lévy-Bruhl, Primitive Mentality (London, 1923; first pub. in French, Paris,
1921).
9. Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azandi (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1937); Nuer Religion (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1956).
10. The relevant issues are interestingly treated in John Kekes’s book, A Justifica-
tion of Rationality (Albany,: State University of New York Press, 1976), pp. 137–49.
11. “Est ridiculum querere quae habere non possumus,” as Cicero wisely observed
(Pro Archia, iv. 8).
12. Further discussion of some of this chapter’s themes is presented in the author’s
Rationality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 12
1. A homely fishing analogy of Eddington’s is useful here. He saw the experi-
mentalists as akin to a fisherman who trawls nature with the net of his equipment for
detection and observation. Now suppose (says Eddington) that a fisherman trawls the
seas using a net of two-inch mesh. Then fish of a smaller size will simply go uncaught,
and those who analyze the catch will have an incomplete and distorted view of aquatic
life.The situation in science is the same. Only by improving our observational means of
trawling nature can such imperfections be mitigated. (See A. S. Eddington, The Nature
of the Physical World [New York: Macmillan, 1928].)
2. D. A. Bromley et al. Physics in Perspective, Student Edition (Washington, DC:
National Academy of Sciences, 1973); pp. 13, 16. See also Gerald Holton, “Models for
Understanding the Growth and Excellence of Scientific Research,” in Stephen R.
Graubard and Gerald Holton, eds., Excellence and Leadership in the Democracy (New
York: Free Press, 1962), p. 115.
3. Note, however, that an assumption of the finite dimensionality of the phase
space of research-relevant physical parameters becomes crucial here. For if these were
Notes to Pages 196–214
387

limitless in number, one could always move on to the inexpensive exploitation of virgin
territory.
4. “Looking back, one has the impression that the historical development of the
physical description of the world consists of a succession of layers of knowledge of in-
creasing generality and greater depth. Each layer has a well-defined field of validity; one
has to pass beyond the limits of each to get to the next one, which will be characterized
by more general and more encompassing laws and by discoveries constituting a deeper
penetration into the structure of the Universe than the layers recognized before.”
(Edoardo Amaldi, “The Unity of Physics,” Physics Today, vol. 261, no. 9 [September
1973], p. 24.) See also E. P. Wigner, “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics
in the Natural Sciences,” Communication on Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 13
(1960), pp. 1–14; as well as his “The Limits of Science,” Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society, vol. 93 (1949), pp. 521–26. Compare also chapter 8 of Henry Mar-
genau, The Nature of Physical Reality (New York: Knopf, 1950).
5. D. A. Bromley et al., Physics in Perspective, Student Edition (Washington DC:
National Academy of Sciences, 1973), p. 23.
6. Gerald Holton, “Models for Understanding the Growth and Excellence of
Scientific Research,” in Stephen R. Graubard and Gerald Holton (editors), Excellence
and Leadership in a Democracy (op. cit.), p. 115.
7. Gunther S. Stent, The Coming of the Golden Age (Garden City: American Mu-
seum of Natural History, 1969), pp. 111–113. One notable exception to this view is that
of the eminent Russian physicist Peter Kapitsa. After surveying various fundamental
discoveries of the past he writes: “If we honestly extrapolate this curve we see it does not
have any tendency toward saturation and that in the very near future many more such
discoveries, which give us the possibility of increasing our control over nature and put
new strength in our hands, will be made. Subjectively it seems that we know all there is
to know about nature. However, when we read the works of scientists of the Newtonian
era we see that they felt precisely the same. We can, therefore, be sure that further dis-
coveries must still be made” (The Future Problems of Science,” in M. Goldsmith and 
A. Mackay [eds.], The Science of Science [London, 1964], pp. 102–13 [see pp. 105–6].)
This reflects standard, “party-line” thinking in the U.S.S.R. See pp. 123–31 below, and
also see footnote 33.
8. See the author’s Peirce’s Philosophy of Science, (Notre Dame and London: Uni-
versity of Notre Dame Press, 1978).
9. W. Stanley Jevons, The Principles of Science, 2nd ed. (London: Macmillan and
Co., 1877), pp. 752–53.
10. The present critique of convergentism is thus very different from that of W. V.
O. Quine. He argues that the idea of “convergence to a limit” is defined for numbers but
not for theories, so that speaking of scientific change as issuing in a “convergence to a
limit” is a misleading metaphor.“There is a faulty use of mathematical analogy in speak-
ing of a limit of theories, since the notion of a limit depends on that of a ‘nearer than,’
which is defined for numbers and not for theories” Word and Object (Cambridge, MA:
Technology Press of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1960), p. 23. I am per-
388
Notes to Pages 214–220

fectly willing to apply the metaphor of substantial and insignificant differences to theo-
ries, but am concerned to deny that, as a matter of fact, the course of scientific theory-
innovation must eventually descend to the level of trivialities.
11. Some of the themes of this chapter are also addressed in the author’s Scientific
Progress (Oxford, Blackwell, 1977), and in Scientific Realism (Dordrecht: D. Reidel,
1987).
12. This realization is something of which we can make no effective use: while we
realize that many of our scientific beliefs are wrong, we have no way of telling which
ones, and no way of telling how error has crept in. And, per contra, the same holds for
truth. Cp. Robert Almeder, Blind Realism (Savage, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1992).
13. Collected Papers, ed. by C. Hartshorne et al., vol. I (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1931), pp. 44–45 (sects. 108–9); ca. 1896.
14. Derek J. Price, Science Since Babylon (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1961), p. 137.
15. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1970). See also I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave, eds., Criticism and the Growth of
Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970).
16. The prime exponent of this position is Paul Feyerabend. See his essays “Ex-
planation, Reduction, and Empiricism,” in Herbert Feigl and Grover Maxwell, eds.,
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. III (Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 1962); “Problems of Empiricism,” in R. G. Colodny, ed., Beyond the Edge
of Certainty (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1965), pp. 145–260 and “On the ‘Meaning’ of Sci-
entific Terms,” Journal of Philosophy, vol. 62 (1965), pp. 266–74.
17. Practical problems have a tendency to remain structurally invariant.The send-
ing of messages is just that, whether horse-carried letters or laser beams arc used in
transmitting the information.
18. This (essentially Baconian) idea that control over nature is the pivotal deter-
minant of progress—in contrast to purely intellectual criteria (such as growing refine-
ment, complication, or precision; let alone cumulation or proliferation)—has been
mooted by several writers in response to Kuhn. See, for example, Paul M. Quay,
“Progress as a Demarcation Criterion for the Science,” Philosophy of Science, vol. 41
(1974), pp. 154–70 (especially p. 158 and also Friedrich Rapp, “Technological and Sci-
entific Knowledge,” in Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science: Proceedings in the Vth
International Congress of DLMPS/IUHPS: London, Ontario, 1975 (Toronto: University
of Toronto Press, 1976). The relevant issues are treated in depth in the present author’s
Methodological Pragmatism (Oxford: Blackwell, 1977).
19. For Hobbes’s ideas in this region, see Hans Fiebig, Erkenntnis und technische
Erzeugung: Hobbes’ operationale Philosophie der Wissenschaft (Meisenheim am Glan:
Forscher, 1973).
20. Further discussion of some of this chapter’s themes can be found in chapter 7,
“Cost Escalation in Empirical Inquiry” of the author’s Cognitive Economy (Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989). Scientific Progress (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1978),
Notes to Pages 220–228
389

and The Limits of Science (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1984) are also relevant.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 13
1. Hans Reichenbach, Experience and Prediction (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1938), p. 376.
2. Science and Hypothesis (New York: Dover Press, 1914), pp. 145–46.
3. Immanuel Kant was the first philosopher clearly to perceive and emphasize
this crucial point: “But such a principle [of systematicity] does not prescribe any law for
objects . . . , it is merely a subjective law for the orderly management of the possessions
of our understanding, that by the comparison of its concepts it may reduce them to the
smallest possible number; it does not justify us in demanding from the objects such uni-
formity as will minister to the convenience and extension of our understanding; and we
may not, therefore, ascribe to the [methodological or regulative] maxim [‘Systematize
knowledge!’] any objective [or descriptively constitutive] validity.” (CPuR, A306 
B362.) Compare also C. S. Peirce’s idea that the systematicity of nature is a regulative
matter of scientific attitude rather than a constitutive matter of scientific fact. See
Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers, vol. 7 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1958), sect. 7.134.
4. Herbert Spencer, First Principles, 7th ed. (London: Appleton’s, 1889); see sects.
14–17 of part II, “The Law of Evolution.”
5. On the process in general see John H. Holland, Hidden Order: How Adaptation
Builds Complexity (Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 1995). Regarding the specifically
evolutionary aspect of the process see Robert N. Brandon, Adaptation and Environment
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990.)
6. On the issues of this paragraph compare Stuart Kaufmann, At Home in the
Universe: To Search for the Laws of Self-Organization and Complexity (New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
7. An interesting illustration of the extent to which lessons in the school of better
experience have accustomed us to expect complexity is provided by the contrast between
the pairs: rudimentary/nonuanced; unsophisticated/sophisticated; plain/elaborate; sim-
ple/intricate. Note that in each case the second, complexity-reflective alternative has a
distinctly more positive (or less negative) connotation than its opposite counterpart.
8. On this process see sections 1 of chapter 12.
9. See B. W. Petley, The Fundamental Physical Constants and the Frontiers of
Measurement (Bristol: Hilger, 1985).
10. On the structure of dialectical reasoning see the author’s Dialectics (Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1977), and for the analogous role of such reasoning
in philosophy see The Strife of Systems (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1985).
390
Notes to Pages 228–237

11. See John Dupré, The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of the Dis-
unity of Science (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).
12. See Steven Weinberg, Dreams of a Formal Theory (New York: Pantheon, 1992).
See also Edoardo Amaldi, “The Unity of Physics,” Physics Today, vol. 261 (September,
1973), pp. 23–29. Compare also C. F. von Weizsäcker, “The Unity of Physics,” in Ted
Bastin (ed.) Quantum Theory and Beyond (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
13. The older figures are given in S. S. Visher, “Starred Scientists, 1903–1943,” in
American Men of Science (Baltimore, 1947). For many further details regarding the devel-
opment of American science see the author’s Scientific Progress (Oxford: Blackwell, 1978).
14. See, for example, Derek J. Price, Little Science, Big Science (New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 1963), p. 11.
15. Cf. Derek J. Price, Science Since Babylon, 2nd ed. (New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1975); see in particular chapter 5, “Diseases of Science.”
16. Data from An International Survey of Book Production During the Last Decades
(Paris: UNESCO, 1985).
17. Raymond Ewell, “The Role of Research in Economic Growth,” Chemical and
Engineering News, vol. 33 (1955), pp. 2980–85.
18. It is worth noting for the sake of comparison that for more than a century now
the total U.S. federal budget, its nondefense subtotal, and the aggregate budgets of all fed-
eral agencies concerned with the environmental sciences (Bureau of Mines, Weather
Bureau, Army Map Service, etc.) have all grown at a uniform per annum rate of 9 per-
cent. (See H. W. Menard, Science: Growth and Change [Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1971], p. 188.)
19. Data from William George, The Scientist in Action (New York: Arno 
Press, 1938).
20. “Impact of Large-Scale Science on the United State,” Science, vol. 134 (1961;
21 July issue), pp. 161–64 (see p. 161). Weinberg further writes: “The other main con-
tender [apart from space-exploration] for the position of Number One Event in the Sci-
entific Olympics is high-energy physics. It, too, is wonderfully expensive (the Stanford
linear accelerator is expected to cost $100  106), and we may expect to spend $400 
106 per year on this area of research by 1970” (Ibid., p. 164).
21. There is thus no suggestion of cumulatively here. Clearly, knowledge, like pop-
ulations, grows not just by additions (births) but also by abandonment (deaths). But
with knowledge, in contrast to population, the concepts of displacement and replace-
ment play a more crucial role. Knowledge never dies off without leaving progeny: in this
domain you cannot eliminate something with nothing.
22. Note that a self-concatenated concept or fact is still a concept or fact, even as
a self-mixed color is still a color.
23. In information theory, entropy is the measure of the information conveyed by a
message, and is there measured by k log M, where M is the number of structurally equiv-
alent messages available via the available sorts of symbols. By extension, the log I measure
Notes to Pages 237–243
391

of the knowledge contained in a given body of information might accordingly be desig-
nated as the enentropy. Either way, the concept at issue measures informative actuality in
relation to informative possibility. For there are two types of informative possibilities (1)
structural/syntactical as dealt with in classical information theory, and (2) hermeneu-
tic/semantical (i.e., genuinely meaning-oriented) as dealt with in the present theory.
24. Some writers have suggested that the subcategory of significant information
included in an overall body of crude data of size I should be measured by I k (for some
suitably adjusted value 0 
 k 
 1)—for example, by the “Rousseau’s Law” standard of I
(For details see Chapter VI of the author’s Scientific Progress [Oxford: Blackwell, 1978].)
Now since log I k  k log I which is proportional to log I, the specification of this sort of
quality level for information would again lead to a K  log I relationship.
25. See Stanislaw M. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician (New York: Scribner,
1976).
26. Max Planck, Vorträge und Erinnerungen, 5th ed. (Stuttgart: S. Hirzel, 1949),
p. 376; italics added. Shrewd insights seldom go unanticipated, so it is not surprising
that other theorists should be able to contest claims to Planck’s priority here. C. S. Peirce
is particularly noteworthy in this connection.
27. Henry Brooks Adams, The Education of Henry Adams (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1918).
28. To be sure, we are caught up here in the usual cyclic pattern of all hypothetico-
deductive reasoning. In addition to explaining the various phenomena we have been
canvasing that projected K/I relationship is in turn substantiated by them. This is not a
vicious circularity but simply a matter of the systemic coherence that lies at the basis of
inductive reasonings. Of course the crux is that there also be some predictive power,
which is exactly what our discussion of deceleration is designed to exhibit.
29. Some of the themes of this chapter were also addressed in the author’s Scien-
tific Progress (Oxford: Blackwell, 1978). This book is also available in translation: Ger-
man transl., Wissenschaftlicher Fortschritt (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1982); French transl., Le
Progrès scientifique (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1994).
30. Edward Gibbon, Memoirs of My Life (Harmondworth: Penguin Books,
1984), p. 63.
31. Gibbon’s “law of learning” thus means that a body of experience that grows
linearly over time yields a merely logarithmic growth in cognitive age. Thus a youngster
of ten years has attained only one-eighth of his or her chronological expected life span
but has already passed the halfway mark of his or her cognitive expected life span.
32. It might be asked: “Why should a mere accretion in scientific ‘information’—
in mere belief—be taken to constitute progress, seeing that those later beliefs are not nec-
essarily true (even as the earlier one’s were not)?” The answer is that they are in any case
better substantiated—that they are “improvements” on the earlier one’s by way of the
elimination of shortcomings. For a detailed consideration is the relevant issues, see the
author’s Scientific Realism (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1987).
392
Notes to Pages 243–248

33. Derek J. de Solla Price, Little Science, Big Science (New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1963), pp. 6–8.
34. For the statistical situation in science see Derek J. de Solla Price, Science Since
Babylon (New Haven, 1961; 2nd ed. 1975), See chapter 8,“Diseases of Science.” Further
detail is given in Price’s Little Science, Big Science (op. cit.).
35. The data here are set out in the author’s Scientific Progress (Oxford: Blackwell,
1978).
36. D. A. Bromley et al. Physics in Perspective (Washington, DC: National Academy
of Science, 1973); pp. 16, 23. See also Gerald Holton, “Models for Understanding the
Growth and Excellence of Scientific Research,” in Stephen R. Graubard and Gerald
Holton, eds., Excellence and Leadership in a Democracy (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1962), p. 115.
37. To be sure, we are caught up here in the usual cyclic pattern of all hypothetico-
deductive reasoning. In addition to explaining the various phenomena we have been
canvasing that projected K/I relationship is in turn substantiated by them. This is not a
vicious circularity but simply a matter of the systemic coherence that lies at the basis of
inductive reasonings.
38. This relationship conveys an important lesson. For the question arises: Is the
situation of a diminishing returns on scientific effort not incompatible with the fact (so
decidedly emphasized in chapter 2) that natural science is potentially incompletable? To
see that no incompatibility arises it suffices to recall that an ever decreasing series need
not yield a convergent sum as indeed the series 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, . . . indeed does not. And it
is just this series that corresponds to the relationship d
d
t
 K(t)  1
t
.
39. Recall here the discussion of chapter 12. On these matters see also the author’s
Priceless Knowledge? (Savage, MD: Littlefield Adams, 1996).
40. This follows because:
.
d
d
t
.
 K  c log I  .1
I
.
 .
d
d
t
.
 I.
And when I ≅t (as will be the case with I’s linear growth over time in line with a steady-
state resource investment) then:
.
d
d
t
.
 K  .1
t
.

41. See Henry Brooks Adams, The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1918).
42. The situation with automobiles is analogous. Modern cars are simpler to op-
erate (self-starting, self-shifting, power steering, etc.). But they are vastly more complex
to manufacture, repair, maintain, etc.
Notes to Pages 250–255
393

43. Further discussion of some of this chapter’s themes is presented in the author’s
Scientific Progress (Oxford: Blackwell, 1978), Cognitive Economy (Pittsburgh: University
of Pittsburgh Press, 1989), and The Limits of Science, 2nd ed. (Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1999).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 14
1. The author’s Cognitive Systematization (Oxford: Blackwell, 1979) deals with
further aspects of these matters.
2. Note that this is independent of the question Would we ever want to do so?
Do we ever want to answer all those predictive questions about ourselves and our envi-
ronment, or are we more comfortable in the condition in which “ignorance is bliss”?
3. One possible misunderstanding must be blocked at this point. To learn about
nature, we must interact with it. And so, to determine some feature of an object, we may
have to make some impact on it that would perturb its otherwise obtaining condition.
(That indeterminacy principle of quantum theory affords a well-known reminder of
this.) It should be clear that this matter of physical interaction for data acquisition is not
contested in the ontological indifference thesis here at issue.
4. S. W. Hawking, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?” Physics Bulletin,
vol. 32 (1981), pp. 15–17.
5. As stated this question involves a bit of anthropomorphism in its use of “you.”
But this is so only for reasons of stylistic vivacity.That “you” is, of course, only shorthand
for “computer number such-and-such.”
6. This sentiment was abroad among physicists of the fin de siècle era of 1890–1900.
(See Lawrence Badash,“The Completeness of Nineteenth-Century Science,” Isis, vol. 63
[1972], pp. 48–58.) and such sentiments are coming back into fashion today. See Richard
Feynmann, The Character of Physical Law, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (1965), p. 172. See
also Gunther Stent, The Coming of the Golden Age, Garden City, NY: Natural History
Press, 1969); and S. W. Hawking, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?” Physics
Bulletin, vol. 32 (1981), pp. 15–17.
7. See Eber Jeffrey, “Nothing Left to Invent,” Journal of the Patent Office Society,
vol. 22 (July 1940), pp. 479–81.
8. For this inference could only be made if we could move from a thesis of the
format ~(∃r)(r  S & r v p) to one of the format (∃r)(r  S & r v ~p), where “v” repre-
sents a grounding relationship of “furnishing a good reason” and p is, in this case, the
particular thesis “S will at some point require drastic revision.” That is, the inference
would go through only if the lack (in S) of a good reason for p were itself to assure the
existence (in S) of a good reason for ~p. But the transition to this conclusion from the
given premise would go through only if the former, antecedent fact itself constituted
such a good reason that is, only if we have ~(∃r)(r  S & r v p) v ~p.Thus, the inference
would go through only if, by the contraposition, p v(∃r)(r  S & r v p). This thesis
claims that the vary truth of p will itself be a good reason to hold that S affords a good
reason for p—in sum, that S is complete.
394
Notes to Pages 256–268

9. One possible misunderstanding must be blocked at this point. To learn about
nature, we must interact with it. And so, to determine some feature of an object, we may
have to make some impact upon it that would perturb its otherwise obtaining condition.
(That indeterminancy principle of quantum theory affords a well-known reminder of
this.) It should be clear that this matter of physical interaction for data acquisition is not
contested in the ontological indifference thesis here at issue.
10. Compare Chapter 10 of the author’s Limits of Science (Pittsburgh: University
of Pittsburgh Press, 1999).
11. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Practical Reason, p. 122 [Akad.].
12. See the author’s Peirce’s Philosophy of Science (Notre Dame, IN: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1978).
13. Some further aspects of this chapter’s themes are presented in the author’s
Limits of Science (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1984; rev. ed.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 15
1. Erwin Schroedinger, What Is Life? (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1945), p. 31.
2. Eugene P. Wigner, “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the
Natural Sciences,” Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 13 (1960),
pp. 1–14 (see p. 2).
3. Ibid, p. 14.
4. Albert Einstein, Lettres à Maurice Solovine (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1956),
pp. 114–15.
5. K. R. Popper, Objective Knowledge (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972), p. 28.
6. Mary Hesse, Revolutions and Reconstructions in the Philosophy of Science
(Bloomington, IN: University of Indiana Press, 1980), p. 154.
7. Conversations with Gerald Massey have helped in clarifying this part of 
the argument.
8. Galileo Galilei, Dialogo II in Le Opere di Galileo Galilei (Edizio Nazionale, vols.
I–XX (Florence, 1890–1909), vol. VII, p. 298. (I owe this reference to Juergen Mittel-
strass.) Kepler wrote, “Thus God himself was too kind to remain idle, and began to play
the game of signatures, signing his likeness into the world. I therefore venture to think
that all nature and all the graceful sky are symbolized in the art of geometry.” (Quoted in
Freeman Dyson,“Mathematics in the Physical Sciencs” in The Mathematical Sciences, ed.,
by the Committee on Support of Research in the Mathematical Sciences [Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1969], p. 99.)
Notes to Pages 270–286
395

9. To say that such a world must be understandable in such terms is not, of
course, to say anything about how far intelligent beings will actually succeed in un-
derstanding it.
10. Just this approach is the salient feature of the Quinean program of “episte-
mology naturalized.”
11. It is this unavoidable error-tolerant aspect of nature that blocks any prospect
of a naive “it works, therefore it’s true” pragmatism at the level of theses.To be sure, as re-
gards large-scale methods from providing action-guiding theses, the situation is differ-
ent. Here “it works systematically, therefore it is cogent (as a cognitive method—i.e., its
deliverances are rationally credible)” is something else again. (See the author’s Method-
ological Pragmatism [Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1977].)
12. Further deliberations regarding some of this chapter’s themes are presented in
the authors’ Scientific Realism (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1987).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 16
1. E. Purcell in A. G. W. Cameron (ed.), Interstellar Communication: A Collection
of Reprints and Original Contributions (New York and Amsterdam: W. A. Benjamin,
1963), p. 142.
2. See Stephen H. Dole, Habitable Planets for Man (New York: Blaisdell, 1964;
2nd ed., New York: American Elsevier, 1970) and also Carl Sagan, Cosmos (New York:
Random House, 1980).
3. See p. 29 of A. G. W. Cameron (ed.), Interstellar Communication: A Collection of
Reprints and Original Contributions (New York and Amsterdam: W. A. Benjamin, 1963).
4. See Su-Shu Huang “Life Outside the Solar System,” Scientific American 202,
vol. 4 (April 1960), p. 55.
5. See Sir Arthur Eddington, The Nature of the Physical World (New York:
Macmillan; Cambridge, Eng.: The University Press, 1928), p. 177.
6. See I. S. Shklovskii and Carl Sagan, Intelligent Life in the Universe (San Fran-
cisco, London, Amsterdam: Holden-Day, 1966), p. 411.
7. Ibid., p. 359.
8. See A. G. W. Cameron (ed.), Interstellar Communication: A Collection of
Reprints and Original Contributions (New York and Amsterdam: W. A. Benjamin,
1963), p. 190.
9. On this issue see George Gaylord Simpson, “The Nonprevalence of Hu-
manoids,” Science, vol. 143 (1964), pp. 769–775, chapter 13 of This View of Life: The
World of an Evolutionist (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1964).
10. See A. G. W. Cameron (ed.), Interstellar Communication: A Collection of Reprints
and Original Contributions (New York and Amsterdam: W. A. Benjamin, 1963), p. 75.
396
Notes to Pages 286–309

11. Compare A. G. W. Cameron (ed.), Interstellar Communication, p. 312.
12. Christiaan Huygens, Cosmotheoros:The Celestial Worlds Discovered—New Con-
jectures Concerning the Planetary Worlds, Their Inhabitants and Productions (London,
1698; reprinted London: F. Cass & Co., 1968), p. 359.
13. This chapter draws upon the author’s essay “Extraterrestrial Science,”
Philosophia Naturalis, vol. 21 (1984), pp. 400–24.
NOTES TO CHAPTER 17
1. The thesis “I know that p is a known fact that I don’t know” comes to:
Ki[(∃x)Kxp & ~ Kip]) (here i  oneself)
This thesis entails my knowing both (∃x)Kxp and ~Kip. But the former circumstance
entails Kip, and this engenders a contradiction.
2. In maintaining (i.e., claiming to know) p & ~Kip we claim:
Ki(p & ~Kip).
But since Kx(p & q) ⇒(Kxp & Kxq) obtains, we obtain both Kip and Ki(~Kip). But the
latter of these entails ~Kip. And so a manifest contradiction results.
3. Accordingly there is no problem about “to is a (particular) truth you don’t
know,” although I could not then go on to claim modestly that “You know everything
that I do.” For the contentions ~Kyto and (∀t)(Kit →Kyt) combine to yield ~Kito which
conflicts with the claim Kito that I stake in characterizing t o as a truth.
4. The progress of science offers innumerable illustrations of this phenomenon,
as does the process of individual maturation:
After three or thereabouts, the child begins asking himself and those around
him questions, of which the most frequently noticed are the “why” questions.
By studying what the child asks “why” about one can begin to see what kind
of answers or solutions the child expects to receive. . . . A first general obser-
vations is that the child’s whys bear witness to an intermediate precausality
between the efficient cause and the final cause. Specifically, these questions
seek reasons for phenomena which we see as fortuitous but which in the child
arouse a need for a finalist explanations. “Why are there two Mount Salèves,
a big one and a little one?” asked a six year-old boy.To which many of his con-
temporaries, when asked the same question, replied, “One for big trips and
another for small trips.” (Jean Piaget and B. Inhelder, The Psychology of the
Child, trans. by H. Weaver [New York: Basic Books, 1969], pp. 109–10)
5. Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic (1783), sect. 57; Akad.,
p. 352.
Notes to Pages 310–322
397

6. Or perhaps alternatively: always after a certain time—at every stage subse-
quent to a certain juncture.
7. Socrates dicens, se ispum dicere falsum, nihil dicit. (Prantl, Geschichte der Logik in
Abenlande [Leipzig: S. Hirzel, 1955], vol. IV, p. 139 n. 569.) It became a commonly en-
dorsed doctrine in late medieval times that paradoxical statements do not preset propo-
sitions and for this reason cannot be classed as true or false. (See E. J. Ashworth,
Language and Logic in the Post-Medieval Period (Dordrecht: Reidel, Yale University
Press, 1974), p. 115 for later endorsements of this approach.) Thus later writers dis-
missed insolubles as not being propositions at all, but “imperfect assertions” (orationes
imperfectae). (See E. J. Ashworth, Language and Logic in the Post-Medieval Period [Dor-
drecht: Reidel, 1974], p. 116.)
8. This work was published together with a famous prior (1872) lecture On the
Limits of Scientific Knowledge as Ueber Die Grenzen des Naturekennens: Die Sieben Wal-
trätsel—Zwei Vorträge (11th ed., Leipzig, 1916). The earlier lecture has appeared in
English trans. “The Limits of Our Knowledge of Nature,” Popular Scientific Monthly,
vol. 5 (1874), pp. 17–32. For Reymond cf. Ernest Cassirer, Determinism and Indetermin-
ism in Modern Physics: Historical and Systematic Studies of the Problems of Causality (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1956), part 1.
9. Bonn, 1889.Trans. by J. McCabe as The Riddle of the Universe—at the Close of the
Nineteenth Century (New York and London, 1901). On Haeckel see the article by Rollo
Handy in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (ed. by Paul Edwards), vol. III (New York, 1967).
10. Haeckel, op. cit., pp. 365–66.
11. Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers, ed. by C. Hartshorne et al., vol. VI
(Cambridge, MA, 1929), sect. 6.556.
12. Of course these questions already exist—what lies in the future is not their
existence but their presence on the agenda of active concern.
13. Some of this chapter’s themes are also treated in the author’s Limits of Science,
2nd ed. (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000). And see also Timothy
Williamson, Knowledge and Its Limits (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
NOTES TO CHAPTER 18
1. Michael Dummett, “Truth,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 59
(1958–59), p. 160.
2. C. S. Peirce, Collected Papers, ed. by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1934), vol. V, sect. 5.64–67.
3. On the other hand, there is also the fact that we can control the content and
the outcome of our dreams as little as those of conscious experience.
4. Mediations, No. VI: Philosophical Works, edited by E. S. Haldane and G. R. T.
Ross, vol. I (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1911), pp. 187–89.
398
Notes to Pages 323–338

5. An informative of philosophical issues located in this general area, see Vincent
Julian Fecher, Error, Deception, and Incomplete Truth (Rome: Officium Libri Catholici,
1975).
6. To be sure, abstract things, such as colors or numbers, will not have disposi-
tional properties. For being divisible by four is not a disposition of sixteen. Plato got the
matter right in Book VII of the Republic. In the realm of abstracta, such as those of
mathematics, there are not genuine processes—and process is a requisite of dispositions.
Of course, there may be dispositional truths in which numbers (or colors, etc.) figure
that do not issue in any dispositional properties of these numbers (or colors, etc.) them-
selves—a truth, for example, such as my predilection for odd numbers. But if a truth (or
supposed truth) does no more than to convey how someone thinks about a thing, then
it does not indicate any property of the thing itself. In any case, however, the subsequent
discussion will focus on realia in contrast to fictionalia and concreta in contrast to ab-
stracta. (Fictional things, however, can have dispositions: Sherlock Holmes was addicted
to cocaine, for example. Their difference from realia is dealt with below.)
7. This aspect of objectivity was justly stressed in the “Second Analogy” of Kant’s
Critique of Pure Reason, though his discussion rests on ideas already contemplated by
Leibniz, Philosophische Schriften, edited by C. I. Gerhardt, vol. VII, pp. 319 ff.
8. See C. I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation (La Salle, IL: Open
Court, 1962), pp. 180–81.
9. This also indicates why the dispute over mathematical realism (Platonism) has
little bearing on the issue of physical realism. Mathematical entities are akin to fictional
entities in this—that we can only say about them what we can extract by deductive means
from what we have explicitly put into their defining characterization. These abstract
entities do not have nongeneric properties since each is a “lowest species” unto itself.
10. Our position thus takes no issue with P. F. Strawson’s precept that “facts are
what statements (when true) state.” (“Truth,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Sup-
plementary Vol. 24 (1950), pp. 129–56; see p. 136.) Difficulty would ensue only if an
“only” were inserted.
11. But can any sense be made of the idea of merely possible (i.e., possible but non-
actual) languages? Of course it can! Once we have a generalized conception (or definition)
of a certain kind of thing—be it a language or a caterpillar—then we are inevitably in a po-
sition to suppose the theoretical prospect of items that meet these conditions are over and
above those that in fact do so. The prospect of supposing the existence of certain “mere”
possibilities cannot be denied—that, after all, is just what possibilities are all about.
12. Note, however, that if a Davidsonian translation argument to the effect that “if
it’s sayable at all, then, it’s sayable in our language” were to succeed—which it does not—
then the matter would stand on a very different footing. For it would then follow that
any possible language can state no more than what can be stated in our own (actual) lan-
guage. And then the realm of facts (i.e., what is (correctly) statable in some possible lan-
guage) and of that of truths (i.e., what is (correctly) statable in some actual language)
would necessarily coincide. Accordingly, our thesis that the range of facts is larger than
that of truths hinges crucially on a failure of such a translation argument. (See Donald
Notes to Pages 339–342
399

Davidson, “The Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme,” Proceedings and Addresses of the
American Philosophical Association, vol. 47 [1973–1974], pp. 5–20, and also the critique
of his position in chapter II of the author’s Empirical Inquiry [Totowa, NJ: Rowman &
Littlefield, 1982].)
13. Compare Philip Hugly and Charles Sayward, “Can a Language Have Indenu-
merably Many Expressions?” History and Philosophy of Logic, vol. 4 (1983), pp. 73–82.
14. Compare F. H. Bradley’s thesis: “Error is truth, it is partial truth, that is false
only because partial and left incomplete,” Appearance and Reality (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1893), p. 169.
15. The author’s Empirical Inquiry discusses further relevant issues.
16. One possible misunderstanding must be blocked at this point. To learn about
nature, we must interact with it. And so, to determine a feature of an object, we may
have to make some impact on it that would perturb its otherwise obtaining condition.
(The indeterminacy principle of quantum mechanics affords a well-known reminder of
this.) It should be clear that this matter of physical interaction for data-acquisition is not
contested in the ontological indifference thesis here at issue.
17. William P. Alston, “Yes, Virginia,There Is a Real World,” Proceedings and Ad-
dresses of the American Philosophical Association, 52 (1979), pp. 779–808 (see p. 779).
Compare: “[T]he world is composed of particulars [individual existing things or
processes] which have intrinsic characteristics—i.e., properties they have or relationships
they enter into with other particulars independently of how anybody characterizes, con-
ceptualizes, or conceives of them.” Frederick Suppe,“Facts and Empirical Truth,” Cana-
dian Journal of Philosophy, col. 3 (1973), pp. 197–212 (see p. 200).
18. Compare deliberations about realism with those regarding objectivity in chap-
ter 9 above. The same pragmatic rationale is at work in both contexts.
19. Kant held that we cannot experientially learn through perception about the
objectivity of outer things, because we can only recognize our perceptions as perceptions
(i.e., representations of outer things) if these outer things are supposed as such from the
first (rather than being learned or inferred). As Kant summarizes in the “Refutation of
Idealism”: “Idealism assumed that the only immediate experience is inner experience,
and that from it we can only infer outer things—and this, moreover, only in an untrust-
worthy manner. . . . But in the above proof it has been shown that outer experience is
really immediate” (Critique and Pure Reason, B276).
20. The point too is Kantian in its orientation.
21. Maimonides, The Guide for the Perplexed, I, 71, 96a.
22. For some recent discussions of scientific realism, see Wilfred Sellars, Science
Perception and Reality (London: Humanities Press, 1963); E. McKinnon, ed., The Prob-
lem of Scientific Realism (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1972); Rom Harré,
Principles of Scientific Thinking (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970); and Fred-
erick Suppe, ed., The Structure of Scientific Theories, 2nd ed. (Urbana: University of Illi-
nois Press, 1977).
400
Notes to Pages 342–363

23. Keith Lehrer, “Review of Science, Perception, and Reality by Wilfred Sellars,”
The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 63 (1966), p. 269.
24. Further discussion of some of this chapter’s themes is presented in the author’s
Limits of Science (Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000).
Notes to Pages 364–367
401

This page intentionally left blank.

403
Adams, Henry Brooks, 247, 254,
392n27, 393n41
Albert, Hans, 371n15
Almeder, Robert, 371n15, 389n12
Alston, William P., 369n1, 400n17
Amaldi, Edoardo, 388n4, 391n12
Anaximander of Miletus, 343
Archimedes, 115
Aristotle, xiii, 57, 113, 115–18, 122, 236,
327, 378n12, 381n2&7
Armstrong, D. M., 370n7
Asch, Solomon, 109, 380n9
Ashworth, E. J., 398m7
Audi, Robert, 373n6, 383n8
Austin, J. L., 373n9, 374n12
Axelrod, Robert, 380n7
Ayer, A. J., 118
Bacon, Francis, 214, 225, 371n6
Badash, Lawrence, 394n6, 395n9
Baier, Kurt, 193, 386n3
Ball, J. A., 307
Becquerel, Henri, 260, 346
Benn, Stanley I., 386n2
Bennett, Jonathan, 386n2
Benstein, Richard J., 385n1
Bernoulli, Daniel, 248
Bayle, Pierre, 371n7
Blanshard, Brand, 384n15
Bohr, Neils, 32
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 236
BonJour, Lawrence, 383n8
Bonk, Sigmund, 377n4
Bradbury, Ray, 308
Bradley, F. H., 133, 344, 400n14
Brandom, Robert, 175, 371n9&11,
385n2
Brandon, Robert N., 390n5
Brentano, Franz, 93, 118, 381n10
Bridgman, P. W., 25
Bromley, D. A., 387n2, 388n5, 393n36
Caesar, Julius, 64
Carnap, Rudolf, 24, 373n10, 379n19
Carneades, 374n16, 378n10
Carrier, L. S., 373n5
Cassirer, Ernest, 398n8
Chammah, A. M., 380n3
Cherniak, Christopher, 386n2
Chisholm, Roderick M., 93, 115, 118,
381n5, 381n10&12, 383n8
Churchland, P. M., 375n8
Churchland, P. S., 375n8
Cicero, 387n11
Comte, Auguste, 218, 326
Copernicus, 33
Craig, Edward, 369n1
Dalton, John, 32
Darwall, Stephen L., 386n2
Davidson, Donald, 68, 74, 375n5,
376n13, , 399n12, 400n12
Davis, Morton D., 380n3
De Bois-Reymond, Emil, 324, 325
Delaney, C. F., 374n18
Derrida, Jacques, 74
Descartes, René, 68, 85, 93, 117, 118,
155, 338, 386n4
Dewey, John, 25, 153
Index of Names

Dilthey, Wilhelm, 153
Dingler, Hugo, 116, 381n6
Dole, Stephen H., 300, 396n2
Doyle, A. Conan, 371n14
Dummett, Michael, 336, 398n1
Dupré, John, 391n11
Durkheim, Émile, 198
Dyson, Freeman, 395n8
Eddington, Arthur, 302, 362, 387n1,
396n5
Einstein, Albert, 280, 289, 311, 395n4
Ellis, Brian, 386n3
Epstein, Richard A., 376n3, 377n6
Euclid, 113
Evans-Prirchard, E. E., 199
Ewell, Raymond, 239, 391n17
Ewing, A. C., 381n5
Fecher, Vincent Julian, 399n5
Feyerabend, Paul K., 46, 389n16
Feynmann, Richard, 394n6
Fiebig, Hans, 389n19
Firth, Roderick, 381n10
Frankfurt, Harry G., 374n11
Galen, 156
Galileo, Galilei, 33, 286, 395n8
Garfinkel, Harold, 379n21
Gauthier, David, 380n7
George, William, 391n19
Gettier, Edmund, 3, 369n1
Gibbon, Edward, 64, 248, 392n30,
392n31
Gifford, Nancy L., 384n1
Goedel, Kurt, 319, 345
Goethe, Wolfgang von, 120
Goldman, A. I., 373n6, 383n8
Goldman, Alvin, 369n1
Gonseth, Gerdinand, 378n14
Goodman, Lenn E., 385n5
Haeckel, Ernest, 324, 325, 398n9,
398n10
Hall, Roland, 377n4
Handy, Rollo, 398n9
Hanson, Norwood R., 378n14
Hardwig, John, 380n5
Harman, Gilbert, 383n8
Harré, Rom, 400n22
Harris, J. F., 385n1
Hartshorne, Charles, 389n13
Harvey, William, 260, 346
Hawking, S. W., 394n4&6, 395n9
Hayek, F. A., 375n9
Hegel, G . F. W., 261, 344
Heidegger, Martin, 385n7
Heraclitus, 323
Hesse, Mary, 281, 395n6
Hilbert, David, 381n4
Hilpinen, Risto, 379n17
Hobbes, Thomas, 225, 389n19
Holland, John H., 390n5
Holton, Gerald, 387n2, 388n6, 393n36
Huang, Su-Shu, 396n4
Hugly, Philip, 400n12
Hume, David, 50–51, 188
Huntford, Roland, 369n1, 374n19
Husserl, Edmund, 260, 346
Huygens, Christiaan, 312, 397n12
Ilbert, Courtenay, 376n2
Inhelder, B., 397n4
James, William, xvii, 50–51, 55, 68, 153,
156, 168, 169, 174n20, 369n2, 374n14,
379n24, 385n2&3&8
Jeffrey, Eber, 394n7, 395n10
Jeffrey, Richard, 379n19
Jevons, W. Stanley, 218, 388n9
Joachim, H. H., 381n5, 384n14
Johnson, Samuel, 155
Johnson. Oliver A., 373n8
Kalven, Harry Jr., 380n12
Kant, Immanuel, 68, 180, 188, 271, 315,
321–323, 326, 350, 352, 354, 375n4,
390n3, 395n11, 397n5, 399n7, 400n19
Kapitsa, Peter, 388n7
Kaufmann, Stuart, 390n6
Kekes, John, 386n5, 387n10
Kepler, Johannes, 72, 142, 395n8
404
Index of Names

Klein, Peter, 373n6
Koyré, Alexandre, 311
Kuhn, Thomas, 224, 389n18
Kyburg, H. K. Jr., 378n17
Lalande, André, 376n3, 377n3
Lambert, J. H., 114, 381n1, 381n3
Laudan, Larry, 372n16, 385n1
Lehe, Robert Tad, 384n15
Lehrer, Keith, 43, 369n1, 372n5, 373n6,
374n13, 383n8, 401n23
Levi, Isaac, 379n18, 381n4
Levin, Michael E., 372n18
Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien, 199, 387n8
Lewis, C. I., 118, 381n9, 340, 373n10,
383n7, 399n8
Locke, John, 376n13
Lycan, W. G., 383n8
Maimonides, 400n21
Makinson, D. C., 371n4
Makridakis, S., 371n3
Malcolm, Norman, 373n10
Manktelow, K. I., 386n2
Margenau, Henry, 388n4
Margolis, Joseph, 385n1
Massey, Gerald, 395n7
Maxwell, James Clark, 57
McDowell, John, 376n13
McGill, Alan, 385n1
McTaggart, J. M. E., 319
Menard, H. W., 391n18
Mendeleev, D. I., 236
Merton. R. K., 379n1
Mill, John Stuart, 218
Mittelstrass, Juergen, 395n8
Montaigne, Michel de, 22
Moore, G. E., 11, 155, 370n9
Mortimore, G. W., 386n2
Moser, Paul K., 369n1, 386n2
Nansen, Fridtjof, xvii, 54, 369n1,
374n19
Nathanson, Stephan, 386n2
Newman, J. H., 372n2
Newton, Isaac, 33, 57, 102, 115, 214,
236, 238, 266, 280, 294
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 24, 184, 386n6
Niiniluoto, Ilkka, 372n16
Nozick, Robert, 373n6
Over, D. E., 386n2
Palmer, Scott D., 384n15
Pap, Arthur, 384n14
Pappus, 115
Pearman, J. P. T., 301, 302
Pears, David, 386n2
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 25, 52, 57, 71,
155, 218, 223, 238 , 267, 270, 272,
282, 326, 329, 335, 336–39, 347, 358,
371n15, 374n18, 374n21, 376n11,
377n5, 390n3, 392n26, 398n2&11
Petley, B. W., 390n9
Piaget, Jean, 397n4
Planck, Max, 235, 247, 392n26
Plantinga, Alvin, 369n1
Plato, 369n1, 381n8, 399n6
Poincaré, Henri, 230
Polanyi, Michael, 383n9
Pollock, John, 369n1, 383n8
Polya, George, 378n11
Popper, Karl R., 25, 281, 371n15,
372n16, 382n13, 395n5
Price, Derek J. De Solla, 389n14,
391n14, 391n15, 393n33&34
Prior, A. N., 371n4
Pritchard, H. A., 372n4
Protagoras, 335
Pruss, Alexander, 376n15
Ptolemy, 33, 57, 115, 236
Putnam, Hilary, 376n13, 385n1
Pyrro, 371n7
Quay, Paul M., 389n18
Quine, W. V. O., 68, 383n8, 388n10
Quinton, Anthony, 381n10
Rapp, Friedrich, 389n18
Rappoport, Anatol, 380n3
Ravetz, Jerome R., 380n2
Index of Names
405

Reichenbach, Hans, 24, 390n1
Rorty, Richard, 385n1, 385n1
Rosenberg, Jay, 383n8
Rougier, Louis, 376n10
Royce, Josiah, 344
Russell, Bertrand, 4, 75, 139, 372n3,
381n6
Rutherford, Ernst, 32
Sabini, John, 380n8, 380n11
Sagan, Carl, 300, 304, 313, 396n6
Sartre, Jean Paul, 163
Sayward, Charles, 400n13
Scheffler, Israel, 377n8
Schick, Frederick, 386n2
Schiller, F. S. C., 153
Schlick, Moritz, 381n6
Schroedinger, Erwin, 280, 289, 395n1
Schutz, Alfred, 379n21
Sebond, Raymond, 371n6
Sellars, Wilfred, 400n22, 401n23
Sextus, Empiricus, 22, 24, 58, 385n2
Shakespeare, William, 287, 334
Shklovskii, I. S., 304, 313, 396n6
Shope, Robert K., 369n1
Siegel, Harvey, 385n1
Silver, Maury, 380n8&11
Simon, Herbert, 378n14, 381n11, 386n2
Simpson, George Gaylord, 396n9
Smith, Adam, 109
Solovine, Maurice, 280
Sorensen, Roy A., 371n2
Sosa, Ernest, 62–63, 78, 369n1, 375n2
Sowell, Thomas, 380n6
Speigelberg, Herbert, 384n1
Spencer, Herbert, 234, 235, 390n4
Spinoza, Baruch, 115, 280, 344
Stent, Gunther S., 217, 388n7, 394n6
Stephen, James, 83
Stough, Charlotte L., 378n10
Strawson, P. F., 399n10
Suppe, Frederick, 400n17
Sylvan, Richard, 371n9
Themistius, 356
Thyssen, Johannes, 384n1
Tuomela, Raimo, 380n7
Twain, Mark, 75
Ulam, Stanislaw M., 392n25
Ullian, Joseph, 383n8
Unger, Peter, 24–25, 373n6, 375n22,
384n1
Van Fraassen, Bas, 25
Visher, S. S., 391n13
Wallon, Douglas N., 377n4
Weinberg, Steven, 391n12
Weinberg, Alvin M., 240
Weizsaecker, C. F. von, 391n12
Whately, Richard, 85, 377n7
White, A. R., 381n7
Whitehead, A. N., 68
Wigner, Eugene P., 280, 388n4, 395n2
Williamson, Timothy, 398n13
Winch, Peter, 198, 385n4, 387n7
Winkley, R. G., 371n3
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 25, 51
Zagzebski, Linda Trinkhaus, 369n1
Zeisel, Hans, 380n12
406
Index of Names

