
Logic
A CONCISE INTRODUCTION TO
T W E L F T H  E D I T I O N
PATRICK J. HURLEY
University of San Diego
Australia • Brazil • Mexico • Singapore • United Kingdom • United States

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial 
review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right to 
remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by
ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.

© 2015, 2012, 2008, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright 
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by 
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited 
to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web distribution, 
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except 
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013937903
ISBN-13: 978-1-285-19654-1
ISBN-10: 1-285-19654-6
Cengage Learning 
200 First Stamford Place, 4th Floor 
Stamford, CT 06902 
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with 
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, 
Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. Locate your local office at  
international.cengage.com/region.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit 
www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store 
or at our preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Instructors: Please visit login.cengage.com and log in to access instructor-
specific resources.
A Concise Introduction to Logic,  
Twelfth Edition
Patrick J. Hurley
Product Director: Suzanne Jeans
Product Manager: Debra Matteson 
Content Developer: Florence Kilgo
Content Coordinator: Joshua Duncan
Media Developer: Christian Biagetti
Marketing Manager: Shanna Shelton
Content Project Manager: Jill Quinn
Art Director: PreMedia Global
Manufacturing Planner: Sandee Milewski
Rights Acquisition Specialist: Shalice  
  Shah-Caldwell
Production Service: Greg Hubit Bookworks 
Copy Editor: Marne Evans
Proofreader: Debra Nichols
Text and Cover Designer: PreMedia Global
Cover Image: © fzd.it/Shutterstock
Compositor: MPS Limited
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 17 16 15 14 13
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706.
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions. 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to  
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
WCN: 02-200-203

It is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone, 
to believe anything upon insufficient evidence.
–W. K. Clifford
Nothing can be more important than the art of 
formal reasoning according to true logic.
–Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
To: All of the students past and present, 
who have learned logic from this book.

Brief Contents
iv
Brief Contents
	 Part I	
INFORMAL LOGIC
	
1	 Basic Concepts 
1
	
2	 Language: Meaning and Definition 
80
	
3	 Informal Fallacies 
122
	 Part II	
FORMAL LOGIC
	
4	 Categorical Propositions 
200
	
5	 Categorical Syllogisms 
264
	
6	 Propositional Logic 
316
	
7	 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic 
388
	
8	 Predicate Logic 
454
	 Part I1i	 INDUCTIVE LOGIC
	
9	 Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning 
524
	
10	 Causality and Mill’s Methods 
544
	
11	 Probability 
569
	
12	 Statistical Reasoning 
587
	
13	 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning 
609
	
14	 Science and Superstition 
632
Answers to Selected Exercises  661
Glossary/Index  705

Contents
Contents
Preface   xi
Part I		
INFORMAL LOGIC
	
1	
Basic Concepts 
1
	
1.1	
Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions  1
	 Exercise 1.1   7
	
1.2	
Recognizing Arguments  14
	 Exercise 1.2   25
	
1.3	
Deduction and Induction  33
	 Exercise 1.3   40
	
1.4	
Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency  44
	 Exercise 1.4   55
	
1.5	
Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity  59
	 Exercise 1.5   64
	
1.6	
Extended Arguments  66
	 Exercise 1.6   71
	
2	
Language: Meaning and Definition 
80
	
2.1	
Varieties of Meaning  80
	 Exercise 2.1   85
	
2.2	
The Intension and Extension of Terms  91
	 Exercise 2.2   94
	
2.3	
Definitions and Their Purposes  96
	 Exercise 2.3   102 
v

vi   CONTENTS
	
2.4	
Definitional Techniques  104
	 Exercise 2.4   111
	
2.5	
Criteria for Lexical Definitions  114
	 Exercise 2.5   118
	
3	
Informal Fallacies 
122
	
3.1	
Fallacies in General  122
	 Exercise 3.1   124
	
3.2	
Fallacies of Relevance  125
	 Exercise 3.2   138
	
3.3	
Fallacies of Weak Induction  143
	 Exercise 3.3   154
	
3.4	
Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity,  
and Illicit Transference  160
	 Exercise 3.4   174
	
3.5	
Fallacies in Ordinary Language  182
	 Exercise 3.5   188
Part ii	 FORMAL LOGIC
	
4	
Categorical Propositions 
200
	
4.1	
The Components of Categorical Propositions  200
	 Exercise 4.1   203
	
4.2	
Quality, Quantity, and Distribution  203
	 Exercise 4.2   208
	
4.3	
Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition  209
	 Exercise 4.3   219
	
4.4	
Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition  221
	 Exercise 4.4   229
	
4.5	
The Traditional Square of Opposition  231
	 Exercise 4.5   238
	
4.6	
Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint  243
	 Exercise 4.6   249

CONTENTS   vii
	
4.7	
Translating Ordinary Language Statements into  
Categorical Form  251
	 Exercise 4.7   258
	
5	
Categorical Syllogisms 
264
	
5.1	
Standard Form, Mood, and Figure  264
	 Exercise 5.1   269
	
5.2	
Venn Diagrams  272
	 Exercise 5.2   282
	
5.3	
Rules and Fallacies  285
	 Exercise 5.3   292
	
5.4	
Reducing the Number of Terms  294
	 Exercise 5.4   296
	
5.5	
Ordinary Language Arguments  297
	 Exercise 5.5   300
	
5.6	
Enthymemes  301
	 Exercise 5.6   303
	
5.7	
Sorites  307
	 Exercise 5.7   310
	
6	
Propositional Logic 
316
	
6.1	
Symbols and Translation  316
	 Exercise 6.1   326
	
6.2	
Truth Functions  330
	 Exercise 6.2   339
	
6.3	
Truth Tables for Propositions  342
	 Exercise 6.3   348
	
6.4	
Truth Tables for Arguments  351
	 Exercise 6.4   354
	
6.5	
Indirect Truth Tables  358
	 Exercise 6.5   365
	
6.6	
Argument Forms and Fallacies  367
	 Exercise 6.6   379

viii   CONTENTS
	
7	
Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic 
388
	
7.1	
Rules of Implication I  388
	 Exercise 7.1   396
	
7.2	
Rules of Implication II  401
	 Exercise 7.2   406
	
7.3	
Rules of Replacement I  411
	 Exercise 7.3   417
	
7.4	
Rules of Replacement II  424
	 Exercise 7.4   429
	
7.5	
Conditional Proof  437
	 Exercise 7.5   441
	
7.6	
Indirect Proof  443
	 Exercise 7.6   447
	
7.7	
Proving Logical Truths  449
	 Exercise 7.7   451
	
8	
Predicate Logic 
454
	
8.1	
Symbols and Translation  454
	 Exercise 8.1   461
	
8.2	
Using the Rules of Inference  464
	 Exercise 8.2   473
	
8.3	
Quantifier Negation Rule  477
	 Exercise 8.3   480
	
8.4	
Conditional and Indirect Proof  482
	 Exercise 8.4   486
	
8.5	
Proving Invalidity  489
	 Exercise 8.5   494
	
8.6	
Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantifiers  496
	 Exercise 8.6   504
	
8.7	
Identity  507
	 Exercise 8.7   516

CONTENTS   ix
Part iiI	 INDUCTIVE LOGIC
	
9	
Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning 
524
	
9.1	
Analogical Reasoning  524
	
9.2	
Legal Reasoning  527
	
9.3	
Moral Reasoning  531
	 Exercise 9   535
	
10	
Causality and Mill’s Methods 
544
	
10.1	
“Cause” and Necessary and Sufficient Conditions  544
	
10.2	
Mill’s Five Methods  546
	
10.3	
Mill’s Methods and Science  556
	 Exercise 10   561
	
11	
Probability 
569
	
11.1	
Theories of Probability  569
	
11.2	
The Probability Calculus  573
	 Exercise 11   583
	
12	
Statistical Reasoning 
587
	
12.1	
Evaluating Statistics  587
	
12.2	
Samples  588
	
12.3	
The Meaning of “Average”  592
	
12.4	
Dispersion  594
	
12.5	
Graphs and Pictograms  599
	
12.6	
Percentages  602
	 Exercise 12   603
	
13	
Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning 
609
	
13.1	
The Hypothetical Method  609
	
13.2	
Hypothetical Reasoning: Four Examples from Science  612

x   CONTENTS
	
13.3	
The Proof of Hypotheses  618
	
13.4	
The Tentative Acceptance of Hypotheses  621
	 Exercise 13   624
	
14	
Science and Superstition 
632
	
14.1	
Distinguishing Between Science and Superstition  632
	
14.2	
Evidentiary Support  633
	
14.3	
Objectivity  638
	
14.4	
Integrity  643
	
14.5	
Concluding Remarks  647
	 Exercise 14   649
Answers to Selected Exercises  661
Glossary/Index  705

xi
The most immediate benefit derived from the study of logic is the skill 
needed to construct sound arguments of one’s own and to evaluate the 
arguments of others. In accomplishing this goal, logic instills a sensitivity 
for the formal component in language, a thorough command of which 
is indispensable to clear, effective, and meaningful communication. On 
a broader scale, by focusing attention on the requirement for reasons 
or evidence to support our views, logic provides a fundamental defense 
against the prejudiced and uncivilized attitudes that threaten the founda-
tions of our democratic society. Finally, through its attention to inconsis-
tency as a fatal flaw in any theory or point of view, logic proves a useful 
device in disclosing ill-conceived policies in the political sphere and,  
ultimately, in distinguishing the rational from the irrational, the sane from 
the insane. This book is written with the aim of securing these benefits.
About A Concise Introduction to Logic
The new edition of A Concise Introduction to Logic maintains the text’s tradition of careful 
sequencing, precision, elegance, and clarity, by retaining a number of signature features:
	 Chapters are organized so that earlier sections provide the foundation for later ones. 
Later sections can be skipped by instructors opting to do so.
	 The main points are always presented up front so students cannot possibly 
miss them.
	 Relevant and up-to-date examples are used extensively.
	 Key terms are introduced in boldface type and defined in the Glossary/Index.
	 Central concepts are illustrated in graphic boxes.
	 Numerous exercises, many drawn from real-life sources such as newspapers, text-
books, and magazines, are included to perfect student skills—the current edition 
includes nearly 2,700 exercises.
	 Biographical vignettes of prominent logicians are included to give logic a  
human face.
	 Dialogue exercises illustrate the application of logical principles to real-life 
situations.
Preface
Logic: The key to all learning

xii   Preface
	 Venn diagrams for syllogisms are presented in a novel and more effective way, using 
color to identify the relevant areas.
	 End-of-chapter summaries facilitate student review.
	 Every third exercise is answered in the back of the book so students can check  
their work.
	 Important rules and tables are printed on the inside covers for ready access, and, in 
the current edition, they are also presented on a tear-out card.
New to This Edition
New Digital Solutions for Students and Instructors
Important to this revision is the introduction of several inte-
grated digital products and platforms created to satisfy the diverse needs of today’s stu-
dents and instructors. The hub of the wheel, so to speak, is MindTap™, a personalized, 
fully online digital learning platform that offers an interactive eBook, a tutorial program, 
and homework all in one place. Specifically, MindTap includes the MindTap Reader™  
(the interactive eBook), Learning Logic (the tutorial program), Aplia™ (which provides 
robust homework assignments), and video lectures (devoted to conceptually difficult 
topics. For more details about this new digital solution, see the Note to the Student, Note 
to the Instructor, and Versions and Platforms sections later in this preface.
On our new Instructor Companion Site, instructors will find all the tools they need 
to teach a rich and successful introductory logic course. The protected teaching  
materials include an Instructor’s Manual, which contains answers to all textbook  
exercises; Lecture Slides, in Microsoft® PowerPoint®, customizable to fit your particular 
needs; and a set of image slides that contain all of the photos and art from the text. Also 
included is the author-created 600-page Test Bank. The multiple-choice tests, which 
are machine-gradable, can be a great time-saver. The tests in the Test Bank match the 
Practice Tests available to the students in MindTap in length and format. New to this 
edition, this Test Bank will be delivered via Cognero™, an online testing system that 
allows you to author, edit, and manage Test-Bank content. You can create multiple 
test versions and instantly deliver them through your Learning Management System 
(LMS) from your classroom, or wherever you may be, with no special installations or  
downloads required.
New Features
	 Section-Opening “Previews” induce students to start thinking about the material 
that follows by connecting the section content to real-life scenarios pertinent to 
students’ lives. Instructors can use these new previews as discussion starters either 
in class or online, via MindTap.

	 The Guide to Important Rules and Argument Forms is presented both as a tear-out  
card and printed on the inside covers for ready access. That way, if the tear-out card 
is removed and later misplaced, the rules and argument forms are still available on 
the inside covers.
New Chapter Content
As you proceed through the book, you will encounter numerous less-visible improve-
ments. Instructors familiar with the text will be most interested in the following revisions:
	 Further explanation of the Aristotelian/Boolean distinction is provided in a sepa-
rately published paper entitled “Existential Import: Historical Background.” This 
paper is available on MindTap and the Instructor Companion Site.
	 More treatment is given to argument forms/statement forms and their substitution 
instances.
	 Three new dialogues replace the older dialogues in Chapter 3. All of the dialogues, 
including the new ones, were edited by an expert in creative writing.
	 The treatment of ad populum is expanded to include a presentation of appeal to 
fear and appeal to tradition.
	 Expanded treatment is given to the suppressed evidence fallacy.
	 The idea of vacuous truth is introduced and explained in Chapter 4.
	 Many new exercises are added to Chapters 4 and 8.
	 Cues are given in Chapter 6 for producing well-formed formulas.
English examples are given for the first eight rules of inference.
	 Further instruction, focusing on the main operator of the conclusion, is provided 
for deriving proofs.
	 “Change of quantifier rule” is changed to “quantifier negation rule.”
	 Further treatment is given to the subjectivist (epistemic) theory of probability 
(Chapter 11).
	 Hypothetical reasoning in science is more clearly distinguished from hypothetical 
reasoning in ordinary life (Chapter 13).
	 The distinction between scientific evidence and religious evidence is approached 
differently; cures in traditional Eastern medicine are mentioned in connection with 
placebos (Chapter 14).
	 The problem of scientists faking evidence is explored (Chapter 14).
	 A complete list of improvements is given in the Instructor’s Manual.
Preface   xiii

Note to the Student
Imagine that you are interviewing for a job. The person across the desk asks about 
your strengths, and you reply that you are energetic, enthusiastic, and willing to work 
long hours. Also, you are creative and innovative, and you have good leadership skills. 
Then the interviewer asks about your weaknesses. You hadn’t anticipated this ques-
tion, but after a moment’s thought you reply that your reasoning skills have never been  
very good.
The interviewer quickly responds that this weakness could create big problems.
“Why is that?” you ask.
“Because reasoning skills are essential to good judgment. And without good judgment 
your creativity will lead to projects that make no sense. Your leadership skills will  
direct our other employees in circles. Your enthusiasm will undermine everything we have  
accomplished up until now. And your working long hours will make things even worse.”
“But don’t you think there is some position in your company that is right for me?” you ask.
The interviewer thinks for a moment and then replies, “We have a competitor on the 
other side of town. I hear they are hiring right now. Why don’t you apply with them?”
The point of this brief dialogue is that good reasoning skills are essential to doing any-
thing right. The business person uses reasoning skills in writing a report or preparing 
a presentation; the scientist uses them in designing an experiment or clinical trial, the 
department manager uses them in maximizing worker efficiency, the lawyer uses them 
in composing an argument to a judge or jury. And that’s where logic comes in. The 
chief purpose of logic is to develop good reasoning skills. In fact, logic is so important 
that when the liberal arts program of studies was formulated fifteen hundred years ago, 
logic was selected as one of the original seven liberal arts. Logic remains to this day a 
central component of a college or university education.
From a more pragmatic angle, logic is important to earning a good score on any of 
the several tests required for admission to graduate professional schools—the LSAT, 
GMAT, MCAT, GRE, and so on. Obviously, the designers of these tests recognize that 
the ability to reason logically is a prerequisite to success in these fields. Also, logic is a 
useful tool in relieving what has come to be called math anxiety. For whatever reason, 
countless students today are terrified of any form of reasoning that involves abstract 
symbols. If you happen to be one of these students, you should find it relatively easy to 
master the use of logical symbols, and your newly found comfort with these symbols 
will carry over into the other, more difficult fields.
Before commencing your study of logic, be sure to check out MindTap (www.cengage 
.com/mindtap). This highly robust Internet platform supports all of the supplements 
that accompany your textbook. It has the advantage of being able to play on any Internet- 
enabled device including desktops, laptops, and mobile devices, which allows you 
to learn anywhere, at any time, and on your terms. Some of the products offered on 
xiv   Preface

Preface   xv
MindTap are Learning Logic, a set of video lectures that presents challenging subjects 
in logic, an eBook (MindTap Reader) containing everything in the textbook, and prac-
tice tests for every chapter. Also available is a supplement called Logic and Graduate-
Level Admission Tests, which shows how the principles you will learn in studying logic 
can be used to answer questions on the LSAT, GMAT, MCAT, and GRE.
Among the MindTap offerings that I would especially urge you to investigate is Learn-
ing Logic. This is an interactive tutorial program that virtually teaches the entire course 
in a very user-friendly way. It tracks the textbook chapter by chapter, but your com-
puter must be equipped with speakers or headphones, because the audio component  
is essential.
Because proficiency in logic involves developing a skill, it helps to work through the 
practice problems in Learning Logic and the exercises in the textbook more than once. 
This will help you see that good reasoning (and bad reasoning, too) follows certain 
patterns whose identification is crucial to success in logic. As you progress, I think you 
will find that learning logic can be lots of fun, and working with the online resources 
of MindTap should enhance your overall learning experience.
Note to the Instructor
The image on the front cover is intended to convey the message that logic is the key 
to all learning. Hopefully, by the end of their course, your students will be persuaded 
that this claim is true. To promote the achievement of this goal, the new edition fea-
tures “previews,” at the beginning of chapter sections, that are designed to engage the  
students’ interest, promote prior learning, and induce them to read the section that fol-
lows. The instructor can also use these previews as springboards for in-class lectures. 
While the inclusion of these previews is probably the most visible change in the new 
edition, as you proceed through the book you will encounter numerous less visible im-
provements. Many of them are listed above in “New Chapter Content,” and a complete 
list is given in the Instructor’s Manual.
As I mentioned above, a central feature of this revision is the introduction of MindTap, 
a personalized, fully online digital learning platform that offers an interactive eBook, a 
tutorial program, and homework all in one place. See the “Digital Packaging Options” 
section below for help in deciding which ISBN to select for your course based on the 
digital assets you want your students to access.
One of the more noteworthy offerings on MindTap is Learning Logic. This tutorial 
program virtually teaches the course, and it is especially helpful for students who have 
difficulty mastering logical principles directly from the textbook or from classroom 
lectures alone. The program is multimedia, which means that students learn not only 
by seeing but also by hearing. In addition, it incorporates easy-to-use forward and  
reverse buttons, so students who have failed to understand something the first time 
can easily go back to hear the lesson repeated. Learning Logic contains over two  
thousand practice problems not contained in the textbook, and students get  
immediate feedback for correct and incorrect answers.

xvi   Preface
Another great product available on MindTap is Aplia, an online homework program 
that improves student comprehension by increasing effort and engagement. Students 
get immediate feedback on their work—not only what they got right or wrong—but 
why; and they can choose to see another set of related problems if they want further 
practice. Aplia’s simple-to-use course management interface allows instructors to post 
announcements, host student discussions, e-mail students, and manage the grade 
book. Personalized help is available from a knowledgeable and friendly support team. 
To learn more, ask your Cengage Learning sales representative for a demonstration, or 
view a specific demonstration for this book at www.aplia.com.
Also note that the Instructor’s Companion Website contains the Instructor’s Manual and 
the Test Bank. The Instructor’s Manual includes answers to all the book’s exercises and 
a complete list of the improvements introduced in this edition. The author-generated  
Test Bank includes numerous tests for each chapter in the book.
Let me now turn to alternate ways of approaching the textbook. In general, the mate-
rial in each chapter is arranged so that certain later sections can be skipped without 
affecting subsequent chapters. For example, those wishing a brief treatment of natural 
deduction in both propositional and predicate logic may want to skip the last three 
sections of Chapter 7 and the last four (or even five) sections of Chapter 8. Chapter 2 
can be skipped altogether, although some may want to cover the first section of that 
chapter as an introduction to Chapter 3. Finally, Chapters 9 through 14 depend only 
slightly on earlier chapters, so these can be treated in any order one chooses. However, 
Chapter 14 does depend in part on Chapter 13.
Type of Course
Traditional 
logic course
Informal logic 
course, critical- 
reasoning course
Course emphasizing 
modern formal logic
Recommended 
material
Chapter 1
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Secions 7.1–7.4
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Sections 5.1–5.3
Sections 5.5–5.6
Sections 6.1–6.4
Section 6.6
Chapter 9
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Critical Thinking and 
Writing Supplement
Chapter 1
Sections 4.1–4.3
Section 4.7
Sections 6.1–6.5
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Truth Trees Supplement
Optional 
material
Chapter 2
Sections 7.5–7.7
Chapters 9–14
Section 5.4
Section 5.7
Section 6.5
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 3
Sections 4.4–4.6
Sections 5.1–5.2
Section 5.7
Section 6.6

Preface   xvii
Digital Options
A Concise Introduction to Logic is available in multiple formats, including as a printed 
textbook that can be bought alone [ISBN: 9781285196541], and it can be combined 
with digital solutions in a variety of ways, including the following:
1.  Textbook + MindTap [ISBN: 9781305121768]. Includes, in addition to the printed text-
book, access to the MindTap course, with Learning Logic (the tutorial), Aplia quizzing assignments, 
Videos (covering difficult-to-master topics in logic), chapter learning path activities, quizzing, Truth 
Trees, Critical Thinking and Writing, and the full-text interactive eBook (MindTap Reader).
2.  Textbook + Aplia [ISBN: 9781285992273]. Includes, in addition to the printed textbook, 
access to the Aplia course (with automatically graded assignments featuring detailed, immediate 
feedback on every question), the course management interface (which allows instructors to post 
announcements, upload course materials, host student discussions, e-mail students, and manage the 
grade book), and the full-text interactive eBook (MindTap Reader).
3.  MindTap (alone) [ISBN: 9781285427355]. Available with the interactive eBook (MindTap 
Reader), this option includes everything in Option 1 except the printed textbook. Available only at 
www.cengagebrain.com, this option can be a cost-saving choice for students.
4.  Aplia (alone) [ISBN: 9781285427577]. Available with the interactive eBook (MindTap 
Reader), this option includes everything in Option 2 except the printed textbook. Available only at 
www.cengagebrain.com, this option can be a cost-saving choice for students.
5.  Instructor Companion Site [ISBN: 9781305072855]. This password-protect website for 
instructors features all of the Instructor’s Manual, Lecture Slides, and Test Bank delivered via Cognero.  
Access all of your instructor resources by logging into your account at www.cengage.com/login.
6.  Custom Options. Cengage Learning offers custom solutions for your course—whether it’s 
making a small modification to A Concise Introduction to Logic to match your syllabus or combining 
multiple sources to create something truly unique. You can also pair your custom text with our 
digital solutions such as MindTap and Aplia. For more information, visit www.cengage.com/custom.
7.  CengageBrain. Let this be your students’ online source for an à la carte offering of all of the 
products they need for a successful logic course. Visit www.cengagebrain.com.
Contact your personal Learning Consultant, sites.cengage.com/RepFinder/, for more 
information about all available options, pricing, and assistance in selecting the best 
solutions for your students and your course.
Acknowledgments
For their reviews and suggestions leading to this twelfth edition I want to thank the 
following: 
Ida Baltikauskas, Century College; Peter Barry, Saginaw Valley State University; Jeff Broome, Arapahoe 
Community College; Loren Cannon, Humboldt State University; Darryl Cohen, Mesa Community 
College; Michael Coledu, Reedley College; Louis Colombo, Bethune-Cookman University; Jack Crumley, 
University of San Diego; Drew Dalton, Florida Southern College; Ray Darr, Southern Illinois University; 
Jeffrey Easlick, Saginaw Valley State University; William Ferraiolo, San Joaquin Delta College; Albert 
Filice, Mesa Community College; Paul Gass, Coppin State University; Dimitria Gatzia, The University 
of Akron Wayne College; Alexander Hall, Clayton State University; Ryan Hickerson, Western 
Oregon University; Jeremy Hovda, Minneapolis Community & Technical College; Debby Hutchins,  

xviii   Preface
Gonzaga University; Ron Jackson, Clayton State University; William Jamison, University of Alaska 
Anchorage; Richard A. Jones, Howard University; Patrick Kenny, Onondaga Community College; 
Kristin Klamm-Doneen, Anoka Ramsey Community College; Stephen Leach, UTPA; Chris Lorkowski, 
Kent State University–Trumbull Campus; Ian MacKinnon, The University of Akron; Leemon McHenry, 
California State University Northridge; Daniel Metz, Metropolitan State College of Denver; Alexander 
Miller, Piedmont Technical College; Nathaniel Nicol, Washington State University; Tim O’Neill, 
Rochester Community and Technical College; Stephen Pacheco, University of San Diego; Joseph 
Pak, Los Angeles City College; Christopher Pallotti, Los Angeles Valley College/CSUN; Christopher 
Pearson, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville; Fernando Rincon-Tellez, Piedmont Technical 
College; Matthew Roberts, Patrick Henry College; Michael Rooney, Pasadena City College; Candice 
Shelby, University of Colorado Denver; Robert Skipper, St. Mary’s University; Matthew Slater, Bucknell 
University; Kent Slinker, Pima Community College; Paul Studtmann, Davidson College; Weimin Sun, 
California State University, Northridge; Corine Sutherland, Cerritos College; Robert Sutton, Cape 
Fear Community College; Mojgan Taheri, California State University, Northridge; J. Ramon Tello, Shasta 
College; Mark Thames, El Centro College; Michael Thune, Joliet Junior College; William Vanderburgh, 
Wichita State University; Michael Ventimiglia, Sacred Heart University; Susan Vineberg, Wayne State 
University; Mark Vopat, Youngstown State University; Dennis Weiss, York College of Pennsylvania; 
Derrick Willis, Temple College; Sandra Woien, Mesa Community College; Julie Yoo, California State 
University, Northridge; Xiaoyu Zhu, Antelope Valley College.
Of course any errors or omissions that may remain are the result of my own oversight.
Those who have contributed reviews and suggestions leading to the eleven previous 
editions, and to whom I express my continued thanks, are the following: 
James T. Anderson, University of San Diego; Carol Anthony, Villanova University; Joseph Asike, Howard 
University; Harriet E. Baber, University of San Diego; Kent Baldner, Western Michigan University; James 
Baley, Mary Washington College; Jerome Balmuth, Colgate University; Victor Balowitz, State University 
of New York, College at Buffalo; Ida Baltikauskas, Century College; Gary Baran, Los Angeles City 
College; Robert Barnard, University of Mississippi; Gregory Bassham, Kings College; Thora Bayer, 
Xavier University of Louisiana; David Behan, Agnes Scott College; John Bender, Ohio University, 
Athens; James O. Bennett, University of Tennessee, Knoxville; Victoria Berdon, IUPU Columbus; 
Robert Berman, Xavier University of Louisana; Kevin Berry, Ohio University; Joseph Bessie, Normandale 
Community College; John R. Bosworth, Oklahoma State University; Andrew Botterell, University of 
Toronto; Tom Browder, University of Nevada, Las Vegas; Harold Brown, Northern Illinois University; 
Kevin Browne, Indiana University Southeast; Ken Buckman, University of Texas, Pan American; Robert 
Burch, Texas A&M University; Keith Burgess-Jackson, University of Texas, Arlington; Michael Byron, 
Kent State University; Scott Calef, Ohio Wesleyan University; Gabriel Camacho, El Paso Community 
College; James Campbell, University of Toledo; Loren Cannon, Humboldt State University; Charles Carr, 
Arkansas State University; William Carroll, Coppin State University; Jennifer Caseldine-Bracht, IUPU 
Fort Wayne; John Casey, Northern Illinois University; Robert Greg Cavin, Cypress College; Ping-Tung 
Chang, University of Alaska; Prakash Chenjeri, Southern Oregon University; Drew Christie, University 
of New Hampshire; Timothy Christion, University of North Texas; Ralph W. Clarke, West Virginia 
University; David Clowney, Rowan University; Michael Cole, College of William and Mary; Michael J. 
Colson, Merced College; William F. Cooper, Baylor University; William Cornwell, Salem State College; 
Victor Cosculluela, Polk Community College; Mike Coste, Front Range Community College; Ronald 
R. Cox, San Antonio College; Houston A. Craighead, Winthrop University; Donald Cress, Northern 
Illinois University, DeKalb; Jack Crumley, University of San Diego; Linda Damico, Kennesaw State 

Preface   xix
University; William J. DeAngelis, Northeastern University; Joseph DeMarco, Cleveland State 
University; Paul DeVries, Wheaton College; Jill Dieterle, Eastern Michigan University; Mary Domski, 
University of New Mexico; Beverly R. Doss and Richard W. Doss, Orange Coast College; Paul Draper, 
Purdue University; William A. Drumin, King’s College, Pennsylvania; Clinton Dunagan, Saint Philips 
College; Paul Eckstein, Bergen Community College; Anne M. Edwards, Austin Peay State University; 
Michael Epperson, California State University, Sacramento; Lenore Erickson, Cuesta College; 
Cassandra Evans, San Diego City College; Frank Fair, Sam Houston State University; Evan Fales, 
University of Iowa; Thompson Faller, University of Portland; Lewis S. Ford, Old Dominion University; 
Gary Foulk, Indiana State University, Terre Haute; Timothy C. Fout, University of Louisville; LeAnn 
Fowler, Slippery Rock University; Craig Fox, California University of Pennsylvania; Thomas H. Franks, 
Eastern Michigan University; Bernard D. Freydberg, Slippery Rock University; Thomas J. Frost, Biola 
University/Long Beach City College; Dick Gaffney, Siena College; George Gale, University of 
Missouri–Kansas City; Pieranna Garavaso, University of Minnesota at Morris; Paul Gass, Coppin 
State University; Joseph Georges, El Camino College; Kevin Gibson, University of Colorado; James 
Granitto, Santiago Canyon College; Victor Grassian, Los Angeles Harbor College; Catherine Green, 
Rockhurst University; James Greene, Northern Michigan University; Harold Greenstein, SUNY 
Brockport; J. Randall Groves, Ferris State University; Shahrokh Haghighi, California State University; 
Alexander W. Hall, Clayton State University; Dean Hamden, Montclair State University; Courtney 
Hammond, Cuyamaca College; Ken Hanly, Brandon University; Anthony Hanson, West Valley College; 
Merle Harton, Edward Waters College; Larry Hauser, Alma College; Deborah Heikes, University of 
Alabama in Huntsville; Ronald Hill, University of San Diego; Lawrence Hinman, University of San 
Diego; Lynn Holt, Mississippi State University; John B. Howell, III, Southwestern Baptist Theological 
Seminary; R. I. G. Hughes, University of South Carolina, Columbia; Peter Hutcheson, Texas State 
University; Debby D. Hutchins, Boston College; William H. Hyde, Golden West College; Ron Jackson, 
Clayton State University; William Jamison, University of Alaska Anchorage; Sandra Johanson, Green 
River Community College; Gary Jones, University of San Diego; Richard Jones, Howard University; 
Russel Jones, University of Oklahoma; Glenn C. Joy, Texas State University, San Marcos; Olin Joynton, 
North Harris County College; Grant Julin, St. Francis University; Joseph Keim Campbell, Washington 
State University; Glen Kessler, University of Virginia; Charles F. Kielkopf, Ohio State University; Moya 
Kinchla, Bakersfield College; Bernard W. Kobes, Arizona State University; Keith W. Krasemann, 
College of DuPage; Richard La Croix, State University College at Buffalo; Sandra LaFave, West Valley 
College, Saratoga, California; William Lawhead, University of Mississippi; Stephen Leach, UTPA; 
Richard Lee, University of Arkansas; Lory Lemke, University of Minnesota, Morris; Robert Levis, 
Pasadena City College; Chenyang Li, Monmouth College, Monmouth, Illinois; Chris M. Lorkowski, 
Kent State University; Keane Lundt, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts; Ardon Lyon, City 
University of London; Scott MacDonald, University of Iowa; Ian MacKinnon, The University of Akron; 
Krishna Mallick, Salem State College; Thomas Manig, University of Missouri–Columbia; James Manns, 
University of Kentucky; Dalman Mayer, Bellevue Community College; Larry D. Mayhew, Western 
Kentucky University; Leemon McHenry, California State University, Northridge; Robert McKay, 
Norwich University; Rick McKita, Colorado State University; Phillip McReynolds, Pennsylvania State 
University; Erik Meade, Southern Illinois University–Edwardsville; Noel Merino, Humboldt State 
University; Kenneth R. Merrill, University of Oklahoma; Thomas Michaud, Wheeling Jesuit College; 
Dolores Miller, University of Missouri–Kansas City; George D. Miller, DePaul University; Richard 
Miller, East Carolina University; Frederick Mills, Bowie State University; Jeff Mitchell, Arkansas Tech 
University; John Mize, Long Beach City College; Allyson Mount, Keene State College; Seyed 
Mousavian, University of Alberta; Dwayne Mulder, California State University, Fresno; John D. Mullen, 
Dowling College; Madeline Muntersbjorn, University of Toledo; Henry Nardone, Kings College; 

xx   Preface
Theresa Norman, South Texas Community College; David O’Connor, Seton Hall University; Len 
Olsen, Georgia Southern University; Elane O’Rourke, Moorpark College; Brendan O’Sullivan, 
Rhodes College; Stephen Pacheco, University of San Diego; Rodney Peffer, University of San Diego; 
Linda Peterson, University of San Diego; Robert G. Pielke, El Camino College; Cassandra Pinnick, 
Western Kentucky University; Nelson Pole, Cleveland State University; Norman Prigge, Bakersfield 
State University; Gray Prince, West Los Angeles College; R. Puligandla, University of Toledo; T. R. 
Quigley, Oakland University; Nani Rankin, Indiana University at Kokomo; Robert Redmon, Virginia 
Commonwealth University; Bruce Reichenbach, Augsburg College; Herminia Reyes, San Diego State 
University; David Ring, Southern Methodist University; Tony Roark, Boise State University; Michael 
Rooney, Pasadena City College; Phyllis Rooney, Oakland University; Beth Rosdatter, University of 
Kentucky; Michelle M. Rotert, Rock Valley College; Paul A. Roth, University of Missouri–Saint Louis; 
Daniel Rothbart, George Mason University; Robert Rupert, University of Colorado, Boulder; Sam 
Russo, El Camino College; Frank Ryan, Kent State University; Eric Saidel, George Washington 
University; Kelly Salsbery, Stephen F. Austin State University; Paul Santelli, Siena College; Stephen 
Satris, Clemson University; Phil Schneider, Coastal Carolina University; Philip Schneider, George 
Mason University; James D. Schumaker, University of North Carolina at Charlotte; Stephanie Semler, 
Radford University; Pat Sewell, University of North Texas; Elizabeth Shadish, El Camino College; 
Joseph G. Shay, Boston College; Janet Simpson, Suffolk County Community College; Aeon Skoble, 
Bridgewater State College; Dennis L. Slivinski, California State University, Channel Islands; Arnold 
Smith, Youngstown State University; John-Christian Smith, Youngstown State University; Joshua Smith, 
Central Michigan University; Paula Smithka, University of Southern Mississippi; Eric W. Snider, 
University of Toledo; Bob Snyder, Humboldt University; Joseph Snyder, Anne Arundel Community 
College; Lynne Spellman, University of Arkansas; David Stern, University of Iowa; James Stuart, Bowling 
Green State University; Paul Studtmann, Davidson College; Krys Sulewski, Edmonds Community 
College; John Sullins, Sonoma State University; John Sweigart, James Madison University; Clarendon 
Swift, Moorpark College; Wayne Swindall, California Baptist College; Brian Tapia, Foothill College; 
Bangs Tapscott, University of Utah; J. Ramon Tello, Shasta College; Jan Thomas, University of Arkansas 
at Little Rock; Phil Thompson, Eastern Illinois University; Richard Tieszen, San Jose State University; 
Larry Udell, West Chester University; Ted Ulrich, Purdue University; Robert Urekew, University of 
Louisville; William Uzgalis, Oregon State University; William Vanderburgh, Wichita State University; 
Mark Vopat, Youngstown State University; Thomas H. Warren, Solano College; Andrew J. Waskey, 
Dalton State University; Roy Weatherford, University of South Florida; Chris Weigand, Our Lady of 
the Lake University; David Weinburger, Stockton State College; Paul Weirich, University of Missouri–
Columbia; David Weise, Gonzaga University; Robert Wengert, University of Illinois at Urbana–
Champaign; Shannon Grace Werre, Edmonds Community College; Gerald Joseph Williams, Seton 
Hall University; Frank Wilson, Bucknell University; W. Kent Wilson, University of Illinois, Chicago; 
Katherine D. Witzig, Southwestern Illinois College; Stephen Wykstra, Calvin College; Marie Zaccaria, 
Georgia Perimeter College; Jeffrey Zents, University of Texas.
Finally, it has been a pleasure working with publisher Clark Baxter, former philosophy  
editor Joann Kozyrev, new philosophy editor Debra Matteson, content developer 
Florence Kilgo, content project manager Jill Quinn, production supervisor Greg 
Hubit, copy editor Marne Evans, proofreader Debra Nichols, content coordina-
tor Joshua Duncan, dialogue specialist Karen Mockler, and exercise checker Steven  
Livaditis. Most of all, I want to thank my wife, Linda Peterson, for her countless  
suggestions and support.

1
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.
1 
1.1	 Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
1.2	 Recognizing Arguments
1.3	 Deduction and Induction
1.4	 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency
1.5	 Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity
1.6	 Extended Arguments
1.1	
Arguments, Premises,  
and Conclusions
PREVIEW    Suppose a student with whom you are in a long-term relationship happens to see you 
sitting close to someone else in the library. The person you have been dating for months now accuses 
you of cheating and threatens to break off the relationship. You, in turn, try to prove that the event in 
the library was perfectly innocent and amounted to nothing. To do this, you need an argument. In this 
section you will learn about arguments and their basic components, premises and conclusions.
Logic may be defined as the organized body of knowledge, or science, that evaluates 
arguments. All of us encounter arguments in our day-to-day experience. We read them 
in books and newspapers, hear them on television, and formulate them when commu-
nicating with friends and associates. The aim of logic is to develop a system of methods 
and principles that we may use as criteria for evaluating the arguments of others and 
as guides in constructing arguments of our own. Among the benefits to be expected 
from the study of logic is an increase in confidence that we are making sense when we 
criticize the arguments of others and when we advance arguments of our own.
An argument, in its simplest form, is a group of statements, one or more of which 
(the premises) are claimed to provide support for, or reasons to believe, one of the 
others (the conclusion). Every argument may be placed in either of two basic groups: 
those in which the premises really do support the conclusion and those in which they 
do not, even though they are claimed to. The former are said to be good arguments  
(at least to that extent), the latter bad arguments. The purpose of logic, as the science that  
Basic Concepts

2   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
evaluates arguments, is thus to develop methods and techniques that allow us to distin-
guish good arguments from bad.
As is apparent from the given definition, the term argument has a very specific 
meaning in logic. It does not mean, for example, a mere verbal fight, as one might have 
with one’s parent, spouse, or friend. Let us examine the features of this definition in 
greater detail. First of all, an argument is a group of statements. A statement is a sen-
tence that is either true or false—in other words, typically a declarative sentence or a 
sentence component that could stand as a declarative sentence. The following ­sentences 
are statements:
Chocolate truffles are loaded with calories.
Melatonin helps relieve jet lag.
Political candidates always tell the complete truth.
No wives ever cheat on their husbands.
Tiger Woods plays golf and Maria Sharapova plays tennis.
The first two statements are true, the second two false. The last one expresses two state-
ments, both of which are true. Truth and falsity are called the two possible truth ­values 
of a statement. Thus, the truth value of the first two statements is true, the truth value 
of the second two is false, and the truth value of the last statement, as well as that of its 
components, is true.
Unlike statements, many sentences cannot be said to be either true or false. Ques-
tions, proposals, suggestions, commands, and exclamations usually cannot, and so are 
not usually classified as statements. The following sentences are not statements:
Where is Khartoum?	
(question)
Let’s go to a movie tonight.	
(proposal)
I suggest you get contact lenses.	
(suggestion)
Turn off the TV right now.	
(command)
Fantastic!	
(exclamation)
The statements that make up an argument are divided into one or more premises 
and exactly one conclusion. The premises are the statements that set forth the reasons 
or evidence, and the conclusion is the statement that the evidence is claimed to support 
or imply. In other words, the conclusion is the statement that is claimed to follow from 
the premises. Here is an example of an argument:
All film stars are celebrities.
Halle Berry is a film star.
Therefore, Halle Berry is a celebrity.
The first two statements are the premises; the third is the conclusion. (The claim that 
the premises support or imply the conclusion is indicated by the word “therefore.”) In 
this argument the premises really do support the conclusion, and so the argument is a 
good one. But consider this argument:
Some film stars are men.
Cameron Diaz is a film star.
Therefore, Cameron Diaz is a man.

SECTION 1.1 Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions   3
1
In this argument the premises do not support the conclusion, even though they are 
claimed to, and so the argument is not a good one.
One of the most important tasks in the analysis of arguments is being able to distin-
guish premises from conclusions. If what is thought to be a conclusion is really a prem-
ise, and vice versa, the subsequent analysis cannot possibly be correct. Many ­arguments 
contain indicator words that provide clues in identifying premises and conclusion. 
Some typical conclusion indicators are
therefore	
accordingly	
entails that
wherefore	
we may conclude	
hence
thus	
it must be that	
it follows that
consequently	
for this reason	
implies that
we may infer	
so	
as a result
Whenever a statement follows one of these indicators, it can usually be identified as 
the conclusion. By process of elimination the other statements in the argument are the 
premises. Example:
Tortured prisoners will say anything just to relieve the pain. Consequently, torture is not 
a reliable method of interrogation.
The conclusion of this argument is “Torture is not a reliable method of interrogation,” 
and the premise is “Tortured prisoners will say anything just to relieve the pain.”
Premises
Conclusion
Claimed
evidence
What is claimed to follow
from the evidence
If an argument does not contain a conclusion indicator, it may contain a premise 
indicator. Some typical premise indicators are
since	
in that	
seeing that
as indicated by	
may be inferred from	
for the reason that
because	
as	
in as much as
for	
given that	
owing to
Any statement following one of these indicators can usually be identified as a premise. 
Example:
Expectant mothers should never use recreational drugs, since the use of these drugs can 
jeopardize the development of the fetus.

4   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
The premise of this argument is “The use of these drugs can jeopardize the ­development of 
the fetus,” and the conclusion is “Expectant mothers should never use recreational drugs.”
In reviewing the list of indicators, note that “for this reason” is a conclusion ­indicator, 
whereas “for the reason that” is a premise indicator. “For this reason” (except when fol-
lowed by a colon) means for the reason (premise) that was just given, so what follows 
is the conclusion. On the other hand, “for the reason that” announces that a premise is 
about to be stated.
Sometimes a single indicator can be used to identify more than one premise. Con-
sider the following argument:
It is vitally important that wilderness areas be preserved, for wilderness provides es-
sential habitat for wildlife, including endangered species, and it is a natural retreat from 
the stress of daily life.
The premise indicator “for” goes with both “Wilderness provides essential habitat for 
wildlife, including endangered species,” and “It is a natural retreat from the stress of 
daily life.” These are the premises. By method of elimination, “It is vitally important 
that wilderness areas be preserved” is the conclusion.
Some arguments contain no indicators. With these, the reader/listener must ask 
such questions as: What single statement is claimed (implicitly) to follow from the oth-
ers? What is the arguer trying to prove? What is the main point in the passage? The 
answers to these questions should point to the conclusion. Example:
The space program deserves increased expenditures in the years ahead. Not only does 
the national defense depend on it, but the program will more than pay for itself in terms 
of technological spin-offs. Furthermore, at current funding levels the program cannot 
fulfill its anticipated potential.
The conclusion of this argument is the first statement, and all of the other state-
ments are premises. The argument illustrates the pattern found in most arguments that 
lack indicator words: The intended conclusion is stated first, and the remaining state-
ments are then offered in support of this first statement. When the argument is restruc-
tured according to logical principles, however, the conclusion is always listed after the 
premises:
P1:	
The national defense is dependent on the space program.
P2:	
The space program will more than pay for itself in terms of technological spinoffs.
P3:	
At current funding levels the space program cannot fulfill its anticipated potential.
C:	
The space program deserves increased expenditures in the years ahead.
When restructuring arguments such as this, one should remain as close as possible 
to the original version, while at the same time attending to the requirement that prem-
ises and conclusion be complete sentences that are meaningful in the order in which 
they are listed.
Note that the first two premises are included within the scope of a single sentence 
in the original argument. For the purposes of this chapter, compound arrangements of 
statements in which the various components are all claimed to be true will be consid-
ered as separate statements.

SECTION 1.1 Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions   5
1
Passages that contain arguments sometimes contain statements that are neither 
premises nor conclusions. Only statements that are actually intended to support the 
conclusion should be included in the list of premises. If, for example, a statement serves 
merely to introduce the general topic, or merely makes a passing comment, it should 
not be taken as part of the argument. Examples:
The claim is often made that malpractice lawsuits drive up the cost of health care. But if 
such suits were outlawed or severely restricted, then patients would have no means of 
recovery for injuries caused by negligent doctors. Hence, the availability of malpractice 
litigation should be maintained intact.
Massive federal deficits push up interest rates for everyone. Servicing the debt  
gobbles up a huge portion of the federal budget, which lowers our standard of living.  
And big deficits also weaken the value of the dollar. For these reasons, Congress must 
make a determined effort to cut overall spending and raise taxes. Politicians who ignore 
this reality imperil the future of the nation.
In the first argument, the opening statement serves merely to introduce the topic, so it 
is not part of the argument. The premise is the second statement, and the conclusion is 
the last statement. In the second argument, the final statement merely makes a passing 
comment, so it is not part of the argument. The premises are the first three statements, 
and the statement following “for these reasons” is the conclusion.
Closely related to the concepts of argument and statement are those of inference and 
proposition. An inference, in the narrow sense of the term, is the reasoning process 
expressed by an argument. In the broad sense of the term, “inference” is used inter-
changeably with “argument.” Analogously, a proposition, in the narrow sense, is the 
meaning or information content of a statement. For the purposes of this book, however, 
“proposition” and “statement” are used interchangeably.
Note on the History of Logic
The person who is generally credited as the father of logic is the ancient Greek phi-
losopher Aristotle (384–322 b.c.). Aristotle’s predecessors had been interested in the 
art of constructing persuasive arguments and in techniques for refuting the arguments 
of others, but it was Aristotle who first devised systematic criteria for analyzing and 
evaluating arguments.
Aristotle’s chief accomplishment is called syllogistic logic, a kind of logic in which 
the fundamental elements are terms, and arguments are evaluated as good or bad  
depending on how the terms are arranged in the argument. Chapters 4 and 5 of this 
textbook are devoted mainly to syllogistic logic. But Aristotle also deserves credit for 
originating modal logic, a kind of logic that involves such concepts as possibility, ne-
cessity, belief, and doubt. In addition, Aristotle catalogued several informal fallacies, a 
topic treated in Chapter 3 of this book.
After Aristotle’s death, another Greek philosopher, Chrysippus (280–206 b.c.), one 
of the founders of the Stoic school, developed a logic in which the fundamental ele-
ments were whole propositions. Chrysippus treated every proposition as either true or 
false and developed rules for determining the truth or falsity of compound propositions  

1
6   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
from the truth or falsity of their components. In the course of doing so, he laid the 
foundation for the truth functional interpretation of the logical connectives presented 
in Chapter 6 of this book and introduced the notion of natural deduction, treated in 
Chapter 7.
For thirteen hundred years after the death of Chrysippus, relatively little creative 
work was done in logic. The physician Galen (a.d. 129–ca. 199) developed the ­theory 
of the compound categorical syllogism, but for the most part philosophers con-
fined themselves to writing commentaries on the works of Aristotle and Chrysippus.  
Boethius (ca. 480–524) is a noteworthy example.
The first major logician of the Middle Ages was Peter Abelard (1079–1142). Abelard 
reconstructed and refined the logic of Aristotle and Chrysippus as communicated by 
Boethius, and he originated a theory of universals that traced the universal character 
of general terms to concepts in the mind rather than to “natures” existing outside the 
mind, as Aristotle had held. In addition, Abelard distinguished arguments that are valid  
because of their form from those that are valid because of their content, but he held that 
only formal validity is the “perfect” or conclusive variety. This textbook follows Abelard 
on this point.
After Abelard, the study of logic during the Middle Ages flourished through the 
work of numerous philosophers. A logical treatise by William of Sherwood (ca. 1200–
1271) contains the first expression of the “Barbara, Celarent . . .” poem quoted in Sec-
tion 5.1 of this book, and the Summulae Logicales of Peter of Spain (ca. 1205–1277) 
became the standard textbook in logic for three hundred years. However, the most 
original contributions from this period were made by William of Ockham (ca. 1285–
1347). Ockham extended the theory of modal logic, conducted an exhaustive study of 
the forms of valid and invalid syllogisms, and further developed the idea of a meta- 
language, a higher-level language used to discuss linguistic entities such as words, 
terms, and propositions.
Toward the middle of the fifteenth century, a reaction set in against the logic of 
the Middle Ages. Rhetoric largely displaced logic as the primary focus of attention; 
the logic of Chrysippus, which had already begun to lose its unique identity in the 
Middle Ages, was ignored altogether, and the logic of Aristotle was studied only in 
highly simplistic presentations. A reawakening did not occur until two hundred years 
later through the work of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716).
Leibniz, a genius in numerous fields, attempted to develop a symbolic language or 
“calculus” that could be used to settle all forms of disputes, whether in theology, philos-
ophy, or international relations. As a result of this work, Leibniz is sometimes credited 
with being the father of symbolic logic. Leibniz’s efforts to symbolize logic were carried 
into the nineteenth century by Bernard Bolzano (1781–1848).
In the middle of the nineteenth century, logic commenced an extremely rapid pe-
riod of development that has continued to this day. Work in symbolic logic was done by 
many philosophers and mathematicians, including Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871), 
George Boole (1815–1864), William Stanley Jevons (1835–1882), and John Venn 
(1834–1923). The rule bearing De Morgan’s name is used in Chapter 7 of this book. 
Boole’s interpretation of categorical propositions and Venn’s method for diagramming 

1
them are covered in Chapters 4 and 5. At the same time a revival in inductive logic was 
initiated by the British philosopher John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), whose methods of 
induction are presented in Chapter 10.
Across the Atlantic, the American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914) 
developed a logic of relations, invented symbolic quantifiers, and suggested the 
­truth-table method for formulas in propositional logic. These topics are covered in 
Chapters 6 and 8 of this book. The truth-table method was completed independently 
by Emil Post (1897–1954) and Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951).
Toward the end of the nineteenth century, the foundations of modern mathematical 
logic were laid by Gottlob Frege (1848–1925). His Begriffsschrift sets forth the theory  
of quantification presented in Chapter 8 of this text. Frege’s work was continued 
into the twentieth century by Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) and Bertrand  
Russell (1872–1970), whose monumental Principia Mathematica attempted to reduce 
the whole of pure mathematics to logic. The Principia is the source of much of the sym-
bolism that appears in Chapters 6, 7, and 8 of this text.
During the twentieth century, much of the work in logic has focused on the formal-
ization of logical systems and on questions dealing with the completeness and con-
sistency of such systems. A now-famous theorem proved by Kurt Gödel (1906–1978) 
states that in any formal system adequate for number theory there exists an undecidable 
formula—that is, a formula such that neither it nor its negation is derivable from the 
axioms of the system. Other developments include multivalued logics and the formal-
ization of modal logic. Most recently, logic has made a major contribution to tech-
nology by providing the conceptual foundation for the electronic circuitry of digital 
computers.
EXERCISE 1.1	
	 I.	 Each of the following passages contains a single argument. Using the letters “P” 
and “C,” identify the premises and conclusion of each argument, writing premises 
first and conclusion last. List the premises in the order in which they make the 
most sense (usually the order in which they occur), and write both premises and 
conclusion in the form of separate declarative sentences. Indicator words may be 
eliminated once premises and conclusion have been appropriately labeled. The ex-
ercises marked with a star are answered in the back of the book.
	
★1.	 Carbon monoxide molecules happen to be just the right size and shape, and 
happen to have just the right chemical properties, to fit neatly into cavities 
within hemoglobin molecules in blood that are normally reserved for oxygen 
molecules. Consequently, carbon monoxide diminishes the oxygen-carrying 
capacity of blood.
(Nivaldo J. Tro, Chemistry: A Molecular Approach, 2nd ed.)
	
2.	 Since the good, according to Plato, is that which furthers a person’s real inter-
ests, it follows that in any given case when the good is known, men will seek it.
(Avrum Stroll and Richard Popkin, Philosophy and the Human Spirit)
SECTION 1.1 Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions   7

1
	
3.	 As the denial or perversion of justice by the sentences of courts, as well as 
in any other manner, is with reason classed among the just causes of war, it 
will follow that the federal judiciary ought to have cognizance of all causes in 
which the citizens of other countries are concerned.
(Alexander Hamilton, Federalist Papers, No. 80)
	
★4.	 When individuals voluntarily abandon property, they forfeit any expectation 
of privacy in it that they might have had. Therefore, a warrantless search or 
seizure of abandoned property is not unreasonable under the Fourth Amend-
ment.
( Judge Stephanie Kulp Seymour, United States v. Jones)
	
5.	 Artists and poets look at the world and seek relationships and order. But they 
translate their ideas to canvas, or to marble, or into poetic images. Scientists 
try to find relationships between different objects and events. To express the 
order they find, they create hypotheses and theories. Thus the great scientific 
theories are easily compared to great art and great literature.
(Douglas C. Giancoli, The Ideas of Physics, 3rd ed.)
	
6.	 The fact that there was never a land bridge between Australia and mainland 
Asia is evidenced by the fact that the animal species in the two areas are very 
different. Asian placental mammals and Australian marsupial mammals have 
not been in contact in the last several million years.
(  T. Douglas Price and Gary M. Feinman, Images of the Past)
	
★7.	 It really does matter if you get enough sleep. We need sleep to think clearly, 
react quickly, and create memories. Studies show that people who are taught 
mentally challenging tasks do better after a good night’s sleep. Other research 
suggests that sleep is needed for creative problem solving.
(U.S. National Institutes of Health, “Your Guide to Healthy Sleep”)
	
8.	 The classroom teacher is crucial to the development and academic success 
of the average student, and administrators simply are ancillary to this effort. 
For this reason, classroom teachers ought to be paid at least the equivalent of 
administrators at all levels, including the superintendent.
(Peter F. Falstrup, letter to the editor)
	
9.	 An agreement cannot bind unless both parties to the agreement know what 
they are doing and freely choose to do it. This implies that the seller who  
intends to enter a contract with a customer has a duty to disclose exactly what 
the customer is buying and what the terms of the sale are.
(Manuel G. Velasquez, “The Ethics of Consumer Production”)
	 ★10.	 Punishment, when speedy and specific, may suppress undesirable behavior, 
but it cannot teach or encourage desirable alternatives. Therefore, it is cru-
cial to use positive techniques to model and reinforce appropriate behavior  
that the person can use in place of the unacceptable response that has to be 
suppressed.
(  Walter Mischel and Harriet Mischel, Essentials of Psychology)
1
8   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
SECTION 1.1 Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions   9
	
11.	 Profit serves a very crucial function in a free-enterprise economy, such as our 
own. High profits are the signal that consumers want more of the output of the 
industry. High profits provide the incentive for firms to expand output and for 
more firms to enter the industry in the long run. For a firm of above-average 
efficiency, profits represent the reward for greater efficiency.
(Dominic Salvatore, Managerial Economics, 3rd ed.)
	
12.	 Cats can think circles around dogs! My cat regularly used to close and lock the 
door to my neighbor’s doghouse, trapping their sleeping Doberman inside. 
Try telling a cat what to do, or putting a leash on him—he’ll glare at you and 
say, “I don’t think so. You should have gotten a dog.”
(Kevin Purkiser, letter to the editor)
	 ★13.	 Since private property helps people define themselves, since it frees people 
from mundane cares of daily subsistence, and since it is finite, no individual 
should accumulate so much property that others are prevented from accumu-
lating the necessities of life.
(Leon P. Baradat, Political Ideologies, Their Origins and Impact)
	
14.	 To every existing thing God wills some good. Hence, since to love any thing 
is nothing else than to will good to that thing, it is manifest that God loves 
everything that exists.
(  Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica)
	
15.	 Women of the working class, especially wage workers, should not have more 
than two children at most. The average working man can support no more 
and the average working woman can take care of no more in decent fashion.
(Margaret Sanger, Family Limitations)
	 ★16.	 Radioactive fallout isn’t the only concern in the aftermath of nuclear explo-
sions. The nations of planet Earth have acquired nuclear weapons with an ex-
plosive power equal to more than a million Hiroshima bombs. Studies suggest 
that explosion of only half these weapons would produce enough soot, smoke, 
and dust to blanket the Earth, block out the sun, and bring on a nuclear winter 
that would threaten the survival of the human race.
( John W. Hill and Doris K. Kolb, Chemistry for Changing Times, 7th ed.)
	
17.	 An ant releases a chemical when it dies, and its fellows then carry it away to 
the compost heap. Apparently the communication is highly effective; a healthy 
ant painted with the death chemical will be dragged to the funeral heap again 
and again.
(Carol R. Ember and Melvin Ember, Cultural Anthropology, 7th ed.)
	
18.	 Every art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and pursuit, is thought 
to aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly been declared to 
be that at which all things aim.
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)
1

1
	 ★19.	 Poverty offers numerous benefits to the nonpoor. Antipoverty programs pro-
vide jobs for middle-class professionals in social work, penology, and public 
health. Such workers’ future advancement is tied to the continued growth of 
bureaucracies dependent on the existence of poverty.
( J. John Palen, Social Problems)
	
20.	 Corn is an annual crop. Butcher’s meat, a crop which requires four or five 
years to grow. As an acre of land, therefore, will produce a much smaller quan-
tity of the one species of food than the other, the inferiority of the quantity 
must be compensated by the superiority of the price.
(Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations)
	
21.	 Neither a borrower nor lender be
	
	For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
	
	And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
(  William Shakespeare, Hamlet I, 3)
	 ★22.	 The stakes in whistleblowing are high. Take the nurse who alleges that phy-
sicians enrich themselves in her hospital through unnecessary surgery; the 
engineer who discloses safety defects in the braking systems of a fleet of new 
rapid-transit vehicles; the Defense Department official who alerts Congress 
to military graft and overspending: all know that they pose a threat to those 
whom they denounce and that their own careers may be at risk.
(Sissela Bok, “Whistleblowing and Professional Responsibility”)
	
23.	 If a piece of information is not “job relevant,” then the employer is not entitled 
qua employer to know it. Consequently, since sexual practices, political be-
liefs, associational activities, etc., are not part of the description of most jobs, 
that is, since they do not directly affect one’s job performance, they are not 
legitimate information for an employer to know in the determination of the 
hiring of a job applicant.
(George G. Brenkert, “Privacy, Polygraphs, and Work”)
	
24.	 Many people believe that a dark tan is attractive and a sign of good health, but 
mounting evidence indicates that too much sun can lead to health problems. 
One of the most noticeable effects is premature aging of the skin. The sun also 
contributes to certain types of cataracts, and, what is most worrisome, it plays 
a role in skin cancer.
( Joseph M. Moran and Michael D. Morgan, Meteorology, 4th ed.)
	 ★25.	 Contrary to the tales of some scuba divers, the toothy, gaping grin on the 
mouth of an approaching shark is not necessarily anticipatory. It is gener-
ally accepted that by constantly swimming with its mouth open, the shark is 
simply avoiding suffocation. This assures a continuous flow of oxygen-laden 
water into their mouths, over their gills, and out through the gill slits.
(Robert A. Wallace et al., Biology: The Science of Life)
	
26.	 Not only is the sky blue [as a result of scattering], but light coming from it 
is also partially polarized. You can readily observe this by placing a piece of 
Polaroid (for example, one lens of a pair of Polaroid sunglasses) in front of 
1
10   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
your eye and rotating it as you look at the sky on a clear day. You will notice a 
change in light intensity with the orientation of the Polaroid.
(Frank J. Blatt, Principles of Physics, 2nd ed.)
	
27.	 Since the secondary light [from the moon] does not inherently belong to the 
moon and is not received from any star or from the sun, and since in the 
whole universe there is no other body left but the earth, what must we con-
clude? What is to be proposed? Surely we must assert that the lunar body (or 
any other dark and sunless orb) is illuminated by the earth.
(Galileo Galilei, The Starry Messenger)
	 ★28.	 Anyone familiar with our prison system knows that there are some inmates 
who behave little better than brute beasts. But the very fact that these prison-
ers exist is a telling argument against the efficacy of capital punishment as a 
deterrent. If the death penalty had been truly effective as a deterrent, such 
prisoners would long ago have vanished.
(“The Injustice of the Death Penalty,” America)
	
29.	 Though it is possible that REM sleep and dreaming are not necessary in the 
adult, REM deprivation studies seem to suggest otherwise. Why would REM 
pressure increase with deprivation if the system is unimportant in the adult?
(Herbert L. Petri, Motivation: Theory and Research, 2nd ed.)
	
30.	 We say that an end pursued in its own right is more complete than an end  
pursued because of something else, and that an end that is never choice- 
worthy because of something else is more complete than ends that are  
choiceworthy both in their own right and because of this end. Hence, an end 
that is always choiceworthy in its own right, and never because of something 
else, is complete without qualification.
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)
	II.	 The following arguments were taken from magazine and newspaper editorials and 
letters to the editor. In most instances the main conclusion must be rephrased to 
capture the full intent of the author. Write out what you interpret the main conclu-
sion to be.
	
★1.	 University administrators know well the benefits that follow notable success 
in college sports: increased applications for admissions, increased income 
from licensed logo merchandise, more lucrative television deals, post-season 
game revenue and more successful alumni fund drives. The idea that there is 
something ideal and pure about the amateur athlete is self-serving bunk.
(Michael McDonnell, letter to the editor)
	
2.	 In a nation of immigrants, people of diverse ethnic backgrounds must have a 
common bond through which to exchange ideas. How can this bond be ac-
complished if there is no common language? It is those who shelter the immi-
grant from learning English by encouraging the development of a multilingual 
society who are creating a xenophobic atmosphere. They allow the immigrant 
to surround himself with a cocoon of language from which he cannot escape 
and which others cannot penetrate.
(Rita Toften, letter to the editor)
SECTION 1.1 Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions   11
1

1
	
3.	 The health and fitness of our children has become a problem partly because 
of our attitude toward athletics. The purpose of sports, especially for children, 
should be to make healthy people healthier. The concept of team sports has 
failed to do this. Rather than learning to interact and cooperate with others, 
youngsters are taught to compete. Team sports have only reinforced the no-
tion that the team on top is the winner, and all others are losers. This approach 
does not make sports appealing to many children, and some, especially among 
the less fit, burn out by the time they are twelve.
(Mark I. Pitman, “Young Jocks”  )
	
★4.	 College is the time in which a young mind is supposed to mature and acquire 
wisdom, and one can only do this by experiencing as much diverse intellectual 
stimuli as possible. A business student may be a whiz at accounting, but has he 
or she ever experienced the beauty of a Shakespearean sonnet or the bound-
less events composing Hebrew history? Most likely not. While many of these 
neoconservatives will probably go on to be financially successful, they are rob-
bing themselves of the true purpose of collegiate academics, a sacrifice that 
outweighs the future salary checks.
( Robert S. Griffith, “Conservative College Press”)
	
5.	 History has shown repeatedly that you cannot legislate morality, nor does any-
one have a right to. The real problem is the people who have a vested interest 
in sustaining the multibillion-dollar drug industry created by the laws against 
drugs. The legalization of drugs would remove the thrill of breaking the law; 
it would end the suffering caused by unmetered doses, impurities, and sub-
standard paraphernalia. A huge segment of the underground and extralegal 
economy would move into a legitimate economy, taking money away from 
criminals, eliminating crime and violence, and restoring many talented people 
to useful endeavor.
(  Thomas L. Wayburn, letter to the editor)
	
6.	 Infectious disease is no longer the leading cause of death in this country, 
thanks to antibiotics, but there are new strains of bacteria that are resistant 
to—and others that grow only in the presence of—antibiotics. Yet Congress 
wants to cut the National Institutes of Health budget. Further cuts would leave 
us woefully unprepared to cope with the new microbes Mother Nature has 
cooking in her kitchen.
(  Valina L. Dawson, letter to the editor)
	
★7.	 A person cannot reject free will and still insist on criminality and codes of 
moral behavior. If people are compelled by forces beyond their control (genes 
or environment), then their actions, no matter how vile, are excusable. That 
means the Nuremberg trials of Nazi murderers were invalid, and all prison 
gates should be flung open. The essence of our humanity is the ability to 
choose between right and wrong, good and evil, and act accordingly. Strip that 
from us and we are mere animals.
(Rabbi Gilbert S. Rosenthal, letter to the editor)
1
12   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
	
8.	 Ideally, decisions about health-care should be based on the doctor’s clinical 
judgment, patient preference, and scientific evidence. Patients should always 
be presented with options in their care. Elective cesarean section, however, is 
not used to treat a problem but to avoid a natural process. An elective surgery 
like this puts the patient at unnecessary risk, increases the risk for complica-
tions in future deliveries, and increases health-care costs.
(Anne Foster-Rosales, M.D., letter to the editor)
	
9.	 Parents who feel guilty for the little time they can (or choose to) spend with 
their children “pick up” after them—so the children don’t learn to face the 
consequences of their own choices and actions. Parents who allow their chil-
dren to fail are showing them greater love and respect.
(Susan J. Peters, letter to the editor)
	 ★10.	 Most of the environmental problems facing us stem, at least in part, from the 
sheer number of Americans. The average American produces three quarters 
of a ton of garbage every year, consumes hundreds of gallons of gasoline, and 
uses large amounts of electricity (often from a nuclear power plant, coal burn-
ing, or a dam). The least painful way to protect the environment is to limit 
population growth.
(Craig M. Bradley, letter to the editor)
	III.	Define the following terms:
logic	
premise	
inference
argument	
conclusion	
proposition
statement	
conclusion indicator	
syllogistic logic
truth value	
premise indicator	
modal logic
	IV.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 The purpose of the premise or premises is to set forth the reasons or evidence 
given in support of the conclusion.
	
2.	 Some arguments have more than one conclusion.
	
3.	 All arguments must have more than one premise.
	
4.	 The words “therefore,” “hence,” “so,” “since,” and “thus” are all conclusion  
indicators.
	
5.	 The words “for,” “because,” “as,” and “for the reason that” are all premise  
indicators.
	
6.	 In the strict sense of the terms, inference and argument have exactly the same 
meaning.
	
7.	 In most (but not all) arguments that lack indicator words, the conclusion is the 
first statement.
	
8.	 Any sentence that is either true or false is a statement.
	
9.	 Every statement has a truth value.
	
10.	 Aristotle is the  person usually credited with being the father of logic.
SECTION 1.1 Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions   13
1
 Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

14   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1.2	
Recognizing Arguments
PREVIEW    Suppose your instructor claims that you failed to submit an essay by the due date and 
that your grade will suffer as a result. In response, you might argue that in fact the essay was submitted 
on time, or explain why the essay was late. Explanations are different from arguments. In this section 
you will learn how to distinguish arguments from several forms of nonarguments, including explana-
tions, expository passages, and illustrations.
Not all passages contain arguments. Because logic deals with arguments, it is important 
to be able to distinguish passages that contain arguments from those that do not. In 
general, a passage contains an argument if it purports to prove something; if it does not 
do so, it does not contain an argument.
In the previous section of this book we learned that every argument has at least 
one premise and exactly one conclusion. The premise or premises set forth the alleged 
evidence or reasons, and the conclusion asserts what is claimed to follow from the al-
leged evidence or reasons. This definition of an argument expresses what is needed for 
a passage to contain an argument:
1.	 At least one of the statements must claim to present evidence or reasons.
2.	 There must be a claim that the alleged evidence supports or implies something—
that is, a claim that something follows from the alleged evidence or reasons.
It is not necessary that the premises present actual evidence or true reasons nor that 
the premises actually support the conclusion. But at least the premises must claim to 
present evidence or reasons, and there must be a claim that the evidence or reasons 
support or imply something. Also, you should recognize that the second claim is not 
equatable with the intentions of the arguer. Intentions are subjective and, as such, are 
usually not accessible to the evaluator. Rather, this claim is an objective feature of an 
argument grounded in its language or structure.
In deciding whether a passage contains an argument, the claim that the alleged rea-
sons or evidence supports or implies something is usually the more important of the 
two. Such a claim can be either explicit or implicit. An explicit claim is usually asserted 
by premise or conclusion indicator words (“thus,” “since,” “because,” “hence,” “there-
fore,” and so on). Example:
Mad cow disease is spread by feeding parts of infected animals to cows, and this practice 
has yet to be completely eradicated. Thus, mad cow disease continues to pose a threat 
to people who eat beef.
The word “thus” expresses the claim that something is being inferred, so the passage is 
an argument.
1

1
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   15
A
ristotle was born in Stagira, a small Greek 
town situated on the northern coast of the 
Aegean Sea. His father was a physician in the 
court of King Amyntas II of Macedonia, and the young 
Aristotle was a friend of the King’s son Philip, who 
was later to become king himself and the father of 
Alexander the Great. When he was about seventeen,  
Aristotle was sent to Athens to further his education in 
Plato’s Academy, the finest institution of higher learning 
in the Greek world. After Plato’s death Aristotle left for  
Assos, a small town on the coast of Asia Minor, where 
he married the niece of the local ruler.
Six years later Aristotle accepted an invitation to 
return to Macedonia to serve as tutor of the young 
Alexander. When Alexander ascended the throne 
following his father’s assassination, Aristotle’s tutorial 
job was finished, and he departed for Athens where 
he set up a school near the temple of Apollo Lyceus. 
The school came to be known as the Lyceum, and 
Alexander supported it with contributions of money 
and specimens of flora and fauna derived from his 
far-flung conquests. After Alexander’s death, an anti- 
Macedonian rebellion forced Aristotle to leave Athens 
for Chalcis, about thirty miles to the north, where he 
died one year later at the age of sixty-two.
Aristotle is universally recognized as the originator 
of logic. He defined logic as the study of the process 
by which a statement follows by necessity from one 
or more other statements. The most fundamental kind 
of statement, he thought, is the categorical proposi-
tion, and he classified the four kinds of categorical 
propositions in terms of their being universal, par-
ticular, affirmative, and negative. He also developed 
the square of opposition, which shows how one such 
proposition implies the truth or falsity of another,  
and he identified 
the relations of 
conversion, 
ob-
version, and con-
traposition, which  
provide the basis 
for various imme-
diate inferences.
His 
crowning 
achievement is the 
theory of the cat-
egorical syllogism, 
a kind of argument 
consisting of three 
categorical propositions. He showed how categorical 
syllogisms can be catalogued in terms of mood and 
figure, and he developed a set of rules for determining 
the validity of categorical syllogisms. Also, he showed 
how the modal concepts of possibility and necessity 
apply to categorical propositions. In addition to the 
theory of the syllogism, Aristotle advanced the theory 
of definition by genus and difference, and he showed 
how arguments could be defective in terms of thirteen 
forms of informal fallacy.
Aristotle made profound contributions to many ar-
eas of human learning including biology, physics, meta-
physics, epistemology, psychology, aesthetics, ethics, and 
politics. However, his accomplishments in logic were so 
extensive and enduring that two thousand years after 
his death, the great philosopher Immanuel Kant said 
that Aristotle had discovered everything that could be 
known about logic. His logic was not superseded until 
the end of the nineteenth century when Frege, White-
head, and Russell developed modern mathematical 
logic.
Aristotle 384–322 b.c.
eminentlogicians
© Mansell/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images
1

16   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
An implicit claim exists if there is an inferential relationship between the statements 
in a passage, but the passage contains no indicator words. Example:
The genetic modification of food is risky business. Genetic engineering can introduce 
unintended changes into the DNA of the food-producing organism, and these changes 
can be toxic to the consumer.
The inferential relationship between the first statement and the other two constitutes 
an implicit claim that evidence supports something, so we are justified in calling the 
passage an argument. The first statement is the conclusion, and the other two are the 
premises.
In deciding whether there is a claim that evidence supports or implies something, 
keep an eye out for (1) premise and conclusion indicator words and (2) the presence 
of an inferential relationship between the statements. In connection with these points, 
however, a word of caution is in order. First, the mere occurrence of an indicator word 
by no means guarantees the presence of an argument. For example, consider the fol-
lowing passages:
Since Edison invented the phonograph, there have been many technological innovations.
Since Edison invented the phonograph, he deserves credit for a major technological  
innovation.
In the first passage the word “since” is used in a temporal sense. It means “from the time 
that.” Thus, the first passage is not an argument. In the second passage “since” is used in 
a logical sense, and so the passage is an argument.
The second cautionary point is that it is not always easy to detect the occurrence of 
an inferential relationship between the statements in a passage, and one may have to 
review a passage several times before making a decision. In reaching such a decision, 
one may find it helpful to mentally insert the word “therefore” before the various state-
ments to see whether it makes sense to interpret one of them as following from the 
others. Even with this mental aid, however, the decision whether a passage contains an 
inferential relationship (as well as the decision about indicator words) often involves a 
heavy dose of interpretation. As a result, not everyone will agree about every passage. 
Sometimes the only answer possible is a conditional one: “If this passage contains an 
argument, then these are the premises and that is the conclusion.”
To assist in distinguishing passages that contain arguments from those that do not, 
let us now investigate some typical kinds of nonarguments. These include simple non-
inferential passages, expository passages, illustrations, explanations, and conditional 
statements.
Simple Noninferential Passages
Simple noninferential passages are unproblematic passages that lack a claim that any-
thing is being proved. Such passages contain statements that could be premises or con-
clusions (or both), but what is missing is a claim that any potential premise supports a 
conclusion or that any potential conclusion is supported by premises. Passages of this 

1
sort include warnings, pieces of advice, statements of belief or opinion, loosely associ-
ated statements, and reports.
A warning is a form of expression that is intended to put someone on guard against 
a dangerous or detrimental situation. Examples:
Watch out that you don’t slip on the ice.
Whatever you do, never confide personal secrets to Blabbermouth Bob.
If no evidence is given to prove that such statements are true, then there is no argument.
A piece of advice is a form of expression that makes a recommendation about some 
future decision or course of conduct. Examples:
You should keep a few things in mind before buying a used car. Test drive the car at vary-
ing speeds and conditions, examine the oil in the crankcase, ask to see service records, 
and, if possible, have the engine and power train checked by a mechanic.
Before accepting a job after class hours, I would suggest that you give careful consider-
ation to your course load. Will you have sufficient time to prepare for classes and tests, 
and will the job produce an excessive drain on your energies?
As with warnings, if there is no evidence that is intended to prove anything, then there 
is no argument.
A statement of belief or opinion is an expression about what someone happens to 
believe or think about something. Examples:
We believe that our company must develop and produce outstanding products that will 
perform a great service or fulfill a need for our customers. We believe that our business 
must be run at an adequate profit and that the services and products we offer must be 
better than those offered by competitors.
(Robert D. Hay and Edmund R. Gray, “Introduction to Social Responsibility”)
When I can read the latte menu through the hole in my server’s earlobe, something is 
seriously out of whack. What happened to an earring, maybe two, in each lobe? Now any 
surface is game. Brow, lip, tongue, cheek, nose. I’ve adjusted to untied shoelaces and pants 
that make mooning irrelevant. But when it comes to piercings, I just can’t budge.
(Debra Darvick, “Service with a Smile, and Plenty of Metal”)
Because neither of these statements asserts any claim that a belief or opinion is sup-
ported by evidence, or that it supports some conclusion, there is no argument.
Loosely associated statements may be about the same general subject, but they lack 
a claim that one of them is proved by the others. Example:
Not to honor men of worth will keep the people from contention; not to value goods 
that are hard to come by will keep them from theft; not to display what is desirable will 
keep them from being unsettled of mind.
(Lao-Tzu, Thoughts from the Tao Te Ching)
Because there is no claim that any of these statements provides evidence or reasons for 
believing another, there is no argument.
A report consists of a group of statements that convey information about some topic 
or event. Example:
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   17

18   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
The period of 1648–1789 was one of competition among the primary monarchs of Europe. 
Wars among the great powers were frequent but limited. France made major efforts to  
become paramount, but the balance of power operated to block French expansion.
(Steven L. Spiegel, World Politics in a New Era)
These statements could serve as the premises of an argument, but because the author 
makes no claim that they support or imply anything, there is no argument. Another 
type of report is the news report:
Witnesses said they heard a loud crack before a balcony gave way at a popular nightspot, 
dropping dozens of screaming people fourteen feet. At least eighty people were injured 
at the Diamond Horseshoe casino when they fell onto broken glass and splintered wood. 
Investigators are waiting for an engineer’s report on the deck’s occupancy load.
(Newspaper clipping)
Again, because the reporter makes no claim that these statements imply anything, there 
is no argument.
One must be careful, though, with reports about arguments:
“The Air Force faces a serious shortage of experienced pilots in the years ahead,  
because repeated overseas tours and the allure of high-paying jobs with commercial 
airlines are winning out over lucrative bonuses to stay in the service,” says a prominent 
Air Force official.
(Newspaper clipping)
Properly speaking, this passage is not an argument, because the author of the passage 
does not claim that anything is supported by evidence. Rather, the author reports the 
claim by the Air Force official that something is supported by evidence. If such passages 
are interpreted as “containing” arguments, it must be made clear that the argument is 
not the author’s but one made by someone about whom the author is reporting.
Expository Passages
An expository passage is a kind of discourse that begins with a topic sentence followed 
by one or more sentences that develop the topic sentence. If the objective is not to 
prove the topic sentence but only to expand it or elaborate it, then there is no argument.  
Examples:
There are three familiar states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas. Solid objects ordinarily 
maintain their shape and volume regardless of their location. A liquid occupies a definite 
volume, but assumes the shape of the occupied portion of its container. A gas maintains 
neither shape nor volume. It expands to fill completely whatever container it is in.
(John W. Hill and Doris K. Kolb, Chemistry for Changing Times, 7th ed.)
There is a stylized relation of artist to mass audience in the sports, especially in baseball. 
Each player develops a style of his own—the swagger as he steps to the plate, the unique 
windup a pitcher has, the clean-swinging and hard-driving hits, the precision quickness 
and grace of infield and outfield, the sense of surplus power behind whatever is done.
(Max Lerner, America as a Civilization)

1
In each passage the topic sentence is stated first, and the remaining sentences merely 
develop and flesh out this topic sentence. These passages are not arguments, because 
they lack an inferential claim. However, expository passages differ from simple non-
inferential passages (such as warnings and pieces of advice) in that many of them can 
also be taken as arguments. If the purpose of the subsequent sentences in the passage 
is not only to flesh out the topic sentence but also to prove it, then the passage is an 
argument. Example:
Skin and the mucous membrane lining the respiratory and digestive tracts serve as 
mechanical barriers to entry by microbes. Oil-gland secretions contain chemicals that 
weaken or kill bacteria on skin. The respiratory tract is lined by cells that sweep mucus 
and trapped particles up into the throat, where they can be swallowed. The stomach has 
an acidic pH, which inhibits the growth of many types of bacteria.
(Sylvia S. Mader, Human Biology, 4th ed.)
In this passage the topic sentence is stated first, and the purpose of the remaining 
sentences is not only to show how the skin and mucous membranes serve as barriers to 
microbes but also to prove that they do this. Thus, the passage can be taken as both an 
expository passage and an argument.
In deciding whether an expository passage should be interpreted as an argument, 
try to determine whether the purpose of the subsequent sentences in the passage  
is merely to develop the topic sentence or also to prove that it is true. In borderline 
cases, ask yourself whether the topic sentence makes a claim that everyone accepts or 
agrees with. If it does, the passage is probably not an argument. In real-life situations 
authors rarely try to prove something is true when everyone already accepts it. How-
ever, if the topic sentence makes a claim that many people do not accept or have never 
thought about, then the purpose of the remaining sentences may be both to prove the 
topic sentence is true as well as to develop it. If this is so, the passage is an argument.
Finally, if even this procedure yields no definite answer, the only alternative may be 
to say that if the passage is taken as an argument, then the first statement is the conclu-
sion and the others are the premises.
Illustrations
An illustration is an expression involving one or more examples that is intended to 
show what something means or how it is done. Illustrations are often confused with  
arguments because many illustrations contain indicator words such as “thus.” Examples:
Chemical elements, as well as compounds, can be represented by molecular formulas. 
Thus, oxygen is represented by “O2,” water by “H2O,” and sodium chloride by “NaCl.”
A deciduous tree is any tree that loses its leaves during the winter. For example, maples 
are deciduous. And so are elms, poplars, hawthorns, and alders.
These selections are not arguments, because they make no claim that anything is  
being proved. In the first selection, the word “thus” indicates how something is done— 
namely, how chemical elements and compounds can be represented by formulas. In the 
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   19

20   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
second, the examples cited are intended to illustrate the meaning of the word “decidu-
ous.” It pins down the meaning by providing concrete instances.
However, as with expository passages, many illustrations can be taken as arguments. 
Such arguments are often called arguments from example. Here is an instance of one:
Although most forms of cancer, if untreated, can cause death, not all cancers are life-
threatening. For example, basal cell carcinoma, the most common of all skin cancers, can 
produce disfigurement, but it almost never results in death.
In this passage the example given is intended to prove the truth of “Not all cancers are 
life-threatening.” Thus, the passage is best interpreted as an argument.
In deciding whether an illustration should be interpreted as an argument, determine 
whether the passage merely shows how something is done or what something means, 
or whether it also purports to prove something. In borderline cases it helps to note 
whether the claim being illustrated is one that practically everyone accepts or agrees 
with. If it is, the passage is probably not an argument. As already noted, in real-life  
situations authors rarely attempt to prove what everyone already accepts. But if the 
claim being illustrated is one that many people do not accept or have never thought 
about, then the passage may be interpreted as an argument.
Thus, in reference to the first two examples we considered, most people are aware 
that elements and compounds can be expressed by formulas—practically everyone 
knows that water is H2O—and most people have at least a vague idea of what a decidu-
ous tree is. But they may not have ever considered whether some forms of cancer are 
not life-threatening. This is one of the reasons for evaluating the first two examples as 
mere illustrations and the last one as an argument.
Explanations
One of the most important kinds of nonargument is the explanation. An explanation is 
an expression that purports to shed light on some event or phenomenon. The event or 
phenomenon in question is usually accepted as a matter of fact. Examples:
The sky appears blue from the earth’s surface because light rays from the sun are scat-
tered by particles in the atmosphere.
Golf balls have a dimpled surface because the dimples reduce air drag, causing the ball 
to travel farther.
Navel oranges are called by that name because they have a growth that resembles a hu-
man navel on the end opposite the stem.
Every explanation is composed of two distinct components: the explanandum and 
explanans. The explanandum is the statement that describes the event or phenomenon 
to be explained, and the explanans is the statement or group of statements that pur-
ports to do the explaining. In the first example, the explanandum is the statement “The 
sky appears blue from the earth’s surface” and the explanans is “Light rays from the sun 
are scattered by particles in the atmosphere.”

1
Premises
Conclusion
Accepted
facts
Claimed to
prove
Argument
Explanans
Explanandum
Accepted
fact
Claimed to
shed light on
Explanation
Explanations are sometimes mistaken for arguments because they often contain the 
indicator word “because.” Yet explanations are not arguments, because in an explana-
tion the purpose of the explanans is to shed light on, or to make sense of, the explanan-
dum event—not to prove that it occurred. In other words, the purpose of the explanans 
is to show why something is the case, whereas in an argument, the purpose of the 
premises is to prove that something is the case.
In the first example given, the fact that the sky is blue is readily apparent to ­ 
everyone. The statement that light rays from the sun are scattered by particles in the 
atmosphere is not intended to prove that the sky is blue, but rather to show why it is 
blue. In the second example, practically everyone knows that golf balls have a dimpled 
surface. The purpose of the passage is to explain why they have a dimpled surface—not 
to prove that they do. Similarly, in the third example, it is obvious that naval oranges 
are called naval oranges. The purpose of the passage is to shed light on why they have 
this name.
Thus, to distinguish explanations from arguments, identify the statement that is  
either the explanandum or the conclusion (usually this is the statement that precedes 
the word “because”). If this statement describes an accepted matter of fact, and if the 
remaining statements purport to shed light on this statement, then the passage is an 
explanation.
This method usually works to distinguish arguments from explanations. However, 
some passages can be interpreted as both explanations and arguments. Examples:
Women become intoxicated by drinking a smaller amount of alcohol than men because 
men metabolize part of the alcohol before it reaches the bloodstream, whereas women 
do not.
Household bleach should never be mixed with ammonia because the combination re-
leases chlorine gas, which is highly poisonous.
The purpose of these passages could be to prove the first statement to those who do 
not accept it as fact, and to shed light on that fact to those who do accept it. Alternately, 
the passage could be intended to prove the first statement to a person who accepts its 
truth on blind faith or incomplete experience, and simultaneously to shed light on this 
truth. Thus, these passages can be correctly interpreted as both an explanation and an 
argument.
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   21

22   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
Perhaps the greatest problem confronting the effort to distinguish explanations from 
arguments lies in determining whether something is an accepted matter of fact. Obvi-
ously, what is accepted by one person may not be accepted by another. Thus, the effort 
often involves determining which person or group of people the passage is directed 
to—the intended audience. Sometimes the source of the passage (textbook, newspaper, 
technical journal, etc.) will decide the issue. But when the passage is taken totally out of 
context, ascertaining the source may prove impossible. In those circumstances the only 
possible answer may be to say that if the passage is an argument, then such-and-such is 
the conclusion and such-and-such are the premises.
Conditional Statements
A conditional statement is an “if . . . then . . .” statement; for example:
If professional football games incite violence in the home, then the widespread approval 
given to this sport should be reconsidered.
If Roger Federer has won more Grand Slams than any other contender, then he ­rightfully 
deserves the title of world’s greatest tennis player.
Every conditional statement is made up of two component statements. The component 
statement immediately following the “if” is called the antecedent, and the one follow-
ing the “then” is called the consequent. (Occasionally, the word “then” is left out, and 
occasionally the order of antecedent and consequent is reversed.) In the first example, 
the antecedent is “Professional football games incite violence in the home,” and the 
consequent is “The widespread approval given to this sport should be reconsidered.” In 
both of these examples, there is a meaningful relationship between antecedent and con-
sequent. However, such a relationship need not exist for a statement to count as condi-
tional. The statement “If Janet Jackson is a singer, then Denver is in Colorado” is just as 
much a conditional statement as those about professional football and Roger Federer.
Conditional statements
If 
then 
.
Antecedent
Consequent
if 
.
Consequent
Antecedent
Conditional statements are not arguments, because they fail to meet the criteria given 
earlier. In an argument, at least one statement must claim to present evidence, and there 
must be a claim that this evidence implies something. In a conditional statement, there 
is no claim that either the antecedent or the consequent presents evidence. In other 
words, there is no assertion that either the antecedent or the consequent is true. Rather, 

1
there is only the assertion that if the antecedent is true, then so is the consequent. Of 
course, a conditional statement as a whole may present evidence because it asserts a re-
lationship between statements. Yet when conditional statements are taken in this sense, 
there is still no argument, because there is then no separate claim that this evidence 
implies anything.
Some conditional statements are similar to arguments, however, in that they express 
the outcome of a reasoning process. As such, they may be said to have a certain infer-
ential content. Consider the following:
If Sarah Palin loves shooting wolves from airplanes, then she has little respect for wildlife.
The link between the antecedent and consequent resembles the inferential link  
between the premises and conclusion of an argument. Yet there is a difference because 
the premises of an argument are claimed to be true, whereas no such claim is made for 
the antecedent of a conditional statement. Accordingly, conditional statements are not 
arguments.* Yet their inferential content may be reexpressed to form arguments:
Sarah Palin loves shooting wolves from airplanes.
Therefore, she has little respect for wildlife.
Finally, while no single conditional statement is an argument, a conditional state-
ment may serve as either the premise or the conclusion (or both) of an argument, as 
the following examples illustrate:
If Iran is developing nuclear weapons, then Iran is a threat to world peace.
Iran is developing nuclear weapons.
Therefore, Iran is a threat to world peace.
If our borders are porous, then terrorists can enter the country at will.
If terrorists can enter the country at will, then all of us are less secure.
Therefore, if our borders are porous, then all of us are less secure.
The relation between conditional statements and arguments may now be summa-
rized as follows:
1.	 A single conditional statement is not an argument.
2.	
A conditional statement may serve as either the premise or the conclusion (or both) 
of an argument.
3.	
The inferential content of a conditional statement may be reexpressed to form an 
argument.
The first two rules are especially pertinent to the recognition of arguments. Accord-
ing to the first rule, if a passage consists of a single conditional statement, it is not an 
­argument. But if it consists of a conditional statement together with some other state-
ment, then, by the second rule, it may be an argument, depending on such factors as 
the presence of indicator words and an inferential relationship between the statements.
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   23
*In saying this we are temporarily ignoring the possibility of these statements being enthymemes. As we shall see in 
Chapter 5, an enthymeme is an argument in which a premise or conclusion (or both) is implied but not stated. If, to 
this example, we add the premise “Sarah Palin loves shooting wolves from airplanes” and the conclusion “Therefore 
Sarah Palin has little respect for wildlife,” we have a complete argument. To decide whether a conditional statement is 
an enthymeme, we must be familiar with the context in which it occurs.

24   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
Conditional statements are especially important in logic (and many other fields) 
because they express the relationship between necessary and sufficient conditions. A 
is said to be a sufficient condition for B whenever the occurrence of A is all that is 
needed for the occurrence of B. For example, being a dog is a sufficient condition for 
being an animal. On the other hand, B is said to be a necessary condition for A when-
ever A cannot occur without the occurrence of B. Thus, being an animal is a necessary 
condition for being a dog.
The difference between sufficient and necessary conditions is a bit tricky. So, to 
clarify the idea further, suppose you are given a large, closed cardboard box. Also, sup-
pose you are told there is a dog in the box. Then you know for sure there is an animal in 
the box. No additional information is needed to draw this conclusion. This means that 
being a dog is sufficient for being an animal. However, being a dog is not necessary for 
being an animal, because if you are told that the box contains a cat, you can conclude 
with equal certainty that it contains an animal. In other words, it is not necessary for 
the box to contain a dog for it to contain an animal. It might equally well contain a cat, 
a mouse, a squirrel, or any other animal.
On the other hand, suppose you are told that whatever might be in the box, it is not 
an animal. Then you know for certain there is no dog in the box. The reason you can 
draw this conclusion is that being an animal is necessary for being a dog. If there is 
no animal, there is no dog. However, being an animal is not sufficient for being a dog, 
because if you are told that the box contains an animal, you cannot, from this informa-
tion alone, conclude that it contains a dog. It might contain a cat, a mouse, a squirrel, 
and so on.
These ideas are expressed in the following conditional statements:
If X is a dog, then X is an animal.
If X is not an animal, then X is not a dog.
The first statement says that being a dog is a sufficient condition for being an ani-
mal, and the second that being an animal is a necessary condition for being a dog. 
However, a little reflection reveals that these two statements say exactly the same thing. 
Thus, each expresses in one way a necessary condition and in another way a sufficient 
condition. The terminology of sufficient and necessary conditions will be used in later 
chapters to express definitions and causal connections.
	
Summary
In deciding whether a passage contains an argument, you should look for three things:  
(1) indicator words such as “therefore,” “since,” “because,” and so on; (2) an inferential 
relationship between the statements; and (3) typical kinds of nonarguments. But remember 
that the mere occurrence of an indicator word does not guarantee the presence of an 
­argument. You must check to see that the statement identified as the ­conclusion is claimed 
to be supported by one or more of the other statements. Also keep in mind that in many 

1
EXERCISE 1.2	
	 I.	 Determine which of the following passages are arguments. For those that are, iden-
tify the conclusion. For those that are not, determine the kind of nonargument.
	
★1.	 The turkey vulture is called by that name because its red featherless head re-
sembles the head of a wild turkey.
	
2.	 If public education fails to improve the quality of instruction in both primary 
and secondary schools, then it is likely that it will lose additional students to 
the private sector in the years ahead.
	
3.	 Freedom of the press is the most important of our constitutionally guaranteed 
freedoms. Without it, our other freedoms would be immediately threatened. 
Furthermore, it provides the fulcrum for the advancement of new freedoms.
	
★4.	 A mammal is a vertebrate animal that nurses its offspring. Thus, cats and dogs 
are mammals, as are sheep, monkeys, rabbits, and bears.
	
5.	 It is strongly recommended that you have your house inspected for termite 
damage at the earliest possible opportunity.
	
6.	 Mosquito bites are not always the harmless little irritations most of us take 
them to be. For example, some mosquitoes carry West Nile virus, and people 
who are infected can become very sick or even die.
	
★7.	 If stem-cell research is restricted, then future cures will not materialize. If fu-
ture cures do not materialize, then people will die prematurely. Therefore, if 
stem-cell research is restricted, then people will die prematurely.
arguments that lack indicator words, the conclusion is the first statement. Furthermore, it 
helps to mentally insert the word “therefore” before the various statements before deciding 
that a statement should be interpreted as a conclusion. The typical kinds of nonarguments 
that we have surveyed are as follows:
 warnings	
reports
 pieces of advice	
expository passages
 statements of belief	
illustrations
 statements of opinion	
explanations
 loosely associated statements	
conditional statements
	
Keep in mind that these kinds of nonargument are not mutually exclusive, and that, for 
example, one and the same passage can sometimes be interpreted as both a report and a 
statement of opinion, or as both an expository passage and an illustration. The precise kind 
of nonargument a passage might be is nowhere near as important as correctly deciding 
whether or not it is an argument.
	
After working the exercises in this section, you may, if you wish, proceed directly to  
Section 1.6 [“Extended Arguments”].
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   25

1
	
8.	 Fictional characters behave according to the same psychological probabilities 
as real people. But the characters of fiction are found in exotic dilemmas that 
real people hardly encounter. Consequently, fiction provides us with the op-
portunity to ponder how people react in uncommon situations, and to deduce 
moral lessons, psychological principles, and philosophical insights from their 
behavior.
( J. R. McCuen and A. C. Winkler, Readings for Writers, 4th ed.)
	
9.	 I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free ­peoples 
who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside 
pressures. I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own 
destinies in their own way. I believe that our help should be primarily through 
economic and financial aid, which is essential to economic stability and or-
derly political processes.
(President Truman, Address to Congress, 1947)
	 ★10.	 Five college students who were accused of sneaking into the Cincinnati Zoo 
and trying to ride the camels pleaded no contest to criminal trespass yester-
day. The students scaled a fence to get into the zoo and then climbed another 
fence to get into the camel pit before security officials caught them, zoo of-
ficials said.
(Newspaper clipping)
	
11.	 Mortality rates for women undergoing early abortions, where the procedure 
is legal, appear to be as low as or lower than the rates for normal childbirth. 
Consequently, any interest of the state in protecting the woman from an in-
herently hazardous procedure, except when it would be equally dangerous for 
her to forgo it, has largely disappeared.
( Justice Blackmun, Roe v. Wade)
	
12.	 The pace of reading, clearly, depends entirely upon the reader. He may read 
as slowly or as rapidly as he can or wishes to read. If he does not understand 
something, he may stop and reread it, or go in search of elucidation before 
continuing. The reader can accelerate his pace when the material is easy or 
less than interesting, and can slow down when it is difficult or enthralling. 
If what he reads is moving he can put down the book for a few moments and 
cope with his emotions without fear of losing anything.
(Marie Winn, The Plug-In Drug)
	 ★13.	 Any unit of length, when cubed, becomes a unit of volume. Thus, the cubic 
meter, cubic centimeter, and cubic millimeter are all units of volume.
(Nivaldo J. Tro, Chemistry: A Molecular Approach, 2nd ed.)
	
14.	 Lions at Kruger National Park in South Africa are dying of tuberculosis. “All of 
the lions in the park may be dead within ten years because the disease is incur-
able, and the lions have no natural resistance,” said the deputy director of the 
Department of Agriculture.
(Newspaper clipping)
1
26   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
	
15.	 Economics is of practical value in business. An understanding of the overall 
operation of the economic system puts the business executive in a better posi-
tion to formulate policies. The executive who understands the causes and con-
sequences of inflation is better equipped during inflationary periods to make 
more-intelligent decisions than otherwise.
(Campbell R. McConnell, Economics, 8th ed.)
	 ★16.	 Bear one thing in mind before you begin to write your paper: Famous  
literary works, especially works regarded as classics, have been thoroughly 
studied to the point where prevailing opinion on them has assumed the  
character of orthodoxy.
( J. R. McCuen and A. C. Winkler, Readings for Writers, 4th ed.)
	
17.	 Young people at universities study to achieve knowledge and not to learn a 
trade. We must all learn how to support ourselves, but we must also learn how 
to live. We need a lot of engineers in the modern world, but we do not want a 
world of modern engineers.
(  Winston Churchill, A Churchill Reader, ed. Colin R. Coote)
	
18.	 No business concern wants to sell on credit to a customer who will prove un-
able or unwilling to pay his or her account. Consequently, most business or-
ganizations include a credit department which must reach a decision on the 
credit worthiness of each prospective customer.
(  Walter B. Meigs and Robert F. Meigs, Accounting)
	 ★19.	 For organisms at the sea surface, sinking into deep water usually means death. 
Plant cells cannot photosynthesize in the dark depths. Fishes and other ani-
mals that descend lose contact with the main surface food supply and them-
selves become food for strange deep-living predators.
(David H. Milne, Marine Life and the Sea)
	
20.	 Since the 1950s a malady called whirling disease has invaded U.S. fishing 
streams, frequently attacking rainbow trout. A parasite deforms young fish, 
which often chase their tails before dying, hence the name.
(“Trout Disease—A Turn for the Worse,” National Geographic)
	
21.	 Dachshunds are ideal dogs for small children, as they are already stretched 
and pulled to such a length that the child cannot do much harm one way or 
the other.
(Robert Benchley, quoted in Cold Noses and Warm Hearts)
	 ★22.	 Atoms are the basic building blocks of all matter. They can combine to form 
molecules, whose properties are generally very different from those of the con-
stituent atoms. Table salt, for example, a simple chemical compound formed 
from chlorine and sodium, resembles neither the poisonous gas nor the highly 
reactive metal.
(Frank J. Blatt, Principles of Physics, 2nd ed.)
	
23.	 The coarsest type of humor is the practical joke: pulling away the chair from 
the dignitary’s lowered bottom. The victim is perceived first as a person of 
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   27
1

1
consequence, then suddenly as an inert body subject to the laws of physics:  
authority is debunked by gravity, mind by matter; man is degraded to a  
mechanism.
(Arthur Koestler, Janus: A Summing Up)
	
24.	 If a man holding a belief which he was taught in childhood or persuaded of 
afterwards keeps down and pushes away any doubts which arise about it in his 
mind, purposely avoids the reading of books and the company of men that call 
in question or discuss it, and regards as impious those questions which can-
not easily be asked without disturbing it—the life of that man is one long sin 
against mankind.
(  W. K. Clifford, The Ethics of Belief)
	 ★25.	 It is usually easy to decide whether or not something is alive. This is because 
living things share many common attributes, such as the capacity to extract 
energy from nutrients to drive their various functions, the power to actively 
respond to changes in their environment, and the ability to grow, to differenti-
ate, and to reproduce.
(Donald Voet and Judith G. Voet, Biochemistry, 2nd ed.)
	
26.	 Words are slippery customers. The full meaning of a word does not appear 
until it is placed in its context. . . . And even then the meaning will depend 
upon the listener, upon the speaker, upon their entire experience of the lan-
guage, upon their knowledge of one another, and upon the whole situation.
(C. Cherry, On Human Communication)
	
27.	 Haydn developed the string quartet from the eighteenth-century divertimento, 
giving more substance to the light, popular form and scoring it for two violins, 
a viola, and a cello. His eighty-three quartets, written over the course of his 
creative lifetime, evolved slowly into a sophisticated form. Together they con-
stitute one of the most important bodies of chamber-music literature.
(Robert Hickok, Exploring Music)
	 ★28.	 A person never becomes truly self-reliant. Even though he deals effectively 
with things, he is necessarily dependent upon those who have taught him to 
do so. They have selected the things he is dependent upon and determined the 
kinds and degrees of dependencies.
(B. F. Skinner, Beyond Freedom and Dignity)
	
29.	 There is no doubt that some businessmen conspire to shorten the useful life 
of their products in order to guarantee replacement sales. There is, similarly, 
no doubt that many of the annual model changes with which American (and 
other) consumers are increasingly familiar are not technologically substantive.
(Alvin Toffler, Future Shock)
	
30.	 The brain and the nervous system are composed of two types of cells—­
neurons and glial cells. Neurons are responsible for information transmission 
throughout the nervous system. Glial cells constitute the support system for 
the neurons. For example, glial cells take away the waste products of neurons, 
1
28   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
keep the neurons’ chemical environment stable, and insulate them, allowing 
neurons to do their work more efficiently.
(Richard Griggs, Psychology: A Concise Introduction)
	 ★31.	 In areas where rats are a problem, it is very difficult to exterminate them with 
bait poison. That’s because some rats eat enough poison to die but others eat 
only enough to become sick and then learn to avoid that particular poison 
taste in the future.
(Rod Plotnik, Introduction to Psychology, 4th ed.)
	
32.	 Although it is customary to think of human population as increasing con-
tinuously without declines or fluctuations, population growth has not been 
a steady march. For example, great declines occurred during the time of the 
Black Death, during the fourteenth century. Entire towns were abandoned, 
production of food declined, and in England, one-third of the population died 
within a single decade.
(Daniel B. Botkin and Edward A Keller, Environmental Science)
	
33.	 If someone avoids and is afraid of everything, standing firm against nothing, 
he becomes cowardly; if he is afraid of nothing at all and goes to face every-
thing, he becomes rash. Similarly, if he gratifies himself with every pleasure 
and abstains from none, he becomes intemperate; if he avoids them all, he 
becomes some sort of insensible person. Temperance and bravery, then, are 
ruined by excess and deficiency, but preserved by the mean.
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)
	 ★34.	 Nations are made in two ways, by the slow working of history or the galvanic 
force of ideas. Most nations are made the former way, emerging slowly from 
the mist of the past, gradually coalescing within concentric circles of shared 
sympathies, with an accretion of consensual institutions. But a few nations are 
formed and defined by the citizens’ assent to a shared philosophy.
(George Will, “Lithuania and South Carolina”)
	
35.	 One form of energy can be converted to another. For example, when an elec-
tric motor is connected to a battery, chemical energy is converted to electrical 
energy, which in turn is converted to mechanical energy.
(Raymond A Serway, Physics for Scientists and Engineers, 4th ed.)
	II.	 The following selections were originally submitted as letters to the editor of 
­newspapers and magazines. Determine which of them can, with good reason, be 
considered arguments. In those that can, identify the conclusion.
	
★1.	 What this country needs is a return to the concept of swift and certain jus-
tice. If we need more courts, judges and prisons, then so be it. And as for 
capital punishment, I say let the punishment fit the crime. When criminals 
behave more like humans, then we can start to treat them more humanely. 
In the meantime, I would like to see the Night Stalkers of our society swiftly 
executed rather than coddled by our courts and prisons.
( John Pearson)
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   29
1

1
	
2.	 Social security is not merely a retirement program. Six and a half million chil-
dren in the United States are kept out of poverty each year because of assistance 
from Social Security’s survivors benefits program—which protects virtually 
all American children in the tragic event of the death of a parent. Beneficiaries 
include spouses and children of workers who have died or become disabled; 
grandparents raising grandchildren; severely disabled children; and families 
of fallen service members.
(Donna Butts)
	
3.	 Is there any country in the world that worries more about its kids having fun 
in school, making lessons exciting and relevant, and then is more disappointed 
with the result than the United States? We think learning is like buying a car 
or smoking a cigarette. Just get into the thing or draw a breath and you will be 
effortlessly transported to lands of pleasure and excitement.
(Charles M. Breinin)
	
★4.	 After reading your cover story, I find that cable TV has simply flooded our 
airwaves with more sex, violence, and teenage punk junk. Now our children 
can spend even less time studying and we can spend more time in blank-space 
stares at the idiot box. Cable would be fine with more educational channels—
and fewer cheap thrills aimed at narrow-minded bubble brains.
( Jacqueline Murray)
	
5.	 Once the basic necessities have been achieved, future income is only lightly 
connected to well-being. Democrats generally seek to tax future income to fi-
nance programs that meet basic needs, including food, clothing shelter, retire-
ment security and health care. Republicans, in contrast, seek to protect future 
income from taxation, often at the expense of meeting the basic needs of the 
less fortunate. So which of our two main political parties is more concerned 
with achieving broad happiness, and which party is more concerned with ful-
filling selfishness?
( Jonathan Carey)
	
6.	 Animal abusers are cowards who take their issues out on “easy victims”—and 
their targets often include their fellow humans. I cannot begin to say how many 
incidents I’ve seen involving animal abusers who commit violent acts against 
humans, and animal neglecters who have neglected their children or other 
human dependents. Treating cruelty to animals with the seriousness it de-
serves doesn’t only protect animals, it also makes the entire community safer.
(Martin Mersereau)
	
★7.	 The creation of a third political party—the independent party—would allow 
Congressional aspirants who desire to think for themselves to claim a high 
ground that is currently vacant. The new party would provide a more effective 
forum to discuss the right course for this country and might compel the other 
two parties to do likewise. The pressure such a movement would put on those 
now stagnating in cozy sinecures would, at the least, prove entertaining for a 
weary, frustrated public.
(Bill Cannon)
1
30   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
	
8.	 I agree that when religious institutions exclude woman from their hierar-
chies and rituals, the inevitable implication is that females are inferior. But 
it is important to note that when women’s voices are silenced, it is not only 
the message that such discrimination sends that is damaging. The institutions 
themselves suffer. By disempowering women, religious institutions, and the 
broader societies in which they operate, lose the invaluable input of 51 percent 
of their constituents.
( Jessie Cronan)
	
9.	 It looks like India and China are going to compete for a manned landing on 
the moon by 2020 while America is muddling along with no real future space 
plan. Let’s do something significant in space—say, go to Mars by 2020. We 
could have done it 30 years ago. Planning for a Mars mission was well along. 
But the nation turned away from space after we landed on the moon, even 
canceling the three remaining flights to the moon. These Saturn 5 rockets now 
sit in museums.
(Bill Ketchum)
	 ★10.	 Teenage bullying is all about power. One person has it, one person does not. 
Reluctant to seek help, victims feel ashamed and powerless, and they fear re-
taliation should they “rat out” the bully. Strong anti-bullying programs are 
needed to provide a means to report bullying anonymously, to train all school 
personnel to take reports of bullying seriously, and to offer workshops for 
children on how to respond to being bullied.
(Karen Schulte O’Neill)
	III.	 The following statements represent conclusions for arguments. Each is expressed in 
the form of two alternatives. Select one of the alternatives for each conclusion, and 
then jot down several reasons that support it. Finally, incorporate your reasons into 
a written argument of at least 100 words that supports the conclusion. Include prem-
ise and conclusion indicators in some of your arguments, but not in all of them.
	
1.	 A constitutional amendment that outlaws flag burning should/should not be 
adopted.
	
2.	 Street drugs should/should not be legalized.
	
3.	 The death penalty should/should not be abolished.
	
4.	 Sanctions should/should not be imposed on students for using speech that is 
offensive to minorities.
	
5.	 Free health care should/should not be guaranteed to all citizens.
	
6.	 Same-sex marriages should/should not be recognized by the state.
	
7.	 The possession, ownership, and sale of handguns should/should not be outlawed.
	
8.	 Cigarettes should/should not be regulated as an addictive drug.
	
9.	 Affirmative action programs should/should not be abolished.
	
10.	 Doctors should/should not be allowed to assist terminally ill patients in com-
mitting suicide.
SECTION 1.2 Recognizing Arguments   31
1

1
	IV.	 Define the following terms:
expository passage	
conditional statement
illustration	
antecedent
argument from example	
consequent
explanation	
sufficient condition
explanandum	
necessary condition
explanans
	V.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 Any passage that contains an argument must contain a claim that something is 
supported by evidence or reasons.
	
2.	 In an argument, the claim that something is supported by evidence or reasons 
is always explicit.
	
3.	 Passages that contain indicator words such as “thus,” “since,” and “because” are 
always arguments.
	
4.	 In deciding whether a passage contains an argument, we should always keep 
an eye out for indicator words and the presence of an inferential relationship 
between the statements.
	
5.	 Some expository passages can be correctly interpreted as arguments.
	
6.	 Some passages containing “for example” can be correctly interpreted as argu-
ments.
	
7.	 In deciding whether an expository passage or an illustration should be inter-
preted as an argument, it helps to note whether the claim being developed or 
illustrated is one that is accepted by everyone.
	
8.	 Some conditional statements can be reexpressed to form arguments.
	
9.	 In an explanation, the explanandum usually describes an accepted matter of 
fact.
	
10.	 In an explanation, the explanans is the statement or group of statements that 
does the explaining.
	VI.	 Fill in the blanks with “necessary” or “sufficient” to make the following statements 
true. After the blanks have been filled in, express the result in terms of conditional 
statements.
	
★1.	 Being a tiger is a              condition for being an animal.
	
2.	 Being an animal is a              condition for being a tiger.
	
3.	 Drinking a glass of water is a              condition for quenching one’s 
thirst.
	
★4.	 Having a racket is a              condition for playing tennis.
	
5.	 Heating water is a              condition for brewing coffee.
1
32   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
SECTION 1.3 Deduction and Induction   33
	
6.	 Stepping on a cat’s tail is a              condition for making the cat yowl.
	
★7.	 Burning leaves is a              condition for producing smoke.
	
8.	 Paying attention is a              condition for understanding a lecture.
	
9.	 Being exactly divisible by 4 is a          condition for a number being even.
	 ★10.	 Uttering a falsehood is a              condition for telling a lie.
	VII.	 Page through a book, magazine, or newspaper and find two arguments, one with 
indicator words, the other without. Copy the arguments as written, giving the ap-
propriate reference. Then identify the premises and conclusion of each.
1.3	
Deduction and Induction
PREVIEW    You are walking through campus on the way to class when suddenly you hear a loud 
pop-pop-pop. Simultaneously you see three people fall to the ground. One is screaming for help, and  
the other two are lying motionless. Immediately you take cover behind a nearby tree. Why do you do 
this? Because it looks like an assailant is shooting people and you might be the next victim. Is it certain 
you will be hit? No, but there is a reasonable degree of probability. This section takes up the distinction 
between certain and probable reasoning.
The idea that arguments come in two forms, deductive and inductive, was first as-
serted by Aristotle. In the intervening centuries, deduction and induction have become 
a settled fixture not only in logic but in our intellectual culture. Countless books, both 
fiction and nonfiction, have referred to it. Einstein wrote a paper on it. And a huge 
number of textbooks ranging from philosophy to education, business to psychology, 
and chemistry to anthropology explore the subject. So what is the difference between a 
deductive and an inductive argument? Briefly we can say that deductive arguments are 
those that rest on necessary reasoning, while inductive arguments are those that rest on 
probabilistic reasoning.
Stated more precisely, a deductive argument is an argument incorporating the claim 
that it is impossible for the conclusion to be false given that the premises are true. On the 
other hand, an inductive argument is an argument incorporating the claim that it is im-
probable that the conclusion be false given that the premises are true. Two examples:
The meerkat is closely related to the suricat.
The suricat thrives on beetle larvae.
Therefore, probably the meerkat thrives on beetle larvae.
The meerkat is a member of the mongoose family.
All members of the mongoose family are carnivores.
Therefore, it necessarily follows that the meerkat is a carnivore.
The first of these arguments is inductive, the second deductive.
1
 Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

34   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
In deciding whether an argument is inductive or deductive, we look to certain ob-
jective features of the argument. These features include (1) the occurrence of special 
indicator words, (2) the actual strength of the inferential link between premises and 
conclusion, and (3) the form or style of argumentation. However, we must acknowl-
edge at the outset that many arguments in ordinary language are incomplete, and be-
cause of this, deciding whether the argument should best be interpreted as deductive 
or inductive may be impossible.
The occurrence of special indicator words is illustrated in the examples we just con-
sidered. The word “probably” in the conclusion of the first argument suggests that the 
argument should be taken as inductive, and the word “necessarily” in the conclusion 
of the second suggests that the second argument be taken as deductive. Additional 
inductive indicators are “improbable,” “plausible,” “implausible,” “likely,” “unlikely,” and 
“reasonable to conclude.” Additional deductive indicators are “certainly,” “absolutely,” 
and “definitely.” (Note that the phrase “it must be the case that” is simply a conclusion 
indicator that can occur in either deductive or inductive argments.)
Inductive and deductive indicator words often suggest the correct interpretation. 
However, if they conflict with one of the other criteria (discussed shortly), we should 
probably ignore them. Arguers often use phrases such as “it certainly follows that” 
for rhetorical purposes to add impact to their conclusion and not to suggest that the 
argument be taken as deductive. Similarly, some arguers, not knowing the distinction 
between inductive and deductive, will claim to “deduce” a conclusion when their argu-
ment is more correctly interpreted as inductive.
The second factor that bears on our interpretation of an argument as inductive or 
deductive is the actual strength of the inferential link between premises and conclu-
sion. If the conclusion actually does follow with strict necessity from the premises, the 
argument is clearly deductive. In such an argument it is impossible for the premises to 
be true and the conclusion false. On the other hand, if the conclusion does not follow 
with strict necessity but does follow probably, it is often best to consider the argument 
inductive. Examples:
All entertainers are extroverts.
David Letterman is an entertainer.
Therefore, David Letterman is an extrovert.
The vast majority of entertainers are extroverts.
David Letterman is an entertainer.
Therefore, David Letterman is an extrovert.
In the first example, the conclusion follows with strict necessity from the premises. If 
we assume that all entertainers are extroverts and that David Letterman is an enter-
tainer, then it is impossible that David Letterman not be an extrovert. Thus, we should 
interpret this argument as deductive. In the second example, the conclusion does not 
follow from the premises with strict necessity, but it does follow with some degree of 
probability. If we assume that the premises are true, then based on that assumption it 
is probable that the conclusion is true. Thus, it is best to interpret the second argument 
as inductive.
1

1
R
uth Barcan was born in New York City in 1921. 
Her mother was a homemaker, and her father a  
 typesetter at, and contributor to, the Jewish Daily 
Forward. After completing her primary and secondary 
education at public schools, she enrolled in New York 
University, where, in addition to her academic pursuits, 
she won praise as an outstanding fencer. In 1941 she 
earned a bachelor’s degree in mathematics and phi-
losophy, and five years later she received a PhD in phi-
losophy from Yale University. In 1942 she married Jules 
Alexander Marcus, a physicist, and the couple had four 
children, two boys and two girls.
After graduating from Yale, Barcan Marcus’s early 
career was spent holding several postdoctoral fellow-
ships (including a Guggenheim) and visiting professor-
ships. In 1959 she accepted a position at Roosevelt 
University, followed by positions at the University of 
Illinois, Chicago (where she was founding department 
chair) and Northwestern University. In 1973 she re-
turned to Yale as professor of philosophy.
Commencing early in her career, Barcan Mar-
cus made pioneering contributions to the area of 
quantified modal logic. She proposed, as an axiom,  
the widely discussed 
Barcan formula, which 
asserts, in symbols, 
(x)hFx . h(x) Fx. In 
English, this means  
that if everything is 
nec­essarily F, then it 
is necessary that ev-
erything is F. The for-
mula is controversial 
because it implies that 
all objects that exist in 
every possible world 
exist in the actual world.   This could be taken to imply 
that nothing new can be created.
Personally, Ruth Barcan Marcus was fearless, down 
to earth, unpretentious, and a constant supporter of 
others. She had a great sense of humor—and she 
was also endearingly absentminded. On one occasion, 
while in the midst of a frantic search, she received a call 
from the local supermarket informing her that her final 
exams had been found amid the frozen meats.
Ruth Barcan Marcus 1921–2012
Courtesy Michael Marsland
Occasionally, an argument contains no special indicator words, and the conclusion 
does not follow either necessarily or probably from the premises; in other words, it 
does not follow at all. This situation points to the need for the third factor to be taken 
into account, which is the character or form of argumentation the arguer uses.
Deductive Argument Forms
Many arguments have a distinctive character or form that indicates that the premises 
are supposed to provide absolute support for the conclusion. Five examples of such 
forms or kinds of argumentation are arguments based on mathematics, arguments 
from definition, and categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive syllogisms.
An argument based on mathematics is an argument in which the conclusion  
depends on some purely arithmetic or geometric computation or measurement.  
SECTION 1.3 Deduction and Induction   35
1

36   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
For example, a shopper might place two apples and three oranges into a paper bag and 
then conclude that the bag contains five pieces of fruit. Or a surveyor might measure a 
square piece of land and, after determining that it is 100 feet on each side, conclude that 
it contains 10,000 square feet. Since all arguments in pure mathematics are deductive, 
we can usually consider arguments that depend on mathematics to be deductive as well. 
However, arguments that depend on statistics are a noteworthy exception. As we will 
see shortly, such arguments are usually best interpreted as inductive.
An argument from definition is an argument in which the conclusion is claimed 
to depend merely on the definition of some word or phrase used in the premise or 
conclusion. For example, someone might argue that because Claudia is mendacious, it 
follows that she tells lies, or that because a certain paragraph is prolix, it follows that it 
is excessively wordy. These arguments are deductive because their conclusions follow 
with necessity from the definitions of “mendacious” and “prolix.”
A syllogism, in general, is an argument consisting of exactly two premises and one 
conclusion. Categorical syllogisms will be treated in greater depth in Chapter 5, but 
for now we will say that a categorical syllogism is a syllogism in which each statement 
begins with one of the words “all,” “no,” or “some.” Example:
All ancient forests are sources of wonder.
Some ancient forests are targets of the timber industry.
Therefore, some sources of wonder are targets of the timber industry.
Arguments such as these are nearly always best treated as deductive.
A hypothetical syllogism is a syllogism having a conditional (“if . . . then”) state-
ment for one or both of its premises. Examples:
If estate taxes are abolished, then wealth will accumulate disproportionately.
If wealth accumulates disproportionately, then democracy will be threatened.
Therefore, if estate taxes are abolished, then democracy will be threatened.
If Fox News is a propaganda machine, then it misleads its viewers.
Fox News is a propaganda machine.
Therefore, Fox News misleads its viewers.
Later in this book, the first of these arguments will be given the more specific name 
of pure hypothetical syllogism because it is composed exclusively of conditional (hy-
pothetical) statements. The second argument is called a mixed hypothetical syllogism 
because only one of its component statements is a conditional. Later in this book, the 
second argument will be given the more specific Latin name modus ponens.
A disjunctive syllogism is a syllogism having a disjunctive (“either . . . or  . . .”) 
­statement. Example:
Either global warming will be arrested, or hurricanes will become more intense.
Global warming will not be arrested.
Therefore, hurricanes will become more intense.
As with hypothetical syllogisms, such arguments are usually best taken as deductive. 
Hypothetical and disjunctive syllogisms will be treated in greater depth in Chapter 6.

1
Inductive Argument Forms
In general, inductive arguments are such that the content of the conclusion is in some 
way intended to “go beyond” the content of the premises. The premises of such an argu-
ment typically deal with some subject that is relatively familiar, and the conclusion then 
moves beyond this to a subject that is less familiar or that little is known about. Such 
an argument may take any of several forms: predictions about the future, arguments 
from analogy, inductive generalizations, arguments from authority, arguments based 
on signs, and causal inferences, to name just a few.
A prediction is an argument that proceeds from our knowledge of the past to a 
claim about the future. For example, someone might argue that because certain me-
teorological phenomena have been observed to develop over a certain region of central 
Missouri, a storm will occur there in six hours. Or again, one might argue that because 
certain fluctuations occurred in the prime interest rate on Friday, the value of the dollar 
will decrease against foreign currencies on Monday. Nearly everyone realizes that the 
future cannot be known with certainty; thus, whenever an argument makes a predic-
tion about the future, one is usually justified in considering the argument inductive.
An argument from analogy is an argument that depends on the existence of an 
analogy, or similarity, between two things or states of affairs. Because of the existence 
of this analogy, a certain condition that affects the better-known thing or situation is 
concluded to affect the similar, lesser-known thing or situation. For example, someone 
might argue that because Christina’s Porsche is a great-handling car, it follows that 
Angela’s Porsche must also be a great-handling car. The argument depends on the exis-
tence of a similarity, or analogy, between the two cars. The certitude attending such an 
inference is probabilistic at best.
A generalization is an argument that proceeds from the knowledge of a selected 
sample to some claim about the whole group. Because the members of the sample 
have a certain characteristic, it is argued that all the members of the group have that 
same characteristic. For example, one might argue that because three oranges selected 
from a certain crate were especially tasty and juicy, all the oranges from that crate are 
especially tasty and juicy. Or again, one might argue that because six out of a total 
of nine members sampled from a certain labor union intend to vote for Johnson for 
union president, two-thirds of the entire membership intend to vote for Johnson. These  
examples illustrate the use of statistics in inductive argumentation.
An argument from authority is an argument that concludes something is true be-
cause a presumed expert or witness has said that it is. For example, a person might 
argue that earnings for Hewlett-Packard Corporation will be up in the coming quarter 
because of a statement to that effect by an investment counselor. Or a lawyer might ar-
gue that Mack the Knife committed the murder because an eyewitness testified to that 
effect under oath. Because the investment counselor and the eyewitness could be either 
mistaken or lying, such arguments are essentially probabilistic.
An argument based on signs is an argument that proceeds from the knowledge of 
a sign to a claim about the thing or situation that the sign symbolizes. The word “sign,” 
as it is used here, means any kind of message (usually visual) produced by an intelli-
gent being. For example, when driving on an unfamiliar highway one might see a sign 
SECTION 1.3 Deduction and Induction   37

1
38   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
indicating that the road makes several sharp turns one mile ahead. Based on this infor-
mation, one might argue that the road does indeed make several sharp turns one mile 
ahead. Because the sign might be misplaced or in error about the turns, the conclusion 
is only probable.
A causal inference is an argument that proceeds from knowledge of a cause to a 
claim about an effect, or, conversely, from knowledge of an effect to a claim about a 
cause. For example, from the knowledge that a bottle of wine had been accidentally left 
in the freezer overnight, someone might conclude that it had frozen (cause to effect). 
Conversely, after tasting a piece of chicken and finding it dry and tough, one might 
conclude that it had been overcooked (effect to cause). Because specific instances of 
cause and effect can never be known with absolute certainty, one may usually interpret 
such arguments as inductive.
Further Considerations
It should be noted that the various subspecies of inductive arguments listed here are 
not intended to be mutually exclusive. Overlaps can and do occur. For example, many 
causal inferences that proceed from cause to effect also qualify as predictions. The pur-
pose of this survey is not to demarcate in precise terms the various forms of induction 
but rather to provide guidelines for distinguishing induction from deduction.
Keeping this in mind, we should take care not to confuse arguments in geometry, 
which are always deductive, with arguments from analogy or inductive generaliza-
tions. For example, an argument concluding that a triangle has a certain attribute (such 
as a right angle) because another triangle, with which it is congruent, also has that  
attribute might be mistaken for an argument from analogy. Similarly, an argument 
that concludes that all triangles have a certain attribute (such as angles totaling two 
right angles) because any particular triangle has that attribute might be mistaken for an  
inductive generalization. Arguments such as these, however, are always deductive,  
because the conclusion follows necessarily and with complete certainty from the premises.
One broad classification of arguments not listed in this survey is scientific argu-
ments. Arguments that occur in science can be either inductive or deductive, depend-
ing on the circumstances. In general, arguments aimed at the discovery of a law of 
nature are usually considered inductive. Suppose, for example, that we want to discover 
a law that governs the time required for a falling body to strike the earth. We drop bod-
ies of various weights from various heights and measure the time it takes them to fall. 
Comparing our measurements, we notice that the time is approximately proportional 
to the square root of the distance. From this we conclude that the time required for any 
body to fall is proportional to the square root of the distance through which it falls. 
Such an argument is best interpreted as an inductive generalization.
Another type of argument that occurs in science has to do with the application of 
known laws to specific circumstances. Scientific laws are widely considered to be gen-
eralizations that hold for all times and all places. As so understood, their application to 
a specific situation is always deductive, even though it might relate to the future. Sup-
pose, for example, that we want to apply Boyle’s law for ideal gases to a container of gas 
in our laboratory. Boyle’s law states that the pressure exerted by a gas on the walls of its 

1
container is inversely proportional to the volume. Applying this law, we conclude that 
when we reduce the volume of our laboratory sample by half, the pressure will double. 
This application of Boyle’s law is deductive, even though it pertains to the future.
A final point needs to be made about the distinction between inductive and deduc-
tive arguments. There is a tradition extending back to the time of Aristotle that holds 
that inductive arguments are those that proceed from the particular to the general, 
while deductive arguments are those that proceed from the general to the particular. (A 
particular statement is one that makes a claim about one or more particular members 
of a class, while a general statement makes a claim about all the members of a class.) 
It is true, of course, that many inductive and deductive arguments do work in this way; 
but this fact should not be used as a criterion for distinguishing induction from deduc-
tion. As a matter of fact, there are deductive arguments that proceed from the general 
to the general, from the particular to the particular, and from the particular to the 
general, as well as from the general to the particular; and there are inductive arguments 
that do the same. For example, here is a deductive argument that proceeds from the 
particular to the general:
Three is a prime number.
Five is a prime number.
Seven is a prime number.
Therefore, all odd numbers between two and eight are prime numbers.
And here is one that proceeds from the particular to the particular:
Gabriel is a wolf.
Gabriel has a tail.
Therefore, Gabriel’s tail is the tail of a wolf.
Here is an inductive argument that proceeds from the general to the particular:
All emeralds previously found have been green.
Therefore, the next emerald to be found will be green.
The other varieties are easy to construct. Thus, the progression from particular to general, 
and vice versa, cannot be used as a criterion for distinguishing induction from deduction.
	
Summary
To distinguish deductive arguments from inductive arguments, we attempt to evaluate the 
strength of the argument’s inferential claim—how strongly the conclusion is claimed to fol-
low from the premises. This claim is an objective feature of an argument, and it may or may 
not be related to the subjective intentions of the arguer.
	
To interpret an argument’s inferential claim we look at three factors: special indicator 
words, the actual strength of the inferential link between premises and conclusion, and the 
form or style of argumentation. Given that we have more than one factor to look at, it is 
SECTION 1.3 Deduction and Induction   39

1
40   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PREPOSITIONS
EXERCISE 1.3	
	 I.	 Determine whether the following arguments are best interpreted as being induc-
tive or deductive. Also state the criteria you use in reaching your decision (i.e., the 
presence of indicator words, the nature of the inferential link between premises 
and conclusion, or the character or form of argumentation).
	
★1.	 Because triangle A is congruent with triangle B, and triangle A is isosceles, it 
follows that triangle B is isosceles.
	
2.	 The plaque on the leaning tower of Pisa says that Galileo performed experi-
ments there with falling objects. It must be the case that Galileo did indeed 
perform those experiments there.
	
3.	 The rainfall in Seattle has been more than 15 inches every year for the past thirty 
years. Therefore, the rainfall next year will probably be more than 15 inches.
possible in a single argument for the occurrence of two of these factors to conflict with 
each other, leading to opposite interpretations. For example, in drawing a conclusion to a 
categorical syllogism (which is clearly deductive), an arguer might say “It probably follows 
that . . .” (which suggests induction). To help alleviate this conflict we can list the factors in 
order of importance:
1.		 Arguments in which the premises provide absolute support for the conclusion. 
Such arguments are always deductive.
2.		 Arguments having a specific deductive character or form (e.g., categorical syllo-
gism). This factor is often of equal importance to the first, and, when present, it 
provides a clear-cut indication that the argument is deductive.
3.		 Arguments having a specific inductive character or form (e.g., a prediction). 
Arguments of this sort are nearly always best interpreted as inductive.
4.		 Arguments containing inductive indicator language (e.g., “It probably follows  
that . . .”). Since arguers rarely try to make their argument appear weaker than it 
really is, such language can usually be trusted. But if this language conflicts with one 
of the first two factors, it should be ignored.
5.		 Arguments containing deductive indicator language (e.g., “It necessarily follows  
that . . .”). Arguers occasionally use such language for r hetorical purposes, to make 
their argument appear stronger than it really is, so such language should be evalu-
ated carefully.
6.		 Arguments in which the premises provide only probable support for the conclu-
sion. This is the least important factor, and if it conflicts with any of the earlier ones, 
it should probably be ignored.
	
Unfortunately, many arguments in ordinary language are incomplete, so it often hap-
pens that none of these factors are clearly present. Determining the inductive or deductive 
character of such arguments may be impossible.
40   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
	
★4.	 No e-mail messages are eloquent creations. Some love letters are eloquent cre-
ations. Therefore, some love letters are not e-mail messages.
	
5.	 Amoco, Exxon, and Texaco are all listed on the New York Stock Exchange. It 
must be the case that all major American oil companies are listed on the New 
York Stock Exchange.
	
6.	 The longer a pendulum is, the longer it takes to swing. Therefore, when the 
pendulum of a clock is lengthened, the clock slows down.
	
★7.	 Paying off terrorists in exchange for hostages is not a wise policy, since such 
action will only lead them to take more hostages in the future.
	
8.	 The Matterhorn is higher than Mount Whitney, and Mount Whitney is higher 
than Mount Rainier. The obvious conclusion is that the Matterhorn is higher 
than Mount Rainier.
	
9.	 Although both front and rear doors were found open after the burglary, there 
were pry marks around the lock on the rear door and deposits of mud near the 
threshold. It must be the case that the thief entered through the rear door and 
left through the front.
	 ★10.	 The Wall Street Journal has an article on the new banking regulations. The  
Financial Times, like the Wall Street Journal, is a highly respected business 
publication. Therefore, the Financial Times probably also has an article on the 
new banking regulations.
	
11.	 Cholesterol is endogenous with humans. Therefore, it is manufactured inside 
the human body.
	
12.	 Either classical culture originated in Greece, or it originated in Egypt. Classi-
cal culture did not originate in Egypt. Therefore, classical culture originated in 
Greece.
	 ★13.	 World-renowned physicist Stephen Hawking says that the condition of the 
universe at the instant of the big bang was more highly ordered than it is today. 
In view of Hawking’s stature in the scientific community, we should conclude 
that this description of the universe is correct.
	
14.	 If Alexander the Great died from typhoid fever, then he became infected in 
India. Alexander the Great did die from typhoid fever. Therefore, he became 
infected in India.
	
15.	 Crater Lake, the deepest lake in the United States, was caused by a huge volca-
nic eruption 7,700 years ago. Since human beings have lived around the moun-
tain for more than 10,000 years, it is likely that people witnessed that eruption.
(National Park Service, “Crater Lake—Its History”)
	 ★16.	 Each element, such as hydrogen and iron, has a set of gaps—wavelengths that 
it absorbs rather than radiates. So if those wavelengths are missing from the 
spectrum, you know that that element is present in the star you are observing.
(Rick Gore, “Eyes of Science”)
SECTION 1.3 Deduction and Induction   41
1

1
	
17.	 Because the apparent daily movement which is common to both the planets 
and the fixed stars is seen to travel from the east to the west, but the far-slower 
single movements of the single planets travel in the opposite direction from 
west to east, it is therefore certain that these movements cannot depend on the 
common movement of the world but should be assigned to the planets them-
selves.
( Johannes Kepler, Epitomy of Copernican Astronomy)
	
18.	 Contrary to the common notion that women tend to be chatty compared to 
men, little difference exists between the sexes in terms of talkativeness. Over 
a five-year period researchers placed unobtrusive microphones on 396 col-
lege students in various fields, at campuses in Mexico as well as in the United 
States. They found that both men and women spoke about 16,000 words per day.
(Richard T. Schaefer, Sociology: A Brief Introduction, 8th ed.)
	 ★19.	 When the Romans occupied England, coal was burned. Since coal produces 
quite a bit of soot and sulfur dioxide, there must have been days almost 2,000 
years ago when the air in the larger towns was badly polluted.
(Stanley Gedzelman, The Science and Wonders of the Atmosphere)
	
20.	 The graphical method for solving a system of equations is an approximation, 
since reading the point of intersection depends on the accuracy with which 
the lines are drawn and on the ability to interpret the coordinates of the point.
(Karl J. Smith and Patrick J. Boyle, Intermediate Algebra  
for College Students)
	
21.	 That [the moons of Jupiter] revolve in unequal circles is manifestly deduced 
from the fact that at the longest elongation from Jupiter it is never possible to 
see two of these moons in conjunction, whereas in the vicinity of Jupiter they 
are found united two, three, and sometimes all four together.
(Galileo Galilei, The Starry Messenger)
	 ★22.	 Lenses function by refracting light at their surfaces. Consequently, their ac-
tion depends not only on the shape of the lens surfaces, but also on the indices 
of refraction of the lens material and the surrounding medium.
(Frank J. Blatt, Principles of Physics, 2nd ed.)
	
23.	 Given present growth rates in underdeveloped countries, the limited practice 
of birth control, and the difficulty of slowing the current growth momentum, 
it can be said with virtual certainty that none of the people now reading this 
book will ever live in a world where the population is not growing.
( J. John Palen, Social Problems)
	
24.	 The interpretation of the laws is the proper and peculiar province of the 
courts. A constitution is, in fact, and must be regarded by the judges, as a fun-
damental law. It therefore belongs to them to ascertain its meaning, as well as 
the meaning of any particular act proceeding from the legislative body.
(Alexander Hamilton, Federalist Papers, No. 78)
	 ★25.	 The Simpson incident had shown me that a dog was kept in the stables, and 
yet, though someone had been in and had fetched out a horse, he had not 
1
42   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
barked enough to arouse the two lads in the loft. Obviously the midnight visi-
tor was someone whom the dog knew well.
(A. Conan Doyle, Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes)
	
26.	 Eternity is simultaneously whole. But time has a before and an after. Therefore 
time and eternity are not the same thing.
(  Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica)
	
27.	 Ordinary things that we encounter every day are electrically neutral. There-
fore, since negatively charged electrons are a part of everything, positively 
charged particles must also exist in all matter.
( James E. Brady and Gerard E. Humiston, General Chemistry)
	 ★28.	 Animals that live on plant foods must eat large quantities of vegetation, and 
this consumes much of their time. Meat eaters, by contrast, have no need to 
eat so much or so often. Consequently, meat-eating hominines [early humans] 
may have had more leisure time available to explore and manipulate their 
environment; like lions and leopards, they would have time to spend lying 
around and playing.
(  William A. Haviland, Cultural Anthropology, 8th ed.)
	
29.	 We tell people not to speed, but equip cars with air bags in case they do. So 
what’s wrong with telling kids not to have sex, but making Plan B available in 
case they do?
(Susan Beck, letter to the editor)
	
30.	 Because the moon moves relative to the earth so that it returns to the same 
position overhead after about 25 hours, there are two high and two low tides at 
any point every 25 hours.
(Douglas C. Giancoli, The Ideas of Physics, 3rd ed.)
	II.	 Define the following terms:
	
deductive argument	
prediction
	
inductive argument	
argument from analogy
	
argument based on 	
generalization
	
  mathematics	
argument from authority
	
argument from definition	
argument based on signs
	
categorical syllogism	
causal inference
	
hypothetical syllogism	
particular statement
	
disjunctive syllogism	
general statement
	III.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 In an inductive argument, it is intended that the conclusion contain more in-
formation than the premises.
	
2.	 In a deductive argument, the conclusion is not supposed to contain more in-
formation than the premises.
	
3.	 The form of argumentation the arguer uses may allow one to determine 
whether an argument is inductive or deductive.
SECTION 1.3 Deduction and Induction   43
1

1
	
4.	 The actual strength of the link between premises and conclusion may allow 
one to determine whether an argument is inductive or deductive.
	
5.	 A geometrical proof is an example of an inductive argument.
	
6.	 Most arguments based on statistical reasoning are deductive.
	
7.	 If the conclusion of an argument follows merely from the definition of a word 
used in a premise, the argument is deductive.
	
8.	 An argument that draws a conclusion about a thing based on that thing’s simi-
larity to something else is a deductive argument.
	
9.	 An argument that draws a conclusion that something is true because someone 
has said that it is, is a deductive argument.
	
10.	 An argument that presents two alternatives and eliminates one, leaving the 
other as the conclusion, is an inductive argument.
	
11.	 An argument that proceeds from knowledge of a cause to knowledge of an ef-
fect is an inductive argument.
	
12.	 If an argument contains the phrase “it definitely follows that,” then we know 
for certain that the argument is deductive.
	
13.	 An argument that predicts what will happen in the future, based on what has 
happened in the past, is an inductive argument.
	
14.	 Inductive arguments always proceed from the particular to the general.
	
15.	 Deductive arguments always proceed from the general to the particular.
	IV.	 Page through a book, magazine, or newspaper and find two arguments, one induc-
tive and the other deductive. Copy the arguments as written, giving the appropri-
ate reference. Then identify the premises and conclusion of each.
44   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1.4	
Validity, Truth, Soundness,  
Strength, Cogency
PREVIEW    Suppose you are undecided about your major, and a friend tells you that you should 
major in criminal justice because everyone in your sorority or fraternity is majoring in that field. You 
know that this is a really bad argument, but what is it, exactly, that makes it bad? In this section you 
will learn what causes inductive and deductive arguments to be good or bad and the language used to 
classify them as such.
This section introduces the central ideas and terminology needed to evaluate arguments—
to distinguish good arguments from bad arguments. Regardless of the type of argument, 
whether deductive or inductive, the evaluation of any argument involves answering two 
1
 Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

1
distinct questions: (1) Do the premises support the conclusion? (2) Are all the premises 
true? The answer to the first question is the more important one, because if the premises 
fail to support the conclusion (that is, if the reasoning is bad), the argument is worthless. 
The material that follows first considers deductive arguments and then inductive.
Deductive Arguments
The previous section defined a deductive argument as one incorporating the claim 
that it is impossible for the conclusion to be false given that the premises are true. If 
this claim is true, the argument is said to be valid. Thus, a valid deductive argument 
is an argument in which it is impossible for the conclusion to be false given that the 
premises are true. In these arguments the conclusion follows with strict necessity from 
the premises. Conversely, an invalid deductive argument is a deductive argument in 
which it is possible for the ­conclusion to be false given that the premises are true. In 
these arguments the conclusion does not follow with strict necessity from the premises, 
even though it is claimed to.
An immediate consequence of these definitions is that there is no middle ground 
between valid and invalid. There are no arguments that are “almost” valid and “almost” 
invalid. If the conclusion follows with strict necessity from the premises, the argument 
is valid; if not, it is invalid.
To test an argument for validity we begin by assuming that all the premises are true, 
and then we determine if it is possible, in light of that assumption, for the conclusion 
to be false. Here is an example:
All television networks are media companies.
NBC is a television network.
Therefore, NBC is a media company.
In this argument both premises are actually true, so it is easy to assume that they are 
true. Next we determine, in light of this assumption, if it is possible for the conclusion 
to be false. Clearly this is not possible. If NBC is included in the group of television net-
works (second premise) and if the group of television networks is included in the group 
of media companies (first premise), it necessarily follows that NBC is included in the 
group of media companies (conclusion). In other words, assuming the premises to be 
true and the conclusion false entails a strict contradiction. Thus, the argument is valid.
Here is another example:
All automakers are computer manufacturers.
United Airlines is an automaker.
Therefore, United Airlines is a computer manufacturer.
In this argument, both premises are actually false, but it is easy to assume that they 
are true. Every automaker could have a corporate division that manufactures comput-
ers. Also, in addition to flying airplanes, United Airlines could make cars. Next, in 
light of these assumptions, we determine if it is possible for the conclusion to be false. 
Again, we see that this is not possible, by the same reasoning as the previous example.  
SECTION 1.4 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency   45

46   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
Assuming the premises to be true and the conclusion false entails a contradiction. 
Thus, the argument is valid.
Another example:
All banks are financial institutions.
Wells Fargo is a financial institution.
Therefore, Wells Fargo is a bank.
As in the first example, both premises of this argument are true, so it is easy to assume 
they are true. Next we determine, in light of this assumption, if it is possible for the 
conclusion to be false. In this case it is possible. If banks were included in one part 
of the group of financial institutions and Wells Fargo were included in another part, 
then Wells Fargo would not be a bank. In other words, assuming the premises to be 
true and the conclusion false does not involve any contradiction, and so the argument  
is invalid.
In addition to illustrating the basic idea of validity, these examples suggest an im-
portant point about validity and truth. In general, validity is not something that is 
uniformly determined by the actual truth or falsity of the premises and conclusion. 
Both the NBC example and the Wells Fargo example have actually true premises and 
an actually true conclusion, yet one is valid and the other invalid. The United Airlines 
example has actually false premises and an actually false conclusion, yet the argument 
is valid. Rather, validity is something that is determined by the relationship between 
premises and conclusion. The question is not whether the premises and conclusion 
are true or false, but whether the premises support the conclusion. In the examples of 
valid arguments the premises do support the conclusion, and in the invalid case they 
do not.
Nevertheless, there is one arrangement of truth and falsity in the premises and 
­conclusion that does determine the issue of validity. Any deductive argument having 
actually true premises and an actually false conclusion is invalid. The reasoning behind 
this fact is fairly obvious. If the premises are actually true and the conclusion is actually 
false, then it certainly is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. 
Thus, by the definition of invalidity, the argument is invalid.
The idea that any deductive argument having actually true premises and a false  
conclusion is invalid may be the most important point in all of deductive logic. The en-
tire system of deductive logic would be quite useless if it accepted as valid any inferential 
process by which a person could start with truth in the premises and arrive at falsity in 
the conclusion.
Table 1.1 presents examples of categorical syllogisms (deductive arguments) that 
illustrate the various ­combinations of truth and falsity in the premises and conclusion. 
In the examples having false premises, both premises are false, but it is easy to construct 
other examples having only one false premise. When examining this table, note that 
the only combination of truth and falsity that does not allow for both valid and invalid 
arguments is true premises and false conclusion. As we have just seen, any argument 
having this combination is necessarily invalid.

1
The relationship between the validity of a deductive argument and the truth or ­falsity 
of its premises and conclusion, as illustrated in Table 1.1, is summarized as follows:
Premises
Conclusion
Validity
T
T
?
T
F
Invalid
F
T
?
F
F
?
This short summary table reinforces the point that merely knowing the truth or fal-
sity of the premises and conclusion tells us nothing about validity except in the one case 
of true premises and false conclusion. Any deductive argument having true premises 
and a false conclusion is necessarily invalid.
A sound argument is a deductive argument that is valid and has all true premises. 
Both conditions must be met for an argument to be sound; if either is missing the 
argument is unsound. Thus, an unsound argument is a deductive argument that is 
invalid, has one or more false premises, or both. Because a valid argument is one such 
that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, and because a 
sound argument does in fact have true premises, it follows that every sound argument, 
by definition, will have a true conclusion as well. A sound argument, therefore, is what 
is meant by a good, or successful, deductive argument in the fullest sense of the term.
TABLE 1.1 Deductive Arguments
Valid
Invalid
True premises
All flowers are plants.
All daisies are flowers.
All flowers are plants.
All daisies are plants.
True conclusion
Therefore, all daisies are plants. 
[sound]
Therefore, all daisies are flowers. 
[unsound]
True premises
None exist
All roses are flowers.
All daisies are flowers.
False conclusion
Therefore, all daisies are roses. 
[unsound]
False premises
All flowers are dogs.
All poodles are flowers.
All dogs are flowers. 
All poodles are flowers.
True conclusion
Therefore, all poodles are dogs. 
[unsound]
Therefore, all poodles are dogs. 
[unsound]
False premises
All flowers are dogs.
All tigers are flowers.
All roses are cats.
All daisies are cats.
False conclusion
Therefore, all tigers are dogs. 
[unsound]
Therefore, all daisies are roses. 
[unsound]
SECTION 1.4 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency   47
© Cengage Learning 2015

48   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
Sound
argument
Valid
argument
All true
premises
=
+
In connection with this definition of soundness, a single proviso is required: For 
an argument to be unsound, the false premise or premises must actually be needed 
to support the conclusion. An argument having a conclusion that is validly sup-
ported by true premises but having a superfluous false premise would still be sound.  
By similar reasoning, no addition of a false premise to an originally sound argument 
can make the argument unsound. Such a premise would be superfluous and should 
not be considered part of the argument. Analogous remarks, incidentally, extend  
to induction.
Since (at least from the standpoint of logic) every premise is either true or false, and 
every deductive argument is either valid or invalid, it follows that every deductive argu-
ment is either sound or unsound. However, given that many, if not most, premises have 
truth values that are unknown or impossible to determine, it is not always possible to 
determine the soundness of a deductive argument. But that does not mean that sound-
ness is unimportant in logic. It is crucially important that soundness be recognized 
as a criterion of evaluation that is distinct from validity and that the evaluator be ever 
vigilant never to confuse soundness with validity.
Inductive Arguments
Section 1.3 defined an inductive argument as one incorporating the claim that it 
is improbable that the conclusion be false given that the premises are true. If this 
claim is true, the argument is said to be strong. Thus, a strong inductive argument 
is an inductive argument in which it is improbable that the conclusion be false given 
that the premises are true. In such arguments, the conclusion does in fact follow  
probably from the premises. Conversely, a weak inductive argument is an argument 
in which the conclusion does not follow probably from the premises, even though it 
is claimed to.
All inductive arguments depend on what philosophers call the uniformity of nature. 
According to this principle, the future tends to replicate the past, and regularities that 
prevail in one spatial region tend to prevail in other regions. For example, in the past, 
sugar has always tasted sweet. According to the uniformity of nature, sugar will con-
tinue to taste sweet in the future. Also, just as sugar tastes sweet in Los Angeles, so does 
it in New York, London, and everywhere else. The uniformity of nature is the ultimate 
basis for our judgments about what we naturally expect to occur. Good inductive argu-
ments are those that accord with the uniformity of nature. They have conclusions that 
we naturally expect to turn out true. If the conclusion of such an argument should turn 
out to be false, in violation of our expectations, this occurrence would cause us to react 
with surprise.

1
The procedure for testing the strength of inductive arguments runs parallel to the 
procedure for deduction. First we assume the premises are true, and then we deter-
mine whether, based on that assumption, the conclusion is probably true. This deter-
mination is accomplished by linking up the premises with regularities that exist in our 
experiential background. For example, if the argument is a causal inference, we link 
the information in the premises with known causal patterns. If the argument is an 
argument from signs, we connect the information in the premises with what we know 
about signs: some kinds of signs are trustworthy, others are not. If the argument is a 
generalization, we connect the information in the premises with what we know about 
a sample being representative of a population. All of these regularities are instances of 
the uniformity of nature. Here is an example of a prediction:
All dinosaur bones discovered to this day have been at least 50 million years old. 
Therefore, probably the next dinosaur bone to be found will be at least 50 million 
years old.
In this argument the premise is actually true. Given that all dinosaur bones discovered 
to date have been over 50 million years old (and that thousands of such bones have 
been discovered), the uniformity of nature dictates that the next one to be discovered 
will also be over 50 million years old. This is what we would naturally expect, and any-
thing to the contrary would be highly surprising. Thus, the conclusion is probably true, 
and so the argument is strong.
Here is another example:
All meteorites found to this day have contained salt. Therefore, probably the next mete-
orite to be found will contain salt.
The premise of this argument is clearly false; but if we assume it to be true, then we 
would naturally expect that the next meteorite to be found would contain salt. Thus, 
the argument is strong.
The next example is an argument from analogy:
Dom Pérignon champagne, which is made in France, sells for over $100 per bottle. 
Marquis de la Tour is also a French champagne. Therefore probably it, too, sells for over 
$100 per bottle.
In this argument the premises are actually true, but our background experience tells 
us that the mere fact that two wines come from the same country does not imply that 
they sell for the same price. Thus, the argument is weak. The conclusion, incidentally, 
happens to be false.
Another example:
During the past fifty years, inflation has consistently reduced the value of the American 
dollar. Therefore, industrial productivity will probably increase in the years ahead.
In this argument, the premise is actually true and the conclusion is probably true in the 
actual world, but the probability of the conclusion is in no way based on the assump-
tion that the premise is true. Because there is no direct connection between inflation 
and increased industrial productivity, the premise is irrelevant to the conclusion and it 
SECTION 1.4 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency   49

50   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
provides no probabilistic support for it. The conclusion is probably true independently 
of the premise. As a result, the argument is weak.
This last example illustrates an important distinction between strong inductive ar-
guments and valid deductive arguments. As we will see in later chapters, if the conclu-
sion of a deductive argument is necessarily true independently of the premises, the 
argument is still considered valid. But if the conclusion of an inductive argument is 
probably true independently of the premises, the argument is weak.
These four examples show that in general the strength or weakness of an inductive 
argument results not from the actual truth or falsity of the premises and conclusion, 
but from the probabilistic support the premises give to the conclusion. The dinosaur 
argument has a true premise and a probably true conclusion, and the meteorite argu-
ment has a false premise and a probably false conclusion; yet both are strong because 
the premise of each provides probabilistic support for the conclusion. The industrial 
productivity argument has a true premise and a probably true conclusion, but the argu-
ment is weak because the premise provides no probabilistic support for the conclusion. 
As in the evaluation of deductive arguments, the only arrangement of truth and falsity 
that establishes anything is true premises and probably false conclusion (as in the Dom 
Pérignon argument). Any inductive argument having true premises and a probably false 
conclusion is weak.
TABLE 1.2 Inductive Arguments
Strong
Weak
True premise
Probably true  
conclusion
Every previous U.S. president  
was older than 40.
Therefore, probably the next  
U.S. president will be older 
than 40.  [cogent]
A few U.S. presidents were  
lawyers.
Therefore, probably the next  
U.S. president will be older  
than 40.   [uncogent]
True premise
Probably false  
conclusion
None exist
A few U.S. presidents were  
unmarried.
Therefore, probably the  
next U.S. president will be  
unmarried.  [uncogent]
False premise
Probably true  
conclusion
Every previous U.S. president  
was a TV debater.
Therefore, probably the next U.S.  
president will be a TV debater.  
[uncogent]
A few U.S. presidents were  
dentists.
Therefore, probably the next U.S. 
president will be a TV debater.  
[uncogent]
False premise
Probably false  
conclusion
Every previous U.S. president  
died in office.
Therefore, probably the next 
U.S. president will die in office.  
[uncogent]
A few U.S. presidents were 
dentists.
Therefore, probably the next 
U.S. president will be a dentist.  
[uncogent]
© Cengage Learning

1
Before proceeding further, however, we must qualify and explain this last statement. 
When we speak of the premises being true, we mean “true” in a complete sense. The 
premises must not exclude or overlook some crucial piece of evidence that ­undermines 
the stated premises and requires a different conclusion. This proviso is otherwise 
called the total evidence requirement. If the total evidence requirement is not met, an  
argument might have literally true premises and a probably false conclusion and still be 
strong. Also, when we speak of the conclusion being probably false, we mean probably 
false in the actual world in light of all the known evidence.
Table 1.2 presents several predictions (inductive arguments) that illustrate the vari-
ous combinations of truth and falsity in the premises and conclusion. Note that the 
only arrangement of truth and falsity that is missing for strong arguments is true prem-
ises and probably false conclusion.
The relationship between the strength of an inductive argument and the truth  
or ­falsity of its premises and conclusion, as illustrated in Table 1.2, is summarized  
as follows:
Premises
Conclusion
Strength
T
probably T
?
T
probably F
Weak
F
probably T
?
F
probably  F
?
Like the summary table for deduction, this brief table reinforces the point that merely 
knowing the truth conditions of the premises and conclusion tells us nothing about 
the strength of an argument except in the one case of true premises and probably false 
conclusion. Any inductive argument having true premises (in the sense just explained) 
and a probably false conclusion is weak.
Unlike the validity and invalidity of deductive arguments, the strength and weakness 
of inductive arguments allow for degrees. To be considered strong, an inductive argu-
ment must have a conclusion that is more probable than improbable. In other words, 
given that the premises are true, the likelihood that the conclusion is true must be more 
than 50 percent, and as the probability increases, the argument becomes stronger. For 
this purpose, consider the following pair of arguments:
This barrel contains 100 apples.
Three apples selected at random were found to be ripe.
Therefore, probably all 100 apples are ripe.
This barrel contains 100 apples.
Eighty apples selected at random were found to be ripe.
Therefore, probably all 100 apples are ripe.
The first argument is weak and the second is strong. However, the first is not abso-
lutely weak nor the second absolutely strong. Both arguments would be strengthened 
SECTION 1.4 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency   51

1
52   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
or weakened by the random selection of a larger or smaller sample. For example, if the 
size of the sample in the second argument were reduced to seventy apples, the argu-
ment would be weakened. The incorporation of additional premises into an inductive 
argument will also generally tend to strengthen or weaken it. For example, if the prem-
ise “One unripe apple that had been found earlier was removed” were added to either 
argument, the argument would be weakened.
A cogent argument is an inductive argument that is strong and has all true premises. 
Also, the premises must be true in the sense of meeting the total evidence requirement. 
If any one of these conditions is missing, the argument is uncogent. Thus, an uncogent 
argument is an inductive argument that is weak, has one or more false premises, fails 
to meet the total evidence requirement, or any combination of these. A cogent argu-
ment is the inductive analogue of a sound deductive argument and is what is meant by 
a good, or successful, inductive argument without qualification. Because the conclu-
sion of a cogent argument is genuinely supported by true premises, it follows that the 
conclusion of every cogent argument is probably true in the actual world in light of all 
the known evidence.
Cogent
argument
Strong
argument
All true
premises
=
+
As an illustration of the need for the total evidence requirement, consider the 
­following argument:
Swimming in the Caribbean is usually lots of fun. Today the water is warm, the surf is 
gentle, and on this beach there are no dangerous currents. Therefore, it would be fun to 
go swimming here now.
If the premises reflect all the important factors, then the argument is cogent. But 
if they ignore the fact that several large dorsal fins are cutting through the water 
­(suggesting sharks), then obviously the argument is not cogent. Thus, for cogency the 
premises must not only be true but also not overlook some important fact that requires 
a ­different conclusion.
Finally, just as it is not always possible to determine the soundness of a deductive 
argument, it is not always possible to determine the cogency of an inductive argu-
ment. And this follows for two reasons. Many inductive arguments, especially those 
about complex real-life subjects, are not susceptible to being evaluated as clearly 
strong or clearly weak. And many premises have truth values that are unknown or 
impossible to determine. Yet, it remains important that cogency be recognized as a 
criterion for evaluating inductive arguments and that it not be confused with strength 
and weakness.

1
	
Summary
For both deductive and inductive arguments, two separate questions need to be ­answered: 
(1) Do the premises support the conclusion? (2) Are all the premises true? To answer the 
first question we begin by assuming the premises to be true. Then, for deductive arguments 
we determine whether, in light of this assumption, it necessarily follows that the conclu-
sion is true. If it does, the argument is valid; if not, it is invalid. For ­inductive arguments we 
determine whether it probably follows that the conclusion is true. If it does, the argument 
is strong; if not, it is weak. For inductive arguments we keep in mind the requirements that 
the premises actually support the conclusion and that they not ignore important evidence. 
Finally, if the argument is either valid or strong, we turn to the second question and deter-
mine whether the premises are actually true. If all the premises are true, the argument is 
sound (in the case of deduction) or cogent (in the case of induction). All invalid deductive 
arguments are unsound, and all weak inductive arguments are uncogent.
	
The various alternatives open to statements and arguments may be diagrammed as fol-
lows. Note that in logic one never speaks of an argument as being “true” or “false,” and one 
never speaks of a statement as being “valid,” “invalid,” “strong,” or “weak.”
Statements
True
False
Groups of statements
Deductive arguments
Inductive arguments
Arguments
Nonarguments
Valid
Invalid
(all are unsound)
Strong
Weak
(all are uncogent)
Deductive
Inductive
Sound
Unsound
Cogent
Uncogent
SECTION 1.4 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency   53

1
C
hrysippus was born in Soli, a city located on 
the southeast coast of Asia Minor. Early in life 
he moved to Athens, where he studied under 
the Stoic philosopher Cleanthes, who in turn was a 
student of Zeno of Citium, the founder of Stoicism. 
Upon Cleanthes’ death in 232 b.c., Chrysippus took 
over as leader of the school, and he produced over 
700 treatises that systematized Stoic teaching. All of 
these works have been lost, but fragments survive in 
the writings of Cicero, Seneca, and others. Because of 
his extraordinary contribution, Chrysippus is consid-
ered to be the second founder of Stoicism.
Stoicism derives its name from the Greek word 
stoa, which means porch; Stoic philosophers used to 
gather on a porch in the Agora (public square) in  
Athens to discuss their views. The Stoics prized the 
virtue of self-sufficiency, and they emphasized the im-
portance of not allowing oneself to be carried away by 
emotions or passions such as fear or love. The Stoics 
considered emotions to be false judgments about the 
goodness or badness of something. The proper ther-
apy for those victimized by emotions is to persuade 
them that these judgments are indeed false because 
they constitute obstacles to true happiness.
Chrysippus is often considered to be the originator 
of propositional logic. Unlike Aristotelian logic, where 
the fundamental components are terms, in proposi-
tional logic the fundamental components are whole 
propositions or statements. Aristotle had overlooked 
this kind of logic, but his close friend and successor 
Theophrastus worked out some of the logic of the 
pure hypothetical syllogism (If A then B; If B, then C; 
therefore, If A, then C ). Also, Philo of Megara introduced 
the truth functional interpretation of the material con-
ditional (If A, then B). Beginning at this point, Chry­
sippus advanced propositional logic to a high level of 
development.
Chrysippus div­
ided propositions 
into simple and 
compound, and he  
introduced a set 
of connectives that  
were used to pro-
duce 
compound  
propositions from 
one or more simple  
propositions. The 
compound prop­
ositions  inc­luded  
negation, conjunc­
tion, exclusive disjunction, and implication, and 
Chrysippus showed how the truth value of a com-
pound statement is a function of the truth values 
of its simple components. Chrysippus also intro-
duced a set of rules of inference including what is 
today called modus ponens, modus tollens, disjunc-
tive syllogism, and a rule similar to De Morgan’s rule.  
Finally, he introduced the theory of natural deduction 
by which the conclusion of an argument can be de-
rived from its premises through a series of discrete 
steps.
The broader philosophy of Chrysippus is charac-
terized by monism and determinism. While most of 
us think that the universe is made up of millions of 
discrete entities, Chrysippus argued that in fact only 
one substance exists, and what appear to be individual 
substances are really parts of this one primary sub-
stance. Furthermore, everything that occurs is strictly 
governed by fate. Yet, in the face of this rigid causal 
determinism Chrysippus held that humans are respon-
sible for their actions, and he tried in many ways to 
prove that the two viewpoints are in fact compatible 
with each other.
Chrysippus 280–206 b.c.
eminentlogicians
© Science Source/Photo Researchers
54   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1

EXERCISE 1.4	
	 I.	 The following arguments are deductive. Determine whether each is valid or in-
valid, and note the relationship between your answer and the truth or falsity of the 
premises and conclusion. Finally, determine whether the argument is sound or 
unsound.
	
★1.	 Since Moby Dick was written by Shakespeare, and Moby Dick is a science-­
fiction novel, it follows that Shakespeare wrote a science-fiction novel.
	
2.	 Since London is north of Paris and south of Edinburgh, it follows that Paris is 
south of Edinburgh.
	
3.	 If George Washington was beheaded, then George Washington died. George 
Washington died. Therefore, George Washington was beheaded.
	
★4.	 The longest river in South America is the Amazon, and the Amazon flows 
through Brazil. Therefore, the longest river in South America flows through 
Brazil.
	
5.	 Since the Spanish-American War occurred before the U.S. Civil War, and the 
U.S. Civil War occurred after the Korean War, it follows that the Spanish-
American War occurred before the Korean War.
	
6.	 The Empire State Building is taller than the Statue of Liberty, and the Statue of 
Liberty is taller than the Eiffel Tower. Therefore, the Empire State Building is 
taller than the Eiffel Tower.
	
★7.	 All leopards with lungs are carnivores. Therefore, all leopards are carnivores.
	
8.	 Chicago is a city in Michigan and Michigan is part of the United States. There-
fore, Chicago is a city in the United States.
	
9.	 If President Barack Obama was born in Massachusetts, then he is a native 
of New England. Barack Obama is not a native of New England. Therefore, 
Barack Obama was not born in Massachusetts.
	 ★10.	 Every province in Canada has exactly one city as its capital. Therefore, since 
there are thirty provinces in Canada, there are thirty provincial capitals.
	
11.	 Since the Department of Defense Building outside Washington, D.C., has the 
shape of a hexagon, it follows that it has seven sides.
	
12.	 Since Winston Churchill was English, and Winston Churchill was a famous 
statesman, we may conclude that at least one Englishman was a famous statesman.
	 ★13.	 Since some fruits are green, and some fruits are apples, it follows that some 
fruits are green apples.
	
14.	 All physicians are individuals who have earned degrees in political science, 
and some lawyers are physicians. Therefore, some lawyers are persons who 
have earned degrees in political science.
	
15.	 The United States Congress has more members than there are days in the year. 
Therefore, at least two members of Congress have the same birthday.
SECTION 1.4 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency   55
1

1
	II.	 The following arguments are inductive. Determine whether each is strong or weak, 
and note the relationship between your answer and the truth or falsity of the premise(s) 
and conclusion. Then determine whether each argument is cogent or uncogent.
	
★1.	 The grave marker at Arlington National Cemetery says that John F. Kennedy is 
buried there. It must be the case that Kennedy really is buried in that cemetery.
	
2.	 The ebb and flow of the tides has been occurring every day for millions of 
years. But nothing lasts forever. Therefore, probably the motion of the tides 
will die out within a few years.
	
3.	 The vast majority of Rose Bowl games (in Pasadena, California) have been 
played in freezing-cold weather. Therefore, probably the next Rose Bowl game 
will be played in freezing-cold weather.
	
★4.	 Franklin Delano Roosevelt said that we have nothing to fear but fear itself. 
Therefore, women have no reason to fear serial rapists.
	
5.	 Most popular film stars are millionaires. Viola Davis is a popular film star. 
Therefore, probably Viola Davis is a millionaire.
	
6.	 Constructing the great pyramid at Giza required lifting massive stone blocks 
to great heights. Probably the ancient Egyptians had some antigravity device 
to accomplish this feat.
	
★7.	 People have been listening to rock and roll music for over a hundred years. 
Probably people will still be listening to it a year from now.
	
8.	 Paleontologists have unearthed the fossilized bones of huge reptiles, which 
we have named dinosaurs. Tests indicate that these bones are more than 
50 million years old. Therefore, probably dinosaurs really did roam the 
earth 50 million years ago.
	
9.	 The Declaration of Independence says that all men are endowed by their 
­creator with certain unalienable rights. Therefore it probably follows that a 
creator exists.
	 ★10.	 Coca-Cola is an extremely popular soft drink. Therefore, probably someone, 
somewhere, is drinking a Coke right this minute.
	
11.	 Every map of the United States shows that Alabama is situated on the Pacific 
coast. Therefore, Alabama must be a western state.
	
12.	 When Neil Armstrong landed on the moon, he left behind a gold-plated  
Schwinn bicycle, which he used to ride around on the moon’s surface.  
Probably that bicycle is still up there on the moon.
	 ★13.	 The African American athlete Adrian Peterson is able to withstand tremen-
dous impacts on the football field. However, Serena Williams, like Adrian  
Peterson, is a great African American athlete. Therefore, Serena Williams 
should be able to withstand tremendous impacts on the football field.
	
14.	 Unlike monkeys, today’s humans have feet that are not suited for grasping  
objects. Therefore, a thousand years from now, probably humans will still have 
feet that are not suited for grasping objects.
1
56   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
	
15.	 A random sample of twenty-five famous country and western singers, which 
included Garth Brooks and Dolly Parton, revealed that every single one of 
them studied music in Tasmania. Therefore, probably the majority of famous 
country and western singers studied music in Tasmania.
	III.	 Determine whether the following arguments are inductive or deductive. If an ar-
gument is inductive, determine whether it is strong or weak. If it is deductive, de-
termine whether it is valid or invalid.
	
★1.	 Since Tom is the brother of Agatha, and Agatha is the mother of Raquel, it  
follows that Tom is the uncle of Raquel.
	
2.	 When a cook cannot recall the ingredients in a recipe, it is appropriate that she 
refresh her memory by consulting the recipe book. Similarly, when a student 
cannot recall the answers during a final exam, it is appropriate that she refresh 
her memory by consulting the textbook.
	
3.	 The Broadway Theater marquee says that The Phantom of the Opera is playing 
nightly. Therefore, it must be that case that Phantom is playing there tonight.
	
★4.	 Since Christmas is always on a Thursday, it follows that the day after Christ-
mas is always a Friday.
	
5.	 Suppose figure A is a triangle having two equal angles. It follows that figure A 
has two equal sides.
	
6.	 By accident Karen baked her brownies two hours longer than she should have. 
Therefore, they have probably been ruined.
	
★7.	 After taking LSD, Alice said she saw a flying saucer land in the shopping cen-
ter parking lot. Since Alice has a reputation for always telling the truth, we 
must conclude that a flying saucer really did land there.
	
8.	 Since Phyllis is the cousin of Denise, and Denise is the cousin of Harriet, it 
follows necessarily that Harriet is the cousin of Phyllis.
	
9.	 The picnic scheduled in the park for tomorrow will most likely be cancelled. 
It’s been snowing for six days straight.
	 ★10.	 Circle A has exactly twice the diameter of circle B. From this we may conclude 
that circle A has exactly twice the area of circle B.
	
11.	 Robert has lost consistently at blackjack every day for the past several days. 
Therefore, it is very likely that he will win today.
	
12.	 Since John loves Nancy and Nancy loves Peter, it follows necessarily that John 
loves Peter.
	 ★13.	 This cash register drawer contains over 100 coins. Three coins selected at ran-
dom were found to have dates earlier than 1960. Therefore, probably all of the 
coins in the drawer have dates earlier than 1960.
	
14.	 The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor happened in either 1941 or 1951. But it 
didn’t happen in 1941. Therefore, it happened in 1951.
SECTION 1.4 Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency   57
1

1
	
15.	 Harry will never be able to solve that difficult problem in advanced calculus in 
the limited time allowed. He has never studied anything beyond algebra, and 
in that he earned only a C.
	 ★16.	 Since x  y  10, and x  7, it follows that y  4.
	
17.	 If acupuncture is hocus pocus, then acupuncture cannot relieve chronic pain. But 
acupuncture can relieve chronic pain. Therefore, acupuncture is not hocus pocus.
	
18.	 If inflation heats up, then interest rates will rise. If interest rates rise, then 
bond prices will decline. Therefore, if inflation heats up, then bond prices will 
decline.
	 ★19.	 Statistics reveal that 86 percent of those who receive flu shots do not get the 
flu. Jack received a flu shot one month ago. Therefore, he should be immune, 
even though the flu is going around now.
	
20.	 Since Michael is a Pisces, it necessarily follows that he was born in March.
	IV.	 Define the following terms:
	
valid deductive argument	
strong inductive argument
	
invalid deductive argument	
weak inductive argument
	
sound argument	
cogent argument
	
unsound argument	
uncogent argument
	V.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 Some arguments, while not completely valid, are almost valid.
	
2.	 Inductive arguments allow for varying degrees of strength and weakness.
	
3.	 Invalid deductive arguments are basically the same as inductive arguments.
	
4.	 If a deductive argument has true premises and a false conclusion, it is neces-
sarily invalid.
	
5.	 A valid argument may have a false premise and a false conclusion.
	
6.	 A valid argument may have a false premise and a true conclusion.
	
7.	 A sound argument may be invalid.
	
8.	 A sound argument may have a false conclusion.
	
9.	 A strong argument may have false premises and a probably false conclusion.
	
10.	 A strong argument may have true premises and a probably false conclusion.
	
11.	 A cogent argument may have a probably false conclusion.
	
12.	 A cogent argument must be inductively strong.
	
13.	 If an argument has true premises and a true conclusion, we know that it is a 
perfectly good argument.
	
14.	 A statement may legitimately be spoken of as “valid” or “invalid.”
	
15.	 An argument may legitimately be spoken of as “true” or “false.”
1
58   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

1.5	
Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity
PREVIEW    While at a party you overhear someone talking about you. Disdainfully, the person 
observes that you don’t wear designer clothing, and then comments that losers don’t wear designer cloth-
ing either. The implication is that you are a loser. Hearing this infuriates you. You know the argument is 
clearly invalid, but how do you prove it? In this section you will learn about a simple, intuitive method 
to prove invalid deductive arguments invalid.
This section explores the idea that the validity of a deductive argument is determined 
by its form. This idea was suggested by the arguments in Table 1.1 in the previous 
section. All the arguments in the Valid column have the same valid form, and all the 
arguments in the Invalid column have the same invalid form. The form of an argument 
illustrates the argument’s internal structure or pattern of reasoning. If the pattern of 
reasoning is good, the argument will be valid; if not, it will be invalid.
In reference to Table 1.1, all the valid arguments have this form:
All A are B.
All C are A.
All C are B.
If A, B, and C are thought of as referring to groups of things, it is easy to see that this 
form is valid. Assume, by the second premise, that the Cs (whatever they might be) are 
included in the As, and, by the first premise, that the As (whatever they might be) are 
included in the Bs. Then it necessarily follows that the Cs are included in the Bs, which 
is what the conclusion asserts. 
We can use this example to define what we mean by an argument form. An argu-
ment form, for the present purpose, is an arrangement of letters (in this case A, B, 
and C) and words (in this case “all” and “are”) such that the uniform substitution of 
words or phrases in the place of the letters results in an argument. For this form, the 
words or phrases being substituted must refer to groups of things. Thus, if we substitute 
“sporting events,” “engaging pastimes,” and “baseball games” in the place of A, B, and 
C, respectively, in the argument form (left), we obtain the following argument (right): 
All A are B.	
	
All sporting events are engaging pastimes.
All C are A.	
	
All baseball games are sporting events.	
All C are B.	
	
All baseball games are engaging pastimes.
This argument is called a substitution instance of the argument form. Any substitu-
tion instance of a valid argument form is a valid argument.
Before proceeding to invalid arguments, we must briefly consider valid arguments 
in which the form is not apparent. Many of the arguments in the previous set of ex-
ercises were like this. How can we reconcile the existence of such arguments with the 
claim that validity is determined by form? The answer is that these arguments are 
incomplete, so the form is not explicit. But once such arguments are completed and  
SECTION 1.5 Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity   59
1

60   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
correctly phrased (which we address later in this book), the form becomes apparent. 
For example, consider the following valid argument:
Geese are migratory waterfowl, so they fly south for the winter.
This argument is missing a premise:
Migratory waterfowl fly south for the winter.
The argument can now be rephrased to make its form apparent:
All migratory waterfowl are birds that fly south for the winter.
All geese are migratory waterfowl.
Therefore, all geese are birds that fly south for the winter.
The form of the argument is
All A are B.
All C are A.
All C are B.
This form is identical to the form we just considered and is valid.
Let us now consider an invalid argument form:
All A are B.
All C are B.
All A are C.
In this argument form, if we assume that the As are in the Bs and that the Cs are in the 
Bs, it does not necessarily follow that the As are in the Cs. It would not follow if the As were 
in one part of the Bs and the Cs were in another part, as the following diagram illustrates:
As
Bs
Cs
This diagram suggests that we can prove the form invalid if we can find a substitu-
tion instance having actually true premises and an actually false conclusion. In such a 
substitution instance the As and the Cs would be separated from each other, but they 
would both be included in the Bs. If we substitute “cats” for A, “animals” for B, and 
“dogs” for C, we have such a substitution instance:
All A are B.	
All cats are animals.	
True
All C are B.	
All dogs are animals.	
True
All A are C.	
Therefore, all cats are dogs.	 False
This substitution instance proves the form invalid, because it provides a concrete  
example of a case where the As are in the Bs, the Cs are in the Bs, but the As are not in the Cs.

1
Now, since the form is invalid, can we say that any argument that has this form is 
invalid? Unfortunately, the situation with invalid forms is not quite as simple as it is 
with valid forms. Every substitution instance of a valid form is a valid argument, but 
it is not the case that every substitution instance of an invalid form is an invalid argu-
ment. The reason is that some substitution instances of invalid forms are also substitu-
tion instances of valid forms.* However, we can say that any substitution instance of 
an invalid form is an invalid argument provided that it is not a substitution instance of 
any valid form. Thus, we will say that an argument actually has an invalid form if it is a 
substitution instance of that form and it is not a substitution instance of any valid form.
The fact that some substitution instances of invalid forms are also substitution in-
stances of valid forms means simply that we must exercise caution in identifying the 
form of an argument. However, cases of ordinary language arguments that can be in-
terpreted as substitution instances of both valid and invalid forms are so rare that this 
book chooses to ignore them. With this in mind, consider the following argument:
All romantic novels are literary pieces.
All works of fiction are literary pieces.
Therefore, all romantic novels are works of fiction.
This argument clearly has the invalid form just discussed. This invalid form captures 
the reasoning process of the argument, which is obviously defective. Therefore, the 
argument is invalid, and it is invalid precisely because it has an invalid form.
Counterexample Method
A substitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion (like the cats-and-
dogs example just constructed) is called a counterexample, and the method we have 
just used to prove the romantic-novels argument invalid is called the counterexample 
method. It consists of isolating the form of an argument and then constructing a sub-
stitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion. This proves the form in-
valid, which in turn proves the argument invalid. The counterexample method can be 
used to prove the invalidity of any invalid argument, but it cannot prove the validity of 
any valid argument. Thus, before the method is applied to an argument, the argument 
must be known or suspected to be invalid in the first place. Let us apply the counter­
example method to the following invalid categorical syllogism:
Since some employees are not social climbers and all vice presidents are employees, we 
may conclude that some vice presidents are not social climbers.
*For example, the following valid argument is a substitution instance of the invalid form we have been discussing:
All bachelors are persons.
All unmarried men are persons.
Therefore, all bachelors are unmarried men.
However, because “bachelors” is equivalent in meaning to “unmarried men,” the argument is also a substitution in-
stance of this valid form:
All A are B.
All A are B.
All A are A.
SECTION 1.5 Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity   61

1
62   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
This argument is invalid because the employees who are not social climbers might 
not be vice presidents. Accordingly, we can prove the argument invalid by constructing 
a substitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion. We begin by isolat-
ing the form of the argument:
Some E are not S.
All V are E.     	
Some V are not S.
Next, we select three terms to substitute in place of the letters that will make the 
premises true and the conclusion false. The following selection will work:
E  animals
S  mammals
V  dogs
The resulting substitution instance is this:
Some animals are not mammals.
All dogs are animals.
Therefore, some dogs are not mammals.
The substitution instance has true premises and a false conclusion and is therefore, by 
definition, invalid. Because the substitution instance is invalid, the form is invalid, and 
therefore the original argument is invalid.
In applying the counterexample method to categorical syllogisms, it is useful to keep 
in mind the following set of terms: “cats,” “dogs,” “mammals,” “fish,” and ­“animals.” 
Most invalid syllogisms can be proven invalid by strategically selecting three of these 
terms and using them to construct a counterexample. Because everyone agrees about 
these terms, everyone will agree about the truth or falsity of the premises and conclu-
sion of the counterexample. Also, in constructing the counterexample, it often helps to 
begin with the conclusion. First, select two terms that yield a false conclusion, and then 
select a third term that yields true premises. Another point to keep in mind is that the 
word “some” in logic always means “at least one.” For example, the statement “Some 
dogs are animals” means “At least one dog is an animal”—which is true. Also note that 
this statement does not imply that some dogs are not animals.
Not all deductive arguments, of course, are categorical syllogisms. Consider, for ex-
ample, the following hypothetical syllogism:
If the government imposes import restrictions, the price of automobiles will rise. There-
fore, since the government will not impose import restrictions, it follows that the price 
of automobiles will not rise.
This argument is invalid because the price of automobiles might rise even though im-
port restrictions are not imposed. It has the following form:
If G, then P.
Not G.	
Not P.

1
This form differs from the previous one in that its letters stand for complete statements. 
G, for example, stands for “The government imposes import restrictions.” If we make 
the substitution
G  Abraham Lincoln committed suicide.
P  Abraham Lincoln is dead.
we obtain the following substitution instance:
If Abraham Lincoln committed suicide, then Abraham Lincoln is dead.
Abraham Lincoln did not commit suicide.
Therefore, Abraham Lincoln is not dead.
Since the premises are true and the conclusion false, the substitution instance is clearly 
invalid. Therefore, the form is invalid, and this proves the original argument invalid.
When applying the counterexample method to an argument having a conditional 
statement as a premise (such as the one just discussed), it is recommended that the 
statement substituted in place of the conditional statement express some kind of neces-
sary connection. In the Lincoln example, the first premise asserts the necessary con-
nection between suicide and death. There can be no doubt about the truth of such a 
statement. Furthermore, if it should turn out that the conclusion is a conditional state-
ment, note that one sure way of producing a false conditional statement is by joining 
a true antecedent with a false consequent. For example, the conditional statement “If 
Lassie is a dog, then Lassie is a cat” is clearly false.
Counterexample method
Given: an
invalid
argument
extract
Form of
argument
proves
Form is
invalid.
proves
Given argument
is invalid.
construct
Substitution instance
having true premises,
false conclusion
Being able to identify the form of an argument with ease requires a familiarity 
with the basic deductive argument forms. The first task consists in distinguishing the 
premises from the conclusion. Always write the premises first and the conclusion last. 
The second task involves distinguishing what we may call “form words” from “content 
words.” To reduce an argument to its form, leave the form words as they are, and replace 
the content words with letters. For categorical syllogisms, the words “all,” “no,” “some,” 
“are,” and “not” are form words, and for hypothetical syllogisms the words “if,” “then,” 
and “not” are form words. Additional form words for other types of arguments are “ei-
ther,” “or,” “both,” and “and.” For various kinds of hybrid arguments, a more intuitive 
approach may be needed. Here is an example:
SECTION 1.5 Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity   63

1
All movie stars are actors who are famous, because all movie stars who are famous are 
actors.
If we replace “movie stars,” “actors,” and “famous” with the letters M, A, and F, this  
argument has the following form:
All M who are F are A.
All M are A who are F.
Here is one possible substitution instance for this form:
All humans who are fathers are men.
Therefore, all humans are men who are fathers.
Because the premise is true and the conclusion false, the form is invalid and so is the 
original argument.
Using the counterexample method to prove arguments invalid requires a little in-
genuity because there is no rule that will automatically produce the required term or 
statement to be substituted into the form. Any term or statement will work, of course, 
provided that it yields a substitution instance that has premises that are indisputably 
true and a conclusion that is indisputably false. Ideally, the truth value of these state-
ments should be known to the average individual; otherwise, the substitution instance 
cannot be depended on to prove anything. If, for example, P in the earlier hypothetical 
syllogism had been replaced by the statement “George Wilson is dead,” the substitution 
instance would be useless, because nobody knows whether this statement is true or false.
The counterexample method is useful only for proving invalidity, because the 
only arrangement of truth and falsity that proves anything is true premises and false 
­conclusion. If a substitution instance is produced having true premises and a true 
conclusion, it does not prove that the argument is valid. Furthermore, the method is 
useful only for deductive arguments because the strength and weakness of inductive 
arguments is only partially dependent on the form of the argument. Accordingly, no 
method that relates exclusively to the form of an inductive argument can be used to 
prove the argument weak.
EXERCISE 1.5	
	 I.	 Use the counterexample method to prove the following categorical syllogisms in-
valid. In doing so, follow the suggestions given in the text.
	
★1.	 All galaxies are structures that contain black holes in the center, so all galax-
ies are quasars, since all quasars are structures that contain black holes in the 
center.
	
2.	 Some evolutionists are not people who believe in the Bible, for no creationists 
are evolutionists, and some people who believe in the Bible are not creation-
ists.
	
3.	 No patents are measures that discourage research and development, and all 
patents are regulations that protect intellectual property. Thus, no measures 
1
64   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
that discourage research and development are regulations that protect intel-
lectual property.
	
★4.	 Some farm workers are not people who are paid decent wages, because no 
undocumented individuals are people who are paid decent wages, and some 
undocumented individuals are not farm workers.
	
5.	 Some politicians are people who will stop at nothing to win an election, and 
no people who will stop at nothing to win an election are true statesmen. 
Hence, no politicians are true statesmen.
	
6.	 All meticulously constructed timepieces are true works of art, for all 
Swiss watches are true works of art and all Swiss watches are meticulously 
­constructed timepieces.
	
★7.	 No patrons of fast-food restaurants are health-food addicts. Consequently, 
no patrons of fast-food restaurants are connoisseurs of fine desserts, since no 
connoisseurs of fine desserts are health-food addicts.
	
8.	 Some toxic dumps are sites that emit hazardous wastes, and some sites that 
emit hazardous wastes are undesirable places to live near. Thus, some toxic 
dumps are undesirable places to live near.
	
9.	 All persons who assist others in suicide are people guilty of murder. Accord-
ingly, some individuals motivated by compassion are not persons guilty of 
murder, inasmuch as some people who assist others in suicide are individuals 
motivated by compassion.
	 ★10.	 Some school boards are not groups that oppose values clarification, because 
some school boards are not organizations with vision, and some groups that 
oppose values clarification are not organizations with vision.
	
11.	 All super PACs are unlimited spenders. For this reason, some big-time power 
brokers are not super PACs, in as much as some unlimited spenders are  
big-time power brokers. 
	
12.	 No movie producers are uncompetitive business executives, and some 
Hollywood moguls are movie producers. It follows that no Hollywood moguls 
are uncompetitive business executives.
	 ★13.	 Some improvers of humankind are not exploiters of personal information. As 
a result, some corporate social networks are not improvers of humankind, see-
ing that all corporate social networks are exploiters of personal information. 
	
14.	 Some drone attacks are assaults on human life, given that some stealth opera-
tions are assaults on human life and all drone attacks are stealth operations. 
	
15.	 Some near-death experiences are supernatural phenomena, and no near-
death experiences are easily forgotten happenings. Consequently some easily 
forgotten happenings are not supernatural phenomena.
	II.	 Use the counterexample method to prove each of the following arguments invalid.
	
★1.	 If animal species are fixed and immutable, then evolution is a myth. Therefore, 
evolution is not a myth, since animal species are not fixed and immutable.
SECTION 1.5 Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity   65
1

1
	
2.	 If carbon dioxide is present in the atmosphere, then plants have a source of 
carbon. Hence, since plants have a source of carbon, carbon dioxide is present 
in the atmosphere.
	
3.	 If human rights are recognized, then civilization flourishes. If equality pre-
vails, then civilization flourishes. Thus, if human rights are recognized, then 
equality prevails.
	
★4.	 If energy taxes are increased, then either the deficit will be reduced or con-
servation will be taken seriously. If the deficit is reduced, then inflation will 
be checked. Therefore, if energy taxes are increased, then inflation will be 
checked.
	
5.	 All homeless people who are panhandlers are destitute individuals. Therefore, 
all homeless people are destitute individuals.
	
6.	 Some wrestlers are colorful hulks, since some wrestlers are colorful and some 
wrestlers are hulks.
	
★7.	 All community colleges with low tuition are either schools with large enroll-
ments or institutions supported by taxes. Therefore, all community colleges 
are institutions supported by taxes.
	
8.	 All merchandisers that are retailers are businesses that are inventory rotators. 
Therefore, all merchandisers are inventory rotators.
	
9.	 All diabetes victims are either insulin takers or glucose eliminators. Accord-
ingly, some diabetes victims are glucose eliminators, since some ­diabetes vic-
tims are insulin takers.
	 ★10.	 All FHA loans are living-standard enhancers for the following reasons. All 
reverse mortgages that are FHA loans are either living-standard enhancers or 
home-equity depleters, and all reverse mortgages are home-equity depleters.
1.6	
Extended Arguments
PREVIEW    Should you sign up for Professor Acton’s chemistry class? A friend tries to persuade 
you against doing so: Professor Acton has gotten really negative student evaluations, and such professors 
tend to be boring. So, Professor Acton is probably boring. And students who take boring classes become 
dull, so if you take the class, you will become dull. But dull people tend to lose their friends. So, if you 
sign up for Acton’s class, you will lose your friends. In this section you will learn how to disentangle the 
reasoning of complex arguments such as this.
The logical analysis of extended arguments, such as those found in editorials, essays, 
and lengthy letters to newspaper editors, involves numerous difficulties. Such argu-
ments are often mixed together with fragments of reports, pieces of expository writing, 
66   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

1
SECTION 1.6 Extended Arguments   67
illustrations, explanations, and statements of opinion. Proper analysis involves ­weeding 
out the extraneous material and isolating premises and conclusions. Another problem 
stems from the fact that lengthy arguments often involve complex arrangements of 
subarguments that feed into the main argument in various ways. Distinguishing one 
subargument from another is often a complicated task. And then there are some argu-
mentative passages that involve completely separate strands of argumentation leading 
to separate conclusions. Again, distinguishing the strands and assigning premises to 
the right conclusion is not only problematic but often involves an element of creativity 
on the part of the analyst.
To facilitate the analysis of extended arguments, we will assign numerals to the vari-
ous statements in the passage and use arrows to represent the inferential links. Example:
1 The contamination of underground aquifers represents a pollution problem of cata-
strophic proportions. 2  Half the nation’s drinking water, which comes from these aqui-
fers, is being poisoned by chemical wastes dumped into the soil for generations.
This argument is diagrammed as follows:
2
1
The diagram says that statement 2 , the premise, supports statement 1 , the conclusion.
In extended arguments we can identify two distinct patterns of argumentation, 
which we will name the vertical pattern and the horizontal pattern. The vertical pattern 
consists of a series of arguments in which a conclusion of a logically prior argument 
becomes a premise of a subsequent argument. Example:
1 The selling of human organs, such as hearts, kidneys, and corneas, should be outlawed. 
2 Allowing human organs to be sold will inevitably lead to a situation in which only the 
rich will be able to afford transplants. This is so because 3  whenever something scarce 
is bought and sold as a commodity, the price always goes up. 4  The law of supply and 
demand requires it.
This argument is diagrammed as follows:
4
3
2
1
Vertical
pattern
The diagram says that statement 1 , which is the main conclusion, is supported by 2 , 
which in turn is supported by 3 , which in turn is supported by 4 .

68   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
1
The horizontal pattern consists of a single argument in which two or more prem-
ises provide independent support for a single conclusion. If one of the premises were 
­omitted, the other(s) would continue to support the conclusion in the same way.  
Example:
1 The selling of human organs, such as hearts, kidneys, and corneas, should be outlawed. 
2  If this practice is allowed to get a foothold, people in desperate financial straits will 
start selling their own organs to pay their bills.  Alternately, 3  those with a criminal bent 
will take to killing healthy young people and selling their organs on the black market. 
4  In the final analysis, the buying and selling of human organs comes just too close to 
the buying and selling of life itself.
The diagram for this argument is as follows:
Horizontal
pattern
2
3
4
1
This diagram says that statements 2 , 3 , and 4  support 1 , independently.
Two variations on the horizontal and vertical patterns occur when two or more 
premises support a conclusion conjointly, and when one or more premises support mul-
tiple conclusions. The first variation occurs when the premises depend on one another 
in such a way that if one were omitted, the support that the others provide would be 
diminished or destroyed. The following argument illustrates the occurrence of conjoint 
premises:
1 Getting poor people off the welfare rolls requires that we modify their behavior pat-
terns. 2  The vast majority of people on welfare are high school dropouts, single parents, 
or people who abuse alcohol and drugs. 3  These behavior patterns frustrate any desire 
poor people may have to get a job and improve their condition in life.
Statement 1  is the conclusion. Taken separately, statements 2  and 3  provide lit-
tle or no support for 1 , but taken together they do provide support. That is, 2  and 
3  ­support 1  conjointly. This relationship between the premises is illustrated by the use 
of the brace in the following diagram:
Conjoint
premises
2
3
1
The next example illustrates the occurrence of a multiple conclusion:
1  Dropping out of school and bearing children outside of marriage are two of the pri-
mary causes of poverty in this country.  Therefore, 2  to eliminate poverty we must offer 
incentives for people to get high school diplomas.  Also, 3  we must find some way to 
encourage people to get married before they start having children.

1
In this passage statement 1  supports both 2  and 3 . Since no single argument can 
have more than one conclusion, the passage is correctly evaluated as consisting of two 
arguments. For our purposes, however, we will treat it as if it were a single argument by 
joining the two conclusions with a bracket:
Multiple
conclusion
1
2
3
Our symbolism is now sufficiently developed to analyze most arguments found in 
editorials and letters to the editor of newspapers and magazines. Consider the follow-
ing argument, taken from a newspaper editorial:
1  Government mandates for zero-emission vehicles won’t work because 2  only elec-
tric cars qualify as zero-emission vehicles, and 3  electric cars won’t sell. 4  They are 
too expensive, 5  their range of operation is too limited, and 6  recharging facilities are 
not generally available.
(William Campbell, “Technology Is Not Good Enough”)
We immediately see that 1  is the main conclusion, and 2  and 3  support 1  conjointly. 
Also, 4 , 5 , and 6  support 3  independently. The argument pattern is as follows:
4
5
6
2
3
1
The next argument is taken from a letter to the editor:
1  Rhinos in Kenya are threatened with extinction because 2  poachers are killing them 
for their horn. Since 3  the rhino has no natural predators, 4  it does not need its horn 
to survive. Thus 5  there should be an organized program to capture rhinos in the wild 
and remove their horn. 6  Such a program would eliminate the incentive of the poachers.
(Pamela C. Wagner, “Rhino Poaching”)
First we search for the final conclusion. We select 5 , because it is the ultimate point 
that the passage attempts to establish. Next we survey the premise and conclusion indica-
tors. From this, we see that 2  supports 1  and 3  supports 4 . Finally, we see that 1 , 4 , 
and 6  support 5 . Yet these supporting statements depend on one another for their effect. 
Thus, they support the final conclusion conjointly. The argument ­pattern is as follows:
2
3
1
4
6
5
SECTION 1.6 Extended Arguments   69

1
70   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
The next argument is taken from a magazine article:
1  Skating is a wonderful form of exercise and relaxation, but 2  today’s rollerbladers are 
a growing menace and 3  something should be done to control them. 4  Roller bladers 
are oblivious to traffic regulations as 5  they breeze through red lights and 6  skim down 
the wrong way on one-way streets. 7  They pose a threat to pedestrians because 8  a 
collision can cause serious injury. 9  Rollerbladers are even a hazard to shopkeepers as 
10  they zoom through stores and 11 damage merchandise.
(Joan Schmidt, “Hell—On Wheels”)
After reading the argument, we see that 1  is merely an introductory sentence, and 2 . 
and 3  together compose the main conclusion. Also, 4 , 7 , and 9  support the main 
conclusion independently, while 5  and 6  support 4  independently, 8  supports 7 , 
and 10  and 11 support 9  independently. The diagram is as follows:
5
6
8
10
11
4
7
9
2
3
The next argument is taken from the science column of a newspaper:
1  We can expect small changes to occur in the length of our calendar year for an indefi-
nite time to come. 2  This is true for two reasons. 3  First, the rotation of the earth ex-
hibits certain irregularities. 4  And why is this so? 5  The rotation of any body is affected 
by its distribution of mass, and 6  the earth’s mass distribution is continually subject 
to change. For example, 7  earthquakes alter the location of the tectonic plates. Also, 
8  the liquid core of the earth sloshes as the earth turns, and 9  rainfall redistributes 
water from the oceans. The second reason is that 10  the motion of the tides causes a 
continual slowing down of earth’s rotation. 11 Tidal motion produces heat, and 12 the 
loss of this heat removes energy from the system.
(Isaac Asimov, “As the World Turns”)
Preliminary analysis reveals that the final conclusion is 1 . Also, 2  tells us that the 
supporting statements are divided into two basic groups, but since 2  does not add 
any support, we can leave it out of the diagram. In the first group, 5  and 6  support 
3  conjointly, while 7 , 8 , and 9  support 6  independently. 4  will not appear in the 
diagram, because it serves merely as a premise indicator. In the second group, 11 and  
12 support 10  conjointly. Thus, the argument pattern is as follows:
7
8
9
5
6
11
12
3
10
1

1
Our last example is taken from a letter to the editor of a newspaper:
1  Community college districts save a great deal of money by hiring untenured part-time 
instructors, but 2  the extensive use of these instructors is a disadvantage to the stu-
dents. 3  Most part-time instructors are paid only 60 percent of what a full-time teacher 
earns, and as a result, 4  they are forced to teach five or six courses just to survive. 
5  This detracts from the opportunity to consult with students outside the classroom. 
To make matters worse, 6  many part-timers are not even given office space. Further-
more, 7  the lower pay demoralizes the part-timer, and 8  the lack of tenure makes for 
constant financial insecurity. 9  Obviously these conditions render the instructor less 
receptive to student needs. Lastly, because 10  these part-timers are burning the candle 
from both ends, 11 they have no spare energy to improve their courses, and 12 many 
lack the enthusiasm to motivate their students. As a result, 13 the educational process 
is impaired.
(Gordon Dossett et al., “Part-Time College Instructors”)
Preliminary analysis reveals that the main conclusion is not 1  but 2 . Also, we see 
three main reasons why part-timers are a disadvantage to students: They have little 
opportunity to consult with students, they are less receptive to student needs, and the 
educational process is impaired by 11 and 13 . In the first main branch, the indicator 
“as a result” shows that 3  supports 4 , and 4  and 6  independently support 5 . In the 
second branch, 7  and 8  independently support 9 . In the third, 10  supports both 10 
and 12 , which in turn support 13 independently. Here is the argument pattern:
3
10
4
6
7
8
11
12
5
9
13
2
EXERCISE 1.6	
	 I.	 The following arguments were abstracted from newspaper articles, editorials, and 
letters to the editor. Use the method presented in this section to construct argu-
ment patterns. If a statement is redundant or plays no role in the argument, do not 
include it in the pattern.
	
★1.	 1  The conditions under which many food animals are raised are unhealthy 
for humans. 2  To keep these animals alive, large quantities of drugs must be 
administered. 3  These drugs remain in the animals’ flesh and are passed on to 
the humans who eat it.
(Philip D. Oliver, “We Can Eat Ribs and Still Be Humane”)
SECTION 1.6 Extended Arguments   71

1
	
2.	 1  The development of carbon-embedded plastics, otherwise called “compos-
its,” is an important new technology because 2  it holds the key for new air-
craft and spacecraft designs. This is so because 3  these composits are not only 
stronger than steel but lighter than aluminum.
(  Thomas H. Maugh II, “Composits—The Lightweight Champs of 
Aircraft Industry”)
	
3.	 1  Homework stifles the thrill of learning in the mind of the student.  
2  It instills an oppressive learn-or-else discipline. 3  It quenches the desire for 
knowledge and the love of truth. For these reasons 4  homework should never 
be assigned.
(Colman McCarthy, “Homework’s Tyranny Hobbles 
Promising Minds”)
	
★4.	 1  When parents become old and destitute, the obligation of caring for them 
should be imposed on their children. 2  Clearly, children owe a debt to their 
parents. 3  Their parents brought them into the world and cared for them 
when they were unable to care for themselves. 4  This debt could be appropri-
ately discharged by having grown children care for their parents.
(Gary Jones, “The Responsibility of Parents”)
	
5.	 1  Defending the war on drugs may not be fashionable, but the fact remains 
that 2  hardcore drugs should remain illegal. 3  As long as hardcore drugs are 
illegal, they are harder to get, and 4  the social stigma of being arrested deters 
many users.
(Charles Van DeVenter, “I’m Proof: The War on Drugs Is Working”)
	
6.	 1  The rain forest of Brazil produces oxygen for the whole world, yet 2  it 
yields no monetary return to that country. Given that 3  the industrialized 
nations consume the most oxygen, 4  those nations ought to pay Brazil an an-
nual fee for the use of its rain forest.
(Diane B. Robinson, letter to the editor)
	
★7.	 1  It appears that animals may be able to predict earthquakes. 2  Prior to a 
major quake in China, hundreds of snakes suddenly appeared from hiberna-
tion and froze to death in the snow, 3  fish were seen leaping from rivers and 
lakes, and 4  cows and horses refused to enter barns. Also, 5  prior to a quake 
in Fremont, California, a flood of callers reported strange behavior from their 
pets and domestic animals.
(Michael Bowker, “Can Animals Really Predict Earthquakes?”)
	
8.	 1  Contributions to relief organizations are often wasted. 2  Food sent to war-
torn countries rarely reaches its destination, because 3  food distribution is 
controlled by the warring groups, and 4  these groups sell the food to buy 
weapons and ammunition.
(Michael Maren, “The Faces of Famine”)
	
9.	 1  Research leading to the development of a scramjet engine is worthwhile. 2 
Commercial aircraft incorporating such an engine could cross the Pacific in as 
1
72   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
little as two hours. 3  This would relieve the fatigue of flights from New York 
to Tokyo. Also, 4  such an engine could power future orbiting spacecraft.
(  T.  A. Heppenheimer, “A Plane for Space”)
	 ★10.	 1  There is a lot of pressure on untenured college teachers to dumb down 
their courses. 2  Administrators tend to rehire teachers who bring in more 
money, and 3  teachers who dumb down their classes do precisely this. Why? 
Because 4  easier classes attract more students, and 5  more students means 
more money for the school.
(Lynne Drury Lerych, “Meeting the Bottom Line in the College Biz”)
	
11.	 1  The use of ethanol as an additive in gasoline is really a bad idea. 2  Ethanol 
is produced from corn, and 3  when 40 percent of the annual corn crop is 
burned up in car engines, that obviously raises the price of corn for food. 4 
Also, adding ethanol to gasoline is highly inefficient. 5  Ethanol yields about 
30 percent less energy than gasoline, and 6  it’s more expensive to transport 
and handle than gasoline.
(Colin A. Carter and Henry I. Miller, “Corn for Food, Not Fuel”)
	
12.	 1  Unscrupulous for-profit colleges are not only cheating their students but  
2  they are also ripping off the American taxpayer to the tune of billions of 
dollars. 3  Ninety-six percent of the students who attend these colleges are 
forced to take out loans. 4  Most of these students leave without degrees.  
5  And the students then default on their loans, leaving a 32 billion dollar an-
nual debt to the taxpayer. 
(Newspaper editorial, “False Promises”)
	 ★13.	 1  Numerous cancer patients on chemotherapy suffer from constant nausea, 
loss of appetite, and inability to sleep. 2  For many of these patients, inhaled 
marijuana is the only medicine that provides relief. 3  Also, it causes no harm-
ful side effects. 4  For these reasons, medical marijuana should be legalized 
and made available to these patients. 5  This is not a law and order issue; it is a 
medical and human-rights issue. 
(Gustin L. Reichbach, “A Judge’s Plea for Pot”)
	
14.	 1  The United States is currently experiencing the greatest economic inequal-
ity since the 1920s, and 2  this inequality is depressing the economy. 3  The 
true sustainers of the economy are the bottom 99 percent of households, 
but 4  the top 1 percent takes in 93 percent of the growth in income. Also,  
5  economic inequality is undercutting tax receipts, which are vital for infra-
structure, education and research. This is because 6  income earned by the 
rich is taxed at a far lower rate than income earned by the middle class. 
( Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Inequality Is Holding Back the Recovery”)
	
15.	 1  Programs to develop clean energy have seen some early notable successes. 
2  The price of solar and wind power have both fallen sharply in recent  
years. 3  The nation’s largest wind farm, sprawling across eastern Oregon, 
is now open and running, and 4  there is even good news from the natural 
gas front. 5  The use of natural gas, which is far cleaner than coal, to gener-
ate electricity has jumped substantially in the last few years, and 6  thanks to  
SECTION 1.6 Extended Arguments   73
1

1
government-sponsored research, energy companies are now able to extract 
much more gas from a tract of land than once seemed possible.
(David Leonhardt, “There’s Still Hope for the Planet”)
	II.	 The following arguments gradually increase in difficulty. Use the method pre-
sented in this section to construct argument patterns. If a statement is redundant 
or plays no role in the argument, do not include it in the pattern.
	
★1.	  1  Many people believe that the crime of bribery cannot extend to campaign 
contributions. 2  From a legal standpoint, however, countless campaign con-
tributions are in fact bribes. 3  A bribe is anything of value or advantage given 
with the intent to unlawfully influence the person to whom it is given in his 
official capacity. 4  A campaign contribution is certainly something of value 
or advantage. Furthermore, 5  every contribution from a lobbyist or special 
interest group is given with the intent to influence voting, and 6  thousands of 
such contributions are made in every important election.
(Daniel Hays Lowenstein, “Can Candidates Run for Political Office 
Without Taking Bribes?”)
	
2.	 1  America’s farm policy desperately needs revamping. 2  Seventy-three cents 
of every farm program dollar ends up in the pockets of the nation’s super-
farmers. As a result, 3  the mid-sized family farms are being squeezed out 
of existence. Also, 4  our farm policy courts environmental disaster. 5  Fed-
eral subsidies encourage farmers to use enormous amounts of fertilizer and 
­pesticides. 6  These chemicals percolate down through the soil and pollute 
limited groundwater.
(Osha Gray Davidson, “Rise of America’s Rural Ghetto”)
	
3.	 1  Society values white lives more than black lives. This is clear from the fact 
that 2  killers of whites are much more likely to be sentenced to death than 
killers of blacks. 3  Of the 1,788 people currently on death row, 1,713 were 
convicted of killing a white person. Yet 4  blacks are six times more likely to be 
murder victims than whites are. 5  In Florida, no one has ever been executed 
for murdering a black person, but 6  dozens have been executed for murder-
ing white people.
(Los Angeles Times editorial, “Death and Race”)
	
★4.	 1  Powerful new particle accelerators are important in high-energy physics, 
and 2  they are worth their cost because 3  they will allow scientists to pro-
duce and capture significant quantities of Z particles. 4  Z particles result from 
the collision of positrons and electrons, and 5  particle accelerators are needed 
to achieve significant numbers of these collisions. 6  Z particles are thought 
to be the bearers of the weak nuclear force, and 7  learning the nature of this 
force may lead to the development of entirely new sources of energy.
(Lee Dye, “Linear Collider: Bold Gamble in Atomic Physics”)
	
5.	 1  Although Thomas Jefferson’s contributions to the foundation of the coun-
try were profound, 2  as the master of Monticello, Jefferson was a monster.  
3  Simultaneously with his writing the Declaration of Independence, which 
announced the self-evident truth that all men are created equal, he owned 
1
74   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
175 slaves. 4  Clearly the man was a creepy hypocrite. 5  But Jefferson was 
also cruel. 6  He sometimes punished slaves by selling them away from their  
family and friends, and 7  for slaves and free blacks who ran afoul of the law, 
he advocated harsh, almost barbaric forms of punishment. 
(Paul Finkelman, “The Monster of Monticello”)
	
6.	 1  All men crave material success because 2  it serves as an insurance pol-
icy against sexual rejection. This is true because 3  women love men who are 
successful. 4  Both men and women want power, and 5  success is the form 
of power women feel most deprived of. Thus, 6  women try to achieve it vi-
cariously through men. 7  As the 5-foot 6-inch Dustin Hoffman once put it, 
“When I was in high school, women wouldn’t touch me with a 10-foot pole. 
Now I can’t keep them away with a 10-foot pole.”
(  Warren Farrell, “Success Story: From Frog to Prince”)
	
★7.	
1  Cigarette consumption could be easily reduced by simply outlawing  
tailor-made cigarettes. 2  The manufacture of tailor-made cigarettes to  
American standards is a high-tech industry. 3  It cannot be done in small  
illicit labs like the processing of PCP, cocaine or heroin. 4  The availability of 
quality tobacco for hand-rolling would discourage the development of an il-
legal tailor-made market. 5  Most people would not pay the premium prices  
demanded by an illicit market for a product of unknown quality. 6  They 
could roll a ­high-quality product for themselves. 7  Truly addicted persons 
would continue to smoke no matter how inconvenient. But 8  most would give 
it up as too much bother before it became a deeply ingrained habit.
(Richard Sand, “An Easy Way to Reduce Cigarette Consumption”)
	
8.	 1  Flesh food is not a necessity in the human diet, as 2  nutritionally ade-
quate alternatives are readily available. 3  Many people in the world thrive on a  
nonmeat diet. 4  Indeed, vegetarian Seventh-Day Adventists in this coun-
try live an average of six years longer than their meat-eating counterparts.  
5  The National Academy of Science warns that our fat-laden diet is directly  
responsible for much of the heart disease and cancer that afflict so many.  
6  At a time when people are starving in certain parts of the world, it should be 
noted that a steer must consume sixteen pounds of grain and soy to produce 
one pound of meat. 7  The grain and soybeans we feed our meat-producing  
animals would feed every hungry mouth in the world many times over.  
8  Cattle are competing with humans for food. 9  Clearly, a reassessment of 
the whole concept of killing and eating animals is in order.
(Suzanne Sutton, “Killing Animals for Food—Time for a 
Second Look”)
	
9.	 1  The argument has been made that to cut down on teenage drunk driving 
we should increase the federal excise tax on beer. 2  Such a measure, how-
ever, would almost certainly fail to achieve its intended result. 3  Teenagers are 
notoriously insensitive to cost. 4  They gladly accept premium prices for the 
latest style in clothes or the most popular record albums. And then, 5  those 
who drink and drive already risk arrest and loss of driving privileges. 6  They 
would not think twice about paying a little more for a six-pack. Finally, 7  the 
SECTION 1.6 Extended Arguments   75
1

1
situation is not as bleak as it has been made to appear. 8  The fatality rate for 
teenage drivers is lower today than it has been in years.
( James C. Sanders, “Increased U.S. Tax on Beer”)
	 ★10.	
1  It has been widely acknowledged that the quality of undergraduate  
education in this country is diminishing. 2  An often unrecognized cause of 
this malady is the exploitative way that universities as employers treat their  
part-time and temporary faculty members. 3  In many universities there are 
no formal guidelines for evaluating the work of these instructors. As a result,  
4  poor instructors who solicit the favor of the department chairman are often 
retained over better ones who do not. 5  Another factor is the low pay given 
to these instructors. 6  In order to survive, many of them must accept heavy 
teaching loads spread out over three or four institutions. 7  The quality of in-
struction can only suffer when faculty members stretch themselves so thin. 
Lastly, because 8  part-time and temporary faculty are rarely members of the 
faculty senate, 9  they have no voice in university governance. But 10  with-
out a voice, the shoddy conditions under which they work are never brought 
to light.
(Michael Schwalbe, “Part-Time Faculty Members Deserve a Break”)
	
11.	 1  Doctors who attend elderly people in nursing homes often prescribe tran-
quilizers to keep these people immobile. 2  This practice is often unwarranted, 
and 3  it often impairs the health of the patients. 4  These tranquilizers often 
have damaging side effects in that 5  they accentuate the symptoms of senility, 
and 6  they increase the likelihood of a dangerous fall because 7  they produce 
unsteadiness in walking. Furthermore, since 8  these medications produce im-
mobility, 9  they increase the risk of bedsores. 10  Doctors at the Center for 
Aging and Health say that physicians who care for the elderly are simply pre-
scribing too much medication.
(Hal Willard, “At 90, the Zombie Shuffle”)
	
12.	 1  All of us have encountered motorists who will go to any length to get a 
parking spot within 20 feet of the door they expect to enter. 2  This obsession 
with good parking spots transcends all logic. 3  It might take 5 minutes to 
secure the ideal spot in a store parking lot, 4  while a more distant spot that is 
immediately available is only a 40-second walk from the door. 5  Waiting for 
that ideal spot also results in frenzied nerves and skyrocketing blood pres-
sure. 6  Inevitably the occupant of the desired space will preen her hair before 
departing, and 7  all the while the cars backed up behind the waiting driver 
are blaring their horns. 8  Parking a little farther away is usually easier and 
safer because 9  you can pull out more quickly, and 10  it avoids damage to car 
doors by adjacent parkers.
(Gwinn Owens, “A Ridiculous Addiction”)
	 ★13.	 1  The state has a right to intervene on behalf of unborn children, and 2  this 
right should be implemented immediately. 3  While it may be true that a mere 
fetus has no rights, 4  surely a born child does have rights, and 5  these rights 
project backward to the time it was in the womb. This is true because 6  what 
happens to the child in the womb can have an impact throughout the child’s 
1
76   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts

1
life. 7  It is well known that alcohol and drug abuse by expectant mothers cause 
birth defects, and 8  these defects are not correctable after birth. 9  Granted, 
an expectant mother has the right to treat her own body as she chooses, but  
10  this right does not extend to her unborn child. 11  Once a pregnant woman 
decides to give birth, she effectively transfers part of her rights over to her un-
born child. 12  Unfortunately, however, the unborn child is incapable of secur-
ing these rights for itself. Thus, 13  the intervention of a higher power is justified.
(Alan Dershowitz, “Drawing the Line on Prenatal Rights”)
	
14.	 1  A manned trip to Mars is a justified scientific goal because 2  it affords a 
unique opportunity to explore the origins of the solar system and the emer-
gence of life. However, 3  from a scientific standpoint, an initial landing on 
the tiny Martian moons, Phobos and Deimos, would be more rewarding than 
a landing on the planet itself. Because 4  the Martian terrain is rugged, 5  hu-
mans would not be able to venture far, 6  nor could they operate a robot ve-
hicle for great distances, since 7  Mars’s mountains would block their view.  
8  Explorers on Phobos and Deimos could easily send robot vehicles to the 
planet’s surface. 9  Using Mars’s moons as a base would also be better than un-
manned exploration directed from the Houston space center. Because 10  the 
distance is so great, 11  radio signals to and from Mars can take as long as an 
hour. Thus, 12  driving an unmanned rover from Earth, step by step, would be 
a time-consuming operation. 13  Sample returns to Earth would take months 
instead of hours, and 14  follow-on missions would be years apart instead of 
days, further slowing the process of exploration.
(S. Fred Singer, “The Case for Going to Mars”)
	
15.	 1  A small group of people still believe in nuclear weapons, but 2  the facts 
dictate that nuclear weapons not only should be eliminated but 3  they can 
be eliminated. 4  The opposing arguments are that nuclear weapons hastened 
the end of World War II, they deter nations from going to war, they have kept 
the peace, and nuclear technology is irreversible. But 5  nuclear weapons did 
not persuade the Japanese to surrender. 6  New research shows that the real 
reason Japan surrendered is because the Soviets renounced neutrality and  
entered the war. And 7  before losing two cities to nuclear weapons, Japan had 
already lost sixty-six to conventional weapons. 8  Two more made little differ-
ence. Also, 9  history shows that nuclear weapons are ineffective as a deterrent.  
10  They did not deter the U.S. during the Cuban missile crisis, and 11 they did 
not deter Argentina in the conflict with Britain over the Falklands. Further-
more, 12 there is no good reason to think that nuclear weapons cause peace. 
13 Peace means the absence of war, but 14  the absence of something can be 
explained in countless ways. Lastly, 15 the argument that you can’t stuff the 
nuclear genie back in the bottle is specious. 16 The question is not whether 
nuclear weapons can be disinvented but whether they are useful. 17 This is 
doubtful given that 18 not one has been used since 1945 and 19 the trend in 
modern warfare is toward smaller, more effective precision-guided weapons. 
20 Banning nuclear weapons will not be easy, but 21 the existing ban on chemi-
cal and biological weapons shows that it can be done.
(  Ward Wilson, “The Myth of Nuclear Necessity”)
SECTION 1.6 Extended Arguments   77
1

1
78   CHAPTER 1 Basic Concepts
	
Summary
Logic:  The science that evaluates arguments
Argument: A group of statements comprising one or more premises and one conclusion
Premises: The statements that set forth the reasons or evidence
Conclusion: The statement that is claimed to follow from the premises
To distinguish premises from conclusion, look for:
• Indicator words (“hence,” “therefore,” “since,” “because,” etc.)
• An inferential relationship among the statements
Not all groups of statements are arguments. To distinguish arguments from nonarguments, 
look for:
•	 Indicator words (“hence,” “since,” etc.) 
• An inferential relationship among the statements 
• Typical kinds of nonarguments (warnings, reports, expository passages, etc.)
The most problematic kinds of nonarguments:
• Expository passages (Is the topic sentence proved by the other statements?) 
• Illustrations (Could the passage be an argument from example?) 
• Explanations (Could the explanandum also be a conclusion?)
Conditional statements express the relation between sufficient conditions and necessary 
conditions:
•  A is a sufficient condition for B: The occurrence of A is all that is needed for the occur-
rence of B.
•  A is a necessary condition for B: A cannot occur without the occurrence of B.
	III.	Turn to the editorial pages of a newspaper and select an editorial that contains 
an argument. Keep in mind that some editorials are really reports and contain no 
arguments at all. Also, few editorials are as neat and straightforward as the selec-
tions presented in Parts I and II of this exercise. Guest editorials on the opinion–
editorial page (usually opposite the editorial page) are often better written than 
those on the editorial page. Analyze the argument (or arguments) according to the 
method presented in this section. Begin by placing a numeral at the beginning of 
each statement. Compound statements having components that are claimed to be 
true may be broken up into parts and the parts enumerated accordingly. Numer-
als should usually be placed after genuine premise and conclusion indicators even 
when they occur in the middle of a statement. Do not, however, break up condi-
tional statements into antecedent and consequent. Proceed to identify the main 
conclusion (or conclusions) and determine how the other statements provide sup-
port. Any statement that does not play a direct role in the argument should be left 
out of the final argument pattern.
1
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

1
Arguments are traditionally divided into deductive and inductive:
•  Deductive argument: The conclusion is claimed to follow necessarily from the premises. 
•  Inductive argument: The conclusion is claimed to follow probably from the premises.
To distinguish deductive arguments from inductive arguments, look for:
•  Special indicator phrases (“it necessarily follows that,” “it probably follows that,” etc.) 
•  The actual strength of the inferential relationship between premises and conclusion 
•  Typical forms or styles of argumentation:
• Deductive forms: Arguments based on mathematics; arguments from definition; and 
categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive syllogisms
• Inductive forms: Predictions, arguments from analogy, generalizations, arguments from 
authority, arguments based on signs, and causal inferences
Evaluating an argument (either deductive or inductive) involves two steps:
•  Evaluating the link between premises and conclusion 
•  Evaluating the truth of the premises
Deductive arguments are valid, invalid, sound, or unsound.
•  Valid: The conclusion actually follows from the premises. 
•  Sound: The argument is valid and has all true premises.
Inductive arguments are strong, weak, cogent, or uncogent.
•  Strong:  The conclusion actually follows from the premises.
•  Cogent: The argument is strong and has all true premises.
The validity of a deductive argument is determined by the argument’s form. An invalid form 
allows for a substitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion.
•  Counterexample method:
• Is used to prove invalidity.
• Consists in identifying the form of a given invalid argument and producing a substitu-
tion instance having true premises and a false conclusion.
• This proves the form invalid, which proves the given argument invalid.
The structure of longer arguments can be disclosed by a diagramming method. Four basic 
argument patterns are:
•  Vertical pattern 
•  Horizontal pattern 
•  Conjoint premises 
•  Multiple conclusion
Summary   79

80
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.
2
2.1	 Varieties of Meaning
2.2	 The Intension and Extension of Terms
2.3	 Definitions and Their Purposes
2.4	 Definitional Techniques
2.5	 Criteria for Lexical Definitions
2.1	
Varieties of Meaning
PREVIEW    A friend of yours throws a party but you decide not to go. The next day you happen 
to see her on the way to class and she says that you have now missed two of her parties, and that it took 
you over a day to reply to her last text message. She says that you have become remote and aloof, a drag 
to be around, and are no longer a true friend. Do you see a difference in meaning between her first two 
statements and the other three? This first section of the chapter explores these differences in meaning.
Ordinary language, as most of us are at least vaguely aware, serves various functions in 
our day-to-day lives. The twentieth-century philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein thought 
the number of these functions to be virtually unlimited. Thus, among many other 
things, language is used to
ask questions	
tell jokes
tell stories	
flirt with someone
tell lies	
give directions
guess at answers	
sing songs
form hypotheses	
issue commands
launch verbal assaults	
greet someone
For our purpose, two linguistic functions are particularly important: (1) to convey 
information and (2) to express or evoke feelings. Consider, for example, the following 
statements:
Language: Meaning 
and Definition

SECTION 2.1 Varieties of Meaning   81
2
The death penalty, which is legal in thirty-two states, has been carried out most of-
ten in Georgia; however, since 1977 Texas holds the record for the greatest number of  
executions.
The death penalty is a cruel and inhuman form of punishment in which hapless ­prisoners 
are dragged from their cells and summarily slaughtered only to satiate the bloodlust of 
a vengeful public.
The first statement is intended primarily to convey information about the death 
penalty, whereas the second is intended to persuade us that the death penalty is bad. 
The second accomplishes this function by engaging our feelings and not, as in an argu-
ment, by establishing the truth of a claim.
These statements accomplish their respective functions through the distinct kinds of 
terminology in which they are phrased. Terminology that conveys information is said 
to have cognitive meaning, and terminology that expresses or evokes feelings is said 
to have emotive meaning. Thus, in the first statement the words “legal,” “thirty-six,” 
“most often,” “Georgia,” “record,” and so on have primarily a cognitive meaning, while 
in the second statement the words “cruel,” “inhuman,” “hapless,” “dragged,” “slaugh-
tered,” “bloodlust,” and “vengeful” have a strong emotive meaning. Of course, these 
latter words have cognitive meaning as well. “Cruel” means tending to hurt others, 
“inhuman” means inappropriate for humans, “hapless” means unfortunate, and so on.
The emotively charged statement about the death penalty illustrates two important 
points. The first is that statements of this sort usually have both cognitive meaning and 
emotive meaning. Therefore, since logic is concerned chiefly with cognitive meaning, 
we must be able to distinguish and disengage the cognitive meaning of such statements 
from the emotive meaning. The second point is that part of the cognitive meaning of 
such statements is a value claim. A value claim is a claim that something is good, bad, 
right, wrong, better, worse, more important, or less important than some other thing. 
For example, the statement about the death penalty asserts the value claim that the 
death penalty is wrong or immoral. Such value claims are often the most important 
part of the cognitive meaning of emotive statements. Thus, for the purposes of logic, 
we must be able to disengage the value claims of emotively charged statements from the 
emotive meaning and treat these claims as separate statements.
These observations suggest the reason that people use emotive terminology as often 
as they do: Value claims as such normally require evidence to support them. For ex-
ample, the claim that the death penalty is immoral cannot simply stand by itself. It cries 
out for reasons to support it. But when value claims are couched in emotive terminol-
ogy, the emotive “clothing” tends to obscure the fact that a value claim is being made, 
and it simultaneously gives psychological momentum to that claim. As a result, readers 
and listeners are inclined to swallow the value claim whole without any evidence. Fur-
thermore, the intellectual laziness of many speakers and writers, combined with their 
inability to supply supporting reasons for their value claims, reinforces the desirability 
of couching such claims in emotive terminology.
Many people, for example, will refer to someone as “crazy,” “stupid,” or “weird” when 
they want to express the claim that what that person is doing is bad or wrong and when 
they are unable or unwilling to give reasons for this claim. Also, many people will use 

82   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
such words as “awesome” or “fantastic” to express the claim that something is good. 
Those who happen to be listening, especially if they are friendly with the speaker, will 
often accept these claims without hesitation.
The use of emotive terminology in advertising often results in huge profits for com-
panies that sponsor the ads. The pharmaceutical industry is a prime example. Nowa-
days, instead of pitching their ads to the doctors who prescribe the drugs, pharmaceu-
tical companies go directly to the patients, and they select names for their drugs that 
are easy to recall and convey a positive, though often subtle, emotional message. For 
example, lunesta, a drug for insomnia, suggests a peaceful sleep bathed in moonlight 
(recall that luna means “moon”). Boniva, a drug for osteoporosis, suggests giving new 
life to one’s bones (“bone” + vita). Viagra suggests vigor and growth. Celebrex, a drug 
for arthritis, suggests celebrating. Abilify, a drug for depression, “abilifies” you to be 
happy and productive. Enablex, a drug for overactive bladder, enables you to regain 
control. These are just a few.
For another example of emotive terminology, consider the word “harvest.” This 
word evokes feelings associated with honest, hardworking farmers being rewarded for 
their labor in planting and tending their crops. To capitalize on this positive feeling, 
wood products companies speak of harvesting the trees in 200-year-old forests, even 
though they had nothing to do with planting them, and surgeons speak of harvesting 
the organs from the bodies of donors and the tissue from aborted fetuses. In all of these 
cases, the use of the word “harvest” is specifically calculated to elicit a favorable or 
agreeable response from the listener.
Let us now consider emotive terminology as it occurs in arguments. In arguments, 
emotive terminology accomplishes basically the same function as it does in statements. 
It allows the arguer to make value claims about the subject matter of the argument 
without providing evidence, and it gives the argument a kind of steamroller quality by 
which it tends to crush potential counterarguments before the reader or listener has 
a chance to think of them. This steamroller quality also tends to paralyze the logical 
thought processes of readers or listeners so that they are not able to see illogical argu-
ments in their true light. These effects of emotive terminology can be avoided if the 
reader or listener will disengage the value claims and other cognitive meanings from 
the emotive meaning of the language and reexpress them as distinct premises.
Consider, for example, the following emotively charged argument taken from the 
letters to the editor section of a newspaper:
Now that we know that the rocks on the moon are similar to those in our backyard and 
that tadpoles can exist in a weightless environment, and now that we have put the rest of 
the world in order, can we concentrate on the problems here at home? Like what makes 
people hungry and why is unemployment so elusive?
(Robert J. Boland)
The conclusion of this argument is that our government should take money that has 
been spent on the space program and on international police actions and redirect it 
to solving domestic problems. The author minimizes the importance of the space 
program by covertly suggesting that it amounts to nothing more than work on or-
dinary rocks and tadpoles (which by themselves are relatively insignificant), and he  

SECTION 2.1 Varieties of Meaning   83
2
exaggerates the scope of the international effort by covertly suggesting that it has solved 
every problem on earth but our own. Also, the phrase “put . . . in order” suggests that 
the international effort has been no more important than restoring order to a room in 
one’s house. We might rephrase the argument in emotively neutral language, making 
the implicit suggestions and value claims explicit, as follows:
The space program has been confined to work on ordinary rocks and tadpoles.
Ordinary rocks and tadpoles are less important than domestic hunger and unemployment.
Our international efforts have restored order to every nation on earth but our own.
These efforts have been directed to problems that are less important than our own 
domestic problems.
Therefore, our government should redirect funds that have been spent on these projects 
to solving our own domestic problems.
By restructuring the argument in this way, we can more easily evaluate the degree to 
which the premises support the conclusion. Inspection of the premises reveals that the 
first, third, and possibly fourth premises are false. Thus, the actual support provided 
by the premises is less than what we might have first expected. If the argument were to 
be rephrased a second time so that the premises turned out true (for example, the first 
premise might read “Part of the space program has been devoted to research on ordi-
nary rocks and tadpoles”), the support given to the conclusion would still be weaker 
than the author intended.
Now that we have distinguished emotive meaning from cognitive meaning, let us 
explore some of the ways that language having cognitive meaning can be defective. Two 
of them are vagueness and ambiguity. A vague expression is one that allows for bor-
derline cases in which it is impossible to tell if the expression applies or does not apply. 
Vague expressions often allow for a continuous range of interpretations. The meaning 
is hazy, obscure, and imprecise. For example, words such as “love,” “happiness,” “peace,” 
“excessive,” “fresh,” “rich,” “poor,” “normal,” “conservative,” and “polluted” are vague. 
We can rarely tell with any precision whether they apply to a given situation or not. 
How fresh does something have to be in order to be called “fresh”?
Vagueness can also affect entire statements. Such vagueness may arise not so much 
from the individual words as from the way in which the words are combined. For ex-
ample, suppose someone were to say, “Today our job situation is more transparent.” 
First, what is the meaning of “job situation”? Does it refer to finding a job, keeping 
a job, filling a job, completing a job, or bidding on a job? And what exactly does it 
mean for a job situation to be “transparent”? Does it mean that the job is more easily 
perceived or comprehended? That the job is more easily completed? That we can an-
ticipate our future job needs more clearly? Or what else?
Not all cases of vagueness, however, are problematic. To describe an acquaintance 
as “tall” or “thin” often causes no trouble in ordinary conversation. Indeed, it may be 
burdensome to describe this person in more precise language. Trouble arises only when 
the language is not sufficiently precise for what the situation demands.
The other way in which cognitive meanings can be defective is ambiguity. An  
ambiguous expression is one that can be interpreted as having more than one clearly  

84   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
distinct meaning in a given context. For example, words such as “light,” “proper,” “criti-
cal,” “stress,” “mad,” “inflate,” “chest,” “bank,” “sound,” and “race” can be used ambigu-
ously. Thus, if one were to describe a beer as a light pilsner, does this mean that the beer 
is light in color, light in calories, or light in taste? If one were to describe an action as 
proper, does this mean proper in a moral sense or proper in the sense of being socially 
acceptable? Or if one were to describe a person as critical, does this mean that the per-
son is essential for a certain task or that the person tends to criticize others?
As is the case with vagueness, ambiguity can also affect entire statements. Such am-
biguity often results from the way in which certain words are combined. For example, 
there was a newspaper headline that read, “Tuna are biting off the Washington coast.” 
Does this mean that the tuna are nibbling away at the coastline or that fishermen are 
catching them off the coast? Presumably it means the latter. Another headline read, 
“College students are turning to vegetables.” Does this mean that the students are meta-
morphosing into vegetables or that they are incorporating more vegetables into their 
diet? Again, the intended meaning is probably the latter.
The difference between ambiguity and vagueness is that vague terminology allows 
for a relatively continuous range of interpretations, whereas ambiguous terminology 
allows for multiple discrete interpretations. A vague expression creates a blur of mean-
ing, whereas an ambiguous expression mixes up otherwise clear meanings. However, 
many forms of expression are ambiguous in one context and vague in another. For 
example, the word “slow” in one context could mean either mentally challenged or 
physically slow, but when the word refers to physical slowness, it could be vague. How 
slow is slow? Similar remarks apply to “light,” “fast,” and “rich.”
Ambiguity and vagueness are important in logic because there are countless occasions 
in which the evaluation of an argument leads to the observation, “Well, that depends on 
what you mean by . . .” Certain phraseology in the argument is vague or ambiguous, and 
its meaning must be clarified before any evaluation can proceed. For example, Scientolo-
gists argue that their organization should be exempt from paying taxes because, they 
claim, Scientology is a religion. Evaluating their argument requires that we clarify the 
meaning of “religion.” Pro-life advocates argue that abortion is wrong because it results 
in the killing of human beings. But what is the meaning of “human being”? And some 
feminists argue that leering glances constitute sexual harassment. To evaluate their argu-
ments we must clarify the meaning of “leering glances” and “sexual harassment.”
The role of vagueness and ambiguity in arguments may be conveniently explored 
in the context of conflicting arguments between individuals. Such conflicts are called 
disputes:
CLAUDIA: Mrs. Wilson abuses her children. And how do I know that? I saw her spank 
one of her kids the other day after the kid misbehaved.
JANE: Don’t be silly. Kids need discipline, and by disciplining her children, Mrs. Wilson is 
showing that she loves them.
Here the problem surrounds the vagueness of the words “abuse” and “discipline.” When 
does discipline become abuse? The line separating the two is hazy at best, but unless it 
is clarified, disputes of this sort will never be resolved.

2
EXERCISE 2.1	
	 I.	 The following selection is taken from a speech delivered by George C. Wallace, for-
mer governor of Alabama, on July 4, 1964. In this speech Wallace attacked Lyndon 
Johnson’s signing of the Civil Rights Act. The speech is liberally sprinkled with 
emotive terminology. Make a list of what you consider to be the twenty-five most 
highly charged words or phrases, and then indicate whether they are intended to 
evoke a favorable or an unfavorable attitude from the listener.
We come here today in deference to the memory of those stalwart patriots who on  
July 4, 1776, pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor to establish and 
defend the proposition that governments are created by the people, empowered by the 
people, derive their just powers from the consent of the people, and must forever remain 
subservient to the will of the people.
	
Today, 188 years later, we celebrate that occasion and find inspiration and determina-
tion and courage to preserve and protect the great principles of freedom enunciated in 
the Declaration of Independence.
Another example:
BRENDA: I’m afraid that Smiley is guilty of arson. Last night he confided to me that  
he was the one who set fire to the old schoolhouse.
WARREN: No, you couldn’t be more mistaken. In this country no one is guilty until 
proven so in a court of law, and Smiley has not yet even been accused of anything.
In this case the dispute arises over the ambiguity of the word “guilty.” Brenda is using 
the word in the moral sense. Given that Smiley has admitted to setting fire to the old 
schoolhouse, it is very likely that he did indeed set fire to it and therefore is guilty of 
arson in the moral sense of the term. Warren, on the other hand, is using the word in 
the legal sense. Because Smiley has not been convicted in a court of law, he is not legally 
guilty of anything.
Disputes that arise over the meaning of language are called verbal disputes. But not 
all disputes are of this sort. Some disputes arise over a disagreement about facts, and 
these are called factual disputes. Example:
KEITH: I know that Freddie stole a computer from the old schoolhouse. Barbara told me 
that she saw Freddie do it.
PHYLLIS: That’s ridiculous! Freddie has never stolen anything in his life. Barbara hates 
Freddie, and she is trying to pin the theft on him only to shield her criminal boyfriend.
Here the dispute centers on the factual issues of whether Barbara told the truth and 
whether Freddie stole the computer.
In dealing with disputes, the first question is whether the dispute is factual, verbal, 
or some combination of the two. If the dispute is verbal, then the second question to be 
answered is whether the dispute concerns ambiguity or vagueness.
SECTION 2.1 Varieties of Meaning   85

2
	
It is therefore a cruel irony that the President of the United States has only yesterday 
signed into law the most monstrous piece of legislation ever enacted by the United States 
Congress.
	
It is a fraud, a sham, and a hoax.
	
This bill will live in infamy. To sign it into law at any time is tragic. To do so upon the eve 
of the celebration of our independence insults the intelligence of the American people.
	
It dishonors the memory of countless thousands of our dead who offered up their very 
lives in defense of principles which this bill destroys.
	
Never before in the history of this nation have so many human and property rights 
been destroyed by a single enactment of the Congress. It is an act of tyranny. It is the  
assassin’s knife stuck in the back of liberty.
	
With this assassin’s knife and a blackjack in the hand of the federal force-cult, the left-
wing liberals will try to force us back into bondage. Bondage to a tyranny more brutal than 
that imposed by the British Monarchy which claimed power to rule over the lives of our 
forefathers under sanction of the omnipotent black-robed despots who sit on the bench 
of the United States Supreme Court.
	
This bill is fraudulent in intent, in design, and in execution.
	
It is misnamed. Each and every provision is mistitled. It was rammed through the 
Congress on the wave of ballyhoo, promotions, and publicity stunts reminiscent of  
P. T. Barnum.
	
It was enacted in an atmosphere of pressure, intimidation, and even cowardice, as dem-
onstrated by the refusal of the United States Senate to adopt an amendment to submit the 
bill to a vote of the people.
	
To illustrate the fraud—it is not a civil rights bill. It is a federal penal code. It creates 
federal crimes which would take volumes to list and years to tabulate because it affects 
the lives of 192 million American citizens. Every person in every walk and station of life 
and every aspect of our daily lives become subject to the criminal provisions of this bill.
	
It threatens our freedom of speech, of assembly, of association, and makes the exercise 
of these freedoms a federal crime under certain conditions.
	
It affects our political rights, our right to trial by jury, our right to the full use and 
enjoyment of our private property, the freedom from search and seizure of our private 
property and possessions, the freedom from harassment by federal police and, in short, all 
the rights of individuals inherent in a society of free men.
	
Ministers, lawyers, teachers, newspapers, and every private citizen must guard his 
speech and watch his actions to avoid the deliberately imposed booby traps put into this 
bill. It is designed to make federal crimes of our customs, beliefs, and traditions. Therefore, 
under the fantastic powers of the federal judiciary to punish for contempt of court and 
under their fantastic powers to regulate our most intimate aspects of our lives by injunc-
tion, every American citizen is in jeopardy and must stand guard against these despots.
	II.	 The following selections were taken from the letters-to-the-editor section of a 
newspaper. Each can be interpreted as expressing one or more arguments. Begin 
by identifying the conclusion of each. Then disengage the covert assumptions, 
value claims, and other cognitive assertions from the emotive language and trans-
late them into emotively neutral premises. Use the two examples in the text as 
models. Finally, evaluate the restructured arguments. Some may turn out to be 
good ones.
86   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition

2
	
★1.	 Why don’t animal lovers do something about these dog sled races? Have you 
ever witnessed a race on television? Talk about torture. It’s sickening to watch 
the dogs, panting and their tongues hanging out, pull a heavily laden sled with 
a driver through snow and ice in bitter cold.
(Joe Shapiro)
	
2.	 How anyone who has seen even one photo of the fly-covered, starving chil-
dren in Somalia can still believe in a loving, everpresent, omnipotent God is 
beyond intelligent reasoning.
(William Blanchard)
	
3.	 The creationists have no right to impose their mistaken, ignorant, supersti-
tious beliefs on others. They claim the constitutional right to the free exercise 
of religion. How about the rights of the majority of people who want their 
children taught the scientific truth about evolution—not fallacious myths and 
superstitions from primitive societies.
(Andrew M. Underhill, Jr.)
	
★4.	 God, guts, and guns made this great country of ours free, and you can bet 
your buns it will take more of the same to keep it that way. One of the very last 
things in this world we need is handgun control.
(R. Kinzie)
	
5.	 The insanity plea should be done away with; criminals should lose this easy way 
out. Killers can theoretically spend as little as six months in a mental hospital, 
then be released. It’s time to take a stand for safety and put psychotic killers in 
prison.
(Keith Aikens)
	
6.	 Until now, the protest against the holocaust in our own nation has been vocal 
but far too small. The massacre of an unwanted generation through abortion 
and infanticide has sounded an alarm that should wake up every Christian. 
Helpless and guiltless little infants are mercilessly butchered daily in hospitals 
and clinics across our land. For the love of God, let us all urge the passage of 
the Human Life Bill, now before Congress.
(Jim Key)
	
★7.	 It’s time to challenge all this nonsense about the “celebration of diversity” in 
our society. The more the schizophrenics preach the glories of diversity, the 
more we pull apart. This is not to deny appreciation of the ethnic roots, rituals, 
and foods, which add color to life. But to lay undue emphasis upon diversifica-
tion results in destruction of the “social glue” that binds us together. Our fore-
fathers framed one nation, indivisible. In the misguided effort to “celebrate” 
the uniqueness of every disparate culture and subculture, we betray our heri-
tage and dilute our identities as Americans.
(Ruth M. Armstrong)
	
8.	 A kind and loving God surely favors the pro-choice attitude. He wants his 
world inhabited by happy, well-fed children with parents who love and care 
for them.
SECTION 2.1 Varieties of Meaning   87

2
	
	 	
Our burgeoning population in Third World nations with constant famine 
and disease, and many other human miseries, could be relieved if the Catholic 
Church were to adjust more of its ancient policies to our current civilization.
(Art Bates)
	
9.	 Thousands of years of organized religion have done nothing to solve any prob-
lems and have almost always exacerbated them by promoting fear, superstition, 
and irrational mythologies. Kneeling in prayer to some supernatural entity 
seeking “divine guidance” or, even more implausibly, “divine intervention,” is 
not only a waste of time, it is counterproductive because it lulls the supplicant 
into inactivity.
	
	 	
We must stand up, open our eyes and face life’s challenges head-on in a 
problem-solving approach that is reality-based, empirical, and above all,  
rational.
(James W. Baugh)
	 ★10.	 Liberalism has turned our welfare system from a social safety net into a ham-
mock. We hand out money with few questions asked. When welfare recipients 
are asked for some contribution to our society in return, liberals scream that 
it’s unconstitutional.
	
	 	
Liberalism has transformed our criminal justice system into one that cares 
more about the criminal’s past childhood problems than for the victim. Liber-
alism in its never-ending quest for “social justice” has sacrificed the rights of 
the majority while continuing to push the rights of a few to new limits.
	
	 	
Liberalism has turned our school system from one of excellence to one 
where condoms and metal detectors are more important than prayer.
(Marc Sexton)
III.	 Visit a drug store and find the aisle that displays hair-care products (shampoos, 
conditioners, etc.). Identify five items whose names have emotional meaning. 
Then, for each one, explain how its name is supposed to elicit a favorable response 
from the consumer.
	IV.	 Determine whether the following disputes are verbal, factual, or some combina-
tion of the two. If verbal, discuss whether the dispute arises from vagueness or 
ambiguity.
	
★1.	 FRANK: Look at that huge tree that fell last night. It must have made a tre-
mendous crash when it came down.
	
	 SHIRLEY: No, I’m afraid you’re quite wrong. Sound is a perception, and per-
ceptions depend on a perceiver. Therefore, since nobody was around here last 
night, there was no crash.
	
2.	 VICKIE: Yesterday I visited the exhibition of the work of Jean Michel Basquiat 
at the Central Gallery. What an interesting artist he is!
	
	 BARBARA: Don’t be ridiculous! That’s not art—it’s just graffiti.
	
3.	 PHIL: That was a great basketball game last night. Kobe Bryant scored 37 points.
	
	 ARTHUR: Your statistics are all wet. Bryant scored only 34 points.
88   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition

2
	
★4.	 ROGER: I think modern society is becoming more and more violent every 
day. Just look at the increase in murder, rape, and robbery. Violence is clearly 
an evil that must be eradicated.
	
	 MARK: You might be right about the increase in crime, but the idea that vio-
lence is an evil is nonsense. Violence is quite natural. The universe was cre-
ated in a tremendously violent big bang, the nuclear reactions that bring us 
sunlight are extremely violent, and insects and animals kill and devour one 
another all the time.
	
5.	 KATHY: I was saddened to hear about the death of your uncle. He was such 
a wonderful man. You must be consoled knowing that he’s enjoying his heav-
enly reward.
	
	 ANNE: Thanks, but I’m afraid I don’t know what you mean. If death is the end 
of life, how could my uncle be alive right now in heaven?
	
6.	 HEIDI: This morning I heard a lecture on the life of Jane Austen. She was such 
a wonderfully educated woman.
	
	 DAVID: That’s not true at all. Jane Austen dropped out of school when she 
was only eleven, and she never even attended high school, much less college or 
graduate school.
	
★7.	 LESLIE: Your friend Paul told us that he would be visiting his parents in Knox-
ville this weekend. Therefore, he must not be at home.
	
	 DIANA: I agree that Paul is probably not at home, but you didn’t hear him 
right. He said that his parents live in Nashville.
	
8.	 KARL: There’s a euthanasia measure on the ballot today, and I think I’ll vote 
for it. It seems reasonable that terminally ill patients should be allowed to be 
disconnected from life-support systems so that they can die peacefully and 
naturally.
	
	 SERGIO: You must be crazy! Euthanasia means giving people lethal injec-
tions, and that’s clearly murder.
	
9.	 CHERYL: Tomorrow I’m going to the Metallica concert. Their music is  
fabulous.
	
	 OLIVER: You call that music? Really it’s just noise, and incredibly loud noise 
at that.
	 ★10.	 CAROL: Nelson could not have fought in the battle of Trafalgar, because that 
battle occurred in 1806, and Nelson died in 1804.
	
	 JUSTIN: Your knowledge of history is atrocious! Nelson did fight in Trafalgar, 
and the date was October 21, 1805.
	
11.	 ERIC: I’ve just signed up for Philosophy 502—Dr. Peterson’s class in meta-
physics. I know I’m going to enjoy it because I’ve always been fascinated by 
magic and ghosts.
	
	 LEAH: I’m afraid you’re in for a surprise.
	
12.	 HAROLD: Professor Steinbeck is the most intelligent man I know. His lecture 
series on matter and consciousness was simply brilliant.
SECTION 2.1 Varieties of Meaning   89

2
	
	 JOYCE: Steinbeck is actually an idiot. Yesterday I watched while he tried to get 
his car started. When it wouldn’t start, he opened the hood, and he didn’t even 
notice that someone had stolen the battery.
	 ★13.	 THOMAS: George Foreman committed those crimes of child abuse through 
his own free choice. Nobody put a gun to his head. Therefore, he should be 
punished for them.
	
	 EMILIE: That’s not true. It’s been established that Foreman was severely 
abused himself when he was a child, and such children have an irresistible 
obsession to abuse others when they grow up.
	
14.	 ANTHONY: The sun is much smaller than the earth. You see, it’s just a small 
thing up there in the sky. Therefore, since the sun’s gravitational attraction is 
proportional to its mass, the sun’s gravity is less than the earth’s.
	
	 CINDY: You are as stupid as they come. I agree the mass of the sun is less than 
that of the earth, but its volume is greater. Therefore, since gravitational at-
traction is proportional to volume, the sun’s gravity is greater than the earth’s.
	
15.	 MINDY: President Clinton should have been removed from office because he 
lied about having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky.
	
	 KAREN: Don’t be silly. President Clinton had only oral sex with Lewinsky, 
and oral sex does not constitute sexual relations.
	 ★16.	 FRED: Today’s professional athletes are overpaid. Many of them make mil-
lions of dollars a year.
	
	 SHAWN: I don’t think they are overpaid at all. Just look at the owners of some 
of these teams. They make ten times as much as the athletes do.
	
17.	 BRIAN: That new morning-after pill, RU-486, causes abortion. Therefore, 
since abortion is wrong, you should never take that pill.
	
	 ELAINE: How ignorant you are! RU-486 merely prevents implantation of the 
fertilized ovum. Therefore, since the woman never gets pregnant, there is no 
abortion.
	
18.	 PENNY: In my mind, the use of marijuana should be legalized. After all, caf-
feine and alcohol are no less of a drug than marijuana, and it’s not illegal to 
enjoy a glass of beer or drink a cup of coffee.
	
	 SAM: Your conclusion is way off. Beer and coffee are not drugs; they’re foods.
	 ★19.	 JERRY: In spite of the great strides technology has made in this country, pov-
erty remains a terrible problem. Why, some people earn less than $10,000 per 
year. The government should do something about it.
	
	 FRANKIE: I hardly think that $10,000 per year constitutes poverty. Why, in many 
Third World countries the majority of inhabitants earn less than $1,000 per year.
	
20.	 JOSEPH: Adult human beings have the right to marry whomever they please, 
as long as that person is not a close relative. From this it follows that gays have 
the right to marry someone of their own sex.
	
	 STEPHEN: Your argument makes no sense. Rights are created by laws, and 
since there is no federal law that gives gays the right to marry, they have no 
such right.
90   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

2
SECTION 2.2 The Intension and Extension of Terms   91
2.2	
The Intension and Extension of Terms
PREVIEW    A new friend from a far-away country asks about your political persuasion. You reply 
that you lean toward being a Republican. Your friend then asks what a Republican is. You reply, some-
one such as Donald Trump or Rush Limbaugh. Unfortunately your friend doesn’t know these people. So 
you say that a Republican is someone who supports free enterprise and small government. In this section 
you will learn about these two methods for expressing a definition.
The main task of logic is the evaluation of arguments. However, as we saw in the previ-
ous section, there are countless arguments in which this task leads to the observation, 
“Well, that depends on what you mean by . . .” Such an observation usually indicates 
that the meaning of certain words in the argument is vague or ambiguous. Clearing 
up the problem often involves supplying a definition. Thus, the study of meaning and 
definition is closely related to the main task of logic. In this section we continue our 
inquiry into aspects of linguistic meaning, and the results of this inquiry provide the 
basis for the theory of definition in the next section.
The basic units of any ordinary language are words. Our main concern in this chap-
ter, however, is not with words in general but with terms. A term is any word or ar-
rangement of words that may serve as the subject of a statement. Terms consist of proper  
names, common names, and descriptive phrases. Here are some examples:
Proper names	
Common names	
Descriptive phrases
Napoleon	
animal	
first president of the United States
North Dakota	
restitution	
author of Hamlet
The United States	
house	
books in my library
Senate	
activity	
officers in the Swiss Navy
Toni Morrison	
person	
blue things
Robinson Crusoe	
	
those who study hard
Words that are not terms include verbs, nonsubstantive adjectives, adverbs, preposi-
tions, conjunctions, and all nonsyntactic arrangements of words. The following words 
or phrases are not terms; none can serve as the subject of a statement:
dictatorial	
moreover
runs quickly	
craves
above and beyond	
cabbages into again the forest
The last example is a nonsyntactic arrangement.
At this point it is important to distinguish the use of a word from the mention of 
a word. Without this distinction any word can be imagined to serve as the subject of 
a statement and, therefore, to count as a term. The word “wherever,” for example, is 
not a term, but “wherever” (in quotes) can serve as the subject of a statement, such as 
“ ‘Wherever’ is an eight-letter word.” But in this statement, it is not the word itself that is 
the subject but rather the quoted word. The word is said to be mentioned—not used. On 

92   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
the other hand, “wherever” is used in this statement: “I will follow you wherever you 
go.” In distinguishing terms from nonterms one must be sure that the word or group of 
words can be used as the subject of a statement.
The previous section of this chapter explored the cognitive meaning of language in 
general. The cognitive meaning of terms comprises two kinds: intensional and exten-
sional. The intensional meaning, or intension, consists of the qualities or attributes 
that the term connotes, and the extensional meaning, or extension, consists of the 
members of the class that the term denotes. For example, the intensional meaning of 
the term “cat” consists of the attributes of being furry, of having four legs, of moving 
in a certain way, of emitting certain sounds, and so on, while the extensional meaning 
consists of cats themselves—all the cats in the universe. The term connotes the attri-
butes and denotes the cats.
The intensional meaning of a term is otherwise known as the connotation, and the 
extensional meaning is known as the denotation. Intension and extension are roughly 
equivalent to the more modern terms sense and reference, respectively. Also, note that 
logic uses the terms connotation and denotation differently from the way they are used 
in grammar. In grammar, connotation refers to the subtle nuances of a word, whereas 
denotation refers to the word’s direct and specific meaning.
Thomas Edison
Alexander Graham Bell
Samuel F. B. Morse
Wright brothers
Class members
(extension)
Attributes
(intension)
Clever
Intuitive
Creative
Imaginative
c
o
n
n
o
t
e
s 
d
e
n
o
t
e
s
 
“Inventor”
Exactly how a term connotes a set of attributes allows for at least two different interpre-
tations. Some philosophers take an objective approach and hold that a term connotes what-
ever attributes something must have in order to be denoted by the term. Others take what 
might be called a subjective approach and hold that a term connotes the attributes that 
occur in the minds of the people who use that term. This book takes the latter approach.
In connection with this approach, however, we encounter the problem of terms con-
noting different things to different people. Thus, to a cat lover the term “cat” might 
connote the attributes of being cuddly and adorable, while to someone who hates cats it 
might connote the attributes of being obnoxious and disgusting. To avoid this problem, 
we restrict the meaning of connotation to what is usually called the conventional con-
notation. The ­conventional connotation of a term includes the attributes that the term 
commonly calls forth in the minds of competent speakers of the language. Under this 
interpretation, the connotation of a term remains more or less the same from person to 
person and from time to time.
The denotation of a term also typically remains the same from person to person, 
but it may change over time. The denotation of “currently living cat,” for example, is 

2
constantly fluctuating as some cats die and others are born. The denotation of the term 
“cat,” on the other hand, is presumably constant because it denotes all cats—past, pres-
ent, and future.
Sometimes the denotation of a term can change radically with the passage of time. 
The terms “currently living dodo bird” and “current king of France,” for example, at 
one time denoted actually existing entities, but today all such entities have perished. 
Accordingly, these terms now have what is called empty extension. They are said to 
denote the empty (or “null”) class, the class that has no members. Other terms with 
empty extension include “unicorn,” “leprechaun,” “gnome,” “elf,” and “griffin.” While 
these terms have empty extension, however, they do not have empty intension. “Cur-
rently living dodo bird” and “current king of France,” as well as “unicorn,” “elf,” and 
“griffin,” connote a variety of intelligible attributes.
The fact that some terms have empty extension leads us to an important connec-
tion between extension and intension—namely, that intension determines extension. 
The intensional meaning of a term serves as the criterion for deciding what the exten-
sion consists of. Because we know the attributes connoted by the term “unicorn,” for 
example, we know that the term has empty extension. That is, we know that there are 
no four-legged mammals having a single straight horn projecting from their forehead. 
Similarly, the intension of the word “cat” serves as the criterion for determining what is 
and what is not a member of the class of cats.
One kind of term that raises problems for the intension-determines-extension rule 
is proper names. For example, the name “David” might not appear to have any inten-
sion, but it denotes the person who has this name. Although philosophers have dis-
agreed about this, it would seem that proper names must have some kind of intension 
or we would not know what persons, if any, they denote. One possible solution to this 
problem is that names are shorthand symbols for descriptions or bundles of descrip-
tions. For example, “David” could be shorthand for “the person who lives next door” or 
“the person who works at the corner store and who drives a green Chevy.”
Another possible solution to the problem of proper names is that the intension of 
proper names consists of the causal chain of events leading from the point at which 
the name is first assigned to the point at which a certain person learns about the name. 
Thus, the first link in such a chain might be the baptismal event at which the name “Da-
vid” is given to a certain infant, the second link would be the event in which a certain 
third party is informed of the first event, and so on. This entire chain of events extend-
ing through the linguistic community would then constitute the intension of “David.” 
Thus, we conclude that for all terms, including proper names, intension determines 
extension.
The distinction between intension and extension may be further illustrated by com-
paring the way in which these concepts can be used to give order to random sequences of 
terms. Terms may be put in the order of increasing intension, increasing extension, de-
creasing intension, and decreasing extension. A series of terms is in the order of increas-
ing intension when each term in the series (except the first) connotes more attributes 
than the one preceding it. In other words, each term in the series after the first is more 
specific than the one preceding it. (A term is specific to the degree that it connotes more at-
tributes.) The order of decreasing intension is the reverse of that of increasing intension.
SECTION 2.2 The Intension and Extension of Terms   93

2
A series of terms is in the order of increasing extension when each term in the series 
(except the first) denotes a class having more members than the class denoted by the 
term preceding it. In other words, the class size gets larger with each successive term. 
Decreasing extension is, of course, the reverse of this order. Examples:
increasing intension:	
animal, mammal, feline, tiger
increasing extension:	
tiger, feline, mammal, animal
decreasing intension:	
tiger, feline, mammal, animal
decreasing extension:	
animal, mammal, feline, tiger
These examples illustrate a fact pertaining to most such series: The order of increasing 
intension is usually the same as that of decreasing extension. Conversely, the order of 
decreasing intension is usually the same as that of increasing extension. There are some 
exceptions, however. Consider the following series:
unicorn; unicorn with blue eyes; unicorn with blue eyes and green horn; unicorn  
with blue eyes, green horn, and a weight of over 400 pounds
Each term in this series has empty extension; so, while the series exhibits the order of 
increasing intension, it does not exhibit the order of decreasing extension. Here is an-
other, slightly different, example:
living human being; living human being with a genetic code; living human being with a 
genetic code and a brain; living human being with a genetic code, a brain, and a height of 
less than 100 feet
In this series none of the terms has empty extension, but each term has exactly the same 
extension as the others. Thus, while the intension increases with each successive term, 
once again the extension does not decrease.
EXERCISE 2.2	
	 I.	 The following exercises deal with words and terms.
	
1.	 Determine which of the following words or groups of words are terms and 
which are nonterms.
extortion	
Thomas Jefferson
laborious	
Empire State Building
cunningly	
annoy
practitioner	
render satisfactory
seriousness	
graceful dancer
forever	
wake up
whoever studies	
not only
interestingly impassive	
tallest man on the squad
scarlet	
mountaintop
reinvestment	
between
therefore	
since
94   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition

2
	
2.	 Name some of the attributes connoted by the following terms. Express your 
answer with adjectives or adjectival phrases. Example: The term “elephant” 
connotes the attributes of being large, having tusks, having a trunk.
drum	
wolf	
fanatic	
riot
politician	
Mona Lisa	
carrot	
piano
devil	
Statue of Liberty
	
3.	 In the following, name three items denoted by the terms in the left-hand col-
umn and all items denoted by the terms in the right-hand column:
newspaper	
tallest mountain on earth
scientist	
prime number less than 10
manufacturer	
governor of New York
river	
language of Canada
opera	
Scandinavian country
	
4.	 Put the following sequences of terms in the order of increasing intension:
 
 ★a.	 conifer, Sitka spruce, tree, spruce, plant
	
	 b.	 Italian sports car, car, vehicle, Maserati, sports car
	
	 c.	 doctor of medicine, person, brain surgeon, professional person, surgeon
	
	 d.	 wallaby, marsupial, mammal, animal, kangaroo
	
	 e.	 parallelogram, polygon, square, rectangle, quadrilateral
	
5.	 Construct a series of four terms that exhibits increasing intension but non­
decreasing extension.
	II.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 All words have an intensional meaning and an extensional meaning.
	
2.	 The intensional meaning of a term consists of the attributes connoted by the 
term.
	
3.	 The extensional meaning of a term consists of the members of the class  
denoted by the term.
	
4.	 The extension of a term always remains the same with the passage of time.
	
5.	 Some terms have empty intension.
	
6.	 Some terms have empty extension.
	
7.	 The intension of a term determines the extension.
	
8.	 The intension of a term determines how specific the term is.
	
9.	 The order of increasing intension is always the same as that of decreasing  
extension.
	
10.	 “Leprechaun” and “unicorn” have the same extension.
SECTION 2.2 The Intension and Extension of Terms   95
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

96   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
2.3	
Definitions and Their Purposes
PREVIEW    While enjoying a cup of coffee with a friend, your companion describes you as a  
javaphiliac. Never having heard that word, you ask what “javaphiliac” means, and your friend replies 
that it means a person who loves coffee so much that he or she is practically addicted to it. Later you 
attempt to look up the word in a dictionary but you cannot find it. Do you think your friend’s definition 
is a good one? In this section of the book you will learn that definitions differ depending on the purpose 
they are intended to serve.
Over the years philosophers have held various conflicting views about the purpose of 
definitions. For example, Plato claimed that definitions were intended to explicate the 
meaning of certain eternal essences or forms, such as justice, piety, and virtue. For most 
logicians today, however, definitions are intended exclusively to explicate the meaning 
of words. In conformity with this latter position, we may define definition as a group 
of words that assigns a meaning to some word or group of words. Accordingly, every 
definition consists of two parts: the definiendum and the definiens. The definiendum 
is the word or group of words that is supposed to be defined, and the definiens is the 
word or group of words that does the defining. For example, in the definition “ ‘Tiger’ 
means a large, striped, ferocious feline indigenous to the ­jungles of India and Asia,” the 
word “tiger” is the definiendum, and everything after the word “means” is the defini-
ens. The definiens is not itself the meaning of the definiendum; rather, it is the group 
of words that symbolizes (or that is supposed to symbolize) the same meaning as the 
definiendum. Because we presumably know in advance what the definiens symbolizes, 
we are led, via the definition, to understand what the definiendum symbolizes. It is in 
this way that the definition “assigns” a meaning to its definiendum.
Deniendum
Word to be
dened
Words that do
the dening
=
Deniens
Deﬁnition
Once it has been decided that definitions explicate the meaning of words, other 
disagreements emerge among the philosophers. Some argue that since a definition is 
merely a rule that allows one set of words (the definiens) to be used in place of another 
set (the definiendum), definitions communicate no information at all about the subject 
matter of the definiendum. Others take the opposite tack and argue that since defini-
tions result in a clarification of language, they provide a means for the discovery of 
deeper philosophical truths. It seems, however, that neither of these approaches is able 

2
SECTION 2.3 Definitions and Their Purposes   97
to make good sense of all the various kinds of definitions that are actually employed in 
ordinary usage. As a result, instead of beginning their analysis of definitions with a set 
of a priori criteria, many logicians take a pragmatic approach and begin with a survey 
of the various kinds of definitions that are actually used and of the functions that they 
actually serve. This is the approach taken here.
Stipulative Definitions
A stipulative definition assigns a meaning to a word for the first time. This may involve  
either coining a new word or giving a new meaning to an old word. The purpose of a stip­
ulative definition is usually to replace a more complex expression with a simpler one.
The need for a stipulative definition is often occasioned by some new phenomenon 
or development. For example, many years ago lions were crossbred with tigers. The 
word “tigon” was selected to name the offspring of male tiger and a female lion, and 
“liger” was selected to name the offspring of a male lion and a female tiger. When a 
zebra was crossbred with a donkey, the offspring was called a “zeedonk.” Crossbreeding 
a lime with a kumquat produced a fruit that was called a “limequat,” and crossbreeding 
a plum with an apricot produced a fruit called a “plumcot” and a “plout.” All of these 
words were first assigned their meanings through stipulative definitions.
Another use for stipulative definitions is to set up secret codes. For example, during 
World War II, “Tora! Tora! Tora!” was the Japanese code name that triggered the attack 
on Pearl Harbor. “Wotan” was the German code name for a radar system; “Golfplatz”  
signified Great Britain; and “Operation Sealion” was the plan to invade Great Britain.  
“Operation Crossbow” was the British code name for countermeasures against the  
V-2 rocket; “Manhattan Project” signified the American effort to develop the atomic bomb; 
and “Operation Overlord” was the code name for the planned invasion of Normandy. More  
recently, corporations have employed code names to keep their projects secret from com-
petitors. Intel has named its central processing units “Willamette,” “Deschutes,” and “Clack-
amas”—all of them pertinent to Oregon, where the units were designed. And Apple has 
named its operating systems after big cats: “Snow Leopard,”  “Lion,” and “Mountain Lion.”
Because people are continually coming up with new creations, whether it be food 
concoctions, inventions, modes of behavior, or kinds of apparel, stipulative definitions 
are continually being introduced to name them. The invention of computers pro-
vides a prime example. Today we have dozens of new terms or new uses of old terms  
that did not exist a few years ago: “cyberspace,” “e-mail,” “browser,” “hacker,” “dot- 
com,” “hardware,” “software,” “download,” “website,” “webmaster,” “server,” “boot,” 
“bar code,” “mouse,” “modem,” “cookies,” “spam,” “Blackberry,” “iPhone,” “Bluetooth,” 
“iPad,” “­Twitter,” “tweet,” “texting,” and “sexting”—to name just a few. Earlier, in the 
area of biology, when a certain excretion of the pancreas was refined to its pure form, 
the word “insulin” was chosen to name it, and the word “penicillin” was chosen for 
an antibacterial substance produced by certain Penicillium molds. In mathematics, the 
symbol “105” was chosen as a simple substitute for “10 3 10 3 10 3 10 3 10.”
Because a stipulative definition is a completely arbitrary assignment of a meaning 
to a word for the first time, there can be no such thing as a “true” or “false” stipulative 
definition. Furthermore, for the same reason, a stipulative definition cannot provide 
any new information about the subject matter of the definiendum. The fact that the 

98   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
word “tigon” was selected to replace “offspring of a male tiger and a female lion” tells us 
nothing new about the nature of the animal in question. One stipulative definition may, 
however, be more or less convenient or more or less appropriate than another.
Stipulative definitions are misused in verbal disputes when one person covertly uses 
a word in a peculiar way and then proceeds to assume that everyone else uses that word 
in the same way. Under these circumstances that person is said to be using the word 
“stipulatively.” In such cases the assumption that other persons use the word in the 
same way is rarely justified.
Lexical Definitions
A lexical definition is used to report the meaning that a word already has in a lan-
guage. Dictionary definitions are all instances of lexical definitions. Thus, in contrast 
with a stipulative definition, which assigns a meaning to a word for the first time, a lexi-
cal definition may be true or false depending on whether it does or does not report the 
way a word is actually used. Because words are frequently used in more than one way, 
lexical definitions have the further purpose of eliminating the ambiguity that would 
otherwise arise if one of these meanings were to be confused with another. Here are 
two lexical definitions:
Light: 1. Something that makes things visible. 2. Electromagnetic radiation. 3. Of little 
weight. 4. Having fewer calories than the standard product.
Bank: 1. The slope bordering a stream or river. 2. The inclination of an aircraft during a 
turn. 3. An institution for receiving, lending, and safeguarding money.
Because a lexical definition lists the various meanings that a word can have, a person 
who consults such a definition is better prepared to avoid ambiguous constructions of 
his or her own and to detect those of others. Undetected ambiguity causes the most 
trouble. In many cases the problem lies not with the obvious differences in meaning 
that words such as “light” and “bank” may have but with the subtle shadings of mean-
ing that are more likely to be confused with one another. For example, if a woman is 
described as “nice,” any number of things could be intended. She could be fastidious, 
refined, modest, pleasant, attractive, or even lewd. A good lexical definition will dis-
tinguish these various shadings and thereby guard against the possibility that two such 
meanings will be unconsciously jumbled together.
Precising Definitions
The purpose of a precising definition is to reduce the vagueness of a word. As we saw 
in the first section of this chapter, an expression is vague if there are borderline cases in 
which it is impossible to tell if the word applies or does not apply. Words such as “fresh,” 
“rich,” and “poor” are vague. Once the vagueness of such words is reduced by a precising 
definition, one can reach a decision as to the applicability of the word to a specific situ-
ation. For example, if legislation were ever introduced to give direct financial assistance 
to the poor, a precising definition would have to be supplied specifying exactly who is 
poor and who is not. The definition “ ‘Poor’ means having an annual income of less than 
$10,000 and a net worth of less than $20,000” is an example of a precising definition.

G
enerally considered the greatest logician of 
the Middle Ages, Peter Abelard was born in 
the village of Le Pallet in the Brittany region 
of France. His parents were members of the French 
nobility, and as their eldest son, Abelard was slated to 
inherit substantial wealth and noble standing. However, 
he gave up claim to this inheritance and the knighthood 
that went with it, choosing instead the life of a scholar.
When he was only a teenager, Abelard went off to 
Paris to study philosophy with William of Champeaux 
at the cathedral school of Notre-Dame. He proved to 
be a brilliant student and arrogant to a fault. He openly  
challenged the views of his teacher and seized on 
every opportunity to debate William in public. Later, 
he set up a rival school, describing its founder as the 
“only remaining philosopher in the world.” Gradually, 
he became renowned throughout all of Europe, and 
he was eventually appointed to the faculty of Notre-
Dame, where he attracted hundreds of students eager 
to learn from this illustrious master.
Around this time Abelard’s attentions were drawn 
to Heloise, the beautiful and brilliant young niece of a 
prominent Parisian canon named Fulbert. Making the ac-
quaintance of Fulbert’s young protégé proved a daunting 
task, since her uncle kept her closely guarded. Nonethe-
less, Abelard persuaded Fulbert to allow him to move 
into his house and tutor the gifted niece, who, though 
only in her teens, had already mastered Greek and He-
brew. Fulbert saw this as a way of providing Heloise with 
a first-rate higher education, but for Abelard it provided 
quite a different opportunity. He later compared Ful-
bert’s credulity in allowing him access to his charge as 
akin to placing a lamb in the care of a devouring wolf.
The tutoring sessions rapidly turned toward se-
duction, with Heloise a receptive student. Before long 
Heloise 
became 
pregnant and gave  
birth to a son whom  
she named Astro­
labe (after the as-
tronomical device). 
A public marriage 
mi­ght have abated 
the ensuing scan-
dal, but scholars 
and clerics were 
not supposed to 
marry. The couple 
decided to marry 
secretly, and Heloise fled to a convent to shield her-
self from the scandal mongers who persecuted her for 
being ostensibly unwed. Meanwhile, a furious Fulbert 
plotted to punish Abelard, and he hired a gang of ma-
rauders to break into Abelard’s lodgings in the middle 
of the night and castrate him.
After the castration, Abelard took refuge in one 
monastery after another. However his arrogance made 
him ill suited for monastic life, as he went out of his 
way to provoke the other monks. Much later, he re-
turned to Paris where he taught until he was silenced 
by the church for alleged heresy. At one point he was 
forced to burn one of his own books. Throughout all 
of these calamities, Abelard remained devoted to his 
scholarly endeavors. He developed a truth-functional 
propositional logic and a theory of entailment, and 
he wrote prolifically in the areas of metaphysics, eth-
ics, and philosophy of language. He is buried alongside 
Heloise in the Père-Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. Today, 
their grave site is visited by people seeking solace from 
the frustrations of love.
Peter Abelard 1079–1142
eminentlogicians
  Hulton Archive/Getty Images
2
SECTION 2.3 Definitions and Their Purposes   99

100   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
Whenever words are taken from ordinary usage and used in a highly systematic 
context such as science, mathematics, medicine, or law, they must always be clarified by 
means of a precising definition. The terms “force,” “energy,” “acid,” “element,” “number,” 
“equality,” “contract,” and “agent” have all been given precising definitions by specific 
disciplines.
Sometimes the substance of a court trial may revolve around the precise usage of a 
term. A recent harassment case before the U.S. Court of Appeals depended on whether 
a certain person qualified as a supervisor. The court ruled that a supervisor was one 
who had “the power to hire, fire, demote, promote, transfer, or discipline” an employee. 
This ruling amounted to a precising definition of the word “supervisor.”
Another example involves the practice of surgical transplantation of vital organs. 
Before a heart transplant can be conducted, the donor must be dead; otherwise, the sur-
geon will be accused of murder. If the donor is dead for too long, however, the success 
of the transplant will be imperiled. But exactly when is a person considered to be dead? 
Is it when the heart stops beating, when the person stops breathing, when rigor mortis 
sets in, or some other time? The question involves the meaning of the term “moment of 
death.” The courts have decided that “moment of death” should be taken to mean the 
moment the brain stops functioning, as measured by an electroencephalograph. This 
decision amounts to the acceptance of a precising definition for “moment of death.”
A precising definition differs from a stipulative definition in that the latter involves 
a purely arbitrary assignment of meaning, whereas the assignment of meaning in a 
precising definition is not at all arbitrary. A great deal of care must be taken to ensure 
that the assignment of meaning in a precising definition is appropriate and legitimate 
for the context within which the term is to be employed.
Theoretical Definitions
A theoretical definition assigns a meaning to a word by suggesting a theory that gives a 
certain characterization to the entities that the term denotes. Such a definition provides 
a way of viewing or conceiving these entities that suggests deductive consequences, 
further investigation (experimental or otherwise), and whatever else would be entailed 
by the acceptance of a theory governing these entities. The definition of the term “heat” 
found in texts dealing with the kinetic theory of heat provides a good example: “ ‘Heat’ 
means the energy associated with the random motion of the molecules of a substance.” 
This definition does more than merely assign a meaning to a word; it provides a way of 
conceiving the physical phenomenon that is heat. In so doing, it suggests the deductive 
consequence that as the molecules of a substance speed up, the temperature of the sub-
stance increases. In addition, it suggests a number of experiments—experiments inves-
tigating the relationship between molecular velocity and the phenomena of radiation, 
gas pressure, molecular elasticity, and molecular configuration. In short, this definition 
of “heat” provides the impetus for an entire theory about heat.
Other examples of theoretical definitions are the definition of “light” as a form of 
electromagnetic radiation and the definition of “force,” “mass,” and “acceleration” in 
Newton’s second law of motion as expressed in the equation “F 5 MA.” The latter is 
a kind of contextual definition in which each term is defined in terms of the other 

2
two. Both definitions entail numerous deductive consequences about the phenomena  
involved and suggest numerous avenues of experimental investigation.
Not all theoretical definitions are associated with science. Many terms in philosophy, 
such as “substance,” “form,” “cause,” “change,” “idea,” “good,” “mind,” and “God,” have  
been given theoretical definitions. In fact, most of the major philosophers in history have 
given these terms their own peculiar theoretical definitions, and this fact accounts in part 
for the unique character of their respective philosophies. For example, Gottfried Wilhelm  
Leibniz’s definition of “substance” in terms of what he called “monads” laid the foun-
dation for his metaphysical theory, and John Stuart Mill’s definition of “good” as the 
greatest happiness of the greatest number provided the underpinnings for his utilitar-
ian theory of ethics.
Like stipulative definitions, theoretical definitions are neither true nor false, strictly  
speaking. The reason is that theoretical definitions function as proposals to see or  
interpret some phenomenon in a certain way. Since proposals have no truth value, 
neither do theoretical definitions. They may, however, be more or less interesting or 
more or less fruitful, depending on the deductive consequences they entail and on the 
outcome of the experiments they suggest.
Persuasive Definitions
The purpose of a persuasive definition is to engender a favorable or unfavorable attitude 
toward what is denoted by the definiendum. This purpose is accomplished by assigning 
an emotionally charged or value-laden meaning to a word while making it appear that the 
word really has (or ought to have) that meaning in the language in which it is used. Thus, 
persuasive definitions amount to a certain synthesis of stipulative, lexical, and, possibly, 
theoretical definitions backed by the rhetorical motive to engender a certain attitude. As 
a result of this synthesis, a persuasive definition masquerades as an honest assignment of 
meaning to a term while condemning or blessing with approval the subject matter of the 
definiendum. Here are some examples of opposing pairs of persuasive definitions:
“Abortion” means the ruthless murdering of innocent children.
“Abortion” means a safe and established surgical procedure whereby a woman is  
relieved of an unwanted burden.
“Liberal” means a drippy-eyed do-gooder obsessed with giving away other people’s money.
“Liberal” means a genuine humanitarian committed to the goals of adequate housing and 
health care and of equal opportunity for all of our citizens.
“Capitalism” means the economic system in which individuals are afforded the God-
given freedom to own property and conduct business as they choose.
“Capitalism” means the economic system in which humanity is sacrificed to the wanton 
quest for money, and mutual understanding and respect are replaced by alienation, greed, 
and selfishness.
“Taxation” means the procedure by means of which our commonwealth is preserved 
and sustained.
“Taxation” means the procedure used by bureaucrats to rip off the people who elected them.
SECTION 2.3 Definitions and Their Purposes   101

2
EXERCISE 2.3	
	 I.	 Determine whether the following definitions are stipulative, lexical, precising,  
theoretical, or persuasive.
	
★1.	 “Blind” means, for federal income-tax purposes, either the inability to see 
­better than 20/200 in the better eye with glasses or having a field of vision of 
20 degrees or less.
	
2.	 “Football” means a sport in which modern-day gladiators brutalize one  
another while trying to move a ridiculously shaped “ball” from one end of the 
playing field to the other.
	
3.	 “Glasstooth” means an electronic device worn like a pair of glasses that  
instantly flashes text messages to the recipient.
	
★4.	 “Diffident” means lacking confidence in oneself; characterized by modest reserve.
	
5.	 “Magnetism” means a property of certain substances such as iron, cobalt, and 
nickel that arises from the spin of the electrons in the unfilled inner shell of 
the atoms that compose the substance.
	
6.	 “Fiduciary” means having to do with a confidence or trust; a person who 
holds something in trust.
	
★7.	 “Politician” means a person of unquestioned honesty and integrity whom the 
people, in their collective wisdom, have duly elected to guide the ship of state 
and protect it from the reefs and shoals that threaten it on every side.
	
8.	 “Intoxicated,” for purposes of driving a car in many states, means having a 
blood-alcohol content of 0.08 percent (.0008) or greater.
	
9.	 “Femikin” means a female manikin.
	 ★10.	 “Sound” means a compression wave, in air or some other elastic medium, hav-
ing a frequency ranging (for humans) from 20 to 20,000 vibrations per second.
	
11.	 “Radioactive area” means, for purposes of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commis-
sion, any area accessible to individuals in which there exists radiation at such lev-
els that a major portion of the body could receive in any one hour a dose in excess 
of 5 millirems or in any five consecutive days a dose in excess of 100 millirems.
	
12.	 “Neurosis” means a chronic emotional disturbance that arises from sup-
pressed or forgotten emotional stress (such as resentment, hostility, aggres-
sion, or guilt) experienced in early childhood.
102   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
The objective of a persuasive definition is to influence the attitudes of the reader or 
listener; thus, such definitions may be used with considerable effectiveness in political 
speeches and editorial columns. While persuasive definitions may, like lexical defini-
tions, be evaluated as either true or false, the primary issue is neither truth nor falsity 
but the effectiveness of such definitions as instruments of persuasion.

2
	 ★13.	 “Petrograb” means invading a country to steal its oil.
	
14.	 “Smoker” means a rude and disgusting individual who callously emits noxious  
tobacco fumes into the air, threatening the health and comfort of everyone in 
the vicinity.
	
15.	 “Diadem” means an ornamental headband worn as a badge of royalty; a crown.
	 ★16.	 “Psychiatry” means the fortuitous melding of modern medicine with psychol-
ogy that promises relief to thousands of poor, desperate souls who suffer the 
pains of emotional disorder.
	
17.	 “Gene” means the hereditary unit that occupies a fixed chromosomal locus, 
which through transcription has a specific effect on phenotype and which can 
mutate to various allelic forms.
	
18.	 “Ramster” means an animal produced by crossbreeding a rat with a hamster.
	 ★19.	 “Intractable” means not easily governed; obstinate; unruly; not disposed to be 
taught.
	
20.	 “Recession” means, for purposes of the National Bureau of Economic Research,  
two consecutive quarters of negative growth in real GNP or in aggregate out-
put for the entire economy.
	
21.	 “Gravity” means a force that results from the universal attraction that every par-
ticle of matter has for every other particle, and which varies directly with the 
mass of the particles and inversely with the square of the distance between them.
	 ★22.	 “Assault” means, for legal purposes, an intentional and unprivileged act result-
ing in the apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive contact.
	
23.	 “Television” means the electronic medium that keeps an entire nation of view-
ers in a state of seminarcosis by feeding them a steady stream of inane drivel.
	
24.	 “Obelisk” means an upright, four-sided pillar that terminates in a pyramid; a 
dagger.
	 ★25.	 “Bimboy” means a boy who is a total airhead.
	II.	 The following exercises involve constructing definitions:
	
1.	 Invent stipulative definitions for two new words that you wish to introduce 
into the language for the first time.
	
2.	 Construct lexical definitions for “capital” and “depression,” and indicate two 
different meanings for each.
	
3.	 Construct precising definitions for “middle-aged” and “alcoholic.” Interpret 
both words as relating to people and specify the purpose for which the defini-
tions are to be used.
	
4.	 Construct theoretical definitions for “energy” and “atom.”
	
5.	 Construct opposing pairs of persuasive definitions for “conservative” and “so-
cialism.”
SECTION 2.3 Definitions and Their Purposes   103

104   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
	III.	Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 From the standpoint of logic, many definitions are concerned not with words 
but with things.
	
2.	 The definiendum is the word or term that is supposed to be defined.
	
3.	 The definiens is the word or group of words that assigns a meaning to the 
word being defined.
	
4.	 A stipulative definition is either true or false.
	
5.	 A lexical definition reports the way a word is actually used in a language.
	
6.	 One of the purposes of a lexical definition is to guard against the ambiguous 
use of a word.
	
7.	 The meaning given to a word by a precising definition is completely arbitrary.
	
8.	 Theoretical definitions are either true or false, just as are lexical definitions.
	
9.	 Theoretical definitions provide a theoretical characterization of the entity or 
entities denoted by the word being defined.
	
10.	 The purpose of a persuasive definition is to influence attitudes.
2.4	
Definitional Techniques
PREVIEW    Suppose you are involved in a discussion with a friend as to whether there is really 
any difference between Democrats and Republicans. You ask your friend to define the word “Democrat,” 
and your friend replies that it means a person such as Matt Damon, Leonardo Dicaprio, Sarah Jessica 
Parker, or Gwyneth Paltrow. Do you see any problem with this definition? If so, what is it? This section 
of the chapter explores, among others, definitions such as this.
In the previous section we presented a survey of some of the kinds of definitions actu­
ally in use and the functions they are intended to serve. In this section we will in-
vestigate some of the techniques used to produce these definitions. These techniques 
may be classified in terms of the two kinds of meaning, intensional and extensional, 
discussed in Section 2.2.
Extensional (Denotative) Definitions
An extensional (denotative) definition is one that assigns a meaning to a term by  
indicating the members of the class that the definiendum denotes. There are at least 
three ways of indicating the members of a class: pointing to them, naming them  
individually, and naming them in groups. The three kinds of definitions that result are 
called, respectively, demonstrative or ostensive definitions, enumerative definitions, 
and definitions by subclass.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

2
SECTION 2.4 Definitional Techniques   105
Demonstrative (ostensive) definitions are probably the most primitive form 
of definition. All one need know to understand such a definition is the meaning of 
pointing. As the following examples illustrate, such definitions may be either partial or  
complete, depending on whether all or only some of the members of the class denoted 
by the definiendum are pointed to:
“Chair” means this and this and this—as you point to several chairs, one after the other.
“Washington Monument” means that—as you point to it.
If you were attempting to teach a foreigner your own native language, and neither 
of you understood a word of each other’s language, demonstrative definition would  
almost certainly be one of the methods you would use.
Because demonstrative definitions are the most primitive, they are also the most 
limited. In addition to the limitations affecting all extensional definitions (which will 
be discussed shortly), there is the obvious limitation that the required objects be avail-
able for being pointed at. For example, if one wishes to define the word “sun” and it 
happens to be nighttime, or the word “dog” and none happens to be in the vicinity,  
a demonstrative definition cannot be used.
Demonstrative definitions differ from the other kinds of definitions in that the 
definiens is constituted at least in part by a gesture—the gesture of pointing. Since the 
definiens in any definition is a group of words, however, a gesture, such as pointing, 
must count as a word. While this conclusion may appear strange at first, it is supported 
by the fact that the “words” in many sign languages consist exclusively of gestures.
Enumerative definitions assign a meaning to a term by naming the members of the 
class the term denotes. Like demonstrative definitions, they may also be either partial 
or complete. Examples:
“Actress” means a person such as Nicole Kidman, Emma Thompson, or Natalie Portman.
“Baltic state” means Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania.
Complete enumerative definitions are usually more satisfying than partial ones 
because they identify the definiendum with greater assurance. Relatively few classes, 
however, can be completely enumerated. Many classes, such as the class of real num-
bers greater than 1 but less than 2, have an infinite number of members. Others, such as 
the class of stars and the class of persons, while not infinite, have still too many mem-
bers to enumerate. Therefore, anything approximating a complete enumerative defini-
tion of terms denoting these classes is virtually impossible. Then there are others—the 
class of insects and the class of trees, for example—the vast majority of whose members 
have no names. For terms that denote these classes, either a demonstrative definition 
or a definition by subclass is the more appropriate choice.
A definition by subclass assigns a meaning to a term by naming subclasses of the 
class denoted by the term. Such a definition, too, may be either partial or complete, de-
pending on whether the subclasses named, when taken together, include all the mem-
bers of the class or only some of them. Examples:
“Tree” means an oak, pine, elm, spruce, maple, and the like.
“Flower” means a rose, lily, daisy, geranium, zinnia, and the like.

106   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
“Cetacean” means either a whale, a dolphin, or a porpoise.
“Fictional work” means either a poem, a play, a novel, or a short story.
The first two are partial, the second two complete. As with definitions by enumeration, 
complete definitions by subclass are more satisfying than partial ones; but because rela-
tively few terms denote classes that admit of a conveniently small number of subclasses, 
complete definitions by subclass are often difficult, if not impossible, to provide.
Extensional definitions are chiefly used as techniques for producing lexical and stip-
ulative definitions. Lexical definitions are aimed at communicating how a word is actu-
ally used, and one of the ways of doing so is by identifying the members of the class that 
the word denotes. Dictionaries frequently include references to the individual mem-
bers (or to the subclasses) of the class denoted by the word being defined. Sometimes 
they even include a kind of demonstrative definition when they provide a picture of the 
object that the word denotes. Not all lexical definitions have to occur in dictionaries, 
however. A lexical definition can just as well be spoken, as when one person attempts to 
explain orally to another how a word is used in a language. Such attempts, incidentally, 
often have recourse to all three kinds of extensional definition.
Stipulative definitions are used to assign a meaning to a word for the first time. This 
task may be accomplished by all three kinds of extensional definition. For example, a 
biologist engaged in naming and classifying types of fish might assign names to the 
specific varieties by pointing to their respective tanks (demonstrative definition), and 
then she might assign a class name to the whole group by referring to the names of the 
specific varieties (definition by subclass). An astronomer might point via his telescope 
to a newly discovered comet and announce, “That comet will henceforth be known as 
‘Henderson’s Comet’ ” (demonstrative definition). The organizer of a children’s game 
might make the stipulation: “John, Mary, and Billy will be called ‘Buccaneers,’ and Judy, 
George, and Nancy will be ‘Pirates’ ” (enumerative definition).
Although it is conceivable that extensional definitions could also serve as techniques 
for theoretical and persuasive definitions (though this would be highly unusual), ex-
tensional definitions by themselves cannot properly serve as precising definitions for 
the following reason. The function of a precising definition is to clarify a vague word, 
and vagueness is a problem affecting intensional meaning. Because the intension is im-
precise, the extension is indefinite. To attempt to render the intension precise by exactly 
specifying the extension (as with an extensional definition) would be tantamount to 
having extension determine intension—which cannot be done.
The principle that intension determines extension, whereas the converse is not true, 
underlies the fact that all extensional definitions suffer serious deficiencies. For ex-
ample, in the case of the demonstrative definition of the word “chair,” if all the chairs 
pointed to are made of wood, observers might get the idea that “chair” means “wood” 
instead of something to sit on. Similarly, they might get the idea that “Washington 
Monument” means “tall” or “pointed” or any of a number of other things. From the 
definition of “actress,” readers or listeners might think that “actress” means “woman”—
which would include countless individuals who have nothing to do with the stage or 
screen. From the definition of “tree” they might get the idea that “tree” means “firmly 
planted in the ground,” which would also include the pilings of a building. And they 

2
might think that “cetacean” means “aquatic animal,” which includes salmon, tuna, 
squid, manatees, and so on. In other words, it makes no difference how many indi-
viduals or subclasses are named in an extensional definition, there is no assurance that 
listeners or readers will get the intensional meaning. Extensions can suggest intensions, 
but they cannot determine them.
Intensional (Connotative) Definitions
An intensional definition is one that assigns a meaning to a word by indicating the 
qualities or attributes that the word connotes. Because at least four strategies may be 
used to indicate the attributes a word connotes, there are at least four kinds of inten-
sional definitions: synonymous definition, etymological definition, operational defini-
tion, and definition by genus and difference.
A synonymous definition is one in which the definiens is a single word that con-
notes the same attributes as the definiendum. In other words, the definiens is a syn-
onym of the word being defined. Examples:
“Physician” means doctor.
“Intentional” means willful.
“Voracious” means ravenous.
“Observe” means see.
When a single word can be found that has the same intensional meaning as the word 
being defined, a synonymous definition is a highly concise way of assigning a mean-
ing. Many words, however, have subtle shades of meaning that are not connoted by any 
other single word. For example, the word “wisdom” is not exactly synonymous with 
either “knowledge,” “understanding,” or “sense”; and “envious” is not exactly synony-
mous with either “jealous” or “covetous.”
An etymological definition assigns a meaning to a word by disclosing the word’s 
ancestry in both its own language and other languages. Most ordinary English words 
have ancestors either in Old or Middle English or in some other language such as Greek, 
Latin, or French, and the current English meaning (as well as spelling and pronuncia-
tion) is often closely tied to the meaning (and spelling and pronunciation) of these an-
cestral words. For example, the English word “license” is derived from the Latin verb 
licere, which means to be permitted, and the English word “captain” derives from the 
Latin noun caput, which means head.
Etymological definitions have special importance for at least two reasons. The first 
is that the etymological definition of a word often conveys the word’s root meaning or 
seminal meaning from which all other associated meanings are derived. Unless one is 
familiar with this root meaning, one often fails to place other meanings in their proper 
light or to grasp the meaning of the word when it is used in its most proper sense. For 
example, the word “principle” derives from the Latin word principium, which means 
beginning or source. Accordingly, the “principles of physics” are those fundamental 
laws that provide the “source” of the science of physics. The English word “efficient” 
derives from the Latin verb efficere, which means to bring about. Thus, the “efficient 
SECTION 2.4 Definitional Techniques   107

108   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
cause” of something (such as the motion of a car) is the agent that actually brings that 
thing about (the engine).
The second reason for the importance of etymological definitions is that if one is 
familiar with the etymology of one English word, one often has access to the mean-
ing of an entire constellation of related words. For example, the word “orthodox”  
derives from the two Greek words ortho, meaning right or straight, and doxa, meaning  
belief or opinion. From this, one might grasp that “orthopedic” has to do with straight 
bones (originally in children—pais in Greek means child), and that “orthodontic” has 
to do with straight teeth (odon in Greek means tooth). Similarly, if one is familiar with 
the etymological definition of “polygon” (from the Greek words poly, meaning many, 
and ganos meaning angle), one might grasp the meanings of “polygamy” (from gamos, 
meaning marriage) and “polygraph” (from graphein, meaning to write). A polygraph is a 
lie detector that simultaneously records pulse rate, blood pressure, respiration, and so on.
An operational definition assigns a meaning to a word by specifying certain  
experimental procedures that determine whether or not the word applies to a certain 
thing. Examples:
One substance is “harder than” another if and only if one scratches the other when the 
two are rubbed together.
“Brain activity” means that an electroencephalograph shows oscillations when attached 
to a patient’s head.
A “potential difference” exists between two conductors if and only if a voltmeter shows 
a reading when connected to the two conductors.
A solution is an “acid” if and only if litmus paper turns red when dipped into it.
Each of these definitions prescribes an operation to be performed. The first prescribes 
that the two substances in question be rubbed together, the second that the electroen-
cephalograph be connected to the patient’s head and observed for oscillations, the third 
that the voltmeter be connected to the two conductors and observed for deflection, and 
the fourth that the litmus paper be placed in the solution and observed for color change. 
Unless it specifies such an operation, a definition cannot be an operational definition. For 
example, the definition “A solution is an ‘acid’ if and only if it has a pH of less than 7,” while 
good in other respects, is not an operational definition, because it prescribes no operation.
Operational definitions were invented for the purpose of tying down relatively  
abstract scientific concepts to the solid ground of empirical reality. In this they succeed 
fairly well; yet, from the standpoint of ordinary language usage, they involve certain 
deficiencies. One of these deficiencies concerns the fact that operational definitions 
usually convey only part of the intensional meaning of a term. Certainly “brain activ-
ity” means more than oscillations on an electroencephalograph, just as “acid” means 
more than litmus paper turning red. This deficiency becomes more acute when one  
attempts to apply operational definitions to terms outside the framework of science. For 
example, no adequate operational definition could be given for such words as “love,” “re-
spect,” “freedom,” and “dignity.” Within their proper sphere, however, operational defini-
tions are quite useful and important. Interestingly Einstein developed his special theory 
of relativity in partial response to the need for an operational definition of simultaneity.

2
A definition by genus and difference assigns a meaning to a term by identifying a 
genus term and one or more difference words that, when combined, convey the mean-
ing of the term being defined. Definition by genus and difference is more generally ap-
plicable and achieves more adequate results than any of the other kinds of intensional 
definition. To explain how it works, we must first explain the meanings of the terms 
genus, species, and specific difference.
In logic, genus and species have a somewhat different meaning than they have in 
biology. In logic, genus simply means a relatively larger class, and species means a rela-
tively smaller subclass of the genus. For example, we may speak of the genus animal and 
the species mammal, or of the genus mammal and the species feline, or of the genus 
feline and the species tiger, or the genus tiger and the species Bengal tiger. In other 
words, genus and species are merely relative classifications.
The specific difference, or difference, is the attribute or attributes that distinguish the 
various species within a genus. For example, the specific difference that distinguishes 
tigers from other species in the genus feline would include the attributes of being large, 
striped, ferocious, and so on. Because the specific difference is what distinguishes the 
species, when a genus is qualified by a specific difference, a species is identified. Defi-
nition by genus and difference is based on this fact. It consists of combining a term 
denoting a genus with a word or group of words connoting a specific difference so that 
the combination identifies the meaning of the term denoting the species.
Let us construct a definition by genus and difference for the word “ice.” The first 
step is to identify a genus of which ice is the species. The required genus is water. 
Next we must identify a specific difference (attribute) that makes ice a special form 
of water. The required difference is frozen. The completed definition may now be 
written out:
	
Species	
Difference	
Genus
	
“Ice”	
means	
frozen	
water.
A definition by genus and difference is easy to construct. Simply select a term that 
is more general than the term to be defined, then narrow it down so that it means the 
same thing as the term being defined. Examples:
	
Species	
Difference	
Genus
	
“Daughter”	
means	
female	
offspring.
	
“Husband”	
means	
married	
man.
	
“Doe”	
means	
female	
deer.
	
“Fawn”	
means	
very young	
deer.
	
“Skyscraper”	
means	
very tall	
building.
Other examples are more complex:
“Tent” means a collapsible shelter made of canvas or other material that is stretched 
and sustained by poles.
“Tent” is the species, “shelter” is the genus, and “collapsible” and “made of canvas . . .” 
the difference.
SECTION 2.4 Definitional Techniques   109

2
110   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
Definition by genus and difference is the most effective of the intensional defini-
tions for producing the five kinds of definition discussed in Section 2.3. Stipulative, 
lexical, precising, theoretical, and persuasive definitions can all be constructed accord-
ing to the method of genus and difference. Lexical definitions are typically definitions 
by genus and difference, but they also often include etymological definitions. Opera-
tional definition can serve as the method for constructing stipulative, lexical, precising, 
and persuasive definitions, but because of the limitations we have noted, it typically 
could not be used to produce a complete lexical definition. Other techniques would have 
to be used in addition. Synonymous definition may be used to produce only lexical  
definitions. Since, in a synonymous definition, the definiendum must have a meaning 
before a synonym can be found, this technique cannot be used to produce stipulative 
definitions, and the fact that the definiens of such a definition contains no more infor-
mation than the definiendum prohibits its use in constructing precising, theoretical, 
and persuasive definitions.
This account of definitions is inevitably incomplete. At the beginning of the chapter 
we saw that all words—not just terms—stand in need of definitions, but the account 
given here is based on the intension and extension of terms. Nevertheless, many of the 
techniques developed here can be applied to words in general, and even to symbols. 
For example, Chapters 6 and 8 will present definitions of various symbols that are used 
in modern logic to connect one statement with another and to translate ordinary lan-
guage statements into symbolic form. When logicians introduced these symbols many 
years ago, they did it through stipulative definitions. Also, as we will see in Chapter 6, 
some of these symbols are defined by certain tables, called truth tables, which establish 
each symbol’s meaning under all possible arrangements of truth values. These defini-
tions are probably best described as extensional, and they are similar in some ways to 
demonstrative definitions and enumerative definitions.
The applicability of the seven definitional techniques in producing the five kinds of 
definition is summarized in Table 2.1.
TABLE 2.1 Correlation of Definitional Techniques  
with Types of Definitions
Can Produce This Type of Definition
This Technique
Stipulative
Lexical
Precising
Theoretical
Persuasive
Demonstrative
yes
yes
no
(unusual)
(unusual)
Enumerative
yes
yes
no
(unusual)
(unusual)
Subclass
yes
yes
no
(unusual)
(unusual)
Synonymous
no
yes
no
no
no
Etymological
yes
yes
no
no
no
Operational
(limited)
yes
yes
(unusual)
(unusual)
Genus and  
Difference
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
© Cengage Learning

2
SECTION 2.4 Definitional Techniques   111
EXERCISE 2.4	
	 I.	 Determine whether the following are demonstrative definitions, enumerative  
definitions, definitions by subclass, synonymous definitions, etymological  
definitions, operational definitions, or definitions by genus and difference.
	
★1.	 “Plant” means something such as a tree, a flower, a vine, or a cactus.
	
2.	 “Hammer” means a tool used for pounding.
	
3.	 A triangle is “equilateral” if and only if a compass, when placed sequentially 
on two vertices and properly adjusted, strikes through the other two vertices.
	
★4.	 “State” means something such as Ohio, Arkansas, Minnesota, and Tennessee.
	
5.	 “Angel” is a word that originates from the Greek word angelos, which means 
messenger.
	
6.	 “Neophyte” means beginner.
	
★7.	 “House” means this:
	
8.	 “Painting” means something like da Vinci’s Mona Lisa, van Gogh’s Starry 
Night, Botticelli’s Birth of Venus, or Rembrandt’s Night Watch.
	
9.	 “Dessert” means something such as pie, cake, cookies, or ice-cream sundaes.
	 ★10.	 “Hot” means, for an electric iron, that your wetted finger sizzles when placed 
momentarily in contact with it.
	
11.	 “Universe” originates from the Latin word universus, which means whole or 
entire.
	
12.	 “Mountain” means something such as Everest, Rainier, Whitney, or McKinley.
	 ★13.	 “Hurricane” means a storm having constant winds of at least 74 miles per hour 
that originates at sea.
	
14.	 A substance is “translucent” if and only if when held up to a strong light some 
of the light comes through.
	
15.	 “Insect” means something such as a fly, an ant, a wasp, or a caterpillar.
	 ★16.	 “Poignant” is a word derived from the Latin word pungere, which means prick, 
pierce, or sting.
	
17.	 “Facade” means face.
	
18.	 “Prime number” means a number greater than one that is divisible only by 
itself and one.
	 ★19.	 “Language” means something such as French, German, Spanish, or English.
	
20.	 “Tree” means this, and this, and this (as you point to several trees).
	
21.	 “Oak” means a tree that bears acorns.
	 ★22.	 “Rapier” means sword.

2
	
23.	 An “electric current” flows in a circuit if and only if an ammeter connected in 
series with the circuit shows a reading.
	
24.	 “Philosopher” means someone such as Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, or Kant.
	 ★25.	 “Professional person” means a person such as a doctor, a lawyer, a professor,  
or an architect.
	
26.	 “Error” means mistake.
	
27.	 “Tale” is a word that derives from the Old English word talu, which means talk.
	 ★28.	 “Truck” means a vehicle used for hauling.
	
29.	 “Done” means, in reference to a baking cake, that a wooden toothpick poked 
into the center comes out clean.
	
30.	 “Musical composition” means something such as a symphony, a concerto, 
a sonata, or a toccata.
	II.	 The following exercises involve constructing definitions:
	
1.	 Construct a partial enumerative definition for the following terms by naming 
three members of the class the term denotes. Then find a nonsynonymous 
term that these members serve equally well to define. Example: “Poet” means 
a person such as Wordsworth, Coleridge, or Shelley. A nonsynonymous term 
is “Englishman.”
	
★a.	 skyscraper
	b.	 corporation
	c.	 island
	d.	 composer
	e.	 novel
	
2.	 Construct a complete enumerative definition for the following terms:
	a.	 ocean
	b.	 continent
	
3.	 Construct a definition by subclass for the following terms by naming three 
subclasses of the class the term denotes. Then find a nonsynonymous term 
that these subclasses serve equally well to define.
	
★a.	 animal
	b.	 fish
	c.	 vehicle
	d.	 gemstone
	e.	 polygon
	
4.	 Construct a complete definition by subclass for the following terms:
	a.	 quadrilateral
	b.	 circulating American coin
112   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition

2
	
5.	 Construct synonymous definitions for the following terms:
	
★a.	 intersection
	b.	 fabric
	c.	 nucleus
	d.	 abode
	e.	 wedlock
	f.	 cellar
	g.	 summit
	h.	 apparel
	
6.	 Construct operational definitions for the following words:
	
★a.	 genius
	b.	 ferromagnetic
	c.	 fluorescent
	d.	 alkaline
	e.	 polarized (light)
	
7.	 Construct definitions by genus and difference for the following terms. In each 
definition identify the genus term.
	
★a.	 drake
	b.	 biologist
	c.	 felony
	d.	 widow
	e.	 library
	
8.	 Consult a dictionary to find the etymological roots of the following words, 
and then explain how they relate to the conventional meaning of these words.
	
★a.	 morphology
	b.	 isomorphic
	c.	 isotropic
	d.	 phototropic
	e.	 photography
	f.	 lithography
	g.	 lithology
	h.	 psychology
	III.	Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 The technique of extensional definition may be used to produce precising 
definitions.
SECTION 2.4 Definitional Techniques   113

2
114   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
	
2.	 The technique of extensional definition may be used to produce stipulative 
and lexical definitions.
	
3.	 Most extensional definitions convey the precise intensional meaning of a term.
	
4.	 An intensional definition conveys the meaning of a term by indicating the 
members of the class the term denotes.
	
5.	 In a synonymous definition the definiens must be a single word.
	
6.	 The technique of synonymous definition may be used to construct precising 
definitions.
	
7.	 Operational definitions typically convey the entire intensional meaning of a word.
	
8.	 The species is a subclass of the genus.
	
9.	 The specific difference is an attribute or set of attributes that identifies a species.
	
10.	 Definition by genus and difference may be used to produce stipulative, lexical, 
precising, theoretical, and persuasive definitions.
2.5	
Criteria for Lexical Definitions
PREVIEW    What if you were to look in a dictionary and find these definitions: “Beaver: a furry 
animal”; “Oligarchy: a terrible form of government”; “Art: whatever is produced by an artist.” Upon 
reading such definitions, you would probably think there is something wrong with this dictionary—and 
you would be right. Not just any definition counts as a good lexical definition. This section of the book 
presents a set of rules that governs lexical definitions.
Because the function of a lexical definition is to report the way a word is actually used 
in a language, lexical definitions are the ones we most frequently encounter and are 
what most people mean when they speak of the “definition” of a word. Accordingly, it 
is appropriate that we have a set of rules that we may use in constructing lexical defini-
tions of our own and in evaluating the lexical definitions of others. While some of these 
rules apply to the other kinds of definitions as well, the unique functions that are served 
by stipulative, precising, theoretical, and persuasive definitions prescribe different sets 
of criteria.
Rule 1: A Lexical Definition Should Conform to the Standards 
of Proper Grammar
A definition, like any other form of expression, should be grammatically correct.  
Examples of definitions that are grammatically incorrect are as follows:
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

2
SECTION 2.5 Criteria for Lexical Definitions   115
Vacation is when you don’t have to go to work or school.
Furious means if you’re angry at someone.
Cardiac is like something to do with the heart.
The corrected versions are these:
“Vacation” means a period during which activity is suspended from work or school.
“Furious” means a condition of being very angry.
“Cardiac” means pertaining to, situated near, or acting on the heart.
Technically the definiendum should be put in quotation marks or italics, but this 
convention is not always followed.
Rule 2: A Lexical Definition Should Convey the Essential  
Meaning of the Word Being Defined
The word “human” is occasionally defined as featherless biped. Such a definition fails 
to convey the essential meaning of “human” as the word is used in ordinary English. 
It says nothing about the important attributes that distinguish humans from the other 
animals—namely, the capacity to reason and to use language on a sophisticated level. 
A more adequate definition would be “ ‘Human’ means the animal that has the capacity 
to reason and to speak.”
If a lexical definition is to be given in terms of an operational definition or in terms of 
any of the forms of extensional definition, it should usually be supplemented by one of 
the other forms of intensional definition, preferably definition by genus and difference. 
As noted, from the standpoint of ordinary language usage, an operational definition 
often conveys only part of the intensional meaning of a word, and this part frequently 
misses the essential meaning altogether. As for extensional definitions, at best they can 
only suggest the essential meaning of a word; they cannot determine it precisely. As a 
result, no adequate lexical definition can consist exclusively of extensional definitions.
Rule 3: A Lexical Definition Should Be Neither Too Broad  
nor Too Narrow
If a definition is too broad, the definiens includes too much; if it is too narrow, the 
definiens includes too little. If, for example, “bird” were defined as any warm-blooded 
animal having wings, the definition would be too broad because it would include bats, 
and bats are not birds. If, on the other hand, “bird” were defined as any warm-blooded, 
feathered animal that can fly, the definition would be too narrow because it would  
exclude ostriches and penguins, which cannot fly.
The only types of lexical definitions that tend to be susceptible to either of these 
defi­ciencies are synonymous definitions and definitions by genus and difference. With 
synonymous definitions, one must be careful that the definiens really is a synonym 
of the definiendum. For example, the definition “ ‘king’ means ruler” is too broad  
because many rulers are not kings. “Ruler” is not genuinely synonymous with “king.” 

116   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
As for definitions by genus and difference, one must ensure that the specific difference 
narrows the genus in exactly the right way. Both of the given definitions of “bird” are 
definitions by genus and difference in which the specific difference fails to restrict the 
genus in exactly the right manner.
Rule 4: A Lexical Definition Should Avoid Circularity
A definition is circular when the definiendum is defined in terms of itself, or virtually 
in terms of itself. Sometimes the problem of circularity appears in connection with 
pairs of definitions. The following pair is circular:
“Science” means the activity engaged in by scientists.
“Scientist” means anyone who engages in science.
At other times a definition may be intrinsically circular. Of the following, the first is a 
synonymous definition, the second a definition by genus and difference:
“Soporific” means soporiferous.
“Jewelers’ rouge” means rouge used by a jeweler.
In the first example, the definiendum is virtually the same word as the definiens. As 
a result, anyone who does not already know the meaning of “soporofic” would prob-
ably not know the meaning of “soporiferous,” either. In the second example, “jewelers’ 
rouge” is clearly defined in terms of itself. The corrected definitions are as follows:
“Soporific” means tending to cause sleep.
“Jewelers’ rouge” means a very fine polishing compound.
Certain operational definitions also run the risk of circularity:
“Time” means whatever is measured by a clock.
Arguably a person would have to know what “time” means before he or she could  
understand the purpose of a clock.
Rule 5: A Lexical Definition Should Not Be Negative When  
It Can Be Affirmative
Of the following two definitions, the first is affirmative, the second negative:
“Concord” means harmony.
“Concord” means the absence of discord.
Some words, however, have meanings that are are intrinsically negative. For them, a 
negative definition is quite appropriate. Examples:
“Bald” means lacking hair.
“Darkness” means the absence of light.

2
Rule 6: A Lexical Definition Should Avoid Figurative, Obscure, 
Vague, or Ambiguous Language
A definition is figurative if it involves metaphors or tends to paint a picture instead of 
exposing the essential meaning of a term. Examples:
“Architecture” means frozen music.
“Camel” means a ship of the desert.
A definition is obscure if its meaning is hidden as a result of defective or inappro-
priate language. One source of obscurity is overly technical language. Compare these 
two definitions:
“Bunny” means a mammalian of the family Leporidae of the order Lagomorpha whose 
young are born furless and blind.
“Bunny” means a rabbit.
The problem lies not with technical language as such but with needlessly technical lan-
guage. Because “bunny” is very much a nontechnical term, no technical definition is 
needed. On the other hand, some words are intrinsically technical, and for them only a 
technical definition will suffice. Example:
“Neutrino” means a quasi-massless lepton obeying Fermi-Dirac statistics and having 
one-half quantum unit of spin.
A definition is vague if it lacks precision or if its meaning is blurred—that is, if there 
is no way of telling exactly what class of things the definiens refers to. Example:
“Democracy” means a kind of government where the people are in control.
This definition fails to identify the people who are in control, how they exercise their 
control, and what they are in control of.
A definition is ambiguous if it lends itself to more than one distinct interpretation. 
Example:
“Triangle” means a figure composed of three straight lines in which all the angles are 
equal to two right angles.
Does this mean that each angle separately is equal to two right angles or that the angles 
taken together are equal to two right angles? Either interpretation is possible given the 
ambiguous meaning of “all the angles are equal to two right angles.”
Rule 7: A Lexical Definition Should Avoid Affective Terminology
Affective terminology is any kind of word usage that plays on the emotions of the reader 
or listener. It includes sarcastic and facetious language and any other kind of language 
that could influence attitudes. Examples:
“Communism” means that “brilliant” invention of Karl Marx and other foolish political 
visionaries in which the national wealth is supposed to be held in common by the people.
“Theism” means belief in that great Santa Claus in the sky.
SECTION 2.5 Criteria for Lexical Definitions   117

2
The second example also violates Rule 6 because it contains a metaphor.
Rule 8: A Lexical Definition Should Indicate the Context  
to Which the Definiens Pertains
This rule applies to any definition in which the context of the definiens is important to 
the meaning of the definiendum. For example, the definition “ ‘Deuce’ means a tie in 
points toward a game or in games toward a set” is practically meaningless without any 
reference to tennis. Whenever the definiendum is a word that means different things in 
different contexts, a reference to the context is important. Examples:
“Strike” means (in baseball) a pitch at which a batter swings and misses.
“Strike” means (in bowling) the act of knocking down all the pins with the first ball of  
a frame.
“Strike” means (in fishing) a pull on a line made by a fish in taking the bait.
It is not always necessary to make explicit reference to the context, but at least the 
phraseology of the definiens should indicate the context.
EXERCISE 2.5	
Criticize the following definitions in light of the eight rules for lexical definitions:
	
★1.	 A sculpture is a three-dimensional image made of marble.
	
2.	 “Elusory” means elusive.
	
3.	 “Birdie” means sinking the ball in one stroke under par.
	
★4.	 A cynic is a person who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing.
(Oscar Wilde)
	
5.	 “Semantics” is when somebody studies words.
	
6.	 “iPod” means a handheld electronic device having a single click-wheel on one side.
	
★7.	 A theist is anyone who is not an atheist or an agnostic.
	
8.	 “Intelligence” means whatever is measured by an IQ test.
	
9.	 A symphony is a musical piece written for full orchestra.
	 ★10.	 Feminism is a militant movement originated by a group of deviant women for 
the purpose of undermining the natural distinction between the sexes.
	
11.	 “Wood” means fibrous, lignified cellulose.
	
12.	 Logic is the study of arguments including definitions.
 ★13.	 “Truculent” is if you’re cruel or fierce.
	
14.	 A house is a structure made of wood or stone intended for human habitation.
118   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition

2
	
15.	 Satire is a kind of glass, wherein beholders do generally discover everybody’s 
face but their own.
(Jonathan Swift)
 ★16.	 A carpenter’s square is a square used by a carpenter.
	
17.	 “Safety” means a play in which a player grounds the ball behind his own goal 
line when the ball was caused to cross the goal line by his own team.
	
18.	 Puberty: the time in life in which the two sexes begin first to be acquainted.
(Johnson’s Dictionary)
 ★19.	 “Normal” means an attribute possessed by people who are able to get on in the 
world.
	
20.	 An organic substance is any substance that is not inorganic.
	
21.	 Faith is the bird that sings when the dawn is still dark.
(Rabindranath Tagore)
 ★22.	 “Schooner” means sort of like a sailboat.
	
23.	 “Faith” means reason succumbing to insecurity.
	
24.	 “Gammon” means, in backgammon, a victory in which one player defeats an-
other before he can remove any of his men from the board.
	 ★25.	 A cello is a stringed musical instrument played with a bow.
	
26.	 Tobacco is a plant grown in the southeastern United States that, when enjoyed 
in the form of cigars and cigarettes, produces a most delightful and satisfying 
taste and aroma.
	
27.	 History is the unfolding of miscalculations.
(Barbara Tuchman)
 ★28.	 “Clock” means a manufactured device featuring two pointers that rotate past a 
set of numerals ranging from 1 to 12.
	
29.	 “Soap” means saponified glyceride.
	
30.	 Mackerel: a sea-fish.
(Johnson’s Dictionary)
 ★31.	 “Anchorperson” means an electronic media guru who has great looks but less-
than-average intelligence and who brings canned news to people incapable of 
reading a newspaper.
	
32.	 “Diet” means like when you cut back on your calories.
	
33.	 Animal: a living creature corporeal, distinct, on the one side, from pure spirit, 
on the other, from pure matter.
(Johnson’s Dictionary)
 ★34.	 “Pen” means an instrument used for writing on paper.
	
35.	 Wine is an alcoholic beverage made from grapes.
SECTION 2.5 Criteria for Lexical Definitions   119
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

120   CHAPTER 2 Language: Meaning and Definition
2
	
Summary
Linguistic expressions can have different kinds of meaning:
• Cognitive meaning: Conveys information
• Emotive meaning: Expresses or evokes feelings
Statements having emotive meaning often make value claims. When such statements occur 
in arguments, the value claims should be disengaged from the emotive terminology and 
expressed as separate premises.
Cognitive meanings can be defective in two ways:
• Vagueness: The meaning is blurred.
• Ambiguity: More than one clearly distinct meaning is possible.
A term is a word or phrase that can serve as the subject of a statement. Terms include:
• Proper names (Napoleon, North Dakota, etc.)
• Common names (animal, house, etc.)
• Descriptive phrases (author of Hamlet, books in my library, etc.)
Terms can have different kinds of meaning:
• Intensional meaning (or intension): The attributes that the term connotes
• Extensional meaning (or extension): The members of the class that the term denotes
Terms that refer to nonexistent things have empty extension.
A definition is a word or group of words that assigns a meaning to a word or group  
of words:
• Definiendum: The word or group of words being defined
• Definiens: The word or group of words that does the defining
Definitions can serve different purposes, so there are different kinds of definitions:
• Stipulative definitions assign a meaning to a word when it first comes into use.
• Lexical definitions report the meaning a word has within a community of users.
• Precising definitions reduce the vagueness of a word.
• Theoretical definitions appeal to a theory to characterize whatever the term denotes.
• Persuasive definitions influence the attitudes of the community of users regarding what-
ever the word denotes.
Intensional meaning and extensional meaning provide a basis for constructing definitions:
• Extensional definitions assign a meaning by identifying the things the word denotes:
■
■
Demonstrative definitions “point” to these things.
■
■
Enumerative definitions name individuals that the word denotes.
■
■
Definitions by subclass identify subclasses of these things.
• Intensional definitions assign a meaning by identifying the attributes the word connotes:
■
■
Synonymous definitions equate the word being defined with another word that con-
notes the same attributes.
■
■
Etymological definitions disclose the word’s ancestry.

2
Summary   121
■
■
Operational definitions specify experimental procedures for determining whether the 
word applies to a certain thing.
■
■
Definitions by genus and difference identify a genus term and one or more difference 
words that, when combined, convey the meaning of the definiendum.
Lexical definitions are governed by eight rules. They should:
• Conform to the standards of proper grammar.
• Convey the essential meaning of the word being defined.
• Be neither too broad nor too narrow.
• Avoid circularity.
• Not be negative when they can be affirmative.
• Avoid figurative, obscure, vague, or ambiguous language.
• Avoid affective terminology.
• Indicate the context to which the definiens pertains.

122
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.
3
3.1 	 Fallacies in General
3.2	 Fallacies of Relevance
3.3	 Fallacies of Weak Induction
3.4	 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference
3.5	 Fallacies in Ordinary Language
3.1	
Fallacies in General
PREVIEW    Suppose you read this ad: “Mercury running shoes—the perfect blend of style and 
speed. Buy them and be the envy of your friends.” You buy a pair, and you do indeed receive admiring 
comments. However, on a rainy day you find that the shoes literally disintegrate on your feet. Later you 
find that Mercury shoes are not intended for wet weather. You have been tricked by the ad. In this chapter  
you will learn about many ways in which arguers trick others into accepting unjustified conclusions.
A fallacy is a defect in an argument that arises from either a mistake in reasoning or 
the creation of an illusion that makes a bad argument appear good. The fallacies that  
appear in this chapter involve errors that occur so often that they have been given spe-
cific names. The term non sequitur (“it does not follow”) is another name for fallacy. 
Both deductive and inductive arguments may contain fallacies; if they do, they are either 
unsound or uncogent, depending on the kind of argument. Conversely, if an argument is 
unsound or uncogent, it has one or more false premises or it contains a fallacy (or both).
Fallacies are usually divided into two groups: formal and informal. A formal 
­fallacy is one that may be identified by merely examining the form or structure of an  
argument. Fallacies of this kind are found only in deductive arguments that have 
identifiable forms. Chapter 1 presented some of these forms: categorical syllogisms,  
disjunctive syllogisms, and hypothetical syllogisms. The following categorical syllo-
gism contains a formal fallacy:
All bullfights are grotesque rituals.
All executions are grotesque rituals.
Therefore, all bullfights are executions.
Informal Fallacies

SECTION 3.1 Fallacies in General   123
3
This argument has the following form:
All A are B.
All C are B.
All A are C.
By merely examining this form, one can see that it is invalid. The fact that A, B, and C 
stand respectively for “bullfights,” “grotesque rituals,” and “executions” is irrelevant in 
detecting the fallacy. The problem may be traced to the second premise. If the letters C 
and B are interchanged, the form becomes valid, and the original argument, with the 
same change introduced, also becomes valid (but unsound).
Here is an example of a formal fallacy that occurs in a hypothetical syllogism:
If apes are intelligent, then apes can solve puzzles.
Apes can solve puzzles.
Therefore, apes are intelligent.
This argument has the following form:
If A then B.
B.	
A.
In this case, if A and B are interchanged in the first premise, the form becomes valid, 
and the original argument, with the same change, also becomes valid. This fallacy and 
the one that precedes it will be discussed in later chapters.
In distinguishing formal from informal fallacies, remember that formal fallacies  
occur only in deductive arguments. Thus, if a given argument is inductive, it cannot 
contain a formal fallacy. Also, keep an eye out for standard deductive argument forms 
such as categorical syllogisms and hypothetical syllogisms. If such an argument is in-
valid because of an improper arrangement of terms or statements, it commits a formal 
fallacy. Section 1.5 investigated some of these forms and gave instruction on distin-
guishing the form from the content of an argument. All of the exercises at the end of 
that section commit formal fallacies.
Informal fallacies are those that can be detected only by examining the content of 
the argument. Consider the following example:
The Brooklyn Bridge is made of atoms.
Atoms are invisible.
Therefore, the Brooklyn Bridge is invisible.
To detect this fallacy one must know something about bridges—namely, that they are 
large visible objects, and even though their atomic components are invisible, this does 
not mean that the bridges themselves are invisible.
Or consider this example:
A chess player is a person.
Therefore, a bad chess player is a bad person.

3
To detect this fallacy one must know that the meaning of the word “bad” depends on what 
it modifies, and that being a bad chess player is quite different from being a bad person.
The various informal fallacies accomplish their purpose in so many different ways 
that no single umbrella theory covers them all. Some fallacies work by getting the reader 
or listener to feel various emotions, such as fear, pity, or camaraderie, and then attach-
ing a certain conclusion to those emotions. Others attempt to discredit an opposing 
argument by associating it with certain pejorative features of its author. And then there 
are those that appeal to various dispositions on the part of the reader or listener, such 
as superstition or mental laziness, to get him or her to accept a conclusion. By studying 
the typical ways in which arguers apply these techniques, one is less likely to be fooled 
by the fallacious arguments posed by others or to stumble blindly into fallacies when 
constructing arguments for one’s own use.
Since the time of Aristotle, logicians have attempted to classify the various informal 
fallacies. Aristotle himself identified thirteen and separated them into two groups. The 
work of subsequent logicians has produced dozens more, rendering the task of classify-
ing them even more difficult. The presentation that follows divides twenty-two infor-
mal fallacies into five groups: fallacies of relevance, fallacies of weak induction, fallacies 
of presumption, fallacies of ambiguity, and fallacies of illicit transference. The final 
section of the chapter considers the related topics of detecting and avoiding fallacies in 
the context of ordinary language.
EXERCISE 3.1	
Determine whether the fallacies committed by the following arguments are formal fal-
lacies or informal fallacies.
	★1.	 If Rasputin was really mad, then he deceived Czar Nicholas II. Rasputin was not 
really mad. Therefore, he did not deceive Czar Nicholas II.
	
2.	 Everything that runs has feet. The Columbia River runs very swiftly. Therefore, 
the Columbia River has feet.
	
3.	 All people who believe we create our own reality are people who lack social re-
sponsibility. All people governed by selfish motives are people who lack social 
responsibility. Therefore, all people who believe we create our own reality are 
people governed by selfish motives.
	★4.	 The ship of state is like a ship at sea. No sailor is ever allowed to protest orders 
from the captain. For the same reason, no citizen should ever be allowed to pro-
test presidential policies.
	
5.	 Renowned violinist Pinchas Zukerman has said, “When it comes to vodka, 
Smirnoff plays second fiddle to none.” We must therefore conclude that Smirnoff 
is the best vodka available.
	
6.	 If the Chinese government systematically kills its unwanted orphans, then the 
Chinese government is immoral. The Chinese government is indeed immoral. 
Therefore, the Chinese government systematically kills its unwanted orphans.
124   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   125
★7.	 Sarah Jessica Parker, Ben Affleck, and Julia Roberts are Democrats. Therefore, it 
must be the case that all Hollywood stars are Democrats.
	
8.	 Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Facebook, argues in favor of opening up the Arctic 
National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling. But consider this: Zuckerberg is just a 
moneygrubbing capitalist who only cares about inflating his already bloated bank 
account. Clearly his arguments are ridiculous.
	
9.	 If plastic guns are sold to the public, then terrorists will carry them aboard air-
liners undetected. If plastic guns are sold to the public, then airline hijackings 
will increase. Therefore, if terrorists carry plastic guns aboard airliners un- 
detected, then airline hijackings will increase.
★10.	 Some corporate mergers are arrangements that produce layoffs. Some arrange-
ments that produce layoffs are social catastrophes. Therefore, some corporate 
mergers are social catastrophes.
3.2	
Fallacies of Relevance
PREVIEW    Imagine that a good friend of yours writes an editorial for the school newspaper sup-
porting increased diversity on campus. Then another student attacks the editorial, claiming that your 
friend wrote it only to get attention and to compensate for the fact that he is unpopular and has a hard 
time getting dates. How would you respond to this argument? This section of the book explores argu-
ments similar to the one attacking your friend’s editorial.
The fallacies of relevance share the common characteristic that the arguments in 
which they occur have premises that are logically irrelevant to the conclusion. Yet 
the premises may appear to be psychologically relevant, so the conclusion may seem 
to follow from the premises, even though it does not follow logically. In a good  
argument the premises provide genuine evidence in support of the conclusion. In 
an argument that commits a fallacy of relevance, on the other hand, the connection 
between premises and conclusion is emotional. To identify a fallacy of relevance, 
therefore, one must be able to distinguish genuine evidence from various forms of 
emotional appeal.
1. Appeal to Force  
(Argumentum ad Baculum: Appeal to the “Stick”)
The fallacy of appeal to force occurs whenever an arguer poses a conclusion to another 
person and tells that person either implicitly or explicitly that some harm will come to 
him or her if he or she does not accept the conclusion. The fallacy always involves a threat 
by the arguer to the physical or psychological well-being of the listener or reader, who 
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

126   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
may be either an individual or a group of people. Obviously, such a threat is logically  
irrelevant to the subject matter of the conclusion, so any argument based on such a 
procedure is fallacious. The ad baculum fallacy often occurs when children argue with 
one another:
Child to playmate: Sesame Street is the best show on TV; and if you don’t believe it, I’m 
going to call my big brother over here and he’s going to beat you up.
But it occurs among adults as well:
Secretary to boss: I deserve a raise in salary for the coming year. After all, you know how 
friendly I am with your wife, and I’m sure you wouldn’t want her to find out what’s been 
going on between you and that sexpot client of yours.
The first example involves a physical threat, the second a psychological one. While 
neither threat provides any genuine evidence that the conclusion is true, both provide 
evidence that someone might be injured. If the two types of evidence are confused with 
each other, both arguer and listener may be deluded into thinking that the conclusion 
is supported by evidence, when in fact it is not.
Conclusion
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Appeal to force
Threatens 
Asserts 
A
The appeal to force fallacy usually accomplishes its purpose by psychologically  
impeding the reader or listener from acknowledging a missing premise that, if  
acknowledged, would be seen to be false or at least questionable. The two examples just 
given can be interpreted as concealing the following premises, both of which are most 
likely false:
If my brother forces you to admit that Sesame Street is the best show on TV, then Sesame 
Street is in fact the best show.
If I succeed in threatening you, then I deserve a raise in salary.
The conclusion of the first argument is that Sesame Street is the best show on TV. 
But just because someone is forced into saying that it is does not mean that such is the 
case. Similarly, the conclusion of the second argument is that the secretary deserves a 
raise in salary. But if the boss is threatened into raising the secretary’s salary, this does 
not mean that the secretary deserves a raise. Many of the other informal fallacies can 
be interpreted as accomplishing their purpose in this way.
© Cengage Learning 2015

3
2. Appeal to Pity (Argumentum ad Misericordiam)
The appeal to pity fallacy occurs when an arguer attempts to support a conclusion by 
merely evoking pity from the reader or listener. This pity may be directed toward the 
arguer or toward some third party. Example:
Taxpayer to judge: Your Honor, I admit that I declared thirteen children as dependents on 
my tax return, even though I have only two. But if you find me guilty of tax evasion, my 
reputation will be ruined. I’ll probably lose my job, my poor wife will not be able to have 
the operation that she desperately needs, and my kids will starve. Surely I am not guilty.
The conclusion of this argument is “Surely I am not guilty.” Obviously, the conclu-
sion is not logically relevant to the arguer’s set of pathetic circumstances, although it  
is psychologically relevant. If the arguer succeeds in evoking pity from the listener or 
reader, the latter is likely to exercise his or her desire to help the arguer by accepting the 
argument. In this way the reader or listener may be fooled into accepting a conclusion 
that is not supported by any evidence. The appeal to pity is quite common and is often 
used by students on their instructors at exam time and by lawyers on behalf of their 
clients before judges and juries.
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Appeal to pity
A
Evokes
pity
Conclusion
Asserts 
Of course, some arguments that attempt to evoke sympathetic feelings from the 
reader or listener are not fallacious. We might call them arguments from compassion. 
Such arguments differ from the fallacious appeal to pity in that, in addition to evoking 
compassion on behalf of some person, they supply information about why that per-
son is genuinely deserving of help or special consideration. Whenever possible these 
nonfallacious arguments should show that the person in question is a victim of cir-
cumstances and not responsible for the dire straits he finds himself in, that the recom-
mended help or special consideration is not illegal or inappropriate, and that it will 
genuinely help the person in question. In contrast to such arguments, the appeal to pity 
proceeds by ignoring all of these considerations and attempts to support a conclusion 
by merely evoking pity from the reader or listener.
3. Appeal to the People (Argumentum ad Populum)
Nearly everyone wants to be loved, esteemed, admired, valued, recognized, and accept-
ed by others. The appeal to the people uses these desires to get the reader or listener to 
accept a conclusion. Two approaches are involved: one of them direct, the other indirect.
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   127
© Cengage Learning 2015

128   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
The direct approach occurs when an arguer, addressing a large group of people, excites 
the emotions and enthusiasm of the crowd to win acceptance for his or her conclusion. 
The objective is to arouse a kind of mob mentality. This is the strategy used by nearly  
every propagandist and demagogue. Adolf Hitler was a master of the technique, but 
speech makers at Democratic and Republican national conventions also use it with some 
measure of success. Waving flags and blaring music add to the overall effect. Because the 
individuals in the audience want to share in the camaraderie, the euphoria, and the excite-
ment, they find themselves accepting a variety of conclusions with ever-increasing fervor.
An appeal to negative emotions can also generate a mob mentality. The appeal to 
fear, also known as fear mongering, is a variety of the direct form of the appeal to the 
people that occurs when an arguer trumps up a fear of something in the mind of the 
crowd and then uses that fear as a premise for some conclusion. Of course many fears 
that we experience in daily life are supported by solid evidence, such as the fear of get-
ting mugged in a dark alley when several muggings have occurred there recently. In the 
appeal to fear fallacy, the fear is not supported by any solid evidence, and it usually rests 
on nothing more than irrational suspicion created by repeating a message or rumor 
over and over again. As the message gradually sinks in it causes the crowd to feel uneasy, 
and this alone may be enough to get a large number to accept the arguer,s conclusion.
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Appeal to
the people
A
Plays on need
for security, etc.
Conclusion
Asserts 
Fear mongering has played at least a minor role in nearly every presidential election. 
A famous example was the so-called Daisy Commercial* used in 1964 by the Lyndon  
Johnson campaign to defeat Barry Goldwater. The commercial raised the specter of  
Goldwater’s possible use of nuclear weapons in Vietnam if he were to become president. 
What if Goldwater were elected? Could this lead to an all-out nuclear confrontation with  
the Soviet Union? No one could be sure of the answer. Even though the commercial was 
pulled after its first airing, countless news shows picked it up and repeated it over and 
over again. The effect was to plant the fear of nuclear annihilation in the minds of mil-
lions of voters, and in the end it swayed many of them to side with President Johnson.
Practically any social or political change is fertile ground for appeals to fear. When 
Darwin’s theory of evolution began to be taught in the schools, William Jennings Bryan  
argued that it would increase the number of wars, undermine morality, convert love into 
hate, and destroy civilization. His speeches were a driving force in the movement to ban 
the teaching of evolution. When the nation was debating whether women should be  
allowed to vote, Elihu Root argued that suffrage would make women “hard, harsh,  
* This commercial, in its entirety, is readily available on the Internet.
© Cengage Learning 2015

3
unlovable, repulsive.” When the Soviet Union developed the atomic bomb and became a 
threat to world peace, Senator Joseph McCarthy argued that Soviet spies or sympathizers 
had infiltrated many branches of the government including the State Department and the 
U.S. Army. The resulting atmosphere of fear wrecked the lives of many innocent victims.
As these examples illustrate, the direct approach of appeal to the people is often  
accomplished through oral communication. However, writing can also produce the 
same effect. By using such emotionally charged phrases as “champion of the free- 
enterprise system,” “defender of the working man,” “bleeding-heart liberal,” and “profli-
gate spender,” polemicists can awaken the same kind of mob mentality in their writings 
as they would if they were speaking.
In the indirect approach of appeal to the people, the arguer aims his or her appeal 
not at the crowd as a whole but at one or more individuals separately, focusing on some 
aspect of those individuals’ relationship to the crowd. The indirect approach includes 
such specific forms as the bandwagon argument, the appeal to vanity, the appeal to 
snobbery, and the appeal to tradition.
The bandwagon argument has this general structure: Everybody believes such-
and-such or does such-and-such; therefore, you should believe or do such-and-such, 
too. Examples:
Everyone nowadays is on a low-carb diet. Therefore, you should go on a low-carb diet, too.
Practically everybody believes in life after death. Therefore, you should believe in life after 
death, too.
The idea is that if you want to fit in with the crowd and not stick out like a sore thumb, 
then you, too, will go on the diet and believe in life after death. But of course the mere 
fact that a large group of people happen to be doing something or believe in something 
is not, by itself, a logical reason why you ought to do it, too.
The appeal to vanity is another form of the indirect approach, and it often involves 
linking the love, admiration, or approval of the crowd with some famous figure who is 
loved, admired, or approved of. This version of the fallacy is often used by advertisers, 
parents, and people in general.
Of course you want to look as fresh and beautiful as Ellen DeGeneres. That means you 
will want to buy and use Cover Girl cosmetics.
Daniel Craig wears an Omega wristwatch. Thus, if you want to be like him, you will buy 
and wear an Omega watch, too.
Mother to child: You want to grow up and be just like Wonder Woman, don’t you? Then 
eat your liver and carrots.
The idea is that if you succeed in becoming like DeGeneres, Craig, or Wonder Woman, 
then you will win the love and approval of the crowd; but to become like them you 
must buy the advertised product or, in the case of the little girl, eat the liver and carrots. 
Incidentally, these examples show how the appeal to vanity can overlap the false cause 
fallacy (presented in Section 3.3), because they might be interpreted to mean that using 
Cover Girl cosmetics will cause a person to look like Ellen DeGeneres, and so on. Of 
course, any such causal connection is unlikely.
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   129

130   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
In the appeal to snobbery the crowd that the arguer appeals to is a smaller group 
that is supposed to be superior in some way—more wealthy, more powerful, more cul-
turally refined, more intelligent, and so on. As the argument goes, if the listener wants 
to be part of this group, then he or she will do a certain thing, think in a certain way, or 
buy a certain product. Example:
The Lexus 400 series is not for everyone. Only those with considerable means and  
accomplishment will acquire one. To show the world that you are among the select few, 
you will want to purchase and drive one of these distinguished automobiles.
Even if a group of snobs might happen to think or feel something, this is not a logical 
reason for why you should act in conformity.
The appeal to tradition is yet another variety of the indirect appeal to the people. It 
occurs when an arguer cites the fact that something has become a tradition as grounds 
for some conclusion. The claim that something is a tradition is basically synonymous 
with the claim that a lot of people have done it that way for a long time. Examples:
Traditionally, professional sporting events have been preceded by the national anthem. 
Therefore, professional sporting events should continue to be preceded by the national 
anthem.
Serving turkey on Thanksgiving Day is a long-standing tradition. Therefore, we should 
serve turkey next Thanksgiving Day.
The mere fact that something has been done in a certain way for a long time does not 
by itself justify its being repeated in the future. Yet, there are some appeals to tradition 
that have conclusions that are true for other reasons, and this may trick a reader or 
listener into thinking that the argument is a good one. Example:
Traditionally, guests have worn elegant clothing to Mrs. Channing’s annual cocktail party. 
Therefore, it would not be a good idea for you to go naked to her party this year.
This argument is just as fallacious as the previous two. The conclusion is clearly true, 
but the reason why it is true is not because of any tradition but because the purpose of 
a cocktail party is to foster a feeling of conviviality among the guests. One of the guests 
showing up naked would threaten to destroy this purpose to the detriment of the host 
and all the other guests.
Incidentally, this final point about appeals to tradition with true conclusions applies 
to the other forms of ad populum as well. If such arguments have true conclusions, 
those conclusions are true for reasons other than the fact that the crowd believes some-
thing or feels something.
Both the direct and indirect approaches of the ad populum fallacy have the same 
basic structure:
You want to be accepted/included in the group/loved/esteemed. . . . Therefore, you should 
accept XYZ as true.
In the direct approach the arousal of a mob mentality produces an immediate feeling 
of belonging, even if it relates to something feared. Each person feels united with the 
crowd, and this feeling evokes a sense of strength and security. When the crowd roars 

3
its approval of the conclusions that are then offered, anyone who does not accept them 
automatically cuts himself or herself off from the crowd and risks the loss of his or her 
security, strength, and acceptance. The same thing happens in the indirect approach, 
but the context and technique are somewhat subtler.
4. Argument Against the Person  
(Argumentum ad Hominem)
This fallacy always involves two arguers. One of them advances (either directly or im-
plicitly) a certain argument, and the other then responds by directing his or her atten-
tion not to the first person’s argument but to the first person himself. When this occurs, 
the second person is said to commit an argument against the person.
The argument against the person occurs in three forms: the ad hominem abusive, 
the ad hominem circumstantial, and the tu quoque. In the ad hominem abusive, the 
second person responds to the first person’s argument by verbally abusing the first 
person. Example:
Television entertainer Bill Maher argues that religion is just a lot of foolish nonsense. 
But Maher is an arrogant, shameless, self-righteous pig. Obviously his arguments are not 
worth listening to.
The author of this argument ignores the substance of Maher’s argument and instead 
attacks Maher himself. However, because Maher’s personal attributes are irrelevant to 
whether the premises of his religion argument support the conclusion, the argument 
attacking him is fallacious.
Not all cases of the ad hominem abusive are so blunt, but they are just as fallacious. 
Example:
Secretary of State John Kerry argues that Israel should hold the line on new settlements 
in Palestine. But Kerry is not Jewish, and he has never had any great affection for Israel. 
Thus, his arguments are worthless.
Again, whether John Kerry is Jewish and whether he does or does not have any great  
affection for Israel have nothing to do with whether his premises support his conclusion.
The ad hominem circumstantial begins the same way as the ad hominem abusive, 
but instead of heaping verbal abuse on his or her opponent, the respondent attempts to 
discredit the opponent’s argument by alluding to certain circumstances that affect the 
opponent. By doing so the respondent hopes to show that the opponent is predisposed 
to argue the way he or she does and should therefore not be taken seriously. 
Here is an example:
The Dalai Lama argues that China has no business in Tibet and that the West should do 
something about it. But the Dalai Lama just wants the Chinese to leave so he can return 
as leader. Naturally he argues this way. Therefore, we should reject his arguments.
The author of this argument ignores the substance of the Dalai Lama’s argument and 
attempts to discredit it by calling attention to certain circumstances that affect the 
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   131

132   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
Dalai Lama—namely, that he wants to return to Tibet as its leader. But the fact that 
the Dalai Lama happens to be affected by these circumstances is irrelevant to whether  
his premises support a conclusion. The ad hominem circumstantial is easy to recognize 
because it always takes this form: “Of course Mr. X argues this way; just look at the 
circumstances that affect him.”
Argument against
the person
Argument
A1 = Arguer 1
A2 = Arguer 2
(A2 commits the
fallacy)
A1
Verbally
attacks
Presents 
Rejects 
A2
The tu quoque (“you too”) fallacy begins the same way as the other two varieties of 
the ad hominem argument, except that the second arguer attempts to make the first ap-
pear to be hypocritical or arguing in bad faith. The second arguer usually accomplishes 
this by citing features in the life or behavior of the first arguer that conflict with the 
latter’s conclusion. The fallacy often takes the form, “How dare you argue that I should 
stop doing X; why, you do (or have done) X yourself.” Example:
President Barack Obama argues that we should avoid eating junk food. But look at what 
he eats: greasy cheeseburgers, chili dogs, french fries, hot dogs, fried cheese puffs, sugary 
sodas, hot fudge sundaes, cheese steaks, and snow cones. Clearly, Obama’s arguments 
about food are not worth listening to.
Again, the details of Obama’s diet are irrelevant to whether his premises support his 
conclusion. Thus, this argument is fallacious.
Keep in mind that the purpose of an ad hominem argument is to discredit another 
person’s argument by placing its author in a bad light. Thus, for the fallacy to be com-
mitted, there must always be two arguers (at least implicitly). If it should turn out that 
the person being attacked is not an arguer, then the personal comments made by the 
attacker may well be relevant to the conclusion that is drawn. In general, personal 
observations are relevant to conclusions about what kind of person someone is (good, 
bad, stingy, trustworthy, and so forth) and whether a person has done something. 
Example:
Joseph Kony, leader of the Lord’s Resistance Army, has kidnapped thousands of children 
from villages in central Africa, murdered their parents and relatives, and forced them into 
military service. He has also killed thousands of elephants and sold their ivory to fund his 
operation. Kony is therefore a thoroughly disgusting and despicable human being.
The conclusion is not that Kony’s argument is bad but that Kony himself is bad. Be-
cause the premises give relevant support to this conclusion, the argument commits no 
fallacy. Another example:
© Cengage Learning 2015

3
Shakespeare cannot possibly have written the thirty-six plays attributed to him, because 
the real Shakespeare was a two-bit country businessman who barely finished the fourth 
grade in school and who never left the confines of his native England.
The conclusion is not that some argument of Shakespeare’s is bad but that Shakespeare 
did not write certain plays. Again, since the premises are relevant to this conclusion, the 
argument commits no ad hominem fallacy.
Determining what kind of person someone is includes determining whether that 
person is trustworthy. Thus, personal comments are often relevant in evaluating 
whether a person’s proclamations or statements, unsupported by evidence, warrant our 
belief. Examples of such statements include promises to do something, testimony given 
by a witness, and testimonials in support of a product or service. Here is an example of 
an argument that discredits a witness:
Mickey has testified that he saw Freddy set fire to the building. But Mickey was recently 
convicted on ten counts of perjury, and he hates Freddy with a passion and would love 
to see him sent to jail. Therefore, you should not believe Mickey’s testimony.
This argument commits no fallacy. The conclusion is not that you should reject 
Mickey’s argument but rather that you should reject his testimony. Testimony is not 
argument, and the fact that the witness is a known liar and has a motive to lie now is 
relevant to whether we should believe him. Furthermore, note that the conclusion is 
not that Mickey’s statement is literally false but rather that we should not believe the 
statement. It is quite possible that Mickey really did see Freddy set fire to the building 
and that Mickey’s statement to that effect is true. But if our only reason for believing 
this statement is the mere fact that Mickey has made it, then given the circumstances, 
we are not justified in that belief. Personal factors are never relevant to truth and falsity 
as such, but they are relevant to believability.
Yet there is often a close connection between truth and believability, and this  
provides one of the reasons why ad hominem arguments are often effective. In evalu-
ating any argument there are always two issues to be considered: the quality of the 
reasoning and the truth of the premises. As noted, both are irrelevant to the personal 
characteristics of the arguer. But whether we accept the premises as true may depend 
on the credibility of the arguer. Knowing that the arguer is biased or has a motive to 
lie may provide good grounds for distrusting the premises. Another reason why ad  
hominem arguments are effective is that they engage the emotions of readers and listeners  
and thereby motivate them to transfer their negative feelings about the arguer onto  
the argument.
5. Accident
The fallacy of accident is committed when a general rule is applied to a specific case 
it was not intended to cover. Typically, the general rule is cited (either directly or  
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   133

134   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
implicitly) in the premises and then wrongly applied to the specific case mentioned in 
the conclusion. Two examples:
Freedom of speech is a constitutionally guaranteed right. Therefore, John Q. Radical 
should not be arrested for his speech that incited the riot last week.
People are obligated to keep their promises. When Jessica married Tyler, she promised 
to stay with him for life. Therefore, she should stay with him now, even though he has 
become an abusive spouse addicted to gambling and drugs.
In the first example, the general rule is that freedom of speech is normally guaranteed, 
and the specific case is the speech made by John Q. Radical. Because the speech incited 
a riot, the rule does not apply. In the second example, the general rule is that people are 
obligated to keep their promises, and the specific case is that Jessica should keep her 
promise to stay with Tyler. The rule does not apply because Tyler is no longer the same 
person that Jessica made her promise to.
General rule
Speciﬁc case
Misapplied
Accident
The fallacy of accident gets its name from the fact that one or more accidental features 
of the specific case make it an exception to the rule. In the first example the accidental 
feature is that the speech incited a riot; in the second example the accidental features are 
that Tyler has become an abusive spouse and is addicted to gambling and drugs.
6.  Straw Man
The straw man fallacy is committed when an arguer distorts an opponent’s argument 
for the purpose of more easily attacking it, demolishes the distorted argument, and 
then concludes that the opponent’s real argument has been demolished. By so doing, 
the arguer is said to have set up a straw man and knocked it down, only to conclude 
that the real “man” (opposing argument) has been knocked down as well. Example:
Mr. Goldberg has argued against prayer in the public schools. Obviously Mr. Goldberg 
advocates atheism. But atheism is what they used to have in Russia. Atheism leads to 
the suppression of all religions and the replacement of God by an omnipotent state. Is 
that what we want for this country? I hardly think so. Clearly Mr. Goldberg’s argument 
is nonsense.

3
A = Arguer
Op = Opponent’s
position
Op
Straw man
A
Distorts
Conclusion
Asserts 
Straw man, along with argument against the person, are called refutational fallacies 
because they involve one arguer refuting another. These are the only fallacies pre-
sented in this chapter that always involve two arguers. In the Goldberg argument,  
Mr. Goldberg, who is the first arguer, has presented an argument against prayer in 
the public schools. The second arguer then attacks Goldberg’s argument by equating it 
with an argument for atheism. He then attacks atheism and concludes that Goldberg’s 
argument is nonsense. Since Goldberg’s argument had nothing to do with atheism, the 
second argument commits the straw man fallacy.
As this example illustrates, the kind of distortion the second arguer resorts to is of-
ten an attempt to exaggerate the first person’s argument or make it look more extreme 
than it really is. Here are two more examples:
The garment workers have signed a petition arguing for better ventilation on the work 
premises. Unfortunately, air-conditioning is expensive. Air ducts would have to be run 
throughout the factory, and a massive heat exchange unit installed on the roof. Also, the 
cost of operating such a system during the summer would be astronomical. In view of 
these considerations the petition must be rejected.
The student status committee has presented us with an argument favoring alcohol privi-
leges on campus. What do the students want? Is it their intention to stay boozed up from 
the day they enter as freshmen until the day they graduate? Do they expect us to open 
a bar for them? Or maybe a chain of bars all over campus? Such a proposal is ridiculous!
In the first argument, the petition is merely for better ventilation in the factory—maybe 
a fan in the window during the summer. The arguer exaggerates this request to mean 
an elaborate air-conditioning system installed throughout the building. He then points 
out that this is too expensive and concludes by rejecting the petition. A similar strategy 
is used in the second argument. The arguer distorts the request for alcohol privileges 
to mean a chain of bars all over campus. Such an idea is so patently outlandish that no 
further argument is necessary.
7.  Missing the Point (Ignoratio Elenchi)
All the fallacies we have discussed thus far have been instances of cases where the prem-
ises of an argument are irrelevant to the conclusion. Missing the point illustrates a 
special form of irrelevance. This fallacy occurs when the premises of an argument sup-
port one particular conclusion, but then a different conclusion, often vaguely related 
to the correct conclusion, is drawn. Whenever one suspects that such a fallacy is being  
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   135
© Cengage Learning 2015

136   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
committed, he or she should be able to identify the correct conclusion, the conclusion 
that the premises logically imply. This conclusion must be significantly different from 
the conclusion that is actually drawn. Examples:
Crimes of theft and robbery have been increasing at an alarming rate lately. The conclu-
sion is obvious: We must reinstate the death penalty immediately.
Abuse of the welfare system is rampant nowadays. Our only alternative is to abolish the 
system altogether.
At least two correct conclusions are implied by the premise of the first argument: either 
“We should provide increased police protection in vulnerable neighborhoods” or “We 
should initiate programs to eliminate the causes of the crimes.” Reinstating the death 
penalty is not a logical conclusion at all. Among other things, theft and robbery are not 
capital crimes. In the second argument the premises logically suggest some systematic 
effort to eliminate the cheaters rather than eliminating the system altogether.
Premises
Conclusion “B”
Actually entails
Conclusion “A”
Missing the point
Ignoratio elenchi means “ignorance of the proof.” The arguer is ignorant of the logi-
cal implications of his or her own premises and, as a result, draws a conclusion that 
misses the point entirely. The fallacy has a distinct structure all its own, but in some 
ways it serves as a catchall for arguments that are not clear instances of one or more of 
the other fallacies. An argument should not be identified as a case of missing the point, 
however, if one of the other fallacies fits.
8.  Red Herring
This fallacy is closely associated with missing the point (ignoratio elenchi). The red 
herring fallacy is committed when the arguer diverts the attention of the reader or listener 
by changing the subject to a different but sometimes subtly related one. He or she then  
finishes by either drawing a conclusion about this different issue or by merely presuming 
that some conclusion has been established. By so doing, the arguer purports to have won 
the argument. The fallacy gets its name from a procedure used to train hunting dogs to fol-
low a scent. A red herring (or bag of them) is dragged across the trail with the aim of lead-
ing the dogs astray. Since red herrings have an especially potent scent (caused in part by the 
smoking process used to preserve them), only the best dogs will follow the original scent.

3
To use the red herring fallacy effectively, the arguer must change the original subject 
of the argument without the reader or listener noticing it. One way of doing this is to 
change the subject to one that is subtly related to the original subject. Here are two 
examples of this technique:
Environmentalists are continually harping about the dangers of nuclear power. Unfortu­
nately, electricity is dangerous no matter where it comes from. Every year hundreds of 
people are electrocuted by accident. Since most of these accidents are caused by care-
lessness, they could be avoided if people would just exercise greater caution.
There is a good deal of talk these days about the need to eliminate pesticides from our 
fruits and vegetables. But many of these foods are essential to our health. Carrots are 
an excellent source of vitamin A, broccoli is rich in iron, and oranges and grapefruit have 
lots of vitamin C.
     
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Red herring
A
Draws
off track
Conclusion
Asserts 
Both arguments commit the red herring fallacy. In the first, the original issue is 
whether nuclear power is dangerous. The arguer changes this subject to the danger of 
electrocution and proceeds to draw a conclusion about that. The new subject is clearly 
different from the possibility of nuclear explosion or meltdown, but the fact that both 
are related to electricity facilitates the arguer’s goal of leading someone off the track. In 
the second argument, the original issue is pesticides, and the arguer changes it to the 
value of fruits and vegetables in one’s diet. Again, the fact that the second topic is related 
to the first assists the arguer in committing the fallacy. In neither case does the arguer 
draw a conclusion about the original topic, but by merely diverting the attention of the 
reader or listener, the arguer creates the presumption of having won the argument.
A second way of using the red herring effectively is to change the subject to some 
flashy, eye-catching topic that is virtually guaranteed to distract the listener’s attention. 
Topics of this sort include sex, crime, scandal, immorality, death, and any other topic 
that might serve as the subject of gossip. Here is an example of this technique:
Professor Conway complains of inadequate parking on our campus. But did you know 
that last year Conway carried on a torrid love affair with a member of the English 
Department? The two used to meet every day for clandestine sex in the copier room. 
Apparently they didn’t realize how much you can see through that fogged glass window. 
Even the students got an eyeful. Enough said about Conway.
The red herring fallacy can be confused with the straw man fallacy because both have 
the effect of drawing the reader/listener off the track. This confusion can usually be 
avoided by remembering the unique ways in which they accomplish this purpose. In the 
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   137
© Cengage Learning 2015

3
EXERCISE 3.2	
	 I.	 Identify the fallacies of relevance committed by the following arguments, giving a 
brief explanation for your answer. If no fallacy is committed, write “no fallacy.”
	
★1.	 The position open in the accounting department should be given to Frank 
Thompson. Frank has six hungry children to feed, and his wife desperately 
needs an operation to save her eyesight.
	
2.	 Erica Evans, who takes orders at the local Taco Bell, argues persuasively in 
favor of increasing the minimum wage. But this is exactly what you would ex-
pect. Erica is paid the minimum wage, and if the minimum wage is increased, 
then her own salary will go up. Obviously Erica’s arguments are worthless.
	
3.	 The school board argues that our schools are in desperate need of repair. But 
the real reason our students are falling behind is that they spend too much 
time on their smartphones. Becoming educated means a lot more than learn-
ing how to scroll up and down. The school board should send a letter to the 
parents urging them to confiscate their kids’ smartphones.
	
★4.	 Whoever thrusts a knife into another person should be arrested. But surgeons 
do precisely this when operating. Therefore, surgeons should be arrested.
	
5.	 You should read Irving Stone’s latest novel right away. It’s sold over a million cop-
ies, and practically everyone in the Manhattan cocktail circuit is talking about it.
	
6.	 Friedrich Nietzsche’s philosophy is not worth the paper it’s printed on.  
Nietzsche was an immoral reprobate who went completely insane from  
syphilis before he died.
straw man, the arguer begins by distorting an opponent’s argument and concludes by 
knocking down the distorted argument. In the red herring, the arguer ignores the oppo-
nent’s argument (if there is one) and subtly changes the subject. Thus, to distinguish the 
two fallacies, one should attempt to determine whether the arguer has knocked down 
a distorted argument or simply changed the subject. Also keep in mind that straw man 
always involves two arguers, at least implicitly, whereas a red herring often does not.
Both the red herring and straw man fallacies are susceptible of being confused with 
missing the point, because all three involve a similar kind of irrelevancy. To avoid this 
confusion, one should note that both red herring and straw man proceed by generating 
a new set of premises, whereas missing the point does not. Straw man draws a conclu-
sion from new premises that are obtained by distorting an earlier argument, and red 
herring, if it draws any conclusion at all, draws one from new premises obtained by 
changing the subject. Missing the point, however, draws a conclusion from the original 
premises. Also, in the red herring and straw man, the conclusion, if there is one, is rel-
evant to the premises from which it is drawn; but in missing the point, the conclusion 
is irrelevant to the premises from which it is drawn. Finally, remember that missing the 
point serves in part as a kind of catchall fallacy, and a fallacious argument should not be 
identified as a case of missing the point if one of the other fallacies clearly fits.
138   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	
★7.	 Surely you welcome the opportunity to join our protective organization. 
Think of all the money you will lose from broken windows, overturned trucks, 
and damaged merchandise in the event of your not joining.
	
8.	 Senator Barrow advocates increased Social Security benefits for the poor. It is 
regrettable that the senator finds it necessary to advocate socialism. Socialism 
defeats initiative, takes away promised rewards, and leads directly to ineffi-
ciency and big government. It was tried for years in Eastern Europe, and it 
failed miserably. Clearly, socialism is no good.
	
9.	 Something is seriously wrong with high school education these days. After ten 
years of decline, SAT scores are still extremely low, and high school graduates 
are practically incapable of reading and writing. The obvious conclusion is 
that we should close the schools.
	 ★10.	 The editors of the Daily Register have accused our company of being one of the 
city’s worst water polluters. But the Daily Register is responsible for much more 
pollution than we are. After all, they own the Western Paper Company, and 
that company discharges tons of chemical residue into the city’s river every day.
	
11.	 If 20 percent of adult Americans are functionally illiterate, then it’s no wonder 
that morons get elected to public office. In fact, 20 percent of adult Americans 
are functionally illiterate. Therefore, it’s no wonder that morons get elected to 
public office.
	
12.	 Ladies and gentlemen, today the lines of battle have been drawn. When the din 
of clashing armor has finally died away, the Republican party will emerge victo-
rious! We are the true party of the American people! We embody the values that 
all real Americans hold sacred! We cherish and protect our founding fathers’ 
vision that gave birth to the Constitution! We stand for decency and righteous-
ness; for self-determination and the liberty to conduct our affairs as each of us 
freely chooses! In the coming election, victory will be ours, so help us God!
	 ★13.	 We’ve all heard the argument that too much television is the reason our stu-
dents can’t read and write. Yet many of today’s TV shows are excellent. Grey’s 
Anatomy unveils the personal lives of interns at an urban hospital, The Big 
Bang Theory offers lots of laughs, and American Idol uncovers hidden musical 
talent. Today’s TV is just great!
	
14.	 Surely architect Norris is not responsible for the collapse of the Central Bank 
Tower. Norris has had nothing but trouble lately. His daughter eloped with a 
child molester, his son committed suicide, and his alcoholic wife recently left 
for Las Vegas with his retirement savings.
	
15.	 The First Amendment to the Constitution prevents the government from in-
terfering with the free exercise of religion. The liturgical practice of the Reli-
gion of Internal Enlightenment involves human sacrifice. Therefore, it would 
be wrong for the government to interfere with this religious practice.
	 ★16.	 U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren argues that big banks have been ripping off the 
American consumer for years. It’s clear, however, that Warren says this only to 
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   139

3
scratch up more campaign contributions from those very consumers. Thus, 
you shouldn’t take her arguments seriously.
	
17.	 Professor Pearson’s arguments in favor of the theory of evolution should be 
discounted. Pearson is a cocaine-snorting sex pervert and, according to some 
reports, a member of the Communist Party.
	
18.	 Rudolf Höss, commandant of the Auschwitz concentration camp, confessed 
to having exterminated 1 million people, most of whom were Jews, in the  
Auschwitz gas chamber. We can only conclude that Höss was either insane or 
an extremely evil person.
	 ★19.	 TV commentator Larry Kudlow argues that government should get off the back 
of the American businessman. Obviously, Kudlow wants to abolish government 
altogether. Yet without government there would be no defense, no judicial sys-
tem, no Social Security, and no health and safety regulations. None of us wants 
to forgo these benefits. Thus, we can see that Kudlow’s argument is absurd.
	
20.	 I know that some of you oppose the appointment of David Cole as the new 
sales manager. On further consideration, however, I am confident you will 
find him well qualified for the job. If Cole is not appointed, it may become 
necessary to make severe personnel cutbacks in your department.
	
21.	 Animal rights activists say that animals are abused in biomedical research 
labs. But consider this: Pets are abused by their owners every day. Probably  
25 percent of pet owners should never get near animals. Some cases of abuse 
are enough to make you sick.
	 ★22.	 Of course you want to buy a pair of Slinky fashion jeans. Slinky jeans really 
show off your figure, and all the Hollywood starlets down on the Strip can be 
seen wearing them these days.
	
23.	 Film star Catherine Zeta-Jones says on TV that T-Mobile provides the cover-
age you need at the price you want. But this is exactly what you would expect 
given that T-Mobile pays her millions of dollars to make these ads. Thus, you 
shouldn’t take her testimonials too seriously.
	
24.	 Dr. Morrison has argued that smoking is responsible for the majority of 
health problems in this country and that every smoker who has even the 
slightest concern for his or her health should quit. Unfortunately, however, 
we must consign Dr. Morrison’s argument to the trash bin. Only yesterday  
I saw none other than Dr. Morrison himself smoking a cigar.
	 ★25.	 Mr. Rhodes is suffering from amnesia and has no recollection whatever of the 
events of the past two weeks. We can only conclude that he did not commit the 
crime of murdering his wife a week ago, as he has been accused of doing.
	II.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 In the appeal to force, the arguer physically attacks the listener.
	
2.	 In the direct variety of the appeal to the people, the arguer attempts to create a 
kind of mob mentality.
140   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	
3.	 If an arguer attempts to discredit court room testimony or a promise by pointing 
out that the witness or the person making the promise is a liar, then the arguer 
commits an argumentum ad hominem (argument against the person) fallacy.
	
4.	 The argumentum ad hominem always involves two arguers.
	
5.	 In the argumentum ad hominem circumstantial, the circumstances cited by the 
second arguer are intended precisely to malign the character of the first arguer.
	
6.	 In the tu quoque fallacy, the arguer threatens the reader or listener.
	
7.	 In the fallacy of accident, a general rule is applied to a specific case where it 
does not fit.
	
8.	 In the straw man fallacy, an arguer often distorts another person’s argument by 
making it look more extreme than it really is.
	
9.	 Whenever one suspects that a missing the point fallacy is being committed, one 
should be able to state the conclusion that is logically implied by the premises.
	
10.	 In the red herring fallacy, the arguer attempts to lead the reader or listener off 
the track.
	III.	Identify the fallacies committed in the following dialogue. You should be able to 
find at least one case of each fallacy presented in this section.
Food for Thought
“Let’s hit the produce section first,” Curtis says to his fiancée Talia, as they enter Payless 
grocery store. 
	
“Okay,” she says.
	
“Oh, look,” says Curtis. “The corn is on sale. Let’s get some for dinner.”
	
“I don’t know,” says Talia. “Did you see that sign over the display? The corn is geneti-
cally modified. I know we’ve never paid much attention to that sign in the past, but now 
I’m thinking that maybe we should.”
	
“Why’s that?” asks Curtis.
	
“I read an article the other day about genetically modified foods—they call them GM 
foods—and now I know what’s behind this GM business,” Talia replies. 
	
“And what is behind it?” Curtis asks.
	
Talia picks up an ear and sniffs it. “For starters,” she says, “one of the reasons they 
modify corn is to make it resistant to herbicides like Roundup—you know, the stuff you 
spray on the weeds in the garden. So with GM corn the farmer can spray the whole field 
with Roundup, the weeds will die, and the cornstalks will be unaffected.”
	
“Sounds like a great way to grow corn,” Curtis says.
	
“Yes,” replies Talia, “but that means the corn contains a residue of Roundup. That’s 
definitely not good. Roundup kills human cells and causes birth defects.”
	
“Good grief,” says Curtis. “If what you say is right, I think there is only one conclusion: 
We must ban the sale of Roundup immediately.”
	
After pausing to scratch his head, he continues, “On the other hand, look at all the 
people who are buying this corn. If everyone is buying it, then I think we should, too.”
SECTION 3.2 Fallacies of Relevance   141

3
	
“You’re right that everyone is buying it,” says Talia. “Nearly 90 percent of the corn 
sold in this country is genetically modified. But that doesn’t mean that we should buy it. 
Look, there’s a small display of organic corn over there. Let’s get some of that.”
	
“Now wait just a minute,” says Curtis. “You better not be going organic on me. 
That would be too much. You know I like to eat out at least once a week, and most 
restaurants don’t serve organic food. If you insist on organic, then you will stay at home 
cooking your own food, while I go out.”
	
“Well, maybe I could eat conventional restaurant food once in a while,” says Talia. 
“But organic food has become really appealing these days. That actor Christian Slater 
promotes it in magazine ads. And some of my friends say that he is really sexy and that 
you look like him! Maybe you should think about switching to organic.”
	
“I look like Christian Slater?” asks Curtis, looking flattered. “Wow! Maybe you’re 
right. But now that you’ve raised the issue, that reminds me of something. Didn’t you 
tell me a while back that you had an uncle who grew organic food? If he makes a lot of 
money, you might inherit it. I bet that’s what’s behind this organic thing of yours.”
	
“Not at all,” says Talia. “But I’m glad you mentioned the farmers. Some of these 
people have invested every cent they have in growing organic food. If consumers don’t 
buy it, these poor, hardworking farmers will all go broke. We really can’t let that hap-
pen. They’ve put their heart and soul into growing really healthy food for people like you 
and me. We can’t let them down.”
	
“And here’s another consideration,” continues Talia. “A basic principle of morality 
says that we should help others in need. The owner of this grocery store needs for 
people to buy his organic produce. Thus, I think we have an obligation to buy it.”
	
“Ha, ha,” Curtis laughs. “According to that argument we also have a moral obligation 
to buy the GM food. I don’t think we have a moral obligation to buy anything. But now 
that I think of it, you’ve always been a bit resistant to anything new. When iPads came 
out, you didn’t want one, you didn’t want a flat-screen TV, and now you don’t want GM 
corn. You should be more open to scientific developments.”
	
Talia smirks. “And what about you?” she asks. “You seem to think technology can 
solve all our problems. By that line of reasoning, we should have robots serving our ev-
ery need. Robot doctors, robot lawyers, robot cooks, robot grade-school teachers. But 
robots will never replace human beings. Human beings have feelings. They have hopes 
and fears and they love each other. Robots don’t love anything.”
	
“I know nothing about robots,” says Curtis, “but getting back to corn, just compare 
this GM corn with the organic corn in the other bin. The GM corn looks larger and 
more appetizing than the organic. In fact, we do lots of things these days to make veg-
etables look more appetizing and grow better. For example, we add fertilizer to the soil. 
Nitrogen is an important ingredient in these fertilizers, and so is phosphorus and potas-
sium.”
	
“I didn’t realize you knew so much about fertilizer,” Talia says. “I need some fertilizer 
for my flower garden. Could you recommend something?”
	
“Yes, I could. But in the meantime, shall we get some corn?” Curtis asks as he selects 
two ears from the GM bin.
	
Talia takes one ear from his hand and puts it back. She then crosses over to the or-
ganic bin, tucks an ear under her arm, and smiles at Curtis. “One for you, one for me,” 
she says.
142   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

3
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   143
3.3	
Fallacies of Weak Induction
PREVIEW    You have your heart set on getting a little Pomeranian puppy to keep you company 
during long hours of study, but your roommate is dead set against it. She argues that a former roommate 
of hers got a pit bull to keep her company, and the dog attacked a visitor, causing serious injury. The les-
son is obvious: The Pomeranian will be nothing but trouble. Is your roommate’s argument a good one? 
Read the current section for further analysis of arguments such as this.
The fallacies of weak induction occur not because the premises are logically irrel-
evant to the conclusion, as is the case with the eight fallacies of relevance, but because 
the connection between premises and conclusion is not strong enough to support the 
conclusion. In each of the following fallacies, the premises provide at least a shred of 
evidence in support of the conclusion, but the evidence is not nearly good enough to 
cause a reasonable person to believe the conclusion. Like the fallacies of relevance, 
however, the fallacies of weak induction often involve emotional grounds for believing 
the conclusion.
9.  Appeal to Unqualified Authority  
(Argumentum ad Verecundiam)
We saw in Chapter 1 that an argument from authority is an inductive argument in 
which an arguer cites the authority or testimony of another person in support of some 
conclusion. The appeal to unqualified authority fallacy is a variety of the argument 
from authority and occurs when the cited authority or witness lacks credibility. There 
are several reasons why an authority or witness might lack credibility. The person 
might lack the requisite expertise, might be biased or prejudiced, might have a motive 
to lie or disseminate “misinformation,” or might lack the requisite ability to perceive or 
recall. The following examples illustrate these reasons:
Dr. Bradshaw, our family physician, has stated that the creation of muonic atoms of deu-
terium and tritium hold the key to producing a sustained nuclear fusion ­reaction at room 
temperature. In view of Dr. Bradshaw’s expertise as a physician, we must conclude that 
this is indeed true.
This conclusion deals with nuclear physics, and the authority is a family physician.  
Because it is unlikely that a physician would be an expert in nuclear physics, the  
argument commits an appeal to unqualified authority.
David Duke, former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, has stated, “Jews are not good 
Americans. They have no understanding of what America is.” On the basis of Duke’s 
authority, we must therefore conclude that the Jews in this country are un-American.

144   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
As an authority, David Duke is clearly biased, so his statements cannot be trusted.
James W. Johnston, former Chairman of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, testified before 
Congress that tobacco is not an addictive substance and that smoking cigarettes does 
not produce any addiction. Therefore, we should believe him and conclude that smoking 
does not in fact lead to any addiction.
If Mr. Johnston had admitted that tobacco is addictive, it would have opened the door 
to government regulation, which could put his company out of business. Thus, because 
Johnston had a clear motive to lie, we should not believe his statements.
Old Mrs. Furguson (who is practically blind) has testified that she saw the defendant stab 
the victim with a bayonet while she was standing in the twilight shadows 100 yards from 
the incident. Therefore, members of the jury, you must find the defendant guilty.
Here the witness lacks the ability to perceive what she has testified to, so her testimony 
is untrustworthy.
Of course if an authority is credible, the resulting argument will contain no fallacy. 
Example:
The county tax collector issued a press release stating that property tax revenues are higher 
this year than last. Therefore, we conclude that these revenues are indeed higher this year.
Normally a county tax collector would be considered a qualified expert in the area of 
tax revenues, so assuming the tax collector has no reason to lie, this argument is induc-
tively strong.
In deciding whether a person is a qualified authority, one should keep two impor-
tant points in mind. First, the person might be an authority in more than one field. For 
example, a chemist might also be an authority in biology, or an economist might also be 
an authority in law. The second point is that there are some areas in which practically 
no one can be considered an authority. Such areas include politics, morals, and reli-
gion. For example, if someone were to argue that abortion is immoral because a certain 
philosopher or religious leader has said so, the argument would be weak regardless of 
the authority’s qualifications. Many questions in these areas are so hotly contested that 
there is no conventional wisdom an authority can depend on.
A = Arguer
Au = Unqualiﬁed
authority
Au
Appeal to unqualiﬁed
authority
A
Cites
Conclusion
Asserts 
© Cengage Learning 2015

3
10. Appeal to Ignorance  
(Argumentum ad Ignorantiam)
When the premises of an argument state that nothing has been proved one way or 
the other about something, and the conclusion then makes a definite assertion about 
that thing, the argument commits an appeal to ignorance. The issue usually involves 
something that is incapable of being proved or something that has not yet been proved. 
Example:
People have been trying for centuries to provide conclusive evidence for the claims of 
astrology, and no one has ever succeeded. Therefore, we must conclude that astrology 
is a lot of nonsense.
Conversely, the following argument commits the same fallacy.
People have been trying for centuries to disprove the claims of astrology, and no one 
has ever succeeded. Therefore, we must conclude that the claims of astrology are true.
The premises of an argument are supposed to provide positive evidence for the con-
clusion. The premises of these arguments, however, tell us nothing about astrology; 
rather, they tell us about what certain unnamed and unidentified people have tried 
unsuccessfully to do. This evidence may provide some slight reason for believing the 
conclusion, but certainly not sufficient reason.
Premise:
Nobody has proved
that X is true.
Conclusion:
X is false.
Appeal to ignorance
These examples do, however, lead us to the first of two important exceptions to 
the appeal to ignorance. The first stems from the fact that if qualified researchers 
investigate a certain phenomenon within their range of expertise and fail to turn up 
any evidence that the phenomenon exists, this fruitless search by itself constitutes 
positive evidence about the question. Consider, for example, the following argument:
Teams of scientists attempted over several decades to detect the existence of the  
luminiferous aether, and all failed to do so. Therefore, the luminiferous aether does not exist.
The premises of this argument are true. Given the circumstances, it is likely that the 
scientists in question would have detected the aether if in fact it did exist. Since they 
did not detect it, it probably does not exist. Thus, we can say that the given argument is 
inductively strong (but not deductively valid).
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   145

146   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
As for the two arguments about astrology, if the attempts to prove or disprove the  
astrological claims had been done in a systematic way by qualified experts, the arguments  
would more likely be good. Exactly what is required to qualify someone to investigate  
astrological claims is, of course, difficult to say. But as these arguments stand, the premises  
state nothing about the qualifications of the investigators, and so the arguments remain 
fallacious.
It is not always necessary, however, that the investigators have special qualifications. 
The kinds of qualifications needed depend on the situation. Sometimes the mere ability 
to see and report what one sees is sufficient. Example:
No one has ever seen Mr. Andrews drink a glass of wine, beer, or any other alcoholic 
beverage. Probably Mr.  Andrews is a nondrinker.
Because it is highly probable that if Mr. Andrews were a drinker, somebody would have 
seen him drinking, this argument is inductively strong. No special qualifications are 
needed to be able to see someone take a drink.
The second exception to the appeal to ignorance relates to courtroom procedure. 
In the United States and a few other countries, a person is presumed innocent until 
proven guilty. If the prosecutor in a criminal trial fails to prove the guilt of the defen-
dant beyond reasonable doubt, counsel for the defense may justifiably argue that his or 
her client is not guilty. Example:
Members of the jury, you have heard the prosecution present its case against the defen-
dant. Nothing, however, has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, under 
the law, the defendant is not guilty.
This argument commits no fallacy because “not guilty” means, in the legal sense, that 
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt has not been proved. The defendant may indeed 
have committed the crime of which he or she is accused, but if the prosecutor fails 
to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant is considered “not guilty.”
11.  Hasty Generalization (Converse Accident)
Hasty generalization is a fallacy that affects inductive generalizations. In Chapter 1 we 
saw that an inductive generalization is an argument that draws a conclusion about all 
members of a group from evidence that pertains to a selected sample. The fallacy oc-
curs when there is a reasonable likelihood that the sample is not representative of the 
group. Such a likelihood may arise if the sample is either too small or not randomly 
selected. Here are two examples:
Today’s money managers are a pack of thieves, every last one of them. Look at Bernie 
Madoff and Robert Allen Stanford. They ripped off billions of dollars from thousands of 
trusting clients. And Raj Rajaratnam profited to the tune of millions of dollars through 
illegal insider trading.
Before the last presidential election, three residents of Harlem were quoted as saying 
they supported Barack Obama even though they knew nothing about his policies. Obvi-
ously the issues played no role in the outcome of that election.
In these arguments a conclusion about a whole group is drawn from premises that 
mention only a few instances. Because such small, atypical samples are not sufficient to 
support a general conclusion, each argument commits a hasty generalization.

3
The mere fact that a sample is small, however, does not necessarily mean that it is 
atypical. On the other hand, the mere fact that a sample is large does not guarantee that 
it is typical. In the case of small samples, various factors may intervene that render such 
a sample typical of the larger group. Examples:
Ten milligrams of substance Z was fed to four mice, and within two minutes all four went 
into shock and died. Probably substance Z, in this amount, is fatal to mice in general.
On three separate occasions I drank a bottle of Figowitz beer and found it flat and bitter. 
Probably I would find every bottle of Figowitz beer flat and bitter.
Neither of these arguments commits the fallacy of hasty generalization, because in nei-
ther case is there any likelihood that the sample is atypical of the group. In the first 
argument the fact that the mice died in only two minutes suggests the existence of a 
causal connection between eating substance Z and death. If there is such a connection, 
it would hold for other mice as well. In the second example the fact that the taste of beer 
typically remains constant from bottle to bottle causes the argument to be strong, even 
though only three bottles were sampled.
In the case of large samples, if the sample is not random, it may not be typical of the 
larger group. Example:
One hundred thousand voters from Orange County, California, were surveyed on their 
choice for governor, and 68 percent said they intend to vote for the Republican candi-
date. Clearly the Republican candidate will be elected.
Even though the sample cited in this argument is large, the argument commits a hasty 
generalization. The problem is that Orange County is overwhelmingly Republican, so 
the mere fact that 68 percent intend to vote for the Republican candidate is no indica-
tion of how others in the state intend to vote. In other words, the survey was not con-
ducted randomly, and for this reason the sample is biased. The need for randomness in 
samples is discussed further in Chapter 12 of this book.
Hasty generalization is otherwise called “converse accident” because it proceeds in a 
direction opposite to that of accident. Whereas accident proceeds from the general to 
the particular, converse accident moves from the particular to the general. The prem-
ises cite some characteristic affecting one or more atypical instances of a certain class, 
and the conclusion then applies that characteristic to all members of the class.
Speciﬁc case(s)
(not representative)
General rule
Generalization
Hasty
generalization
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   147

148   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
T
he English philosopher and theologian, William 
of Ockham, was born in or near the village of 
Ockham not far from London. Little is known 
about his childhood, and his biographers are not even 
certain about the year of his birth, with estimates run-
ning from 1280 to 1290. However, they are certain 
that while Ockham was still a small boy, his parents 
delivered him to the nearest Franciscan monastery to 
be brought up in the monastic way of life. His parents’ 
intentions were realized when he entered the Francis-
can Order and was ordained in 1306.
Ockham studied theology at Oxford, possibly 
under Duns Scotus, and he lectured there. He also 
studied and taught at the University of Paris, where 
he wrote extensively on theology and philosophy.  
Ockham’s theological views generated controversy  
among theologians of the day, some of whom  
vehemently opposed him. In 1324, he was called to  
Avignon, then the location of the papal court, to answer  
charges of heresy.
A panel of scholars had been appointed to review 
the charges made against Ockham, and he was obliged 
to remain at a Franciscan house in Avignon through-
out the investigation, which lasted four years. During 
this time, the Franciscan minister general, Michael of 
Cesena, was called to Avignon, because he had be-
come embroiled in a controversy with Pope John XXII 
over the issue of the poverty of Jesus and the apostles. 
Michael held that Jesus and the apostles did not own 
property but instead survived through goodwill offer-
ings of people in the community. The Franciscans re-
garded themselves as emulating the model set by Jesus 
and the apostles, but the pope, who lived in luxury, 
obviously disagreed.
Though Ockham had more than enough prob-
lems of his own, the minister general asked him to 
research the issue 
to see which po-
sition was right—
the pope’s or the 
minister general’s. 
Ockham ultimately 
came out on the 
side of the minis-
ter general, claim-
ing that the pope 
was a heretic and 
had no business 
even being pope. 
This got the Avi-
gnon Franciscans into a great deal of trouble, and to 
extricate themselves they purloined several horses 
and rode out of town in the middle of the night.  
Ludwig of Bavaria, the Holy Roman Emperor, gave 
them protection, and Ockham lived out the rest of 
his life in Munich. While there he turned his attention 
to politics and political philosophy. He was a staunch  
advocate of the separation of church and state, claiming 
that the pope had no right to intervene in state affairs. 
The pope retaliated by excommunicating him.
Ockham is best known for endorsing a principle 
of parsimony that has come to be called “Ockham’s 
razor.” This principle states that, among alternative 
explanations, the simplest one is the best. Ockham 
emphasized the importance of keeping the number 
of entities hypothesized in an explanation to an abso-
lute minimum. In the area of logic, he is known for his 
theory of truth conditions for categorical propositions, 
for work in the foundations of inductive reasoning, for 
preliminary work on a three-valued logic, and for de-
veloping a close approximation to what would later 
come to be known as De Morgan’s rule.
William of Ockham ca. 1285–1347
eminentlogicians
© The Granger Collection, New York
3

3
12.  False Cause
The fallacy of false cause occurs whenever the link between premises and conclusion 
depends on some imagined causal connection that probably does not exist. Whenever 
an argument is suspected of committing the false cause fallacy, the reader or listener 
should be able to say that the conclusion depends on the supposition that X causes Y, 
whereas X probably does not cause Y at all. Examples:
During the past two months, every time that the cheerleaders have worn blue ribbons 
in their hair, the basketball team has been defeated. Therefore, to prevent defeats in the 
future, the cheerleaders should get rid of those blue ribbons.
Successful business executives are paid salaries in excess of $100,000. Therefore, the best 
way to ensure that Ferguson will become a successful executive is to raise his salary to 
at least $100,000.
There are more laws on the books today than ever before, and more crimes are being 
committed than ever before. Therefore, to reduce crime we must eliminate the laws.
The first argument depends on the supposition that the blue ribbons caused the defeats, 
the second on the supposition that a high salary causes success, and the third on the sup-
position that laws cause crime. In no case is it likely that any causal connection exists.
The first argument illustrates a variety of the false cause fallacy called post hoc ergo 
propter hoc (“after this, therefore on account of this”). This variety of the fallacy pre-
supposes that just because one event precedes another event, the first event causes the 
second. Obviously, mere temporal succession is not sufficient to establish a causal con-
nection. Nevertheless, this kind of reasoning is quite common and lies behind most 
forms of superstition. (Example: “A black cat crossed my path and later I tripped and 
sprained my ankle. It must be that black cats really are bad luck.”)
The second and third arguments illustrate a variety of the false cause fallacy called 
non causa pro causa (“not the cause for the cause”). This variety is committed when 
what is taken to be the cause of something is not really the cause at all and the mistake 
is based on something other than mere temporal succession. In reference to the sec-
ond argument, success as an executive causes increases in ­salary—not the other way 
around—so the argument mistakes the cause for the effect. In reference to the third ar-
gument, the increase in crime is, for the most part, only coincidental with the increase 
in the number of laws. Obviously, the mere fact that one event is coincidental with 
another is not sufficient reason to think that one caused the other.
A third variety of the false cause fallacy, and one that is probably committed more of-
ten than either of the others in their pure form, is oversimplified cause. This variety occurs 
when a multitude of causes is responsible for a certain effect but the arguer selects just 
one of these causes and represents it as if it were the sole cause. Here are some examples:
The quality of education in our grade schools and high schools has been declining for 
years. Clearly, our teachers just aren’t doing their job these days.
Today, all of us can look forward to a longer life span than our parents and grandparents. 
Obviously we owe our thanks to the millions of dedicated doctors who expend every 
effort to ensure our health.
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   149

150   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
In reference to the first argument, the decline in the quality of education is caused by 
many factors, including lack of discipline in the home, lack of parental involvement, too 
much television, too much time spent on video games, and drug use by students. Poor 
teacher performance is only one of these factors and probably a minor one at that. In the 
second argument, the efforts of doctors are only one among many factors responsible for 
our longer life span. Other, more important factors include a better diet, more exercise, 
reduced smoking, safer highways, and more-stringent occupational safety standards.
The oversimplified cause fallacy is usually motivated by self-serving interests. Some-
times the arguer wants to take undeserved credit for himself or herself or give unde-
served credit to some movement with which he or she is affiliated. At other times, the 
arguer wants to heap blame on an opponent or shift blame from himself or herself onto 
some convenient occurrence. Instances of the fallacy can resemble either the post hoc 
or the non causa pro causa varieties in that the alleged cause can occur either prior to 
or concurrently with the effect. It differs from the other varieties of false cause fallacy 
in that the single factor selected for credit or blame is often partly responsible for the 
effect, but responsible to only a minor degree.
The last variety of false cause we will consider is called the gambler’s fallacy. This fal-
lacy is committed whenever the conclusion of an argument depends on the ­supposition 
that independent events in a game of chance are causally related. Here is an example:
A fair coin was flipped five times in a row, and each time it came up heads. Therefore, it 
is extremely likely that it will come up tails on the next flip.
In fact, it is no more likely that the coin will come up tails on the next flip than it was on 
the first flip. Each flip is an independent event, so earlier flips have no causal influence 
on later ones. Thus, the fact that the earlier flips came up heads does not increase the 
likelihood that the next flip will come up tails.
For the gambler’s fallacy to be committed, the events must be independent or nearly 
independent. Such events include rolls of a pair of fair (unloaded) dice, spins of a fair 
roulette wheel, and selections of lottery winning numbers. Events are not completely in-
dependent whenever the skill of the gambler affects the outcome. Thus, poker, blackjack, 
and horse-race betting provide less-than-perfect candidates for the gambler’s fallacy.
The false cause fallacy is often convincing because it is often difficult to deter-
mine whether two phenomena are causally related. A lengthy time lapse between the  
Premises
Conclusion
Depends on nonexistent or
minor causal connection
False cause

3
operation of the cause and the occurrence of the effect can exacerbate the problem. 
For example, the thirty-year interval between exposure to asbestos and the onset of 
asbestosis impeded the recognition of a causal connection. Also, when two events are 
causally related, determining the degree of relatedness may be hard. Thus, there may 
be some connection between the electromagnetic field produced by high voltage trans-
mission lines and leukemia, but the connection may be extremely slight. Finally, when 
a causal connection is recognized, it may be difficult to determine which is the cause 
and which is the effect. For example, an allergic reaction may be connected with an 
episode of anxiety, but it may be hard to tell if the reaction causes the anxiety or if the 
anxiety causes the reaction.
The realm of human action constitutes another area in which causal connections are 
notoriously difficult to establish. For example, the attorneys for accused murderer Dan 
White argued that Twinkies, Coke, and potato chips caused him to kill San Francisco 
mayor George Moscone. Other attorneys have blamed their clients’ crimes on PMS, rap 
music, childhood abuse, mental retardation, and hallucinations. The complex nature 
of human motivation renders all such causal claims difficult to evaluate. The situation 
may become even worse when a whole nation of people are involved. Thus, the recent 
drop in crime rates has been attributed to “three strikes” laws, but it is difficult to say 
whether this or some other factor is really responsible.
One point that should be kept in mind when establishing causal connections is that 
statistical correlations by themselves often reveal little about what is actually going on. 
For example, if all that we knew about smoking and lung cancer was that the two fre-
quently occur together, we might conclude any number of things. We might conclude 
that both have a common cause, such as a genetic predisposition, or we might conclude 
that lung cancer is a disease contracted early in life and that it manifests itself in its early 
stages by a strong desire for tobacco. Fortunately, in this case we have more evidence 
than a mere statistical correlation. This additional evidence inclines us to believe that 
the smoking is a cause of the cancer.
13.  Slippery Slope
The fallacy of slippery slope is a variety of the false cause fallacy. It occurs when the 
conclusion of an argument rests on an alleged chain reaction and there is not sufficient 
reason to think that the chain reaction will actually take place. Here is an example:
Immediate steps should be taken to outlaw pornography once and for all. The continued 
manufacture and sale of pornographic material will almost certainly lead to an increase 
in sex-related crimes such as rape and incest. This in turn will gradually erode the moral  
fabric of society and result in an increase in crimes of all sorts. Eventually a complete disin-
tegration of law and order will occur, leading in the end to the total collapse of civilization.
Because there is no good reason to think that the mere failure to outlaw pornography 
will result in all these dire consequences, this argument is fallacious. An equally falla-
cious counterargument is as follows:
Attempts to outlaw pornography threaten basic civil rights and should be summarily 
abandoned. If pornography is outlawed, censorship of newspapers and news magazines 
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   151

152   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
is only a short step away. After that there will be censorship of textbooks, political 
speeches, and the content of lectures delivered by university professors. Complete mind 
control by the central government will be the inevitable result.
Both arguments attempt to persuade the reader or listener that the welfare of society 
rests on a “slippery slope” and that a single step in the wrong direction will result in an 
inevitable slide all the way to the bottom.
The slippery slope fallacy can involve various kinds of causality. For example, some-
one might argue that removing a single brick from a building would set off a chain reac-
tion leading to the destruction of the building, or that chopping down a tall tree would 
set off a cascade of falling trees leading to the destruction of the forest. These arguments 
depend on pure physical causality. On the other hand, someone might argue that start-
ing a rumor about the health of the economy would set off a chain reaction leading to 
the collapse of the stock market. Such an argument would depend on the kind of causal-
ity found in interpersonal communications.
The following example involves a chain reaction of mental causes where wanting one 
thing leads to wanting another.
Professor Fallon has asked us to purchase a coffeemaker for her office. But we shouldn’t 
do that because next she’ll want a microwave, and then a convection oven. Then she’ll 
want a full-sized refrigerator, a sink with hot and cold water, a dishwasher, and a complete 
set of expensive china. This will exhaust the budget of our department.
Deciding whether a slippery slope fallacy has been committed can be difficult when 
one is uncertain whether the alleged chain reaction will or will not occur. This ques-
tion is discussed in Section 3.5. But many slippery slopes rest on a mere emotional 
conviction on the part of the arguer that a certain action or policy is bad, and the arguer 
attempts to trump up support for his or her position by citing all sorts of dire conse-
quences that will result if the action is taken or the policy followed. In such cases there 
is usually little problem in identifying the argument as a slippery slope.
Chain reaction
(not likely to occur)
Slippery slope
Disaster
Innocent
ﬁrst step
14. Weak Analogy
This fallacy affects inductive arguments from analogy. As we saw in Chapter 1, an argu-
ment from analogy is an argument in which the conclusion depends on the existence of 

3
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   153
an analogy, or similarity, between two things or situations. The fallacy of weak analogy 
is committed when the analogy is not strong enough to support the conclusion that is 
drawn. Example:
Amber’s dog is similar in many ways to Kyle’s cat. Both like being petted, they enjoy being 
around people, they beg for food at the dinner table, and they sleep with their owners. 
Amber’s dog loves to romp on the beach with Amber. Therefore, Kyle’s cat probably 
loves to romp on the beach with Kyle.
In this argument the similarities cited between Amber’s dog and Kyle’s cat probably 
have nothing to do with the cat’s attitude toward romping on the beach. Thus, the argu-
ment is fallacious.
The basic structure of an argument from analogy is as follows:
Entity A has attributes a, b, c, and z.
Entity B has attributes a, b, c.
Therefore, entity B probably has attribute z also.
Evaluating an argument having this form requires a two-step procedure: (1) Identify 
the attributes a, b, c, . . . that the two entities A and B share, and (2) determine how 
the attribute z, mentioned in the conclusion, relates to the attributes a, b, c, . . . If some 
causal or systematic relation exists between z and a, b, or c, the argument is strong; oth-
erwise, it is weak. In the given example, the two entities share the attributes of ­liking to 
be petted, enjoying people, begging for food, and sleeping with their owners. Because 
it is highly probable that none of these attributes is systematically or causally related to 
romping on the beach, the argument is fallacious.
Premises
Conclusion
Depends on inadequate
analogy
Weak analogy
As an illustration of when the requisite systematic or causal relation does and does 
not exist, consider the following arguments:
The flow of electricity through a wire is similar to the flow of water through a pipe. 
Obviously a large-diameter pipe will carry a greater flow of water than a pipe of small 
diameter. Therefore, a large-diameter wire should carry a greater flow of electricity than 
a small-diameter wire.

3
The flow of electricity through a wire is similar to the flow of water through a pipe. 
When water runs downhill through a pipe, the pressure at the bottom of the hill is 
greater than it is at the top. Thus, when electricity flows downhill through a wire, the 
voltage should be greater at the bottom of the hill than at the top.
The first argument is good and the second is fallacious. Both arguments depend on the  
similarity between water molecules flowing through a pipe and electrons flow­ing 
through a wire. In both cases there is a systematic relation between the diameter of 
the pipe/wire and the amount of flow. In the first argument this systematic relation 
provides a strong link between premises and conclusion, and so the argument is a 
good one. But in the second argument a causal connection exists between difference in  
elevation and increase in pressure that holds for water but not for electricity. Water 
molecules flowing through a pipe are significantly affected by gravity, but electrons 
flowing through a wire are not. Thus, the second argument is fallacious.
The theory and evaluation of arguments from analogy is one of the most complex 
and elusive subjects in all of logic. Additional material on arguments from analogy  
appears in Section 3.5 and Chapter 9 of this text.
EXERCISE 3.3	
	 I.	 Identify the fallacies of weak induction committed by the following arguments, giv-
ing a brief explanation for your answer. If no fallacy is committed, write “no fallacy.”
	
★1.	 The Daily News carried an article this morning about three local teenagers 
who were arrested on charges of drug possession. Teenagers these days are 
nothing but a bunch of junkies.
	
2.	 If a car breaks down on the freeway, a passing mechanic is not obligated to 
render emergency road service. For similar reasons, if a person suffers a heart 
attack on the street, a passing physician is not obligated to render emergency 
medical assistance.
	
3.	 There must be something to psychical research. Three famous physicists— 
Oliver Lodge, James Jeans, and Arthur Stanley Eddington—took it seriously.
	
★4.	 The secretaries have asked us to provide lounge areas where they can spend 
their coffee breaks. This request will have to be refused. If we give them lounge 
areas, next they’ll be asking for spas and swimming pools. Then it will be rac-
quet ball courts, tennis courts, and fitness centers. Expenditures for these fa-
cilities will drive us into bankruptcy.
	
5.	 The accumulation of pressure in a society is similar to the buildup of pressure 
in a boiler. If the pressure in a boiler increases beyond a critical point, the 
boiler will explode. Accordingly, if a government represses its people beyond a 
certain point, the people will rise up in revolt.
	
6.	 A few minutes after Governor Harrison finished his speech on television, a 
devastating earthquake struck southern Alaska. For the safety of the people up 
there, it is imperative that Governor Harrison make no more speeches.
154   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	
★7.	 No one has ever been able to prove the existence of extrasensory perception. 
We must therefore conclude that extrasensory perception is a myth.
	
8.	 Lester Brown, universally respected author of the yearly State of the World re-
port, has said that the destruction of tropical rain forests is one of the ten most 
serious worldwide problems. Thus, it must be the case that this is indeed a 
very serious problem.
	
9.	 Bill Gates and Warren Buffet give millions of dollars to charitable causes every 
year. It must be the case that all wealthy people give huge amounts of money to 
charity every year.
	 ★10.	 North Korean leader Kim Jong-un says that his country’s nuclear program is 
purely for peaceful purposes. Therefore, given Mr. Kim’s familiarity with that 
program, we should not think for a moment that he plans to use it to develop 
nuclear weapons.
	
11.	 Probably no life exists on Venus. Teams of scientists have conducted exhaus-
tive studies of the planet’s surface and atmosphere, and no living organisms 
have been found.
	
12.	 We don’t dare let the animal-rights activists get their foot in the door. If they 
sell us on the idea that dogs, cats, and dolphins have rights, next it will be 
chickens and cows. That means no more chicken Kiev or prime rib. Next it 
will be worms and insects. This will lead to the decimation of our agricultural 
industry. The starvation of the human race will follow close behind.
	 ★13.	 No one would buy a pair of shoes without trying them on. Why should anyone 
be expected to get married without premarital sex?
	
14.	 No one has proved conclusively that America’s nuclear power plants constitute 
a danger to people living in their immediate vicinity. Therefore, it is perfectly 
safe to continue to build nuclear power plants near large metropolitan centers.
	
15.	 There are more churches in New York City than in any other city in the nation, 
and more crimes are committed in New York City than anywhere else. So, if 
we are to eliminate crime, we must abolish the churches.
	II.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 If an arguer cites a statement by a recognized expert in support of a conclusion 
and the statement falls within the expert’s range of expertise, then the arguer 
commits an appeal to unqualified authority.
	
2.	 If an arguer cites a statement in support of a conclusion and the statement 
reflects the strong bias of its author, then the arguer commits an appeal to 
unqualified authority.
	
3.	 In the appeal to ignorance, the arguer accuses the reader or listener of being 
ignorant.
	
4.	 If an attorney for the defense in an American or Canadian criminal trial argues 
that the prosecution has proved nothing beyond a reasonable doubt about the 
guilt of the defendant, then the attorney commits an appeal to ignorance.
	
5.	 Hasty generalization always proceeds from the particular to the general.
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   155

3
	
6.	 The post hoc ergo propter hoc variety of the false cause fallacy presumes that X 
causes Y merely because X happens before Y.
	
7.	 If an argument concludes that X causes Y simply because X and Y occur over 
the same time interval, then the argument commits the non causa pro causa 
variety of the false cause fallacy.
	
8.	 If the conclusion of an argument depends on the occurrence of a chain  
reaction of events, and there is good reason to believe that the chain reaction 
will actually occur, the argument commits a slippery slope fallacy.
	
9.	 The fallacy of weak analogy always depends on an alleged similarity between 
two things or situations.
	
10.	 If an argument from analogy depends on a causal or systematic relationship 
between certain attributes, and there is good reason to believe that this rela-
tionship exists, then the argument commits no fallacy.
	III.	Identify the fallacies of relevance and weak induction committed by the following 
arguments. If no fallacy is committed, write “no fallacy.”
	
★1.	 On our first date, George had his hands all over me, and I found it nearly 
impossible to keep him in his place. A week ago Tom gave me that stupid line 
about how, in order to prove my love, I had to spend the night with him. Men 
are all alike. All any of them want is sex.
	
2.	 Tagging by graffiti artists has become a terrible problem in recent years. Obvi-
ously our schools are stifling the creative spirit of these young people.
	
3.	 According to certain reports, when Barack Obama was a youngster he  
attended a Muslim seminary in Indonesia for four years. Others say that when 
he was sworn in as a senator he placed his hand on a Koran instead of a Bible. 
And some say he bears a striking resemblance to the Antichrist. Moreover, 
countless e-mail messages speak of Muslim sleeper cells hidden away in every 
branch of the government. Could they all be linked to Obama? Just imagine, 
he gives the signal and they all spring into action. In no time our Constitution 
is replaced by Sharia law. We can’t wait a minute longer. Obama must be im-
peached and removed from office.
	
★4.	 Todd Burpo, the best-selling author, argues in his book that heaven is real and 
that his son Colton met Jesus and John the Baptist in a near-death experience. 
But it’s clear that Burpo says these things only to sell lots of books. Therefore, 
his arguments have no merit.
	
5.	 What the farmer sows in the spring he reaps in the fall. In the spring he sows 
$8-per-bushel soybeans. Therefore, in the fall he will reap $8-per-bushel soy-
beans.
	
6.	 World-renowned physicist Stephen Hawking claims that black holes do not 
gobble up everything that falls into them without leaving a trace, but that 
something is always left behind. Given Hawking’s stature as a scientist and the 
many years he has worked on this problem, we should conclude that this is 
indeed the case.
156   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	
★7.	 Emily has bought over 100 tickets on the weekly state lottery, and she has 
never won anything. Therefore, the likelihood increases every week that she 
will win something if she continues to buy tickets.
	
8.	 Johnny, of course I deserve the use of your bicycle for the afternoon. After all, 
I’m sure you wouldn’t want your mother to find out that you played hooky 
today.
	
9.	 Practically everyone downloads music free of charge from the Internet these 
days. Therefore, you should have no qualms about doing this yourself.
	 ★10.	 Ellen Quinn has argued that logic is not the most important thing in life.  
Apparently Ellen advocates irrationality. It has taken two million years for the 
human race to achieve the position that it has, and Ellen would throw the 
whole thing into the garbage. What utter nonsense!
	
11.	 When water is poured on the top of a pile of rocks, it always trickles down to 
the rocks on the bottom. Similarly, when rich people make lots of money, we 
can expect this money to trickle down to the poor.
	
12.	 Extensive laboratory tests have failed to prove any deleterious side effects of 
the new painkiller lexaprine. We conclude that lexaprine is safe for human 
consumption.
	 ★13.	 Environmentalists accuse us of blocking the plan to convert Antarctica into 
a world park. In fact, nothing could be further from the truth. Antarctica is a 
huge continent teeming with life. It is the home of millions of penguins, seals, 
sea birds, and sea lions. Also, great schools of finfish and whales inhabit its 
coastal waters.
	
14.	 Michael Moore, the documentary filmmaker, argues that capitalist institu-
tions are ravaging America’s middle class and walking away with billions of 
dollars in their pockets. But Moore is just a big, fat, populist rabble-rouser, and 
a multimillionaire to boot. He should keep his mouth shut.
	
15.	 The operation of a camera is similar in many ways to the operation of an eye. 
If you are to see anything in a darkened room, the pupils of your eyes must 
first dilate. Accordingly, if you are to take a photograph (without flash) in a 
darkened room, the aperture of the camera lens must first be increased.
	 ★16.	 Certainly Miss Malone will be a capable and efficient manager. She has a  
great figure, a gorgeous face, and tremendous poise, and she dresses very  
fashionably.
	
17.	 James Dobson, founder of Focus on the Family, says that men have the divine 
obligation to lead their families, and women have the divine obligation to sub-
mit to their husband’s authority. Given Dobson’s apparent ability to receive 
messages from God, we must conclude that this statement is absolutely true.
	
18.	 Dear Internal Revenue Service: I received a notice that my taxes are being 
audited for last year. But you have no right to do this. The deadline for filing 
a return was April 15, and I filed my tax return on April 12—a full three days 
before the deadline.
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   157

3
	 ★19.	 To prevent dangerous weapons from being carried aboard airliners, those 
seeking to board must pass through a magnetometer and submit to a possible 
pat-down search. Therefore, to prevent alcohol and drugs from being carried 
into rock concerts, those entering should submit to similar search procedures.
	
20.	 Mr. Flemming’s arguments against the rent-control initiative on the Septem-
ber ballot should be taken with a grain of salt. As a landlord he would natu-
rally be expected to oppose the initiative.
	
21.	 India is suffering a serious drought, thousands of children are dying of starva-
tion in their mothers’ arms, and homeless beggars line the streets of the major 
cities. Surely we must give these poor downtrodden people the chance of bet-
tering their condition in America, the land of wealth and opportunity.
	 ★22.	 Members of the jury, you have heard Shirley Gaines testify that the defendant 
did not offer to perform acts of prostitution for the undercover police officer. 
But Gaines is a known prostitute herself and a close friend of the defendant. 
Also, only a year ago she was convicted of twelve counts of perjury. Therefore, 
you should certainly discount Gaines’s testimony.
	
23.	 It is ridiculous to hear that man from Peru complaining about America’s pov-
erty. Peru has twice as much poverty as America has ever had.
	
24.	 Angela complains that the problems on the algebra test were too hard. But 
have you ever seen the way Angela flirts with that good-looking quarterback 
on the football team? She’s constantly batting those long, black eyelashes at 
him, and her tight-fitting sweaters leave nothing to the imagination. Angela 
should pay more attention to her studies.
	 ★25.	 Nobody has ever proved that immoral behavior by elected officials erodes 
public morality. Therefore, we must conclude that such behavior does not 
erode public morality.
	
26.	 Freedom of speech is guaranteed by the First Amendment. Therefore, your 
friend was acting within his rights when he shouted “Fire! Fire!” in that 
crowded theater, even though it was only a joke.
	
27.	 No one, on encountering a watch lying on a forest trail, would expect that it 
had simply appeared there without having been made by someone. For the 
same reason, no one should expect that the universe simply appeared without 
having been made by some being.
	 ★28.	 On Monday I drank ten rum and Cokes, and the next morning I woke up with 
a headache. On Wednesday I drank eight gin and Cokes, and the next morn-
ing I woke up with a headache. On Friday I drank nine bourbon and Cokes, 
and the next morning I woke up with a headache. Obviously, to prevent fur-
ther headaches I must give up Coke.
	
29.	 Radio entertainer Rush Limbaugh claims there is not a shred of evidence to 
prove that nicotine is addictive or that cigarettes cause emphysema, lung cancer, 
or any other disease. Given Limbaugh’s apparent expertise in medical science, 
we can only conclude that what he says about nicotine and cigarettes is true.
158   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	
30.	 Some of the parents in our school district have asked that we provide bilingual 
education in Spanish. This request will have to be denied. If we provide this 
service, then someone will ask for bilingual education in Greek. Then it will 
be German, French, and Hungarian. Polish, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, and 
Korean will follow close behind. We certainly can’t accommodate all of them.
	IV.	 Identify the fallacies committed in the following dialogue. You should be able to 
find at least one case of each fallacy presented in this section and one case of a fal-
lacy presented in the previous section.
Gun Love
Holly and her friend Ben have just attended a panel discussion in response to a recent 
shooting on a college campus. As they leave the auditorium and head for the parking lot, 
Holly asks, “Do you agree with any of the panelists?”
	 “I agree with the panelist who said that guns should be banned on every campus,” 
Ben replies. “And I would even go a step further and say that we need strict gun control 
throughout the U.S. The simple fact is that guns are way too available in this country.”
	 “Sounds like you’re saying that the availability of guns leads to violent crime,” Holly 
says. “Is that what you’re saying?”
	 “Yes, I do think guns lead to crime,” Ben replies.
	 “Well, let me ask you this,” Holly says. “Has anybody ever proved that? Has anybody 
ever proved that the mere availability of guns leads to violent crime? The answer is no. 
So until somebody proves that it does, we should conclude that that gun availability does 
not lead to violence.”
	 “Well, you heard what one of the panelists said about England, didn’t you?” Ben asks. 
“England has strict limitations on gun possession, and practically no gun-related crime.  
I think that proves that guns do cause crime. If the U.S. would adopt the English law, crime 
in this country would drop like a rock.”
	 “In fact,” Holly counters, “the England example proves nothing of the sort. There’s no 
reason to think that what works in England would also work in the U.S.”
	 “Why do you think that?” Ben asks.
	 “Well,” Holly responds, “you recall what the other panelist said about gun control in 
this country. When Evanston, Illinois, banned guns altogether a few years back, that led to 
no reduction at all in violent crime. That shows that gun availability does not cause crime. 
If every city in the country followed Evanston’s example, they would get the same result.”
	 “Sounds like you’re pretty negative on gun control,” Ben observes.
	 “Yes, I am,” Holly replies. “As soon as we have gun registration, the next thing you 
know we’ll need a license to buy a gun. And that will lead the government to impose a 
tax on gun ownership. Taxes always increase, and when gun owners are no longer able to 
pay the tax, that will lead to gun confiscation. Finally, when guns are completely removed 
from the hands of the public, there will be nothing to prevent some wild-eyed fanatic 
from taking over the government. Complete totalitarianism will follow in no time.”
	 “Do you really think that could happen in this country?” Ben asks.
	 “If it happened in Nazi Germany, it could happen here,” she replies. “And, as one of the 
panelists said, it did happen in Nazi Germany, and Fascist Italy, too.”
	 “So, do you think you have a right to own a gun?” Ben asks.
SECTION 3.3 Fallacies of Weak Induction   159

160   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
	 “Absolutely,” Holly replies. “The current president of the NRA—his name escapes me 
at the moment—says that the right to own a gun, even an assault weapon, is guaranteed 
by the Constitution. Given that he knows a lot about guns, what he says about them is 
certainly true.”
	 “I’ll withhold judgment on that,” says Ben. “But here’s what I think you should do.  
You should take a couple deep breaths and calm down. You’ve turned into a gun nut. If 
people see what’s happened to you, they won’t take any of your arguments seriously.”
	 “Think what you want about me,” Holly says. “But the next time you’re robbed at 
gunpoint, don’t come crying in my direction.”
	 Ben laughs. “Okay, I promise I won’t. Well, see you around . . . if I survive!”
	 “See you!” she says.
3.4	
Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity,  
and Illicit Transference
PREVIEW    You’re out on a blind date. Initially you hit it off really well, but then your date says, 
“It’s obvious that we’re physically attracted to each other. So, either we spend the night together or it’s 
clear that you’re not interested in me.” Regardless of how you might be inclined to respond to your date’s 
proposition, do you at least feel a bit uneasy about it? If not, you should, because it amounts to a com-
mon logical fallacy. To learn more about it, and others like it, read through this section of the book.
The fallacies of presumption include begging the question, complex question, false 
dichotomy, and suppressed evidence. These fallacies arise not because the premises 
are irrelevant to the conclusion or provide insufficient reason for believing the con-
clusion but because the premises presume what they purport to prove. Begging the  
question presumes that the premises provide adequate support for the conclusion when 
in fact they do not, and complex question presumes that a question can be answered by 
a simple “yes,” “no,” or other brief answer when a more sophisticated answer is needed. 
False dichotomy presumes that an “either . . . or . . .” statement presents jointly exhaus-
tive alternatives when in fact it does not, and suppressed evidence presumes that no 
important evidence has been overlooked by the premises when in fact it has.
The fallacies of ambiguity include equivocation and amphiboly. These fallacies arise 
from the occurrence of some form of ambiguity in either the premises or the conclu-
sion (or both). As we saw in Section 2.1, an expression is ambiguous if it is susceptible 
to different interpretations in a given context. The words “light” and “bank” are am-
biguous, as is the statement “Tuna are biting off the Washington coast.” When the con-
clusion of an argument depends on a shift in meaning of an ambiguous word or phrase 
or on the wrong interpretation of an ambiguous statement, the argument commits a 
fallacy of ambiguity.
3
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

3
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   161
The fallacies of illicit transference include composition and division. Arguments 
that commit these fallacies involve the incorrect transference of an attribute from the 
parts of something onto the whole, or from the whole onto the parts.
15.  Begging the Question (Petitio Principii)
The fallacy of begging the question is committed whenever the arguer creates the  
illusion that inadequate premises provide adequate support for the conclusion by leaving 
out a possibly false (shaky) key premise, by restating a possibly false premise as the con-
clusion, or by reasoning in a circle. The Latin name for this fallacy, petitio principii, means 
“request for the source.” The actual source of support for the conclusion is not apparent, 
and so the argument is said to beg the question. After reading or hearing the argument, 
the observer is inclined to ask, “But how do you know X?” where X is the needed support.
Premise
Shaky key
premise
(missing)
Conclusion
Begging the question
1.
Shaky premise
Conclusion
(restates
premise)
2.
Shaky premise
Conclusion
Conclusion
Conclusion
3.
The first, and most common, way of committing this fallacy is by leaving a possibly 
false key premise out of the argument while creating the illusion that nothing more is 
needed to establish the conclusion. Examples:
Murder is morally wrong. This being the case, it follows that abortion is morally wrong.
We know that humans are intended to eat lots of fruit because the human hand and arm 
are perfectly suited for picking fruit from a tree.
It’s obvious that the poor in this country should be given handouts from the government. 
After all, these people earn less than the average citizen.
Clearly, terminally ill patients have a right to doctor-assisted suicide. After all, many of 
these people are unable to commit suicide by themselves.
The first of these arguments begs the question “How do you know that abortion is 
a form of murder?” The second begs the question “Does the structure and function of 
the human hand and arm tell us what humans should eat?” And the third and fourth 
beg the questions “Just because the poor earn less than the average citizen, does this 
imply that the government should give them handouts?” and “Just because terminally 

162   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
ill patients cannot commit suicide by themselves, does it follow that they have a right 
to a doctor’s assistance?”
These questions indicate that something has been left out of the original arguments. 
Thus, the first argument is missing the premise “Abortion is a form of murder”; the sec-
ond is missing the premise “The structure and function of the human hand and arm tell 
us what humans should eat”; and so on. These premises are crucial for the soundness 
of the arguments. If the arguer is unable to establish the truth of these premises, then 
the arguments prove nothing. However, in most cases of begging the question, this is 
precisely the reason why such premises are left unstated. The arguer is not able to estab-
lish their truth, and by employing rhetorical phraseology such as “of course,” “clearly,” 
“this being the case,” and “after all,” the arguer hopes to create the illusion that the stated 
premise, by itself, provides adequate support for the conclusion when in fact it does not.
The same form of begging the question often appears in arguments concerning re-
ligious topics to justify conclusions about the existence of God, the immortality of the 
soul, and so on. Example:
The world in which we live displays an amazing degree of organization. Obviously this 
world was created by an intelligent God.
This argument begs the question “How do you know that the organization in the 
world could only have come from an intelligent creator?” Of course the claim that it 
did come from an intelligent creator may well be true, but the burden is on the arguer 
to prove it. Without supporting reasons or evidence, the argument proves nothing. Yet 
most people who are predisposed to believe the conclusion are likely to accept the ar-
gument as a good one. The same can be said of most arguments that beg the question, 
and this fact suggests another reason why arguers resort to this fallacy: Such arguments 
tend to reinforce preexisting inclinations and beliefs.
The second form of petitio principii occurs when the conclusion of an argument 
merely restates a possibly false premise in slightly different language. In such an argu-
ment, the premise supports the conclusion, and the conclusion tends to reinforce the 
premise. Examples:
Capital punishment is justified for the crimes of murder and kidnapping because it is 
quite legitimate and appropriate that someone be put to death for having committed 
such hateful and inhuman acts.
Anyone who preaches revolution has a vision of the future for the simple reason  
that if a person has no vision of the future he could not possibly preach revolution.
In the first argument, saying that capital punishment is “justified” means the same thing 
as saying that it is “legitimate and appropriate,” and in the second argument the premise 
and the conclusion say exactly the same thing. However, by repeating the same thing 
in slightly different language, the arguer creates the illusion that independent evidence 
is being presented in support of the conclusion, when in fact it is not. Both arguments 
contain rhetorical phraseology (“hateful and inhuman,” “simple reason,” and “could not 
possibly”) that help effect the illusion. The first argument begs the question “How do 
you know that capital punishment really is legitimate and ­appropriate?” and the second  

3
begs the question “How do you know that people who preach revolution really do have 
a vision of the future?”
The third form of petitio principii involves circular reasoning in a chain of inferences 
having a first premise that is possibly false. Example:
Verizon has the best wireless service. After all, their phones have the clearest sound. 
And we know this is so because customers hear better on Verizon phones. And this  
follows from the fact that Verizon has digital technology. But this is exactly what you would  
expect given that Verizon has the best wireless service.
On encountering this argument, the attentive reader is inclined to ask, “Where does 
this reasoning begin? What is its source?” Since the argument goes in a circle, it has no 
beginning or source, and as a result it proves nothing. Of course, in this example the 
circularity is rather apparent, so the argument is not likely to convince anyone. Cases 
in which circular reasoning may convince involve long and complex arguments having 
premises that depend on one another in subtle ways and a possibly false key premise 
that depends on the conclusion.
In all cases of begging the question, the arguer uses some linguistic device to cre-
ate the illusion that inadequate premises provide adequate support for a conclusion. 
Without such an illusion, the fallacy is not committed. Thus, the following arguments 
commit no fallacy:
No dogs are cats.
Therefore, no cats are dogs.
London is in England and Paris is in France.
Therefore, Paris is in France and London is in England.
In both of these examples, the premise amounts to little more than a restatement of 
the conclusion. Yet both arguments are sound because they are valid and have true 
premises. No fallacy is committed, because no illusion is created to make inadequate 
premises appear as adequate. We will study arguments of this sort in Chapters 4 and 7.
Here is another example:
Rome is in Germany or Rome is in Germany.
Therefore, Rome is in Germany.
This argument is valid, but it is unsound because it has a false premise. However, it 
commits no fallacy because, again, no illusion is created to cover anything up. Argu-
ments having this form also appear in Chapter 7.
As with these examples, arguments that beg the question are normally valid. This is 
easy to see. Any argument that includes the conclusion as one of the premises is clearly 
valid, and those forms of the fallacy that leave a key premise out of the argument be-
come valid when that key premise is introduced. The problem with arguments that beg 
the question is that they are usually unsound, or at least not clearly sound, because the 
premise needed to provide adequate support for the conclusion is, at best, of uncertain 
truth value. Because such arguments presume the truth of this premise, begging the 
question is called a fallacy of presumption.
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   163

164   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
16.  Complex Question
The fallacy of complex question is committed when two (or more) questions are asked in 
the guise of a single question and a single answer is then given to both of them. Every com-
plex question presumes the existence of a certain condition. When the respondent’s answer 
is added to the complex question, an argument emerges that establishes the presumed con-
dition. Thus, although not an argument as such, a complex question involves an implicit 
argument. This argument is usually intended to trap the respondent into acknowledging 
something that he or she might otherwise not want to acknowledge. Examples:
Have you stopped cheating on exams?
Where did you hide the marijuana you were smoking?
Let us suppose the respondent answers “yes” to the first question and “under the bed” 
to the second. The following arguments emerge:
You were asked whether you have stopped cheating on exams. You answered, “Yes.” 
Therefore, it follows that you have cheated in the past.
You were asked where you hid the marijuana you were smoking. You replied, “Under the 
bed.” It follows that you were in fact smoking marijuana.
On the other hand, let us suppose that the respondent answers “no” to the first question 
and “nowhere” to the second. We then have the following arguments:
You were asked whether you have stopped cheating on exams. You answered, “No.” 
Therefore, you continue to cheat.
You were asked where you hid the marijuana you were smoking. You answered,  
“Nowhere.” It follows that you must have smoked all of it.
Obviously, each of the questions is really two questions:
Did you cheat on exams in the past? If you did cheat in the past, have you stopped now?
Were you smoking marijuana? If you were smoking it, where did you hide it?
If respondents are not sophisticated enough to identify a complex question when 
one is put to them, they may answer quite innocently and be trapped by a conclusion 
that is supported by no evidence at all; or, they may be tricked into providing the evi-
dence themselves. The correct response lies in resolving the complex question into its 
component questions and answering each separately.
Completed
argument
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
Complex
question
Responds 
A
Attempts to trap
by asking question
R/L
© Cengage Learning 2015

3
The fallacy of complex question should be distinguished from another kind of ques-
tion known in law as a leading question. A leading question is one in which the answer 
is in some way suggested in the question. Whether or not a question is a leading one is 
important in the direct examination of a witness by counsel. Example:
Tell us, on April 9, did you see the	
 
defendant shoot the deceased?	
(leading question)
Tell us, what did you see on April 9?	
(straight question)
Leading questions differ from complex questions in that they involve no logical 
­fallacies—that is, they do not attempt to trick the respondent into admitting some-
thing he or she does not want to admit. To distinguish between the two, however, one 
sometimes needs to know whether prior questions have been asked. Here are some 
additional examples of complex questions:
Are you going to be a good little boy and eat your hamburger?
Is George Hendrix still telling lies?
How long must I put up with your snotty behavior?
When are you going to stop talking nonsense?
17.  False Dichotomy
The fallacy of false dichotomy is committed when a disjunctive (“either . . . or . . .”) 
premise presents two unlikely alternatives as if they were the only ones available, and 
the arguer then eliminates the undesirable alternative, leaving the desirable one as the 
conclusion. Such an argument is clearly valid, but since the disjunctive premise is false, 
or at least probably false, the argument is typically unsound. The fallacy is often com-
mitted by children when arguing with their parents, by advertisers, and by adults gen-
erally. Here are three examples:
Either you let me attend the Lady Gaga concert or I’ll be miserable for the rest of my 
life. I know you don’t want me to be miserable for the rest of my life, so it follows that 
you’ll let me attend the concert.
Either you use Ultra Guard deodorant or you risk the chance of perspiration odor. 
Surely you don’t want to risk the chance of perspiration odor. Therefore, you will want 
to use Ultra Guard deodorant.
Either we adopt a one-world government, or regional wars will continue forever. We 
certainly can’t tolerate constant war. Therefore, we must adopt a one-world government.
In none of these arguments does the disjunctive premise present the only alterna-
tives available, but in each case the arguer tries to convey that impression. For example, 
in the first argument, the arguer tries to convey the impression that he or she either 
goes to the concert or faces a lifetime of misery, and that no other alternatives are pos-
sible. Clearly, however, this is not the case.
The fallacious nature of false dichotomy lies in the creation of an illusion that the 
disjunctive premise presents jointly exhaustive alternatives. If it did, the premise would 
be true of necessity. For example, the statement “Either Reno is in Nevada, or it is not 
in Nevada” presents jointly exhaustive alternatives and is true of necessity. But in the  
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   165

166   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
fallacy of false dichotomy, not only do the two alternatives fail to be jointly exhaus-
tive, but they are not even likely. As a result, the disjunctive premise is false, or at least  
probably false. Thus, the fallacy amounts to making a false or probably false premise 
appear true.
Also, if one of the alternatives in the disjunctive premise is factually true beyond any 
doubt, then the fallacy is not committed. For example, the following argument is valid 
and sound:
Either Seattle is in Washington, or it is in Oregon.
Seattle is not in Oregon.
Therefore, Seattle is in Washington
False dichotomy is otherwise called “false bifurcation” and the “either-or fallacy.” 
Also, in most cases the arguer expresses only the disjunctive premise and leaves it to the 
reader or listener to supply the missing statements:
Either you buy me a new mink coat, or I’ll freeze to death when winter comes.
Either I continue smoking, or I’ll get fat and you’ll hate to be seen with me.
The missing premise and conclusion are easily introduced.
18.  Suppressed Evidence
Chapter 1 explained that a cogent argument is an inductive argument with good rea-
soning and true premises. The requirement of true premises includes the proviso that 
the premises not ignore some important piece of evidence that outweighs the presented 
evidence and entails a very different conclusion. If an inductive argument does indeed 
ignore such evidence, then the argument commits the fallacy of suppressed evidence. 
Consider, for example, the following argument:
Most dogs are friendly and pose no threat to people who pet them. Therefore, it would 
be safe to pet the little dog that is approaching us now.
If the arguer ignores the fact that the little dog is excited and foaming at the mouth 
(which suggests rabies), then the argument commits a suppressed evidence fallacy. This 
fallacy is classified as a fallacy of presumption because it works by creating the pre-
sumption that the premises are both true and complete when in fact they are not.
Perhaps the most common occurrence of the suppressed evidence fallacy appears 
in inferences based on advertisements. Nearly every ad neglects to mention certain 
negative features of the product advertised. As a result, an observer who sees or hears 
an advertisement and then draws a conclusion from it may commit the fallacy of sup-
pressed evidence. Example:
The ad for Kentucky Fried Chicken says, “Buy a bucket of chicken and have a barrel of fun!” 
Therefore, if we buy a bucket of that chicken, we will be guaranteed to have lots of fun.
The ad fails to state that the fun does not come packaged with the chicken but must 
be supplied by the buyer. Also, of course, the ad fails to state that the chicken is loaded 
with fat and that the buyer’s resultant weight gain and clogged arteries may not amount 
to a barrel of fun. By ignoring these facts, the argument based on the ad is fallacious.

3
Another rich source of the suppressed evidence fallacy is the biennial U.S. general 
election in which two candidates, usually a Republican and a Democrat, compete with 
each other for a single office. During the campaign leading up to the election countless 
speech makers (including the candidates themselves) tear down the policies and ac-
complishments of the candidate they oppose only to conclude that the candidate they 
favor should be elected. Example:
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Smith has supported policies that will bankrupt Medicare 
and Social Security, his budgetary recommendations increase the federal deficit, and his  
approach to foreign policy will destabilize the Middle East. Therefore, you should vote 
to elect Jones to this office.
What the speaker fails to mention are the many undisputed successes that Smith has 
achieved. Also, he fails to mention that Jones is even less qualified than Smith for the 
office, and that Jones’s policies bode even worse for Medicare, Social Security, the fed-
eral deficit, and the Middle East. When these unmentioned facts are taken into account 
it becomes clear that it is actually Smith who should be elected.
Another way that an arguer can commit the suppressed evidence fallacy is by  
ignoring important events that have occurred with the passage of time that render an 
inductive conclusion improbable. 
The following argument resembles one that Mitt Romney used in a presidential  
debate with Barack Obama:
The U.S. military has fewer battleships, M1 rifles, and horse-drawn howitzers today than 
it did in 1940. Therefore, the U.S. military is a less effective fighting force today than it 
was in 1940.
The argument ignores that fact that battleships, M1 rifles, and horse-drawn  
howitzers became obsolete long ago and have been replaced by more-effective ships 
and weaponry. Thus, it is not true that the U.S. military is less effective today than it was  
in 1940.
Premises
Conclusion
Ignores stronger evidence that
supports a diﬀerent conclusion
Suppressed evidence
Yet another form of suppressed evidence is committed by arguers who quote  
passages out of context from sources such as the Bible, the Constitution, and the Bill of 
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   167

168   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
Rights to support a conclusion that the passage was not intended to support. Consider, 
for example, the following argument against gun control:
The Second Amendment to the Constitution states that the right of the people to keep 
and bear arms shall not be infringed. But a law controlling handguns would infringe the right 
to keep and bear arms. Therefore, a law controlling handguns would be unconstitutional.
In fact, the Second Amendment reads, “A well regulated militia being necessary to the 
security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.” 
In other words, the constitutional right to keep and bear arms is in some way related 
to the preservation of a well-regulated militia. Arguably a law controlling hand guns  
that is unrelated to the preservation of a well-regulated militia could be constitutional.
The suppressed evidence fallacy is similar to the form of begging the question in 
which the arguer leaves a key premise out of the argument. The difference is that sup-
pressed evidence leaves out a premise that requires a different conclusion, while that 
form of begging the question leaves out a premise that is needed to support the stated 
conclusion. However, because both fallacies proceed by leaving a premise out of the 
argument, there are cases where the two fallacies overlap.
19.  Equivocation
The fallacy of equivocation occurs when the conclusion of an argument depends on 
the fact that a word or phrase is used, either explicitly or implicitly, in two different 
senses in the argument. Such arguments are either invalid or have a false premise, and 
in either case they are unsound. Examples:
Some triangles are obtuse. Whatever is obtuse is ignorant. Therefore, some triangles are 
ignorant.
Any law can be repealed by the legislative authority. But the law of gravity is a law. 
Therefore, the law of gravity can be repealed by the legislative authority.
We have a duty to do what is right. We have a right to speak out in defense of the in-
nocent. Therefore, we have a duty to speak out in defense of the innocent.
A mouse is an animal. Therefore, a large mouse is a large animal.
In the first argument “obtuse” is used in two different senses. In the first premise it de-
scribes a certain kind of angle, whereas in the second it means dull or stupid. The sec-
ond argument equivocates on the word “law.” In the first premise it means statutory law, 
and in the second it means law of nature. The third argument uses “right” in two senses. 
In the first premise “right” means morally correct, but in the second it means a just 
claim or power. The fourth argument illustrates the ambiguous use of a relative word.  
The word “large” means different things depending on the context. Other relative 
words that are susceptible to this same kind of ambiguity include “small,” “good,” “bad,” 
“light,” “heavy,” “difficult,” “easy,” “tall,” and “short.”
To be convincing, an argument that commits an equivocation must use the equivo-
cal word in ways that are subtly related. Of the examples just given, only the third might 
fulfill this requirement. Since both uses of the word “right” are related to ­ethics, the 

3
unalert observer may not notice the shift in meaning. Another technique is to spread 
the shift in meaning out over the course of a lengthy argument. Political speech mak-
ers often use phrases such as “equal opportunity,” “gun control,” “national security,” 
and “environmental protection” in one way at the beginning of a speech and in quite 
another way at the end. A third technique consists in using such phrases one way in 
a speech to one group and in a different way in a speech to an opposing group. If the 
same people are not present at both speeches, the equivocation is not detected.
20. Amphiboly
The fallacy of amphiboly occurs when the arguer misinterprets an ambiguous state-
ment and then draws a conclusion based on this faulty interpretation. The original 
statement is usually asserted by someone other than the arguer, and the ambiguity usu-
ally arises from a mistake in grammar or punctuation—a missing comma, a dangling 
modifier, an ambiguous antecedent of a pronoun, or some other careless arrangement 
of words. Because of this ambiguity, the statement may be understood in two clearly 
distinguishable ways. The arguer typically selects the unintended interpretation and 
proceeds to draw a conclusion based on it. Here are some examples:
The tour guide said that standing in Greenwich Village, the Empire State Building could 
easily be seen. It follows that the Empire State Building is in Greenwich Village.
John told Henry that he had made a mistake. It follows that John has at least the courage 
to admit his own mistakes.
Professor Johnson said that he will give a lecture about heart failure in the biology lec-
ture hall. It must be the case that a number of heart failures have occurred there recently.
The premise of the first argument contains a dangling modifier. Is it the observer or 
the Empire State Building that is supposed to be standing in Greenwich Village? The 
factually correct interpretation is the former. In the second argument the pronoun “he” 
has an ambiguous antecedent; it can refer either to John or to Henry. Perhaps John 
told Henry that Henry had made a mistake. In the third argument the ambiguity con-
cerns what takes place in the biology lecture hall; is it the lecture or the heart failures? 
The correct interpretation is probably the former. The ambiguity can be eliminated by  
Word or phrase
used in two senses
Equivocation
Premises
Conclusion
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   169

170   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
inserting commas (“Professor Johnson said that he will give a lecture, about heart fail-
ure, in the biology lecture hall”) or by moving the ambiguous modifier (“Professor 
Johnson said that he will give a lecture in the biology lecture hall about heart failure”). 
Ambiguities of this sort are called syntactical ambiguities.
Two areas where cases of amphiboly cause serious problems involve contracts and 
wills. The drafters of these documents often express their intentions in terms of am-
biguous statements, and alternate interpretations of these statements then lead to dif-
ferent conclusions. Examples:
Mrs. Hart stated in her will, “I leave my 500-carat diamond necklace and my pet chinchilla 
to Alice and Theresa.” Therefore, we conclude that Alice gets the necklace and Theresa 
gets the chinchilla.
Mr. James signed a contract that reads, “In exchange for painting my house, I promise 
to pay David $5,000 and give him my new Cadillac only if he finishes the job by May 1.” 
Therefore, since David did not finish until May 10, it follows that he gets neither the 
$5,000 nor the Cadillac.
In the first example the conclusion obviously favors Alice. Theresa is almost certain 
to argue that the gift of the necklace and chinchilla should be shared equally by her 
and Alice. Mrs. Hart could have avoided the dispute by adding either “respectively” or 
“collectively” to the end of the sentence. In the second example, the conclusion favors 
Mr. James. David will argue that the condition that he finish by May 1 affected only the 
Cadillac and that he therefore is entitled to the $5,000. The dispute could have been 
avoided by properly inserting a comma in the language of the promise.
Amphiboly differs from equivocation in two important ways. First, equivocation is 
always traced to an ambiguity in the meaning of a word or phrase, whereas amphiboly 
involves a syntactical ambiguity in a statement. The second difference is that amphiboly 
usually involves a mistake made by the arguer in interpreting an ambiguous statement 
made by someone else, whereas the ambiguity in equivocation is typically the arguer’s 
own creation. If these distinctions are kept in mind, it is usually easy to distinguish 
amphiboly from equivocation. Occasionally, however, the two fallacies occur together, 
as the following example illustrates:
Premises
Conclusion
Mentions ambiguous
statement
Misinterprets
that statement
Amphiboly

3
The Great Western Cookbook recommends that we serve the oysters when thoroughly 
stewed. Apparently the delicate flavor is enhanced by the intoxicated condition of the diners.
First, it is unclear whether “stewed” refers to the oysters or to the diners, and so the ar-
gument commits an amphiboly. But if “stewed” refers to the oysters it means “cooked,” 
and if it refers to the diners it means “intoxicated.” Thus, the argument also involves an 
equivocation.
21.  Composition
The fallacy of composition is committed when the conclusion of an argument depends 
on the erroneous transference of an attribute from the parts of something onto the 
whole. In other words, the fallacy occurs when it is argued that because the parts have 
a certain attribute, it follows that the whole has that attribute, too, and the situation 
is such that the attribute in question cannot be legitimately transferred from parts to 
whole. Examples:
Maria likes anchovies. She also likes chocolate ice cream. Therefore, it is certain that she 
would like a chocolate sundae topped with anchovies.
Each player on this basketball team is an excellent athlete. Therefore, the team as a whole 
is excellent.
Each atom in this teacup is invisible. Therefore, this teacup is invisible.
Sodium and chlorine, the atomic components of salt, are both deadly poisons. Therefore, 
salt is a deadly poison.
In these arguments the attributes that are transferred from the parts onto the whole 
are designated by the words “Maria likes,” “excellent,” “invisible,” and “deadly poison,”  
respectively. In each case the transference is illegitimate, and so the argument is fallacious.
Not every such transference is illegitimate, however. Consider the following arguments:
Every atom in this teacup has mass. Therefore, this teacup has mass.
Every component in this picket fence is white. Therefore, the whole fence is white.
In each case an attribute (having mass, being white) is transferred from the parts onto 
the whole, but these transferences are quite legitimate. Indeed, the fact that the atoms 
have mass is the very reason why the teacup has mass. The same reasoning extends to 
the fence. Thus, the acceptability of these arguments is attributable, at least in part, to 
the legitimate transference of an attribute from parts onto the whole.
These examples illustrate the fact that the fallacy of composition is indeed an  
informal fallacy. It cannot be discovered by a mere inspection of the form of an  
argument—that is, by the mere observation that an attribute is being transferred from 
parts onto the whole. In addition, detecting this fallacy requires a general knowledge 
of the situation and of the nature of the attribute being transferred. The critic must be 
certain that, given the situation, the transference of this particular attribute is incorrect.
Further caution is required by the fact that composition is sometimes confused with 
hasty generalization. The only time this confusion is possible is when the “whole” is a 
class (such as the class of people in a city or the class of trees in a forest), and the “parts” 
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   171

172   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
are the members of the class. In such a case composition proceeds from the members of 
the class to the class itself. Hasty generalization, on the other hand, proceeds from the 
specific to the general. Because it is sometimes easy to mistake a statement about a class 
for a general statement, composition can be mistaken for hasty generalization. Such a 
mistake can be avoided if one is careful to keep in mind the distinction between these 
two kinds of statements. This distinction falls back on the difference between the collec-
tive and the distributive predication of an attribute. Consider the following statements:
Fleas are small.
Fleas are numerous.
The first statement is a general statement. The attribute of being small is predicated 
distributively; that is, it is assigned (or distributed) to each and every flea in the class. 
Each and every flea in the class is said to be small. The second statement, on the other 
hand, is a statement about a class as a whole, or what we will call a “class statement.” The 
attribute of being numerous is predicated collectively; in other words, it is assigned not 
to the individual fleas but to the class of fleas. The meaning of the statement is not that 
each and every flea is numerous but that the class of fleas is large.
To distinguish composition from hasty generalization, therefore, the following pro-
cedure should be followed. Examine the conclusion of the argument. If the conclusion 
is a general statement—that is, a statement in which an attribute is predicated distribu-
tively to each and every member of a class—the fallacy committed is hasty generaliza-
tion. But if the conclusion is a class statement—that is, a statement in which an attribute 
is predicated collectively to a class as a whole—the fallacy is composition. Example:
Less fuel is consumed by a car than by a fire truck. Therefore, less fuel is consumed in the 
United States by cars than by fire trucks.
At first sight this argument might appear to proceed from the specific to the general 
and, consequently, to commit a hasty generalization. But in fact the conclusion is not a 
Whole
Attribute is
improperly transferred
Composition
Parts

3
general statement at all but a class statement. The conclusion states that the whole class 
of cars uses less fuel than does the whole class of fire trucks (which is false, because 
there are many more cars than fire trucks). Since the attribute of using less fuel is predi-
cated collectively, the fallacy committed is composition.
22.  Division
The fallacy of division is the exact reverse of composition. As composition goes from 
parts to whole, division goes from whole to parts. The fallacy is committed when the 
conclusion of an argument depends on the erroneous transference of an attribute from 
a whole (or a class) onto its parts (or members). Examples:
Salt is a nonpoisonous compound. Therefore, its component elements, sodium and chlo-
rine, are nonpoisonous.
This airplane was made in Seattle. Therefore, every component part of this airplane was 
made in Seattle.
The Royal Society is over 300 years old. Professor Thompson is a member of the Royal 
Society. Therefore, Professor Thompson is over 300 years old.
In each case the attribute, designated respectively by the terms “nonpoisonous,” “made 
in Seattle,” and “over 300 years old,” is illegitimately transferred from the whole or class 
onto the parts or members. As with the fallacy of composition, however, this kind of 
transference is not always illegitimate. The following arguments contain no fallacy:
This teacup has mass. Therefore, the atoms that compose this teacup have mass.
This field of poppies is uniformly orange. Therefore, the individual poppies are orange.
Obviously, one must be acquainted with the situation and the nature of the attribute 
being transferred to decide whether the fallacy of division is actually committed.
Just as composition can sometimes be confused with hasty generalization (converse 
accident), division can sometimes be confused with accident. As with composition, 
Whole
Attribute is
improperly transferred
Division
Parts
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   173

3
this confusion can occur only when the “whole” is a class. In such a case, division pro-
ceeds from the class to the members, whereas accident proceeds from the general to 
the specific. Thus, if a class statement is mistaken for a general statement, division may 
be mistaken for accident. To avoid such a mistake, one should analyze the premises of 
the argument. If the premises contain a general statement, the fallacy committed is ac-
cident; but if they contain a class statement, the fallacy is division. Example:
Stanley Steamers have almost disappeared.
This car is a Stanley Steamer.
Therefore, this car has almost disappeared.
The first premise is not a general statement but a class statement. The attribute of hav-
ing almost disappeared is predicated collectively. Accordingly, the fallacy committed is 
division, not accident.
This example also illustrates how cases of division that involve class statements can 
include a subtle form of equivocation. In the conclusion, the word “disappeared” means 
fading from vision, as when the lights are turned down; but in the first premise it means 
rarely seen. The equivocation is a kind of secondary fallacy that results from the pri-
mary fallacy, which is division.
The next example shows how division turns up in arguments dealing with averages.
The average American family has 2.5 children.
The Jones family is an average American family.
Therefore, the Jones family has 2.5 children.
The statement “The average American family has 2.5 children” is not a general statement, 
but rather a class statement. The sense of the statement is not that each and every family 
has 2.5 children, but that the class of families having two parents is reducible to about  
55 percent children and 45 percent adults. Thus, once again, the fallacy is division, and 
not accident.
EXERCISE 3.4	
	 I.	 Identify the fallacies of presumption, ambiguity, and illicit transference committed 
by the following arguments, giving a brief explanation for your answer. If no fal-
lacy is committed, write “no fallacy.”
	
★1.	 Either we require forced sterilization of Third World peoples or the world 
population will explode and all of us will die. We certainly don’t want to die, so 
we must require forced sterilization.
	
2.	 Every sentence in this paragraph is well written. Therefore, the paragraph is 
well written.
	
3.	 An athlete is a human being. Therefore, a good athlete is a good human being.
174   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	
★4.	 James said that he saw a picture of a beautiful girl stashed in Stephen’s locker. 
We can only conclude that Stephen has broken the rules, because girls are not 
allowed in the locker room.
	
5.	 Why is it so difficult for you to reach a decision?
	
6.	 Water will quench one’s thirst. Water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen. 
Therefore, hydrogen will quench one’s thirst, and so will oxygen.
	
★7.	 People who lack humility have no sense of beauty, because everyone who has 
a sense of beauty also has humility.
	
8.	 Butane is combustible. Therefore, it burns.
	
9.	 Twenty years ago, Kung Fong, the great sumo wrestler, could have yanked up 
one of the fir trees in the new municipal arboretum with a single pull. There-
fore, since Mr. Fong is as strong today as he was then, he could just as easily 
pull up one of those trees today.
	 ★10.	 If Thomas gives Marie a ring, then Thomas and Marie will be engaged.  
Thomas did give Marie a ring. In fact, he phoned her just the other night. 
Therefore, Thomas and Marie are engaged.
	
11.	 Alex, I heard your testimony in court earlier today. Tell me, why did you lie on 
the witness stand?
	
12.	 Johnson is employed by the General Services Administration, and everyone 
knows that the GSA is the most inefficient branch of the government. There-
fore, Johnson must be an inefficient worker.
	 ★13.	 All men are mortal. Therefore, someday man will disappear from the earth.
	
14.	 Each and every cell in this carrot is 90 percent water. Therefore, the entire 
­carrot is 90 percent water.
	
15.	 George said that he was interviewing for a job drilling oil wells in the supervi-
sor’s office. We can only conclude that the supervisor must have an awfully 
dirty office.
	 ★16.	 During the fifty years that Mr. Jones worked, he contributed $90,000 to Social 
Security. Now that he is retired, he stands to collect $200,000 from the system. 
Obviously he will collect a much greater monetary value than he contributed.
	
17.	 Either you marry me right now or I’ll be forced to leave you and never speak to 
you again. I’m sure you wouldn’t want me to do that. Therefore, you’ll marry 
me right now.
	
18.	 Either Meg Ryan or Britney Spears is a popular singer. Meg Ryan is not a pop-
ular singer. Therefore, Britney Spears is a popular singer.
	 ★19.	 Switzerland is 48 percent Protestant. Heidi Gilsing is a Swiss. Therefore, Heidi 
Gilsing is 48 percent Protestant.
	
20.	 Picasso is the greatest artist of the twentieth century. We know that this is 
so because art critics have described him in these terms. These art critics are 
correct in their assessment because they have a more keenly developed sense 
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   175

3
of appreciation than the average person. This is true because it takes a more 
keenly developed sense of appreciation to realize that Picasso is the greatest 
artist of the twentieth century.
	
21.	 An atomic bomb causes more damage than a conventional bomb. Therefore, 
during World War II more damage was caused by atomic bombs than by con-
ventional bombs.
	 ★22.	 Sylvia, I saw you shopping for wine the other day. Incidentally, are you still 
drinking excessively?
	
23.	 The author warns about numerous computational errors in his accounting 
text. Therefore, he must have written it very carelessly.
	
24.	 Emeralds are seldom found in this country, so you should be careful not to 
misplace your emerald ring.
	 ★25.	 Of course abortion is permissible. After all, a woman has a right to do as she 
pleases with her own body.
	II.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 Arguments that commit the fallacy of begging the question are normally valid.
	
2.	 The effect of begging the question is to hide the fact that a premise may not be 
true.
	
3.	 The correct way of responding to a complex question is to divide the question 
into its component questions and answer each separately.
	
4.	 False dichotomy always involves an “either . . . or . . .” statement, at least  
implicitly.
	
5.	 The fallacy of equivocation arises from a syntactical defect in a statement.
	
6.	 The fallacy of amphiboly usually involves the ambiguous use of a single word.
	
7.	 Amphiboly usually arises from the arguer’s misinterpreting a statement made 
by someone else.
	
8.	 The fallacy of composition always proceeds from whole to parts.
	
9.	 The fallacy of division always proceeds from parts to whole.
	
10.	 A general statement makes an assertion about each and every member of a 
class.
	
11.	 A class statement makes an assertion about a class as a whole.
	
12.	 In the statement “Divorces are increasing,” an attribute is predicated distribu-
tively.
	
13.	 In the statement “Waistlines are increasing,” an attribute is predicated distrib-
utively.
	
14.	 Composition and division involve the distributive predication of an attribute.
	
15.	 Equivocation and amphiboly are classified as fallacies of ambiguity.
176   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	III.	 Identify the fallacies of relevance, weak induction, presumption, ambiguity, and 
illicit transference committed by the following arguments, giving a brief explana-
tion for your answer. If no fallacy is committed, write “no fallacy.”
	
★1.	 In his History of the American Civil War, Jeffry Noland argues that the war had 
little to do with slavery. However, as a historian from Alabama, Noland could 
not possibly present an accurate account. Therefore, his arguments should be 
discounted.
	
2.	 Mr. Wilson said that on July 4 he went out on the veranda and watched the 
fireworks go up in his pajamas. We conclude that Mr. Wilson must have had 
an exciting evening.
	
3.	 Oregon State Representative Dennis Richardson says that the reason the Con-
necticut elementary school massacre occurred is because the teachers were 
not armed. Thus, to prevent future shootings of this sort we must make sure 
that every teacher in the United States is armed with a gun.
	
★4.	 A crust of bread is better than nothing. Nothing is better than true love. There-
fore, a crust of bread is better than true love.
	
5.	 Every member of the Delta Club is over 70 years old. Therefore, the Delta 
Club must be over 70 years old.
	
6.	 Of course you should eat Wheaties. Wheaties is the breakfast of champions, 
you know.
	
★7.	 Surely it’s morally permissible to kill animals for food. If God didn’t want us to 
eat animals, he wouldn’t have made them out of meat.
	
8.	 The idea that black people in this country live in poverty is ridiculous. Look 
at Oprah Winfrey. She’s a millionaire. And so are Denzel Washington, Morgan 
Freeman, and Michael Jordan.
	
9.	 No one has ever proved that the human fetus is not a person with rights. 
Therefore, abortion is morally wrong.
	 ★10.	 Giant pandas are rapidly disappearing. This animal is a giant panda. There-
fore, this animal should disappear any minute now.
	
11.	 When a car breaks down so often that repairs become pointless, the car is 
thrown on the junk heap. Similarly, when a person becomes old and diseased, 
he or she should be mercifully put to death.
	
12.	 The twenty-story Carson Building is constructed of concrete blocks. Each 
and every concrete block in the structure can withstand an earthquake of 9.5 
on the Richter scale. Therefore, the building can withstand an earthquake of  
9.5 on the Richter scale.
	 ★13.	 Childhood obesity is a major problem these days. Obviously our public health 
officials have not been doing their job.
	
14.	 This administration is not anti-German, as it has been alleged. Germany is 
a great country. It has contributed immensely to the world’s artistic treasury. 
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   177

3
Goethe and Schiller made magnificent contributions to literature, and Bach, 
Beethoven, Wagner, and Brahms did the same in music.
	
15.	 Paul, it was great to see you at the party the other night. Everyone there was 
doing crack. Incidentally, how long have you been dealing that stuff?
	 ★16.	 Texas oilman T. Boone Pickens says that natural-gas fracking is perfectly safe 
and poses no threat to the nation’s drinking water. Therefore we must con-
clude that fracking is just as safe as he claims it is.
	
17.	 Senator Barbara Boxer’s arguments for the protection of wilderness areas 
should be ignored. Boxer is just another one of those tree-hugging liberals 
who supports such legislation only to please the environmental nuts in her 
home state of California.
	
18.	 Professor Andrews, surely I deserve a B in logic. I know that I have gotten F’s 
on all the tests, but if you give me an F for my final grade, I will lose my schol-
arship. That will force me to drop out of school, and my poor, aged parents, 
who yearn to see me graduate, will be grief stricken for the rest of their lives.
	 ★19.	 Molecules are in constant random motion. The Statue of Liberty is composed 
of molecules. Therefore, the Statue of Liberty is in constant random motion.
	
20.	 Either we have prayer in our public schools or the moral fabric of society will 
disintegrate. The choice should be obvious.
	
21.	 White sheep eat more than black sheep (because there are more of them). 
Therefore, this white sheep eats more than that black sheep.
	 ★22.	 If someone rents a piece of land and plants crops on it, the landlord is never 
permitted to come and take those crops for himself when harvest time arrives. 
Similarly, if couples enlist the services of a surrogate mother to provide them 
with a baby, the mother should never be allowed to welch on the deal and keep 
the baby for herself once it is born.
	
23.	 Motives and desires exert forces on people, causing them to choose one thing 
over another. But force is a physical quantity, governed by the laws of physics. 
Therefore, human choices are governed by the laws of physics.
	
24.	 Each and every brick in the completely brick-faced Wainright Building has a 
reddish-brown color. Therefore, the Wainright Building has a reddish-brown 
color.
	 ★25.	 Humanitarian groups have argued in favor of housing for the poor. Unfortu-
nately, these high-density projects have been tried in the past and have failed. 
In no time they turn into ghettos with astronomical rates of crime and delin-
quency. Clearly, these humanitarian arguments are not what they seem.
	
26.	 Pauline said that after she had removed her new mink coat from the shipping 
carton she threw it into the trash. We conclude that Pauline has no apprecia-
tion for fine furs.
	
27.	 We know that induction will provide dependable results in the future because 
it has always worked in the past. Whatever has consistently worked in the past 
178   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
will continue to work in the future, and we know that this is true because it has 
been established by induction.
	 ★28.	 What goes up must come down. The price of food has been going up for years. 
Therefore, it will surely come down soon.
	
29.	 Mr. Prime Minister, I am certain you will want to release the members of our 
National Liberation Group whom you currently hold in prison. After all, I’m 
sure you will want to avoid having car bombs go off in the centers of your 
most heavily populated cities.
	
30.	 Recent studies have shown that non-organic food has the same vitamins, min-
erals, proteins, and other nutrients as organic food. Therefore, it’s just as good 
to eat non-organic food as organic food.
	 ★31.	 We’ve all heard the complaint that millions of Americans are without adequate 
health care. But America’s doctors, nurses, and hospitals are among the best 
in the world. Thousands of people come from abroad every year to be treated 
here. Clearly there is nothing wrong with our health-care system.
	
32.	 Real estate mogul Donald Trump argues that good management is essential 
to any business. But who is he to talk? Trump’s own mismanagement drove 
Trump Entertainment Resorts into bankruptcy three times in eighteen years.
	
33.	 The farmers of our state have asked that we introduce legislation to provide 
subsidies for soybeans. Unfortunately, we will have to turn down their request. 
If we give subsidies to the soybean farmers, then the corn and wheat growers 
will ask for the same thing. Then it will be the cotton growers, citrus growers, 
truck farmers, and cattle raisers. In the end, the cost will be astronomical.
	 ★34.	 The travel brochure states that walking up O’Connell Street, the statue of  
Parnell comes into view. Apparently that statue has no trouble getting around.
	
35.	 Criminals are basically stupid, because anyone who isn’t basically stupid 
wouldn’t be a criminal.
	
36.	 Professor Glazebrooks’s theory about the origin of the Martian craters is un-
doubtedly true. Rudolph Orkin, the great concert pianist, announced his sup-
port of the theory in this morning’s newspaper.
	 ★37.	 Mr. Franklin has lost at the craps table for the last ten throws of the dice. 
Therefore, it is extremely likely that he will win on the next throw.
	
38.	 Raising a child is like growing a tree. Sometimes violent things, such as ­cutting 
off branches, have to be done to force the tree to grow straight. Similarly, cor-
poral punishment must sometimes be inflicted on children to force them to 
develop properly.
	
39.	 Good steaks are rare these days, so don’t order yours well done.
	 ★40.	 The Book of Mormon is true because it was written by Joseph Smith. Joseph 
Smith wrote the truth because he was divinely inspired. We know that Joseph 
Smith was divinely inspired because the Book of Mormon says that he was, 
and the Book of Mormon is true.
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   179

3
	
41.	 The students attending Bradford College come from every one of the fifty 
states. Michelle attends Bradford College. Therefore, Michelle comes from 
every one of the fifty states.
	
42.	 Rhubarb pie is a dessert. Therefore, whoever eats rhubarb pie eats a dessert.
	 ★43.	 The vast majority of car accidents occur within twenty miles of one’s home. 
Apparently it is much more dangerous to drive close to home than far away 
from home.
	
44.	 Either you buy me a new BMW, or I won’t be able to get back and forth to 
school. I know you want me to go to school, so the choice is clear.
	
45.	 Nobody has ever proved that using cell phones causes brain tumors. There-
fore, using cell phones does not cause brain tumors.
	 ★46.	 On Friday I took Virginia out to dinner. She told me that if I wasn’t interested 
in a serious relationship, I should forget about dating her. On Saturday I took 
Margie to a film. When we discussed it afterward over a drink, she couldn’t 
understand why I wasn’t interested in babies. Women are all alike. All they 
want is a secure marriage.
	
47.	 Dozens of species of plants and animals are being wiped out every year, even 
though we have laws to prevent it. Clearly, we should repeal the Endangered 
Species Act.
	
48.	 People are driving their cars like maniacs tonight. There must be a full moon.
	 ★49.	 A line is composed of points. Points have no length. Therefore, a line has no 
length.
	
50.	 Are you in favor of the ruinous economic policy of the Democratic Platform 
Committee?
	IV.	 Identify the fallacies committed in the following dialogue. You should be able to 
find at least one case of each fallacy presented in this section and a few of the falla-
cies presented in the two previous sections.
Personal Paper Mill
Carly catches sight of Brad as the two head for their class in sociology. “Hi!” she says as 
she joins him. “Did you get your paper finished?”
	 “Yes,” he replies. “And given that first-rate work deserves an A, I deserve an A for  
this paper.”
	 “That’s great!” she says.
	 “But just between you and me, I had my girlfriend write my paper.”
	 “Don’t tell me that.” Carly looks disgusted. “Do you think that’s moral?”
	 “Beats me. Why do you always insist on giving moral advice to everyone?”
	 “The real question is, why do you always ignore moral advice?” she asks.
	 “Well, the way I see it,” Brad says, “there’s really nothing wrong with plagiarism.  
After all, students who plagiarize their work usually get better grades. Anyway, I’m just  
180   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
following in the footsteps of most U.S. presidents. They have speechwriters who write 
most of their speeches. Why shouldn’t I get someone to write my papers?”
	 “You are so stupid!” Carly replies. “Honestly, I really think everyone should stop listen-
ing to you.”
	 “Okay, how about this?” he asks. “Either I get someone to write this paper for me, or 
I’ll get an F in the class. I can’t afford to get an F; thus, I get someone to write the paper 
for me.”
	 “That’s not much better,” Carly replies. “But you should realize that plagiarism is really 
dangerous. If you get caught, it could destroy your reputation.”
	 “I doubt many students would think badly of me,” he says. “Practically everyone plagia-
rizes their work nowadays, and if they do it, so can I.”
	 “It’s not true that all students plagiarize their work,” Carly replies. “In fact, I am quite 
certain that none of them do. I certainly don’t, and all of the students I know don’t.”
	 “Ah, but you do plagiarize your work,” Brad insists.
	 “What do you mean?” Carly asks.
	 “Well, every word of your paper appears in the dictionary, so it’s clear that you plagia-
rized it from the dictionary.”
	 “Very funny,” Carly says. “But here’s what I think. I think you should ask Professor 
Halvorson for an extension on your paper and write it yourself. She really takes plagia-
rism seriously, and she insists that all work submitted to her be original.”
	 “But this paper is original work,” Brad insists, as they enter the social sciences building. 
“My girlfriend has never written a paper like this before, and she didn’t copy it from anyone.”
	 Carly laughs. “I don’t think that’s what she means by ‘original.’” Incidentally, did you 
remember to attach a copy of the integrity pledge to the front of your paper? The aca-
demic integrity policy says that all instructors must direct their students to sign their full 
name on the integrity pledge, which asserts that the work being submitted has not been 
plagiarized.”
	 “Yes, I have attached a copy of the pledge document to the paper, and I signed it ‘Pro-
fessor Judy Halvorson,’ just as the rule says.”
	 “How dense can you get?” Carly asks. “You’re not supposed to sign the professor’s 
name! You’re supposed to sign your own name.”
	 “Oh,” says Brad. For the first time he looks concerned. “But that means I would be 
lying.”
	 “Yes, it would,” Carly agrees, “but I don’t see why that should bother you. Still, I can 
assure you of this: If you hand in the paper, you won’t graduate.”
	 “You’re wrong about that,” Brad counters. “Consider this. I’m a member of the senior 
class, and the senior class graduates in May. That means I’ll graduate in May.”
	 “I wouldn’t bet on it,” Carly says, as they approach their classroom. “You forget that 
I’m on the Academic Integrity Committee, and I’ve sworn to uphold the policy on plagiarism.”
	 “Uh oh.” Brad looks concerned again. “That had slipped my mind. But you won’t rat 
on me, will you? Please, please don’t. All my life I have struggled with my sense of self-
esteem, and if I get an F on this paper, I will feel absolutely crushed.”
	 “Rat on you? Well, that depends,” says Carly.
	 They enter the classroom, and Brad gives Carly a tense smile. “On what?”
	 Carly smiles grimly back. “On whether you hand in the paper your girlfriend wrote.”
SECTION 3.4 Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Illicit Transference   181
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

182   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
3.5	
Fallacies in Ordinary Language
PREVIEW    A friend of yours has a bad case of dandruff. He starts eating broccoli, and his dan-
druff clears up. Clearly the broccoli did it. But if it worked for your friend, it will work for everyone, so 
what we have here is a new cure for dandruff. And if you’re not convinced, just think of the thousands 
of unfortunate dandruff sufferers who have tried every cure in the book for years and gotten no relief. 
This section of the book deals with passages such as this, where multiple fallacies are jumbled together.
This section addresses two topics. The first concerns the challenge of detecting the 
fallacies of others in ordinary language, and the second relates to the goal of avoiding 
fallacies in one’s own arguments.
Detecting Fallacies
Most of the informal fallacies that we have seen thus far have been clear-cut, easily recog-
nizable instances of a specific mistake. When fallacies occur in ordinary usage, however, 
they are often neither clear-cut nor easily recognizable. The reason is that there are in-
numerable ways of making mistakes in arguing, and variations inevitably occur that may 
not be exact instances of any specifically named fallacy. In addition, one fallacious mode 
of arguing may be mixed with one or more others, and the strands of reasoning may have 
to be disentangled before the fallacies can be named. Yet another problem arises from 
the fact that arguments in ordinary language are rarely presented in complete form. A 
premise or conclusion often is left unexpressed, which may obscure the nature of the 
evidence that is presented or the strength of the link between premises and conclusion.
Consider, for example, the following letter that appeared in a newspaper:
God, I am sick of “women’s rights”! Every time one turns on the news we hear about 
some form of discrimination against some poor female who wants to be a fireman—or 
some “remark” that suggests or implies women are inferior to men.
	 I, for one, do not want to be rescued by a “woman fireman,” especially if I am a 6-foot-2 
male and she is a 5-foot-6 female.
	 Why is it that women find their “role” so degrading? What is wrong with being a wife 
and mother, staying home while the male goes out and “hunts for food” and brings it 
home to his family?
	 I don’t think women have proven themselves to be as inventive, as capable (on the 
average) of world leadership, as physically capable, or as “courageous” as men. They have 
yet to fight a war (the average American woman) and let’s face it ladies, who wants to?
	 Whether a person is female, black, white, handicapped—whatever—ability is  
what counts in the final analysis. Women cannot demand “equality”—no one can—unless 
it is earned.
	 When push comes to shove and a damsel is in distress, she is hard-pressed to protect 
herself and usually has to be rescued by a man. Until I can move a piano, beat off a po-
tential robber or rapist, or fight a war, I am quite content to be a woman, thank you.
(Patricia Kelley)

3
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   183
This letter presents numerous fallacies. The phrase “poor female who wants to be a 
fireman” suggests a mild ad hominem abusive, and equating women’s rights in general 
with the right to be a firefighter suggests a straw man. The second paragraph commits 
another straw man fallacy by supposing that the job of firefighter inevitably entails 
such activities as climbing up ladders and rescuing people. Surely there are many male 
firefighters who cannot do this. The same paragraph also can be interpreted as begging 
the question: Do women who want to be firefighters want the specific job of rescuing 
tall men?
The third paragraph throws out a red herring. The issue is whether women have 
the right to be considered for a job of their choice and whether they must be paid as 
much as a man in the same situation. Whether there is something wrong with being a 
wife and mother is quite a different issue. Also, the reference to men hunting for food 
suggests a possible begging of the question: Are we still locked into a “hunter-gatherer” 
social structure?
The paragraph about whether women have proved themselves to be as inventive, 
capable, and courageous as men begs yet another question: Assuming, for the sake of 
argument, that this is true, have women been allowed to occupy roles in society where 
such inventiveness, capability, and courageousness can be demonstrated? Furthermore, 
this paragraph commits a red herring fallacy and/or misses the point: Even if women 
have not proved this, what does that have to do with the issue? Most jobs do not require 
any high degree of inventiveness or courage or a capacity for world leadership.
The paragraph about ability begs yet another question: Is it in fact the case that women  
have less ability? I am not aware that anything of the sort has ever been proved. Finally, 
the last paragraph throws out another red herring. What does moving pianos and beat-
ing off rapists have to do with most jobs or the question of equal pay for equal work?
Probably the single most important requirement for detecting fallacies in ordi-
nary language is alertness. The reader or listener must pay close attention to what the  
arguer is saying. What is the conclusion? What are the reasons given in support of  
the conclusion? Are the reasons relevant to the conclusion? Do the reasons support the 
conclusion? If the reader or listener is half asleep or lounging in that passive, drugged- 
out state that attends much television viewing, then none of these questions will  
receive answers. Under those circumstances the reader or listener will never be able to 
detect informal fallacies, and he or she will accept even the worst reasoning without the  
slightest hesitation.
Avoiding Fallacies
Why do people commit informal fallacies? Unfortunately, this question allows for 
no simple, straightforward answer. The reasons underlying the commission of falla-
cies are complex and interconnected. However, we can identify three factors that lead 
to most of the informal mistakes in reasoning. The first is intent. Many fallacies are  
committed intentionally. The arguer may know full well that his or her reasoning is 
defective but goes ahead with it anyway because of some benefit for himself or herself 
or some other person. All of the informal fallacies we have studied can be used for that 
purpose, but some of them are particularly well suited to it. These include the appeal to 

184   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
force, appeal to pity, appeal to the people, straw man, ad hominem, complex question, 
false dichotomy, and suppressed evidence. Here is such a case of appeal to force:
I deserve a chocolate sundae for dessert, and if you don’t buy me one right now, I’ll start 
screaming and embarrass you in front of all of the people in this restaurant.
And here is a case of false dichotomy that conveys the appearance of being inten-
tionally committed:
Either you take me on a Caribbean cruise, or I’ll have a nervous breakdown. It’s up to you.
The key to avoiding fallacies that are intentionally committed probably lies in some 
form of moral education. The arguer must come to realize that using intellectually dis-
honest means in order to acquire something he or she does not deserve is just another 
form of cheating.
The situation becomes more complicated, however, when the sought-after goal is 
morally justified. Arguers sometimes use fallacious reasoning intentionally to trick a 
person into doing something that is really for that person’s own good. Here is a false 
dichotomy of that sort:
Either you control your eating and get regular exercise, or you’ll have a heart attack and 
die. The choice is yours.
Given the beneficial consequences of controlled eating and regular exercise, some moral  
philosophers will find nothing wrong with this argument. Others will contend that  
manipulating someone into doing something violates human dignity. In either case, 
such arguments are logically unacceptable.
The second factor that leads to the commission of informal fallacies is a careless 
mental posture combined with an emotional disposition favoring or opposing some 
person or thing. The careless mental posture opens the door, so to speak, to fallacious 
reasoning, and the emotional disposition pushes the arguer through it. Even people 
who are thoroughly versed in the informal fallacies occasionally succumb to the deadly 
combination of mental carelessness and emotional impetus. For example, arguments 
such as the following ad hominem abusive can sometimes be heard in the halls of uni-
versity philosophy departments:
Professor Ballard’s argument in favor of restructuring our course offering isn’t worth 
a hoot. But what would you expect from someone who publishes in such mediocre 
journals? And did you hear Ballard’s recent lecture on Aristotle? It was total nonsense.
When people who should know better are confronted with the fact that their argu-
ment commits a common fallacy, they often admit with embarrassment that they have 
not been thinking and then revise their argument according to logical principles. In 
contrast, people who are not familiar with the distinction between good and fallacious 
reasoning will likely deny that there is anything wrong with their argument. Thus, the 
key to avoiding fallacies that arise from mental carelessness lies in developing a thor-
ough familiarity with the informal fallacies, combined with a habitual realization of 
how emotions affect people’s reasoning. Everyone should realize that unchecked emo-
tions are an open invitation to illogical reasoning, and they can lead a person to commit 
quite blindly every one of the fallacies we have studied thus far.

3
The third factor that leads to the commission of informal fallacies is far more dif-
ficult to contend with than the first two. It consists in the influence of what we might 
call the “worldview” of the arguer. By worldview we mean a cognitive network of 
beliefs, attitudes, habits, memories, values, and other elements that conditions and 
renders meaningful the world in which we live. Beginning in infancy, our worldview 
emerges quietly and unconsciously from enveloping influences—culture, language, 
gender, religion, politics, and social and economic status. As we grow older, it contin-
ues to develop through the shaping forces of education and experience. Once it has 
taken root, our worldview determines how each of us sizes up the world in which we 
live. Given a set of circumstances, it indicates what is reasonable to believe and what 
is unreasonable.
In connection with the construction and evaluation of arguments, an arguer’s 
worldview determines the answer to questions about importance, relevance, causal 
connections, the qualifications of authorities, whether a sample is typical or atypical of 
a group, what can and cannot be taken for granted, and other factors. However, because 
these determinations inevitably involve unexamined presuppositions, the arguer’s  
worldview can lead to the commission of informal fallacies. All of the fallacies we have 
studied so far are likely candidates, but the ones especially susceptible are appeal to pity, 
straw man, missing the point, appeal to unqualified authority, hasty generalization, 
false cause, slippery slope, weak analogy, begging the question, false dichotomy, and 
suppressed evidence.
Thus, a person with a victim mentality may think that his pathetic circumstances 
really justify some favorable treatment; an uncritical conservative may cite with com-
plete confidence the authority of Rush Limbaugh; a person with a racist worldview may 
conclude that the errant behavior of a handful of Asians, African Americans, or His-
panics really is typical of the larger class; a person with a liberal worldview may quite 
innocently distort an opponent’s argument by equating it with fascism; a pro-life arguer 
may consider it obvious that the fetus is a person with rights, while a pro-choice arguer 
may take it for granted that the fetus is not a person with rights, and so on. Consider, 
for example, the following argument from analogy:
A court trial is like a professional football game. In a professional football game, the most 
important thing is winning. Similarly, in a trial, the most important thing is winning.
This argument is consistent with the worldview of many, if not most, lawyers. Law-
yers are trained as advocates, and when they enter a courtroom they see themselves 
going into battle for their clients. In any battle, winning is the most important objec-
tive. But this viewpoint presupposes that truth and justice are either unattainable in the 
courtroom or of secondary importance. Thus, while many lawyers would evaluate this 
argument as nonfallacious, many nonlawyers would reject it as a weak analogy.
For another example, consider the following causal inference:
After enslaving most of Eastern Europe for nearly fifty years, the evil Soviet empire finally 
collapsed. Obviously God listened to our prayers.
This argument reflects the worldview of many theists. It presupposes that there is a 
God, that God listens to prayers, that God is influenced by prayers, that God has the 
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   185

186   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
3
power to alter the course of history, and that God does alter the course of history. While 
the theist is likely to consider this argument a good one, the atheist will reject it as a 
blatant case of false cause.
To avoid fallacies that arise from the influence of worldviews, the arguer must  
acknowledge and critique his or her presuppositions. Doing so inclines the arguer to 
couch his or her arguments in language that takes those presuppositions into account. 
The result is nearly always an argument that is more intelligently crafted, and, it is 
hoped, more persuasive. However, the task of recognizing and critiquing one’s presup-
positions is not easy. Presuppositions are intrinsically linked to one’s worldview, and 
many people are not even aware that they have a worldview. The reason is that world-
views are formed through a process that is largely unconscious. Thus, the arguer must 
first recognize that he or she has a worldview and must then exercise constant vigilance 
over the presuppositions it comprises.
Even after one’s presuppositions have been exposed and thoroughly critiqued, 
however, there is no guarantee that one’s arguments will agree with the arguments 
of others who have critiqued their worldviews. This is because a person’s worldview 
reflects the unique perspective that person has on the world. No two people share 
exactly the same perspective. Nevertheless, disclosing and critiquing the presup-
positions in one’s worldview lays a foundation for meaningful communication with 
other reasonable arguers, and it provides a context of reasonableness for working out  
disagreements.
In summary, the three factors that are probably responsible for most informal falla-
cies are intent, mental carelessness combined with emotional dispositions, and unex-
amined presuppositions in the arguer’s worldview. However, these factors rarely occur 
in isolation. In the vast majority of cases, two or all three conspire to produce fallacious 
reasoning. This fact exacerbates the difficulty in avoiding informal fallacies in one’s 
own arguments and in detecting fallacies in the arguments of others.
Now let us consider some cases of real-life arguments in light of the factors we have 
just discussed. All are taken from letters-to-the-editor columns of newspapers and 
magazines. The first relates to affirmative action programs:
I’m a nonracist, nonsexist, white male born in 1969, who has never owned a slave, treated 
anyone as inferior because of his or her race, or sexually harassed a female co-worker. In 
other words, I don’t owe women or minorities a thing. Since when are people required 
to pay for the sins of their predecessors simply because they belong to the same race 
or gender?
(Ben Gibbons)
The author of this argument presupposes that racist and sexist patterns in society 
have not benefited him in any way. Among other things, he presupposes that his white 
ancestors in no way benefited from their being white and that none of these benefits 
passed down to him. On the other hand, given that he has received such benefits, he 
may presuppose that he is not obligated to pay any of them back. Of course, none of 
these things may have occurred, but the author should at least address these issues. 
Because he does not address them, the argument begs the question.
The next argument relates to secondhand smoke from cigarettes:

3
Now, besides lung cancer and other nasty business, secondhand smoke causes deafness 
and impotence. Was secondhand smoke a problem when people heated their homes 
solely by fireplaces? How about those romantic teepees with the smoke hole at the top? 
And what about fireplaces in new homes? Let’s have some research about the problems 
caused by these as well as barbecues. A little cancer with your hot dog, anyone?
(Pat Sharp)
This argument seems to commit the fallacy of equivocation. The arguer begins by  
using “secondhand smoke” to refer to the smoke from burning tobacco, and then uses 
the term to refer to the smoke from fireplaces, teepee fires, and barbecues. Smoke from 
burning tobacco is clearly not the same thing as smoke from burning wood or char-
coal. Alternately, the argument might be seen to beg the question: “But do people burn 
tobacco in their fireplaces and barbecues?” These fallacies probably arise either from 
the intentions of the author or from carelessness in failing to distinguish the two kinds 
of secondhand smoke. In either event, the author is probably hostile to government  
efforts to control secondhand tobacco smoke in confined areas.
The next argument deals with gun control:
Detroit, the seventh largest city and one with strict gun laws, had 596 homicides last 
year. In the same year Phoenix, the ninth largest city and one that at the time did not 
require gun owners to be licensed, had 136 homicides. Criminals don’t fear the toothless 
criminal-justice system, but they do fear armed citizens.
(Paul M. Berardi)
This argument commits a false cause fallacy. The author presupposes that the avail-
ability of guns caused Phoenix to have a lower homicide rate than Detroit. The arguer 
also presupposes that Detroit and Phoenix are comparable as to homicide rate merely 
because they are roughly the same size. As a result, the argument involves a weak anal-
ogy and also begs the question. The additional factors of emotion and intent may also 
be present. The arguer probably hates the prospect of gun control, and he may be fully 
aware of the fact that Phoenix and Detroit are not comparable for his purpose, but he 
went ahead with the comparison anyway.
The next argument deals with religious fundamentalism:
If we compromise God’s word, we compromise the truth. To say that the fundamentalist 
is a loud shrill voice drowning out religious moderation implies that diluted truth is bet-
ter than absolute truth.
(Gerald Gleason)
This argument begs the question. The arguer presupposes that there is a God, that God 
has spoken, that God has revealed his intentions to fundamentalist preachers, and that 
those preachers accurately report the word of God. The argument also seems to reflect 
an emotional disposition in favor of religious fundamentalism.
The last argument we will consider relates to English as the official U.S. language:
This great country has been held together for more than 200 years because of one 
simple thing: the English language. There are two things we must do: Make English the 
official language of the United States and do away with bilingual education.
(David Moisan)
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   187

3
EXERCISE 3.5	
	 I.	 Most of the following selections were taken from letters-to-the-editors columns of 
news­papers and magazines. Identify any fallacies that may be committed, giving a 
brief explanation for your answer. Then, if a fallacy is identified, discuss the pos-
sible factors that led the arguer to commit the fallacy.
	
★1.	 Exporting cigarettes [to Asia] is good business for America; there is no  
reason we should be prohibited from doing so. Asians have been smoking 
for decades; we are only offering variety in their habit. If the Asians made  
tobacco smoking illegal, that would be a different situation. But as long as it is 
legal, the decision is up to the smokers. The Asians are just afraid of American  
supremacy in the tobacco industries.
(Pat Monohan)
	
2.	 When will these upper-crust intellectuals realize that the masses of work-
ing people are not in cozy, cushy, interesting, challenging, well-paying jobs, 
professions and businesses? My husband is now 51; for most of the last  
33 years he has worked in the same factory job, and only the thought of retir-
ing at 62 has sustained him. When he reaches that age in 11 years, who will tell 
him that his aging and physically wracked body must keep going another two 
years? My heart cries out for all the poor souls who man the assembly lines, 
ride the trucks or work in the fields or mines, or in the poorly ventilated, hot-
in-summer, cold-in-winter factories and garages. Many cannot afford to retire 
at 62, 65, or even later. Never, never let them extend the retirement age. It’s a 
matter of survival to so many.
(Isabel Fierman)
	
3.	 Women in military combat is insane. No society in its right mind would have 
such a policy. The military needs only young people and that means the only 
women who go are those in their child-bearing years. Kill them off and society 
will not be able to perpetuate itself.
(Jack Carman)
	
★4.	 Dear Ann: I’ve read that one aspirin taken every other day will reduce the risk 
of heart attack. Why not take two and double the protection?
(Boston)
	
5.	 The American Civil Liberties Union did a study that found that in the last  
eighty years it believes twenty-five innocent people have been executed in the 
United States. This is unfortunate. But, there are innocent people who die each 
This argument misses the point. The arguer presupposes that making English the  
official language would guarantee that all citizens speak it and that doing away with 
bilingual education would accelerate the learning process of immigrant children.  
The argument may also reflect the fear that many feel in connection with the changes 
U.S. society is experiencing as a result of recent immigration.
188   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
year in highway accidents. Out of 40,000 deaths, how many deaths are related 
to driving while intoxicated? How many more thousands are injured and incur 
financial ruin or are invalids and handicapped for the remainder of their lives?
(Mahlon R. Braden)
	
6.	 Mexico’s president expresses legitimate concern when he questions supplying 
oil to Americans who are unwilling to apply “discipline” in oil consumption. 
In view of the fact that his country’s population is expected to double in only 
twenty-two years, isn’t it legitimate for us to ask when Mexicans will apply 
the discipline necessary to control population growth and quit dumping their 
excess millions over our borders?
(Wayne R. Bartz)
	
★7.	 A parent would never give a ten-year-old the car keys, fix him or her a mar-
tini, or let him or her wander at night through a dangerous part of town. The 
same holds true of the Internet. Watch what children access, but leave the Net 
alone. Regulation is no substitute for responsibility.
(Bobby Dunning)
	
8.	 How would you feel to see your children starving and have all doors slammed 
in your face? Isn’t it time that all of us who believe in freedom and human 
rights stop thinking in terms of color and national boundaries? We should 
open our arms and hearts to those less fortunate and remember that a time 
could come when we might be in a similar situation.
(Lorna Doyle)
	
9.	 A capital gains tax [reduction] benefits everyone, not just the “rich,” be-
cause everyone will have more money to invest or spend in the private 
economy, resulting in more jobs and increasing prosperity for all. This is 
certainly better than paying high taxes to a corrupt, self-serving, and in-
competent government that squanders our earnings on wasteful and useless  
programs.
(David Miller)
	 ★10.	 After reading “Homosexuals in the Churches,” I’d like to point out that I don’t 
know any serious, capable exegetes who stumble over Saint Paul’s denuncia-
tion of homosexuality. Only a fool (and there seem to be more and more these 
days) can fail to understand the plain words of Romans, Chapter one. God did 
not make anyone “gay.” Paul tells us in Romans 1 that homosexuals become 
that way because of their own lusts.
(LeRoy J. Hopper)
	
11.	 When will they ever learn—that the Republican Party is not for the people 
who voted for it?
(Alton L. Stafford)
	
12.	 Before I came to the United States in July, 1922, I was in Berlin where I visited 
the famous zoo. In one of the large cages were a lion and a tiger. Both respected 
each other’s strength. It occurred to me that it was a good illustration of “bal-
ance of power.” Each beast followed the other and watched each other’s moves. 
When one moved, the other did. When one stopped, the other stopped.
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   189

3
	
	 	
In today’s world, big powers or groups of powers are trying to maintain the 
status quo, trying to be as strong as or stronger than the other. They realize 
a conflict may result in mutual destruction. As long as the countries believe 
there is a balance of power we may hope for peace.
(Emilie Lackow)
	 ★13.	 Doctors say the birth of a baby is a high point of being a doctor. Yet a medi-
cal survey shows one out of every nine obstetricians in America has stopped 
delivering babies.
	
	 	
Expectant mothers have had to find new doctors. In some rural areas, 
women have had to travel elsewhere to give birth.
	
	 	
How did this happen? It’s part of the price of the lawsuit crisis.
	
	 	
The number of lawsuits Americans file each year is on the rise. Obstetri-
cians are among the hardest hit—almost three out of four have faced a mal-
practice claim. Many have decided it isn’t worth the risk.
(Magazine ad by the Insurance Information Institute)
	
14.	 The conservative diatribe found in campus journalism comes from the 
mouths of a handful of affluent brats who were spoon-fed through the ’90s. 
Put them on an ethnically more diverse campus, rather than a Princeton or a 
Dartmouth, and then let us see how long their newspapers survive.
(David Simons)
	
15.	 I see that our courts are being asked to rule on the propriety of outlawing 
video games as a “waste of time and money.”
	
	 	
It seems that we may be onto something here. A favorable ruling would 
open the door to new laws eliminating show business, spectator sports, cock-
tail lounges, the state of Nevada, public education and, of course, the entire 
federal bureaucracy.
(A. G. Dobrin)
	 ★16.	 The death penalty is the punishment for murder. Just as we have long jail 
terms for armed robbery, assault and battery, fraud, contempt of court, fines 
for speeding, reckless driving and other numerous traffic violations, so must 
we have a punishment for murder. Yes, the death penalty will not deter mur-
ders any more than a speeding ticket will deter violating speed laws again, but 
it is the punishment for such violation!
(Lawrence J. Barstow)
	
17.	 Would you rather invest in our nation’s children or Pentagon waste? The 
choice is yours.
(Political ad)
	
18.	 My gun has protected me, and my son’s gun taught him safety and responsibility 
long before he got hold of a far more lethal weapon—the family car. Cigarettes 
kill many times more people yearly than guns and, unlike guns, have absolutely 
no redeeming qualities. If John Lennon had died a long, painful and expensive 
death from lung cancer, would you have devoted a page to a harangue against 
the product of some of your biggest advertisers—the cigarette companies?
(Silvia A. DeFreitas)
190   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	 ★19.	 If the advocates of prayers in public schools win on this issue, just where will it 
end? Perhaps next they will ask for prayers on public transportation? Prayers 
by government workers before they start their job each day? Or maybe,  
mandatory prayers in public restaurants before starting each meal might be a 
good idea.
(Leonard Mendelson)
	
20.	 So you want to ban smoking in all eating establishments? Well, you go right 
ahead and do that little thing. And when the 40 percent of smokers stop eating 
out, the restaurants can do one of two things: close, or raise the price of a $20 
dinner 40 percent to $28.
(Karen Sawyer)
	
21.	 Pigeons are forced to leave our city to battle for life. Their struggle is an end-
less search for food. What manner of person would watch these hungry crea-
tures suffer from want of food and deny them their survival? These helpless 
birds are too often ignored by the people of our city, with not the least bit of 
compassion shown to them. Pigeons are God’s creatures just as the so-called 
human race is. They need help.
(Leslie Ann Price)
	 ★22.	 You take half of the American population every night and set them down in 
front of a screen watching people getting stabbed, shot and blown away. And 
then you expect them to go out into the streets hugging each other?
(Mark Hustad)
	
23.	 So you think that putting the worst type of criminal out of his misery is wrong. 
How about the Americans who were sent to Korea, to Vietnam, to Beirut, to 
Central America? Thousands of good men were sacrificed supposedly for the 
good of our country. At the same time we were saving and protecting Charles 
Manson, Sirhan Sirhan [Robert Kennedy’s murderer], and a whole raft of oth-
ers too numerous to mention.
(George M. Purvis)
	
24.	 The fact is that the hype over “acid rain” and “global warming” is just that: 
hype. Take, for example, Stephen Schneider, author of Global Warming. In his 
current “study” he discusses a “greenhouse effect of catastrophic proportions,” 
yet twenty years ago Schneider was a vocal proponent of the theory of a “new 
ice age.”
(Urs Furrer)
	 ★25.	 Just as our parents did for us, my husband and I rely solely on Christian Sci-
ence for all the health needs of our four sons and find it invaluable for the 
quick cure of whatever ailments and contagions they are subject to. One 
particular healing that comes to mind happened several years ago when our 
youngest was a toddler. He had a flu-type illness that suddenly became quite 
serious. We called a Christian Science practitioner for treatment and he was 
completely well the next morning.
(Ellen Austin)
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   191

3
	
26.	 As somebody who has experienced the tragedy of miscarriage—or spontane-
ous abortion—at eight weeks, I greatly resent the position that a fetus is not 
a baby. I went through the grief of losing a baby, and no one should tell me 
otherwise.
(Ann Fons)
	
27.	 How can we pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and 
not establish laws to punish people who burn the flag to make a statement? We 
are a people who punish an individual who libels another person but will not 
seek redress from an individual who insults every citizen of this great country 
by desecrating the flag.
(William D. Lankford)
	 ★28.	 The notion of “buying American” is as misguided as the notion of buying  
Wisconsin, or Oshkosh, Wisconsin, or South Oshkosh, Wisconsin. For the 
same reasons that Wisconsin increases its standard of living by trading with 
the rest of the nation, America increases its standard of living by trading with 
the rest of the world.
(Phillip Smith)
	
29.	 We’ve often heard the saying, “Far better to let 100 guilty men go free than 
to condemn one innocent man.” What happens then if we apply the logic of 
this argument to the question, “Is a fetus an unborn human being?” Then is it 
not better to let 100 fetuses be born rather than to mistakenly kill one unborn 
human being? This line of reasoning is a strictly humanist argument against 
abortion.
(James Sebastian)
	
30.	 In our society it is generally considered improper for a man to sleep, shower, 
and dress amid a group of women to whom he normally would be sexually at-
tracted. It seems to me, then, to be equally unacceptable that a gay man sleep, 
shower, and dress in a company of men to whom, we assume, he would be no 
less sexually attracted.
(Mark O. Temple)
	 ★31.	 I say “bravo” and “right on!” Now we have some real-life humane heroes to 
look up to! These brave people [a group of animal liberators] went up against 
the insensitive bureaucratic technology, and won, saving former pet animals 
from senseless torture.
	
	 	
If researchers want to experiment, let them use computers, or themselves—
but not former pet animals! I know it’s bad enough they use monkeys and rats, 
but if those animals are bred knowing nothing else but these Frankensteins 
abusing them it’s different (but not better) than dogs or cats that have been 
loved and petted all their lives to suddenly be tortured and mutilated in the 
name of science. End all animal research! Free all research animals!
	
	 	
Right on, animal liberators!
(Linda Magee)
	
32.	 Dear Ann: Recently I was shopping downtown in 20-below-zero weather. A 
stranger walked up to me and said, “I wonder how many beautiful rabbits 
192   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
died so you could have that coat?” I noticed she was wearing a down coat, so I 
asked if the geese they got the down from to make her coat were still alive. She 
looked surprised. Obviously she had never given it a thought.
	
	 	
If people are so upset about cruelty to animals, why don’t they go after the 
folks who refuse to spend the money to have their pets neutered and spayed? 
Thousands of dogs are put to death every year because the animal pounds 
can’t feed and house them. Talk about cruelty to animals—that’s the best  
example there is.
(“Baby It’s Cold Outside”)
	
33.	 I prayed for the U.S. Senate to defeat the prayer amendment—and it did. There 
is a God.
(Richard Carr)
	 ★34.	 People of the Philippines, I have returned! The hour of your redemption is 
here! Rally to me! Let the indomitable spirit of Bataan and Corregidor lead on! 
As the lines of battle roll forward to bring you within the zone of operations, 
rise and strike! For future generations of your sons and daughters, strike! Let 
no heart be faint! Let every arm be steeled! The guidance of divine God points 
the way! Follow in his name to the Holy Grail of righteous victory!
(General Douglas MacArthur)
	
35.	 As the oldest of eleven children (all married), I’d like to point out our com-
bined family numbers more than 100 who vote only for pro-life candidates. 
Pro-lifers have children, pro-choicers do not.
(Mrs. Kitty Reickenback)
	
36.	 I am 12 years old. My class had a discussion on whether police used unneces-
sary force when arresting the people from Operation Rescue.
	
	 	
My teacher is an ex-cop, and he demonstrated police holds to us. They 
don’t hurt at all unless the person is struggling or trying to pull away. If any-
body was hurt when they were arrested, then they must have been struggling 
with the officers trying to arrest them.
(Ben Torre-Bueno)
	 ★37.	 As corporate farms continue to gobble up smaller family farms, they control 
a larger percentage of the grain and produce raised in the United States. Some 
have already reached a point in size where, if they should decide to withhold 
their grain and produce from the marketplace, spot shortages could occur and 
higher prices would result. The choice is to pay us family farmers now or pay 
the corporations later.
(Delwin Yost)
	
38.	 If you buy our airline ticket now you can save 60 percent, and that means  
60 percent more vacation for you.
(Radio ad)
	
39.	 Why all the flap about atomic bombs? The potential for death is always with 
us. Of course, if you just want something to worry about, go ahead. Franklin 
D. Roosevelt said it: “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”
(Lee Flemming Reese)
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   193

3
	 ★40.	 September 17 marked the anniversary of the signing of the U.S. Constitution. 
How well have we, the people, protected our rights? Consider what has hap-
pened to our private-property rights.
	
	 	
“Property has divine rights, and the moment the idea is admitted into so-
ciety that property is not as sacred as the laws of God, anarchy and tyranny 
begin.” John Quincy Adams, 1767–1848, Sixth President of the United States.
	
	 	
Taxes and regulations are the two-edged sword which gravely threatens the 
fabric of our capitalistic republic. The tyranny of which Adams speaks is with 
us today in the form of government regulators and regulations which have all 
but destroyed the right to own property. Can anarchy be far behind?
(Timothy R. Binder)
	
41.	 Evolution would have been dealt serious setbacks if environmentalists had 
been around over the eons trying to save endangered species.
	
	 	
Species are endangered because they just do not fit the bigger picture any 
more as the world changes. That’s not bad. It’s just life.
	
	 	
In most cases we have seen the “endangered species” argument is just a 
ruse; much deeper motives usually exist, and they are almost always selfish 
and personal.
(Tom Gable)
	
42.	 The problem that I have with the pro-choice supporters’ argument is that they 
make “choice” the ultimate issue. Let’s face facts. No one has absolute freedom 
of choice sanctioned by the law. One can choose to rob a bank, but it’s not law-
ful. Others can choose to kill their one-year-old child, but it is not legal. Why 
then should a woman have the legal right to take the life of her unborn child?
(Loretta S. Horn)
	 ★43.	 If a car or truck kills a person, do politicians call for car control or truck con-
trol? And call in all cars/trucks?
	
	 	
If a child burns down a house do we have match control or child control 
and call in all of each?
	
	 	
Gun control and confiscation is equally as pathetic a thought process in an 
age of supposed intelligence.
(Pete Hawes)
	
44.	 I was incensed to read in your article about the return of anti-Semitism that 
New York City Moral Majority Leader Rev. Dan C. Fore actually said that “Jews 
have a God-given ability to make money, almost a supernatural ability . . .”  
I find it incredibly ironic that he and other Moral Majority types conveniently 
overlook the fact that they, too, pack away a pretty tidy sum themselves 
through their fund-raising efforts. It is sad that anti-Semitism exists, but to 
have this prejudice voiced by leaders of religious organizations is deplorable. 
These people are in for quite a surprise come Judgment Day.
(John R. Murks)
	
45.	 I couldn’t help but compare the ducks in Fairbanks, Alaska, who refuse to 
fly south for the winter to our welfare system. Instead of going south, four 
ducks have set up housekeeping there because people keep feeding them. 
The biologist dealing with the ducks said that while it’s nice that people are  
194   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
concerned, in the long run it isn’t good for the ducks because it conditions 
them to stay when they need to get to warmer temperatures. Our welfare 
system, in many instances, conditions people to stay on welfare. Compas-
sion is a wonderful virtue, and we need to help people who need help, but is 
it compassionate to keep people on welfare who should be developing and 
using their God-given abilities to do for themselves what the government is 
doing for them?
(Donna Symes)
	 ★46.	 Why are people so shocked that Susan Smith apparently chose to kill her chil-
dren because they had become an inconvenience? Doesn’t this occur every day 
in abortion clinics across the country? We suspect Smith heard very clearly 
the message many feminists have been trying to deliver about the expendable 
nature of our children.
(Kevin and Diana Cogan)
	
47.	 What’s wrong with kids today? Answer: nothing, for the majority of them. 
They are great.
	
	 	
Witness the action of two San Diego teenage boys recently, when the Nor-
mal Heights fire was at its worst. They took a garden hose to the roof of a 
threatened house—a house belonging to four elderly sisters, people they didn’t 
even know. They saved the house, while neighboring houses burned to the 
ground.
	
	 	
In the Baldwin Hills fire, two teenage girls rescued a blind, retired Navy 
man from sure death when they braved the flames to find him, confused, out-
side his burning house. He would probably have perished if they hadn’t run a 
distance to rescue him.
(Theodore H. Wickham)
	
48.	 Now that Big Brother has decided that I must wear a seatbelt when I ride in a 
car, how long will it take before I have to wear an inner tube when I swim in  
my pool, a safety harness when I climb a ladder, and shoes with steel- 
­reinforced toecaps when I carry out the garbage?
(G. R. Turgeon)
	 ★49.	 Dear Ann: I was disappointed in your response to the girl whose mother used 
the strap on her. The gym teacher noticed the bruises on her legs and backside 
and called it “child abuse.” Why are you against strapping a child when the 
Bible tells us in plain language that this is what parents should do?
	
	 	
The Book of Proverbs mentions many times that the rod must be used. 
Proverbs 23:13 says: “Withhold not correction from the child for if thou beat-
est him with the rod he shall not die.” Proverbs 23:14 says: “Thou shalt beat 
him with the rod and shalt deliver his soul from death.”
	
	 	
There is no substitute for a good whipping. I have seen the results of trying 
to reason with kids. They are arrogant, disrespectful and mouthy. Parents may 
wish for a more “humane” way, but there is none. Beating children is God’s 
way of getting parents to gain control over their children.
(Davisville, W.Va.)
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   195

3
	
50.	 The Fourth Amendment guarantees our right to freedom from unreasonable 
search and seizure. It does not prohibit reasonable search and seizure. The 
matter of sobriety roadblocks to stop drunk drivers boils down to this: Are 
such roadblocks reasonable or unreasonable? The majority of people answer: 
“Reasonable.” Therefore, sobriety roadblocks should not be considered to be 
unconstitutional.
(Haskell Collier)
	
51.	 The Supreme Court recently ruled that a police department in Florida did not 
violate any rights of privacy when a police helicopter flew over the backyard 
of a suspected drug dealer and noticed marijuana growing on his property. 
Many people, including groups like the Anti-Common Logic Union, felt that 
the suspect’s right to privacy outweighed the police department’s need to pro-
tect the public at large.
	
	 	
The simple idea of sacrificing a right to serve a greater good should be al-
lowed in certain cases. In this particular case the danger to the public wasn’t 
extremely large; marijuana is probably less dangerous than regular beer. But 
anything could have been in that backyard—a load of cocaine, an illegal stock-
pile of weapons, or other major threats to society.
(Matt Cookson)
	 ★52.	 I am 79 and have been smoking for 60 years. My husband is 90 and has in-
haled my smoke for some 50 years with no bad effects.
	
	 	
I see no reason to take further steps to isolate smokers in public places, 
other than we now observe.
	
	 	
Smokers have taken punishment enough from neurotic sniffers, some of 
whom belong in bubbles. There are plenty of injudicious fumes on our streets 
and freeways.
(Helen Gans)
	
53.	 The mainstream press finds itself left behind by talk radio, so they try to mini-
mize its importance. Americans are finding the true spirit of democracy in 
community and national debate. Why should we be told what to believe by a 
news weekly or the nightly news when we can follow public debate as it un-
folds on talk radio?
(Adam Abbott)
	
54.	 The issue is not whether we should subsidize the arts, but whether anyone 
should be able to force someone else to subsidize the arts. You and I are free 
to give any amount of our money to any artistic endeavor we wish to support. 
When the government gets involved, however, a group of bureaucrats is given 
the power to take our money and give it to the arts they wish to support. We 
are not consulted. That is not a way to promote a responsible culture. That is 
tyranny.
(Jerry Harben)
	 ★55.	 Who are these Supreme Court justices who have the guts to OK the burning of 
our flag?
196   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies

3
	
	 	
If the wife or daughter of these so-called justices were raped, could the rap-
ist be exonerated because he took the First Amendment? That he was just ex-
pressing himself? How about murder in the same situation?
(Robert A. Lewis)
	
56.	 I have one question for those bleeding hearts who say we should not have used 
the atomic bomb: If the nation responsible for the Rape of Nanking, the Man-
churian atrocities, Pearl Harbor and the Bataan Death March had invented the 
bomb first, don’t you think they would have used it? So do I.
(Bill Blair)
	
57.	 Since when did military service become a right, for gays or anyone else? The 
military has always been allowed to discriminate against people who don’t 
meet its requirements, including those who are overweight or too tall or too 
short. There is an adequate supply of personnel with the characteristics they 
need. And there is no national need for gays in the military.
(William R. Cnossen)
	 ★58.	 There is something very wrong about the custom of tipping. When we go to a 
store, we don’t decide what a product is worth and pay what we please; we pay 
the price or we leave. Prices in coffee bars and restaurants should be raised, 
waiters should be paid a decent wage, and the words “no tipping” should be 
clearly visible on menus and at counters.
(George Jochnowitz)
	
59.	 Most Americans do not favor gun control. They know that their well-being 
depends on their own ability to protect themselves. So-called “assault rifles” 
are used in few crimes. They are not the weapon of choice of criminals,  
but they are for people trying to protect themselves from government  
troops.
(Larry Herron)
	
60.	 Holding a gun, a thief robs John Q. Public of thousands of dollars. Holding 
a baby, an unmarried mother robs taxpayers of thousands of dollars. If one 
behavior is considered a crime, then so should the other.
(Louis R. Ward)
	II.	 Turn to the editorial pages of a newspaper or the letters column of a magazine and 
find an instance of a fallacious argument in the editorials or letters to the editor. 
Identify the premises and conclusion of the argument and write an analysis at least 
one paragraph in length identifying the fallacy or fallacies committed and the fac-
tors that may have led the arguer to commit them.
SECTION 3.5 Fallacies in Ordinary Language   197
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

3
198   CHAPTER 3 Informal Fallacies
	
Summary
Fallacy: A defect in an argument that arises from a mistake in reasoning or the creation of 
an illusion that makes a bad argument appear good. There are two kinds of fallacy:
• Formal fallacy: Detectable by analyzing the form of an argument
• Informal fallacy: Detectable only by analyzing the content of an argument
Fallacies of Relevance: The premises are not relevant to the conclusion:
• Appeal to force: Arguer threatens the reader/listener.
• Appeal to pity: Arguer elicits pity from the reader/listener.
• Appeal to the people: Arguer incites a mob mentality (direct form) or appeals to our 
desire for security, love, or respect (indirect form). This fallacy includes appeal to fear, 
the bandwagon argument, appeal to vanity, appeal to snobbery, and appeal to tradition.
• Argument against the person: Arguer personally attacks an opposing arguer by verbally 
abusing the opponent (ad hominem abusive), presenting the opponent as predisposed to 
argue as he or she does (ad hominen circumstantial), or by presenting the opponent as a 
hypocrite (tu quoque).
	
Note: For this fallacy to occur, there must be two arguers.
• Accident: A general rule is applied to a specific case it was not intended to cover.
• Straw man: Arguer distorts an opponent’s argument and then attacks the distorted  
argument.
	
Note: For this fallacy to occur, there must be two arguers.
• Missing the point: Arguer draws a conclusion different from the one supported by the 
premises.
	
Note: Do not cite this fallacy if another fallacy fits.
• Red herring: Arguer leads the reader/listener off the track.
Fallacies of Weak Induction: The premises may be relevant to the conclusion, but they  
supply insufficient support for the conclusion:
• Appeal to unqualified authority: Arguer cites an untrustworthy authority.
• Appeal to ignorance: Premises report that nothing is known or proved about some 
subject, and then a conclusion is drawn about that subject.
• Hasty generalization: A general conclusion is drawn from an atypical sample.
• False cause: Conclusion depends on a nonexistent or minor causal connection. This fal-
lacy has four forms: post hoc ergo propter hoc, non causa pro causa, oversimplified cause, 
and the gambler’s fallacy.
• Slippery slope: Conclusion depends on an unlikely chain reaction of causes.
• Weak analogy: Conclusion depends on a defective analogy (similarity).
Fallacies of Presumption: The premises presume what they purport to prove:
• Begging the question: Arguer creates the illusion that inadequate premises are adequate 
by leaving out a key premise, restating the conclusion as a premise, or reasoning in a circle.
• Complex question: Multiple questions are concealed in a single question.

3
S u m m a ry    199
• False dichotomy: An “either . . . or . . . ” premise hides additional alternatives.
• Suppressed evidence: Arguer ignores important evidence that requires a different  
conclusion.
Fallacies of Ambiguity: The conclusion depends on some kind of linguistic ambiguity:
• Equivocation: Conclusion depends on a shift in meaning of a word or phrase.
• Amphiboly: Conclusion depends on an incorrect interpretation of an ambiguous  
statement made by someone other than the arguer.
Fallacies of Illicit Transference: An attribute is incorrectly transferred from the parts of 
something onto the whole or from the whole onto the parts:
• Composition: An attribute is incorrectly transferred from the parts to the whole.
• Division: An attribute is incorrectly transferred from the whole to the parts.
Fallacies that occur in real-life argumentation may be hard to detect:
• They may not exactly fit the pattern of the named fallacies.
• They may involve two or more fallacies woven together in a single passage.
Three factors underlie the commission of fallacies in real-life argumentation:
• The intent of the arguer (the arguer may intend to mislead someone).
• Mental carelessness combined with unchecked emotions.
• Unexamined presuppositions in the arguer’s worldview.

200
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.
4 
4.1 	 The Components of Categorical Propositions
4.2	 Quality, Quantity, and Distribution
4.3	 Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition
4.4	 Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition
4.5	 The Traditional Square of Opposition
4.6	 Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint
4.7	 Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form
4.1	
The Components  
of Categorical Propositions
PREVIEW    Suppose you accidentally sit down with the wrong group in the airport and miss your 
flight. Or you are on your way to a final exam, but when you open the classroom door you are shocked 
to find that you don’t recognize the group of students. Or you accidentally mix sleeping pills in with your 
morning vitamins. Groups of people and things are important to everybody. Your favorite NFL team  
is a group. The people you call your friends constitute a group. Chapter 4 will improve your ability to 
reason about groups.
In Chapter 1 we saw that a proposition (or statement—here we are ignoring the dis-
tinction) is a sentence that is either true or false. A proposition that relates two classes, 
or categories, is called a categorical proposition. The classes in question are denoted 
respectively by the subject term and the predicate term, and the proposition asserts 
that either all or part of the class denoted by the subject term is included in or excluded 
from the class denoted by the predicate term. Here are some examples of categorical 
propositions:
American Idol contestants hope for recognition.
Junk foods do not belong in school cafeterias.
Many of today’s unemployed have given up on finding work.
Not all romances have a happy ending.
Oprah Winfrey publishes magazines.
Categorical Propositions
200
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

SECTION 4.1 The Components of Categorical Propositions   201
4
The first statement asserts that the entire class of American Idol contestants is included 
in the class of people who hope for recognition, the second that the entire class of junk 
foods is excluded from the class of things that belong in school cafeterias, and the third 
that part of the class of today’s unemployed people is included in the class of ­people 
who have given up on finding work. The fourth statement asserts that part of the class 
of romances is excluded from the class of things that have a happy ­ending, and the last 
statement asserts that the class that has Oprah Winfrey as its single ­member is included 
in the class of people who publish magazines.
Since any categorical proposition asserts that either all or part of the class  
denoted by the subject term is included in or excluded from the class denoted by the 
predicate term, it follows that there are exactly four types of categorical propositions:  
(1) those that assert that the whole subject class is included in the predicate class,  
(2) those that assert that part of the subject class is included in the predicate class,  
(3) those that assert that the whole subject class is excluded from the predicate  
class, and (4) those that assert that part of the subject class is excluded from the predi-
cate class. A categorical prop­osition that expresses these relations with complete clarity 
is called a ­standard-form categorical proposition. A categorical proposition is in stan-
dard form if and only if it is a substitution instance of one of the following four forms:
All S are P.
No S are P.
Some S are P.
Some S are not P.
Many categorical propositions, of course, are not in standard form because, among 
other things, they do not begin with the words “all,” “no,” or “some.” In the final section 
of this chapter we will develop techniques for translating categorical propositions into 
standard form, but for now we may restrict our attention to those that are already in 
standard form.
The words “all,” “no,” and “some” are called quantifiers because they specify how 
much of the subject class is included in or excluded from the predicate class. The first 
form asserts that the whole subject class is included in the predicate class, the second 
that the whole subject class is excluded from the predicate class, and so on. (Inciden-
tally, in formal deductive logic the word “some” always means at least one.) The letters 
S and P stand respectively for the subject and predicate terms, and the words “are” and 
“are not” are called the copula because they link (or “couple”) the subject term with the 
predicate term.
Consider the following example:
All members of the American Medical Association are people holding degrees from 
recognized academic institutions.
This standard-form categorical proposition is analyzed as follows:
quantifier:	
all
subject term:	
members of the American Medical Association
copula:	
are
predicate term:	
people holding degrees from recognized academic institutions

202   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
A
lice Ambrose was born in 1906 in Lexing­
ton, Illinois. She was orphaned at age 13, but 
still managed to attend Millikin University in  
Decatur and graduate with a major in mathematics 
and philosophy. After earning a PhD in philosophy 
from the University of Wisconsin, where she worked 
on Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica, she  
entered a postdoctoral program at Cambridge  
University. There she studied under, and became a close  
disciple of, the famous philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein.  
(She received a second PhD from that university in 
1938.) In 1937 she accepted a teaching position in  
philosophy at Smith College, where she remained until 
her retirement in 1972.
Within a year after arriving at Smith, Ambrose  
met and married the philosopher Morris Lazerowitz,  
with whom she coauthored several books and  
articles. One was a textbook in symbolic logic, com­
monly called “Ambrose and Lazerowitz” that was 
used by a generation of young philosophers. Other 
subjects on which Ambrose did important work in­
clude the foundations of mathematics, finitism in 
mathematics, logical 
impossibility, the jus­
tification of induction, 
and 
Wittgenstein’s 
the­ory of proof. Am­
brose was a particu­
larly lucid writer, and 
this, combined with 
her keen insight, won 
widespread recogni­
tion by philosophers 
and logicians.
From 
1975 
to 
1976 Ambrose served as president of the American 
Philosophical Association (Eastern Division). Interest­
ingly, in that office she was immediately preceded by 
John Rawls, and immediately succeeded by Hillary 
Putnam. Ambrose was also a dedicated supporter of 
peace and social justice, and she remained active as a 
speaker and writer until her death in 2001 at the age 
of 94. Today Smith College sponsors an annual ad­
dress in her honor.
Alice Ambrose 1906–2001
Courtesy Pat Safford
In resolving standard-form categorical propositions into their four components, one 
must keep these components separate. They do not overlap. In this regard, note that 
“subject term” and “predicate term” do not mean the same thing in logic that “­subject” 
and “predicate” mean in grammar. The subject of the example statement includes the 
quantifier “all,” but the subject term does not. Similarly, the predicate includes the cop-
ula “are,” but the predicate term does not.
Two additional points should be noted about standard-form categorical proposi-
tions. The first is that the form “All S are not P” is not a standard form. This form is 
ambiguous and can be rendered as either “No S are P” or “Some S are not P,” depending 
on the content. The second point is that there are exactly three forms of ­quantifiers and 
two forms of copulas. Other texts allow the various forms of the verb “to be” (such as 
“is,” “is not,” “will,” and “will not”) to serve as the copula. For the sake of uniformity, this 
book restricts the copula to “are” and “are not.” The last section of this chapter describes 
techniques for translating these alternate forms into the two accepted ones.
4

SECTION 4.2 Quality, Quantity, and Distribution   203
EXERCISE 4.1	
In the following categorical propositions identify the quantifier, subject term, copula, 
and predicate term.
★1.	 Some executive-pay packages are insults to ordinary workers.
	
2.	 No stressful jobs are occupations conducive to a healthy lifestyle.
	
3.	 All oil-based paints are products that contribute to photochemical smog.
★4.	 Some preachers who are intolerant of others’ beliefs are not television evangelists.
	
5.	 All trials in which a coerced confession is read to the jury are trials in which a 
guilty verdict can be reversed.
	
6.	 Some artificial hearts are mechanisms that are prone to failure.
★7.	 No sex-education courses that are taught competently are programs that are  
currently eroding public morals.
	
8.	 Some universities that emphasize research are not institutions that neglect  
undergraduate education.
Originated by Aristotle, the theory of categorical propositions has constituted one 
of the core topics in logic for over 2,000 years. It remains important even today because 
many of the statements we make in ordinary discourse are either categorical propo-
sitions as they stand or are readily translatable into them. Standard-form ­categorical 
propositions represent an ideal of clarity in language, and a familiarity with the rela-
tionships that prevail among them provides a backdrop of precision for all kinds of  
linguistic usage. In Chapter 5 we will see how categorical propositions may be com-
bined to produce categorical syllogisms, a kind of argumentation that is closely related 
to the most basic forms of human reasoning.
4.2	
Quality, Quantity, and Distribution
PREVIEW    How one class of things relates to another is often important to keep in mind. For 
example, if you tell lies, it’s important to keep separate the class of people you have lied to from the class 
of people you have told the truth. And if the class of people you would like to date partly overlaps the 
class of people your best friend would like to date, ignoring this fact might lead to trouble. The relations 
between classes form the subject matter of this section of the book.
Quality and quantity are attributes of categorical propositions. In order to see how 
these attributes pertain, it is useful to rephrase the meaning of categorical propositions 
in class terminology:
4
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

204   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
The quality of a categorical proposition is either affirmative or negative ­depending 
on whether it affirms or denies class membership. Accordingly, “All S are P” and “Some 
S are P” have affirmative quality, and “No S are P” and “Some S are not P” have nega-
tive quality. These are called affirmative propositions and negative propositions, 
respectively.
The quantity of a categorical proposition is either universal or particular, depending 
on whether the statement makes a claim about every member or just some member of 
the class denoted by the subject term. “All S are P” and “No S are P” each assert some-
thing about every member of the S class and thus are universal propositions. “Some 
S are P” and “Some S are not P” assert something about one or more members of the S 
class and hence are particular propositions.
Note that the quantity of a categorical proposition may be determined through mere 
inspection of the quantifier. “All” and “no” immediately imply universal quantity, while 
“some” implies particular. But categorical propositions have no “qualifier.” In universal 
propositions the quality is determined by the quantifier, and in particular propositions 
it is determined by the copula.
Particular propositions mean no more and no less than the meaning assigned to 
them in class notation. The statement “Some S are P” does not imply that some S are 
not P, and the statement “Some S are not P” does not imply that some S are P. It often 
happens, of course, that substitution instances of these statement forms are both true. 
For example, “Some apples are red” is true, as is “Some apples are not red.” But the fact 
that one is true does not necessitate that the other be true. “Some zebras are animals” is 
true (because at least one zebra is an animal), but “Some zebras are not animals” is false. 
Similarly, “Some turkeys are not fish” is true, but “Some turkeys are fish” is false. Thus, 
the fact that one of these statement forms is true does not logically imply that the other 
is true, as these substitution instances clearly prove.
Since the early Middle Ages the four kinds of categorical propositions have com-
monly been designated by letter names corresponding to the first four vowels of the 
Roman alphabet: A, E, I, O. The universal affirmative is called an A proposition, 
the universal negative an E proposition, the particular affirmative an I proposition, 
and the particular negative an O proposition. Tradition has it that these letters were 
derived from the first two vowels in the Latin words affirmo (“I affirm”) and nego 
(“I deny”), thus:
Proposition
Meaning in class notation
All S are P.
Every member of the S class is a member of the  
P class; that is, the S class is included in the P class.
No S are P.
No member of the S class is a member of the P class;  
that is, the S class is excluded from the P class.
Some S are P.
At least one member of the S class is a member of  
of the P class.
Some S are not P.
At least one member of the S class is not a member of  
of the P class.

4
Unlike quality and quantity, which are attributes of propositions, distribution is an 
attribute of the terms (subject and predicate) of propositions. A term is said to be dis-
tributed if the proposition makes an assertion about every member of the class denoted 
by the term; otherwise, it is undistributed. Stated another way, a term is distributed if 
and only if the statement assigns (or distributes) an attribute to every member of the 
class denoted by the term. Thus, if a statement asserts something about every member 
of the S class, then S is distributed; if it asserts something about every member of the P 
class, then P is distributed; otherwise S and P are undistributed.
Let us imagine that the members of the classes denoted by the subject and predicate 
terms of a categorical proposition are contained respectively in circles marked with the 
letters “S” and “P.” The meaning of the statement form “All S are P” may then be repre-
sented by the following diagram:
S P
The S circle is contained in the P circle, which represents the fact that every member of S 
is a member of P. (Of course, should S and P represent terms denoting identical classes,  
the two circles would overlap exactly.) As the diagram shows, “All S are P” makes a 
claim about every member of the S class, since the statement says that every member 
of S is in the P class. But the statement does not make a claim about every member of 
the P class, since there may be some members of P that are outside of S. Thus, by the  
n
Universal
A
E
f
f
g
Particular
I
O
r
m
o
Proposition
Letter name
Quantity
Quality
All S are P.
A
universal
affirmative
No S are P.
E
universal
negative
Some S are P.
I
particular
affirmative
Some S are not P.
O
particular
negative
SECTION 4.2 Quality, Quantity, and Distribution   205
The material presented thus far in this section may be summarized as follows:

206   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
definition of “distributed term” given above, S is distributed and P is not. In other 
words, for any universal affirmative (A) proposition, the subject term, whatever it may 
be, is distributed, and the predicate term is undistributed.
Let us now consider the universal negative (E) proposition. “No S are P” states that 
the S and P classes are separate, which may be represented as follows:
P
S
This statement makes a claim about every member of S and every member of P. It 
asserts that every member of S is separate from every member of P, and also that 
every member of P is separate from every member of S. Accordingly, by our defini-
tion, both the subject and predicate terms of universal negative (E) propositions are 
distributed.
The particular affirmative (I) proposition states that at least one member of S is 
a member of P. If we represent this one member of S that we are certain about by an  
asterisk, the resulting diagram looks like this:
P
*S
Since the asterisk is inside the P class, it represents something that is simultaneously an 
S and a P; in other words, it represents a member of the S class that is also a member of 
the P class. Thus, the statement “Some S are P ” makes a claim about one member (at 
least) of S and also one member (at least) of P, but not about all members of either class. 
Hence, by the definition of distribution, neither S nor P is distributed.
The particular negative (O) proposition asserts that at least one member of S is not a 
member of P. If we once again represent this one member of S by an asterisk, the result-
ing diagram is as follows:
P
*S
Since the other members of S may or may not be outside of P, it is clear that the state-
ment “Some S are not P ” does not make a claim about every member of S, so S is 
not distributed. But, as may be seen from the diagram, the statement does assert that 
every member of P is separate and distinct from this one member of S that is outside 
the P circle. Thus, in the particular negative (O) proposition, P is distributed and S is 
undistributed.

4
At this point the notion of distribution may be somewhat vague and elusive. Unfor-
tunately, there is no simple and easy way to make the idea graphically clear. The best 
that can be done is to repeat some of the things that have already been said. First of 
all, distribution is an attribute or quality that the subject and predicate terms of a cat-
egorical proposition may or may not possess, depending on the kind of proposition. If 
the proposition in question is an A type, then the subject term, whatever it may be, is 
distributed. If it is an E type, then both terms are distributed; if an I type, then neither; 
and if an O type, then the predicate. If a certain term is distributed in a proposition, this 
simply means that the proposition says something about every member of the class that 
the term denotes. If a term is undistributed, the proposition does not say something 
about every member of the class.
An easy way to remember the rule for distribution is to keep in mind that universal 
(A and E) statements distribute their subject terms and negative (E and O) statements 
distribute their predicate terms. As an aid to remembering this arrangement, the follow-
ing mnemonic may be useful: “Unprepared Students Never Pass.” Attending to the first 
letter in these words may help one recall that Universals distribute Subjects, and Nega-
tives distribute Predicates. Another mnemonic that accomplishes the same purpose is 
“Any Student Earning B’s Is Not On Probation.” In this mnemonic the first letters may 
help one recall that A statements distribute the Subject, E statements ­distribute Both 
terms, I statements distribute Neither term, and O statements distribute the Predicate.
Finally, note that the attribute of distribution, while not particularly important to 
subsequent developments in this chapter, is essential to the evaluation of syllogisms in 
the next chapter.
The material of this section may now be summarized as follows:
Proposition
Letter 
name
Quantity
Quality
Terms  
distributed
All S are P.
A
universal
affirmative
S
No S are P.
E
universal
negative
S and P
Some S are P.
I
particular
affirmative
none
Some S are not P.
O
particular
negative
P
Two mnemonic devices for distribution
“Unprepared Students Never Pass”
“Any Student Earning B’s Is Not 
On Probation”
Universals distribute Subjects.
A distributes Subject.
Negatives distribute Predicates.
E distributes Both.
I distributes Neither.
O distributes Predicate.
SECTION 4.2 Quality, Quantity, and Distribution   207

4
EXERCISE 4.2	
	 I.	 For each of the following categorical propositions identify the letter name,  
quantity, and quality. Then state whether the subject and predicate terms are dis-
tributed or undistributed.
	
★1.	 No vampire movies are films without blood.
	
2.	 All governments that bargain with terrorists are governments that encourage 
terrorism.
	
3.	 Some symphony orchestras are organizations on the brink of bankruptcy.
	
★4.	 Some Chinese leaders are not thoroughgoing opponents of capitalist  
economics.
	
5.	 All human contacts with benzene are potential causes of cancer.
	
6.	 No labor strikes are events welcomed by management.
	
★7.	 Some hospitals are organizations that overcharge the Medicare program.
	
8.	 Some affirmative action plans are not programs that result in reverse  
discrimination.
	II.	 Change the quality but not the quantity of the following statements:
	
★1.	 All drunk drivers are threats to others on the highway.
	
2.	 No wildlife refuges are locations suitable for condominium developments.
	
3.	 Some slumlords are people who eventually wind up in jail.
	
★4.	 Some CIA operatives are not champions of human rights.
	III.	 Change the quantity but not the quality of the following statements:
	
★1.	 All owners of pit bull terriers are people who can expect expensive lawsuits.
	
2.	 No tax proposals that favor the rich are fair proposals.
	
3.	 Some grade-school administrators are people who choke the educational  
process.
	
★4.	 Some residents of Manhattan are not people who can afford to live there.
	IV.	 Change both the quality and the quantity of the following statements:
	
★1.	 All oil spills are events catastrophic to the environment.
	
2.	 No alcoholics are people with a healthy diet.
	
3.	 Some Mexican vacations are episodes that end with gastrointestinal distress.
	
★4.	 Some corporate lawyers are not people with a social conscience.
208   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

4
SECTION 4.3 Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition   209
4.3	
Venn Diagrams and the Modern  
Square of Opposition
PREVIEW    Think of a football game. At kickoff time, all the members of one team are at one end 
of the field, and all the members of the other team are at the other end. This idea of assigning distinct 
spatial regions to two classes (the two teams) is the basic idea behind Venn diagrams for categorical 
propositions. Two circles identify the two regions, and you are supposed to imagine all the members of 
one class as occupying one circle and all the members of the other class as occupying the other circle.
Existential Import
The primary goal of our inquiry into categorical propositions is to disclose the role that 
such propositions play in the formation of arguments. However, it turns out that we 
can interpret universal (A and E) propositions in two different ways, and according to 
one of these interpretations an argument might be valid, while according to the other it 
might be invalid. Thus, before turning to the evaluation of arguments, we must explore 
the two possible interpretations of universal propositions. Our investigation will focus 
on what is called existential import. To illustrate this concept, consider the following 
pair of propositions:
All Tom Cruise’s movies are hits.
All unicorns are one-horned animals.
The first proposition implies that Tom Cruise has indeed made some movies. In other 
words, the statement has existential import. It implies that one or more things denoted 
by the subject term actually exist. On the other hand, no such implication is made by the 
statement about unicorns. The statement might be said to be true, because unicorns, by 
definition, have a single horn. But the statement does not imply that unicorns actually exist.
Thus, the question arises: Should universal propositions be interpreted as implying 
that the things talked about actually exist? Or should they be interpreted as implying  
no such thing? In response to this question, logicians have taken two different approaches.  
Aristotle held that universal propositions about existing things have existential import. 
In other words, such statements imply the existence of the things talked about:
Aristotelian standpoint
All pheasants are birds.	
Implies the existence of pheasants.
No pine trees are maples.	
Implies the existence of pine trees.
All satyrs are vile creatures.	
Does not imply the existence of satyrs.
The first two statements have existential import because their subject terms denote 
actually existing things. The third statement has no existential import, because satyrs 
do not exist.

210   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
On the other hand, according to the theory developed by the nineteenth-century 
logician George Boole (as perfected by John Venn), no universal propositions have  
existential import. Such statements never imply the existence of the things talked about:
Boolean standpoint
All trucks are vehicles.	
Does not imply the existence of trucks.
No roses are daisies.	
Does not imply the existence of roses.
All werewolves are monsters.	
Does not imply the existence of werewolves.
We might summarize these results by saying that the Aristotelian standpoint is “open” 
(or receptive) to existence.* When things exist, the Aristotelian standpoint recognizes 
their existence, and universal statements about those things have existential import. In 
other words, existence counts for something. On the other hand, the Boolean stand-
point is “closed” (unreceptive) to existence. When things exist, the Boolean standpoint 
does not recognize their existence, and universal statements about those things have 
no existential import. Conversely, when things do not exist, neither the Aristotelian 
nor the Boolean standpoint recognizes any existence. Under these circumstances, the 
Aristotelian standpoint merges with the Boolean.†
The Aristotelian standpoint differs from the Boolean standpoint only with regard 
to universal (A and E) propositions. The two standpoints are identical with regard to 
particular (I and O) propositions. Both the Aristotelian and the Boolean standpoints 
recognize that particular propositions make a positive assertion about existence. For 
example, from both standpoints, the statement “Some cats are animals” asserts that at 
least one cat exists that is an animal. Also, from both standpoints, “Some fish are not 
mammals” asserts that at least one fish exists that is not a mammal. Thus, from both 
standpoints, the word “some” implies existence.‡
Adopting either the Aristotelian or the Boolean standpoint amounts to accepting 
a set of ground rules for interpreting the meaning of universal propositions. Either 
standpoint can be adopted for any categorical proposition or any argument composed 
of categorical propositions. Taking the Aristotelian standpoint amounts to recogniz-
ing that universal statements about existing things convey evidence about existence. 
Conversely, for a statement to convey such evidence, the Aristotelian standpoint must 
be taken and the subject of the statement must denote actually existing things. Taking 
the Boolean standpoint, on the other hand, amounts to ignoring any evidence about 
existence that universal statements might convey.
*In general, we interpret this openness to existence as extending to the subject class, the predicate class, and the com-
plements of these classes. However, in the present account we confine our attention to the subject class. The concept of 
class complement is discussed in Section 4.4 (Obversion).
†For a more complete account of the relation between the Aristotelian and the Boolean standpoints, see “Existential 
Import: Historical Background,” by Patrick J. Hurley. For availability, please see the preface to this book under “New 
to This Edition.”
‡In ordinary language, the word “some” occasionally implies something less than actual existence. For example, the 
statement “Some unicorns are tenderhearted” does not seem to suggest that unicorns actually exist, but merely that 
among the group of imaginary things called “unicorns,” there is a subclass of tenderhearted ones. In the vast majority 
of cases, however, “some” in ordinary language implies existence. The logical “some” conforms to these latter uses.

George Boole 1815–1864
eminentlogicians
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division [LC-USZ62-61664]
4
SECTION 4.3 Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition   211
T
he English mathematician and philosopher 
George Boole is known primarily for the  
development of Boolean algebra—a type of 
logic based on the three fundamental operations of 
and, or, and not. The American philosopher and logician  
Charles Sanders Peirce was captivated by Boole’s 
ideas, and he saw a possible application in the area of 
electrical circuitry. Fifty years later, the American math­
ematician and engineer Claude Shannon put theory  
to practice by showing how Boole’s system could be 
used in designing telephone routing switches. This  
innovation subsequently led to the development of 
electronic digital computers.
Boole’s early years were marked by struggle. His 
father, John, was a cobbler, and his mother, Mary Ann, 
a lady’s maid. They could afford only the most basic 
education for their son, which John supplemented by 
teaching mathematics and science to young George 
and by hiring a Latin tutor for him. Boole taught him­
self Greek, French, and German. His father, a leading 
member of the Mechanics Institute, was intrigued by the  
application of mathematics in making instruments, 
and he passed this interest to his son. Though poverty  
limited the resources available to him, Boole used 
mathematics journals borrowed from the institute 
to further his mathematics education on his own.
When George was only sixteen, his father’s shoe­
making business folded, and it fell to him to support 
the family by working as an assistant teacher. When 
he was twenty-two, he took over the operation of a 
boarding school after its former director had died, and 
his whole family assisted him in running it. Throughout 
this period, Boole continued his study of mathemat­
ics, and at age twenty-nine he published a paper on 
the use of algebraic methods in solving differential  
equations. In recognition of this work he received the 
Royal Society Me­
dal, which brought 
him considerable 
fame in the math­
ematical world.
Three years later 
Boole 
published 
The Mathematical 
Analysis of Logic, 
which brought to 
fruition some of 
Lei­bniz’s 
earlier 
spec­ulations 
on 
the 
relationship 
between mathematics and logic. It also showed how the 
symbolism of mathematics could be imported into logic. 
This work won him a professorship at Queens College, 
in Cork, Ireland, where he remained for the rest of his 
life. Seven years later he published a much larger and 
more mature work on the same subject, An Investigation 
of the Laws of Thought, on Which Are Founded the Mathe-
matical Theories of Logic and Probabilities. This later work 
presented a complete system of symbolic reasoning.
Boole married Mary Everest (the niece of Sir 
George Everest, after whom Mt. Everest is named). 
He met her when she came to visit her famous uncle 
in Cork, and the relationship developed through his 
giving her lessons on differential equations. The couple 
had five daughters, but when Boole was only forty-nine 
his life was cut short from what was probably pneu­
monia. Boole had walked two miles in the pouring rain 
to lecture at Queens, and he delivered the lecture in 
wet clothing. After he developed a high fever and be­
came desperately ill, his wife, thinking that a good cure 
always mirrors the cause, poured cold water on him as 
he lay in bed. He died shortly thereafter.

212   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
Because the Boolean standpoint is closed to existence, it is simpler than the  
Aristotelian standpoint, which recognizes existential implications. For this reason, we 
will direct our attention first to arguments considered from the Boolean standpoint. 
Later, in Section 4.5, we will extend our treatment to the Aristotelian standpoint.
Venn Diagrams
From the Boolean standpoint, the four kinds of categorical propositions have the  
following meaning. Notice that the first two (universal) propositions imply nothing 
about the existence of the things denoted by S:
All S are P.  No members of S are outside P.
No S are P.  No members of S are inside P.
Some S are P.  At least one S exists that is a P.
Some S are not P.  At least one S exists that is not a P.
Adopting this interpretation of categorical propositions, the nineteenth-century  
logician John Venn developed a system of diagrams to represent the information they 
express. These diagrams have come to be known as Venn diagrams.
A Venn diagram is an arrangement of overlapping circles in which each circle repre-
sents the class denoted by a term in a categorical proposition. Because every ­categorical 
proposition has exactly two terms, the Venn diagram for a single categorical proposi-
tion consists of two overlapping circles. Each circle is labeled so that it represents one  
of the terms in the proposition. Unless otherwise required, we adopt the convention 
that the left-hand circle represents the subject term, and the right-hand circle the 
­predicate term. Such a diagram looks like this:
P
S
The members of the class denoted by each term should be thought of as situated 
inside the corresponding circle. Thus, the members of the S class (if any such mem-
bers exist) are situated inside the S circle, and the members of the P class (if any such 
members exist) are situated inside the P circle. If any members are situated inside the 
area where the two circles overlap, then such members belong to both the S class and 
the P class. Finally, if any members are situated outside both circles, they are members 
of neither S nor P.
Suppose, for example, that the S class is the class of Americans and the P class is 
the class of farmers. Then, if we use numerals to identify the four possible areas, the 
diagram looks like this:

4
1
2
3
4
Farmers
Americans
Anything in the area marked “1” is an American but not a farmer, anything in the 
area marked “2” is both an American and a farmer, and anything in the area marked “3” 
is a farmer but not an American. The area marked “4” is the area outside both circles; 
thus, anything in this area is neither a farmer nor an American.
We can now use Venn diagrams to represent the information expressed by  
the four kinds of categorical proposition. To do this we make a certain kind of mark  
in a diagram. Two kinds of marks are used: shading an area and placing an X in  
an area. Shading an area means that the shaded area is empty,* and placing an X  
in an area means that at least one thing exists in that area. The X may be thought  
of as representing that one thing. If no mark appears in an area, this means that nothing 
is known about that area; it may contain members or it may be empty. Shading is always 
used to represent the content of universal (A and E) propositions, and placing an X in 
an area is always used to represent the content of particular (I and O) propositions. The 
content of the four kinds of categorical propositions is represented as follows:
P
S
E: No S are P.
P
S
X
I: Some S are P.
P
S
O: Some S are not P.
P
S
A: All S are P.
X
Shading = emptiness
             X = existence
SECTION 4.3 Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition   213
*In many mathematics texts, shading an area of a Venn diagram indicates that the area is not empty. The significance 
of shading in logic is exactly the opposite.

214   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
Recall that the A proposition asserts that no members of S are outside P. This is rep-
resented by shading the part of the S circle that lies outside the P circle. The E proposi-
tion asserts that no members of S are inside P. This is represented by shading the part of 
the S circle that lies inside the P circle. The I proposition asserts that at least one S exists 
and that S is also a P. This is represented by placing an X in the area where the S and P 
circles overlap. This X represents an existing thing that is both an S and a P. Finally, the 
O proposition asserts that at least one S exists, and that S is not a P. This is represented 
by placing an X in the part of the S circle that lies outside the P circle. This X represents 
an existing thing that is an S but not a P.
Because there is no X in the diagrams that represent the universal propositions, 
these diagrams say nothing about existence. For example, the diagram for the A propo-
sition merely asserts that nothing exists in the part of the S circle that lies outside the P  
circle. The area where the two circles overlap and the part of the P circle that lies outside  
the S circle contain no marks at all. This means that something might exist in these 
areas, or they might be completely empty. Similarly, in the diagram for the E proposi-
tion, no marks appear in the left-hand part of the S circle and the right-hand part of 
the P circle. This means that these two areas might contain something or, on the other 
hand, they might not.
The Modern Square of Opposition
Let us compare the diagram for the A proposition with the diagram for the O proposi-
tion. The diagram for the A proposition asserts that the left-hand part of the S circle 
is empty, whereas the diagram for the O proposition asserts that this same area is not 
empty. These two diagrams make assertions that are the exact opposite of each other. 
As a result, their corresponding statements are said to contradict each other. Analo-
gously, the diagram for the E proposition asserts that the area where the two circles 
overlap is empty, whereas the diagram for the I proposition asserts that the area where 
the two circles overlap is not empty. Accordingly, their corresponding propositions are 
also said to contradict each other. This relationship of mutually contradictory pairs 
of propositions is represented in a diagram called the modern square of opposition. 
This diagram, which arises from the modern (or Boolean) interpretation of categorical 
propositions, is represented as follows:
A
E
O
I
Contra
dictory
Contra
dictory
Logically
undetermined
Logically
undetermined
Logically
undetermined
Logically
undetermined

4
If two propositions are related by the contradictory relation, they necessarily have 
opposite truth value. Thus, if a certain A proposition is given as true, the corresponding 
O proposition must be false. Similarly, if a certain I proposition is given as false, the cor-
responding E proposition must be true. But no other inferences are possible. In particu-
lar, given the truth value of an A or O proposition, nothing can be determined about 
the truth value of the corresponding E or I propositions. These propositions are said to 
have logically undetermined truth value. Like all propositions, they do have a truth 
value, but logic alone cannot determine what it is. Similarly, given the truth value of an 
E or I proposition, nothing can be determined about the truth value of the correspond-
ing A or O propositions. They, too, are said to have logically undetermined truth value.
Finally, suppose we should be given a set of four propositions about nonexisting 
things, such as flying zebras. The A proposition, which asserts that there are no flying  
zebras outside the predicate class will be true because there are no flying zebras at all, 
and the E proposition, which asserts that there are no flying zebras inside the predicate 
class will be true for the same reason. These propositions are said to be vacuously true, 
because their truth value results solely from the fact that the subject class is empty, or 
void of members. Furthermore, the truth value of these propositions does not vio-
late the “logically undetermined” relation between the A and the E because it results 
not from any relation between these propositions but from the fact the subject class is 
empty. The same can be said about the false truth values of the I and the O.
Testing Immediate Inferences
Since the modern square of opposition provides logically necessary results, we can use 
it to test certain arguments for validity. We begin by assuming the premise is true, and 
we enter the pertinent truth value in the square. We then use the square to compute 
the truth value of the conclusion. If the square indicates that the conclusion is true, the 
argument is valid; if not, the argument is invalid. Here is an example:
Some trade spies are not masters at bribery.
Therefore, it is false that all trade spies are masters at bribery.
Arguments of this sort are called immediate inferences because they have only one 
premise. Instead of reasoning from one premise to the next, and then to the conclusion, 
we proceed immediately from the single premise to the conclusion. To test this argu-
ment for validity, we begin by assuming that the premise, which is an O proposition, is 
true, and we enter this truth value in the square of opposition. We then use the square 
to compute the truth value of the corresponding A proposition. By the contradictory 
relation, the A proposition is false. Since the conclusion claims that the A proposition 
is false, the conclusion is true, and therefore the argument is valid. Arguments that are 
valid from the Boolean standpoint are said to be unconditionally valid because they 
are valid regardless of whether their terms refer to existing things.
Note that the conclusion of this argument has the form “It is false that all S are P.” 
Technically, statements of this type are not standard-form categorical propositions 
because, among other things, they do not begin with a quantifier. To remedy this  
difficulty we adopt the convention that statements having this form are equivalent to 
SECTION 4.3 Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition   215

216   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
“ ‘All S are P’ is false.” Analogous remarks apply to the negations of the E, I, and O statements.
Here is another example:
It is false that all meteor showers are common spectacles.
Therefore, no meteor showers are common spectacles.
We begin by assuming that the premise is true. Since the premise claims that an A propo-
sition is false, we enter “false” into the square of opposition. We then use the square to 
compute the truth value of the corresponding E proposition. Since there is no relation that 
links the A and E propositions, the E proposition has undetermined truth value. Thus, the 
conclusion of the argument has undetermined truth value, and the argument is invalid.
We can also use Venn diagrams to test immediate inferences for validity. However, using 
this technique often requires that we diagram statements beginning with the phrase “It is 
false that.” Let us begin by showing how to diagram such statements. Here are two examples:
It is false that all A are B.
It is false that some A are B.
The first statement claims that “All A are B” is false. Thus, to diagram it, we do the 
exact opposite of what we would do to diagram “All A are B.” To diagram “All A are B,” 
we shade the left-hand part of the A circle:
B
A
All A are B.
To diagram “It is false that all A are B,” we enter an X in the left-hand part of the  
A circle. Entering an X in an area is the opposite of shading an area:
X
B
A
It is false that all A are B.
Any statement that is diagrammed by entering an X in an area is a particular proposi-
tion. Thus, as the diagram shows, “It is false that all A are B” is actually a particular prop-
osition. By similar reasoning, “It is false that no A are B” is also a particular proposition.
To diagram “It is false that some A are B,” we do the exact opposite of what we would 
do to diagram “Some A are B.” For “Some A are B,” we would enter an X in the overlap 
area. Thus, to diagram “It is false that some A are B,” we shade the overlap area:
B
A
It is false that some A are B.

4
Any statement that is diagrammed by shading an area is a universal proposition. 
Thus, “It is false that some A are B” is actually a universal proposition. By similar rea-
soning, “It is false that some A are not B” is also a universal proposition.
Now let us use Venn diagrams to test an immediate inference. To do so we begin by 
using letters to represent the terms, and we then draw Venn diagrams for the premise 
and conclusion. If the information expressed by the conclusion diagram is contained in 
the premise diagram, the argument is valid; if not, it is invalid. Here is the symbolized 
form of the trade spies inference that we tested earlier.
Some T are not M.
Therefore, it is false that all T are M.
The next step is to draw two Venn diagrams, one for the premise and the other  
for the conclusion. For the premise we enter an X in the left-hand part of the T circle, 
and for the conclusion, as we have just seen, we enter an X in the left-hand part of the 
T circle:
M
T
Some T are not M.
M
T
X
X
It is false that all T are M.
To evaluate the inference, we look to see whether the information expressed by the 
conclusion diagram is also expressed by the premise diagram. The conclusion diagram 
asserts that something exists in the left-hand part of the T circle. Since this informa-
tion is also expressed by the premise diagram, the inference is valid. In this case, the 
diagram for the conclusion is identical to the diagram for the premise, so it is clear 
that premise and conclusion assert exactly the same thing. However, as we will see in  
Sections 4.5 and 4.6, for an immediate inference to be valid, it is not necessary that 
premise and conclusion assert exactly the same thing. It is only necessary that the 
premise assert at least as much as the conclusion.
Here is the symbolized version of the meteor shower inference evaluated earlier:
It is false that all M are C.
Therefore, no M are C.
To diagram the premise, we enter an X in the left-hand part of the M circle, and for 
the conclusion we shade the overlap area:
SECTION 4.3 Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition   217

4
C
M
It is false that all M are C.
C
M
X
No M are C.
Here, the conclusion diagram asserts that the overlap area is empty. Since this  
information is not contained in the premise diagram, the inference is invalid.
We conclude with a special kind of inference:
All smartphones are wireless devices.
Therefore, some smartphones are wireless devices.
The completed Venn diagrams are as follows:
W
S
All S are W.
W
S
Some S are W.
X
The information of the conclusion diagram is not contained in the premise dia-
gram, so the inference is invalid. However, if the premise were interpreted as having 
existential import, then the S circle in the premise diagram would not be empty. 
Specifically, there would be members in the overlap area. This would make the in-
ference valid.
Arguments of this sort are said to commit the existential fallacy. From the Bool-
ean standpoint, the existential fallacy is a formal fallacy that occurs whenever an  
argument is invalid merely because the premise lacks existential import. Such argu-
ments always have a universal premise and a particular conclusion. The fallacy con-
sists in attempting to derive a conclusion having existential import from a premise 
that lacks it.
The existential fallacy is easy to detect. Just look for a pair of diagrams in which the 
premise diagram contains shading and the conclusion diagram contains an X. If the X 
218   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS

4
EXERCISE 4.3	
	 I.	 Draw Venn diagrams for the following propositions.
	
★1.	 No life decisions are happenings based solely on logic.
	
2.	 All electric motors are machines that depend on magnetism.
	
3.	 Some political campaigns are mere attempts to discredit opponents.
	
★4.	 Some rock-music lovers are not fans of Madonna.
in the conclusion diagram is in the same part of the left-hand circle that is unshaded in 
the premise diagram, then the inference commits the existential fallacy. In the smart- 
phone example we just considered, the premise diagram contains shading, and the con-
clusion diagram contains an X. Also, the X in the conclusion diagram is in the overlap 
area, and this area is unshaded in the premise diagram. Thus, the inference commits 
the existential fallacy.
There are exactly eight inference forms that commit the existential fallacy. Four  
of them are as follows. (The other four are left for an exercise.) Among these forms, 
recall that any proposition asserting that a particular (I or O) proposition is false is a 
­universal proposition, and any proposition asserting that a universal (A or E) proposi-
tion is false is a particular proposition. With this in mind, you can see that all of these 
forms proceed from a universal premise to a particular conclusion.
Existential fallacy
All A are B.
Therefore, some A are B.
It is false that some A are not B.
Therefore, it is false that no A are B.
No A are B.
Therefore, it is false that all A are B.
It is false that some A are B.
Therefore, some A are not B.
Finally, while all of these forms proceed from a universal premise to a particular 
conclusion, it is important to see that not every inference having a universal prem-
ise and a particular conclusion commits the existential fallacy. For example, the  
inference “All A are B; therefore, some A are not B” does not commit this fallacy.  
This inference is invalid because the conclusion contradicts the premise. Thus, to de-
tect the existential fallacy, one must ensure that the invalidity results merely from the 
fact that the premise lacks existential import. This can easily be done by constructing 
a Venn diagram.
SECTION 4.3 Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition   219

4
	
5.	 All redistricting plans are sources of controversy.
	
6.	 No tax audits are pleasant experiences for cheaters.
	
★7.	 Some housing developments are complexes that exclude children.
	
8.	 Some cruise ships are not steam-driven vessels.
	II.	 Use the modern square of opposition to determine whether the following immedi-
ate inferences are valid or invalid from the Boolean standpoint.
	
★1.	 No sculptures by Rodin are boring creations.
	
	 Therefore, all sculptures by Rodin are boring creations.
	
2.	 It is false that some lunar craters are volcanic formations.
	
	 Therefore, no lunar craters are volcanic formations.
	
3.	 All trial lawyers are people with stressful jobs.
	
	 Therefore, some trial lawyers are people with stressful jobs.
	
★4.	 All dry martinis are dangerous concoctions.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some dry martinis are not dangerous concoctions.
	
5.	 It is false that no jazz musicians are natives of New Orleans.
	
	 Therefore, some jazz musicians are not natives of New Orleans.
	
6.	 Some country doctors are altruistic healers.
	
	 Therefore, some country doctors are not altruistic healers.
	
★7.	 No fertility drugs are solutions to every problem.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all fertility drugs are solutions to every problem.
	
8.	 It is false that no credit cards are things that contain holograms.
	
	 Therefore, some credit cards are things that contain holograms.
	
9.	 It is false that some stunt pilots are not colorful daredevils.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some stunt pilots are colorful daredevils.
	 ★10.	 No vampires are avid connoisseurs of garlic bread.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some vampires are avid connoisseurs of garlic 
bread.
	
11.	 No talk radio shows are accurate sources of information.
	
	 Therefore, some talk radio shows are not accurate sources of information.
	
12.	 Some stellar constellations are spiral-shaped objects.
	
	 Therefore, no stellar constellations are spiral-shaped objects.
	 ★13.	 It is false that some soap bubbles are not occasions of glee.
	
	 Therefore, some soap bubbles are occasions of glee.
	
14.	 It is false that all weddings are light-hearted celebrations.
	
	 Therefore, some weddings are not light-hearted celebrations.
	
15.	 It is false that some chocolate soufflés are desserts containing olives.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all chocolate soufflés are desserts containing olives.
220   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS

4.4	
Conversion, Obversion,  
and Contraposition
PREVIEW    After watching a vampire flick on TV, you discuss the movie with some friends. One 
insists that every vampire movie is a horror film, while another says that every movie that is not a hor-
ror film is also not about vampires. A third says that these two statements are the same, while a fourth 
says they are not. How would you settle this disagreement? Could you prove that what you say is correct? 
This section of the book is all about relations between statements such as these.
For a preliminary glimpse into the content of this section, consider the statement “No dogs 
are cats.” This statement claims that the class of dogs is separated from the class of cats. 
But the statement “No cats are dogs” claims the same thing. Thus, the two statements 
have the same meaning and the same truth value. For another example, consider the 
statement “Some dogs are not retrievers.” This statement claims there is at least one dog 
outside the class of retrievers. But the statement “Some dogs are non-retrievers” claims 
the same thing, so again, the two statements have the same meaning and the same truth 
value.
Conversion, obversion, and contraposition are operations that can be performed on 
a categorical proposition, resulting in a new statement that may or may not have the 
same meaning and truth value as the original statement. Venn diagrams are used to 
determine how the two statements relate to each other.
Conversion
The simplest of the three operations is conversion, and it consists of switching the 
subject term with the predicate term. For example, if the statement “No foxes are 
hedgehogs” is converted, the resulting statement is “No hedgehogs are foxes.” This new 
statement is called the converse of the given statement. To see how the four types of 
	III.	Use Venn diagrams to evaluate the immediate inferences in Part II of this exercise. 
Identify any that commit the existential fallacy.
	IV.	 This section of Chapter 4 identified four forms of the existential fallacy. Use Venn 
diagrams to identify the other four. In doing so, keep in mind that all forms of this 
fallacy have a universal premise and a particular conclusion, that “It is false that 
some A are B” and “It is false that some A are not B” are universal propositions, 
and “It is false that all A are B” and “It is false that no A are B” are particular.
4
SECTION 4.4 Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition   221
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

222   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
categorical propositions relate to their converse, compare the following sets of Venn 
diagrams:
B
A
B
A
Some B are
not A.
Some B are A.
B
X
X
X
X
A
B
A
Some A are
not B.
Some A are B.
B
A
B
A
No B are A.
All B are A.
B
A
B
A
No A are B.
All A are B.
Converse
Given statement form
If we examine the diagram for the E statement, we see that it is identical to that of its 
converse. Also, the diagram for the I statement is identical to that of its converse. This 
means that the E statement and its converse are logically equivalent, and the I state-
ment and its converse are logically equivalent. Two statements are said to be logically 
equivalent statements when they necessarily have the same truth value (as we will see 
again in Chapter 6). Thus, converting an E or I statement gives a new statement that 
always has the same truth value (and the same meaning) as the given statement. These 
equivalences are strictly proved by the Venn diagrams for the E and I statements.
(quantiﬁer)
(copula)
P
Conversion
S
Switch
On the other hand, the diagram for the A statement is clearly not identical to the 
diagram for its converse, and the diagram for the O statement is not identical to the 
diagram for its converse. Also, these pairs of diagrams are not the exact opposite of 
each other, as is the case with contradictory statements. This means that an A statement  

4
SECTION 4.4 Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition   223
and its converse are logically unrelated as to truth value, and an O statement and its 
converse are logically unrelated as to truth value. In other words, converting an A or 
O statement gives a new statement whose truth value is logically undetermined in re-
lation to the given statement. The converse of an A or O statement does have a truth 
value, of course, but logic alone cannot tell us what it is.
Because conversion yields necessarily determined results for E and I statements, it 
can be used as the basis for immediate inferences having these types of statements as 
premises. The following inference forms are valid:
No A are B.
Therefore, no B are A.
Some A are B.
Therefore, some B are A.
Since the conclusion of each inference form necessarily has the same truth value as 
the premise, if the premise is assumed true, it follows necessarily that the conclusion 
is true. On the other hand, the next two inference forms are invalid. Each commits the 
fallacy of illicit conversion:
All A are B.
Therefore, all B are A.
Some A are not B.
Therefore, some B are not A.
Here are two examples of inferences that commit the fallacy of illicit conversion:
All cats are animals.	
(True)
Therefore, all animals are cats.	
(False)
Some animals are not dogs.	
(True)
Therefore, some dogs are not animals.	
(False)
Obversion
More complicated than conversion, obversion requires two steps: (1) changing the 
quality (without changing the quantity), and (2) replacing the predicate with its term 
complement. The first part of this operation was treated in Exercise 4.2. It consists in 
changing “No S are P” to “All S are P” and vice versa, and changing “Some S are P” to 
“Some S are not P” and vice versa.
The second step requires understanding the concept of class complement. The com-
plement of a class is the group consisting of everything outside the class. For example, 
the complement of the class of dogs is the group that includes everything that is not a 
dog (cats, fish, trees, and so on). The term complement is the word or group of words 
that denotes the class complement. For terms consisting of a single word, the term 
complement is usually formed by simply attaching the prefix “non” to the term. Thus, 
the complement of the term “dog” is “non-dog,” the complement of the term “book” is 
“non-book,” and so on.
The relationship between a term and its complement can be illustrated by a Venn 
diagram. For example, if a single circle is allowed to represent the class of dogs, then 
everything outside the circle represents the class of non-dogs:

224   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
dogs
non-dogs
We now have everything we need to form the obverse of categorical propositions. 
First we change the quality (without changing the quantity), and then we replace the 
predicate term with its term complement. For example, if we are given the statement 
“All horses are animals,” then the obverse is “No horses are non-animals”; and if we 
are given the statement “Some trees are maples,” then the obverse is “Some trees are 
not non-maples.” To see how the four types of categorical propositions relate to their 
obverse, compare the following sets of Venn diagrams:
B
A
B
A
All A are
non-B.
No A are
non-B.
B
A
B
A
No A are B.
All A are B.
B
A
B
A
Some A are
non-B.
Some A are
not non-B.
B
X
X
X
X
A
B
A
Some A are
not B.
Some A are B.
Obverse
Given statement form
To see how the obverse diagrams are drawn, keep in mind that “non-B” desig-
nates the area outside the B circle. Thus, “No A are non-B” asserts that the area where  
A overlaps non-B is empty. This is represented by shading the left-hand part of the  
A circle. “All A are non-B” asserts that all members of A are outside B. This means that 
no members of A are inside B, so the area where A overlaps B is shaded. “Some A are 
not non-B” asserts that at least one member of A is not outside B. This means that at 
least one ­member of A is inside B, so an X is placed in the area where A and B overlap. 

4
Finally, “Some A are non-B” asserts that at least one member of A is outside B, so an  
X is placed in the left-hand part of the A circle.
If we examine these pairs of diagrams, we see that the diagram for each given state-
ment form is identical to the diagram for its obverse. This means that each of the four 
types of categorical proposition is logically equivalent to (and has the same meaning 
as) its obverse. Thus, if we obvert an A statement that happens to be true, the resulting 
statement will be true; if we obvert an O statement that happens to be false, the result-
ing statement will be false, and so on.
(quantiﬁer)
(copula)
Replace with
term complement
Change
quality
P
Obversion
S
(for A and E) 
(for I and O) 
It is easy to see that if a statement is obverted and then obverted again, the result-
ing statement will be identical to the original statement. For example, the obverse of 
“All horses are animals” is “No horses are non-animals.” To obvert the latter statement 
we again change the quality (“no” switches to “all”) and replace “non-animals” with its 
term complement. The term complement is produced by simply deleting the prefix 
“non.” Thus, the obverse of the obverse is “All horses are animals.”
When a term consists of more than a single word, more ingenuity is required to form 
its term complement. For example, if we are given the term “animals that are not native 
to America,” it would not be appropriate to form the term complement by ­writing “non- 
animals that are not native to America.” Clearly it would be better to write “animals native 
to America.” Even though this is technically not the complement of the given term, the 
procedure is justified if we allow a reduction in the scope of discourse. This can be seen 
as follows. Technically the term complement of “animals that are not native to America” 
denotes all kinds of things such as ripe tomatoes, battleships, gold rings, and so on. But 
if we suppose that we are talking only about animals (that is, we reduce the scope of 
discourse to animals), then the complement of this term is “animals native to America.”
As is the case with conversion, obversion can be used to supply the link between the 
premise and the conclusion of immediate inferences. The following inference forms 
are valid:
All A are B.	
Some A are B.
Therefore, no A are non-B.	
Therefore, some A are not non-B.
No A are B.	
Some A are not B.
Therefore, all A are non-B.	
Therefore, some A are non-B.
Because the conclusion of each inference form necessarily has the same truth value as its 
premise, if the premise is assumed true, it follows necessarily that the conclusion is true.
SECTION 4.4 Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition   225

226   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
Contraposition
Like obversion, contraposition requires two steps: (1) switching the subject and pred-
icate terms and (2) replacing the subject and predicate terms with their term com-
plements. For example, if the statement “All goats are animals” is contraposed, the  
resulting statement is “All non-animals are non-goats.” This new statement is called the 
contrapositive of the given statement. To see how all four types of categorical proposi-
tions relate to their contrapositive, compare the following sets of diagrams:
B
A
B
A
Some non-B
are not non-A.
Some non-B
are non-A.
B
X
X
X
X
A
B
A
Some A are
not B.
Some A are B.
B
A
B
A
No non-B
are non-A.
All non-B are
non-A.
B
A
B
A
No A are B.
All A are B.
Contrapositive
Given statement form
(quantiﬁer)
(copula)
P
Contraposition
S
S
wi
tc
h 
an
d 
re
pl
ac
e 
wi
th
 
te
r
m
 c
o
m
pl
e
m
e
nt
 
To see how the first diagram on the right is drawn, remember that “non-A” desig-
nates the area outside A. Thus, “All non-B are non-A” asserts that all members of non-B  

4
are outside A. This means that no members of non-B are inside A. Thus, we shade 
the area where non-B overlaps A. “No non-B are non-A” asserts that the area where 
non-B overlaps non-A is empty. Since non-B is the area outside the B circle and 
non-A is the area outside the A circle, the place where these two areas overlap is the 
area outside both circles. Thus, we shade this area. “Some non-B are non-A” asserts 
that something exists in the area where non-B overlaps non-A. Again, this is the 
area outside both circles, so we place an X in this area. Finally, “Some non-B are not 
non-A” asserts that at least one member of non-B is outside non-A. This means that 
at least one member of non-B is inside A, so we place an X in the area where non-B 
overlaps A.
Now, inspection of the diagrams for the A and O statements reveals that they are 
identical to the diagrams of their contrapositive. Thus, the A statement and its contra-
positive are logically equivalent (and have the same meaning), and the O statement and 
its contrapositive are logically equivalent (and have the same meaning). On the other 
hand, the diagrams of the E and I statements are neither identical to nor the exact op-
posite of the diagrams of their contrapositives. This means that contraposing an E or I  
statement gives a new statement whose truth value is logically undetermined in rela-
tion to the given statement.
To help remember when conversion and contraposition yield logically
equivalent results, note the second and third vowels in the words.
Conversion works for E and I propositions, contraposition works for
A and O propositions.
C O N V E R S I O N
C O N T R A
P O S I T I O N
As with conversion and obversion, contraposition may provide the link between the 
premise and the conclusion of an immediate inference. The following inference forms 
are valid:
All A are B.
Therefore, all non-B are non-A.
Some A are not B.
Therefore, some non-B are not non-A.
On the other hand, the following inference forms are invalid. Each commits the fal-
lacy of illicit contraposition:
Some A are B.
Therefore, some non-B are non-A.
No A are B.
Therefore, no non-B are non-A.
SECTION 4.4 Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition   227

4
228   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
Here are two examples of inferences that commit the fallacy of illicit contraposition:
No dogs are cats.	
(True)
Therefore, no non-cats are non-dogs.	
(False)
Some animals are non-cats.	
(True)
Therefore, some cats are non-animals.	
(False)
In regard to the first inference, an example of something that is both a non-cat and a 
non-dog is a pig. Thus, the conclusion implies that no pigs are pigs, which is false. In re-
gard to the second inference, if both premise and conclusion are obverted, the premise 
becomes “Some animals are not cats,” which is true, and the conclusion becomes “Some 
cats are not animals,” which is false.
Both illicit conversion and illicit contraposition are formal fallacies: They can be 
detected through mere examination of the form of an argument.
Finally, note that the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions has pre-
vailed throughout this section. This means that the results obtained are unconditional, 
and they hold true regardless of whether the terms in the propositions denote actually 
existing things. Thus, they hold for propositions about unicorns and leprechauns just 
as they do for propositions about dogs and animals. These results are summarized in 
the following table.
Conversion: Switch Subject and Predicate Terms
Given Statement
Converse
Truth Value
E:  No A are B.
No B are A.
Same truth value as given 
statement
I:   Some A are B.
Some B are A.
A:  All A are B.
All B are A.
Undetermined truth value
O: Some A are not B.
Some B are not A.
Obversion: Change Quality; Replace Predicate with Term Complement
Given Statement
Obverse
Truth Value
A:  All A are B.
No A are non-B.
Same truth value as given 
statement
E:  No A are B.
All A are non-B.
I:   Some A are B.
Some A are not non-B.
O: Some A are not B.
Some A are non-B.
Contraposition: Switch Subject and Predicate Terms; Replace Each with Its 
Term Complement
Given Statement
Contrapositive
Truth Value
A:  All A are B.
All non-B are non-A.
Same truth value as given 
statement
O: Some A are not B.
Some non-B are not non-A.
E:  No A are B.
No non-B are non-A.
Undetermined truth value
I:   Some A are B.
Some non-B are non-A.
}
}
}
}
}

4
SECTION 4.4 Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition   229
EXERCISE 4.4	
	 I.	 Exercises 1 through 6 provide a statement, its truth value in parentheses, and an 
operation to be performed on that statement. Supply the new statement and the 
truth value of the new statement. (Hint: For number 1, first obtain the converse of 
“No A are non-B”; then, since the given statement is a true E proposition, use this 
information to calculate the truth value of the converse.)
	
	   Exercises 7 through 12 provide a statement, its truth value in parentheses, and a 
new statement. Determine how the new statement was derived from the given state-
ment and supply the truth value of the new statement. (Hint: For number 7, first 
compare the terms in the given statement with the terms in the new statement. This 
will tell you the operation. Then, since the given statement is a false E proposition,  
use this information together with the operation to calculate the truth value of the 
new statement.)
	
	 	
	
	
	
	
Truth 
	
	Given statement	
	
Operation	
New statement	
value
 
★1.	 No A are non-B. (T)	
conv.	
	
	
2.	 Some A are B. (T)	
contrap.	
	
	
3.	 All A are non-B. (F)	
obv.	
	
 
★4.	 All non-A are B. (F)	
contrap.	
	
	
5.	 Some non-A are not B. (T)	
conv.	
	
	
6.	 Some non-A are non-B. (T)	
obv.	
	
 
★7.	 No non-A are non-B. (F)	
	
No B are A.	
	
8.	 Some A are not non-B. (T)	
	
Some A are B.	
	
9.	 All A are non-B. (F)	
	
All non-B are A.	
 ★10.	 No non-A are B. (F)	
	
All non-A are non-B.	
	
11.	 Some non-A are not B. (T)	
	
Some non-B are not A.	
	
12.	 Some A are non-B. (F)	
	
Some non-B are A.	
	II.	 Perform the operations of conversion, obversion, and contraposition as indicated.
	
1.	 Convert the following propositions and state whether the converse is logically 
equivalent or not logically equivalent to the given proposition.
 
★a.	 All hurricanes are storms intensified by global warming.
	
	 b.	 No sex-change operations are completely successful procedures.
	
	 c.	 Some murals by Diego Rivera are works that celebrate the revolutionary 
spirit.
	
	 d.	 Some forms of carbon are not substances with a crystalline structure.

4
	
2.	 Obvert the following propositions and state whether the obverse is logically 
equivalent or not logically equivalent to the given proposition.
 
 ★a.	 All radically egalitarian societies are societies that do not preserve indi-
vidual liberties.
	
	 b.	 No cult leaders are people who fail to brainwash their followers.
	
	 c.	 Some college football coaches are people who do not slip money to their 
players.
	
	 d.	 Some budgetary cutbacks are not actions fair to the poor.
	
3.	 Contrapose the following propositions and state whether the contrapositive is 
logically equivalent or not logically equivalent to the given proposition.
	
★a.	 All physicians whose licenses have been revoked are physicians ineligible 
to practice.
	
	 b.	 No unpersecuted migrants are migrants granted asylum.
	
	 c.	 Some politicians who do not defend Social Security are politicans who do 
not want to increase taxes.
	
	 d.	 Some opponents of gay marriage are not opponents of civil unions.
	III.	Use conversion, obversion, and contraposition to determine whether the following 
arguments are valid or invalid. For those that are invalid, name the fallacy committed.
	
★1.	 All commodity traders are gamblers who risk sudden disaster.
	
	 Therefore, all gamblers who risk sudden disaster are commodity traders.
	
2.	 No child abusers are people who belong in day-care centers.
	
	 Therefore, all child abusers are people who do not belong in day-care centers.
	
3.	 Some states having limited powers are not slave states.
	
	 Therefore, some free states are not states having unlimited powers.
	
★4.	 Some insane people are illogical people.
	
	 Therefore, some logical people are sane people.
	
5.	 Some organ transplants are not sensible operations.
	
	 Therefore, some organ transplants are senseless operations.
	
6.	 No individuals who laugh all the time are people with a true sense of humor.
	
	 Therefore, no people with a true sense of humor are individuals who laugh all 
the time.
	
★7.	 All periods when interest rates are high are times when businesses tend not  
to expand.
	
	 Therefore, all times when businesses tend to expand are periods when interest 
rates are low.
	
8.	 Some swimsuits are not garments intended for the water.
	
	 Therefore, some garments intended for the water are not swimsuits.
	
9.	 No promises made under duress are enforceable contracts.
	
	 Therefore, no unenforceable contracts are promises made in the absence of 
duress.
230   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS

4
SECTION 4.5 The Traditional Square of Opposition   231
4.5	
The Traditional Square of Opposition
PREVIEW    A friend of yours argues that it is morally wrong to buy any product made in a  
sweatshop. So when that same friend buys a new iPhone, you point out that the iPhone was made in a 
sweatshop in China. Still, your friend insists that he did nothing wrong in buying it. You are quick to 
observe that your friend is contradicting himself. But your friend then denies he is contradicting himself. 
Just what does it mean for two statements to contradict each other? That, and more, is the subject of this 
section of the book.
In Section 4.3 we adopted the Boolean standpoint, and we saw how the modern square 
of opposition applies regardless of whether the propositions refer to actually existing 
things. In this section, we adopt the Aristotelian standpoint, which recognizes that  
	 ★10.	 All ladies of the night are individuals with low self-esteem.
	
	 Therefore, no ladies of the night are individuals with high self-esteem.
	
11.	 Some graffiti writers are artists relieving pent-up frustrations.
	
	 Therefore, some artists relieving pent-up frustrations are graffiti writers.
	
12.	 Some peaceful revolutions are episodes that erupt in violence.
	
	 Therefore, some episodes that do not erupt in violence are non-peaceful  
revolutions.
	 ★13.	 Some insurance companies are not humanitarian organizations.
	
	 Therefore, some humanitarian organizations are not insurance companies.
	
14.	 Some fossil fuels are unrenewable energy sources.
	
	 Therefore, some fossil fuels are not renewable energy sources.
	
15.	 All hired killers are criminals who deserve the death penalty.
	
	 Therefore, all criminals who deserve the death penalty are hired killers.
	 ★16.	 No nonprescription drugs are medicines without adverse effects.
	
	 Therefore, no medicines with adverse effects are prescription drugs.
	
17.	 All fire-breathing dragons are lizards that languish in soggy climates.
	
	 Therefore, no fire-breathing dragons are lizards that flourish in soggy  
climates.
	
18.	 Some distant galaxies are not structures visible to the naked eye.
	
	 Therefore, some structures visible to the naked eye are not distant galaxies.
	 ★19.	 All unpleasant experiences are things we do not like to remember.
	
	 Therefore, all things we like to remember are pleasant experiences.
	
20.	 Some pro-lifers are not people concerned with child welfare.
	
	 Therefore, some pro-lifers are people unconcerned with child welfare.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

232   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
universal propositions about existing things have existential import. For such proposi-
tions the traditional square of opposition becomes applicable. Like the modern square, 
the traditional square of opposition is an arrangement of lines that illustrates ­logically 
necessary relations among the four kinds of categorical propositions. However,  
because the Aristotelian standpoint recognizes the additional factor of existential  
import, the traditional square supports more inferences than does the modern square. 
It is represented as follows:
A
E
O
F
T
F
T
Subalternation
Contrary
Subcontrary
Subalternation
I
Contra
dictory
Contra
dictory
The four relations in the traditional square of opposition may be characterized as 
follows:
Contradictory	 	 opposite truth value
Contrary	
	 at least one is false (not both true)
Subcontrary	
	 at least one is true (not both false)
Subalternation	 	 truth flows downward, falsity flows upward
The contradictory relation is the same as that found in the modern square. Thus, if 
a certain A proposition is given as true, the corresponding O proposition is false, and 
vice versa, and if a certain A proposition is given as false, the corresponding O proposi-
tion is true, and vice versa. The same relation holds between the E and I propositions. 
The contradictory relation thus expresses complete opposition between propositions.
The contrary relation differs from the contradictory in that it expresses only partial 
opposition. Thus, if a certain A proposition is given as true, the corresponding E prop-
osition is false (because at least one must be false), and if an E proposition is given as 
true, the corresponding A proposition is false. But if an A proposition is given as false, 
the corresponding E proposition could be either true or false without violating the “at 
least one is false” rule. In this case, the E proposition has logically undetermined truth 
value. Similarly, if an E proposition is given as false, the corresponding A proposition 
has logically undetermined truth value.
These results are borne out in ordinary language. Thus, if we are given the actually 
true A proposition “All cats are animals,” the corresponding E proposition “No cats are 
animals” is false, and if we are given the actually true E proposition “No cats are dogs,” 
the corresponding A proposition “All cats are dogs” is false. Thus, the A and E proposi-
tions cannot both be true. However, they can both be false. “All animals are cats” and 
“No animals are cats” are both false.

4
The subcontrary relation also expresses a kind of partial opposition. If a certain I 
proposition is given as false, the corresponding O proposition is true (because at least one 
must be true), and if an O proposition is given as false, the corresponding I proposition is 
true. But if either an I or an O proposition is given as true, then the corresponding propo-
sition could be either true or false without violating the “at least one is true” rule. Thus, in 
this case the corresponding proposition would have logically undetermined truth value.
Again, these results are borne out in ordinary language. If we are given the actually 
false I proposition “Some cats are dogs,” the corresponding O proposition “Some cats 
are not dogs” is true, and if we are given the actually false O proposition “Some cats are 
not animals,” the corresponding I proposition “Some cats are animals” is true. Thus, the 
I and O propositions cannot both be false, but they can both be true. “Some animals are 
cats” and “Some animals are not cats” are both true.
The subalternation relation is represented by two arrows: a downward arrow marked 
with the letter T (true), and an upward arrow marked with an F (false). These arrows 
can be thought of as pipelines through which truth values “flow.” The downward arrow 
“transmits” only truth, and the upward arrow only falsity. Thus, if an A proposition is 
given as true, the corresponding I proposition is true also, and if an I proposition is given 
as false, the corresponding A proposition is false. But if an A proposition is given as false, 
this truth value cannot be transmitted downward, so the corresponding I proposition 
will have logically undetermined truth value. Conversely, if an I proposition is given as 
true, this truth value cannot be transmitted upward, so the corresponding A proposi-
tion will have logically undetermined truth value. Analogous reasoning prevails for the 
subalternation relation between the E and O propositions. To remember the direction of 
the arrows for subalternation, imagine that truth “trickles down,” and falsity “floats” up.
Now that we have examined these four relations individually, let us see how they can 
be used together to determine the truth values of corresponding propositions. The first 
rule of thumb that we should keep in mind when using the square to compute more 
than one truth value is always to use contradiction first. Now, let us suppose that we are 
told that the nonsensical proposition “All adlers are bobkins” is true. Suppose further 
that adlers actually exist, so we are justified in using the traditional square of opposition. 
By the contradictory relation, “Some adlers are not bobkins” is false. Then, by either the 
contrary or the subalternation relation, “No adlers are bobkins” is false. Finally, by either 
contradictory, subalternation, or subcontrary, “Some adlers are bobkins” is true.
Next, let us see what happens if we assume that “All adlers are bobkins” is false. By 
the contradictory relation, “Some adlers are not bobkins” is true, but nothing more can 
be determined. In other words, given a false A proposition, both contrary and subal-
ternation yield undetermined results, and given a true O proposition (the one whose 
truth value we just determined), subcontrary and subalternation yield undetermined 
results. Thus, the corresponding E and I propositions have logically undetermined 
truth value. This result illustrates two more rules of thumb. Assuming that we always 
use the contradictory relation first, if one of the remaining relations yields a logically 
undetermined truth value, the others will as well. The other rule is that whenever one 
statement turns out to have logically undetermined truth value, its contradictory will 
also. Thus, statements having logically undetermined truth value will always occur in 
pairs, at opposite ends of diagonals on the square.
SECTION 4.5 The Traditional Square of Opposition   233

234   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
Testing Immediate Inferences
Next, let us see how we can use the traditional square of opposition to test immediate 
inferences for validity. Here is an example:
All Swiss watches are true works of art.
Therefore, it is false that no Swiss watches are true works of art.
We begin, as usual, by assuming the premise is true. Since the premise is an A propo-
sition, by the contrary relation the corresponding E proposition is false. But this is 
exactly what the conclusion says, so the argument is valid.
Here is another example:
Some viruses are structures that attack T cells.
Therefore, some viruses are not structures that attack T cells.
Here the premise and conclusion are linked by the subcontrary relation. According 
to that relation, if the premise is assumed true, the conclusion has logically undeter-
mined truth value, and so the inference is invalid. It commits the formal fallacy of  
illicit subcontrary. Analogously, inferences that depend on an incorrect application of 
the contrary relation commit the formal fallacy of illicit contrary, and inferences that 
depend on an illicit application of subalternation commit the formal fallacy of illicit 
subalternation. Some forms of these fallacies are as follows:
Illicit contrary
It is false that all A are B.
Therefore, no A are B.
It is false that no A are B.
Therefore, all A are B.
Illicit subcontrary
Some A are B.
Therefore, it is false that some A are not B.
Some A are not B.
Therefore, some A are B.
Illicit subalternation
Some A are not B.
Therefore, no A are B.
It is false that all A are B.
Therefore, it is false that some A are B.
Cases of the incorrect application of the contradictory relation are so infrequent that an 
“illicit contradictory” fallacy is not usually recognized.
As we saw at the beginning of this section, for the traditional square of opposition to 
apply, the Aristotelian standpoint must be adopted, and the propositions to which it is 
applied must assert something about actually existing things. The question may now be 

4
asked, What happens when the Aristotelian standpoint is adopted but the ­propositions 
are about things that do not exist? The answer is that under these conditions the tra-
ditional square gives exactly the same results as the modern square (see Section 4.3). 
Inferences that are based on a correct application of the contradictory relation are valid, 
but inferences that are based on an otherwise correct application of the other three rela-
tions are invalid and commit the existential fallacy.
The reason for this result is easy to see. The modern square of opposition rests on the 
Boolean standpoint, and the traditional square rests on the Aristotelian standpoint. But 
the Aristotelian standpoint differs from the Boolean only with respect to universal propo-
sitions about existing things. The Aristotelian standpoint interprets these propositions as 
having existential import, while the Boolean standpoint does not. But universal proposi-
tions about things that do not exist have no existential import from the Aristotelian stand-
point. In other words, the Aristotelian standpoint interprets these propositions in exactly 
the same way as does the Boolean. Thus, for universal propositions about things that do 
not exist, the traditional square gives exactly the same results as the modern square.
Accordingly, the existential fallacy is committed from the Aristotelian standpoint 
when and only when contrary, subcontrary, and subalternation are used (in an other-
wise correct way) to draw a conclusion from a premise about things that do not exist. 
All such inferences begin with a universal proposition, which has no existential import, 
and they conclude with a particular proposition, which has existential import. The 
existential fallacy is never committed in connection with the contradictory relation, 
nor is it committed in connection with conversion, obversion, or contraposition, all 
of which hold regardless of existence. The following inferences commit the existential 
fallacy from the Aristotelian standpoint:
All witches who fly on broomsticks are fearless women.
Therefore, some witches who fly on broomsticks are fearless women.
No wizards with magical powers are malevolent beings.
Therefore, it is false that all wizards with magical powers are malevolent beings.
The first depends on an otherwise correct use of the subalternation relation, and 
the second on an otherwise correct use of the contrary relation. If flying witches and 
magical wizards actually existed, both arguments would be valid. But since they do not 
exist, both arguments are invalid and commit the existential fallacy. In regard to the 
second example, recall that the conclusion, which asserts that an A proposition is false, 
is actually a particular proposition. Thus, this example, like the first one, proceeds from 
the universal to the particular.
All cats are animals. 
Boolean: Invalid, existential fallacy
Some cats are animals. 
Aristotelian: Valid
All unicorns are animals. 
Boolean: Invalid, existential fallacy
Some unicorns are animals. 
Aristotelian: Invalid, existential fallacy
Existential fallacy examples:    Two standpoints
SECTION 4.5 The Traditional Square of Opposition   235

236   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
The phrase conditionally valid applies to an argument after the Aristotelian  
standpoint has been adopted and we are not certain if the subject term of the premise 
denotes actually existing things. For example, the following inference is conditionally 
valid:
All students who failed the exam are students on probation.
Therefore, some students who failed the exam are students on probation.
The validity of this inference rests on whether there were in fact any students  
who failed the exam. The inference is either valid or invalid, but we lack sufficient  
information about the meaning of the premise to tell which is the case. Once it  
becomes known that there are indeed some students who failed the exam, we can 
assert that the inference is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint. But if there are 
no students who failed the exam, the inference is invalid because it commits the  
exis­tential fallacy.
Similarly, all inference forms that depend on valid applications of contrary, subcon-
trary, and subalternation are conditionally valid because we do not know if the letters 
in the propositions denote actually existing things. For example, the following infer-
ence form, which depends on the contrary relation, is conditionally valid:
All A are B.
Therefore, it is false that no A are B.
If “dogs” and “animals” are substituted in place of A and B, respectively, the result-
ing inference is valid. But if “unicorns” and “animals” are substituted, the resulting  
inference is invalid because it commits the existential fallacy. In Section 4.3, we noted 
that all inferences (and inference forms) that are valid from the Boolean standpoint are 
unconditionally valid. They are valid regardless of whether their terms denote actually 
existing things.
In testing an inference for validity, we are never concerned with the actual truth 
of the premise. Regardless of whether the premise is actually true or false, we always 
begin by assuming it to be true, and then we determine how this assumption bears on 
the truth or falsity of the conclusion. The actual truth of the premise affects only the 
soundness of the argument. So let us now turn to the question of soundness. Recall 
from Section 1.4 that a sound argument is one that is valid and has all true premises, 
and consider the following example:
All cats are dogs.
Therefore, some cats are dogs.
The premise is obviously false; but if we assume it to be true, then it follows necessar-
ily by subalternation that the conclusion is true. Thus, the inference is valid. However, 
because the premise is false, the inference is unsound.
Here is another example:
No rabbits are toads.
Therefore, it is false that all rabbits are toads.

4
This inference is sound. By the contrary relation it is valid, and it also has a true 
 premise.
Here is a final example:
Some unicorns are not gazelles.
Therefore, it is false that all unicorns are gazelles.
This inference differs from the others in that the premise asserts the existence of some-
thing that does not actually exist (namely, unicorns). In other words, the premise seems 
to be self-contradictory. Nevertheless, the inference can be evaluated in the usual way. 
If the premise is assumed true, then it necessarily follows that the conclusion is true by 
the contradictory relation. Thus, the inference is valid. But the inference is unsound 
because it has a false premise. The premise asserts the existence of something that does 
not actually exist.
Now that we have seen how the traditional square of opposition, by itself, is used 
to test inferences for validity and soundness, let us see how it can be used together  
with the operations of conversion, obversion, and contraposition to prove the  
validity of inferences that are given as valid. Suppose we are given the following  
valid inference:
All inappropriate remarks are faux pas.
Therefore, some faux pas are not appropriate remarks.
To prove this inference valid, we select letters to represent the terms, and then we 
use some combination of conversion, obversion, and contraposition together with the 
traditional square to find the intermediate links between premise and conclusion:
All non-A are F.	
(assumed true)
Some non-A are F.	
(true by subalternation)
Some F are non-A.	
(true by conversion)
Therefore, some F are not A.	
(true by obversion)
The premise is the first line in this proof, and each succeeding step is validly derived 
from the one preceding it by the relation written in parentheses at the right. Since the 
conclusion (which is the last step) follows by a series of three necessary inferences, the 
inference is valid.
Various strategies can be used to construct proofs such as this, but one useful pro-
cedure is first to concentrate on obtaining the individual terms as they appear in the 
conclusion, then to attend to the order of the terms, and finally to use the square of 
opposition to adjust quality and quantity. As the faux pas proof illustrates, however, 
variations on this procedure are sometimes necessary. The fact that the predicate of the 
conclusion is “A,” while “non-A” appears in the premise, leads us to think of obversion. 
But using obversion to change “non-A” into “A” requires that the “non-A” in the prem-
ise be moved into the predicate position via conversion. The latter operation, however, 
is valid only on E and I statements, and the premise is an A statement. The fact that the 
conclusion is a particular statement suggests subalternation as an intermediate step, 
thus yielding an I statement that can be converted.
SECTION 4.5 The Traditional Square of Opposition   237

4
238   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
EXERCISE 4.5	
	 I.	 Use the traditional square of opposition to find the answers to these problems. 
When a statement is given as false, simply enter an “F” into the square of opposi-
tion and compute (if possible) the other truth values.
	
★1.	 If “All fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing” is true, what is 
the truth value of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 No fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
	
	 b.	 Some fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
	
	 c.	 Some fashion fads are not products of commercial brainwashing.
	
2.	 If “All fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing” is false, what is 
the truth value of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 No fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
	
	 b.	 Some fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
	
	 c.	 Some fashion fads are not products of commercial brainwashing.
	
3.	 If “No sting operations are cases of entrapment” is true, what is the truth value 
of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 All sting operations are cases of entrapment.
	
	 b.	 Some sting operations are cases of entrapment.
	
	 c.	 Some sting operations are not cases of entrapment.
	
★4.	 If “No sting operations are cases of entrapment” is false, what is the truth value 
of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 All sting operations are cases of entrapment.
	
	 b.	 Some sting operations are cases of entrapment.
	
	 c.	 Some sting operations are not cases of entrapment.
	
5.	 If “Some assassinations are morally justifiable actions” is true, what is the 
truth value of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 All assassinations are morally justifiable actions.
	
	 b.	 No assassinations are morally justifiable actions.
	
	 c.	 Some assassinations are not morally justifiable actions.
	
6.	 If “Some assassinations are morally justifiable actions” is false, what is the 
truth value of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 All assassinations are morally justifiable actions.
	
	 b.	 No assassinations are morally justifiable actions.
	
	 c.	 Some assassinations are not morally justifiable actions.

4
	
★7.	 If “Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are not curable diseases” is true, 
what is the truth value of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 All obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
	
	 b.	 No obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
	
	 c.	 Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
	
8.	 If “Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are not curable diseases” is false, 
what is the truth value of the following statements?
	
	 a.	 All obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
	
	 b.	 No obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
	
	 c.	 Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
	II.	 Use the traditional square of opposition to determine whether the following imme­
diate inferences are valid or invalid. Name any fallacies that are committed.
	
★1.	 All advocates of school prayer are individuals who insist on imposing their 
views on others.
	
	 Therefore, some advocates of school prayer are individuals who insist on  
imposing their views on others.
	
2.	 It is false that no jailhouse informants are people who can be trusted.
	
	 Therefore, some jailhouse informants are not people who can be trusted.
	
3.	 All homemakers are people with real jobs.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no homemakers are people with real jobs.
	
★4.	 It is false that some trolls are not creatures who live under bridges.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no trolls are creatures who live under bridges.
	
5.	 Some campus romances are episodes plagued by violence.
	
	 Therefore, some campus romances are not episodes plagued by violence.
	
6.	 Some pornographic publications are materials protected by the First Amendment.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no pornographic publications are materials protected 
by the First Amendment.
	
★7.	 It is false that all mainstream conservatives are people who support free legal 
services for the poor.
	
	 Therefore, no mainstream conservatives are people who support free legal 
services for the poor.
	
8.	 It is false that some forms of human creativity are activities amenable to math-
ematical analysis.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all forms of human creativity are activities amenable 
to mathematical analysis.
	
9.	 It is false that some tooth fairies are daytime visitors.
	
	 Therefore, some tooth fairies are not daytime visitors.
	 ★10.	 It is false that some orthodox psychoanalysts are not individuals driven by a 
religious fervor.
SECTION 4.5 The Traditional Square of Opposition   239

4
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some orthodox psychoanalysts are individuals driven 
by a religious fervor.
	
11.	 Some school busses manufactured on the moon are not plasma-powered vehicles.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all school busses manufactured on the moon are 
plasma-powered vehicles.
	
12.	 It is false that some network news programs are exercises in mediocrity.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no network news programs are exercises in mediocrity.
	 ★13.	 No flying reindeer are animals who get lost in the fog.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all flying reindeer are animals who get lost in the fog.
	
14.	 It is false that no leveraged buyouts are deals unfair to workers.
	
	 Therefore, all leveraged buyouts are deals unfair to workers.
	
15.	 It is false that some wood ticks are not carriers of Lyme disease.
	
	 Therefore, some wood ticks are carriers of Lyme disease.
	III.	Use the traditional square of opposition to determine whether the following  
immediate inferences are valid or invalid and sound or unsound. Name any  
fallacies that are committed.
	
★1.	 All dolphins are polar bears.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no dolphins are polar bears.
	
2.	 It is false that some recessions are not periods of economic decline.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no recessions are periods of economic decline.
	
3.	 It is false that some suicide survivors are comeback kids.
	
	 Therefore, some suicide survivors are not comeback kids.
	
★4.	 It is false that some ruby earrings are not pieces of jewelry.
	
	 Therefore, some ruby earrings are pieces of jewelry.
	
5.	 It is false that all visitors to Rio are Carnival addicts.
	
	 Therefore, no visitors to Rio are Carnival addicts.
	
6.	 Some tax cheats are not honest citizens.
	
	 Therefore, no tax cheats are honest citizens.
	
★7.	 All truthful lies are curious assertions.
	
	 Therefore, some truthful lies are curious assertions.
	
8.	 It is false that no bankrupt hair salons are thriving enterprises.
	
	 Therefore, all bankrupt hair salons are thriving enterprises.
	
9.	 It false that some functional skateboards are not devices equipped with wheels.
	
	 Therefore, all functional skateboards are devices equipped with wheels.
	 ★10.	 Some film directors are artistic visionaries.
	
	 Therefore, some film directors are not artistic visionaries.
	IV.	 Exercises 1 through 10 provide a statement, its truth value in parentheses, and 
an operation to be performed on that statement. Supply the new statement and 
the truth value of the new statement. Exercises 11 through 20 provide a state-
ment, its truth value in parentheses, and a new statement. Determine how the new  
240   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS

4
statement was derived from the given statement and supply the truth value of the 
new statement. Take the Aristotelian standpoint in working these exercises and as-
sume that the terms refer to actually existing things.
	
	
Operation/	
Truth 
	
	 Given statement	
	
relation	
New statement	
value
	
★1.	 All non-A are B. (T)	
contrap.	
	
	
2.	 Some A are non-B. (F)	
subalt.	
	
	
3.	 No A are non-B. (T)	
obv.	
	
	
★4.	 Some non-A are not B. (T)	
subcon.	
	
	
5.	 No A are non-B. (F)	
contradic.	
	
	
6.	 No A are B. (T)	
contrap.	
	
	
★7.	 All non-A are B. (T)	
contrary	
	
	
8.	 Some A are not non-B. (F)	
obv.	
	
	
9.	 No A are non-B. (F)	
conv.	
	
	 ★10.	 Some non-A are non-B. (F)	
subcon.	
	
	
11.	 Some non-A are not B. (T)	
	
All non-A are B.	
	
12.	 Some A are non-B. (T)	
	
Some non-B are A.	
	 ★13.	 All non-A are B. (F)	
	
No non-A are non-B.	
	
14.	 Some non-A are not B. (T)	
	
No non-A are B.	
	
15.	 All A are non-B. (F)	
	
All non-B are A.	
	 ★16.	 Some non-A are non-B. (F)	
	
No non-A are non-B.	
	
17.	 Some A are not non-B. (T)	
	
Some B are not non-A.	
	
18.	 No non-A are B. (T)	
	
Some non-A are not B.	
	 ★19.	 No A are non-B. (F)	
	
All A are non-B.	
	
20.	 Some non-A are B. (F)	
	
Some non-A are not B.	
	V.	 Use either the traditional square of opposition or conversion, obversion, or con-
traposition to determine whether the following immediate inferences are valid or 
invalid. For those that are invalid, name the fallacy committed.
	
★1.	 It is false that some jogging events are not aerobic activities.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no jogging events are aerobic activities.
	
2.	 No meat-eating vegetarians are individuals with a high-protein diet.
	
	 Therefore, no individuals with a high-protein diet are meat-eating vegetarians.
	
3.	 Some jobs in health care are not glamorous occupations.
	
	 Therefore, some jobs in health care are glamorous occupations.
	
★4.	 Some terminally ill patients are patients who do not want to live.
	
	 Therefore, some patients who want to live are recovering patients.
SECTION 4.5 The Traditional Square of Opposition   241

4
	
5.	 All Barbie dolls are toys that engender a false sense of values.
	
	 Therefore, no Barbie dolls are toys that engender a true sense of values.
	
6.	 All flying elephants are jolly pachyderms.
	
	 Therefore, some flying elephants are jolly pachyderms.
	
★7.	 It is false that some international terrorists are political moderates.
	
	 Therefore, some international terrorists are not political moderates.
	
8.	 No pet hamsters are animals that need much attention.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all pet hamsters are animals that need much attention.
	
9.	 Some hedge-fund managers are not responsible investors.
	
	 Therefore, some responsible investors are not hedge-fund managers.
	 ★10.	 It is false that all substances that control cell growth are hormones.
	
	 Therefore, no substances that control cell growth are hormones.
	
11.	 Some cases of whistle-blowing are actions disloyal to employers.
	
	 Therefore, some cases of whistle-blowing are not actions loyal to employers.
	
12.	 No stolen computer chips are easy items to trace.
	
	 Therefore, no difficult items to trace are computer chips that are not stolen.
	 ★13.	 Some economists are followers of Ayn Rand.
	
	 Therefore, some economists are not followers of Ayn Rand.
	
14.	 All porcelain figurines are fragile artifacts.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some porcelain figurines are not fragile artifacts.
	
15.	 Some pleasant recollections are not missed opportunities.
	
	 Therefore, some availed opportunities are not unpleasant recollections.
	VI.	 Use the traditional square of opposition together with conversion, obversion, and 
contraposition to prove that the following immediate inferences are valid. Show 
each intermediate step in the deduction.
	
★1.	 All insurance policies are cryptically written documents.
	
	 Therefore, some cryptically written documents are insurance policies.
	
2.	 No gemstones that do not contain chromium are emeralds.
	
	 Therefore, some stones that are not emeralds are not gemstones that contain 
chromium.
	
3.	 It is false that some Ficus benjaminas are untemperamental house plants.
	
	 Therefore, all Ficus benjaminas are temperamental house plants.
	
★4.	 All exogenous morphines are addictive substances.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all addictive substances are endogenous morphines.
	
5.	 No people who do not advocate free-enterprise economics are fundamentalist 
Christians.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some fundamentalist Christians are not people who 
advocate free-enterprise economics.
242   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS

4
SECTION 4.6 Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint   243
4.6	
Venn Diagrams  
and the Traditional Standpoint
PREVIEW    Suppose you are sharing a pizza and antipasto with a friend. Your friend invites you 
to consider two statements, which are contraries: All pizzas are antipastos and No pizzas are antipas-
tos. Then, she says, “Look at this pizza. It’s obviously not an antipasto.” When we generalize this result,  
the first statement is false and the second statement true. But isn’t it possible that in some crazy world 
with strange pizzas, both statements would be true? In such a world the contrary relation would not 
hold.” Is your friend correct in this assessment?
Earlier in this chapter we saw how Venn diagrams can be used to represent the content 
of categorical propositions from the Boolean standpoint. With a slight modification 
they can also be used to represent the content of categorical propositions from the tra-
ditional, or Aristotelian, standpoint. These modified Venn diagrams can then be used 
to prove the relationships of the traditional square of opposition, and also to test the 
validity of immediate inferences from the traditional standpoint.
The difference between the Boolean standpoint and the Aristotelian standpoint 
concerns only universal (A and E) propositions. From the Boolean standpoint, univer-
sal propositions have no existential import, but from the Aristotelian standpoint they 
do have existential import when their subject terms refer to actually existing things. 
For example, from the Boolean standpoint the statement “All raccoons are pests” does 
not imply the existence of anything, but from the Aristotelian standpoint it implies the 
existence of raccoons. Thus, if we are to construct a Venn diagram to represent such 
a statement from the Aristotelian standpoint, we need to use some symbol that repre-
sents this implication of existence.
	
6.	 It is false that some Gothic cathedrals are buildings that do not feature pointed 
arches.
	
	 Therefore, some buildings that feature pointed arches are Gothic cathedrals.
 
★7.	 Some people who recognize paranormal events are not non-scientists.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no scientists are people who recognize paranormal events.
	
8.	 It is false that no unhealthy things to ingest are food additives.
	
	 Therefore, some food additives are not healthy things to ingest.
	
9.	 It is false that some illegal searches are not sobriety checkpoints.
	
	 Therefore, some sobriety checkpoints are not legal searches.
	 ★10.	 It is false that some feminists are not advocates of equal pay for equal work.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all advocates of equal pay for equal work are non-
feminists.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

244   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
The symbol that we will use for this purpose is an X surrounded by a circle. Like 
the X’s that we have used up until now, this circled X signifies that something exists 
in the area in which it is placed. However, the two symbols differ in that the uncircled  
X represents the positive claim of existence made by particular (I and O) propositions, 
whereas the circled X represents an implication of existence made by universal proposi-
tions about actually existing things. For the purpose at hand, a circled X is placed inside 
the S circle as follows:
P
S
A: All S are P
P
S
X
E: No S are P
X
In the diagram for the A statement, the left-hand part of the S circle is shaded, so if 
there are any members of S, they must be in the area where the two circles overlap. 
Thus, a circled X is placed in the overlap area. In the diagram for the E statement, the 
overlap area is shaded, so if there are any members of S they must be in the left-hand 
part of the S circle. Thus, a circled X is placed in this area.
The diagrams for the I and O statements are the same from the Aristotelian stand-
point as they are from the Boolean:
P
S
I: Some S are P.
P
S
X
O: Some S are not P.
X
Proving the Traditional Square of Opposition
We can now use this modified Venn diagram technique to prove the relations of the 
traditional square of opposition.* Having such a proof is important because up until 
now these relations have only been illustrated with various examples; they have not 
*The modified Venn diagram technique can also be used to prove the validity of conversion, obversion, and  
contraposition from the Aristotelian standpoint, but to do so a circled X must be entered in the unshaded part of both 
the S and P circles and also in the unshaded area outside both circles.

4
been proved. The accompanying figure reproduces the traditional square of ­opposition 
together with Venn diagrams that represent the Aristotelian interpretation of the four 
standard-form categorical propositions.
Let us begin with the contradictory relation. If the A statement is given as true, then 
the left-hand part of the S circle is empty. This makes the O statement false, because it 
claims that the left-hand part of the S circle is not empty. And if the O statement is given 
as true, then the left-hand part of the S circle is not empty, which makes the A statement 
false. On the other hand, if the O statement is given as false, then the left-hand part of 
the S circle is empty. However, given that some members of S exist, they must be in the 
overlap area. This double outcome makes the A statement true. Also, if the A statement 
is given as false, then either the left-hand part of the S circle is not empty, or the overlap 
area is empty (or both). If the left-hand part of the S circle is not empty, then the O state-
ment is true. Alternately, if the overlap area is empty, then, given that some members of 
S exist, they must be in the left-hand part of the S circle, and, once again, the O statement 
is true. Analogous reasoning applies for the relation between the E and I statements.
P
S
X
P
S
X
P
S
X
P
S
X
A
E
O
F
T
F
T
Subalternation
Contrary
Subcontrary
Subalternation
I
Contra
dictory
Contra
dictory
Next, we turn to the contrary relation. If the A statement is given as true, then the over-
lap area is not empty, which makes the E statement false. By analogous reasoning, if the 
E statement is given as true, the overlap area is empty, which makes the A statement false.  
However, if the A statement is given as false (making the O statement true), then the E 
statement could be either true or false depending on whether or not the overlap area is 
empty. Thus, in this case the E statement would have logically ­undetermined truth value. By 
analogous reasoning, if the E statement is given as false (making the I statement true), the 
A statement could be either true or false depending on whether or not the left-hand part of 
the S circle is empty. Thus, the A statement would have logically undetermined truth value.
SECTION 4.6 Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint   245

246   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
Turning next to the subcontrary relation, if the I statement is given as false, then 
the area where the S and P circles overlap is empty. Given that at least one S exists, 
there must be something in the left-hand part of the S circle, which makes the O 
statement true. By analogous reasoning, if the O statement is given as false, there 
must be something in the overlap area, making the I statement true. But if the I 
­statement is given as true, then the O statement could be either true or false de-
pending on whether something exists in the left-hand part of the S circle. Thus, the 
O statement would have undetermined truth value. Similarly, if the O statement is 
given as true, then the I statement could be either true or false depending on whether 
something exists in the overlap area. Thus, the I statement would have undetermined 
truth value.
Finally, we consider subalternation. If the A statement is given as true, then  
something exists in the area where the S and P circles overlap, which makes the I 
statement true as well. And if the I statement is given as false, then the overlap area is 
empty, making the A statement false. But if the A statement is given as false (making 
the O statement true), then the I statement could be either true or false depending 
on whether something exists in the overlap area. Thus, the I statement would have 
logically undetermined truth value. And if the I statement is given as true, then the A 
statement could be either true or false depending on whether or not the left-hand part 
of the S circle is empty. Thus, the A statement would have logically undetermined truth 
value. Analogous reasoning applies for the subalternation relation between the E and 
O statements.
Testing Immediate Inferences
From the Aristotelian standpoint, the modified Venn diagram technique involving 
circled X’s can be used to test immediate inferences. The only requirement is that the 
subject and predicate terms of the conclusion be the same as those of the premise. 
Such inferences depend on the square of opposition and do not involve the opera-
tions of conversion, obversion, and contraposition. Venn diagrams can also be used 
to test inferences involving these latter operations, but a further modification must be 
introduced.
Since any inference that is valid from the Boolean standpoint is also valid from the 
Aristotelian standpoint, testing the inference from the Boolean standpoint is often sim-
pler. If the inference is valid, then it is valid from both standpoints. But if the inference 
is invalid from the Boolean standpoint and has a particular conclusion, then it may be 
useful to test it from the Aristotelian standpoint. Let us begin by testing an inference form 
for validity:
All A are B.
Therefore, some A are B.
First, we draw Venn diagrams from the Boolean standpoint for the premise and 
conclusion:

4
B
A
All A are B.
B
A
X
Some A are B.
The information of the conclusion diagram is not represented in the premise diagram, 
so the inference form is not valid from the Boolean standpoint. Thus, noting that 
the conclusion is particular, we adopt the Aristotelian standpoint and assume for the  
moment that the subject of the premise (A) denotes at least one existing thing. This 
thing is represented by placing a circled X in the open area of that circle:
B
A
All A are B.
B
A
X
X
Some A are B.
Now the information of the conclusion diagram is represented in the premise diagram. 
Thus, the inference form is conditionally valid from the Aristotelian standpoint. It is 
valid on condition that the circled X represents at least one existing thing.
To test a complete inference we begin by testing its form. Here is an example:
No penguins are birds that can fly.
Therefore, it is false that all penguins are birds that can fly.
First, we reduce the immediate inference to its form and test it from the Boolean stand-
point:
B
P
No P are B.
B
P
X
It is false that
all P are B.
SECTION 4.6 Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint   247

4
248   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
Since the inference form is not valid from the Boolean standpoint, we adopt the  
Aristotelian standpoint and assume for the sake of this test that the subject of the prem-
ise (P) denotes at least one existing thing:
B
P
No P are B.
B
P
X
X
It is false that
all P are B.
The Venn diagrams show that the inference form is conditionally valid from the  
Aristotelian standpoint. It is valid on condition that the circled X represents at least one 
existing thing. Since the circled X is in the P circle, the final step is to see if the term in 
the inference corresponding to P denotes something that exists. The term in question 
is “penguins,” and at least one penguin actually exists. Thus, the condition is fulfilled, 
and the inference is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint.
Another example:
All sugarplum fairies are delicate creatures.
Therefore, some sugarplum fairies are delicate creatures.
This immediate inference has the same form as the first one we tested. The form is not 
valid from the Boolean standpoint, but it is conditionally valid from the Aristotelian 
standpoint:
D
S
All S are D.
D
S
X
X
Some S are D.
The final step is to see if the circled X represents at least one existing thing. The circled 
X is in the S circle and S stands for “sugarplum fairies,” which do not exist. Thus, the  
requisite condition is not fulfilled, and the inference is not valid from the Aristotelian 
standpoint. The inference commits the existential fallacy from the Aristotelian standpoint.
The steps involved in testing an immediate inference from the Aristotelian stand-
point may now be summarized:
1.	 Reduce the inference to its form and test it from the Boolean standpoint. If the 
form is valid, proceed no further. The inference is valid from both stand­points.

4
SECTION 4.6 Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint   249
EXERCISE 4.6	
	 I.	 Use the modified Venn diagram technique to determine if the following imme-
diate inference forms are valid from the Boolean standpoint, conditionally valid 
from the Aristotelian standpoint, or invalid.
	
★1.	 Some A are not B.
	
	 Therefore, no A are B.
	
2.	 It is false that some A are B.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all A are B.
	
3.	 It is false that no A are B.
	
	 Therefore, some A are B.
	
★4.	 All A are B.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no A are B.
	
5.	 Some A are B.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some A are not B.
	
6.	 Some A are not B.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all A are B.
 
★7.	 It is false that some A are B.
	
	 Therefore, no A are B.
	
8.	 It is false that some A are not B.
	
	 Therefore, some A are B.
	
9.	 It is false that all A are B.
	
	 Therefore, no A are B.
	 ★10.	 No A are B.
	
	 Therefore, some A are not B.
	II.	 Use the modified Venn diagram technique to determine if the following immedi-
ate inferences are valid from the Boolean standpoint, valid from the Aristotelian 
standpoint, or invalid. Identify any inferences that commit the existential fallacy 
from either standpoint.
	
★1.	 No summer romances are banal pastimes.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that some summer romances are banal pastimes.
2.	
If the inference form is invalid from the Boolean standpoint and has a particular con-
clusion, then adopt the Aristotelian standpoint and look to see if the left-hand premise 
circle is partly shaded. If it is, enter a circled X in the unshaded part and retest the form.
3.	
If the inference form is conditionally valid, determine if the circled X represents 
something that exists. If it does, the condition is fulfilled, and the inference is valid 
from the Aristotelian standpoint. If it does not, the inference is invalid, and it com-
mits the existential fallacy from the Aristotelian standpoint.

4
	
2.	 It is false that some people who hunger for wealth are not victims of their  
obsession.
	
	 Therefore, some people who hunger for wealth are victims of their obsession.
	
3.	 No lamps containing genies are ordinary sources of light.
	
	 Therefore, some lamps containing genies are not ordinary sources of light.
 
★4.	 It is false that some duck hunters are animal-rights activists.
	
	 Therefore, some duck hunters are not animal-rights activists.
	
5.	 All repressive political regimes are insults to human dignity.
	
	 Therefore, no repressive political regimes are insults to human dignity.
	
6.	 It is false that all skating rinks are playgrounds for amateurs.
	
	 Therefore, some skating rinks are not playgrounds for amateurs.
	
★7.	 All pixies who slide down moonbeams are fun-loving daredevils.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no pixies who slide down moonbeams are fun-loving 
daredevils.
	
8.	 It is false that some graduate teaching assistants are not underpaid laborers.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no graduate teaching assistants are underpaid laborers.
	
9.	 Some housing projects are developments riddled with crime.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that no housing projects are developments riddled with 
crime.
	 ★10.	 It is false that some thunderstorms are quiescent phenomena.
	
	 Therefore, all thunderstorms are quiescent phenomena.
	
11.	 No flower gardens are creations that feature skunkweed.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all flower gardens are creations that feature  
skunkweed.
	
12.	 It is false that no incendiary devices are contraptions that misfire.
	
	 Therefore, some incendiary devices are not contraptions that misfire.
	 ★13.	 It is false that some pet lovers are people who think that animals are mere  
machines.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all pet lovers are people who think that animals  
are mere machines.
	
14.	 No werewolves are creatures who lurk about in the daytime.
	
	 Therefore, it is false that all werewolves are creatures who lurk about in the 
daytime.
	
15.	 Some soccer games are not thrilling events to watch.
	
	 Therefore, no soccer games are thrilling events to watch.
250   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

4
SECTION 4.7 Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form   251
4.7	
Translating Ordinary Language  
Statements into Categorical Form
PREVIEW    You are engaged in a discussion with a friend about why some students have an  
easier time getting dates than other students. Your friend makes this observation: “Only people who 
laugh a lot get dates. This implies that a few people who get dates laugh a lot.” Is your friend’s argument 
valid? If so, how would you prove that it is? What is the meaning of the words “only” and “a few”? In the 
current section of the book you will learn how to deal with statements containing words such as these.
Although few statements that occur in ordinary written and oral expression are categori-
cal propositions in standard form, many of them can be translated into standard-form 
propositions. Such translation has two chief benefits. The first is that the operations and  
inferences pertinent to standard-form categorical propositions (contrary, subcontrary, etc.)  
become applicable to these statements. The second is that such statements, once trans-
lated, are completely clear and unambiguous as to their meaning. Many statements in 
ordinary language are susceptible to multiple interpretations, and each ­interpretation 
represents one possible mode of translation. The effort to translate such statements dis-
closes the various interpretations and thus helps prevent misunderstanding and confusion.
Translating statements into categorical form is like any other kind of translation 
in that no set of specific rules will cover every possible form of phraseology. Yet, one 
general rule always applies: Understand the meaning of the given statement, and then 
reexpress it in a new statement that has a quantifier, subject term, copula, and predi-
cate term. Some of the forms of phraseology that are typically encountered are terms 
without nouns, nonstandard verbs, singular propositions, adverbs and pronouns,  
unexpressed and nonstandard quantifiers, conditional statements, exclusive proposi-
tions, “the only,” and exceptive propositions.
1. Terms Without Nouns
The subject and predicate terms of a categorical proposition must contain either a plu-
ral noun or a pronoun that serves to denote the class indicated by the term. Nouns and 
pronouns denote classes, while adjectives (and participles) connote attributes. If a term 
consists of only an adjective, a plural noun or pronoun should be introduced to make 
the term genuinely denotative. Examples:
Some roses are red.	
Some roses are red flowers.
All tigers are carnivorous.	
All tigers are carnivorous animals.
2.  Nonstandard Verbs
According to the position adopted earlier in this chapter, the only copulas that are al-
lowed in standard-form categorical propositions are “are” and “are not.” Statements in 

252   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
ordinary usage, however, often incorporate other forms of the verb “to be.” Such state-
ments may be translated as the following examples illustrate:
Some college students will	
Some college students are people who
become educated.	
will become educated.
Some dogs would rather bark	
Some dogs are animals that would rather
than bite.	
bark than bite.
In other statements no form of the verb “to be” occurs at all. These may be translated 
as the following examples indicate:
Some birds fly south during the	
Some birds are animals that fly south
winter.	
during the winter.
All ducks swim.	
All ducks are swimmers.
	
	
  or
	
All ducks are animals that swim.
3.  Singular Propositions
A singular proposition (statement) is a proposition that makes an assertion about a 
specific person, place, thing, or time. Singular propositions are typically translated into 
universals by means of a parameter. A parameter is a phrase that, when introduced 
into a statement, affects the form but not the meaning. Some parameters that may be 
used to translate singular propositions are these:
people identical to
places identical to
things identical to
cases identical to
times identical to
For example, the statement “Socrates is mortal” may be translated as “All people iden-
tical to Socrates are people who are mortal.” Because only one person is identical to 
Socrates, namely Socrates himself, the term “people identical to Socrates” denotes the 
class that has Socrates as its only member. In other words, it simply denotes Socrates. 
Such a translation admittedly leaves some of the original information behind, because 
singular statements usually have existential import, whereas universal statements do 
not—at least from the Boolean standpoint. But if such translations are interpreted 
from the Aristotelian standpoint, the existential import is preserved. Here are some 
examples:
George went home.	
All people identical to George are people 
	
who went home.
Sandra did not go shopping.	
No people identical to Sandra are people 
	
who went shopping.

4
There is a radio in the bedroom.	
All places identical to the bedroom 
	
are places there is a radio.
	
	
or
	
Some radios are things in the bedroom.
The moon is full tonight.	
All things identical to the moon are things 
	
that are full tonight.
	
	
or
	
All times identical to tonight are times the 
	
moon is full.
I hate gin.	
All people identical to me are people 
	
who hate gin.
	
	
or
	
All things identical to gin are things that 
	
I hate.
In translating singular statements, note that the parameter “people identical to” is not 
the same as “people similar to” or “people like.” There may be many people like Socrates, 
but there is only one person identical to Socrates. Also note that parameters should not 
be used when the term in question already has a plural noun (or pronoun) that denotes 
the intended class. Such use is not wrong, technically, but it is redundant. Example:
Diamonds are carbon allotropes.	
Correct: 	
All diamonds are carbon 
	
	
	
	
allotropes.
	
Redundant: All things identical to diamonds 
	
	
	
 are things identical to carbon 
	
	
	
 allotropes.
4. Adverbs and Pronouns
When a statement contains a spatial adverb such as “where,” “wherever,” “anywhere,” 
“everywhere,” or “nowhere,” or a temporal adverb such as “when,” “whenever,” “any-
time,” “always,” or “never,” it may be translated in terms of “places” or “times,” respec-
tively. Statements containing pronouns such as “who,” “whoever,” “anyone,” “what,” 
“whatever,” or “anything” may be translated in terms of “people” or “things,” respec-
tively. Examples:
He always wears a suit to work.	
All times he goes to work are times he 
	
wears a suit.
He is always clean shaven.	
All times are times he is clean shaven.
She never brings her lunch to school.	
No times she goes to school are times 
	
she brings her lunch.
Nowhere on earth are there any unicorns.	
No places on earth are places there 
	
are unicorns.
Whoever works hard will succeed.	
All people who work hard are people 
	
who will succeed.
SECTION 4.7 Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form   253

254   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
Whenever he wins he celebrates.	
All times he wins are times he celebrates.
She goes where she chooses.	
All places she chooses to go are places 
	
she goes.
She does what she wants.	
All things she wants to do are things 
	
she does.
Notice the order of the subject and predicate terms in the last four examples. When 
translating statements such as these it is often easy to confuse the subject term with 
the predicate term. However, since these statements are all translated as A type cat-
egorical propositions, such a mix-up amounts to committing the fallacy of illicit 
conversion. To prevent it from happening, keep this rule in mind: For “W” words 
(“who,” “what,” “when,” “where,” “whoever,” “whatever,” “whenever,” “wherever”), 
the language ­following the “W” word goes into the subject term of the categorical  
proposition.
5.  Unexpressed Quantifiers
Many statements in ordinary usage have quantifiers that are implied but not expressed. 
In introducing the quantifiers one must be guided by the most probable meaning of the 
statement. Examples:
Emeralds are green gems.	
All emeralds are green gems.
There are lions in the zoo.	
Some lions are animals in the zoo.
A tiger is a mammal.	
All tigers are mammals.
A fish is not a mammal.	
No fish are mammals.
A tiger roared.	
Some tigers are animals that roared.
Children are human beings.	
All children are human beings.
Children live next door.	
Some children are people who live 
	
next door.
6.  Nonstandard Quantifiers
In some ordinary language statements, the quantity is indicated by words other 
than the three standard-form quantifiers. Such words include “few,” “a few,” “not 
every,” “anyone,” and various other forms. Another problem occurs when the 
quantifier “all” is combined with the copula “are not.” As we have already seen,  
statements of the form “All S are not P” are not standard-form categorical propo­
sitions. Depending on their meaning, they should be translated as either “No S are P” 
or “Some S are not P.” When the intended meaning is “Some S are not P,” the mean-
ing may be indicated by placing oral emphasis on the word “all.” For example, “All  
athletes are not superstars” means “Some athletes are not superstars.” Here are 
some additional examples:

4
A few soldiers are heroes.	
Some soldiers are heroes.
Anyone who votes is a citizen.	
All voters are citizens.
Not everyone who votes is a Democrat.	
Some voters are not Democrats.
Not a single dog is a cat.	
No dogs are cats.
All newborns are not able to talk.	
No newborns are people able to talk.
All prisoners are not violent.	
Some prisoners are not violent people.
Many entertainers are comedians	
Some entertainers are comedians.
Several demonstrators were arrested.	
Some demonstrators are people who 
	
were arrested.
Few sailors entered the regatta.	
Some sailors are people who entered 
	
the regatta and some sailors are not 
	
people who entered the regatta.
Notice that this last statement beginning with “few” cannot be translated as a single 
categorical proposition. Such statements (and some beginning with “a few”) must be 
translated as a compound arrangement of an I proposition and an O proposition. State-
ments beginning with “almost all” and “not quite all” must be handled in the same way. 
When these statements occur in arguments, the arguments must be treated in the same 
way as those containing exceptive propositions, which will be discussed shortly.
7.  Conditional Statements
When the antecedent and consequent of a conditional statement refer to the same class 
of things, the statement can usually be translated into categorical form. Such statements 
are always translated as universals. Language following the word “if” goes in the subject 
term of the categorical proposition, and language following “only if” goes in the predi-
cate term. Examples:
If it’s a mouse, then it’s a mammal.	
All mice are mammals.
If a bear is hungry, then it is dangerous.	
All hungry bears are dangerous animals.
Jewelry is expensive if it is made of gold.	
All pieces of jewelry made of gold are 
	
expensive things.
A car is a Camry only if it’s a Toyota.	
All Camrys are Toyotas.
Conditional statements having a negated consequent are usually best translated as  
E propositions. Examples:
If it’s a turkey, then it’s not a mammal.	
No turkeys are mammals.
If an animal has four legs, then it is not 	
No four-legged animals are birds.
a bird.	
A knife will cut only if it isn’t dull.	
No knives that cut are dull knives.
SECTION 4.7 Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form   255

256   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
The word “unless” means “if not.” Since language following the word “if” goes in the 
subject, statements containing “unless” are translated as categorical propositions hav-
ing negated subject terms. Examples:
Tomatoes are edible unless they are	
All unspoiled tomatoes are edible 
spoiled. 	
tomatoes.
Unless a boy misbehaves he will be	
All boys who do not misbehave are
treated decently.	
boys who will be treated decently.
8.  Exclusive Propositions
Many propositions that involve the words “only,” “none but,” “none except,” and  
“no . . . except” are exclusive propositions. Efforts to translate them into categorical 
propositions often lead to confusing the subject term with the predicate term. To avoid 
such confusion keep in mind that language following “only,” “none but,” “none except,” 
and “no . . . except” goes in the predicate term of the categorical proposition. For exam-
ple, the statement “Only executives can use the silver elevator” is translated “All people 
who can use the silver elevator are executives.” If it were translated “All executives are 
people who can use the silver elevator,” the translation would be incorrect. Examples:
Only elected officials will attend the	
All people who will attend the conven-
convention.	
tion are elected officials.
None but the brave deserve the fair.	
All people who deserve the fair are 
	
brave people.
No birds except peacocks are proud	
All birds proud of their tails are peacocks.
of their tails.
He owns only blue-chip stocks.	
All stocks he owns are blue-chip stocks.
She invited only wealthy socialites.	
All people she invited are wealthy 
	
socialites.
For a statement involving “only,” “none but,” “none except,” and “no . . . except” to be 
a genuinely exclusive proposition, the word that follows these words must be a plural 
noun or pronoun. If the word that follows “only,” “none but,” or the like ­designates an 
individual, the statement really asserts two things. For example, the statement “Only 
Megan painted a picture” asserts that Megan painted a picture and that no other person 
painted a picture. Thus it would be translated as two statements: “All people identical 
to Megan are people who painted a picture, and all people who painted a picture are 
people identical to Megan.” This section of the book will ignore cases where the word 
following “only,” “none but,” or the like designates an individual.
Also note that many English statements containing “only” are ambiguous because 
“only” can be interpreted as modifying alternate words in the statement. Consider, for 
example, the statement “He only jogs after sunset.” Does this mean “He is the only person 
who jogs after sunset” or “He jogs and does not walk after sunset” or “The only time he 
jogs is after sunset”? If the statement’s context does not provide an answer, the translator 

4
SECTION 4.7 Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form   257
is free to pick any of these senses for translation. This same ambiguity, incidentally, affects 
the last two examples in the earlier list. Accordingly, they might also be translated “All 
things he owns are blue-chip stocks” and “All socialites she invited are wealthy people.”
9. “The Only”
Statements beginning with the words “the only” are translated differently from those 
beginning with “only.” For example, the statement “The only cars that are available are 
Chevrolets” means “If a car is available, then it is a Chevrolet.” This in turn is translated 
as “All cars that are available are Chevrolets.” In other words, language following “the 
only” goes in the subject term of the categorical proposition. Examples:
The only animals that live in this	
All animals that live in this canyon
canyon are skunks.	
are skunks.
Accountants are the only ones who	
All those who will be hired are
will be hired.	
accountants.
Statements involving “the only” are similar to those involving “only” in this one re-
spect: When the statement is about an individual, two statements are needed to translate 
it. For example, “The only person who painted a picture is Megan” means that Megan 
painted a picture, and no other person painted a picture. The statement is equivalent in 
meaning to “Only Megan painted a picture.” Thus, it is translated “All people identical 
to Megan are people who painted a picture, and all people who painted a picture are 
people identical to Megan.” Statements involving “the only” that refer to individuals are 
ignored throughout the remainder of this chapter.
10.  Exceptive Propositions
Propositions of the form “All except S are P” and “All but S are P” are exceptive propo-
sitions. They must be translated not as single categorical propositions but as pairs of 
conjoined categorical propositions. Statements that include the phrase “none except,” 
on the other hand, are exclusive (not exceptive) propositions. “None except” is synony-
mous with “none but.” Here are some examples of exceptive propositions:
All except students are invited.	
No students are invited people, and 
	
all nonstudents are invited people.
All but managers must report to the	
No managers are people who must 
president. 	
report to the president, and all 
	
nonmanagers are people who must 
	
report to the president.
Because exceptive propositions cannot be translated into single categorical propo­
sitions, many of the simple inferences and operations pertinent to categorical proposi-
tions cannot be applied to them. Arguments that contain exceptive propositions as 
premises or conclusion can be evaluated only through the application of extended tech-
niques. This topic is taken up in the next chapter.

4
EXERCISE 4.7	
	 I.	 Translate the following into standard-form categorical propositions.
	
★1.	 Any bank that makes too many risky loans will fail.
	
2.	 Temporary workers are not eligible for fringe benefits.
	
3.	 Terrorist attacks succeed whenever security measures are lax.
	
★4.	 Bromine is extractable from seawater.
	
5.	 Not all guilt feelings are psychological aberrations.
	
6.	 Every jazz fan admires Duke Ellington.
	
★7.	 If it’s a halogen, then it isn’t chemically inert.
	
8.	 A television show that depicts violence incites violence.
	
9.	 Manipulators do not make good marriage partners.
	 ★10.	 None but pirate ships fly the Jolly Roger.
	
11.	 She gains weight whenever she’s depressed.
258   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
Key word (to be eliminated)
whoever, wherever, always, anyone, 
never, etc.
a few, several, many
if … then
 
unless
only, none but, none except, 
no … except
the only
all but, all except, few
not every, not all
there is, there are
Rule for A propositions
Language following these words goes in the subject term:  “if,”  “the only,” and “W” 
words (”who,”  “what,”  “when,”  “where,”  “whoever,”  “whatever,”  “whenever,”  
“wherever”).
Language following these words goes in the predicate term:  “only if,”  “only,”  “none 
but,”  “none except,”  and “no … except.”
Translation hint
use “all” together with people, 
      places, times
use “some”
use “all” or “no”
use “if not”
use “all”
use “all”
two statements required
use “some … are not”
use “some”

4
	
12.	 She’s depressed whenever she gains weight.
	 ★13.	 A man is a bachelor only if he is unmarried.
	
14.	 Warmth always relieves pain.
	
15.	 Joseph J. Thomson discovered the electron.
	 ★16.	 A few organic silicones are used as lubricants.
	
17.	 Only nuclear-powered vehicles are suitable for deep-space exploration.
	
18.	 Comets are the only heavenly bodies with tails.
	 ★19.	 There is a giant star in the Tarantula Nebula.
	
20.	 If a pregnant woman drinks alcohol, she risks giving birth to a deformed child.
	
21.	 No shellfish except oysters make pearls.
	 ★22.	 Only diabetics require insulin treatments.
	
23.	 The electroscope is a device for detecting static electricity.
	
24.	 Occasionally there are concerts in Central Park.
	 ★25.	 Berlin was the setting for the 1936 Olympic Games.
	
26.	 The Kentucky Derby is never run in January.
	
27.	 The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it.
	 ★28.	 Where there’s smoke, there’s fire.
	
29.	 Lunar eclipses do not occur unless the moon is full.
	
30.	 Radio transmissions are disrupted whenever sunspot activity increases.
	 ★31.	 If an ore isn’t radioactive, then it isn’t pitchblende.
	
32.	 All but the rats left the sinking ship.
	
33.	 A pesticide is dangerous if it contains DDT.
	 ★34.	 John Grisham writes only novels about lawyers.
	
35.	 He who hesitates is lost.
	
36.	 Modern corporations are all run in the interest of their managers.
	 ★37.	 Unless the sun is shining, a rainbow cannot occur.
	
38.	 Whoever suffers allergic reactions has a weakened immune system.
	
39.	 All fruits except pineapples ripen after they are picked.
	 ★40.	 Few corporate raiders are known for their integrity.
	
41.	 Monkeys are found in the jungles of Guatemala.
	
42.	 Monkeys are mammals.
	 ★43.	 I like strawberries.
	
44.	 All passengers are not allowed to smoke on board the aircraft.
SECTION 4.7 Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form   259

260   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
	
45.	 All flowers are not fragrant.
	 ★46.	 Cynthia travels where she wants.
	
47.	 Bats are the only true flying mammals.
	
48.	 Not every river runs to the sea.
	 ★49.	 Physicists do not understand the operation of superconductors.
	
50.	 Many apartment dwellers are victimized by noise.
	
51.	 There are forced labor camps in China.
	 ★52.	 Whatever increases efficiency improves profitability.
	
53.	 Dolphins are swimming between the breakers.
	
54.	 Feathers are not heavy.
	 ★55.	 Few picnics are entirely free of ants.
	
56.	 A civil right is unalienable if it is a human right.
	
57.	 She says what she pleases.
	 ★58.	 Several contestants won prizes.
	
59.	 An animal is a feline only if it is a cat.
	
60.	 Renee does whatever she is told to do.
	II.	 The following exercises contain typical mistakes that students make in attempting 
to translate statements into standard form. Correct the errors and redundancies in 
these attempted translations.
	
★1.	 Some of the figure-skating finalists are performers who are athletes that may 
win medals.
	
2.	 All cars identical to BMWs are the only cars that young lawyers drive.
	
3.	 All vertebrates except cartilaginous fishes are animals with a bony skeleton.
	
★4.	 No downhill skiers are effective competitors if they suffer from altitude sickness.
	
5.	 All substances like cobalt are things that are substances identical to ferromag-
netic metals.
	
6.	 No people identical to nuclear pacifists are people who believe a just war is 
possible.
 
★7.	 All people identical to matadors are not performers who succumb easily to fear.
	
8.	 All companies identical to Google are looking forward to a bright future.
	
9.	 No toxic dumps are ecological catastrophes unless they leak.
	 ★10.	 All crocodiles are things identical to dangerous animals when they are hungry.
	III.	 Translate the premise and conclusion of the following immediate inferences 
into standard-form categorical propositions. Then use conversion, obversion,  
260   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS

4
S u m m a ry    261
	
Summary
Categorical Proposition: A proposition that relates two classes (or categories). Standard-
form categorical propositions occur in four forms and are identified by letter names:
• A:  All S are P.
• E:   No S are P.
• I:   Some S are P.
• O: Some S are not P.
Every standard-form categorical proposition has four components:
• Quantifier (“all,” “no,” “some”)
• Subject term
• Copula (“are,” “are not”)
• Predicate term
contraposition, or the traditional square of opposition to determine whether each 
is valid or invalid. For those that are invalid, name the fallacy committed.
	
★1.	 Flu vaccines are never completely effective.
	
	 Therefore, not every flu vaccine is completely effective.
	
2.	 Only diamonds are a girl’s best friend.
	
	 Therefore, every diamond is a girl’s best friend.
	
3.	 A child destined to succeed in life has high self-esteem.
	
	 Therefore, a child with low self-esteem is not destined to succeed in life.
	
★4.	 A few toymakers want unrestricted online access to kids.
	
	 Therefore, not all toymakers want restricted online access to kids.
	
5.	 There are banks that engage in money laundering.
	
	 Therefore, there are banks that do not engage in money laundering.
	
6.	 Not a single major storm fails to cause flight cancellations.
	
	 Therefore, every major storm causes flight cancellations.
	
★7.	 Tax cuts never please everyone.
	
	 Therefore, every tax cut pleases everyone.
	
8.	 Military exercises are sometimes condemned by opponents.
	
	 Therefore, any military exercise is condemned by opponents.
	
9.	 It is false that not a single charter school is an academic underperformer.
	
	 Therefore, several charter schools are academic underperformers.
	 ★10.	 Fake artworks are sold on eBay.
	
	 Therefore, a few items sold on eBay are fake artworks.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

262   CHAPTER 4 CATEGORICAL Propositions
4
The quality of a categorical proposition:
• Affirmative (All S are P, Some S are P.)
• Negative (No S are P, Some S are not P.)
The quantity of a categorical proposition:
• Universal (All S are P, No S are P.)
• Particular (Some S are P, Some P are not P.)
The subject and predicate terms are distributed if the proposition makes an assertion 
about every member of the class denoted by the term; otherwise, undistributed:
• A:  Subject term is distributed.
• E:  Subject and predicate terms are distributed.
• I:   Neither term is distributed.
• O: Predicate term is distributed.
Universal (A and E) propositions allow for two different interpretations:
• Aristotelian: Universal propositions about existing things have existential import.
• Boolean: Universal propositions have no existential import.
The modern square of opposition is a diagram that represents necessary inferences from 
the Boolean standpoint:
• A and O propositions contradict each other.
• E and I propositions contradict each other.
The content of categorical propositions may be represented by two-circle Venn diagrams:
• Shading an area indicates that the area is empty.
• Entering an X in an area means that the area is not empty.
Using Venn diagrams to test an immediate inference:
• Enter the content of the premise and conclusion in separate Venn diagrams.
• See if the content of the conclusion diagram is contained in the premise diagram.
Three operations that sometimes yield logically equivalent results:
• Conversion: Switch S and P. Logically equivalent results for E, I.
• Obversion: Change the quality, replace P with its term complement. Logically equivalent 
results for A, E, I, O.
• Contraposition: Switch S and P, replace S and P with term complements. Logically  
equivalent results for A, O.
Two formal fallacies may occur when these operations are used to derive conclusions:
• Illicit conversion: Performing conversion on an A or O premise.
• Illicit contraposition: Performing contraposition on an E or I premise.
The traditional square of opposition applies to categorical propositions when the Aristote­
lian standpoint is adopted and the subject term refers to existing things:
• Contrary: Holds between A and E. At least one is false.
• Subcontrary: Holds between I and O. At least one is true.

4
• Subalternation: Holds between A and I and between E and O. Truth flows downward 
and falsity flows upward.
• Contradiction: Holds as in the modern square.
Three formal fallacies may occur when the traditional square is used to derive conclusions:
• Illicit contrary: Results from an incorrect application of Contrary.
• Illicit subcontrary: Results from an incorrect application of Subcontrary.
• Illicit subalternation: Results from an incorrect application of Subalternation.
Existential Fallacy: Occurs when Contrary, Subcontrary, or Subalternation are used on 
premises whose subject terms refer to nonexistent things.
Venn diagrams may be modified to apply to the Aristotelian standpoint:
• For A and E: Enter a circled X in the unshaded part of the subject circle.
• The circled X represents the temporary assumption of existence.
• May be used to prove the traditional square and test immediate inferences.
Translation: Propositions not in standard from may be put into standard form.
• Translation must have a proper quantifier, subject term, copula, predicate term.
• Translate singular propositions by using a parameter.
• Translate adverbs and pronouns by using “persons,” “places,” “things,” “times.”
• For A propositions:
■
■
Language following “if,”  “the only,” and “W” words goes in the subject term.
■
■
Language following “only if,”  “only,”  “none but,”  “none except,” and “no . . . except” 
goes in the predicate term.
S u m m a ry    263

Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.
264
5 
5.1 	 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure
5.2	 Venn Diagrams
5.3	 Rules and Fallacies
5.4	 Reducing the Number of Terms
5.5	 Ordinary Language Arguments
5.6	 Enthymemes
5.7	 Sorites
5.1	
Standard Form, Mood, and Figure
PREVIEW    While walking across a bridge you feel a sudden jolt, and then the bridge starts  
swaying like crazy. Fortunately, it remains standing, but later you hear that another bridge in the area 
collapsed. Why didn’t the bridge you were on collapse? The strength of a bridge is largely determined 
by its structure, and the bridge you crossed may have had greater structural integrity than the one that 
did collapse. In this section you will learn that the validity of an argument, like the strength of a bridge, 
depends on its form, or structure.
In the general sense of the term, a syllogism is a deductive argument consisting of two 
premises and one conclusion. Provisionally we will define a categorical syllogism as a 
­syllogism consisting of three categorical propositions and containing a total of three 
different terms, each of which appears twice in distinct propositions. (We will give a 
more precise definition shortly.) The following argument is a categorical syllogism:
All soldiers are patriots.
No traitors are patriots.
Therefore, no traitors are soldiers.
Each of the three terms in a categorical syllogism has its own name depending on its 
position in the argument. The major term, by definition, is the predicate of the conclu-
sion, and the minor term is the subject of the conclusion. The middle term, which pro-
vides the middle ground between the two premises, is the one that occurs once in each 
Categorical Syllogisms
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

SECTION 5.1 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure   265
5
premise and does not occur in the conclusion. Thus, for the argument just given, the 
major term is “soldiers,” the minor term is “traitors,” and the middle term is “patriots.”
The premises of a categorical syllogism also have their own names. The major 
­premise, by definition, is the one that contains the major term, and the minor ­premise 
is the one that contains the minor term. Thus, in the syllogism just given the major prem-
ise is “All soldiers are patriots,” and the minor premise is “No traitors are ­patriots.” Now 
that we are supplied with these definitions, we may proceed to the idea of standard form. 
A standard-form categorical syllogism is one that meets the ­following four conditions:
1.	 All three statements are standard-form categorical propositions.
2.	 The two occurrences of each term are identical.
3.	 Each term is used in the same sense throughout the argument.
4.	 The major premise is listed first, the minor premise second, and the conclusion last.
The first condition requires that each statement have a proper quantifier, subject 
term, copula, and predicate term. The second condition is clear. The third rules out 
the possibility of equivocation. For example, if a syllogism containing the word “men” 
used that term in the sense of human beings in one statement and in the sense of male  
human beings in another statement, the syllogism would really contain more than 
three terms and would therefore not be in standard form. Finally, the fourth condition 
merely requires that the three statements be listed in the right order.
The syllogism about soldiers is in standard form because all four conditions are 
fulfilled. However, the following syllogism is not in standard form, because the fourth 
condition is violated:
All watercolors are paintings.
Some watercolors are masterpieces.
Therefore, some paintings are masterpieces.
To put this syllogism into standard form the order of the premises must be reversed. 
The major premise (the one containing “masterpieces,” which is the predicate term 
in the conclusion) must be listed first, and the minor premise (the one containing 
­“paintings,” which is the subject term in the conclusion) must be listed second.
Now that we have a definition of standard-form categorical syllogism, we can 
give a more precise definition of categorical syllogism. A categorical syllogism is a  
deductive argument consisting of three categorical propositions that is capable of being 
1. Quantiﬁer 
copula
2. Quantiﬁer 
copula
3. Quantiﬁer 
copula
Minor
term
Standard form of a syllogism
Minor premise
(contains minor term)
Conclusion
Major premise
(contains major term)
Major
term

266   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
translated into standard form. For an argument to qualify as a categorical syllogism, 
all three statements need not be standard-form categorical propositions; but if they 
are, the analysis is greatly simplified. For this reason, all of the syllogisms presented 
in the first four sections of this chapter will consist of statements that are in standard 
form. In later sections, techniques will be developed for translating non-standard-form 
­syllogisms into equivalent arguments that are in standard form.
After a categorical syllogism has been put into standard form, its validity or ­invalidity 
may be determined through mere inspection of the form. The individual form of a syl-
logism consists of two factors: mood and figure. The mood of a categorical ­syllogism 
consists of the letter names of the propositions that make it up. For example, if the 
major premise is an A proposition, the minor premise an O proposition, and the con-
clusion an E proposition, the mood is AOE. To determine the mood of a ­categorical 
syllogism, one must first put the syllogism into standard form; the letter name of the 
statements may then be noted to the side of each. The mood of the syllogism is then 
designated by the order of these letters, reading the letter for the major premise first, 
the letter for the minor premise second, and the letter for the conclusion last.
The figure of a categorical syllogism is determined by the location of the two occur-
rences of the middle term in the premises. Four different arrangements are possible. 
If we let S represent the subject of the conclusion (minor term), P the predicate of the 
conclusion (major term), and M the middle term, and leave out the quantifiers and 
copulas, the four possible arrangements may be illustrated as follows:
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
M
P
P
M
M
P
P
M
S
M
S
M
M
S
M
S
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
P
In the first figure the middle term is top left, bottom right; in the second, top right, 
­bottom right, and so on. Example:
No painters are sculptors.
Some sculptors are artists.
Therefore, some artists are not painters.
This syllogism is in standard form. The mood is EIO and the figure is four. The form 
of the syllogism is therefore designated as EIO-4.
To remember how the four figures are defined, imagine the four possible arrange-
ments of the middle term as depicting the outline of a shirt collar:
2
1
4
X
X
X
X
3

SECTION 5.1 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure   267
5
The only problem with this device is that it may lead you to confuse the second figure 
with the third. To avoid this confusion, keep in mind that for these two figures the  
S and P terms go on the same “collar flap” as the middle term. These terms are repre-
sented by the X’s in the diagram. Thus, for the second figure, S and P are to the left of 
the middle term, and for the third figure they are to the right.
Since there are four kinds of categorical propositions and there are three categorical 
propositions in a categorical syllogism, there are 64 possible moods (4 × 4 × 4 = 64). 
And since there are four different figures, there are 256 different forms of categorical 
syllogisms (4 × 64 = 256).
Once the mood and figure of a syllogism is known, the validity of the syllogism can 
be determined by checking the mood and figure against a list of valid syllogistic forms. 
To do this, first adopt the Boolean standpoint and see if the syllogism’s form appears 
in the following table of unconditionally valid forms. If it does, the syllogism is valid 
from the Boolean standpoint. In other words, it is valid regardless of whether its terms 
denote actually existing things.
Unconditionally Valid Forms
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
AAA
EAE
IAI
AEE
EAE
AEE
AI I
IAI
AI I
EIO
OAO
EIO
EIO
AOO
EIO
If the syllogism does not appear on the list of unconditionally valid forms, then adopt 
the Aristotelian standpoint and see if the syllogism’s form appears in the following ta-
ble of conditionally valid forms. If it does, the syllogism is valid from the Aristotelian 
standpoint on condition that a certain term (the “critical” term) denotes actually exist-
ing things. The required condition is stated in the last column.
Conditionally Valid Forms
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Required
condition
AAI
AEO
AEO
S exists
EAO
EAO
AAI
EAO
M exists
EAO
AAI
P exists
For example, the AAI-1 is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint if the subject of the 
conclusion (the minor term) denotes actually existing things. The EAO-3 is valid 
if the middle term denotes actually existing things. Thus, if we are given an AAI-1 
­syllogism and the minor term is “cats,” then the syllogism is valid from the Aristotelian 
­standpoint. But if the minor term is “unicorns,” then the syllogism is invalid. On the 

268   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
other hand, if the minor term is “students who failed the exam” and we are not certain 
if there are any such students, then the syllogism is conditionally valid.
The relationship between the Aristotelian standpoint and the Boolean standpoint is 
illustrated in the following bar graph:
Boolean
Number of valid forms
Aristotelian
Conditionally
valid
Unconditionally
valid
Information conveyed by premises
15
24
The graph shows that when the premises of a syllogistic form are recognized as convey-
ing information about existence, an additional nine forms become valid.
Interestingly, during the Middle Ages logic students used to memorize a little poem 
that served as a rule of thumb for distinguishing valid from invalid syllogisms. The 
vowels in the words identified the mood, and the words “prioris,” “secundae,” and so 
on the figure.
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prioris;
Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco secundae;
Tertia, Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, Felapton,
Bocardo, Ferison habet: quarta insuper addit
Bramantip, Camenes, Dimaris, Fesapo, Fresison.
For example, the “Barbara” syllogism (this designation is still encountered today) is 
AAA-1, “Celarent” is EAE-1, and so on. This poem conforms substantially to the two 
tables given earlier, except that five forms have been left out. The reason these forms 
were left out is that the logicians of that time considered them weak: They draw a partic-
ular conclusion from premises that would support a (stronger) universal conclusion. For 
example, the weaker AAI-1 is left out in favor of the stronger AAA-1. Needless to say, 
few students today depend on this poem to distinguish valid from invalid syllogisms.
We have seen how, given the syllogism, we can obtain the mood and figure. But 
sometimes we need to go in the reverse direction: from the mood and figure to the syl-
logistic form. Suppose we are given the form EIO-4. To reconstruct the syllogistic form 
is easy. First use the mood to determine the skeleton of the form:
E	
No ______ are ______.
I	
Some ______ are ______.
O	
Some ______ are not ______.
5

SECTION 5.1 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure   269
EXERCISE 5.1	
	 I.	 The following syllogisms are in standard form. Identify the major, minor, and 
middle terms, as well as the mood and figure of each. Then use the two lists of 
valid syllogistic forms to determine whether each is valid from the Boolean stand-
point, valid from the Aristotelian standpoint, or invalid.
	
★1.	 All neutron stars are things that produce intense gravity.
	
	 All neutron stars are extremely dense objects.
	
	 Therefore, all extremely dense objects are things that produce intense gravity.
	
2.	 No insects that eat mosquitoes are insects that should be killed.
	
	 All dragonflies are insects that eat mosquitoes.
	
	 Therefore, no dragonflies are insects that should be killed.
	
3.	 No environmentally produced diseases are inherited afflictions.
	
	 Some psychological disorders are not inherited afflictions.
	
	 Therefore, some psychological disorders are environmentally produced  
diseases.
	
★4.	 No people who mix fact with fantasy are good witnesses.
	
	 Some hypnotized people are people who mix fact with fantasy.
	
	 Therefore, some hypnotized people are not good witnesses.
	
5.	 All ozone molecules are good absorbers of ultraviolet rays.
	
	 All ozone molecules are things destroyed by chlorine.
	
	 Therefore, some things destroyed by chlorine are good absorbers of ultra­
violet rays.
	II.	 Put the following syllogisms into standard form, using letters to represent the 
terms, and name the mood and figure. Then use the two lists of valid syllogistic 
forms to determine whether each is valid from the Boolean standpoint, valid from 
the Aristotelian standpoint, or invalid.
Then use the figure to determine the arrangement of the middle terms:
E	
No ______ are M.
I	
Some M are ______.
O	
Some ______ are not ______.
Finally, supply the major and minor terms, using the letters S and P to designate the 
subject and predicate of the conclusion. The predicate of the conclusion is always  
repeated in the first premise, and the subject of the conclusion is repeated in the second 
premise:
E	
No P are M.
I	
Some M are S.
O	
Some S are not P.
5
SECTION 5.1 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure   269

270   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
	
★1.	 No Republicans are Democrats, so no Republicans are big spenders, since all 
big spenders are Democrats.
	
2.	 Some latchkey children are not kids who can stay out of trouble, for some 
youngsters prone to boredom are latchkey children, and no kids who can stay 
out of trouble are youngsters prone to boredom.
	
3.	 No rent-control proposals are regulations welcomed by landlords, and all 
­regulations welcomed by landlords are measures that allow a free hand in 
­raising rents. Therefore, some rent-control proposals are measures that allow 
a free hand in raising rents.
	
★4.	 Some insects that feed on milkweed are not foods suitable for birds, inas-
much as no monarch butterflies are foods suitable for birds and all monarch 
­butterflies are insects that feed on milkweed.
	
5.	 No undocumented individuals are people who have a right to welfare pay-
ments, and some migrant workers are undocumented individuals. Thus, some 
people who have a right to ­welfare payments are migrant workers.
	
6.	 Some African nations are not countries deserving military aid, because some 
African nations are not upholders of human rights, and all countries ­deserving 
military aid are upholders of human rights.
	
★7.	 All pranksters are exasperating individuals, consequently some leprechauns 
are exasperating individuals, since all leprechauns are pranksters.
	
8.	 Some racists are not people suited to be immigration officials, given that 
some humanitarians are not people suited to be immigration officials, and no  
humanitarians are racists.
	
9.	 No people who respect human life are terrorists, and all airline hijackers are 
terrorists. Hence, no airline hijackers are people who respect human life.
	 ★10.	 Some silicates are crystalline substances, because all silicates are oxygen 
­compounds, and some oxygen compounds are not crystalline substances.
	III.	Reconstruct the syllogistic forms from the following combinations of mood  
and figure:
	
★1.	 OAE-3
	
2.	 EIA-4
	
3.	 AII-3
	
★4.	 IAE-1
	
5.	 AOO-2
	
6.	 EAO-4
	
★7.	 AAA-1
	
8.	 EAO-2
5

SECTION 5.1 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure   271
5
	
9.	 OEI-3
	 ★10.	 OEA-4
IV.	 Construct the following syllogisms.
	
★1.	 An EIO-2 syllogism with these terms—major—dogmatists; minor—theolo-
gians; middle—scholars who encourage freethinking.
	
2.	 An unconditionally valid syllogism in the first figure with a particular 
­affirmative conclusion and these terms: major—people incapable of objectivity;  
minor—Supreme Court justices; middle—lockstep ideologues.
	
3.	 An unconditionally valid syllogism in the fourth figure having two universal 
premises and these terms: major—teenage suicides; minor—heroic episodes; 
middle—tragic occurrences.
	
★4.	 A valid syllogism having mood OAO and these terms: major—things  
capable of replicating by themselves; minor—structures that invade cells;  
middle—viruses.
	
5.	 A valid syllogism in the first figure having a universal negative conclusion 
and these terms: major—guarantees of marital happiness; minor—prenuptial 
agreements; middle—legally enforceable documents.
	V.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 Every syllogism is a categorical syllogism.
	
2.	 Some categorical syllogisms cannot be put into standard form.
	
3.	 The statements in a categorical syllogism need not be expressed in  
standard form.
	
4.	 The statements in a standard-form categorical syllogism need not be  
expressed in standard form.
	
5.	 In a standard-form categorical syllogism the two occurrences of each term 
must be identical.
	
6.	 The major premise of a standard-form categorical syllogism contains the 
­subject of the conclusion.
	
7.	 To determine its mood and figure, a categorical syllogism must first be put 
into standard form.
	
8.	 In a standard-form syllogism having Figure 2, the two occurrences of the  
middle term are on the right.
	
9.	 The unconditionally valid syllogistic forms are valid from both the Boolean 
and the Aristotelian standpoints.
	
10.	 The conditionally valid syllogistic forms are invalid if the requisite condition 
is not fulfilled.
SECTION 5.1 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure   271
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

272   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
5.2	
Venn Diagrams
PREVIEW    You hear on TV that a robbery is in progress at a local bank. The bank employees are 
being held as hostages in the vault, while the customers are hiding from the robbers in a meeting room. 
You then discover that a friend of yours was in the bank when the robbery began. You reason that since 
your friend was a customer, he is in the meeting room—which means that he is not being held hostage. 
This reasoning process, which assigns classes to three spatial areas, underlies the application of Venn 
diagrams to syllogisms.
Venn diagrams provide the most intuitively evident and, in the long run, easiest to 
remember technique for testing the validity of categorical syllogisms. The technique is 
basically an extension of the one developed in Chapter 4 to represent the informational 
content of categorical propositions. Because syllogisms contain three terms, whereas 
propositions contain only two, the application of Venn diagrams to syllogisms requires 
three overlapping circles.
These circles should be drawn so that seven areas are clearly distinguishable within 
the diagram. The second step is to label the circles, one for each term. The precise order 
of the labeling is not critical, but we will adopt the convention of always assigning the 
lower-left circle to the subject of the conclusion, the lower-right circle to the predicate 
of the conclusion, and the top circle to the middle term. This convention is easy to  
remember because it conforms to the arrangement of the terms in a standard-form syl-
logism: The subject of the conclusion is on the lower left, the predicate of the conclusion 
is on the lower right, and the middle term is in the premises, above the conclusion.*
P
M
1
2
4
5
6
7
3
S
Anything in the area marked “1” is an M but neither an S nor a P, anything in the area 
marked “2” is both an S and an M but not a P, anything in the area marked “3” is a 
member of all three classes, and so on.
The test procedure consists of transferring the information content of the premises 
to the diagram and then inspecting the diagram to see whether it necessarily implies 
*Some textbooks present three-circle Venn diagrams with two circles on the top and one on the bottom. This textbook 
presents them the way John Venn himself drew them, with two circles on the bottom and one on the top. See his  
Symbolic Logic (London: Macmillan, 1881), 105, 114, 116.

5
SECTION 5.2 Venn Diagrams   273
the truth of the conclusion. If the information in the diagram does do this, the argu-
ment is valid; otherwise it is invalid.
The use of Venn diagrams to evaluate syllogisms usually requires a little practice at 
first. Perhaps the best way of learning the technique is through illustrative examples, 
but a few pointers are needed first:
1.	 Marks (shading or placing an X) are entered only for the premises. No marks are 
made for the conclusion.
2.	 If the argument contains one universal premise, this premise should be entered first in 
the diagram. If there are two universal premises, either one can be done first.
3.	 When entering the information contained in a premise, one should concentrate on the 
circles corresponding to the two terms in the statement. While the third circle cannot 
be ignored altogether, it should be given only minimal attention.
4.	 When inspecting a completed diagram to see whether it supports a particular con-
clusion, one should remember that particular statements assert two things. “Some  
S are P” means “At least one S exists and that S is a P”; “Some S are not P” means “At 
least one S exists and that S is not a P.”
5.	 When shading an area, one must be careful to shade all of the area in question.  
Examples:
Wrong:
Right:
6.	 The area where an X goes is always initially divided into two parts. If one of these parts 
has already been shaded, the X goes in the unshaded part. Examples:
Right:
	
If one of the two parts is not shaded, the X goes on the line separating the two parts. 
Examples:
Right:

274   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
John Venn 1834–1923
eminentlogicians
Reproduced by permission of the Master and Fellows of Gonville and 
Caius College, Cambridge, UK
J
ohn Venn is known mainly for his circle diagrams, 
which have contributed to work in many areas of 
mathematics and logic, including computer science,  
   set theory, and statistics. His book The Logic of Chance 
(1866) advanced probability theory by introducing the 
relative frequency interpretation of probability; it sig-
nificantly influenced later developments in statistical 
theory as well. In Symbolic Logic (1881) he defended 
George Boole against various critics and rendered 
the new logic intelligible to nonmathematical thinkers.  
Finally, in The Principles of Empirical and Inductive Logic 
(1889) he criticized Mill’s methods of induction as being 
of limited application as an engine of discovery in science.
John Venn was born in Hull, England, the son of 
Henry Venn, the Drypool parish rector, and Martha 
Sykes Venn, who died when John was a child. The 
Venns were prominent members of the evangelical 
movement within the Church of England. John Venn’s 
grandfather had been an evangelical leader, as was 
his father, whom his contemporaries regarded as the 
head of the evangelical movement. His father served 
for many years in an administrative capacity for the 
Church Missionary Society, and John was expected to 
follow in the family tradition. In 1858, after graduating 
from Gonville and Caius (pronounced “keys”) College, 
Cambridge, he was ordained and served for a time as 
a curate in parishes near London.
Perhaps owing to his contact with Henry Sidgwick 
and other Cambridge agnostics, Venn’s confidence in 
the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England be-
gan to erode. Also, as a result of his reading the works 
of De Morgan, Boole, and Mill, his interest shifted al-
most totally from theological matters to issues related 
to logic. At age twenty-eight, Venn returned to Cam-
bridge to become a lecturer in logic and probability 
theory. Five years later, he­ married Susanna Carnegie 
Edmonstone, 
the 
daughter of an An-
glican cleric, and 
they had one child,  
John Archibald Venn.  
In 1883, at age forty- 
nine, Venn became 
a fel­low of the 
Royal Society and 
recei­ved the de-
gree of Doctor of 
Science.
The greater part  
of Venn’s life cen­
tered completely on his association with Cambridge. 
In 1857 he became a fellow of Caius, and he re-
mained a member of the college foundation for 
sixty-six years, until his death. During the last twenty 
years of his life he served as college president, during 
which time he wrote a history of the college. Also, 
in collaboration with his son, he completed Part I of 
the massive Alumni Cantabrigienses, which contains 
short biographies of 76,000 graduates and office- 
holders ranging from the university’s earliest days 
through 1751.
John Venn’s son said of his father that he was a “fine 
walker and mountain climber.” Also, in keeping with 
his view that abstract subjects such as logic and math-
ematics ought to serve practical utility, Venn loved to 
use this knowledge to build machines. He invented a 
cricket bowling machine that was used against the best 
batsman of an Australian team. The machine “clean 
bowled” this batsman four times. Today Venn is me-
morialized by a stained-glass window in the dining hall 
of Caius College that contains a representation of a 
Venn diagram.
5

5
This means that the X may be in either (or both) of the two areas—but it is not known 
which one.
7.	 An X should never be placed in such a way that it dangles outside of the diagram, and 
it should never be placed on the intersection of two lines.
Wrong:
Wrong:
Boolean Standpoint
Because the Boolean standpoint does not recognize universal premises as having exis-
tential import, its approach to testing syllogisms is simpler and more general than that 
of the Aristotelian standpoint. Hence, we will begin by testing syllogisms from that 
standpoint and later proceed to the Aristotelian standpoint. Here is an example:
1. No P are M.	
EAE-2
  All S are M.
  No S are P.
Since both premises are universal, it makes no difference which premise we enter first 
in the diagram. To enter the major premise, we concentrate our attention on the M and 
P circles, which are highlighted with color:
P
M
S
No P are M.
We now complete the diagram by entering the minor premise. In doing so, we concen-
trate our attention on the S and M circles, which are highlighted with color:
P
M
S
All S are M.
SECTION 5.2 Venn Diagrams   275

276   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
The conclusion states that the area where the S and P circles overlap is shaded. Inspec-
tion of the diagram reveals that this area is indeed shaded, so the syllogistic form is 
valid. Because the form is valid from the Boolean standpoint, it is unconditionally valid. 
In other words, it is valid regardless of whether its premises are recognized as having 
existential import.
Here is another example:
2. All M are P.	
AEE-1
  No S are M.
  No S are P.
Again, both premises are universal, so it makes no difference which premise we enter 
first in the diagram. To enter the major premise, we concentrate our attention on the 
M and P circles:
P
M
S
All M are P.
To enter the minor premise, we concentrate our attention on the M and S circles:
P
M
S
No S are M.
Again, the conclusion states that the area where the S and P circles overlap is shaded. 
Inspection of the diagram reveals that only part of this area is shaded, so the syllogistic 
form is invalid.
Another example:
3. Some P are M.	
IAI-4
  All M are S.	
  Some S are P.

5
We enter the universal premise first. To do so, we concentrate our attention on the  
M and S circles:
P
M
S
All M are S.
To enter the particular premise, we concentrate our attention on the M and P circles. 
This premise tells us to place an X in the area where the M and P circles overlap.  
Because part of this area is shaded, we place the X in the remaining area:
P
M
S
Some P are M.
X
The conclusion states that there is an X in the area where the S and P circles overlap. 
Inspection of the diagram reveals that there is indeed an X in this area, so the syllogistic 
form is valid.
The examples that follow are done in a single step.
P
M
S
4. All P are M.
    Some S are not M.
    Some S are not P.
AOO-2
X
The universal premise is entered first. The particular premise tells us to place an X in 
the part of the S circle that lies outside the M circle. Because part of this area is shaded, 
we place the X in the remaining area. The conclusion states that there is an X that is 
inside the S circle but outside the P circle. Inspection of the diagram reveals that there 
is indeed an X in this area, so the syllogistic form is valid.
SECTION 5.2 Venn Diagrams   277

278   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
P
M
S
IAI-1
1
2
X
5. Some M are P.
     All S are M.
     Some S are P.
As usual, we enter the universal premise first. In entering the particular premise, we 
concentrate on the area where the M and P circles overlap. (For emphasis, this area is 
colored in the diagram.) Because this overlap area is divided into two parts (the areas 
marked “1” and “2”), we place the X on the line (arc of the S circle) that separates the 
two parts. The conclusion states that there is an X in the area where the S and P circles 
overlap. Inspection of the diagram reveals that the single X is dangling outside of this 
overlap area. We do not know if it is in or out. Thus, the syllogistic form is invalid.
P
M
S
AOO-1
1
2
X
6. All M are P.
     Some S are not M.
     Some S are not P.
In entering the particular premise, we concentrate our attention on the part of the  
S circle that lies outside the M circle (colored area). Because this area is divided into 
two parts (the areas marked “1” and “2”), we place the X on the line (arc of the P circle) 
separating the two areas. The conclusion states that there is an X that is inside the  
S circle but outside the P circle. There is an X in the S circle, but we do not know whether  
it is inside or outside the P circle. Hence, the syllogistic form is invalid.
P
M
S
7. All M are P.
     All S are M.
     All S are P.
AAA-1
This is the “Barbara” syllogism. The conclusion states that the part of the S circle that is 
outside the P circle is empty. Inspection of the diagram reveals that this area is indeed 
empty. Thus, the syllogistic form is valid.

5
P
M
S
8. Some M are not P.
    Some S are M.
    Some S are not P.
OIO-1
X
1
2
b
a X
In this diagram no areas have been shaded, so there are two possible areas for each 
of the two X’s. The X from the first premise goes on the line (arc of the S circle) 
separating areas 1 and 2, and the X from the second premise goes on the line (arc of 
the P ­circle) separating areas a and b. The conclusion states that there is an X that is 
inside the S circle but outside the P circle. We have no certainty that the X from the 
first premise is inside the S circle, and while the X from the second premise is inside 
the S circle, we have no certainty that it is outside the P circle. Hence, the syllogistic 
form is invalid.
We have yet to explain the rationale for placing the X on the boundary separating 
two areas when neither of the areas is shaded. Consider this syllogistic form:
P
M
S
No P are M.
Some S are not M.
Some S are P.
P
M
S
P
X
M
Right:
Wrong:
Wrong:
S
X
X
In each of the three diagrams the content of the first premise is represented correctly. 
The problem concerns placing the X from the second premise. In the first diagram 
the X is placed inside the S circle but outside both the M circle and the P circle. This 
diagram asserts: “At least one S is not an M and it is also not a P.” Clearly the diagram 
says more than the premise does, and so it is incorrect. In the second diagram the X 
is placed inside the S circle, outside the M circle, and inside the P circle. This diagram 
asserts: “At least one S is not an M, but it is a P.” Again, the diagram says more than the 
premise says, and so it is incorrect. In the third diagram, which is done correctly, the X 
is placed on the boundary between the two areas. This diagram asserts: “At least one S 
is not an M, and it may or may not be a P.” In other words, nothing at all is said about P,  
and so the diagram represents exactly the content of the second premise.
SECTION 5.2 Venn Diagrams   279

280   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
Aristotelian Standpoint
For the syllogistic forms tested thus far, we have adopted the Boolean standpoint, which 
does not recognize universal premises as having existential import. We now shift to the 
Aristotelian standpoint, where existential import can make a difference to validity. To 
test a syllogism from the Aristotelian standpoint, we follow basically the same proce-
dure we followed in Section 4.6 to test immediate inferences:
1.	 Reduce the syllogism to its form and test it from the Boolean standpoint. If the form 
is valid, proceed no further. The syllogism is valid from both standpoints.
2.	 If the syllogistic form is invalid from the Boolean standpoint and has universal prem-
ises and a particular conclusion, then adopt the Aristotelian standpoint and look to 
see if there is a Venn circle that is completely shaded except for one area. If there is, 
enter a circled X in that area and retest the form.
3.	 If the syllogistic form is conditionally valid, determine if the circled X represents 
something that exists. If it does, the condition is fulfilled, and the syllogism is valid 
from the Aristotelian standpoint.
In regard to step 2, if the diagram contains no Venn circle completely shaded except 
for one area, then the syllogism is invalid from the Aristotelian standpoint. However, if 
it does contain such a Venn circle and the syllogism has a particular conclusion, then 
we place a circled X in the one unshaded area. This circled X represents the temporary 
assumption that the Venn circle in question is not empty.
In regard to step 3, if the circled X does not represent something that exists, then the 
syllogism is invalid. As we will see in Section 5.3, such syllogisms commit the existen-
tial fallacy from the Aristotelian standpoint.
The table of conditionally valid syllogistic forms presented in Section 5.1 names 
nine forms that are valid from the Aristotelian standpoint if a certain condition is ful-
filled. The following syllogism has one of those forms:
9.  No fighter pilots are tank commanders.
All fighter pilots are courageous individuals.
Therefore, some courageous individuals are not tank commanders.
First, we replace the terms with letters and test the syllogism from the Boolean  
standpoint:
T
F
C
No F are T.
All F are C.
Some C are not T.
EAO-3
The conclusion asserts that there is an X that is inside the C circle but outside the  
T circle. Inspection of the diagram reveals no X’s at all, so the syllogism is invalid from 

5
the Boolean standpoint. Proceeding to step 2, we adopt the Aristotelian standpoint and, 
noting that the conclusion is particular and that the F circle is all shaded except for one 
area, we enter a circled X in that area:
T
F
C
X
The diagram now indicates that the syllogism is conditionally valid, so we proceed to 
step 3 and determine whether the circled X represents something that actually exists. 
Since the circled X represents an F, and since F stands for fighter pilots, the circled X 
does represent something that exists. Thus, the condition is fulfilled, and the syllogism 
is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint.
The F circle in this diagram represents the critical term, first mentioned in connec-
tion with the table of conditionally valid forms in Section 5.1. The critical term is the 
term listed in the farthest right-hand column of that table. As the diagram shows, if 
the circle for the critical term has at least one member, then this member is necessarily 
also in the circle representing the subject of the conclusion (in this case C). This fact 
provides the basis for a definition of critical term. The critical term is the term in a 
categorical syllogism which, when it denotes at least one existing thing, guarantees that 
the subject of the conclusion denotes at least one existing thing.
Here is another example:
10. All reptiles are scaly animals.
	
All currently living tyrannosaurs are reptiles.
	
Therefore, some currently living tyrannosaurs are scaly animals.
First we test the syllogism from the Boolean standpoint:
S
R
C
All R are S.
All C are R.
Some C are S.
AAI-1
The conclusion asserts that there is an X in the area where the C and S circles overlap.  
Since the diagram contains no X’s at all, the syllogism is invalid from the Boolean 
standpoint. Proceeding to step 2, we adopt the Aristotelian standpoint. Then, after  
SECTION 5.2 Venn Diagrams   281

282   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
EXERCISE 5.2	
	 I.	 Use Venn diagrams to determine whether the following standard-form categori-
cal syllogisms are valid from the Boolean standpoint, valid from the Aristotelian 
standpoint, or invalid. Then, identify the mood and figure, and cross-check your 
answers with the tables of valid syllogisms found in Section 5.1.
	
★1.	 All corporations that overcharge their customers are unethical businesses.
	
	 Some unethical businesses are investor-owned utilities.
	
	 Therefore, some investor-owned utilities are corporations that overcharge 
their customers.
	
2.	 No AIDS victims are people who pose an immediate threat to the lives of others.
	
	 Some kindergarten children are AIDS victims.
	
	 Therefore, some kindergarten children are not people who pose an immediate 
threat to the lives of others.
	
3.	 No individuals truly concerned with the plight of suffering humanity are 
­people motivated primarily by self-interest.
	
	 All television evangelists are people motivated primarily by self-interest.
noticing that the conclusion is particular and that the C circle is all shaded except for 
one area, we enter a circled X in that area:
S
R
C
X
The diagram now indicates that the syllogism is conditionally valid, so we proceed to 
the third step and determine whether the circled X represents something that actually 
exists. Since the circled X represents a C, and C stands for currently living tyrannosaurs, 
the circled X does not represent something that actually exists. Thus, the condition 
is not fulfilled, and the syllogism is invalid. As we will see in the next section of this 
chapter, the syllogism commits the existential fallacy from the Aristotelian standpoint.
In determining whether the circled X stands for something that exists, we always 
look to the Venn circle that is all shaded except for one area. If the term corresponding 
to that circle denotes existing things, then the circled X represents one of those things. 
In some diagrams, however, there may be two Venn circles that are all shaded except 
for one area, and each may contain a circled X in the unshaded area. In these cases we 
direct our attention only to the circled X needed to draw the conclusion. If that circled 
X stands for something that exists, the argument is valid; if not, it is invalid.
282   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5

SECTION 5.1 Standard Form, Mood, and Figure   283
	
	 Therefore, some television evangelists are not individuals truly concerned 
with the plight of suffering humanity.
	
★4.	 All high-fat diets are diets high in cholesterol.
	
	 Some diets high in cholesterol are not healthy food programs.
	
	 Therefore, some healthy food programs are not high-fat diets.
	
5.	 No engineering majors are candidates for nightly hookups.
	
	 No candidates for nightly hookups are deeply emotional individuals.
	
	 Therefore, no deeply emotional individuals are engineering majors.
	
6.	 All impulse buyers are consumers with credit cards.
	
	 All shopaholics are impulse buyers.
	
	 Therefore, all shopaholics are consumers with credit cards.
	
★7.	 No pediatricians are individuals who jeopardize the health of children.
	
	 All faith healers are individuals who jeopardize the health of children.
	
	 Therefore, no faith healers are pediatricians.
	
8.	 Some individuals prone to violence are not men who treat others humanely.
	
	 Some police officers are individuals prone to violence.
	
	 Therefore, some police officers are not men who treat others humanely.
	
9.	 Some ATM locations are places criminals lurk.
	
	 All places criminals lurk are places to avoid at night.
	
	 Therefore, some places to avoid at night are ATM locations.
	 ★10.	 No corporations that defraud the government are organizations the govern-
ment should deal with.
	
	 Some defense contractors are not organizations the government should deal with.
	
	 Therefore, some defense contractors are not corporations that defraud the 
government.
	
11.	 All circular triangles are plane figures.
	
	 All circular triangles are three-sided figures.
	
	 Therefore, some three-sided figures are plane figures.
	
12.	 All supernovas are objects that emit massive amounts of energy.
	
	 All quasars are objects that emit massive amounts of energy.
	
	 Therefore, all quasars are supernovas.
	 ★13.	 No people who profit from the illegality of their activities are people who want 
their activities legalized.
	
	 All drug dealers are people who profit from the illegality of their activities.
	
	 Therefore, no drug dealers are people who want their activities legalized.
	
14.	 Some individuals who risk heart disease are people who will die young.
	
	 Some smokers are individuals who risk heart disease.
	
	 Therefore, some smokers are people who will die young.
	
15.	 Some communications satellites are rocket-launched failures.
	
	 All communications satellites are devices with antennas.
	
	 Therefore, some devices with antennas are rocket-launched failures.
SECTION 5.2 Venn Diagrams   283
5

284   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
	 ★16.	 All currently living dinosaurs are giant reptiles.
	
	 All giant reptiles are ectothermic animals.
	
	 Therefore, some ectothermic animals are currently living dinosaurs.
	
17.	 All survivalists are people who enjoy simulated war games.
	
	 No people who enjoy simulated war games are soldiers who have tasted the 
agony of real war.
	
	 Therefore, all soldiers who have tasted the agony of real war are survivalists.
	
18.	 No spurned lovers are Valentine’s Day fanatics.
	
	 Some moonstruck romantics are Valentine’s Day fanatics.
	
	 Therefore, some moonstruck romantics are not spurned lovers.
	 ★19.	 No theocracies are regimes open to change.
	
	 All theocracies are governments that rule by force.
	
	 Therefore, some governments that rule by force are not regimes open to change.
	
20.	 Some snowflakes are not uniform solids.
	
	 All snowflakes are six-pointed crystals.
	
	 Therefore, some six-pointed crystals are not uniform solids.
	II.	 Use Venn diagrams to obtain the conclusion that is validly implied by each of the fol-
lowing sets of premises. If no conclusion can be validly drawn, write “no conclusion.”
	
★1.	 No P are M.
	
	 All S are M.
	
2.	 Some P are not M.
	
	 Some M are S.        
	
3.	 Some M are P.
	
	 All S are M.     
	
★4.	 Some M are not P.
	
	 All M are S.            
	
5.	 Some P are M.
	
	 All M are S.     
	
6.	 No M are P.
	
	 Some S are not M.
	
★7.	 All M are P.
	
	 All S are M.
	
8.	 All P are M.
	
	 All S are M.
	
9.	 No P are M.
	
	 Some M are S.
	 ★10.	 No P are M.
	
	 No M are S.
	III.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 In the use of Venn diagrams to test the validity of syllogisms, marks are some-
times entered in the diagram for the conclusion.
	
2.	 When an X is placed on the arc of a circle, it means that the X could be in  
either (or both) of the two areas that the arc separates.
	
3.	 If an X lies on the arc of a circle, the argument cannot be valid.
	
4.	 When representing a universal statement in a Venn diagram, one always 
shades two of the seven areas in the diagram (unless one of these areas is  
already shaded).
	
5.	 If a completed diagram contains two X’s, the argument cannot be valid.
	
6.	 If the conclusion asserts that a certain area is shaded, and inspection of the 
diagram reveals that only half that area is shaded, the argument is valid.
284   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5

SECTION 5.3 Rules and Fallacies   285
	
7.	 If the conclusion asserts that a certain area contains an X and inspection of  
the diagram reveals that only half an X appears in that area, the argument  
is valid.
	
8.	 If the conclusion is in the form “All S are P,” and inspection of the diagram 
reveals that the part of the S circle that is outside the P circle is shaded, then 
the argument is valid.
	
9.	 If, in a completed diagram, three areas of a single circle are shaded, and ­placing 
a circled X in the one remaining area would make the conclusion true, then 
the argument is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint but not from the Bool-
ean standpoint.
	
10.	 If, in a completed diagram, three areas of a single circle are shaded, but the 
argument is not valid from the Boolean standpoint, then it must be valid from 
the Aristotelian standpoint.
5.3	
Rules and Fallacies
PREVIEW    Your college or university probably specifies rules that a student must satisfy in order 
to graduate. You must earn a certain number of course units, the courses must be in designated subject 
areas, you must maintain a certain GPA, and so on. If you follow all of the rules, you will reach your 
goal—which is graduation. Likewise, there are rules that determine whether the premises of a categori-
cal syllogism support the conclusion. If all the rules are followed, the syllogism is valid.
The idea that valid syllogisms conform to certain rules was first expressed by Aristotle. 
Many such rules are discussed in Aristotle’s own account, but logicians of today gener-
ally settle on five or six.* If any one of these rules is violated, a specific formal fallacy 
is committed and, accordingly, the syllogism is invalid. Conversely, if none of the rules 
is broken, the syllogism is valid. These rules may be used as a convenient cross-check 
against the method of Venn diagrams. We will first consider the rules as they apply 
from the Boolean standpoint, and then shift to the Aristotelian standpoint.
Boolean Standpoint
Of the five rules presented in this section, the first two depend on the concept of 
­distribution, the second two on the concept of quality, and the last on the concept 
of quantity. In applying the first two rules, you may want to recall either of the two  
mnemonic devices presented in Chapter 4: “Unprepared Students Never Pass” and “Any 
5
*Some texts include a rule stating that the three terms of a categorical syllogism must be used in the same sense 
throughout the argument. In this text this requirement is included as part of the definition of standard-form categorical 
syllogism and is subsequently incorporated into the definition of categorical syllogism. See Section 5.1.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

286   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
Student Earning B’s Is Not On Probation.” These mnemonics help one remember that 
the four categorical propositions distribute their terms as follows:
Statement type
Terms distributed
A
subject
E
subject, predicate
I
none
O
predicate
Here is the first rule.
Rule 1: The Middle Term Must Be Distributed at Least Once.
  Fallacy:	
Undistributed middle
 Example:	
All sharks are fish.
	
	
All salmon are fish.	
	
	
All salmon are sharks.
In this standard-form categorical syllogism the middle term is “fish.” In both premises 
“fish” occurs as the predicate of an A proposition and therefore it is not distributed in 
either premise. Thus, the syllogism commits the fallacy of undistributed middle and 
is invalid. If the major premise were rewritten to read “All fish are sharks,” then “fish” 
would be distributed in that premise and the syllogism would be valid. But, of course, 
it would still be unsound because the rewritten premise would be false.
The logic behind Rule 1 may be explained by recounting how the middle term  
accomplishes its intended purpose, which is to provide a common ground between the 
subject and predicate terms of the conclusion. Let us designate the minor, major, and 
middle terms by the letters S, P, and M, respectively, and let us suppose that M is distrib-
uted in the major premise. By definition, P is related to the whole of the M class. Then, 
when the M class is related either in whole or in part to S, S and P necessarily become 
related. Analogous reasoning prevails if we suppose that M is distributed in the minor 
premise. But if M is undistributed in both premises, S and P may be related to different 
parts of the M class, in which case there is no common ground for relating S and P. This 
is exactly what happens in our fish example. The terms “salmon” and “sharks” are related 
to different parts of the fish class, so no common ground exists for relating them.
Rule 2: If a Term Is Distributed in the Conclusion, Then It Must  
Be Distributed in a Premise.
  Fallacies:	
Illicit major; illicit minor
Examples:	
All horses are animals.
	
Some dogs are not horses.
	
Some dogs are not animals.
	
All tigers are mammals.
	
All mammals are animals.
	
All animals are tigers.

5
In the first example the major term, “animals,” is distributed in the conclusion but  
not in the major premise, so the syllogism commits the fallacy of illicit major, or,  
more precisely, “illicit process of the major term.” In the second example the minor term, 
“animals,” is distributed in the conclusion but not in the minor premise. The second  
example therefore commits the fallacy of illicit minor, or “illicit process of the  
minor term.”
In applying this rule, one must always examine the conclusion first. If no terms 
are distributed in the conclusion, Rule 2 cannot be violated. If one or both terms in 
the conclusion are distributed, then the appropriate premise must be examined. If the 
term distributed in the conclusion is also distributed in the premise, then the rule is 
not violated. But, if the term is not distributed in the premise, the rule is violated and 
the syllogism is invalid. In applying Rule 2 (and also Rule 1), you may find it helpful to 
begin by marking all the distributed terms in the syllogism—either by circling them or 
by labeling them with a small raised letter “d.”
The logic behind Rule 2 is easy to understand. Let us once again designate the minor, 
major, and middle terms by the letters S, P, and M, respectively, and let us suppose that 
a certain syllogism commits the fallacy of illicit major. The conclusion of that syllogism 
then makes an assertion about every member of the P class, but the major premise 
makes an assertion about only some members of the P class. Because the minor prem-
ise, by itself, says nothing at all about the P class, the conclusion clearly contains infor-
mation not contained in the premises, and the syllogism is therefore invalid. Analogous 
reasoning applies to the fallacy of illicit minor.
Rule 2 becomes intuitively plausible when it is recognized that distribution is a posi-
tive attribute. Granting this, an argument that has a term distributed in the ­conclusion 
but not in the premises has more in the conclusion than it does in the premises and is 
therefore invalid. Of course, it is always permissible to have more in a premise than 
appears in the conclusion, so it is perfectly all right for a term to be distributed in a 
premise but not in the conclusion.
Rule 3: Two Negative Premises Are Not Allowed.
   Fallacy:	
Exclusive premises
Example:	
No fish are mammals.
	
Some dogs are not fish.
	
Some dogs are not mammals.
This syllogism may be seen as invalid because it has true premises and a false conclu-
sion. The defect stems from the fact that it has two negative premises.
On reflection, Rule 3 should be fairly obvious. Let S, P, and M once again designate 
the minor, major, and middle terms. Now, if the P class and the M class are separate 
either wholly or partially, and the S class and the M class are separate either wholly or 
partially, nothing is said about the relation between the S class and the P class. These 
two classes may be either distinct or identical in whole or in part. Venn diagrams may 
be used effectively to illustrate the fact that no conclusion can be validly drawn from 
two negative premises.
SECTION 5.3 Rules and Fallacies   287

288   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
Rule 4: A Negative Premise Requires a Negative Conclusion, 
and a Negative Conclusion Requires a Negative Premise.
    Fallacy:	
Drawing an affirmative conclusion from a negative premise
or 
	
Drawing a negative conclusion from affirmative premises
Examples:	
All crows are birds.
	
Some wolves are not crows.
	
Some wolves are birds.
	
All triangles are three-angled polygons.
	
All three-angled polygons are three-sided polygons.
	
Some three-sided polygons are not triangles.
These arguments may be seen as invalid because each has true premises and a false 
conclusion. The first draws an affirmative conclusion from a negative premise, and the 
second draws a negative conclusion from affirmative premises.
The logic behind Rule 4 may be seen as follows. If S, P, and M once again designate 
the minor, major, and middle terms, an affirmative conclusion always states that the 
S class is contained either wholly or partially in the P class. The only way that such 
a conclusion can follow is if the S class is contained either wholly or partially in the  
M class, and the M class wholly in the P class. In other words, it follows only when both 
premises are affirmative. But if, for example, the S class is contained either wholly or 
partially in the M class, and the M class is separate either wholly or partially from the 
P class, such a conclusion will never follow. Thus, an affirmative conclusion cannot be 
drawn from negative premises.
Conversely, a negative conclusion asserts that the S class is separate either  
wholly or partially from the P class. But if both premises are affirmative, they assert 
class inclusion rather than separation. Thus, a negative conclusion cannot be drawn 
from ­affirmative premises.
As a result of the interaction of these first four rules, it turns out that no valid syl-
logism can have two particular premises. This result is convenient to keep in mind, 
because it allows us to identify as invalid any standard-form syllogism in which both 
premises start with “some.” Because it is logically derivable from the first four rules, a 
separate rule to this effect is not given here.
Rule 5: If Both Premises Are Universal, the Conclusion Cannot  
Be Particular.
   Fallacy:	
Existential fallacy
Example:	
All mammals are animals.
	
All tigers are mammals.
	
Some tigers are animals.
The example has two universal premises and a particular conclusion, so it violates 
Rule 5. It commits the existential fallacy from the Boolean standpoint. The reason the 
syllogism is invalid from the Boolean standpoint is that the conclusion asserts that  

5
tigers exist, whereas the premises make no such assertion. From the Boolean stand-
point, universal premises have no existential import.
In applying Rule 5, keep in mind that the existential fallacy is a fallacy that occurs 
when a syllogism is invalid merely because the premises lack existential import. Thus, if 
a syllogism is invalid for some other reason (that is, if it commits some other fallacy), it 
does not commit the existential fallacy. Hence, before deciding that a syllogism breaks 
Rule 5, make certain that no other rule is violated. If a syllogism does break one of the 
other four rules, Rule 5 does not apply.
Aristotelian Standpoint
Any categorical syllogism that breaks one of the first four rules is invalid from the 
Aristotelian standpoint. However, if a syllogism breaks only Rule 5, it is valid from the 
Aristotelian standpoint on condition that the critical term denotes at least one existing 
thing. (The critical term is the term listed in the farthest right-hand column of the table 
of conditionally valid syllogistic forms presented in Section 5.1.) In the example given 
in connection with Rule 5, the critical term is “tigers,” and the syllogism breaks no 
other rules, so it is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint. The conclusion asserts that 
tigers exist, and from the Aristotelian standpoint the premises imply their existence. 
On the other hand, consider the following example:
All mammals are animals.
All unicorns are mammals.
Some unicorns are animals.
In this example, the critical term is “unicorns.” Since unicorns do not exist, the prem-
ises have no existential import from the Aristotelian standpoint. Thus, the syllogism 
is invalid from the Aristotelian standpoint, and it commits the existential fallacy from 
that standpoint. Of course, it also commits the existential fallacy from the Boolean 
standpoint.
In addition to consulting the table of conditionally valid forms, one way of identify-
ing the critical term is to draw a Venn diagram. The critical term is the one that corre-
sponds to the circle that is all shaded except for one area. In the case of two such circles, 
it is the one that corresponds to the Venn circle containing the circled X on which the 
conclusion depends. Another way of identifying the critical term is through examina-
tion of the distributed terms in the syllogism. The critical term is the one that is super-
fluously distributed. In other words, it is the term that, in the premises, is distributed in 
more occurrences than is necessary for the syllogism to obey the first two rules. Here 
are three examples:
All Md are P.	
No Md are P d.	
All P d are M.
All Sd are M.	
All Md are S.	
All Md are S.
Some S are P.	
Some S are not P d.	
Some S are P.
The distributed terms are tagged with a small raised “d.” In the first syllogism, M 
must be distributed to satisfy Rule 1, but S, in the second premise, need not be distrib-
uted to satisfy any rule. Thus, by the superfluous distribution rule, S is the term that must  
SECTION 5.3 Rules and Fallacies   289

290   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
denote actually existing things for the syllogism to be valid from the Aristotelian stand-
point. In the second syllogism, P must be distributed in the first premise to satisfy Rule 2,  
and M must be distributed once to satisfy Rule 1; but M is distributed twice. Thus, 
M is the term that must denote existing things for the syllogism to be valid from the 
Aristotelian standpoint. In the third syllogism, M must be distributed to satisfy Rule 1,  
but P need not be distributed to satisfy any rule. Thus, in this syllogism, P is the  
critical term.
You may recall that the existential fallacy from the Boolean standpoint first appeared 
in Section 4.3, where it arose in connection with the modern square of opposition. Also, 
the existential fallacy from the Aristotelian standpoint first appeared in Section 4.5,  
where it arose in connection with the traditional square of opposition. The two ver-
sions of the existential fallacy that appear in connection with Rule 5 stem from the 
same mistake as it relates to categorical syllogisms.
Finally, if you turn to the table of conditionally valid forms in Section 5.1, you will 
see that all of the forms listed there break Rule 5. All of them have universal premises 
and a particular conclusion, and they break no other rule. Thus, all of them commit 
the existential fallacy from the Boolean standpoint. But if the Aristotelian standpoint 
is adopted and the critical term refers to something that does not exist, the Aristotelian 
standpoint gives exactly the same results as the Boolean. (See Section 4.3.) Thus, under 
these conditions, all of the syllogistic forms in the conditionally valid table commit the 
existential fallacy from the Aristotelian standpoint as well.
Proving the Rules
The foregoing discussion has shown that if a syllogism breaks any one of the five rules, 
it cannot be valid from the Boolean standpoint. Thus, we have shown that each of 
the rules is a necessary condition for validity. The question remains, however, whether 
a syllogism’s breaking none of the rules is a sufficient condition for validity. In other 
words, does the fact that a syllogism breaks none of the rules guarantee its validity? The 
answer to this question is “yes,” but unfortunately there appears to be no quick method 
for proving this fact. Therefore, if you are willing to take your instructor’s word for it, 
you may stop reading this section now and proceed to the exercises. The proof that 
follows is somewhat tedious, and it proceeds by considering four classes of syllogisms 
having A, E, I, and O propositions for their conclusions.
Let us first suppose we are given a valid syllogism having an A proposition for its 
conclusion. Once again, suppose that P, S, and M designate the major, minor, and mid-
dle terms, respectively. Then, by Rules 1 and 2, both M and S are distributed in the 
premises. Further, by Rule 4, both premises are affirmative. Now, since I propositions 
distribute neither term, and A propositions distribute only one term, both premises 
must be A propositions, and S must be distributed in one and M in the other. Accord-
ingly, the premises are “All S are M” and “All M are P.” If we now combine these premises 
with the conclusion, “All S are P,” we can determine by simple reasoning or a Venn dia-
gram that the syllogism is valid. Note that only Rules 1, 2, and 4 were used in producing 
this first step in our proof, but the resulting syllogism obeys the unused rules as well.  
A similar process applies to the steps that follow.

5
Next, we consider a syllogism having an E proposition for its conclusion. By Rules 1 
and 2, all three terms are distributed in the premises, and by Rules 3 and 4, one premise 
is negative and the other affirmative. Because three terms are distributed in the prem-
ises and there are only two premises, one of the premises must distribute two terms. 
Accordingly, this premise must be an E proposition. Furthermore, the other premise, 
which is affirmative and which distributes the third term, must be an A proposition. 
From this we conclude that there are four possible sets of premises: “All S are M ” and 
“No M are P ” (or its converse), and “All P are M ” and “No M are S” (or its converse). 
Since converting an E proposition has no effect on validity, we may ignore the converse 
of these propositions. If we now combine the two given sets of premises with the con-
clusion, “No S are P,” simple reasoning or a pair of Venn diagrams will establish the 
validity of the two resulting syllogisms.
Next, consider a syllogism having an I proposition for its conclusion. By Rule 1, 
M is distributed in at least one premise, and by Rule 4, both premises are affirmative. 
Further, by Rule 5, both premises cannot be universal. Thus, at least one premise is an 
I proposition. However, since the other premise distributes a term, that premise must 
be an A proposition. Accordingly, the four possible sets of premises are “All M are S” 
and “Some M are P ” (or its converse), and “All M are P ” and “Some M are S” (or its  
converse). Again, since converting an I proposition has no effect on validity, we may 
ignore the converse of these propositions. Then if we combine the two given pairs of 
premises with the conclusion, “Some S are P,” simple reasoning or a pair of Venn dia-
grams will establish the validity of the two resulting syllogisms.
Last, we consider a syllogism having an O proposition for its conclusion. By Rules 1 
and 2, both M and P are distributed in the premises. Also, by Rules 3 and 4, one premise 
is negative and the other affirmative, and by Rule 5, both premises cannot be universal. 
However, both premises cannot be particular (I and O), because then only one term 
would be distributed. Therefore, the premises are either A and O or E and I. In regard 
to the first of these alternatives, either M is the subject of the A statement and P is the 
predicate of the O, or P is the subject of the A statement and M is the predicate of the O.  
This gives the premises as “All M are S” and “Some M are not P,” and “All P are M ” and 
“Some S are not M.” When these pairs of premises are combined with the conclusion, 
“Some S are not P,” simple reasoning or a pair of Venn diagrams will establish the valid-
ity of the two resulting syllogisms. Finally, considering the other alternative (E and I), 
the resulting four sets of premises are “No M are P” (or its converse) and “Some M are 
S” (or its converse). Again ignoring the converted propositions, simple reasoning or a 
Venn diagram will establish the validity of the single resulting syllogism.
This procedure proves that the five rules collectively provide a sufficient condition 
for the validity of any syllogism from the Boolean standpoint. Since eight distinct infer-
ences or Venn diagrams were needed to accomplish it, this shows that there are really 
only eight significantly distinct syllogisms that are valid from the Boolean standpoint. 
The other seven are variations of these that result from converting one of the premises. 
For syllogisms having particular conclusions and universal premises about existing 
things, an analogous procedure can be used to prove that the first four rules collectively 
provide a sufficient condition for the validity of any syllogism from the Aristotelian 
standpoint.
SECTION 5.3 Rules and Fallacies   291

EXERCISE 5.3	
	 I.	 Reconstruct the following syllogistic forms and use the five rules for syllogisms to 
determine if they are valid from the Boolean standpoint, conditionally valid from 
the Aristotelian standpoint, or invalid. For those that are conditionally valid, iden-
tify the condition that must be fulfilled. For those that are invalid from either the 
Boolean or Aristotelian standpoint, name the fallacy or fallacies committed. Check 
your answers by constructing a Venn diagram for each.
	
★1.	 AAA-3
	
2.	 IAI-2
	
3.	 EIO-1
	
★4.	 AAI-2
	
5.	 IEO-1
	
6.	 EOO-4
	
★7.	 EAA-1
	
8.	 AII-3
	
9.	 AAI-4
	 ★10.	 IAO-3
	II.	 Use the five rules to determine whether the following standard-form syllogisms 
are valid from the Boolean standpoint, valid from the Aristotelian standpoint, or 
invalid. For those that are invalid from either the Boolean or Aristotelian stand-
point, name the fallacy or fallacies committed. Check your answer by constructing 
a Venn diagram for each.
	
★1.	 Some nebulas are clouds of gas.
	
	 Some clouds of gas are objects invisible to the naked eye.
	
	 Therefore, some objects invisible to the naked eye are nebulas.
	
2.	 No individuals sensitive to the difference between right and wrong are people 
who measure talent and success in terms of wealth.
	
	 All corporate takeover experts are people who measure talent and success in 
terms of wealth.
	
	 Therefore, no corporate takeover experts are individuals sensitive to the 
­difference between right and wrong.
	
3.	 No endangered species are creatures loved by the timber industry.
	
	 All spotted owls are endangered species.
	
	 Therefore, some spotted owls are not creatures loved by the timber industry.
	
★4.	 Some cases of affirmative action are not measures justified by past discrimination.
	
	 No cases of affirmative action are illegal practices.
	
	 Therefore, some illegal practices are not measures justified by past  
discrimination.
	
11.	 AII-2
	
12.	 AIO-3
	 ★13.	 AEE-4
	
14.	 EAE-4
	
15.	 EAO-3
	 ★16.	 EEE-1
	
17.	 EAE-1
	
18.	 OAI-3
	 ★19.	 AOO-2
	
20.	 EAO-1
292   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5

	
5.	 All transparent metals are good conductors of heat.
	
	 All transparent metals are good conductors of electricity.
	
	 Therefore, some good conductors of electricity are good conductors of heat.
	
6.	 All members of the National Rifle Association are people opposed to gun control.
	
	 All members of the National Rifle Association are law-abiding citizens.
	
	 Therefore, all law-abiding citizens are people opposed to gun control.
	
★7.	 No searches based on probable cause are violations of Fourth Amendment rights.
	
	 Some warrantless searches are violations of Fourth Amendment rights.
	
	 Therefore, some warrantless searches are not searches based on probable cause.
	
8.	 All war zones are places where abuse of discretion is rampant.
	
	 Some places where abuse of discretion is rampant are international borders.
	
	 Therefore, some international borders are war zones.
	
9.	 All inside traders are people subject to prosecution.
	
	 Some executives with privileged information are not people subject to  
prosecution.
	
	 Therefore, some executives with privileged information are inside traders.
	 ★10.	 All successful flirts are masters at eye contact.
	
	 All masters at eye contact are people genuinely interested in others.
	
	 Therefore, some people genuinely interested in others are successful flirts.
	III.	Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
1.	 If a standard-form categorical syllogism violates one of the first four rules, it 
may still be valid.
	
2.	 If a valid standard-form syllogism has an E statement as its conclusion, then 
both the major and minor terms must be distributed in the premises.
	
3.	 If a standard-form syllogism has two I statements as premises, then it is invalid.
	
4.	 If a standard-form syllogism has an E and an O statement as premises, then no 
conclusion follows validly.
	
5.	 If a standard-form syllogism has an I statement as its conclusion, then Rule 2 
cannot be violated.
	
6.	 If a valid standard-form syllogism has an O statement as its conclusion, then 
its premises can be an A and an I statement.
	
7.	 If a valid standard-form syllogism has an E statement as a premise, then its 
conclusion can be an A statement.
	
8.	 If a standard-form syllogism breaks only Rule 5 and its three terms are “dogs,” 
“cats,” and “animals,” then the syllogism is valid from the Boolean standpoint.
	
9.	 If a standard-form syllogism breaks only Rule 5 and its three terms are “dogs,” 
“cats,” and “animals,” then the syllogism is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint.
	
10.	 If a standard-form syllogism breaks only Rule 5 and its three terms are  
“elves,” “trolls,” and “gnomes,” then the syllogism is valid from the Aristotelian 
standpoint.
SECTION 5.3 Rules and Fallacies   293
5
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

294   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5.4	
Reducing the Number of Terms
PREVIEW    As a favor to a friend, you offer to do her laundry. After you remove the clothing from 
the dryer, you begin to match her socks. But you are dismayed to find that six individual socks seem 
to have no exact match. But then you discover that if you turn three of those six socks inside out, they 
match the other three. Reducing the terms in a syllogism is a bit like turning socks inside out to create a 
match. The goal is to end up with three pairs of terms that are exact matches.
Categorical syllogisms, as they occur in ordinary spoken and written expression, are 
seldom phrased according to the precise norms of the standard-form syllogism. Some-
times quantifiers, premises, or conclusions are left unexpressed, chains of syllogisms 
are strung together into single arguments, and terms are mixed together with their  
negations in a single argument. The final four sections of this chapter are concerned 
with developing techniques for reworking such arguments in order to render them 
testable by Venn diagrams or by the rules for syllogisms.
In this section we consider arguments that contain more than three terms but that 
can be modified to reduce the number of terms to three. Consider the following:
All photographers are non-writers.
Some editors are writers.
Therefore, some non-photographers are not non-editors.
This syllogism is clearly not in standard form because it has six terms: “photogra-
phers,” “editors,” “writers,” “non-photographers,” “non-editors,” and “non-writers.” 
But because three of the terms are complements of the other three, the number of 
terms can be reduced to a total of three, each used twice in distinct propositions. To 
accomplish the reduction, we can use the three operations of conversion, obversion, 
and contraposition discussed in Chapter 4. But, of course, since the reworked syllo-
gism must be equivalent in meaning to the original one, we must use these operations 
only on the kinds of statements for which they yield logically equivalent results. That 
is, we must use conversion only on E and I statements and contraposition only on  
A and O statements. Obversion yields logically equivalent results for all four kinds of 
categorical statements.
Let us rewrite our six-term argument using letters to represent the terms, and then obvert 
the first premise and contrapose the conclusion in order to eliminate the negated letters:
	
Symbolized argument	
Reduced argument
	
All P are non-W.	
No P are W.
	
Some E are W.	
Some E are W.
	
Some non-P are not non-E.	
Some E are not P.
Because the first premise of the original argument is an A statement and the conclusion 
an O statement, and because the operations performed on these statements yield logi-
cally equivalent results, the reduced argument is equivalent in meaning to the original 
argument. The reduced argument is in standard syllogistic form and may be evaluated 
5

SECTION 5.4 Reducing the Number of Terms   295
A
s a child, Saul Kripke demonstrated prodigious 
intellectual abilities. By the age of ten he had 
read all the plays of Shakespeare, and he dis-
covered algebra, which he said he could have invented 
on his own. By fourteen he had mastered geometry 
and calculus and became deeply involved in philoso-
phy. At seventeen he wrote a paper, published in the 
prestigious Journal of Symbolic Logic, that introduced a 
completeness theorem for modal logic. Legend has 
it that when this paper reached the attention of the 
Harvard mathematics department, someone there 
invited him to apply for a teaching position. He re-
plied, “My mother said that I should finish high school 
and go to college first.” Today Kripke is considered by 
many to be the world’s greatest living philosopher and 
logician.
Saul Kripke was born the son of a rabbi in Bay 
Shore, New York, in 1940. He attended public grade 
school and high school in Omaha, Nebraska, and  
then Harvard University where, during his sopho-
more year, he taught a graduate-level course at MIT. 
In 1962 he graduated summa cum laude with a bach-
elor’s degree in mathematics. After that, instead of 
going to graduate school, he simply began teaching—
first at Harvard, then 
Rockefeller Univer-
sity, then Princeton 
University, and fi-
nally CUNY Gradu-
ate Center. He has 
received 
honorary 
degrees from sev-
eral universities, and 
in 2001 he received 
the 
Schock 
Prize 
(comparable to the 
Nobel Prize) in Logic 
and Philosophy.
Kripke is universally hailed for his work in modal 
logic where, in addition to proving its formal com-
pleteness, he created a semantics, now called Kripke 
semantics, in which a proposition is said to be neces-
sarily true when it holds in all possible worlds and 
possibly true when it holds in some possible world. 
Also, his book Naming and Necessity made ground-
breaking contributions to the philosophy of language 
by introducing a new theory of reference for proper 
names.
Saul Kripke 1940–
Steve Pyke/Premium Archive /Getty Images
either with a Venn diagram or by the five rules for syllogisms. The application of these 
methods indicates that the reduced argument is valid. We conclude, therefore, that the 
original argument is also valid.
It is not necessary to eliminate the negated terms in order to reduce the number of 
terms. It is equally effective to convert certain non-negated terms into negated ones. 
Thus, instead of obverting the first premise of the example argument and contraposing 
the conclusion, we could have contraposed the first premise and converted and then 
obverted the second premise. The operation is performed as follows:
	
Symbolized argument	
Reduced argument
	
All P are non-W.	
All W are non-P.
	
Some E are W.	
Some W are not non-E.
	
Some non-P are not non-E.	
Some non-P are not non-E.
5

296   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
EXERCISE 5.4	
Rewrite the following arguments using letters to represent the terms, reduce the num-
ber of terms, and put the arguments into standard form. Then test the new forms with 
Venn diagrams or by means of the five rules for syllogisms to determine the validity or 
invalidity of the original arguments.
	★1.	 Some intelligible statements are true statements, because all unintelligible state-
ments are meaningless statements and some false statements are meaningful state-
ments.
	 2.	 Some people who do not regret their crimes are convicted murderers, so some 
convicted murderers are people insusceptible of being reformed, since all people 
susceptible of being reformed are people who regret their crimes.
	 3.	 All Peace Corps volunteers are people who have witnessed poverty and desolation, 
and all people insensitive to human need are people who have failed to witness 
poverty and desolation. Thus, all Peace Corps volunteers are people ­sensitive to 
human need.
The reduced argument is once again equivalent to the original one, but now we must 
reverse the order of the premises to put the syllogism into standard form:
	
Some W are not non-E.
	
All W are non-P.
	
Some non-P are not non-E.
When tested with a Venn diagram or by means of the five rules, this argument will, of 
course, also be found valid, and so the original argument is valid. When using a Venn 
diagram, no unusual method is needed; the diagram is simply lettered with the three 
terms “W,” “non-E,” and “non-P.”
The most important point to remember in reducing the number of terms is that 
conversion and contraposition must never be used on statements for which they yield 
undetermined results. That is, conversion must never be used on A and O statements, 
and contraposition must never be used on E and I statements. The operations that are 
allowed are summarized as follows:
Conversion:
No A are B.
No B are A.
Some A are B.
Some B are A.
Obversion:
All A are B.
No A are non-B.
No A are B.
All A are non-B.
Some A are B.
Some A are not non-B.
Some A are not B.
Some A are non-B.
Contraposition:
All A are B.
All non-B are non-A.
Some A are not B.
Some non-B are not non-A.
296   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5

5
	
★4.	 Some unintentional killings are not punishable offenses, inasmuch as all cases 
of self-defense are unpunishable offenses, and some intentional killings are 
cases of self-defense.
	
5.	 All aircraft that disintegrate in flight are unsafe planes. Therefore, no poorly 
maintained aircraft are safe planes, because all well-maintained aircraft are 
aircraft that remain intact in flight.
	
6.	 No objects that sink in water are chunks of ice, and no objects that float in 
water are things at least as dense as water. Accordingly, all chunks of ice are 
things less dense than water.
	
★7.	 Some proposed flights to Mars are inexpensive ventures, because all  
unmanned space missions are inexpensive ventures, and some proposed 
flights to Mars are not manned space missions.
	
8.	 All schools driven by careerism are institutions that do not emphasize liberal 
arts. It follows that some universities are not institutions that ­emphasize lib-
eral arts, for some schools that are not driven by careerism are universities.
	
9.	 No cases of AIDS are infections easily curable by drugs, since all diseases that 
infect the brain are infections not easily curable by drugs, and all diseases that 
do not infect the brain are cases other than AIDS.
	 ★10.	 Some foreign emissaries are people without diplomatic immunity, so some 
people invulnerable to arrest and prosecution are foreign emissaries, because 
no people with diplomatic immunity are people vulnerable to arrest and  
prosecution.
5.5	
Ordinary Language Arguments
PREVIEW    Suppose you are struggling in your biology class and you are afraid you might not 
pass. You decide to speak to the instructor, who tells you: “You won’t pass the course unless you pass the 
final exam—but surely you will pass the final exam; it’s relatively easy. Thus, you will pass the course.” 
Should this response cause you to rest more easily? In this section you will learn how to test the validity 
of arguments such as the one given by your instructor.
Many arguments that are not standard-form categorical syllogisms as written can be 
translated into standard-form syllogisms. In doing so we often use techniques developed 
in the last section of Chapter 4—namely, inserting quantifiers, modifying subject and 
predicate terms, and introducing copulas. The goal, of course, is to produce an argument 
consisting of three standard-form categorical propositions that contain a total of three 
different terms, each of which occurs twice in distinct propositions. Once translated, the 
argument can be tested by means of a Venn diagram or the rules for syllogisms.
SECTION 5.5 Ordinary Language Arguments   297
5
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

298   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
Since the task of translating arguments into standard-form syllogisms involves not 
only converting the component statements into standard form but adjusting these state-
ments one to another so that their terms occur in matched pairs, a certain amount of 
practice may be required before it can be done with facility. In reducing the terms to 
three matched pairs it is often helpful to identify some factor common to two or all three 
propositions and to express this common factor through the strategic use of param-
eters. For example, if all three statements are about people, the term “people” or “people 
identical to” might be used; or if they are about times or places, the term “times” or 
“times identical to” or the term “places” or “places identical to” might be used. Here is  
an example:
Whenever people put off marriage until they are older, the divorce rate decreases.  
Today, people are putting off marriage until they are older. Therefore, the divorce rate 
is decreasing today.
The temporal adverbs “whenever” and “today” suggest that “times” should be used as 
the common factor. Following this suggestion, we have this:
All times people put off marriage until they are older are times the divorce rate decreases.  
All present times are times people put off marriage until they are older. Therefore, all 
present times are times the divorce rate decreases.
This is a standard-form categorical syllogism. Notice that each of the three terms is 
matched with an exact duplicate in a different proposition. To obtain such a match, it 
is sometimes necessary to alter the wording of the original statement just slightly. Now 
if we adopt the convention
M	=	 times people put off marriage until they are older
D	 =	 times the divorce rate decreases
P	 =	 present times
the syllogism may be symbolized as follows:
All M are D.
All P are M.
All P are D.
This is the so-called “Barbara” syllogism and is, of course, valid. Here is another  
example:
Boeing must be a manufacturer because it hires riveters, and any company that hires 
riveters is a manufacturer.
For this argument the parameter “companies” suggests itself:
All companies identical to Boeing are manufacturers, because all companies identical  
to Boeing are companies that hire riveters, and all companies that hire riveters are  
manufacturers.

5
The first statement, of course, is the conclusion. When the syllogism is written in  
standard form, it will be seen that it has, like the previous syllogism, the form AAA-1.
Here is another example:
If a piece of evidence is trustworthy, then it should be admissible in court. Polygraph 
tests are not trustworthy. Therefore, they should not be admissible in court.
To translate this argument, using a single common factor is not necessary:
All trustworthy pieces of evidence are pieces of evidence that should be admissible in 
court. No polygraph tests are trustworthy pieces of evidence. Therefore, no polygraph 
tests are pieces of evidence that should be admissible in court.
This syllogism commits the fallacy of illicit major and is therefore invalid.
As was mentioned in Section 4.7, arguments containing an exceptive proposition 
must be handled in a special way. Let us consider one that contains an exceptive propo-
sition as a premise:
All of the jeans except the Levi’s are on sale. Therefore, since the Calvin Klein jeans are 
not Levi’s, they must be on sale.
The first premise is translated as two conjoined categorical propositions: “No Levi’s 
are jeans on sale,” and “All jeans that are not Levi’s are jeans on sale.” These give rise to 
two syllogisms:
No Levi’s are jeans on sale.
No Calvin Klein jeans are Levi’s.
Therefore, all Calvin Klein jeans are jeans on sale.
All jeans that are not Levi’s are jeans on sale.
No Calvin Klein jeans are Levi’s.
Therefore, all Calvin Klein jeans are jeans on sale.
The first syllogism, which is in standard form, is invalid because it has two negative 
premises. The second one, on the other hand, is not in standard form, because it has 
four terms. If the second premise is obverted, so that it reads “All Calvin Klein jeans are 
jeans that are not Levi’s,” the syllogism becomes an AAA-1 standard-form syllogism, 
which is valid.
Each of these two syllogisms may be viewed as a pathway in which the conclusion of 
the original argument might follow necessarily from the premises. Since it does follow 
via the second syllogism, the original argument is valid. If both of the resulting syllo-
gisms turned out to be invalid, the original argument would be invalid.
SECTION 5.5 Ordinary Language Arguments   299

5
EXERCISE 5.5	
Translate the following arguments into standard-form categorical syllogisms, then use 
Venn diagrams or the rules for syllogisms to determine whether each is valid or invalid. 
See Section 4.7 for help with the translation.
	
★1.	 Physicists are the only scientists who theorize about the nature of time, and 
Stephen Hawking certainly does that. Therefore, Stephen Hawking must be a 
physicist.
	
2.	 Whenever suicide rates decline, we can infer that people’s lives are better  
adjusted. Accordingly, since suicide rates have been declining in recent years, 
we can infer that people’s lives have been better adjusted in recent years.
	
3.	 Environmentalists purchase only fuel-efficient cars. Hence, Wranglers must 
not be fuel efficient, since environmentalists do not purchase them.
	
★4.	 Whoever wrote the Declaration of Independence had a big impact on civiliza-
tion, and Thomas Jefferson certainly had that. Therefore, Thomas Jefferson 
wrote the Declaration of Independence.
	
5.	 There are public schools that teach secular humanism. Therefore, since  
secular humanism is a religion, there are public schools that teach religion.
	
6.	 Any city that has excellent art museums is a tourist destination. Therefore, 
Paris is a tourist destination, because it has excellent art museums.
	
★7.	 Shania Twain sings what she wants. Hence, since Shania sings country songs, 
it follows that she must want to sing country songs.
	
8.	 Not all interest expenses are tax deductible. Home-mortgage payments are in-
terest expenses. Thus, they are not tax deductible.
	
9.	 If a marriage is based on a meshing of neuroses, it allows little room for 
growth. If a marriage allows little room for growth, it is bound to fail. There-
fore, if a marriage is based on a meshing of neuroses, it is bound to fail.
	 ★10.	 TV viewers cannot receive scrambled signals unless they have a decoder. 
Whoever receives digital satellite signals receives scrambled signals. There-
fore, whoever receives digital satellite signals has a decoder.
	
11.	 Wherever icebergs are present, threats to shipping exist. Icebergs are not present 
in the South Pacific. Hence, there are no threats to shipping in the South Pacific.
	
12.	 According to surveys, there are college students who think that Africa is in 
North America. But anyone who thinks that has no knowledge of geography. 
It follows that there are college students who have no knowledge of geography.
	 ★13.	 Diseases carried by recessive genes can be inherited by offspring of two carri-
ers. Thus, since cystic fibrosis is a disease carried by recessive genes, it can be 
inherited by offspring of two carriers.
	
14.	 All of the movies except the chick flicks were exciting. Hence, the action films 
were exciting, because none of them is a chick flick.
	
15.	 Autistic children are occasionally helped by aversion therapy. But aversion 
therapy is sometimes inhumane. Thus, autistic children are sometimes helped 
by inhumane therapy.
300   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

5
SECTION 5.6 Enthymemes   301
5.6	
Enthymemes
PREVIEW    Suppose, while driving your car, you notice the flashing light of a police cruiser in 
your rearview mirror. When the officer pulls you over, he says that you were speeding in a school zone 
and that he’s going to issue you a traffic citation. When you ask how much the fine is for speeding in a 
school zone, he tells you it is two hundred dollars. Immediately you draw the conclusion that your ticket 
is going to cost you two hundred dollars. The reasoning process you used is typical of what is involved in 
enthymemes, which we now take up.
An enthymeme is an argument that is expressible as a categorical syllogism but that is 
missing a premise or a conclusion. Examples:
The corporate income tax should be abolished; it encourages waste and high prices.
Animals that are loved by someone should not be sold to a medical laboratory, and lost 
pets are certainly loved by someone.
The first enthymeme is missing the premise “Whatever encourages waste and high 
prices should be abolished,” and the second is missing the conclusion “Lost pets should 
not be sold to a medical laboratory.”
Enthymemes occur frequently in ordinary spoken and written English for several 
reasons. Sometimes it is simply boring to express every statement in an argument. 
The listener or reader’s intelligence is called into play when he or she is required to 
supply a missing statement, thereby sustaining his or her interest. On other occasions 
the arguer may want to slip an invalid or unsound argument past an unwary listener 
or reader, and this aim may be facilitated by leaving a premise or conclusion out of 
the picture.
Many enthymemes are easy to convert into syllogisms. The reader or listener must 
first determine what is missing, whether it is a premise or conclusion, and then intro-
duce the missing statement with the aim of converting the enthymeme into a good 
argument. Attention to indicator words will often provide the clue as to the nature 
of the missing statement, but a little practice can render this task virtually automatic. 
The missing statement need not be expressed in categorical form; expressing it in the 
general context of the other statements is sufficient and is often the easier alternative. 
Once this is done, the entire argument may be translated into categorical form and then 
tested with a Venn diagram or by the rules for syllogisms. Example:
Venus completes its orbit in less time than the Earth, because Venus is closer to the sun.
Missing premise: Any planet closer to the sun completes its orbit in less time than the 
Earth.
Translating this argument into categorical form, we have

302   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
All planets closer to the sun are planets that complete their orbit in less time than the Earth.
All planets identical to Venus are planets closer to the sun.
All planets identical to Venus are planets that complete their orbit in less time than the Earth.
This syllogism is valid (and sound).
Any enthymeme (such as the one about Venus) that contains an indicator word 
is missing a premise. This may be seen as follows. If an enthymeme contains a con-
clusion indicator, then the conclusion follows it, which means that the missing  
statement is a premise. On the other hand, if the enthymeme contains a premise indi-
cator, then the conclusion precedes it, which means, again, that the missing statement 
is a premise.
If, however, an enthymeme contains no indicator words at all (such as the two  
enthymemes at the beginning of this section), then the missing statement could be 
either a premise or a conclusion. If the two given statements are joined by a word such 
as “and,” “but,” “moreover,” or some similar conjunction, the missing statement is usu-
ally a conclusion. If not, the first statement is usually the conclusion, and the missing 
statement is a premise. To test this latter alternative, it may help to mentally insert the 
word “because” between the two statements. If this insertion makes sense, the missing 
statement is a premise.
After the nature of the missing statement has been determined, the next task is to 
write it out. To do so, one must first identify its terms. This can be done by taking  
account of the terms that are given. Two of the terms in the given statements will match 
up with each other. Once this pair of terms is found, attention should be focused on the 
other two terms. These are the ones that will be used to form the missing statement. In 
constructing the missing statement, attention to the rules for syllogisms may be help-
ful (if the resulting syllogism is to be valid). For example, if the missing statement is a 
conclusion and one of the given premises is negative, the missing conclusion must be 
negative. Or if the missing statement is a premise and the stated conclusion is universal, 
the missing premise must be universal.
The enthymemes that we have considered thus far have been fairly straightforward. 
The kinds of enthymemes that occur in letters-to-the-editor columns of magazines and 
newspapers often require a bit more creativity to convert into syllogisms. Consider the 
following:
The motorcycle has served as basic transportation for the poor for decades. It deserves 
to be celebrated.
(William B. Fankboner)
The conclusion is the last statement, and the missing premise is that any vehicle that 
has served as basic transportation for the poor for decades deserves to be celebrated. 
The enthymeme may be written as a standard-form syllogism as follows:
All vehicles that have served as basic transportation for the poor for decades are  
vehicles that deserve to be celebrated.
All vehicles identical to the motorcycle are vehicles that have served as basic transporta-
tion for the poor for decades.
Therefore, all vehicles identical to the motorcycle are vehicles that deserve to be celebrated.
5

EXERCISE 5.6	
	 I.	 In the following enthymemes, determine whether the missing statement is a prem-
ise or a conclusion. Then supply the missing statement, attempting whenever pos-
sible to convert the enthymeme, into a valid argument. The missing statement 
need not be expressed as a standard-form categorical proposition.
	
★1.	 Some police chiefs undermine the evenhanded enforcement of the law,  
because anyone who fixes parking tickets does that.
	
2.	 Any form of cheating deserves to be punished, and plagiarism is a form of 
cheating.
	
3.	 Carrie Underwood is a talented singer. After all, she’s won several Grammy 
awards.
	
★4.	 A few fraternities have dangerous initiation rites, and those that do have no 
legitimate role in campus life.
	
5.	 Only nonprofit organizations are exempt from paying taxes, so churches must 
be exempt.
The syllogism is valid and arguably sound. Here is another example:
I know several doctors who smoke. In a step toward my own health, I will no longer be 
their patient. It has occurred to me that if they care so little about their own health, how 
can they possibly care about mine?
( Joan Boyer)
In this argument the author draws three connections: the connection between doctors’ 
smoking and doctors’ caring about their own health, between doctors’ caring about 
their own health and doctors’ caring about the author’s health, and between doctors’ 
caring about the author’s health and doctors who will have the author as a patient. Two 
arguments are needed to express these connections:
All doctors who smoke are doctors who do not care about their own health.
All doctors who do not care about their own health are doctors who do not care about 
my health.
Therefore, all doctors who smoke are doctors who do not care about my health.
And,
All doctors who smoke are doctors who do not care about my health.
All doctors who do not care about my health are doctors who will not have me  
as a patient.
Therefore, all doctors who smoke are doctors who will not have me as a patient.
Notice that the conclusion of the first argument becomes a premise in the second argu-
ment. To put these arguments into final standard form, the order of the premises must 
be reversed. Both arguments are valid, but probably not sound.
SECTION 5.6 Enthymemes   303
5

	
6.	 All of the operas except Mozart’s were well performed, and Carmen was not 
written by Mozart.
	
★7.	 Not all phone calls are welcome, but those from friends are.
	
8.	 Higher life-forms could not have evolved through merely random processes, 
because no organized beings could have evolved that way.
	
9.	 None but great novels are timeless, and The Brothers Karamazov is a great 
novel.
	 ★10.	 Antiwar protests have been feeble in recent years because there is no military 
draft.
	
11.	 Wherever water exists, human life can be sustained, and water exists on the moon.
	
12.	 If a symphony orchestra has effective fund-raisers, it will survive; and the 
Cleveland symphony has survived for years.
	 ★13.	 Mechanistic materialists do not believe in free will, because they think that 
everything is governed by deterministic laws.
	
14.	 A contract to buy land is not enforceable unless it’s in writing, but our client’s 
contract to buy land is in writing.
	
15.	 The only telescopes that are unaffected by the atmosphere are orbiting tele-
scopes, and the Hubble telescope is in orbit.
	II.	 Translate the enthymemes in Part I of this exercise into standard-form categorical 
syllogisms and test them for validity.
	III.	The following enthymemes were originally submitted in letters to the editors 
of various magazines and newspapers. Convert them into valid standard-form  
syllogisms. In some cases two syllogisms may be required.
	
★1.	 If the Defense Department is so intent on fighting alcohol abuse, why does it 
make alcohol so readily available and acceptable? Alcohol is tax free at post 
liquor stores, and enlisted men’s and officers’ clubs make drinking almost a 
mandatory facet of military life.
(Diane Lynch)
	
2.	 All aid to Israel should be stopped at once. Why should the American taxpayer 
be asked to send billions of dollars to Israel when every city in the United 
States is practically broke and millions of people are out of work?
(Bertha Grace)
	
3.	 Suicide is not immoral. If a person decides that life is impossible, it is his or 
her right to end it.
(Donald S. Farrar)
	
★4.	 The best way to get people to read a book is to ban it. The fundamentalist 
families in Church Hill, Tennessee, have just guaranteed sales of Macbeth, The 
Diary of Anne Frank, The Wizard of Oz, and other stories.
(Paula Fleischer)
	
5.	 The budget deficit will not be brought under control because to do so would 
require our elected leaders in Washington to do the unthinkable—act coura-
geously and responsibly.
(Bruce Crutcher)
304   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5

	
6.	 The Constitution bans any law that is so vague that “men of common intel-
ligence must necessarily guess at its meaning.” Sexual harassment laws, how-
ever, are so vague that no one knows what they mean.
(Hans Bader)
	
★7.	 College students of today are the higher-income taxpayers of tomorrow. Con-
gress should consider financial aid as an investment in the financial future of 
our country.
(Carol A. Steimel)
	
8.	 Our genes and our environment control our destinies. The idea of conscious 
choice is ridiculous. Yes, prisons should be designed to protect society, but 
they should not punish the poor slobs who were headed for jail from birth.
(Paul R. Andrews)
	
9.	 Encouraging toy-gun play gives children a clear message that the best way to 
deal with frustration and conflict is with a gun. Is this the message that we 
want to be sending our kids?
(Patricia Owen)
	 ★10.	 The U.S. surgeon general’s latest report on cigarettes and cancer is an interest-
ing example of natural selection in the late twentieth century. The intelligent 
members of our species will quit smoking, and survive. The dummies will 
continue to puff away.
(Kelly Kinnon)
	IV.	 Page through a magazine or newspaper and identify five topics of current interest. 
Construct an enthymeme involving each topic.
	V.	 Translate the arguments in the following dialogue into standard-form categori-
cal syllogisms. The dialogue contains more than twenty arguments, and most are  
expressed in the form of enthymemes. The first translated syllogism may be found 
in the answer key in the back of the book.
Do Kids Make Parents Happy?
Tad and Lara, his fiancée, are walking in the park. Tad pauses a moment to look at some 
children playing in the grass. Lara stops beside him. 
	
“I know we’ve talked about this before,” she says, “but I wish you’d get over this idea 
about us having a bunch of kids.”
	
“I’ll think about it,” Tad says. “But could you tell me once again about why you don’t 
want any?”
	
“I think most couples believe that kids automatically bring happiness,” Lara says. “But 
that’s simply not the case. I’ve read some recent studies about this. They show that child-
less couples experience higher levels of emotional well-being than couples with kids. Thus, 
childless couples are happier than couples with kids.”
	
“I’ve read those studies of yours,” Tad says, “but I don’t know what to make of them. 
Consider this. Kids make you laugh, and laughter is essential to happiness. So kids do 
make you happy. Plus, in a way, having kids makes you immortal.”
	
“How do you figure that?”
SECTION 5.6 Enthymemes   305
5

	
“Okay, not immortal exactly, but I mean that they make you participate in a kind of 
immortality. Your children grow up and have children, and those children have children, 
and on it goes. This feeling of contributing to the perpetuation of the human race makes 
you happy, don’t you think?”
	
“Frankly,” Lara replies, “that’s all a bit too removed from the ‘now’ to suit me. Maybe 
at the beginning when a couple is expecting their first child, they tend to be happy. But 
once the baby arrives, the honeymoon ends. The newborn has to be fed every couple of 
hours, the parents aren’t getting any sleep, and those parents aren’t happy.”
	
“Well, very tired, yes, but unhappy?” says Tad. “Plus, it’s temporary and only lasts for 
the first few months.”
	
“And after the first few months, you have toys and food all over the house and sticky 
stuff on all the furniture. How happy is living in a constant mess going to make you?”
	
“Not very, I guess. But there’s more to life than a neat house. Having kids will force 
us not to be selfish, and no one who’s selfish is truly happy. Also, kids promote an atmo-
sphere of growth. Watching kids learn, change, and grow makes parents happy. Don’t you 
think that’s true?” 
	
“Sure,” Lara says, “in theory. In reality, growing means infants become toddlers who 
scream, whine, and throw tantrums. Having to listen to all that racket makes no one 
happy. And then, life just gets more hectic. Kids constantly have to be driven to and from 
school, dancing lessons, little league, the mall—all detracting from the happiness of the 
parents. Right?”
	
“Right,” Tad says, “but kids are fun. They’re constantly playing; and having playful chil-
dren around you brings happiness. Plus some kids grow up to accomplish extraordinary 
things. How could one not be happy at witnessing the success of one’s child?”
	
“Okay,” says Lara, “but kids take up a tremendous amount of time. Couples who have 
kids often have no time for vacations—I know that wouldn’t make you happy. And some 
couples with kids don’t even have time for sex. How would you like that?”
	
“I wouldn’t,” Tad admits. “But maybe we could learn to manage our time better than 
those other couples. Which leads me to something else: Having kids will force us to work 
together as a couple. That will deepen our relationship, and deeper relationships are hap-
pier relationships. And don’t forget unconditional love. Kids love you for who you are. 
They don’t care what you look like, whether you’re overweight, or what kind of car you 
drive. Being loved like that makes you happy.”
	
“Well, of course it does,” says Lara. “But what about money? Kids cost a fortune. Food, 
clothing, medical bills, and a college education will leave us constantly broke. Can we be 
happy like that? And what about my career? I have goals, just like you. If I’m constantly 
pregnant or taking care of little kids, I’ll never achieve them. I can’t possibly be happy if 
that happens.”
	
“No,” Tad says. “We’d have to work that out. As we grow older, though, think about 
what our lives will be like without any children. We’ll be lonely and cut off, with no one 
to call us and no grandchildren to visit us. Does that sound like happiness to you?”
	
“Ha!” Lara says. “You assume that the kids will eventually leave the house. You forget 
that we live in the age of boomerang offspring. After they finish school, they come back 
home to live, and you never get rid of them. How does that grab you?”
	
“Well, we didn’t stay around long after college. I think when we decided to leave the 
nest and get married, we made our parents truly happy.”
	
“Yeah,” Lara replies. “I think we did. So maybe we’ve proved your case. Some kids, at 
least, end up making their parents happy.”
5
306   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

5
SECTION 5.7 Sorites   307
5.7	
Sorites
PREVIEW    Suppose an instructor bans the use of all electronic devices in the classroom. This 
measure might generate a thread of arguments on a message board. One student might argue that she 
needs her laptop to compose class notes. Another needs his iPad to retrieve information from the Internet 
for class discussion. Yet another needs his Droid to check e-mails. Each argument adds to the original 
one and alters its direction. This string of arguments containing many premises is similar to a sorites.
A sorites is a chain of categorical syllogisms in which the intermediate conclusions 
have been left out. The name is derived from the Greek word soros, meaning “heap,” 
and is pronounced “sōrītëz,” with the accent on the second syllable. The plural form is 
also “sorites.” Here is an example:
All bloodhounds are dogs.
All dogs are mammals.
No fish are mammals.
Therefore, no fish are bloodhounds.
The first two premises validly imply the intermediate conclusion “All bloodhounds are 
mammals.” If this intermediate conclusion is then treated as a premise and put together 
with the third premise, the final conclusion follows validly. The sorites is thus com-
posed of two valid categorical syllogisms and is therefore valid. The rule in evaluating a 
sorites is based on the idea that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. If any of the 
component syllogisms in a sorites is invalid, the entire sorites is invalid.
A standard-form sorites is one in which each of the component propositions is in 
standard form, each term occurs twice, the predicate of the conclusion is in the first 
premise, and each successive premise has a term in common with the preceding one.* 
The sorites in the example is in standard form. Each of the propositions is in standard 
form, each term occurs twice; the predicate of the conclusion, “bloodhounds,” is in the 
first premise; the other term is in the first premise; “dogs,” is in the second premise, and 
so on.
We will now introduce two techniques for testing a sorites for validity. The first 
technique involves three steps: (1) put the sorites into standard form, (2) introduce the 
intermediate conclusions, and (3) test each component syllogism for validity. If each 
component is valid, the sorites is valid. Consider the following sorites form:
No B are C.
Some E are A.
All A are B.
All D are C.
Some E are not D.
*Actually, there are two definitions of standard-form sorites: the Goclenian and the Aristotelian. The one given here 
is the Goclenian. In the Aristotelian version, the premises are arranged so that the subject of the conclusion occurs in 
the first premise.

308   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
To put the sorites form into standard form, the premises must be rearranged. To do this 
find the premise that contains the predicate of the conclusion and write it first. Then 
find the premise that contains the other term in the first premise and write it second. 
Continue in this way until all the premises are listed:
All D are C.
No B are C.
All A are B.
Some E are A.
Some E are not D.
Next, the intermediate conclusions are drawn. Venn diagrams are useful in performing 
this step, and they serve simultaneously to check the validity of each component syllogism:
D
A
E
All D are C.
No B are C.
All A are B.
Some E are A.
Some E are not D.
(1) No B are D.
D
B
A
D
C
B
X
(2) No A are D.
(3) Some E are not D.
The first intermediate conclusion, “No B are D,” is drawn from the first two premises. 
The second, “No A are D,” is drawn from the first intermediate conclusion and the third 
premise. And the third conclusion, which is identical to the final conclusion, is drawn 
from the second intermediate conclusion and the fourth premise. Since all conclusions 
are drawn validly, the sorites is valid. On the other hand, if at some step in the proce-
dure no conclusion can be drawn, the sorites is invalid.
The second technique for testing the validity of a sorites is faster and simpler than 
the first one because it does not require that the intermediate conclusions be derived. 
This second technique consists in applying five rules that closely resemble the rules for 
syllogisms. The rules are as follows:
Rule 1:  Each of the middle terms must be distributed at least once.
Rule 2:  If a term is distributed in the conclusion, then it must be distributed in a premise.
Rule 3: Two negative premises are not allowed.
Rule 4: A negative premise requires a negative conclusion, and a negative conclusion 
requires a negative premise.
Rule 5:  If all the premises are universal, the conclusion cannot be particular.
Rule 1 refers to the “middle terms” in the sorites. These are the terms that occur in 
matched pairs in the premises. The conclusion referred to in Rules 2, 4, and 5 is the 
final conclusion of the sorites. Also, as with categorical syllogisms, if a sorites breaks 

5
only Rule 5, it is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint on condition that its critical 
term refers to at least one existing thing.
The critical term can be identified in the same way as it is for categorical syllogisms. 
There are three possible approaches. By entering the mood and figure of the last com-
ponent syllogism of the sorites into the table of conditionally valid forms in Section 5.1,  
the critical term is given in the farthest right-hand column. Applying the superfluous 
distribution rule, the critical term is the term in the premises that is distributed in more 
occurrences than is necessary for the sorites to obey the first two rules. And in the 
Venn diagram for the final component syllogism of the sorites, the critical term is the 
one that corresponds to the circle that is all shaded except for one area. In the case of 
two such circles, it is the one that corresponds to the Venn circle containing the circled 
X on which the conclusion depends.
Before applying the rules, it helps to put the sorites into standard form; in either  
event the sorites must be written so that the terms occur in matched pairs. The  
following sorites is in standard form, and the distributed terms are marked with a small 
raised “d.” As is apparent, there are three middle terms: M, K, and R.
All Sd are M.
All Kd are M.
No Kd are Rd.
Some F are R.
Some F are not Sd.
This sorites breaks Rule 1 because neither occurrence of M in the first two premises 
is distributed. Thus, the sorites is invalid. Note that no other rule is broken. Both of 
the K’s in lines 2 and 3 are distributed, one of the R’s in lines 3 and 4 is distributed, S is 
distributed in the conclusion and also in the first premise, there is a negative conclu-
sion and only one negative premise, and while the conclusion is particular so is one of 
the premises.
The logic behind the five rules is as follows. For Rule 1, each of the middle terms in 
the sorites is also a middle term in one of the component syllogisms. Thus, if Rule 1 
is broken, one of the component syllogisms has an undistributed middle, making the 
entire sorites invalid.
For Rule 2, when the sorites is in standard form, the predicate of the conclusion must 
appear in each of the intermediate conclusions. Thus, if the predicate of the conclusion is 
distributed, it must also be distributed in each of the intermediate conclusions, and also in 
the first premise. Otherwise, one of the component syllogisms would have either an illicit 
major or an illicit minor, making the entire sorites invalid. Analogously, if the subject of 
the conclusion is distributed, it must also be distributed in the last premise. Otherwise, the 
last component syllogism would have an illicit minor, making the entire sorites invalid.
For Rule 3, when a negative premise appears in the list of premises, the conclusion 
derived from that premise must be negative, as must all subsequent conclusions. Other-
wise, one of the component syllogisms would break Rule 4 for syllogisms. If a second 
negative premise should appear, the syllogism consisting of that premise and the prior 
intermediate conclusion would commit the fallacy of exclusive premises, making the 
entire sorites invalid.
SECTION 5.7 Sorites   309

Similarly, for Rule 4, when a negative premise appears in the list of premises, all 
subsequent conclusions must be negative. Otherwise, one of the component syllo-
gisms would break Rule 4 for syllogisms. Conversely, if the conclusion of the sorites is 
negative, either the last premise or the last intermediate conclusion must be negative. 
Otherwise, the last component syllogism would break Rule 4 for syllogisms. If the last 
intermediate conclusion is negative, then either the prior premise or the prior interme-
diate conclusion must be negative. If we continue this reasoning, we see that some prior 
premise must be negative.
For Rule 5, a particular conclusion has existential import, while universal premises 
(from the Boolean standpoint) do not. Thus, if all the premises are universal and the 
conclusion is particular, the sorites as a whole commits the existential fallacy.
One of the advantages of the rules method for testing a sorites is that invalidity can 
often be detected through immediate inspection. Once a sorites has been put into stan-
dard form, any sorites having more than one negative premise is invalid, and any sorites 
having a negative premise and an affirmative conclusion (or vice versa) is invalid. Also, 
as with syllogisms, any sorites having more than one particular premise is invalid. This 
last requirement is implied by the other rules.
EXERCISE 5.7	
	 I.	 Rewrite the following sorites in standard form, reducing the number of terms 
when necessary. Then supply the intermediate conclusions and test with Venn  
diagrams.
	
★1.	 No B are C.
	
	 Some D are C.
	
	 All A are B.            
	
	 Some D are not A.
	
2.	 No C are D.
	
	 All A are B.
	
	 Some C are not B.
	
	 Some D are not A.
	
3.	 No S are M.
	
	 All F are S.
	
	 Some M are H.
	
	 All E are F.             
	
	 Some H are not E.
	
★4.	 Some T are K.
	
	 No K are N.
	
	 Some C are Q.
	
	 All T are C.            
	
	 Some Q are not N.
	
5.	 All B are C.
	
	 No C are D. 
	
	 All E are A.
	
	 All A are B.
	
	 Some E are not D.
	
6.	 All M are non-P.
	
	 Some M are S.
	
	 All K are P.                           
	
	 Some non-K are not non-S.
	
★7.	 All non-U are non-V.
	
	 No U are non-W.
	
	 All V are Y.
	
	 No X are W.                
	
	 All Y are non-X.
	
8.	 All D are non-C.
	
	 All non-B are non-A.
	
	 Some E are D.
	
	 All B are C.                         
	
	 Some non-A are not non-E.
310   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5

	
9.	 All non-L are non-K.
	
	 Some K are M.
	
	 All P are non-L.
	
	 No non-N are M.
	
	 No Q are non-P.         
	
	 Some N are not Q.
	II.	 For the sorites in Part I above, rewrite each in standard form, reducing the num-
ber of terms when necessary. Then use the five rules for sorites to test each for 
validity.
	III.	The following sorites are valid. Rewrite each sorites in standard form, using let-
ters to represent the terms and reducing the number of terms whenever necessary. 
Then use Venn diagrams or the rules method to prove each one valid.
	
★1.	 Whatever produces oxygen supports human life.
	
	 Rain forests produce oxygen.
	
	 Nothing that supports human life should be destroyed.
	
	 Rain forests should not be destroyed.
	
2.	 No restrictive trade policies fail to invite retaliation.
	
	 Trade wars threaten our standard of living.
	
	 Some Chinese trade policies are restrictive.
	
	 Policies that invite retaliation lead to a trade war.                        
	
	 Some Chinese trade policies threaten our standard of living.
	
3.	 Anything that poisons drinking water causes disease and death.
	
	 Chemicals percolating through the soil contaminate aquifers.
	
	 Dumped chemicals percolate through the soil.
	
	 Whatever contaminates aquifers poisons drinking water.            
	
	 Dumped chemicals cause disease and death.
	
★4.	 Nothing that is brittle is ductile.
	
	 Superconductors are all ceramics.
	
	 Only ductile things can be pulled into wires.
	
	 Ceramics are brittle.                                       
	
	 Superconductors cannot be pulled into wires.
	
5.	 Some college students purchase their term papers.
	
	 Any cheat is expelled from college.
	
	 No one will achieve his career goals who is expelled.
	
	 No one who purchases term papers is other than a cheat.
	
	 Some college students will not achieve their career goals.
	
6.	 Creation science does not favor the teaching of evolution.
	
	 Nothing should be taught that frustrates the understanding of life.
	
	 Whatever opposes the teaching of evolution impedes the learning of biology.
	
	 Anything that enhances the understanding of life fosters the learning of biology.
	
	 Creation science should not be taught.
	 ★10.	 All R are S.
	
	 No non-V are T.
	
	 No Q are non-R.
	
	 No non-Q are P.
	
	 All T are non-S.  
	
	 All V are non-P.
SECTION 5.7 Sorites   311
5

	
★7.	 Whoever gives birth to crack babies increases future crime rates.
	
	 Some pregnant women use crack.
	
	 None but criminals increase future crime rates.
	
	 Pregnant crack users never give birth to anything but crack babies.
	
	 Some pregnant women are criminals.
	
8.	 Whatever retards population growth increases food availability.
	
	 Anything that prevents starvation enhances life.
	
	 Birth-control measures never accelerate population growth.
	
	 Anything that enhances life should be encouraged.
	
	 Whatever increases food availability prevents starvation.
	
	 Birth-control measures should not be discouraged.
	
9.	 A few countries allow ivory trading.
	
	 Whatever country resists elephant killing discourages poachers.
	
	 Any country that allows ivory trading encourages poachers.
	
	 No country that promotes the extinction of elephants should escape the  
condemnation of the civilized world.
	
	 Any country that supports elephant killing promotes the extinction of elephants.
	
	 A few countries should be condemned by the civilized world.
	 ★10.	 Anything that promotes skin cancer causes death.
	
	 Whatever preserves the ozone layer prevents the release of CFCs.
	
	 Nothing that resists skin cancer increases UV radiation.
	
	 Anything that destroys the ozone layer increases UV radiation.
	
	 There are packaging materials that release CFCs.
	
	 Nothing that causes death should be legal.
	
	 Some packaging materials should be illegal.
	IV.	 The following sorites are taken from Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic Logic. All are valid. 
Rewrite each sorites in standard form, using letters to represent the terms and  
reducing the number of terms whenever necessary. Then use Venn diagrams or 
the rules method to prove each one valid.
	
★1.	 No ducks waltz.
	
	 No officers ever decline to waltz.
	
	 All my poultry are ducks.
	
	 My poultry are not officers.
	
2.	 No experienced person is incompetent.
	
	 Jenkins is always blundering.
	
	 No competent person is always blundering.
	
	 Jenkins is inexperienced.
	
3.	 No terriers wander among the signs of the zodiac.
	
	 Nothing that does not wander among the signs of the zodiac is a comet.
	
	 Nothing but a terrier has a curly tail.
	
	 No comet has a curly tail.
312   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5

	
★4.	 All hummingbirds are richly colored.
	
	 No large birds live on honey.
	
	 Birds that do not live on honey are dull in color.
	
	 All hummingbirds are small.
	
5.	 All unripe fruit is unwholesome.
	
	 All these apples are wholesome.
	
	 No fruit grown in the shade is ripe.
	
	 These apples were grown in the sun.
	
6.	 All my sons are slim.
	
	 No child of mine is healthy who takes no exercise.
	
	 All gluttons who are children of mine are fat.
	
	 No daughter of mine takes any exercise.           
	
	 All gluttons who are children of mine are unhealthy.
	
★7.	 The only books in this library that I do not recommend for reading are  
unhealthy in tone.
	
	 The bound books are all well-written.
	
	 All the romances are healthy in tone.
	
	 I do not recommend you to read any of the unbound books.
	
	 All the romances in this library are well-written.
	
8.	 No interesting poems are unpopular among people of real taste.
	
	 No modern poetry is free from affectation.
	
	 All your poems are on the subject of soap bubbles.
	
	 No affected poetry is popular among people of real taste.
	
	 No ancient poem is on the subject of soap bubbles.	
	
	
	 All your poems are uninteresting.
	
9.	 All writers who understand human nature are clever.
	
	 No one is a true poet unless he can stir the hearts of men.
	
	 Shakespeare wrote Hamlet.
	
	 No writer who does not understand human nature can stir the hearts  
of men.
	
	 None but a true poet could have written Hamlet.
	
	 Shakespeare was clever.
	 ★10.	 I trust every animal that belongs to me.
	
	 Dogs gnaw bones.
	
	 I admit no animals into my study unless they beg when told to do so.
	
	 All the animals in the yard are mine.
	
	 I admit every animal that I trust into my study.
	
	 The only animals that are really willing to beg when told to do so are dogs.
	
	 All the animals in the yard gnaw bones.
SECTION 5.7 Sorites   313
5
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

314   CHAPTER 5 Categorical Syllogisms
5
	
Summary
Categorical syllogism:
• A deductive argument consisting of three categorical propositions
• Containing three different terms
• Each term occurs twice in distinct propositions
Terms in a categorical syllogism:
• Major term: The term that occurs in the predicate of the conclusion
• Minor term: The term that occurs in the subject of the conclusion
• Middle term: The term that occurs twice in the premises
Premises of a categorical syllogism:
• Major premise: The premise that contains the major term
• Minor premise: The premise that contains the minor term
Standard-form categorical syllogism:
• All three propositions are in standard form.
• The two occurrences of each term are identical.
• Each term is used in the same sense throughout the argument.
• The major premise is listed first, minor premise second, conclusion last.
The validity of a categorical syllogism is determined by its mood and figure:
• Mood: Consists of the letter names of the propositions in the syllogism
• Figure: Is determined by how the occurrences of the middle term are arranged
Tables for categorical syllogisms:
• Unconditionally valid: Lists all forms valid from the Boolean standpoint
• Conditionally valid: Lists additional forms valid from the Aristotelian standpoint
• Critical term: The term listed in the farthest right-hand column of the conditionally  
valid table.
Venn diagrams: To test a syllogism:
• Enter the information from the premises into the diagram.
• Look at the completed diagram to see if it supports the conclusion.
• If a syllogism having universal premises and a particular conclusion is not valid from the 
Boolean standpoint, test it from the Aristotelian standpoint.
Rules for syllogisms: For a syllogism to be valid from the Boolean standpoint:
• The middle term must be distributed in at least one premise;
• A term distributed in the conclusion must also be distributed in a premise;
• At least one premise must be affirmative;
• A negative conclusion requires a negative premise, and vice versa;
• A particular conclusion requires a particular premise.
If only the last rule is broken, a syllogism is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint on condi-
tion that the critical term refers to at least one existing thing.

5
Summary   315
Some syllogisms having more than three terms can be reduced to standard form:
• Each additional term must be a complement of one of the others.
• Conversion, obversion, and contraposition must be applied only when they yield logically 
equivalent results.
Ordinary language syllogisms: The component propositions are not in standard form.
• Can be converted into standard-form syllogisms by applying the techniques presented in 
Section 4.7.
Enthymemes: Syllogisms that are missing a premise or conclusion:
• Can be converted into standard-form syllogisms by supplying the missing statement.
Sorites: A chain of syllogisms in which the intermediate conclusions are missing
Testing a sorites:
• Using the five rules:
■
■
Put the sorites into standard form.
■
■
Apply the rules.
■
■
If only the last rule is broken, a sorites is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint on 
condition that the critical term refers to at least one existing thing.
• Using Venn diagrams
■
■
Put the sorites into standard form.
■
■
Supply the missing intermediate conclusions.
■
■
Test each component syllogism.

316
6 
6.1 	 Symbols and Translation
6.2	 Truth Functions
6.3	 Truth Tables for Propositions
6.4	 Truth Tables for Arguments
6.5	 Indirect Truth Tables
6.6	 Argument Forms and Fallacies
6.1	
Symbols and Translation
PREVIEW    If you have contributed to Internet chat boards or sent text messages you may have 
used abbreviations. Some common ones are LOL (laughing out loud), IMO (in my opinion), BTW (by 
the way), CUL8R (see you later), B4 (before), and D8 (date). The idea is that simpler expressions are 
often more manageable, especially on handheld devices. The same idea holds in logic. Simplifying the 
components of an argument paves the way for a speedy evaluation of the argument’s validity.
Earlier chapters showed that the validity of a deductive argument is purely a function of 
its form. By knowing the form of an argument, we can often tell immediately whether 
it is valid or invalid. Unfortunately, however, ordinary linguistic usage often obscures 
the form of an argument. To dispel this obscurity, logic introduces various simplifying 
procedures. In Chapter 5, letters were used to represent the terms in a syllogism, and 
techniques were developed to reduce syllogisms to what is called standard form. In 
this chapter, form recognition is facilitated through the introduction of special sym-
bols called operators, or connectives. When arguments are expressed in terms of these 
symbols, determining validity often becomes a matter of mere visual inspection.
In the two previous chapters, the fundamental elements were terms. In ­propositional 
logic, however, the fundamental elements are whole statements (or propositions). 
Statements are represented by letters, and these letters are then combined by means of 
the operators to form more-complex symbolic representations.
Propositional Logic
316
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

SECTION 6.1 Symbols and Translation   317
6
To understand the symbolic representation used in propositional logic, we must dis-
tinguish simple statements from compound statements. A simple statement is one that 
does not contain any other statement as a component. Here are some examples:
Fast foods tend to be unhealthy.
James Joyce wrote Ulysses.
Parakeets are colorful birds.
The bluefin tuna is threatened with extinction.
Any convenient uppercase letter may be selected to represent each statement. Thus, F 
might be selected to represent the first, J the second, P the third, and B the fourth. As 
will be explained shortly, lowercase letters are reserved for use as statement variables.
A compound statement is one that contains at least one simple statement as a 
­component. Here are some examples:
It is not the case that Al Qaeda is a humanitarian organization.
Dianne Reeves sings jazz, and Christina Aguilera sings pop.
Either people get serious about conservation or energy prices will skyrocket.
If nations spurn international law, then future wars are guaranteed.
The Broncos will win if and only if they run the ball.
Using uppercase letters to stand for the simple statements, these compound statements 
may be represented as follows:
It is not the case that A.
D and C.
Either P or E.
If N then F.
B if and only if R.
In the first example, note that the statement is compound even though it contains only 
a single component (A). In general, negative statements are interpreted as compound 
units consisting of an affirmative statement and the phrase “it is not the case that.”
The expressions “it is not the case that,” “and,” “or,” “if . . . then . . . ,” and “if and only  
if” are translated by logical operators. The five logical operators* are as follows:
Operator
Name
Logical  
function
Used to translate
∼
tilde
negation
not, it is not the case that
dot
conjunction
and, also, moreover
⋁
wedge
disjunction
or, unless
⊃
horseshoe
implication
if . . . then . . . , only if
≡
triple bar
equivalence
if and only if
Saying that logical operators are used to “translate” these English expressions does 
not mean that the expressions and the operators are identical. As in any ­translation 
*Some textbooks use the ampersand, &, in place of the dot; the arrow, →, in place of the horseshoe; and the double 
arrow, ↔, in place of the triple bar.

318   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
(from English to French, for example), a certain distortion of meaning occurs.  
The meaning of such English expressions as “and,” “or,” and “if and only if” is often 
vague and may vary with context, whereas the meaning of the logical operators is clear, 
precise, and invariable. Thus, when we say that the logical operators may be used to 
translate expressions in ordinary language, we mean that the operators capture a cer-
tain aspect of their correlative English expressions. The precise character of this aspect 
is spelled out in the next section of this chapter. The purpose of the current section is to 
develop a familiarity with the logical operators through practice in translation.
When we use the operators to translate the previous examples of compound state-
ments, the results are as follows:
It is not the case that A.	
∼A
D and C.	
D
C
Either P or E.	
P ⋁ E
If N then F.	
N ⊃ F
B if and only if R.	
B ≡ R
The statement ∼A is called a negation. The statement D  C is called a conjunctive 
statement (or a conjunction), and the statement P ⋁ E is called a disjunctive state-
ment (or a disjunction); in the conjunctive statement, the components D and C are 
called conjuncts, and in the disjunctive statement the components P and E are called 
disjuncts. The statement N ⊃ F is called a conditional statement (or a conditional), 
and it expresses the relation of material implication. Its components are called an-
tecedent (N ) and consequent (F ). Lastly, B ≡ R is called a biconditional statement 
(or a biconditional), and it expresses the relation of material equivalence.
Let us now use the logical operators to translate additional English statements.  
The tilde symbol is used to translate any negated simple proposition:
Rolex does not make computers.	
∼R
It is not the case that Rolex makes computers.	
∼R
It is false that Rolex makes computers.	
∼R
As these examples show, the tilde is always placed in front of the proposition it ne-
gates. All of the other operators are placed between two propositions. Also, unlike the 
other operators, the tilde cannot be used to connect two propositions. Thus, G ∼ H is 
not a proper expression. But the tilde is the only operator that can immediately follow 
another operator. Thus, it would be proper to write G  ∼H. In the Rolex examples, 
the tilde is used to negate a simple proposition, but it can also be used to negate a 
compound proposition—for example ∼(G  F ). In this case the tilde negates the entire 
expression inside the parentheses.
These statements are all negations. The main operator is a tilde. 

SECTION 6.1 Symbols and Translation   319
6
At this point we should define what is called the main operator in a compound state-
ment. The main operator is the operator that has as its scope everything else in the 
statement. If there are no parentheses in the statement, the main operator will either  
be the only operator or, if there is more than one, it will be the operator that is not a 
tilde. If there are parentheses, brackets, or braces in the statement, the main operator 
will be the operator that lies outside all parentheses, brackets, and braces; if there is 
more than one such operator, the main operator will be the one that is not a tilde.
For example, in the statement H  ( J ⋁ K ), the main operator is the dot, because its 
scope extends to everything else in the statement, whereas the scope of the wedge  
extends only to the J and K. In the statement ∼(K  M ), the main operator is the tilde 
because its scope extends to everything else. In the statement K ⊃ ∼(L  M ), the main 
operator is the horseshoe, because, once again, its scope extends to everything else in 
the statement. Excluding the tilde, it is the only operator outside the parentheses.
The dot symbol is used to translate such conjunctions as “and,” “also,” “but,”  
­“however,” “yet,” “still,” “moreover,” “although,” and “nevertheless”:
Tiffany sells jewelry, and Gucci sells cologne.	
T
G
Tiffany sells jewelry, but Gucci sells cologne.	
T
G
Tiffany sells jewelry; however, Gucci sells cologne.	
T
G
Tiffany and Ben Bridge sell jewelry.	
T
B
Note that the last example is equivalent in meaning to “Tiffany sells jewelry, and Ben 
Bridge sells jewelry.” To translate such a statement as a conjunction of two simple state-
ments, the original statement must be equivalent to a compound statement in English. 
For example, the statement “Mary and Louise are friends” is not equivalent in meaning 
to “Mary is a friend, and Louise is a friend,” so this statement cannot be translated as 
M  L.
These statements are all conjunctions. The main operator is a dot.
The wedge symbol is used to translate “or” and “unless.” A previous chapter ex-
plained that “unless” is equivalent in meaning to “if not.” This equivalence holds in 
propositional logic as well, but in propositional logic it is usually simpler to equate “un-
less” with “or.” For example, the statement “You won’t graduate unless you pass fresh-
man English” is equivalent to “Either you pass freshman English or you won’t graduate” 
and also to “If you don’t pass freshman English, then you won’t graduate.” As the next 
section demonstrates, the wedge symbol has the meaning of “and/or”—that is, “or” 
in the inclusive sense. Although “or” and “unless” are sometimes used in an exclusive 
sense, the wedge is usually used to translate them as well.

320   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
The word “either,” which is often used to introduce disjunctive statements, has  
primarily a punctuational meaning. The placement of this word often tells us where 
parentheses and brackets must be introduced in the symbolic expression. If parenthe-
ses or brackets are not needed, “either” does not affect the translation. A similar point 
applies to the word “both,” which is often used to introduce conjunctive statements. 
Here are some disjunctive statements:
Aspen allows snowboards or Telluride does.	
A ⋁ T
Either Aspen allows snowboards or Telluride does.	
A ⋁ T
Aspen allows snowboards unless Telluride does.	
A ⋁ T
Unless Aspen allows snowboards, Telluride does.	
A ⋁ T
From the English sense of these statements, it should be clear that A ⋁ T is logically 
equivalent to T ⋁ A. Also T  G is logically equivalent to G  T. Logically equivalent 
propositions necessarily have the same truth value.
These statements are all disjunctions. The main operator is a wedge.
The horseshoe symbol is used to translate “if . . . then . . . ,” “only if, ” and similar 
expressions that indicate a conditional statement. The expressions “in case,” “provided 
that,” “given that,” and “on condition that” are usually translated in the same way 
as “if.” By customary usage, the horseshoe symbol is also used to translate “implies.”  
Although “implies” is used most properly to describe the relationship between the 
premises and conclusion of an argument, we may accept this translation as an alternate 
meaning for “implies.”
The function of “only if ” is, in a sense, just the reverse of “if.” For example, the state-
ment “You will catch a fish only if your hook is baited” does not mean “If your hook 
is baited, then you will catch a fish.” If it meant this, then everyone with a baited hook 
would catch a fish. Rather, the statement means “If your hook is not baited, then you 
will not catch a fish,” which is logically equivalent to “If you catch a fish, then your 
hook was baited.” To avoid mistakes in translating “if ” and “only if ” remember this 
rule: The statement that follows “if ” is always the antecedent, and the statement that 
follows “only if ” is always the consequent. Thus, “C only if H ” is translated C ⊃ H, 
whereas “C if H ” is translated H ⊃ C. Additional examples:
If Purdue raises tuition, then so does Notre Dame.	
P ⊃ N
Notre Dame raises tuition if Purdue does.	
P ⊃ N
Purdue raises tuition only if Notre Dame does.	
P ⊃ N
Cornell cuts enrollment provided that Brown does.	
B ⊃ C

SECTION 6.1 Symbols and Translation   321
6
Cornell cuts enrollment on condition that Brown does.	
B ⊃ C
Brown’s cutting enrollment implies that Cornell does.	
B ⊃ C
In translating conditional statements, it is essential not to confuse antecedent with 
consequent. Just as 6 ÷ 3 is not equal to 3 ÷ 6, the statement A ⊃ B is not logically 
equivalent to B ⊃ A.
These statements are all conditionals (material implications). The main
operator is a horseshoe.
The horseshoe symbol is also used to translate statements phrased in terms of suf-
ficient conditions and necessary conditions. Event A is said to be a sufficient condition 
for event B whenever the occurrence of A is all that is required for the occurrence of B. 
On the other hand, event A is said to be a necessary condition for event B whenever 
B cannot occur without the occurrence of A. For example, having the flu is a sufficient 
condition for feeling miserable, whereas having air to breathe is a necessary condition 
for survival. Other things besides having the flu might cause a person to feel miserable, 
but that by itself is sufficient; other things besides having air to breathe are required for 
survival, but without air, survival is impossible. In other words, air is necessary.
To translate statements involving sufficient and necessary conditions into symbolic 
form, place the statement that names the sufficient condition in the antecedent of the 
conditional and the statement that names the necessary condition in the consequent. 
The mnemonic device “SUN” may be conveniently used to keep this rule in mind. 
Turning the U sideways creates S ⊃ N, wherein S and N designate sufficient and nec-
essary conditions, respectively. Whatever is given as a sufficient condition goes in the 
place of the S, and whatever is given as a necessary condition goes in the place of the N:
Hilton’s opening a new hotel is a sufficient  
condition for Marriott’s doing so.	
H ⊃ M
Hilton’s opening a new hotel is a necessary condition  
for Marriott’s doing so.	
M ⊃ H
The triple-bar symbol is used to translate the expressions “if and only if” and “is  
a sufficient and necessary condition for”:
JFK tightens security if and only if O’Hare does.	
J ≡ O
JFK’s tightening security is a sufficient and  
necessary condition for O’Hare’s doing so.	
J ≡ O
Analysis of the first statement reveals that J ≡ O is logically equivalent to ( J ⊃ O)  (O ⊃ J ). 
The statement “JFK tightens security only if O’Hare does” is translated  
J ⊃ O, and “JFK tightens security if O’Hare does” is translated O ⊃ J. Combining the 

322   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
two English statements, we have (J ⊃ O)  (O ⊃ J ), which is just a longer way of writing  
J ≡ O. A similar analysis applies to the second statement. Because the order of the two  
conjuncts can be reversed, J ≡ O is logically equivalent to O ≡ J. However, when trans-
lating such statements, we adopt the convention that the letter representing the first  
English statement is written to the left of the triple bar, and the letter representing the 
second English statement is written to the right of the triple bar. Thus, the examples 
given are translated J ≡ O, and not O ≡ J.
These statements are all biconditionals (material equivalences).
The main operator is a triple bar.
Whenever more than two letters appear in a translated statement, we must use  
parentheses, brackets, or braces to indicate the proper range of the operators. The 
statement A  B ⋁ C, for example, is ambiguous. When parentheses are introduced, 
this statement becomes either (A  B) ⋁ C or A  (B ⋁ C). These two statements are 
not logically equivalent. Thus, with statements such as these, some clue must be found 
in the English statement that indicates the correct placement of the parentheses in 
the symbolic statement. Such clues are usually given by commas and semicolons, by 
such words as “either” and “both,” and by the use of a single predicate in conjunction 
with two or more subjects. The following examples illustrate the correct placement of  
parentheses and brackets:
Prozac relieves depression and Allegra combats  
allergies, or Zocor lowers cholesterol.	
(P A) ⋁ Z
Prozac relieves depression, and Allegra combats  
allergies or Zocor lowers cholesterol.	
P 
A ⋁ Z )
Either Prozac relieves depression and Allegra combats  
allergies or Zocor lowers cholesterol.	
(P A) ⋁ Z
Prozac relieves depression and either Allegra combats  
allergies or Zocor lowers cholesterol.	
P 
A ⋁ Z )
Prozac relieves depression or both Allegra combats  
allergies and Zocor lowers cholesterol.	
P ⋁ (A Z )
Prozac relieves depression and Allegra or Zocor lowers  
cholesterol.	
P 
A ⋁ Z )
If Merck changes its logo, then if Pfizer increases  
sales, then Lilly will reorganize.	
M ⊃ (P ⊃ L)
If Merck’s changing its logo implies that Pfizer  
increases sales, then Lilly will reorganize.	
(M ⊃ P ) ⊃ L

SECTION 6.1 Symbols and Translation   323
6
If Schering and Pfizer lower prices or Novartis downsizes,  
then Warner will expand production.	
[(S P ) ⋁ N ] ⊃ W
Do not confuse these three statement forms:
A if B
A only if B
A if and only if B
When a tilde appears in a symbolic expression, by convention it is considered to  
affect only the unit that immediately follows it. For example, in the expression ∼K ⋁ M 
the tilde affects only the K; in the expression ∼(K ⋁ M ) it affects the entire expres-
sion inside the parentheses. In English, the expression “It is not the case that K or M” 
is ambiguous, because the range of the negating words is indefinite. To eliminate this 
ambiguity, we now adopt the convention that the negating words are considered to  
affect only the unit that follows them. Thus, “It is not the case that K or M” is translated 
∼K ⋁ M.
The statement “Not both S and T ” is translated ∼(S  T ). By an important rule 
called De Morgan’s rule, this statement is logically equivalent to ∼S ⋁ ∼T. For example, 
the statement “Not both Steven and Thomas were fired” is equivalent in meaning to  
“Either Stephen was not fired or Thomas was not fired.” Because the former statement 
is not equivalent in meaning to “Stephen was not fired and Thomas was not fired,”  
∼(S  T ) is not logically equivalent to ∼S  ∼T. Analogously, the statement “Not either 
S or T ” is translated ∼(S ⋁ T ), which by De Morgan’s rule is logically equivalent to  
∼S  ∼T. For example, “Not either Steven or Thomas was fired” is equivalent in mean-
ing to “Steven was not fired and Thomas was not fired.” Thus, ∼(S ⋁ T ) is not logically 
equivalent to ∼S ⋁ ∼T. The following examples illustrate these points:
Megan is not a winner, but Kathy is.	
∼M
K
Not both Megan and Kathy are winners.	
∼(M
K )
Either Megan or Kathy is not a winner.	
∼M ⋁ ∼K
Both Megan and Kathy are not winners.	
∼M
∼K
Not either Megan or Kathy is a winner.	
∼(M ⋁ K )
Neither Megan nor Kathy is a winner.	
∼(M ⋁ K )
Notice the function of “either” and “both”:
Not either A or B.
Either not A or not B.
Not both A and B.
Both not A and not B.

324   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
G
ottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was a polymath who 
knew virtually everything that could be known 
at the time about nearly every area of intellec-
tual endeavor. He also made important contributions 
to many of them, including physics, engineering, philos-
ophy, theology, history, law, politics, and philology. In 
mathematics Leibniz invented differential and integral 
calculus (independently of Newton) and the theory of 
differential equations. He also discovered the binary 
number system (used by all of today’s digital comput-
ers), and he created the first calculating machine that 
could add, subtract, multiply, and divide. In metaphys-
ics he created the famous theory of monads which, 
among other things, explained the relation between 
the soul and the body.
Leibniz was born in Leipzig to prominent parents. 
His father (who died when Leibniz was six) was a pro-
fessor of moral philosophy at the city’s university, and 
his mother was the daughter of a famous lawyer. As a 
child Leibniz proved himself a prodigy. By age twelve 
he was fluent in Latin and had a passing knowledge 
of Greek, both of which he had learned by himself. 
By thirteen he was deep into the works of Aristotle 
and scholastic philosophy, and at fourteen he entered 
the University of Leipzig, where he studied philosophy, 
mathematics, and law. After completing that program 
he began a doctoral program in law; however, when 
he applied for the degree at age twenty, he was re-
fused because of his youth. Not to be outdone, Leib-
niz presented his thesis to the University of Altdorf, 
and the professors there were so impressed that they 
immediately awarded him the degree of Doctor of 
Laws and offered him a professorship.
Quite early in life Leibniz developed a taste for the fin-
er things in life, including expensive clothing; long, flowing 
wigs; fancy carriag-
es; and luxurious 
accommodations. 
However, follow-
ing the death of 
his mother when 
he was eighteen, 
an uncle received 
what should have 
been Leibniz’s in-
heritance. 
When 
this happened Leib-
niz 
figured 
that 
the best way of 
satisfying his expensive tastes was to attach himself to 
the wealthy and the powerful, which he did with great 
success. He entered the employment of the elector of 
Mainz, and by the age of twenty-four he held the rank 
of privy counselor of justice, one of the highest posi-
tions in the government. His work as a diplomat allowed 
him the opportunity to travel widely and meet most of 
the prominent figures in Europe. Later he worked for 
the Duke of Hanover, a position that also allowed much 
time for travel and independent study.
Leibniz is sometimes called the father of symbolic 
logic for his work in developing the universal character-
istic, a symbolic language in which any item of informa-
tion can be represented in a natural and systematic 
way, together with the calculus ratiocinator, a deduc-
tive system for manipulating the symbols and deriv-
ing consequences. Given the dispassionate nature of 
this enterprise, Leibniz thought that it would serve 
to resolve differences of opinion in religion, theology, 
and philosophy. However, at age seventy he died in  
Hanover before completing the project.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz 1646–1716
eminentlogicians
Bpk, Berlin/Herzog Anton Ulrich-Museum, Braunschweig, Germany/ 
Art Resource, NY
6

SECTION 6.1 Symbols and Translation   325
6
The symbolic expressions that we have used throughout this section to trans-
late meaningful, unambiguous English statements are called well-formed formulas 
(WFFs). “WFFs” is usually pronounced “woofs.” A well-formed formula is a syntacti-
cally correct arrangement of symbols. In English, for example, the expression “there is 
a cat on the porch” is syntactically correct, but “Porch on the is cat a there” is not syn-
tactically correct. Some examples of symbolic arrangements that are not well-formed 
formulas are “A ⊃ ⋁ B,” “A  B (⋁ C ),” and “∼⋁ B ≡ ⊃ C.”
A few informal cues for constructing well-formed formulas follow. In these cues, 
the term statements includes simple statements and compound statements. Remember,  
~A is a compound statement.
Statements cannot be combined without an operator occurring between them.
Not WFFs: 	
AB,  A(B ⊃ C ), (A ⊃ B)(B ⋁ C )
WFFs:	 	
A ⊃ B,  A ⋁ ∼B,  A  (B ≡ C )
A tilde cannot immediately follow a statement, but it can immediately precede any 
statement (except when it immediately follows a statement).
Not WFFs:	
A∼,  A∼B,  (A  B)∼
WFFs:	 	
∼A,  ∼(A  B), ∼∼A
A tilde cannot immediately precede any other operator.
Not WFFs:	
∼ A,  A∼⋁ B
A dot, wedge, horseshoe, or triple bar must go immediately between statements.
Not WFFs: 	
A,  A ⋁,  A  ⊃ B
WFFs:	 	
A  B,  A ⊃ ∼B,  A ⋁ (B  C )
Parentheses, brackets, and braces must be inserted to prevent ambiguity.
Not WFFs:	
A ⊃ B ⋁ C,  A  B ≡ C 
WFFs:	 	
A ⊃ (B ⋁ C),  (A  B) ⊃ C
or, unless
if . . . then, only if, implies, given that, in case,
provided that, on condition that, suﬃcient con-
dition for, necessary condition for (Note: Do not
confuse antecedent with consequent!)
if and only if, is equivalent to, suﬃcient and nec-
essary condition for
v
Summary
Operator
not, it is not the case that, it is false that
and, yet, but, however, moreover, nevertheless,
still, also, although, both, additionally,
furthermore

EXERCISE 6.1	
	 I.	 Translate the following statements into symbolic form using capital letters to rep-
resent affirmative English statements.
	
★1.	 Cartier does not make cheap watches.
	
2.	 Arizona has a national park but Nebraska does not.
	
3.	 Either Stanford or Tulane has an architecture school.
	
★4.	 Both Harvard and Baylor have medical schools.
	
5.	 If Chanel has a rosewood fragrance, then so does Lanvin.
	
6.	 Chanel has a rosewood fragrance if Lanvin does.
	
★7.	 Maureen Dowd writes incisive editorials if and only if Paul Krugman does.
	
8.	 Reese Witherspoon wins best actress only if Martin Scorsese wins best director.
	
9.	 Armani will launch a leather collection given that Gucci rejects skinny  
models.
	 ★10.	 The Packers’ winning most of their games implies that Aaron Rodgers is a 
great quarterback.
	
11.	 Bill Gates does not support malaria research unless Warren Buffet does.
	
12.	 Mercedes will introduce a hybrid model only if Lexus and BMW do.
	 ★13.	 Mariah Carey sings pop and either Elton John sings rock or Diana Krall 
sings jazz.
	
14.	 Either Mariah Carey sings pop and Elton John sings rock or Diana Krall 
sings jazz.
	
15.	 Not both Jaguar and Porsche make motorcycles.
	 ★16.	 Both Jaguar and Porsche do not make motorcycles.
	
17.	 Either Nokia or Seiko makes cell phones.
	
18.	 Not either Ferrari or Maserati makes economy cars.
	 ★19.	 Neither Ferrari nor Maserati makes economy cars.
	
20.	 Either Ferrari or Maserati does not make economy cars.
	
21.	 If Bill O’Reilly spins the news, then if Chris Matthews fights back, then Rachel 
Maddow tells it straight.
	 ★22.	 If Bill O’Reilly’s spinning the news implies that Chris Matthews fights back, 
then Rachel Maddow tells it straight.
	
23.	 Tommy Hilfiger celebrates casual if and only if neither Ralph Lauren nor  
Calvin Klein offers street chic.
6
326   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

SECTION 6.1 Symbols and Translation   327
6
	
24.	 If Saks promotes gift cards, then either Macy’s or Bloomingdale’s puts on a 
fashion show.
	 ★25.	 Either Rado does not make a sapphire watch or if Movado makes one then so 
does Pulsar.
	
26.	 If either Lockheed Martin or Raytheon floods the world with weapons of 
war, then neither General Dynamics nor Boeing reduces the likelihood of  
armed conflict.
	
27.	 If Electronic Arts and Activision Blizzard sell extremely violent video games, 
then either Colt or Smith & Wesson can expect increased profits.
	 ★28.	 Mercury is a planet given that both Pluto and Ceres are not.
	
29.	 Saturn has rings, and Neptune is windy or Jupiter is massive.
	
30.	 Saturn has rings and Neptune is windy, or Jupiter is massive.
	 ★31.	 Tiffany and Ben Bridge will release an emerald collection unless Zales and 
Kay do not.
	
32.	 Chevron continues to pollute provided that British Petroleum does, but Koch 
Industries and Exxon Mobil deny climate change.
	
33.	 Either Sonia Sotomayor or Antonin Scalia have a modern approach to the 
Constitution, but it is not the case that both do.
	 ★34.	 Barack Obama emphasizes peaceful negotiation; but if North Korea starts a 
war, then either China or Japan will be involved.
	
35.	 It is not the case that both Iran gives up its nuclear program and Sudan or 
Pakistan combats terrorism.
	
36.	 It is not the case that either Hezbollah will renounce violence or Al Qaeda and 
the Taliban will be defeated.
	 ★37.	 If Monsanto poisons the entire human race, then if Nestlé buries us in bottles, 
then Smithfield and Tyson load us up with antibiotics.
	
38.	 If Maria Cantwell promotes alternative energy, then if Patty Murray supports 
wilderness areas, then Dianne Feinstein’s advocating gun control implies that 
Susan Collins does so, too.
	
39.	 It is not the case that either Tiger Woods and Maria Sharapova play profes-
sional football or Drew Brees and Serena Williams play professional baseball.
	 ★40.	 It is not the case that both Kobe Bryant or Shaquille O’Neal plays professional 
tennis and Calvin Johnson or Matt Ryan plays professional basketball.
	
41.	 Israel’s abandoning its settlements is a sufficient condition for the Palestinians’ 
declaring an end to hostilities.
	
42.	 Israel’s abandoning its settlements is a necessary condition for the Palestinians’  
declaring an end to hostilities.

6
	 ★43.	 Israel’s abandoning its settlements is a sufficient and necessary condition for 
the Palestinians’ declaring an end to hostilities.
	
44.	 The Taliban’s being defeated is a sufficient condition for Pakistan’s winning 
the war on terror only if Afghanistan’s securing its borders is a necessary con-
dition for the UN’s stopping the opium trade.
	
45.	 Katie Couric and Diane Sawyer report international news if and only if Erica 
Hill and Norah O’Donnell cover political developments.
	 ★46.	 It is not the case that both Walmart’s jeopardizing worker safety implies that 
Target does and Costco’s treating workers decently implies that Kmart does.
	
47.	 Cameron Diaz promotes environmental causes if Ben Affleck supports civil 
liberties, provided that Sean Penn opposes the death penalty.
	
48.	 JP Morgan’s getting another bailout implies that Goldman Sachs cheats its cli-
ents, given that Bank of America’s foreclosing on more homes implies that 
neither Morgan Stanley nor Citigroup curtails obscene bonuses.
	 ★49.	 If Christina Aguilera’s singing soul and Justin Timberlake’s singing pop are 
sufficient and necessary conditions for Kelly Clarkson’s singing rock, then nei-
ther Beyoncé nor Shakira will sing rap.
	
50.	 Nassau’s advertising sizzling night clubs is a necessary condition for Puerto 
Vallarta’s offering luxury hotels; moreover, Cancun’s having turquoise waters 
and Acapulco’s promising powder-white beaches is a sufficient condition for 
Jamaica’s offering reggae music.
	II.	 Translate the following statements into symbolic form using capital letters to  
represent affirmative English statements.
	
★1.	 Unless we reduce the incidence of child abuse, future crime rates will increase.
	
2.	 If pharmaceutical makers conceal test results, they are subject to substantial 
fines.
	
3.	 African safaris are amazing, but they are also expensive.
	
★4.	 Cigarette manufacturers are neither honest nor socially responsible.
	
5.	 Psychologists and psychiatrists do not both prescribe antidepressant drugs.
	
6.	 If health maintenance organizations cut costs, then either preventive ­medicine 
is emphasized or the quality of care deteriorates.
	
★7.	 A necessary condition for a successful business venture is good planning.
	
8.	 If cocaine is legalized, then its use may increase but criminal activity will  
decline.
	
9.	 Ozone depletion in the atmosphere is a sufficient condition for increased 
­cancer rates.
	 ★10.	 If affirmative action programs are dropped, then if new programs are not 
­created, then minority applicants will suffer.
328   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
SECTION 6.1 Symbols and Translation   329
	
11.	 If Internet use continues to grow, then more people will become cyberaddicts 
and normal human relations will deteriorate.
	
12.	 Human life will not perish unless either we poison ourselves with pollution or 
a large asteroid collides with the Earth.
	 ★13.	 Cooling a group of atoms to absolute zero and keeping them bunched  
together is a necessary and sufficient condition for producing a Bose–Einstein 
condensate.
	
14.	 If motion pictures contain subliminal sex messages or if they challenge the 
traditional family, then conservative politicians call for censorship.
	
15.	 Either clear-cutting in national forests is halted and old-growth trees are  
allowed to stand, or salmon runs will be destroyed and bird habitats  
obliterated.
	 ★16.	 Three-strikes laws will be enforced and longer sentences imposed only if hun-
dreds of new prisons are built, and that will happen only if taxes are increased.
	
17.	 The Ebola virus is deadly, but it will become a major threat to humanity if and 
only if it becomes airborne and a vaccine is not developed.
	
18.	 If evolutionary biology is correct, then higher life-forms arose by chance, and 
if that is so, then it is not the case that there is any design in nature and divine 
providence is a myth.
	 ★19.	 If banks charge fees for teller-assisted transactions, then more people will 
use ATMs; and if that happens and ATM fees increase, then banks will close 
branches and profits will skyrocket.
	
20.	 If corporate welfare continues, then taxpayer interests will be ignored and  
billions of tax dollars will go to giant corporations; and if the latter occurs, 
then there will not be anything left for the poor and the budget will not be 
balanced.
	III.	 Determine which of the following are not well-formed formulas.
	
1.	 (S  ∼T ) ⋁ (∼U  W )
	
2.	 ∼(K ⋁ L)  (⊃ G ⋁ H )
	
3.	 (E ∼F ) ⋁ (W ≡ X )
	
4.	 (B ⊃  ∼T ) ≡ ∼(∼C ⊃ U )
	
5.	 (F ≡ ∼Q)  (A ⊃ E ⋁ T )
	
6.	 ∼D ⋁ ∼[(P ⊃ Q)  (T ⊃ R)]
	
7.	 [(D  ⋁ Q) ⊃ (P ⋁ E )] ⋁ [A ⊃ (  H )]
	
8.	 M(N ⊃ Q) ⋁ (∼C  D)
	
9.	 ∼(F  ⋁  ∼G ) ⊃ [(A ≡ E )  ∼H ]
	
10.	 (R ≡ S  T ) ⊃ ∼(∼W  ∼X )
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

330   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
6.2	
Truth Functions
PREVIEW    Suppose you have an assignment to write a paper on the design of the Taj Mahal.  
You begin your research by pulling up Google Earth and typing in the name of the building. You are 
then afforded views of the Taj from all possible directions. This gives you an excellent idea of what the 
building looks like. In this section we show how truth tables accomplish something similar with the five 
logical operators. A truth table gives you a “complete view” of an operator by showing how it functions 
under all possible conditions.
The truth value of a compound proposition expressed in terms of one or more logical 
operators is said to be a function of the truth values of its components. This means that 
the truth value of the compound proposition is completely determined by the truth 
values of its components. If the truth values of the components are known, then the 
truth value of the compound proposition can be calculated from the definitions of the 
logical operators. Accordingly, a truth function is any compound proposition whose 
truth value is completely determined by the truth values of its components.
Many compound propositions in ordinary language are not truth functions. For 
example, the statement “Mary believes that Paul is dishonest” is compound because it 
contains the statement “Paul is dishonest” as a component. Yet the truth value of the 
compound statement is not determined by the truth value of the component, because 
Mary’s beliefs about Paul are not compelled by any attribute that Paul may or may not 
possess.
The first part of this section presents the definitions of the five logical operators, the 
second part shows how they are used to compute the truth values of more-complicated 
propositions, and the third examines further the degree to which symbolized expres-
sions match the meaning of expressions in ordinary language.
Definitions of the Logical Operators
The definitions of the logical operators are presented in terms of statement  
variables, which are lowercase letters (p, q, r, s) that can stand for any statement. For 
example, the statement variable p could stand for the statements A, A ⊃ B, B ⋁ C, 
and so on.
Statement variables are used to construct statement forms. A statement form is an 
arrangement of statement variables and operators such that the uniform substitution 
of statements in place of the variables results in a statement. For example, ∼p and  
p ⊃ q are statement forms because substituting the statements A and B in place of p and 
q, ­respectively, results in the statements ∼A and A ⊃ B. A compound statement is said 
to have a certain form if it can be produced by substituting statements in place of the 
letters in that form. Thus, ∼A, ∼(A ⋁ B), and ∼[A  (B ⋁ C )] are negations because they 
can be produced by substituting statements in place of p in the form ∼p.
Now let us consider the definition of the tilde operator (negation). This definition 
is given by a truth table, an arrangement of truth values that shows in every possible 

6
SECTION 6.2 Truth Functions   331
case how the truth value of a compound proposition is determined by the truth values 
of its simple components. The truth table for negation shows how any statement hav-
ing the form of a negation (∼p) is determined by the truth value of the statement that 
is negated (p):
Negation
p
∼p
T
   F
F
   T
The truth table shows that ∼p is false when p is true and that ∼p is true when p is false. 
This is exactly what we would expect, because it perfectly matches ordinary English 
usage. Examples:
It is not the case that McDonald’s makes hamburgers.	
∼M
It is not the case that Starbucks makes hamburgers.	
∼S
The first statement is false because M is true, and the second is true because S is false.
Let us now consider the definition of the dot operator (conjunction). The truth table 
that follows shows how any statement having the form of a conjunction (p  q) is deter-
mined by the truth values of its conjuncts (p, q):
Conjunction
p
q
p  q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
This truth table shows that a conjunction is true when its two conjuncts are true and 
is false in all other cases. This definition reflects ordinary language usage almost as  
perfectly as negation. Consider the following conjunctive statements:
Ferrari and Maserati make sports cars.	
F
M
Ferrari and GMC make sports cars.	
F
G
GMC and Jeep make sports cars.	
G
J
The first statement is true, because both conjuncts are true; but the second and third 
statements are false, because at least one of their conjuncts is false.
Turning now to the definition of the wedge operator (disjunction), the truth table 
is as follows:
Disjunction
p
q
p ⋁ q
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F

332   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
The truth table indicates that the disjunction is true when at least one of the disjuncts 
is true and that otherwise it is false. The truth-functional interpretation of “or” is that 
of inclusive disjunction: Cases in which the disjunction is true include the case when 
both disjuncts are true. This inclusive sense of “or” corresponds to many instances of 
ordinary usage, as the following examples illustrate:
Either Steven King or Cate Blanchett is a novelist.	
S ⋁ C
Either Steven King or Danielle Steel is a novelist.	
S ⋁ D
Either Kobe Bryant or Tiger Woods is a novelist.	
K ⋁ T
The first two statements are true, because in each case at least one of the disjuncts is 
true. The third is false, because both disjuncts are false.
The match between the truth-functional definition of disjunction and ordinary  
usage is not perfect, however. Sometimes the sense of a statement in ordinary language 
is that of exclusive disjunction. Examples:
The Orient Express is on either track A or track B.
You can have either soup or salad with this meal.
Tammy is either ten or eleven years old.
The sense of these statements excludes the possibility of both alternatives being true. 
Thus, if these statements were translated using the wedge, a portion of their ordinary 
meaning would be lost. If the exclusive aspect of these “either . . . or . . .” statements is 
essential, the symbolic equivalent of “but not both” can be attached to their translations. 
Thus the first statement could be translated (A ⋁ B)  ∼(A  B).
Let us now consider the horseshoe operator (material implication, or conditional). 
Its truth table is as follows:
Conditional  
(material implication)
p
q
p ⊃ q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
The truth table shows that a conditional statement is false when the antecedent is true 
and the consequent false and is true in all other cases. This truth-functional interpreta-
tion of conditional statements conforms in part with the ordinary meaning of “if . . . 
then . . .” and in part it diverges. Consider the following examples:
If Nicole Kidman is an actor, then so is Meryl Streep.	
N ⊃ M
If Nicole Kidman is an actor, then so is Wolf Blitzer.	
N ⊃ W
If Wolf Blitzer is an actor, then so is Helen Hunt.	
W ⊃ H
If Wolf Blitzer is an actor, then so is Piers Morgan.	
W ⊃ P

6
In these statements N, M, and H are true and W and P are false. Thus, according to the 
truth-functional interpretation, the first statement is true and the second false. This 
result conforms in large measure to our expectations. But the truth-functional inter-
pretation of the last two statements is true. Although this result may not conflict with 
our expectations, it is not at all clear why these statements should be considered true.
For an intuitive approach to this problem, imagine that your logic instructor made 
the following statement: “If you get an A on the final exam, then you will get an A for 
the course.” Under what conditions would you say that your instructor had lied to you? 
Clearly, if you got an A on the final exam but did not get an A for the course, you would 
say that she had lied. This outcome corresponds to a true antecedent and a false conse-
quent. On the other hand, if you got an A on the final exam and also got an A for the 
course, you would say that she had told the truth (true antecedent, true consequent). 
But what if you failed to get an A on the final exam? Two alternatives are then possible: 
Either you got an A for the course anyway (false antecedent, true consequent) or you 
did not get an A for the course (false antecedent, false consequent). In neither case, 
though, would you say that your instructor had lied to you. Giving her the benefit of 
the doubt, you would say that she had told the truth.
Lastly, let us consider the definition of the triple-bar operator (material equivalence, 
or biconditional). Its truth table is as follows:
Biconditional  
(material equivalence)
p
q
p ≡ q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
The truth table shows that the biconditional is true when its two components have the 
same truth value and that otherwise it is false. These results are required by the fact 
that p ≡ q is simply a shorter way of writing (p ⊃ q)  (q ⊃ p). If p and q are either both 
true or both false, then p ⊃ q and q ⊃ p are both true, making their conjunction true. 
But if p is true and q is false, then p ⊃ q is false, making the conjunction false. Similarly, 
if p is false and q is true, then q ⊃ p is false, again making the conjunction false. Thus,  
p ≡ q is true when p and q have the same truth value and false when they have opposite 
truth values.
The truth-table definition of the triple-bar symbol conforms quite closely with ordi-
nary usage, as the following examples illustrate:
Bill Maher is a show host if and only if Jimmy Fallon is.	
B ≡ J
Bill Maher is a show host if and only if Emma Watson is.	
B ≡ E
Emma Watson is a show host if and only if Matt Damon is.	
E ≡ M
In these statements, B and J are true and E and M false. Thus, from the truth-­functional 
standpoint, the first is true and the second false. This is what we would ordinarily ex-
pect. The third statement, however, turns out to be true because both of its components 
SECTION 6.2 Truth Functions   333

334   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
are false. While this result may not be what we would expect, it does not violate our 
expectations either. Other biconditional statements having false components are more 
obviously true. Example:
Mitt Romney was elected president if and only if he received a majority vote from the 
­electoral college.
This statement asserts what is required for any candidate to be elected or not elected, 
and so it is clearly true.
In summary, the definitions of the five logical operators conform reasonably well 
with ordinary linguistic usage. However, as the last part of this section shows, the 
match is less than perfect. Before considering this question, though, let us use the  
operator definitions to compute the truth values of more-complicated statements.
Computing the Truth Value of Longer  
Propositions
To compute the truth value of a more-complicated expression, use this procedure: 
Enter the truth values of the simple components directly beneath the letters. Then use 
these truth values to compute the truth values of the compound components. The truth 
value of a compound statement is written beneath the operator representing it. Let us 
suppose, for example, that we are told in advance that the simple propositions A, B, 
and C are true and D, E, and F are false. We may then compute the truth value of the 
following compound proposition:
( A ⋁ D ) ⊃ E
First, we write the truth values of the simple propositions immediately below the re-
spective letters and bring the operators and parentheses down:
( A ⋁ D ) ⊃ E
(  T ⋁ F )  ⊃ F
Next, we compute the truth value of the proposition in parentheses and write it beneath 
the operator to which it pertains:
( A ⋁ D )	⊃ E
( T ⋁ F )	 ⊃ F
	
T	
⊃ F
Finally, we use the last-completed line to obtain the truth value of the conditional, 
which is the main operator in the proposition:
( A ⋁ D )	⊃ E
(  T ⋁ F )	⊃ F
	
T	
⊃ F
	
      F

6
The final answer is circled. This is the truth value of the compound proposition given 
that A is true and D and E are false.
The general strategy is to build the truth values of the larger components from the 
truth values of the smaller ones. In general, the order to be followed in entering truth 
values is this:
1.	 Individual letters representing simple propositions
2.	 Tildes immediately preceding individual letters
3.	 Operators joining letters or negated letters
4.	 Tildes immediately preceding parentheses
5.	 And so on
Here are some additional examples. As before, let A, B, and C be true, D, E, and F false. 
Note that the computed truth values are written beneath the operators to which they 
pertain. The final answers, which are written beneath the main operators, are circled.
1.	 ( B
C ) ⊃ (E ⊃ A )	       
⊃ (F ⊃ T )
	
    T         ⊃      T
	
             T
2.	 ∼ (C ⋁ ∼A)    ⊃ ∼B
	
∼ (  T ⋁ ∼T ) ⊃ ∼T
	
∼ (  T ⋁ F )        ⊃  F
	
∼       T          ⊃  F
	
F                   ⊃  F
	
                     T  
3.	 [∼ (D ⋁ F 
B  ⋁ ∼ A) ] ⊃ ∼ (F ⊃ ∼ C )
	
[∼ (F ⋁  
⋁ ∼ T )] ⊃ ∼ (F ⊃ ∼ T )
	
[∼ (F ⋁  
⋁ F )    ] ⊃ ∼ (F ⊃ F     )
	
[∼  
⊃ ∼      T	   
⊃  F
	
                 T                  ⊃  F
	
                                     F
If preferred, the truth values of the compound components may be entered directly 
beneath the operators, without using the line-by-line approach illustrated in these  
examples. The following examples illustrate this second approach, which is used in the 
next section:
1.	 [(D ≡   ∼  A
∼  (C 
∼  B)]  ≡   ∼  [(A  ⊃  ∼  D)  ⋁  (C  ≡   E )]
	
   F   T     F   T      T   T     T  F    F     T     F   F      T   T    T   F    T     T   F    F
2.	 ∼  {[(C
∼  E )  ⊃  ∼  (A
∼  B)]  ⊃  [  ∼  (B  ⋁  D)  ≡   ( ∼  C  ⋁  E )]}
	
F        T  T     T  F        T     T      T  F   F     T     T        F      T  T  F      T      F     T    F   F
SECTION 6.2 Truth Functions   335

336   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
Further Comparison with Ordinary Language
The first part of this section showed that the definitions of the five logical operators 
conform reasonably well with ordinary linguistic usage. This part further examines the 
extent of this match in meaning.
In regard to the dot operator, which is used to translate “and” and “but,” the match 
is often good; but it fails, at least in part, when the meaning of a conjunctive statement 
depends on the order of the conjuncts. Consider the following statements:
She got married and had a baby.	
M
B
She had a baby and got married.	
B
M
The first statement implies that the marriage occurred first, and the baby came later, 
while the second statement implies that the baby came first. This implied meaning is 
lost in the truth-functional interpretation, because M  B is logically equivalent to B  M.
Another kind of mismatch between the truth-functional meaning of conjunctive 
statements and their ordinary language meaning occurs when the order of the con-
juncts implies a causal connection. Example:
He fell off a ladder and broke his arm.	
F
B
He broke his arm and fell off a ladder.	
B
F
The first statement implies that the fall caused the broken arm, but the second ­statement 
implies no such thing. However, the truth functional meanings of the two statements 
are logically equivalent.
For yet another example, consider the following:
This car is ugly, but it’s economical to drive.	
U
E
This car is economical to drive, but it’s ugly.	
E
U
The first statement subtly implies that we should buy this car, while the second implies 
that we should not buy it. But once again, the truth functional interpretations are logi-
cally equivalent.
Another instance where the truth-functional interpretation of “and” differs from the 
ordinary linguistic meaning is offered by slang statements like this one:
You go for that gun, and you’ll regret it.
The sense of this statement is not that you will in fact go for the gun but rather that, if 
you go for that gun, then . . . Accordingly, if this statement were interpreted as a truth-
functional conjunction, its meaning would be distorted.
In regard to the wedge operator, which is used to translate “or” and “unless,” we saw 
that the wedge is defined as inclusive disjunction, but we observed that the English 
word “or” sometimes has the sense of exclusive disjunction. This same observation ap-
plies to “unless.” In the following statements, “unless” has an inclusive sense:
You won’t win the lottery unless you buy a ticket.
It will not rain unless there are clouds in the sky.

6
The meaning of the first statement includes the case of buying a ticket and not winning, 
and the meaning of the second includes the case of there being clouds and no rain. In 
statements like these, where “unless” has an inclusive sense, using the wedge symbol to 
translate “unless” results in no loss of meaning.
On the other hand, in the following statements “unless” is used in the exclusive sense:
Pork is not properly cooked unless the meat is white.
These logs will make a nice campfire unless they are wet.
The first statement suggests that the meat cannot be white and at the same time not be 
properly cooked, and the second suggests that the logs cannot be wet and at the same 
time be used to make a nice campfire. Thus, if these statements are translated using the 
wedge operator, part of the meaning will be left out. If this additional part is essential, it 
can be included by adding the symbolic equivalent of “but not both” to the translation.
In connection with the horseshoe operator, we saw that a question arose when the 
antecedent of a conditional statement turned out to be false. Why, under this circum-
stance, should the conditional statement be said to be true? For an example of some 
conditional statements that conform to the truth-functional interpretation, consider 
the following:
If the temperature rises above 32°F, then the snow will begin to melt.
If Figure A is a triangle, then Figure A has three sides.
If all A are B and all B are C, then all A are C.
In all three examples the statement remains true even though the antecedent might be 
false. In the first, even though the temperature does not rise above 32°F at any ­particular 
moment, the law that governs the melting point of snow holds true. In other words, the 
statement (which expresses this law) is true regardless of the truth value of the ante-
cedent. In the second, the mere fact that Figure A might not be a triangle does not 
affect the fact that a triangle, by definition, has three sides. Thus, the statement (which 
expresses this fact) is true regardless of the truth value of the antecedent. The third 
statement expresses a logical relationship between statements. This logical relationship 
remains unchanged regardless of what the terms A, B, and C are taken to represent. 
Thus, if A, B, and C represent “dogs,” “cats,” and “birds,” respectively, both antecedent 
and consequent turn out to be false, but the conditional statement remains true.
As these examples illustrate, the definition of the horseshoe operator matches the 
meaning of some conditional statements in ordinary language very well. However, in 
general, the match is far from perfect. The source of the mismatch stems from the 
fact that the horseshoe operator designates the material conditional, or truth-functional 
conditional. The material conditional is a kind of conditional statement whose truth 
value depends purely on the truth or falsity of the antecedent and consequent and not 
on any inferential connection between antecedent and consequent. Since many condi-
tional statements in ordinary language express such an inferential connection, when 
the horseshoe operator is used to translate them, part of their meaning is left out. For 
example, compare the following two statements:
SECTION 6.2 Truth Functions   337

338   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
If Shakespeare wrote Hamlet, then the sun rises in the east.
If ice is lighter than water, then ice floats in water.
The first statement expresses no inferential connection between antecedent and 
­consequent, so using the horseshoe operator to translate it results in no loss of ­meaning. 
However, the second statement does express such a connection. The fact that ice is 
lighter than water is the reason why it floats. Accordingly, when the horseshoe operator 
is used to translate the second statement, this special meaning is lost.
The fact that the material conditional ignores inferential connections between ante-
cedent and consequent allows for conflicts between the truth-functional interpretation 
of a conditional statement and the ordinary interpretation. Consider, for example, the 
following:
If Barbara Boxer advocates the use of cocaine, then she is a good senator.
If Chicago is in Michigan, then Chicago is very close to Miami.
According to their ordinary language interpretation, both of these statements are false. 
Good senators do not advocate the use of cocaine, and Michigan is far from Miami. Yet, 
when these statements are interpreted as material conditionals, both turn out to be true, 
because their antecedents are false. In cases like these, when the truth-­functional inter-
pretation of a conditional statement conflicts with the ­ordinary language ­interpretation, 
using the horseshoe operator to translate it may not be appropriate.
While inferential relations between antecedent and consequent often play some role 
in conditionals expressed in the indicative mood (such as those we just considered), 
they play a dominant role in conditional statements expressed in the subjunctive mood. 
Consider, for example, the following:
If I were Bill Gates, then I would be rich.
If dolphins were fish, then they would be cold blooded.
If the Washington Monument were made of lead, then it would be lighter than air.
If President Kennedy had committed suicide, then he would be alive today.
Subjunctive conditionals are often called counterfactual conditionals because their 
antecedents are typically false. As a result, the only way of determining their truth value 
in ordinary language is through some kind of inference. Thus, from our knowledge that 
Bill Gates is rich, we reason that if I were he, then I would be rich. Similarly, from our 
knowledge that all fish are cold blooded, we conclude that if dolphins were fish, then 
they would be cold blooded. On the other hand, we reason that the second two are 
false from our knowledge that lead is heavier than air and our knowledge that suicide 
results in death. Because the truth value of subjunctive conditionals is so closely tied 
to inferences like these and is so unrelated to the truth or falsity of the components, 
subjunctive conditionals are generally not considered to be truth functional at all, and 
the horseshoe operator is not used to translate them. But if they were interpreted truth-
functionally, note that all four of these statements would turn out true, because they 
have false antecedents.

6
EXERCISE 6.2	
	 I.	 Identify the main operator in the following propositions.
	
★1.	 ∼(A ⋁ M )  ∼(C ⊃ E )
	
2.	 (G  ∼P ) ⊃ ∼(H ⋁ ∼W )
	
3.	 ∼[P  (S ≡ K )]
	
★4.	 ∼(K  ∼O) ≡ ∼(R ⋁ ∼B)
	
5.	 (M  B) ⋁ ∼[E ≡ ∼(C ⋁ I )]
	
6.	 ∼[(P  ∼R) ⊃ (∼E ⋁ F )]
	
★7.	 ∼[(S ⋁ L)  M] ⊃ (C ⋁ N )
	
8.	 [∼F ⋁ (N  U )] ≡ ∼H
	
9.	 E  [(F ⊃ A) ≡ (∼G ⋁ H )]
	 ★10.	 ∼[(X ⋁ T )  (N ⋁ F )] ⋁ (K ⊃ L)
	II.	 Write the following compound statements in symbolic form, then use your knowl-
edge of the historical events referred to by the simple statements to determine the 
truth value of the compound statements.
	
★1.	 It is not the case that Hitler ran the Third Reich.
	
2.	 Nixon resigned the presidency and Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address.
These observations about conditional statements apply equally to biconditionals. 
Just as the horseshoe operator expresses material implication, the triple-bar operator 
expresses material equivalence. As such, it ignores any inferential connection between 
its component statements, and, as a result, conflicts can arise between the ordinary 
meaning of a biconditional and its truth-functional meaning. Here are two examples of 
biconditionals expressed in the indicative mood that illustrate such a conflict:
Adolf Hitler was justified in killing millions of Jews if and only if he always confessed his 
sins to a priest.
The Department of Defense building is a hexagon if and only if it has eight sides.
According to the ordinary interpretation, these statements are false. Confessing 
one’s sins to a priest does not justify anything, and hexagons, by definition, have six 
sides, not eight. Yet, when these statements are interpreted as expressing material  
biconditionals, both are true, because in each case the component statements are false. 
In cases like these, when the ordinary meaning of a biconditional conflicts with the 
truth-functional meaning, using the triple-bar operator to translate it may not be  
appropriate. Furthermore, as with subjunctive conditionals, subjunctive biconditionals 
are generally not considered to be truth-functional at all, so the triple-bar operator is 
not used to translate them.
SECTION 6.2 Truth Functions   339

6
	
3.	 France bombed Pearl Harbor, or Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic.
	
★4.	 Hitler ran the Third Reich and Nixon did not resign the presidency.
	
5.	 Edison invented the telephone, or Custer was killed by the Indians.
	
6.	 Alexander the Great civilized America if Napoleon ruled France.
	
★7.	 Washington was assassinated only if Edison invented the telephone.
	
8.	 Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address if and only if France bombed  
Pearl Harbor.
	
9.	 It is not the case that either Alexander the Great civilized America or  
Washington was assassinated.
	 ★10.	 If Hitler ran the Third Reich, then either Custer was killed by the Indians or 
Einstein discovered aspirin.
	
11.	 Either Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic and Edison invented the telephone or 
both Nixon resigned the presidency and it is false that Edison invented the 
telephone.
	
12.	 Lincoln’s having written the Gettysburg Address is a sufficient condition for 
Alexander the Great’s having civilized America if and only if Washington’s 
being assassinated is a necessary condition for Custer’s having been killed by 
the Indians.
	 ★13.	 Both Hitler ran the Third Reich and Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic if neither 
Einstein discovered aspirin nor France bombed Pearl Harbor.
	
14.	 It is not the case that Custer was killed by the Indians unless both Nixon  
resigned the presidency and Edison invented the telephone.
	
15.	 Custer was killed by the Indians, and Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address 
only if either Washington was assassinated or Alexander the Great civilized 
America.
	III.	 Determine the truth values of the following symbolized statements. Let A, B, and 
C be true and X, Y, and Z be false. Circle your answer.
	
★1.	 A  X
	
2.	 B  ∼Y
	
3.	 X ⋁ ∼Y
	
★4.	 ∼C ⋁ Z
	
5.	 B ⊃ ∼Z
	
6.	 Y ⊃ ∼A
	
★7.	 ∼X ⊃ Z
	
8.	 B ≡ Y
	
9.	 ∼C ≡ Z
	 ★10.	 ∼(A  ∼Z )
340   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
	
11.	 ∼B ⋁ (Y ⊃ A)
	
12.	 A ⊃ ∼(Z ⋁ ∼Y )
	 ★13.	 (A  Y ) ⋁ (∼Z  C )
	
14.	 ∼(X ⋁ ∼B )  (∼Y ⋁ A)
	
15.	 (Y ⊃ C )  ∼(B ⊃ ∼X )
	 ★16.	 (C ≡ ∼A) ⋁ (Y ≡ Z )
	
17.	 ∼(A  ∼C ) ⊃ (∼X ⊃ B)
	
18.	 ∼[(B ⋁ ∼C )  ∼(X ⋁ ∼Z )]
	 ★19.	 ∼[∼(X ⊃ C ) ≡ ∼(B ⊃ Z )]
	
20.	 (X ⊃ Z ) ⊃ [(B ≡ ∼X )  ∼(C ⋁ ∼A)]
	
21.	 [(∼X ⋁ Z ) ⊃ (∼C ⋁ B)]  [(∼X  A) ⊃ (∼Y  Z )]
	 ★22.	 ∼[(A ≡ X ) ⋁ (Z ≡ Y )] ⋁ [(∼Y ⊃ B)  (Z ⊃ C )]
	
23.	 [(B  ∼C ) ⋁ (X  ∼Y )] ⊃ ∼[(Y  ∼X ) ⋁ (A  ∼Z )]
	
24.	 ∼{ ∼[(C ⋁ ∼B)  (Z ⋁ ∼A)]  ∼[∼(B ⋁ Y )  (∼X ⋁ Z )]}
	 ★25.	 (Z ⊃ C ) ⊃ {[(∼X ⊃ B) ⊃ (C ⊃ Y )] ≡ [(Z ⊃ X ) ⊃ (∼Y ⊃ Z )]}
	IV.	 When possible, determine the truth values of the following symbolized statements. 
Let A and B be true, Y and Z false. P and Q have unknown truth value. If the truth 
value of the statement cannot be determined, write “undetermined.”
	
★1.	 A ⋁ P
	
2.	 Q ⋁ Z
	
3.	 Q  Y
	
★4.	 Q  A
	
5.	 P ⊃ B
	
6.	 Z ⊃ Q
	
★7.	 A ⊃ P
	
8.	 P ≡ ∼P
	
9.	 (P ⊃ A) ⊃ Z
	 ★10.	 (P ⊃ A) ≡ (Q ⊃ B)
	
11.	 (Q ⊃ B) ⊃ (A ⊃ Y )
	
12.	 ∼(P ⊃ Y ) ⋁ (Z ⊃ Q)
	 ★13.	 ∼(Q  Y ) ≡ ∼(Q ⋁ A)
	
14.	 [(Z ⊃ P ) ⊃ P] ⊃ P
	
15.	 [Q ⊃ (A ⋁ P)] ≡ [(Q ⊃ B) ⊃ Y ]
SECTION 6.2 Truth Functions   341
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

342   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
6.3	
Truth Tables for Propositions
PREVIEW    In the previous section you saw how a truth table gives you a complete view of a 
proposition similar to how Google Earth gives you a complete view of a building. If it should turn out 
that every side of a building is white, then you would call the whole building white. If every side should 
be black, then the whole building would be black. Similarly, if the final column of a truth table should be 
all true, then the proposition is called one thing. If all false, then it is called something else.
The previous section showed how the truth value of a compound proposition could be 
determined, given a designated truth value for each simple component. A truth table 
gives the truth value of a compound proposition for every possible truth value of its 
simple components. Each line in the truth table represents one such possible arrange-
ment of truth values.
In constructing a truth table the first step is to determine the number of lines  
(or rows). Because each line represents one possible arrangement of truth values, the 
total number of lines is equal to the number of possible combinations of truth values for 
the simple propositions. As we saw in Section 6.2, if there is only one simple proposition, 
p, the number of lines in the truth table is two, because there are only two possible truth 
values for p: true, and false. If there are two simple propositions, p and q, there are four 
lines, because there are four combinations of truth values: p true and q true, p true and 
q false, p false and q true, and p false and q false. The relationship between the number 
of different simple propositions and the number of lines in the truth table is expressed 
as follows:
Number of different 
simple propositions
Number of lines in 
truth table
1
  2
2
  4
3
  8
4
16
5
32
6
64
The relationship between these two columns of numbers is expressed by the formula,
L = 2
n
where L designates the number of lines in the truth table, and n the number of ­different 
simple propositions.
Let us now construct a truth table for a compound proposition. We may begin with 
a fairly simple one:
(A ⋁ ∼ B) ⊃ B

6
SECTION 6.3 Truth Tables for Propositions   343
The number of different simple propositions is two. Thus the number of lines in the 
truth table is four. We draw these lines beneath the proposition as follows:
(A  ⋁ ∼  B)   ⊃  B
______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
______________ 
The next step is to divide the number of lines in half. The result is 2. Then we go to the 
first letter on the left (A) and enter T on the first two lines and F on the remaining two 
lines.
(A  ⋁ ∼  B)  ⊃  B
  T	
 
  T	
 
  F	
 
  F	
 
Next we divide that number (two) in half and, since the result is one, write one T, one 
F, one T, and one F beneath the next letter (B):
(A  ⋁ ∼  B)  ⊃  B
  T           T	
 
  T            F	
  F          T	
  F          F	
Inspection of the truth table at this stage reveals that every possible combination of 
truth and falsity has now been assigned to A and B. In other words, the truth table  
exhausts the entire range of possibilities. The next step is to duplicate the B column 
under the second B.
(A  ⋁ ∼   B)  ⊃  B
  T	
T	
T
  T	
F	
F
  F	
T	
T
  F	
F	
F
This much has been automatic.
Now, using the principles developed in the previous section, we compute the re-
maining columns. First, the column under the tilde is computed from the column un-
der B:
(A  ⋁  ∼    B)  ⊃  B
  T    	 F	 T	
T
  T    	 T	 F	
F
  F    	 F	 T	
T
  F    	 T	 F	
F

344   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
Next, the column under the wedge is computed from the column under A and the 
column under the tilde:
(A  ⋁  ∼  B)  ⊃  B
  T	 T	 F	 T	
T
  T	 T	 T	 F	
F
  F	 F	 F	 T	
T
  F	 T	 T	 F	
F
Last, the column under the horseshoe is computed from the column under the wedge 
and the column under B:
(A  ⋁  ∼  B)  ⊃  B
  T	 T	 F	 T	 T	 T
  T	 T	 T	 F	
F	 F
  F	 F	 F	 T	 T	 T
  F	 T	 T	 F	
F	 F
The column under the main operator is outlined to indicate that it represents the entire 
compound proposition. Inspecting the completed truth table, we see that the truth 
value of the compound proposition is true when B is true and false when B is false, 
regardless of the truth value of A.
Let us consider another example: (C  ∼D) ⊃ E. The number of different letters 
is three, so the number of lines is eight. Under C we make half this number true, half 
false (that is, four true, four false). Then, under D we make half this number true, half 
false, and so on (two true, two false, two true, two false). Finally, under E the truth value 
alternates on every line. The truth table thus exhausts every possible arrangement of 
truth values:
(C 
∼  D)  ⊃  E
  T	
T	
T
  T	
T	
F
  T	
F	
T
  T	
F	
F
  F	
T	
T
  F	
T	
F
  F	
F	
T
  F	
F	
F
Now we compute the truth values for the remaining  
columns—first for the tilde, then for the dot, and  
finally for the horseshoe:
(C 
∼  D)  ⊃  E
   T	 F	 F	 T	 T	 T
   T	 F	 F	 T	 T	 F
   T	T	 T	 F	 T	 T
   T	T	 T	 F	
F	 F
   F	 F	 F	 T	 T	 T
   F	F	 F	 T	 T	 F
   F	F	 T	 F	 T	 T
   F	F	 T	 F	 T	 F

6
Inspecting the completed truth table, we see that the compound proposition is false 
only when C is true and D and E are false.
An alternate method for constructing truth tables, which turns out to be faster for 
certain compound propositions, replicates the type of truth table used to define the 
meaning of the five logical operators in Section 6.2. Suppose, for example, that we 
are given this proposition: [(A ⋁ B)  (B ⊃ A)] ⊃ B. We would begin by construct-
ing columns for the simple propositions A and B, writing them to the left of the given 
proposition:
A	 B	
[(A  ⋁  B
B  ⊃  A)]  ⊃  B
T	 T
T	 F
F	 T
F	 F
We would then use the columns on the left to derive the truth values of the compound 
propositions. We would compute first the truth values of the expressions in parenthe-
ses, then the dot, and finally the right-hand horseshoe:
A	 B	
[(A  ⋁  B
B  ⊃  A)]  ⊃  B
T	 T	
T	
T	
T	
T
T	 F	
T	
T	
T	
F
F	 T	
T	
F	
F	
T
F	 F	
F	
F	
T	
T
Classifying Statements
Truth tables may be used to determine whether the truth value of a compound state-
ment depends solely on its form or whether it also depends on the specific truth  
values of its components. A compound statement is said to be a logically true or 
tautologous statement if it is true regardless of the truth values of its components. It 
is said to be a logically false or self-contradictory statement if it is false regardless of 
the truth values of its components. And it is said to be a contingent statement if its 
truth value varies depending on the truth values of its components. By inspecting the  
column of truth values under the main operator, we can determine how the compound  
proposition should be classified:
Column under main operator
Statement classification
all true
tautologous (logically true)
all false
self-contradictory (logically false)
at least one true, at least one false
contingent
As the truth table we developed earlier indicates, (C  ∼D) ⊃ E is a contingent 
proposition. The column under the main operator contains at least one T and at least 
SECTION 6.3 Truth Tables for Propositions   345

346   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
one F. In other words, the truth value of the compound proposition is “contingent” on 
the truth values of its components. Sometimes it is true, sometimes false, depending on 
the truth values of the components.
On the other hand, consider the following truth tables:
[ ( G  ⊃   H 
G ]  ⊃  H	
( G  ⋁    H )    ≡  ( ∼  G      ∼    H )
	
T   T     T    T  T     T   T	 	
   T   T    T      F      F   T   F   F    T
	
T   F     F    F  T     T   F	
T   T    F     F      F   T   F   T    F
	
F   T      T    F  F     T   T	
F   T     T     F      T   F   F   F    T
	
F   T      F    F  F     T   F	
F   F     F     F      T   F   T   T    F
The proposition on the left is tautologous (logically true or a tautology) because the 
column under the main operator is all true. The one on the right is ­self-­contradictory 
(logically false) because the main operator column is all false. In neither case is the truth 
value of the compound proposition contingent on the truth values of the components. 
The one on the left is true regardless of the truth values of its components—in other 
words, necessarily true. The one on the right is ­necessarily false.
If a proposition is either logically true or logically false, its truth value depends merely  
on its form and has nothing to do with its content. As a result, such ­statements 
do not make any genuine assertions about things in the world. For example, the 
­tautologous statement “It is either raining or it is not raining” provides no informa-
tion about the weather. Similarly, the self-contradictory statement “It is raining and 
it is not raining” provides no information about the weather. On the other hand, 
the contingent statement “It is raining in the mountains” does provide information 
about the weather.
Comparing Statements
Truth tables may also be used to determine how two propositions are related to each 
other. Two propositions are said to be logically equivalent statements if they have the 
same truth value on each line under their main operators, and they are contradictory 
statements if they have opposite truth values on each line under their main operators. If  
neither of these relations hold, the propositions are either consistent or inconsistent. 
Two (or more) propositions are consistent statements if there is at least one line on 
which both (or all) of them turn out to be true, and they are inconsistent statements 
if there is no line on which both (or all) of them turn out to be true. By comparing the 
main operator columns, one can determine which is the case. However, because the first 
two relations are stronger than (and may overlap) the second two, the first two relations 
should be considered first.
Columns under  
main operators
Relation
same truth value on each line
logically equivalent
opposite truth value on each line
contradictory
there is at least one line on which  
the truth values are both true
consistent
there is no line on which the truth  
values are both true
inconsistent

6
For example, the following two propositions are logically equivalent. The main opera-
tor columns of their respective truth tables are identical. Note that for proper compari-
son the columns under K must be identical and the columns under L must be identical.
K  ⊃  L	
∼   L   ⊃  ∼  K
T  T    T	
F   T   T   F    T
T  F    F	
T   F   F   F    T	
Logically equivalent
F   T    T	
F   T   T   T   F	
F   T    F	
T   F   T   T   F
For any two propositions that are logically equivalent, the biconditional statement 
formed by joining them with a triple bar is tautologous. Thus, (K ⊃ L) ≡ (∼L ⊃ ∼K ) 
is tautologous. This is easy to see because the columns under the main operators of  
K ⊃ L and ∼L ⊃ ∼K are identical.
The next two propositions are contradictory:
K  ⊃  L	
K   
∼   L
T  T    T	
T  F    F   T
T  F    F	
T  T    T   F	
Contradictory
F   T    T	
F  F     F   T	
F   T    F	
F  F     T   F
The next two propositions are consistent. On the first line of each truth table the  
column under the main operator turns out true. This means that it is possible for both 
propositions to be true, which is the meaning of consistency:
K  ⋁    L	
K   
L
T   T   T	
T  T   T
T   T   F	
T  F   F	
Consistent
F    T   T	
F  F    T
F   F   F	
F  F    F
Finally, the next two propositions are inconsistent. There is no line in the columns un-
der the main operators where the truth values are both true:
K  ≡   L	
K  
∼   L
T   T   T	
T  F    F   T
T   F   F	
T   T   T   F	
Inconsistent
F    F   T	
F   F    F   T
F    T   F	
F   F    T   F
Any pair of propositions is either consistent or inconsistent. Furthermore, some 
consistent propositions are also logically equivalent, and some inconsistent proposi-
tions are either contradictory or logically equivalent. Because of this partial overlap, 
pairs of propositions are usually first classified in terms of the stronger of these rela-
tions, which are logical equivalence and contradiction. If neither of these stronger rela-
tions applies, then the pair of propositions is classified in terms of the weaker relations, 
consistency and inconsistency.
Unlike logical equivalence and contradiction, which usually relate exactly two prop-
ositions, consistency and inconsistency often apply to larger groups of propositions. 
For consistency, the only requirement is that there be at least one line in the group 
SECTION 6.3 Truth Tables for Propositions   347

6
EXERCISE 6.3	
	 I.	 Use truth tables to determine whether the following symbolized statements are 
tautologous, self-contradictory, or contingent.
	
★1.	 N ⊃ (N ⊃ N )
	
2.	 (G ⊃ G) ⊃ G
	
3.	 (S ⊃ R)  (S  ∼R)
	
★4.	 [(E ⊃ F ) ⊃ F ] ⊃ E
	
5.	 (∼K ⊃ H ) ≡ ∼(H ⋁ K )
	
6.	 (M ⊃ P ) ⋁ (P ⊃ M )
	
★7.	 [(Z ⊃ X )  (X ⋁ Z )] ⊃ X
	
8.	 [(C ⊃ D)  ∼C ] ⊃ ∼D
	
9.	 [X ⊃ (R ⊃ F )] ≡ [(X ⊃ R) ⊃ F ]
	 ★10.	 [G ⊃ (N ⊃ ∼G )]  [(N ≡ G)  (N ⋁ G)]
	
11.	 [(Q ⊃ P )  (∼Q ⊃ R)]  ∼(P ⋁ R)
of truth tables where all of the propositions are true, and for inconsistency the only 
requirement is that there be no such line. As a result of these requirements, the state-
ment consisting of the conjunction of a group of inconsistent propositions will always 
be self-contradictory, whereas the statement consisting of the conjunction of a group of 
consistent propositions will never be self-contradictory.
Consistency and inconsistency are important because, among other things, they can 
be used to evaluate the overall rationality of a person’s stated position on something. 
If the statements expressing such a position are consistent, then there is at least a pos-
sibility that the position makes sense. This is so because there will be at least one line 
in the group of truth tables where all of the person’s statements are true. On the other 
hand, if the statements are inconsistent, then there is no possibility that the position 
makes sense. In this case there is no line in the truth tables where all of the statements 
are true. The group of statements, conjoined together, amounts to a self-contradiction.
The truth tables for consistency and logical equivalence also illustrate the impor-
tant difference between two propositions being factually true and their being logically  
equivalent. For example, the statements “Water boils at 100°C” and “The current popu-
lation of the United States is over 200 million” are both true in the present actual world. 
This real-world situation conforms to the one truth-table line on which both state-
ments are true. As a result of this line, the two statements are consistent. However, they 
are not logically equivalent, because their truth values are not necessarily the same. 
The truth value of the second proposition might change in the future, while that of the 
first would remain the same. An analogous distinction, incidentally, holds between two 
statements having actually opposite truth values and their being contradictory.
348   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
	
12.	 [(H ⊃ N )  (T ⊃ N )] ⊃ [(H ⋁ T ) ⊃ N ]
	 ★13.	 [U  (T ⋁ S )] ≡ [(∼T ⋁ ∼U )  (∼S ⋁ ∼U )]
	
14.	 {[(G  N ) ⊃ H ]  [(G ⊃ H ) ⊃ P ]} ⊃ (N ⊃ P )
	
15.	 [(F ⋁ E )  (G ⋁ H )] ≡ [(G  E ) ⋁ (F  H )]
	II.	 Use truth tables to determine whether the following pairs of symbolized statements 
are logically equivalent, contradictory, consistent, or inconsistent. First, determine 
whether the pairs of propositions are logically equivalent or contradictory; then, if 
these relations do not apply, determine if they are consistent or inconsistent.
	
★1.	 ∼D ⋁ B	
∼(D  ∼B )
	
2.	
	
∼(F ⋁ M )
	
3.	 ∼K ⊃ L	
K ⊃ ∼L
	
★4.	 R ⋁ ∼S	
S  ∼R
	
5.	 ∼A ≡ X	
(X  ∼A) ⋁ (A  ∼X )
	
6.	 H ≡ ∼G	
(G  H ) ⋁ (∼G  ∼H )
	
★7.	 (E ⊃ C ) ⊃ L	
E ⊃ (C ⊃ L)
	
8.	 N  (A ⋁ ∼E )	
∼
 ⋁ ∼N )
	
9.	 M ⊃ (K ⊃ P )	
(K  M ) ⊃ P
	 ★10.	 W ≡ (B  T )	
W  (T ⊃ ∼B)
	
11.	 G  (E ⋁ P )	
∼(G  E )  ∼(G  P )
	
12.	 R  (Q ⋁ S )	
(S ⋁ R)  (Q ⋁ R)
	 ★13.	 H  (K ⋁ J )	
( J  H ) ⋁ (H  K )
	
14.	 Z  (C ≡ P )	
C ≡ (Z  ∼P )
	
15.	 Q ⊃ ∼(K ⋁ F )	
(K  Q) ⋁ (F  Q)
	III.	Use truth tables to obtain the answers to the following exercises:
	
★1.	 Renowned economist Harold Carlson makes the following prediction:  
“The balance of payments will decrease if and only if interest rates remain 
steady; however, it is not the case that either interest rates will not remain 
steady or the balance of payments will decrease.” What can we say about  
Carlson’s prediction?
	
2.	 A high school principal made this statement to the school board: “Either music 
is not dropped from the curriculum or the students will become ­cultural phi-
listines; furthermore, the students will not become cultural philistines if and 
only if music is dropped from the curriculum.” Assuming the principal is cor-
rect, what has she told us about music and the students? (Hint: Construct a 
truth table for the principal’s statement and examine the line on which the 
statement turns out true.)
	
3.	 Christina and Thomas are having a discussion about their plans for the eve-
ning. Christina: “If you don’t love me, then I’m certainly not going to have  
SECTION 6.3 Truth Tables for Propositions   349

sex with you.” Thomas: “Well, that means that if I do love you, then you will 
have sex with me, right?” Is Thomas correct? (Hint: Construct a truth table for 
each statement and compare them.)
	
★4.	 Two astronomers are discussing supernovas. Dr. Frank says, “Research has 
established that if a supernova occurs within ten light-years of the Earth, then 
life on Earth will be destroyed.” Dr. Harris says, “Research has also established 
that either a supernova will not occur within ten light-years of the Earth or 
life on Earth will not be destroyed.” Is it possible that both astronomers are 
correct? If so, what can we determine about the occurrence of a supernova?
	
5.	 Antonia Martinez, who is running for the state senate, makes this statement: 
“Either a tax reduction is feasible only if both educational costs do not in-
crease and the welfare program is abolished, or a tax reduction is feasible and 
either the welfare program will not be abolished or educational costs will in-
crease.” What has Martinez told us about taxes, educational costs, and welfare?
	
6.	 Automotive expert Frank Goodbody has this to say about Japanese imports: 
“If Mitsubishi is the sportiest, then both Toyota is the most trouble-free and 
Isuzu is not the lowest priced. If Isuzu is the lowest priced, then both Toyota 
is not the most trouble-free and Mitsubishi is the sportiest.” Is it possible that 
Goodbody is correct in his assessment? If so, what may we conclude about 
Mitsubishi, Toyota, and Isuzu?
	
★7.	 Two stockbrokers are having a discussion. One claims that Netmark will intro-
duce a new product if and only if both Datapro cuts its workforce and Compu-
cel expands production. The other claims that Datapro will cut its workforce, 
and Compucel will expand production if and only if Netmark introduces a 
new product. Is it possible that both stockbrokers are right? If so, what have 
they told us about these companies?
	
8.	 Eric Carson sums up his beliefs about God as follows: “God exists if and only 
if either life is meaningful or the soul is not immortal. God exists and the soul 
is immortal. If God exists, then life is not meaningful.” Is it possible that Eric’s 
beliefs make sense?
	
9.	 Cindy, Jane, and Amanda witnessed a bank robbery. At trial, Cindy testified 
that Lefty did not enter the bank, and if Howard pulled a gun, then Conrad 
collected the money. Jane testified that if Howard did not pull a gun, then 
Lefty entered the bank. Amanda testified that if Conrad collected the money, 
then Howard pulled a gun. Is it possible that all three witnesses told the truth? 
If so, what can we conclude about Lefty, Howard, and Conrad?
	 ★10.	 Nicole Evans expresses her philosophy as follows: “If the mind is identi-
cal to the brain, then personal freedom does not exist and humans are not  
responsible for their actions. If personal freedom does not exist, then the 
mind is identical to the brain. Either humans are responsible for their  
actions or the mind is not identical to the brain. If personal freedom exists, then  
humans are responsible for their actions.” Is it possible that Nicole’s philoso-
phy makes sense? If so, what does it say about the mind, personal freedom, 
and responsibility?
6
350   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

6
SECTION 6.4 Truth Tables for Arguments   351
6.4	
Truth Tables for Arguments
PREVIEW    Have you ever seen a demonstration or stage show involving ultraviolet light (black 
light)? When the light is turned on, certain objects, including white paper, chlorophyll, tonic water, 
and twenty-dollar bills, fluoresce or glow. Their color pops out against the darkened background.  
Using truth tables to test arguments is similar, in a way, and almost as simple as turning on a light 
switch. To a trained eye, the line that shows an invalid argument to be invalid pops out against the  
other lines.
Truth tables provide the standard technique for testing the validity of arguments in 
propositional logic. To construct a truth table for an argument, follow these steps:
1.	 Symbolize the arguments using letters to represent the simple propositions.
2.	
Write out the symbolized argument, placing a single slash between the premises and 
a double slash between the last premise and the conclusion.
3.	
Draw a truth table for the symbolized argument as if it were a proposition broken 
into parts, outlining the columns representing the premises and conclusion.
4.	
Look for a line in which all of the premises are true and the conclusion is false. If such 
a line exists, the argument is invalid; if not, it is valid.
For example, let us test the following argument for validity:
If juvenile killers are as responsible for their crimes as adults are, then execution is a 
­justifiable punishment.
Juvenile killers are not as responsible for their crimes as adults are.
Therefore, execution is not a justifiable punishment.
The first step is to symbolize the argument:
J ⊃ E
∼J   
∼E
Now a truth table may be constructed. Since the symbolized argument contains 
two different letters, the truth table has four lines. Make sure that identical letters 
have identical columns beneath them. Here are the columns for the individual  
letters:
  J   ⊃   E   /   ∼   J   / /   ∼   E
T	
T	
T	
T
T	
F	
T	
F
F	
T	
F	
T
F	
F	
F	
F

352   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
The truth table is now completed, and the columns representing the premises and con-
clusion are outlined:
J    ⊃     E     /     ∼     J     / /     ∼     E
T	
T	
T	
F	
T	
F	
T
T	
F	
F	
F	
T	
T	
F
F	
T	
T	
T	 F	
F	
T
F	
T	
F	
T	
F	
T	
F
Inspection of the third line reveals that both of the premises are true and the conclusion 
is false. The argument is therefore invalid.
Another example:
If insider trading occurs, then investors will not trust the securities markets. If investors 
do not trust the securities markets, then business in general will suffer. Therefore, if in-
sider trading occurs, then business in general will suffer.
The completed truth table is this:
O   ⊃   ∼   T   /   ∼   T   ⊃   B   / /   O   ⊃   B
T	 F	
F	 T	
F	 T	 T	 T	
  T	  T	  T
T	 F	
F	 T	
F	 T	 T	 F	
  T	  F	  F
T	 T	
T	 F	
T	 F	 T	 T	
  T	  T	  T
T	 T	
T	 F	
T	 F	 F	 F	
  T	  F	  F
 F	 T	
F	 T	
F	 T	 T	 T	
  F	  T	  T
 F	 T	
F	 T	
F	 T	 T	 F	
  F	  T	  F
 F	 T	
T	 F	
T	 F	 T	 T	
  F	  T	  T
 F	 T	
T	 F	
T	 F	 F	 F	
  F	  T	  F
Inspection of the truth table reveals that there is no line on which both premises are 
true and the conclusion is false. The argument is therefore valid.
The logic behind the method of truth tables is easy to understand. By definition, 
a valid argument is one in which it is not possible for the premises to be true and the 
conclusion false. A truth table presents every possible combination of truth values that 
the components of an argument may have. Therefore, if no line exists on which the 
premises are true and the conclusion false, then it is not possible for the premises to be 
true and the conclusion false, in which case the argument is valid. Conversely, if there is 
a line on which the premises are true and the conclusion false, then it is possible for the 
premises to be true and the conclusion false, and the argument is invalid. Accordingly, 
to test the validity of an argument, use this procedure:
Look for a line that has all true premises and a false conclusion. If you find 
such a line, the argument is invalid. If not, the argument is valid.
Truth tables provide a convenient illustration of the fact that any argument having in-
consistent premises is valid regardless of what its conclusion may be, and any argument 
having a tautologous conclusion is valid regardless of what its premises may be. Example:
The sky is blue.
The sky is not blue.
Therefore, Paris is the capital of France.

A
	da Byron, born in 1815, was the only child of  
 the English poet George Gordon (Lord Byron)  
 and Annabella Milbanke. By the time Ada was 
born, Lady Byron had grown to detest her husband, 
and she did everything in her power to ensure that 
Ada would grow up to be as much unlike him as pos-
sible. Lady Byron had a talent for mathematics, which 
her husband did not share in the least, so she hired a 
series of tutors to instruct young Ada in that discipline. 
One of those tutors was the famous mathematician 
and logician Augustus De Morgan, with whom Ada 
became a close friend.
In 1835 Ada Byron married William King, and when 
King was elevated to Earl of Lovelace three years later, 
Ada became Countess of Lovelace. The couple had 
three children, but the duties of wife and mother did 
not interrupt Ada’s study of mathematics and logic. 
Two years prior to her marriage Ada met Charles 
Babbage, an early inventor of mechanical computers, 
and when she was first shown Babbage’s Difference 
Engine, she immedi-
ately grasped all the 
intricacies of its op-
eration. A few years 
later, when Babbage 
proposed a design for 
the Analytic Engine, 
Ada wrote a lengthy 
program for the new 
machine, and she en-
visioned how it could 
be used not only to 
solve problems in 
mathematics, but to produce music and graphics as 
well. Because of this work, Ada Byron is usually cred-
ited with being the first computer programmer.
Ada had suffered problems with her health ever 
since childhood, and as she grew older, these problems 
were aggravated by alcohol abuse. In 1852 she died 
from cancer at the relatively young age of thirty-six.
Ada Byron, Countess of Lovelace 1815–1852
© ARPL/HIP/The Image Works
6
S /  ∼  S / /  P
T	 F	 T	
T
T	 F	 T	
F
F	 T	 F	
T
F	 T	 F	
F
Since the premises of this argument are inconsistent, there is no line on which the 
premises are both true. Accordingly, there is no line on which the premises are both 
true and the conclusion false, so the argument is valid. Of course, the argument is un-
sound, because it has a false premise. Another example:
Bern is the capital of Switzerland. Therefore, it is either raining or it is not raining.
B / /  R  ⋁  ∼  R
T	 	 T	 T	 F	 T
T	 	 F	 T	 T	 F
F	 	 T	 T	 F	 T
F	 	 F	 T	 T	 F
SECTION 6.4 Truth Tables for Arguments   353

6
The conclusion of this argument is a tautology. Accordingly, there is no line on which 
the premise is true and the conclusion false, and so the argument is valid. Incidentally, 
it is also sound, because the premise is true.
The conditional statement having the conjunction of an argument’s prem-
ises as its antecedent and the conclusion as its consequent is called the argument’s 
­corresponding conditional. For example, the corresponding conditional of the sec-
ond argument tested in this section is [(O ⊃ ∼T)  (∼T ⊃ B)] ⊃ (O ⊃ B). For any 
valid argument (such as this one), the corresponding conditional is a tautology. This 
is easy to see. In any valid argument, there is no line on which the premises are all 
true and the conclusion false. Thus, in the corresponding conditional, there is no 
line on which the antecedent is true and the consequent false, so the corresponding  
conditional is true on every line.
EXERCISE 6.4	
	 I.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then determine whether 
each is valid or invalid by constructing a truth table for each.
	
★1.	 If national elections deteriorate into TV popularity contests, then smooth-­
talking morons will get elected. Therefore, if national elections do not de-
teriorate into TV popularity contests, then smooth-talking morons will not  
get elected.
	
2.	 Brazil has a huge foreign debt. Therefore, either Brazil or Argentina has a huge 
foreign debt.
	
3.	 If fossil fuel combustion continues at its present rate, then a greenhouse effect 
will occur. If a greenhouse effect occurs, then world temperatures will rise. 
Therefore, if fossil fuel combustion continues at its present rate, then world 
temperatures will rise.
	
★4.	 If there are dried-up riverbeds on Mars, then water once flowed on the Mar-
tian surface. There are dried-up riverbeds on Mars. Therefore, water once 
flowed on the Martian surface.
	
5.	 If high school graduates are deficient in reading, they will not be able to 
compete in the modern world. If high school graduates are deficient in 
writing, they will not be able to compete in the modern world. Therefore, 
if high school graduates are deficient in reading, then they are deficient in 
writing.
	
6.	 The disparity between rich and poor is increasing. Therefore, political con-
trol over economic equality will be achieved only if restructuring the eco-
nomic system along socialist lines implies that political control over economic 
­equality will be achieved.
354   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
	
★7.	 Einstein won the Nobel Prize either for explaining the photoelectric effect or 
for the special theory of relativity. But he did win the Nobel Prize for explaining  
the photoelectric effect. Therefore, Einstein did not win the Nobel Prize for 
the special theory of relativity.
	
8.	 If microchips are made from diamond wafers, then computers will gener-
ate less heat. Computers will not generate less heat and microchips will be 
made from diamond wafers. Therefore, synthetic diamonds will be used for  
jewelry.
	
9.	 Either the USS Arizona or the USS Missouri was not sunk in the attack on 
Pearl Harbor. Therefore, it is not the case that either the USS Arizona or the 
USS Missouri was sunk in the attack on Pearl Harbor.
	 ★10.	 If racial quotas are adopted for promoting employees, then qualified em-
ployees will be passed over; but if racial quotas are not adopted, then prior 
discrimination will go unaddressed. Either racial quotas will or will not be 
adopted for promoting employees. Therefore, either qualified employees will 
be passed over or prior discrimination will go unaddressed.
	 II.	 Determine whether the following symbolized arguments are valid or invalid by 
constructing a truth table for each.
	
★1.	 K ⊃ ∼K
	
	 ∼K
	
2.	 R ⊃ R
	
	 R
	
3.	 P ≡ ∼N
	
	 N ⋁ P
	
★4.	 ∼(G  M )
	
	 M ⋁ ∼G  
	
	 ∼G
	
5.	 K ≡ ∼L
	
	 ∼(L  ∼K)
	
	 K ⊃ L
	
6.	 Z         
	
	 E ⊃ (Z ⊃ E)
	
★7.	 ∼(W  ∼X)
	
	 ∼(X  ∼W )
	
	 X ⋁ W
	
8.	 C ≡ D
	
	 E ⋁ ∼D
	
	 E ⊃ C
	
9.	 A ≡ (B ⋁ C )
	
	 ∼C ⋁ B      
	
	 A ⊃ B
	 ★10.	 J ⊃ (K ⊃ L)
	
	 K ⊃ ( J ⊃ L)
	
	 ( J ⋁ K ) ⊃ L
	
11.	 ∼(K ≡ S)
	
	 S ⊃ ∼(R ⋁ K )
	
	 R ⋁ ∼S
	
12.	 E ⊃ (F  G )
	
	 F ⊃ (G ⊃ H )
	
	 E ⊃ H
	 ★13.	 A ⊃ (N ⋁ Q)
	
	 ∼(N ⋁ ∼A)    
	
	 A ⊃ Q
	
14.	 G ⊃ H
	
	 R ≡ G
	
	 ∼H ⋁ G
	
	 R ≡ H
	
15.	 L ⊃ M
	
	 M ⊃ N
	
	 N ⊃ L
	
	 L ⋁ N
	 ★16.	 S ⊃ T
	
	 S ⊃ ∼T
	
	 ∼T ⊃ S
	
	 S ⋁ ∼T
SECTION 6.4 Truth Tables for Arguments   355

6
	
17.	 W ⊃ X
	
	 X ⊃ W
	
	 X ⊃ Y
	
	 Y ⊃ X	
	
	 W ≡ Y
	
18.	 K ≡ (L ∨ M)
	
	 L ⊃ M
	
	 M ⊃ K
	
	 K ⋁ L     
	
	 K ⊃ L
	 ★19.	 A ⊃ B
	
	 (A
B) ⊃ C
	
	 A ⊃ (C ⊃ D)
	
	 A ⊃ D
	
20.	 ∼A ∨ R
	
	 ∼(N
∼C )
	
	 R ⊃ C
	
	 C ⊃ ∼N 
	
	 A ∨ C
	III.	The following dialogue contains eleven arguments. Translate each into symbolic 
form, and then use truth tables to determine whether each is valid or invalid.
Romance with an Android
“I just came from Professor Shaw’s class on the philosophy of human nature,” Nick says 
to his friend Erin, as he meets her in the hallway. “We discussed the question of whether 
an android could be a person and whether we would ever consider going out on a date 
with an android—assuming it looked just like an attractive human.” 
	 “Sounds like an interesting class,” Erin replies, “but an android could never be a  
person.”
	 “Why is that?” Nick asks.
	 “It’s really quite simple,” she says. “If an android is a person, then it’s rational. But no 
android is rational, so it’s not a person.”
	 “But wait,” Nick says. “Androids can solve problems, and they can also deliberate. 
And if they can either deliberate or solve problems, then they’re rational. Right? So 
androids are rational, after all.”
	 “No they’re not,” Erin says. “If an android is rational, then it’s conscious, and if it’s 
conscious, then it has reflective mental activity—it can reflect on its own act of thinking. 
But no android can do that, so it’s not rational.”
	 “How do you know that no android has reflective mental activity?” he asks.
	 “Because an android has reflective mental activity only if it has a soul,” Erin says. “And 
it’s ridiculous to think that an android could have a soul. Hence it has no reflective men-
tal activity.” 
	 “But consider this,” Nick says. “Either a soul is a material entity or it’s a nonmaterial 
entity. You would agree with that, wouldn’t you?”
	 “Of course,” Erin replies. “Your statement is a tautology.”
	 “Okay,” says Nick. “Now let me finish the argument. If a soul is a material entity, then 
if an android is material, it could easily have a soul. But if a soul is a nonmaterial entity, 
then if God could infuse a soul into it, then it could have a soul. Now an android is mate-
rial and God could infuse a soul into an android—after all, God can do anything. Thus, 
an android could have a soul.”
	 “Well, I know that Descartes considered humans to be machines with souls, but to 
me it’s crazy to think that God would infuse a soul into a computer. He might as well 
356   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
infuse a soul into a pile of rocks. Anyway, let me try another approach,” Erin says. “If an 
android is a person, then it has free will. But if androids are programmed, then they have 
no free will. Androids are just computers made to appear like humans, and every com-
puter is programmed. Hence, once again, an android is not a person. What do you think 
of that?”
	 “By your reasoning,” Nick replies, “even humans may not be free.”
	 “How is that?” Erin asks.
	 “Well,” he says, “whatever we do is caused by our biological makeup or by our social 
conditioning. If it’s caused by our biological makeup, then it’s determined. If it’s caused 
by our social conditioning, then it’s determined, too. And if it’s determined, then it’s not 
free. Thus, whatever we do is not free.”
	 “Not so,” Erin objects. “Our actions may be influenced by our biological makeup and 
our social conditioning, but they’re not caused by them. Not strictly. And if they’re not 
strictly caused by them, they’re not determined by them, and if they’re not determined 
by them, then they’re free. Thus, our actions are free.”
	 “Well, I don’t know what it means for our actions to be influenced by something yet 
not be determined,” Nick replies. “If X is influenced by Y, then X is caused by Y, and if X 
is caused by Y, then X is determined by Y. Thus, if X is influenced by Y, then X is deter-
mined by Y.”
	 “I think you’re equivocating on the meaning of cause,” Erin replies. “But if you’re 
unconvinced, how about this: If an android is a person, then it has feelings. And if it has 
feelings, then it can feel love or compassion. But no android loves anything. Just imagine 
two computers in love. The very thought is absurd. So is one android feeling compassion 
for another. Thus, an android cannot be a person.”
	 “Well, look at it this way,” Nick replies. “Feelings are either mental or they’re physi-
cal. If they’re mental, then they’re brain states, and if they’re brain states then androids 
could have them—because all brain states are just arrangements of atoms. If feelings are 
physical, then androids could have them—because, once again, all physical things are just 
arrangements of atoms. Thus, androids can have feelings.”
	 Erin laughs. “That’s the worst reasoning I’ve ever heard in my life. Sure, feelings may 
be accompanied by physical states, but they’re not identical with them. Anyway, before 
I have to head off to class, tell me this: Do you really think that androids could be  
persons?”
	 “I think it’s possible,” Nick replies.
	 “So, would you go out on a date with an android?”
	 “That depends,” he says.
	 “On what?” Erin asks.
	 “On whether I think she’d be good in bed,” he replies.
	 “Uh-huh.” She sighs. “Well, I’m off to class. Bye.”
SECTION 6.4 Truth Tables for Arguments   357
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

358   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
6.5	
Indirect Truth Tables
PREVIEW    You hear a knock on the door. When you open it, nobody is there. But then you glance 
down and see a little blond puppy with a ribbon tied around its neck. You assume this is a gift from 
your friend Alex. But if that’s so, then Alex’s dog must have recently had puppies. But if Alex’s dog had  
puppies, then at least one must be blond. When you find that none were blond, you conclude that the 
gift is not from Alex. This reasoning process, which begins with an assumption and proceeds backward, 
is similar to what you will use for indirect truth tables.
Indirect truth tables provide a shorter and faster method for testing the validity of 
arguments than do ordinary truth tables. This method is especially applicable to  
arguments that contain a large number of different simple propositions. For example, 
an argument containing five different simple propositions would require an ordinary 
truth table having thirty-two lines. The indirect truth table for such an argument, on 
the other hand, would usually require only a single line and could be constructed in a 
fraction of the time required for the ordinary truth table.
Indirect truth tables can also be used to test a series of statements for consistency. 
In Section 6.3 we showed how ordinary truth tables are used to test pairs of statements 
for consistency and we noted that consistency was a relation that applied to any group 
of propositions. In this section we use indirect truth tables to test groups of three, four, 
five, and six propositions for consistency. Given the abbreviated nature of indirect truth 
tables, this evaluation can usually be done much more quickly than it can with ordinary 
truth tables.
Preliminary Skills
Using indirect truth tables requires developing the skill to work backward from the 
truth value of the main operator of a compound statement to the truth values of its 
simple components. Suppose, for example, that you are given a conjunctive statement 
that is true:
A
B
     T
Because a conjunctive statement can be true in only one way, you know immediately 
that both A and B are true:
A
B
T  T  T
Suppose, on the other hand, that you are given a conditional statement that is false:
A  ⊃  B
      F

6
SECTION 6.5 Indirect Truth Tables   359
Since a conditional statement can be false in only one way, you know that A is true and 
B is false:
A  ⊃  B
T   F     F
But suppose you are given a conditional statement that is true:
A  ⊃  B
      T
Since a conditional statement can be true in three ways, you cannot compute the truth 
values of A and B. It could be the case that A is true and B is true, or A is false and B is 
true, or A is false and B is false. But let us suppose, in relation to this example, that you 
have one more piece of information. Suppose you know that B is false:
A  ⊃  B
     T     F
Then you know immediately that A is false. If A were true, then the truth value under 
the horseshoe would have to be false. But since this truth value is given as true, A must 
be false:
A  ⊃  B
F    T     F
Similarly, suppose you are given a disjunctive statement with these truth values:
A  ⋁  B
F   T
Then you know immediately that B is true, because if a disjunctive statement is true, at 
least one of the disjuncts must be true:
A  ⋁  B
F    T  T
Computing the truth values for the simple components of a compound proposition, 
as we have just done, requires a thorough knowledge of the truth-table definitions of 
the five operators given in Section 6.2. But after a little practice with examples such as 
these, this skill becomes almost automatic.
Testing Arguments for Validity
To construct an indirect truth table for an argument, we begin by assuming that the 
argument is invalid. That is, we assume that it is possible for the premises to be true and 
the conclusion false. Truth values corresponding to true premises and false conclusion 
are entered beneath the main operators for the premises and conclusion. Then, work-
ing backward, the truth values of the separate components are derived. If no contradic-
tion is obtained in the process, this means that it is indeed possible for the premises 
to be true and the conclusion false, as originally assumed, so the argument is therefore 
invalid. If, however, the attempt to make the premises true and the conclusion false 

360   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
necessarily leads to a contradiction, it is not possible for the premises to be true and the 
conclusion false, in which case the argument is valid. Consider the following symbol-
ized argument:
∼A ⊃ (B ⋁ C )
∼B	
	
C ⊃ A
We begin as before by writing the symbolized argument on a single line, placing a 
single slash between the premises and a double slash between the last premise and the 
conclusion. Then we assign T to the premises and F to the conclusion:
∼  A  ⊃  (B  ⋁  C )  /  ∼  B  / /  C  ⊃  A
	
T	
T	
F
We can now derive the truth values of B, C, and A, as follows:
∼  A  ⊃  (B  ⋁  C ) /  ∼  B  / /  C  ⊃  A
	
T	
T	 F	
T	 F	 F
These truth values are now transferred to the first premise:
∼   A   ⊃ ( B   ⋁    C )    /    ∼  B   / /   C   ⊃   A
T   F     T    F   T    T            T   F          T   F    F
We thus have a perfectly consistent assignment of truth values, which makes the prem-
ises true and the conclusion false. The argument is therefore invalid. If an ordinary 
truth table were constructed for this argument, it would be seen that the argument fails 
on the line on which A is false, B is false, and C is true. This is the exact arrangement 
found in the indirect truth table we just finished.
Here is another example. As always, we begin by assigning T to the premises and F 
to the conclusion:
A  ⊃  (B  ⋁  C )  /    B    ⊃  D  /  A  / /  ∼  C  ⊃  D
	 T	
T	
T	
F
From the conclusion we can now derive the truth values of C and D, which are then 
transferred to the first two premises:
A  ⊃  (B  ⋁   C )  /  B  ⊃  D  /  A  / /  ∼  C  ⊃  D
	 T	
	
	 F	
	 T	 F	
T	
T	 F	 F	 F
The truth value of B is now derived from the second premise and transferred, together 
with the truth value of A, to the first premise:
A  ⊃  (B  ⋁     C )  /  B  ⊃  D  /  A  / /  ∼  C  ⊃  D
T	 T	 F	 F	 F	
F	  T	 F	
   T	
   T	   F	   F	    F
A contradiction now appears in the truth values assigned to the first prmise, since  
T ⊃ F is F. The inconsistent truth values are circled. Because every step was strictly 
necessitated by some prior step, we have shown that it is impossible for the premises to 
be true and the conclusion false. The argument is therefore valid.

6
Sometimes a single row of truth values is not sufficient to prove an argument valid. 
Example:
∼  A  ⊃  B  /  B  ⊃  A  /  A  ⊃  ∼  B  / /  A
∼  B
	
T	
T	
    T	
F
Since a conditional statement can be true in any one of three ways, and a conjunctive 
statement can be false in any one of three ways, merely assigning truth to the premises 
and falsity to the conclusion of this argument is not sufficient to obtain the truth values 
of any of the component statements. When faced with a situation such as this, the best 
way of proceeding is either to list all of the possible ways that one of the premises can 
be true or all of the possible ways that the conclusion can be false, and to proceed from 
there. For this argument, let us select the conclusion. Since the conclusion is a false 
conjunctive statement, the first conjunct can be true and the other false, the first can be 
false and the other true, or they can both be false. Thus, we obtain the following:
∼  A   ⊃   B  /   B   ⊃   A  / A   ⊃  ∼  B   / /   A
∼  B
	
T	
T	
T	
T	 F	 F	 T
	
T	
T	
T	
F	 F	 T	 F
	
T	
T	
T	
F	 F	 F	 T
Extending the truth values of A and B to the premises, we obtain the following result:
∼  A  ⊃    B  /   B   ⊃   A  / A   ⊃  ∼  B  / /   A
∼  B
	
T	
T	
T      T      F      T	
T     F  F   T
T   F      T         F	
T	
T	
F     F    T   F
	
 T         T      T       F          T	
F     F    F    T
Since each line necessarily leads to a contradiction, the argument is valid. If a contradic-
tion had been avoided on some line, the argument would, of course, be invalid, because 
it would be possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. Note that in 
this argument it is not necessary to fill out all the truth values on any one line to be 
forced into a contradiction. On each line the contradiction is necessarily derived within 
the context of a single premise.
If an indirect truth table requires more than one line, the method to be followed is 
this: Either select one of the premises and compute all of the ways it can be made true, 
or select the conclusion and compute all of the ways it can be made false. This selection 
should be dictated by the requirement of simplicity. For example, if the conclusion can 
be made false in only two ways, while each of the premises can be made true in three 
ways, then select the conclusion. On the other hand, if one of the premises can be made 
true in only two ways while the conclusion can be made false in three ways, then select 
that premise. If neither of these situations prevails, then select the conclusion.
Having made your selection, proceed to compute the truth values of each line, be-
ginning with the first. If no contradiction is derived on this line, stop! The argument 
has been proved invalid. If a contradiction is derived on the first line, proceed to the 
second line. If no contradiction is derived on this line, then, again, the argument has 
been proved invalid. If a contradiction is derived, proceed to the third line, and so on.  
Remember, the objective is to produce a line having no contradiction. Once such a line 
SECTION 6.5 Indirect Truth Tables   361

362   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
is produced, the argument has been proved invalid, and no further work need be done. 
If, on the other hand, each line necessarily leads to a contradiction, the argument is valid.
Three final points need to be made about indirect truth tables for arguments. First, 
if a contradiction is obtained in the assignment of truth values, every step leading to it 
must be logically implied by some prior step. In other words, the contradiction must be 
unavoidable. If a contradiction is obtained after truth values are assigned haphazardly 
or by guessing, then nothing has been proved. The objective is not to produce a contra-
diction but to avoid one (if possible).
For example, in the following indirect truth table a contradiction is apparent in the 
first premise:
A  ⊃  B  /  C  ⊃  B  / /  A  ⊃  C
T   T   F	
F    T   F	
T   F   F
Yet the argument is invalid. The contradiction that appears is not required by the as-
signment of truth to the premises and falsity to the conclusion. The following indirect 
truth table, which is done correctly, proves the argument invalid:
A  ⊃  B  /  C  ⊃  B  / /  A  ⊃  C
T   T    T	
F  T   T	
T   F    F
The second point is that for valid arguments the order in which the truth values are 
assigned may affect where the contradiction is obtained. That is, depending on the or-
der of assignment, the contradiction may appear in the first premise, second premise, 
third premise, and so on. But, of course, the order of assignment does not affect the 
final determination of validity.
The last point is that it is essential that identical letters be assigned identical truth 
values. For example, if the letter A appears three times in a certain symbolized argu-
ment and the truth value T is assigned to it in one occurrence, then the same truth 
value must be assigned to it in the other occurrences as well. After the truth table has 
been completed, each letter should be rechecked to ensure that one and the same truth 
value has been assigned to its various occurrences.
Argument is
valid
Assume argument
invalid (true premises,
false conclusion)
Argument is
as assumed
(i.e., invalid)
No contradiction
Contradiction
Testing Statements for Consistency
The method for testing a series of statements for consistency is similar to the method 
for testing arguments. We begin by writing the statements on a line, separating each 

6
with a single slash mark. (Since we have no conclusion, we use no double slash marks.) 
Then we assume that the statements are consistent. We assign a T to the main operator 
of each, and we then compute the truth values of the components. If this computation 
leads necessarily to a contradiction, the statements are not as we assumed them to be. 
That is, they are inconsistent. But if no contradiction is reached, the statements are 
consistent. Here is an example:
A  ⋁  B
B  ⊃  (C  ⋁  A)
C  ⊃  ∼  B
∼A
First, we write the statements on a single line separated by a single slash mark; we then 
assign T to each of the main operators:
A    ⋁  B  /  B  ⊃  (C    ⋁  A)  /  C  ⊃  ∼  B  /  ∼  A
	
T	
T	
T	
 T
Next, we compute the truth values of the components. First we compute the truth val-
ue of A. Next, we enter this truth value in the first statement and compute the truth  
value of B. Next, we enter the truth value of B in the second statement and ­compute the 
truth value of C. Finally, the truth values of C and B are carried to the third statement:
A   ⋁  B  /  B  ⊃  (C     ⋁  A)  /  C  ⊃  ∼  B  /  ∼  A
F      T     T	
T    T	
T     T  F	
T   T       F     T	
T     F
Since this computation leads necessarily to a contradiction (third statement), the group 
of statements is inconsistent.
Statements are
inconsistent
Assume statements
consistent (assume all
of them true)
Statements
are as assumed
(i.e., consistent)
No contradiction
Contradiction
Here is another example. The statements are written on a single line, and a T is as-
signed to each of the main operators:
A  ⊃  (B 
C )  /  C  ⊃  ∼  A  /  B  ⋁  A  /  B  ⊃  C
	
T	
T	
T	
T
Since all of the statements can be true in three ways, we select one of them (the fourth) 
and figure all of the ways it can be true:
A  ⊃  (B
C )  /  C  ⊃  ∼  A  /  B   ⋁  A  /   B  ⊃  C
	    T	
T	
T	
T    T        T
	
	
	
	
	
F    T        T
	
	
	
	
	
F    T     F
SECTION 6.5 Indirect Truth Tables   363

364   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
T
he English logician and mathematician Augustus 
De Morgan is famous for the development of 
predicate quantification and the invention of re-
lational algebra—an algebra fundamental to the work 
of Russell and Whitehead in their Principia Mathematica. 
He is known to all students of symbolic logic owing 
to his formulation of what came to be known as De 
Morgan’s rule of inference.
De Morgan was born in Madura, India, where his 
father was employed by the East India Company. He 
became blind in one eye not long after birth, and after 
his family returned to England his fellow students often 
taunted him and played cruel tricks on him because of 
his disability. When he was ten, his father died coming 
home from another trip to India. This left the boy un-
der the influence of his mother, a devout Anglican who 
wanted her son to become an Anglican priest.
De Morgan obtained a BA from Trinity College, 
Cambridge, and might have received a master’s de-
gree but for the fact that Cambridge then required 
all candidates to take a theological test. Because of 
his commitment to the ideal of religious neutrality,  
De Morgan refused to take this test. Perhaps in re-
bellion against his mother’s influence, he developed 
a lifelong habit of avoiding churches, claiming that he 
could not bear hearing sermons. Following his refusal 
to take the exam, he continued his studies at Univer-
sity College London, a new institution founded on the 
principle of religious neutrality. At age twenty-two, he 
became the first professor of mathematics there.
Three years into his professorship, De Morgan be-
came involved in a disagreement with the administra-
tion regarding its treatment of a colleague. De Morgan 
led a faculty protest, and in the end he resigned his 
position on the faculty. Five years later, he returned to 
his former position after his replacement accidentally 
drowned. He re-
mained there for 
thirty years, until, 
at age sixty, he 
became involved 
in another admin-
istrative dispute—
this 
time 
over 
a 
decision 
that 
De Morgan con-
sidered to be in 
violation of the 
university’s stated 
policy of religious 
neutrality. He again resigned in protest, bringing his 
academic career to an end. Though active in academic 
politics, he curiously abstained from all involvement in 
national politics. An acquaintance once remarked that 
“he never voted in an election, and never visited the 
House of Commons.”
De Morgan was proud of his son, George, who be-
came a distinguished mathematician in his own right, 
and he was disconsolate at his son’s untimely death, 
which occurred when De Morgan was sixty-two. The 
death of a daughter, during that same period, com-
pounded his grief, and De Morgan died three years 
later, possibly owing to grief and stress.
De Morgan was known for his sense of humor and 
his interest in odd facts. He produced an almanac of 
full moons spanning a 4,000-year period. A lunar cra-
ter is named after him. He liked to point out that he 
was x years old in the year x2 (43 in 1849). He also 
enjoyed composing bits of verse in imitation of famous 
poets—for example, “Great fleas have little fleas upon 
their backs to bite ’em, and little fleas have lesser fleas, 
and so ad infinitum” (after Jonathan Swift).
Augustus De Morgan 1806–1871
eminentlogicians
© Hulton Archive/Getty Images
6

EXERCISE 6.5	
	 I.	 When possible, compute the truth values of the simple components in the follow-
ing compound propositions. If no truth value can be computed, write a question 
mark (?) under the letter or letters with unknown truth value.
	
★1.	 K ⋁ D
	
	 F T
	
2.	 Q ⊃ N
	
	     T
	
3.	 B   ≡    D
	
	        T   F
	
★4.	 N ⊃ G
	
	        T   T
	
5.	 S ⊃ B
	
	      T  F
	
6.	 K  B
	
	       T
	
★7.	 C ⋁ A
	
	       T F
	
8.	 S ≡ E
	
	      T
	
9.	 M ⊃ R
	
	 T   T
6
Filling out the first line leads to no contradiction, so the statements are consistent:
A  ⊃  (B
C )  /  C  ⊃  ∼  A  /  B  ⋁  A  /  B  ⊃  C
F	 T	
T   T    T        T    T       T    F	
T     T    F	
T     T     T
	
F     T     T
	
F     T     F
As with testing arguments, the objective is to avoid a contradiction. As soon as no 
contradiction is reached, we stop. The statements are consistent. Only if all three lines 
had led to a contradiction would these statements be inconsistent.
Rule for all multiline indirect truth tables
Contradiction is derived
Go to next line (if there is one).
No contradiction is derived
Stop. Argument is invalid/
Statements are consistent.
	 ★10.	 H ⋁ J
	
	 T  T
	
11.	 E ≡ P
	
	 T   F
	
12.	 H ⋁ S
	
	        T
	 ★13.	 C ⊃ P
	
	         F
	
14.	 G  B
	
	       F
	
15.	 S ≡  Q
	
	       T   F
	 ★16.	 G ⋁ K
	
	        F
	
17.	 N ⊃ ∼P
	
	 T T
	
18.	 ∼A ≡  D
	
	          F   T
SECTION 6.5 Indirect Truth Tables   365

6
	 ★19.	 ∼L ⊃ M
	
	        T    F
	
20.	 E ⊃ ∼M
	
	     T         F
	
21.	 ∼N ≡  R
	
	              F  F
	 ★22.	 ∼(H ⋁ B)
	
	 T
	
23.	 Q ⊃ (R  S )
	
	        T     F
	
24.	 K  ⊃  ∼(S ≡ M )
	
	 T   F          F
	 ★25.	 A ⋁ ∼(C  ∼R)
	
	 F T
	II.	 Use indirect truth tables to determine whether the following arguments are valid 
or invalid.
	
★1.	 B ⊃ C
	
	 ∼C   
	
	 ∼B
	
2.	 ∼E ⋁ F
	
	 ∼E   
	
	 ∼F   
	
3.	 P ⊃ (Q  R)
	
	 R ⊃ S          
	
	 P ⊃ S    
	
★4.	 ∼(I ≡  J )
	
	 ∼(I ⊃ J )
	
5.	 W ⊃ (X ⊃ Y )
	
	 X ⊃ (Y ⊃ Z )  
	
	 W ⊃ (X ⊃ Z )
	
6.	 A ⊃ (B ⋁ C )
	
	 C ⊃ (D  E )
	
	 ∼B                
	
	 A ⊃ ∼E
 
★7.	 G ⊃ H
	
	 H ⊃ I
	
	 ∼J ⊃ G
	
	 ∼I       
	
	 J
	
8.	 J ⊃ (∼L ⊃ ∼K )
	
	 K ⊃ (∼L ⊃ M )
	
	 (L ⋁ M ) ⊃ N    
	
	 J ⊃ N
	
9.	 P  (Q ⋁ R)
	
	 (P  R) ⊃ ∼(S ⋁ T )
	
	 (∼S ⋁ ∼T ) ⊃ ∼(P  Q)
	
	 S ≡  T
	 ★10.	 (M ⋁ N ) ⊃ O
	
	 O ⊃ (N ⋁ P )
	
	 M ⊃ (∼Q ⊃ N )
	
	 (Q ⊃ M) ⊃ ∼P 
	
	 N ≡  O
	
11.	 (A ⋁ B) ⊃ (C  D)
	
	 (∼A ⋁ ∼B) ⊃ E
	
	 (∼C ⋁ ∼D) ⊃ E
	
12.	 F ⊃ G
	
	 ∼H ⋁ I
	
	 (G ⋁ I ) ⊃ J
	
	 ∼J             
	
	 ∼(F ⋁ H )
	 ★13.	 (A ⋁ B) ⊃ (C  D)
	
	 (X ⋁ ∼Y ) ⊃ (∼C  ∼W )
	
	 (X ⋁ Z ) ⊃ (A  E )           
	
	 ∼X
	
14.	 ∼G ⊃ (∼H  ∼I )
	
	 J ⊃ H
	
	 K ⊃ (L  M )
	
	 K ⋁ J               
	
	 L  G
	
15.	 N ⋁ ∼O
	
	 P ⋁ O
	
	 P ⊃ Q
	
	 (N ⋁ Q) ⊃ (R  S)
	
	 S ⊃ (R ⊃ T )
	
	 O ⊃ (T ⊃ U )              
	
	 U
366   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   367
6
	III.	Use indirect truth tables to determine whether the following groups of statements 
are consistent or inconsistent.
	
★1.	 K ≡ (R ⋁ M )
	
	 K  ∼R
	
	 M ⊃ ∼K
	
2.	 F ≡ (A  ∼P )
	
	 A ⊃ (P  S )
	
	 S ⊃ ∼F
	
	 A  ∼F
	
3.	 (G ⋁ ∼Q) ⊃ (F ⋁ B)
	
	 ∼(F ⋁ Q)
	
	 B ⊃ N
	
	 (F ⋁ N ) ⊃ Q
	
★4.	 (N ⋁ C ) ≡ E
	
	 N ⊃ ∼(C ⋁ H )
	
	 H ⊃ E
	
	 C ⊃ H
	
5.	 P ⋁ ∼S
	
	 S ⋁ ∼T
	
	 T ⋁ ∼X
	
	 X ⋁ ∼J
	
	 J ⋁ ∼P
	
6.	 (Q ⋁ K ) ⊃ C
	
	 (C  F ) ⊃ (N ⋁ L)
	
	 C ⊃ (F  ∼L)
	
	 Q  ∼N
	
★7.	 S ⊃ (R ≡ A)
	
	 A ⊃ (W  ∼R)
	
	 R ≡ (W ⋁ T )
	
	 S  U
	
	 U ⊃ T
	
8.	 (E ⋁ H ) ⊃ (K  D)
	
	 D ⊃ (M  B)
	
	 B ⊃ ∼E
	
	 ∼(H ⋁ K )
	
	 D ⊃ B
	
9.	 G ⊃ P
	
	 P ⊃ (A
∼G )
	
	 (R ⋁ T ) ⊃ G
	
	 Y ⊃ R
	
	 B ⊃ T
	
	 Y ⋁ B
	 ★10.	 A ⋁ Z
	
	 A ⊃ (T
F )
	
	 Z ⊃ (M  Q)
	
	 Q ⊃ ∼F
	
	 T ⊃ ∼M
	
	 M ⊃ A
6.6	
Argument Forms and Fallacies
PREVIEW    If you have ever played a board game such as checkers or chess, you know that the 
motion of the pieces must conform to certain patterns. For example, in checkers a piece must always 
move diagonally. In chess a knight must always move in an “L” configura­tion. If you violate these pat-
terns, the opposing player will accuse you of cheating. Similarly, simple arguments must conform to 
certain patterns to be valid. If such an argument breaks the pattern, anyone familiar with logic will 
recognize the argument as a fallacy.
Many of the arguments that occur in propositional logic have forms that bear spe-
cific names and can be immediately recognized as either valid or invalid. The first part 
of this section presents some of the more common ones and explains how they are  
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

368   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
recognized. The second part discusses ways of refuting two of these forms, constructive 
and destructive dilemmas. The third part presents a word of caution relating to in-
valid forms. Finally, the fourth part applies to real-life arguments some of the principles  
developed in the first part.
Common Argument Forms
In Section 6.2 we defined a statement form as an arrangement of statement variables 
and operators such that the uniform substitution of statements in place of the vari-
ables results in a statement. An example of a statement form is p  q, where p and q are 
statement variables. Analogously, an argument form is an arrangement of statement 
variables and operators such that the uniform substitution of statements in place of the 
variables results in an argument. The resulting argument is said to be a substitution 
instance of its related argument form. For example, the following arrangement of state-
ment variables and an operator is an argument form:
p
q
p
If the statements A and B are uniformly substituted in place of the p and q of the argu-
ment form, we obtain the following substitution instance, which is an argument:
A
B
A
We can think of the relationship between an argument and its form as analogous to 
the relationship between an animal and its skeleton. Just as a skeleton can carry a lot of 
flesh, so can an argument form, so to speak. The following argument has the form we 
just considered.
[G ⊃ (  J ⋁ K 
H ⋁ N ) ⊃ L]
[G ⊃ (  J ⋁ K )]
A valid argument form is an argument form that satisfies the truth-table test.
The first valid argument form we consider is disjunctive syllogism, which is defined 
as follows:
Disjunctive syllogism (DS):
p   ⋁ q
∼p   
q
The validity of this form can be easily checked by a truth table. Now, given that validity 
is purely a function of the form of an argument, any argument produced by uniformly 
substituting statements in place of the variables in this argument form is a valid argu-
ment. Such an argument is said to have the form of a disjunctive syllogism. The follow-
ing argument was produced in this way and is therefore valid:

6
Either Harvard or Princeton is in New Jersey.	
H ⋁ P
Harvard is not in New Jersey.	
∼H   
Therefore, Princeton is in New Jersey.	
P
The validity of a disjunctive syllogism arises from the fact that one of the premises 
presents two alternatives and the other premise eliminates one of those alternatives, 
leaving the other as the conclusion. This so-called “method of elimination” is essential 
to the validity of a disjunctive syllogism. If one premise should present two alternatives 
and the other premise should affirm one of those alternatives, the argument is invalid 
(unless the conclusion is a tautology). Example:
Either Harvard or Amherst is in Massachusetts.	
H ⋁ A
Harvard is in Massachusetts.	
H       
Therefore, Amherst is not in Massachusetts.	
∼A
Since both Harvard and Amherst are in Massachusetts, the premises are true and the 
conclusion is false. Thus, the argument is invalid. Because the wedge symbol designates 
inclusive disjunction, the disjunctive premise includes the possibility of both disjuncts 
being true. Thus, for the argument to be valid, the other premise must eliminate one 
of the disjuncts.
The next valid argument form we consider is pure hypothetical syllogism. It con-
sists of two premises and one conclusion, all of which are hypothetical (conditional) 
statements, and is defined as follows:
Pure hypothetical syllogism (HS):
p ⊃ q
q ⊃ r
p ⊃ r
Any argument that has the form of a pure hypothetical syllogism (that is, any argument 
that can be produced by uniformly substituting statements in place of the variables in 
the form) is a valid argument. Example:
If world population continues to grow, then cities	
 
will become hopelessly ­overcrowded.	
W ⊃ C
If cities become hopelessly overcrowded, then pollution	
 
will become intolerable.	
C ⊃ P
Therefore, if world population continues to grow, then pollution	
 
will become intolerable.	
W ⊃ P
The validity of a pure hypothetical syllogism is grounded in the fact that the prem-
ises link together like a chain. In the population argument, the consequent of the first 
premise is identical to the antecedent of the second. If the premises fail to link together 
in this way, the argument may be invalid. Example:
If Kevin Bacon is a man, then Kevin Bacon is a human being.	
M ⊃ H
If Kevin Bacon is a woman, then Kevin Bacon is a human being.	
W ⊃ H
Therefore, if Kevin Bacon is a man, then Kevin Bacon is a woman.	
M ⊃ W
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   369

370   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
The premises of this argument are true, and the conclusion is false. Thus, the argument 
is invalid.
Another important valid argument form is called modus ponens (“asserting mode”). 
It consists of a conditional premise, a second premise that asserts the antecedent of the 
conditional premise, and a conclusion that asserts the consequent:
Modus ponens (MP):
p ⊃ q
p     
q
Any argument having the form of modus ponens is a valid argument. Example:
If twelve million children die yearly from starvation, then	
 
something is wrong with food distribution.	
T ⊃ S
Twelve million children die yearly from starvation.	
T       
Therefore, something is wrong with food distribution.	
S
Closely associated with modus ponens is modus tollens (“denying mode”). Modus  
tollens is a valid argument form consisting of one conditional premise, a second ­premise 
that denies the consequent of the conditional premise, and a conclusion that denies the 
antecedent. It is defined as follows:
Modus tollens (MT):
p ⊃ q
∼q     
∼p
Although a little harder to understand than modus ponens, modus tollens can be under-
stood by the following reasoning process: The conclusion states that we do not have p, 
because if we did have p, then (by the first premise) we would have q, and we do not 
have q (by the second premise). Any argument that has the form of modus tollens is a 
valid argument. Example:
If Japan cares about endangered species, then it has	
 
stopped killing whales.	
C ⊃ S
Japan has not stopped killing whales.	
∼S     
Therefore, Japan does not care about endangered species.	
∼C
Two invalid forms are closely associated with modus ponens and modus tollens. These 
are affirming the consequent and denying the antecedent. Affirming the ­consequent 
consists of one conditional premise, a second premise that asserts the ­consequent of  
the conditional, and a conclusion that asserts the antecedent:
Affirming the consequent (AC):
p ⊃ q
q     
p

6
Any argument that has the form of affirming the consequent is an invalid argument.* 
The following argument has this form and is therefore invalid:
If Napoleon was killed in a plane crash, then Napoleon is dead.	
K ⊃ D
Napoleon is dead.	
D       
Therefore, Napoleon was killed in a plane crash.	
K
Given that this argument has true premises and a false conclusion, it is clearly invalid.
Denying the antecedent consists of a conditional premise, a second premise that 
denies the antecedent of the conditional, and a conclusion that denies the consequent:
Denying the antecedent (DA):
p ⊃ q
∼p     
∼q
Any argument that has the form of denying the antecedent is an invalid argument. 
Example:
If Napoleon was killed in a plane crash, then Napoleon is dead.	
K ⊃ D
Napoleon was not killed in a plane crash.	
∼K     
Therefore, Napoleon is not dead.	
∼D
Again, this argument has true premises and a false conclusion, so it is clearly invalid.
A constructive dilemma is a valid argument form that consists of a conjunctive 
premise made up of two conditional statements, a disjunctive premise that asserts the 
antecedents in the conjunctive premise (like modus ponens), and a disjunctive conclu-
sion that asserts the consequents of the conjunctive premise. It is defined as follows:
Constructive dilemma (CD):
( p ⊃ q 
r ⊃ s)
  p  ⋁      r               
  q   ⋁   s
Any argument that has the form of a constructive dilemma is a valid argument. 
Example:
If we choose nuclear power, then we increase the risk 	
 
of a nuclear accident; but if we choose conventional	
 
power, then we add to the greenhouse effect.	
(N ⊃ I 
C ⊃ A)
We must choose either nuclear power or conventional	
 
power.	
 N  ⋁ C                
Therefore, we either increase the risk of a nuclear accident	
 
or add to the greenhouse effect.	
  I  ⋁ A
The destructive dilemma is also a valid argument form. It is similar to the 
constructive dilemma in that it includes a conjunctive premise made up of two  
* See “Note on Invalid Forms” later in this section.
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   371

372   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
conditional statements and a disjunctive premise. However, the disjunctive premise 
denies the consequents of the conditionals (like modus tollens), and the conclusion 
denies the antecedents:
Destructive dilemma (DD):
( p ⊃ q
r ⊃ s)
∼q ⋁ ∼s               
∼p ⋁ ∼r
Any argument that has the form of a destructive dilemma is a valid argument.  
Example:
If we are to reverse the greenhouse effect, then we	
 
must choose nuclear power; but if we are to lower	
 
the risk of a nuclear accident, then we must	
 
choose conventional power.	
(R ⊃ N 
L ⊃ C )
We will either not choose nuclear power or not	
 
choose conventional power.	
∼N ⋁ ∼C           
Therefore, we will either not reverse the greenhouse	
 
effect or not lower the risk of a nuclear accident.	
∼R ⋁ ∼L
Refuting Constructive and Destructive Dilemmas
Now that we are familiar with several argument forms in propositional logic, we may 
return for a closer look at two of them, constructive and destructive dilemmas. Argu-
ments having these forms occur frequently in public debate, where an arguer may use 
them to trap an opponent. Since both forms are valid, the only direct mode of defense 
available to the opponent is to prove the dilemma unsound. This can be done by prov-
ing at least one of the premises false. If the conjunctive premise (­otherwise called the 
 
“horns of the dilemma”) is proven false, the opponent is said to have “grasped the di-
lemma by the horns.” This, of course, may be done by proving either one of the condi-
tional statements false. If, on the other hand, the disjunctive premise is proven false, the 
opponent is said to have “escaped between the horns of the dilemma.” The latter strat-
egy often involves finding a third alternative that excludes the two that are given in the 
e.g.:
F
T
F
F
e.g.:
p v r
F F F
Grasping by the horns:
Prove the conjunctive
premise false by proving
either conjunct false
Escaping between the horns:
Prove the disjunctive
premise false
p 
 q 
r 
 s

6
disjunctive premise. If such a third alternative can be found, both of the given disjuncts 
will be proved false. Consider the following constructive dilemma:
If taxes increase, the economy will suffer, and if taxes decrease, needed government  
services will be curtailed. Since taxes must either increase or decrease, it follows that the 
economy will suffer or that needed government services will be curtailed.
It is easy to escape between the horns of this dilemma by arguing that taxes could be 
kept as they are, in which case they would neither increase nor decrease.
Some dilemmas, however, do not allow for the possibility of escaping between the 
horns. Consider the following constructive dilemma:
If we encourage competition, we will have no peace, and if we do not encourage  
competition, we will make no progress. Since we must either encourage competition or 
not encourage it, we will either have no peace or make no progress.
Since the disjunctive premise of this dilemma is a tautology, it cannot be proven false. 
This leaves the strategy of grasping the dilemma by the horns, which may be done by 
proving either of the conditional statements in the conjunctive premise false. One de-
bater might want to attack the first conditional and argue that competition and peace 
can coexist, while another might want to attack the second and argue that progress can 
be achieved through some means other than encouraging competition.
The strategy to be followed in refuting a dilemma is therefore this: Examine the 
disjunctive premise. If this premise is a tautology, attempt to grasp the dilemma by  
the horns by attacking one or the other of the conditional statements in the conjunc-
tive premise. If the disjunctive premise is not a tautology, then either escape between 
the horns by, perhaps, finding a third alternative, or grasp the dilemma by the horns—
whichever is easier.
A third, indirect strategy for refuting a dilemma involves constructing a counter-
dilemma. This is typically done by changing either the antecedents or the consequents 
of the conjunctive premise while leaving the disjunctive premise as it is, so as to obtain 
a different conclusion. If the dilemma in question is a constructive dilemma, the con-
sequents of the conjunctive premise are changed. Here are possible counterdilemmas 
for the two dilemmas just presented:
If taxes increase, needed government services will be extended, and if taxes decrease, 
the economy will improve. Since taxes must either increase or decrease, it follows that 
needed government services will be extended or the economy will improve.
If we encourage competition, we will make progress, and if we do not encourage compe-
tition, we will have peace. Since we must either encourage competition or not encourage 
it, we will either make progress or have peace.
Constructing a counterdilemma falls short of a refutation of a given dilemma because 
it merely shows that a different approach can be taken to a certain problem. It does not 
cast any doubt on the soundness of the original dilemma. Yet the strategy is often effec-
tive because it testifies to the cleverness of the debater who can accomplish it success-
fully. In the heat of debate the attending audience is often persuaded that the original 
argument has been thoroughly demolished.
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   373

374   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
Note on Invalid Forms
Throughout this book we have seen that any substitution instance of a valid argument 
form is a valid argument. For example, consider modus ponens:
p ⊃ q
p      
q    
Literally any two statements uniformly substituted in the place of p and q will result 
in a valid argument. Thus, the following symbolized arguments both have the form of 
modus ponens, and are accordingly valid:
S ⊃ T	
(K ⋁ B ) ⊃ (N
R )
S      	
 K ⋁ B                   
T	
 N
R
In the first argument S and T are uniformly substituted in the place of p and q, and in 
the second argument K ⋁ B and N  R are uniformly substituted in the place of p and q.
However, this result does not extend to invalid argument forms. Consider, for ex-
ample, affirming the consequent:
p ⊃ q
q       
p
Sometimes the uniform substitution of statements in the place of p and q results in an 
invalid argument, and sometimes it does not. Both of the following symbolized argu-
ments are substitution instances of affirming the consequent, but the one on the left is 
invalid while the one on the right is valid:
G ⊃ N	
(F ⋁ D) ⊃ (F
D)
N         	
 F 
D                   
G	
 F ⋁ D
To deal with this problem we adopt a convention about when an argument will be said 
to have an invalid form. We will say that an argument has an invalid form if it is a sub-
stitution instance of that form and it is not a substitution instance of any valid form. 
According to this convention only the argument on the left has the form of affirming 
the consequent. The argument on the right does not have this form because it is a sub-
stitution instance of the following valid form:
( p ⋁ q) ⊃ ( p
q )
  p
 q                    
 p ⋁ q
The validity of this form results from the fact that the conclusion follows from the 
second premise alone, without any involvement of the first premise. This fact may be 
­easily checked with a truth table.

6
Here is another invalid form:
p ⊃ q
r ⊃ q
p ⊃ r
Both of the following symbolized arguments are substitution instances of this form, but 
only the one on the left is invalid:
K ⊃ L	
∼C ⊃ A
R ⊃ L	
(C ⊃ E ) ⊃ A     
K ⊃ R	
∼C ⊃ (C ⊃ E )
The argument on the right is valid because its conclusion is a tautology. Accordingly, 
only the argument on the left will be said to have the invalid form in question.
The point of this discussion is that when we attempt to determine the validity of 
arguments through mere inspection, we have to exert caution with invalid forms. The 
mere fact that an argument is a substitution instance of an invalid form does not guar-
antee that it is invalid. Before judging it invalid we must make sure that it is not valid for 
some other reason, such as its conclusion being a tautology. However, as concerns the 
exercises at the end of this section, all of the arguments that are substitution instances 
of invalid forms are invalid. In other words, none of them is like either of the right-
hand examples considered in these paragraphs.
Summary and Application
Any argument having one of the following forms is valid:
p ⋁ q	
disjunctive	
p ⊃ q	
pure hypothetical
∼p    	
syllogism	
q ⊃ r	
syllogism (HS)
q	
(DS)	
p ⊃ r	
p ⊃ q	
modus ponens	
p ⊃ q	
modus tollens
p      	
(MP)	
∼q  	
(MT)
q	
	
∼p	
( p ⊃ q
r ⊃ s)	
constructive	
( p ⊃ q
r ⊃ s)	
destructive
   p  ⋁   r                	
dilemma	
 ∼q ⋁ ∼s             	
dilemma (DD)
 q   ⋁   s	
(CD)	
∼p ⋁ ∼r	
Any argument having either of the following forms is invalid:
p ⊃ q	
affirming the	
p ⊃ q	
denying the
q       	
consequent (AC)	
∼p    	
antecedent (DA)
p	
	
∼q	
	
In identifying arguments as having these argument forms, use the following proce-
dure. First symbolize the argument, using uppercase letters for the simple propositions. 
Then see whether the symbolized argument fits the pattern of one of these forms. For 
example, the following symbolized argument has the form of modus ponens, and is 
therefore valid:
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   375

376   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
K ⊃ R
K       
R
If K and R are substituted respectively in place of p and q in the modus ponens form, we 
obtain the symbolized argument in question.
However, not every attempt at argument recognition is as simple as this. For more- 
complicated cases it helps to keep two points in mind:
The order of the premises never affects the argument’s form.
Negated letters can be substituted in place of the p, q, r, and s of an argument form just 
as can non-negated letters.
In regard to the first point, consider these symbolized arguments:
N	
	
∼S
N ⊃ B	
S ⋁ F
B	
	
F
The argument on the left is modus ponens, and the one on the right is a disjunctive syl-
logism. To see this more clearly, simply switch the order of the premises.
In regard to the second point (involving negated letters), consider these examples:
∼G ⊃ ∼H	
∼K ⊃ ∼M
∼G           	
∼∼M        
∼H	 	
∼∼K
The argument on the left is modus ponens, and the one on the right is modus tollens. To 
produce the argument on the left, substitute ∼G in the place of p in the modus ponens 
form, and ∼H in the place of q. For the argument on the right, substitute ∼K in the 
place of p in the modus tollens form, and ∼M in the place of q.
Another problem that complicates the task of argument recognition arises from the 
fact that many arguments can be translated in alternate ways. Consider, for example, 
this argument:
Either the witness lied or Bob is guilty.
The witness told the truth.
Therefore, Bob is guilty.
If we select L to represent “The witness lied,” then the argument can be translated into 
symbols as follows:
L ⋁ B
∼L   
B
This symbolized argument is clearly an instance of disjunctive syllogism.
On the other hand, if we select T to represent “The witness told the truth,” then we 
have this translation:

6
∼T ⋁ B
T         
B
Technically this is not an instance of disjunctive syllogism, because the second premise, 
T, is not preceded by a tilde. To avoid this kind of difficulty in connection with alterna-
tive translations, we introduce two rules. They should be obvious, but if there is any 
doubt about them they can be proved using truth tables. The rules are as follows:
p is logically equivalent to ∼∼p.	
(Double Negation)
p ⋁ q is logically equivalent to q ⋁ p.	
(Commutativity)
According to the first rule, double tildes may be either inserted or deleted prior to any 
statement, and according to the second rule the order of the components in a disjunc-
tive statement may be reversed. Applying the double negation rule to the second prem-
ise of the symbolized argument above, we have
∼T ⋁ B
∼∼T   
B
After this change, the argument is now an instance of disjunctive syllogism.
For examples of how the commutativity rule is applied, consider these symbolized 
arguments:
M ⋁ E	
(R ⊃ L
T ⊃ K )
∼E      	
T ⋁ R                     
M    	
L ⋁ K
Technically the argument on the left is not an instance of disjunctive syllogism because 
the letters in the first premise are in the wrong order, and the argument on the right 
is not an instance of constructive dilemma because the letters in the second premise 
are in the wrong order. We can reverse the order of these letters by applying the com-
mutativity rule:
E ⋁ M	
( R ⊃ L 
T ⊃ K )
∼E     	
R ⋁ T                       
M    	
L ⋁ K
After these changes, the argument on the left is now clearly an instance of disjunctive 
syllogism, and the one on the right is an instance of constructive dilemma.
Here are some additional examples. In some cases the symbolized argument must 
be rewritten using double negation or commutativity before it fits the pattern of the 
argument form indicated.
∼A ⊃ ∼B	
	
A ⊃ ∼B	
∼B ⊃ C    	
HS—valid	
B ⊃ ∼C	
invalid
∼A ⊃ C	
	
A ⊃ ∼C	
∼A ⊃ ∼B	
	
∼A ⊃ B	
B              	
MT—valid	
A            	
DA—invalid
A	
	
∼B	
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   377

378   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
∼A ⋁ ∼B	
	
∼A ⋁ B	
A              	
DS—valid	
∼A      	
invalid
∼B	
	
B	
(A ⊃ ∼B 
∼C ⊃ D)	
	
(∼A ⊃ B 
C ⊃ ∼D)	
A ⋁ ∼C                      	
CD—valid	
B ⋁ ∼D                      	
invalid
∼B ⋁ D	
	
A ⋁ ∼C	
A ⋁ ∼B	
	
A ⊃ ∼B	
B          	
DS—valid	
∼B        	
AC—invalid
A	
	
A	
A	
	
A ⋁ C	
A ⊃ B	
MP—valid	
(A ⊃ B 
C ⊃ D)	
CD—valid
B        	
	
B   ⋁  D	
Let us now see how the argument forms presented in this section can be used to 
interpret the structure of some real-life arguments. Consider the following letter to the 
editor of a newspaper:
If U.S. servicemen are indeed being held in Southeast Asia, what is the motivation of their 
captors? No government there has asked for anything in return, as might be expected if 
they were deliberately holding Americans.
(Norm Oshrin)
This argument is enthymematic; in other words, it is missing certain parts. The author 
intends to prove that U.S. servicemen are not being held in Southeast Asia—because if 
they were, their captors would be demanding something for their return. The argument 
can thus be structured as a modus tollens:
If U.S. servicemen are being held in Southeast Asia, then their captors have demanded 
something for their return.
Their captors have not demanded something for their return.
Therefore, U.S. servicemen are not being held in Southeast Asia.
Here is another example:
In a time when an entire nation believes in Murphy’s law (that if anything can go wrong, 
it surely will) and has witnessed serious accidents in the highly regulated, supposedly fail-
safe nuclear industry, it’s fascinating that people can persist in the fantasy that an error 
will not occur in the area of nuclear weaponry.
(Burk Gossom, Newsweek)
Although this argument allows for more than one analysis, clearly the arguer pres-
ents two main reasons why we can expect an accident in the area of nuclear weaponry: 
“Murphy’s law” (which everyone believes to be true) dictates it, and accidents have 
occurred in the area of nuclear power (which is presumed fail-safe). Thus, at the very 
least, we can extract two modus ponens arguments from this selection:

EXERCISE 6.6	
	 I.	 Interpret the following symbolized arguments in light of the eight argument forms 
presented in this section. In some cases a symbolized argument must be rewritten 
using commutativity or double negation before it becomes an instance of one of 
these forms. Those not having a named form are invalid.
	
★1.	 N ⊃ C
	
	 ∼C     
	
	 ∼N
	
2.	 S ⊃ F
	
	 F ⊃ ∼L
	
	 S ⊃ ∼L
	
3.	 A ⋁ ∼Z
	
	 ∼Z        
	
	 A
	
★4.	 (S ⊃ ∼P )  (∼S ⊃ D)
	
	 S ⋁ ∼S             
	
	 ∼P ⋁ D
	
5.	 ∼N
	
	 ∼N ⊃ T
	
	 T
	
6.	 M ⋁ ∼B
	
	 ∼M     
	
	 ∼B
	
★7.	 (E ⊃ N )  (∼L ⊃ ∼K )
	
	 ∼N ⋁ K            
	
	 ∼E ⋁ L
6
If everyone believes Murphy’s law, then we can expect accidents in nuclear weaponry.
Everyone believes Murphy’s law.
Therefore, we can expect accidents in nuclear weaponry.
If accidents have occurred in nuclear power, then we can expect accidents in nuclear 
weaponry.
Accidents have occurred in nuclear power.
Therefore, we can expect accidents in nuclear weaponry.
Many arguments that we encounter in ordinary life can be interpreted as instances of 
valid argument forms. After being so interpreted, however, not all will turn out sound. 
The invalid forms (denying the antecedent and affirming the consequent) should be 
reserved for the relatively few arguments that are clearly invalid as originally expressed.
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   379
	
8.	 W ⊃ ∼M
	
	 ∼M   
	
	 W
	
9.	 ∼B ⊃ ∼L
	
	 G ⊃ ∼B
	
	 G ⊃ ∼L
	 ★10.	 F ⊃ O
	
	 ∼F     
	
	 ∼O
	
11.	 (K ⋁ B)  (N ⋁ Q)
	
	 K ⋁ N          
	
	 B ⋁ Q
	
12.	 X
	
	 X ⊃ ∼E
	
	 ∼E
	 ★13.	 P ⋁ ∼S
	
	 S         
	
	 P
	
14.	 B  T
	
	 T     
	
	 ∼B

6
	
15.	 ∼R ⋁ ∼Q
	
	 (G ⊃ Q)  (H ⊃ R)
	
	 ∼G ⋁ ∼H
	 ★16.	 ∼G ⊃ H
	
	 H         
	
	 ∼G
	
17.	 K ⊃ ∼C
	
	 C            
	
	 ∼K
	
18.	 (I ⊃ M )  (∼O ⊃ A)
	
	 ∼O ⋁ I          
	
	 M ⋁ A	
★19.	   X ⊃ ∼F
	
	 W ⊃ ∼F
	
	 W ⊃ X	
  20.	   ∼L ⊃ U
	
	  L            
	
	  ∼U
	II.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic notation and then interpret them 
in light of the eight argument forms presented in this section. In some cases a 
symbolized argument must be rewritten using commutativity or double negation  
before it becomes an instance of one of these forms. Those not having a named 
form are invalid.
	
★1.	 A Boeing 757 crashed into the Pentagon on 9/11 only if two giant engines 
were found outside the building. It is not the case that two giant engines were 
found outside the building. Therefore, a Boeing 757 did not crash into the 
Pentagon on 9/11.
	
2.	 If Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, then he was familiar 
with stories from the Old Testament. Michelangelo was familiar with stories 
from the Old Testament. Therefore, Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the 
Sistine Chapel.
	
3.	 If you enter the teaching profession, you will have no money for vacations; 
and if you do not enter the teaching profession, you will have no time for 
vacations. Since you must either enter or not enter the teaching profession, it 
follows that either you will have no money or no time for vacations.
	
★4.	 Either the wealthiest people are the happiest, or it is not the case that money 
can buy everything. The wealthiest people are not the happiest. Therefore, 
money cannot buy everything.
	
5.	 Either drivers are forbidden to send text messages, or the highways will not 
become safer. Drivers are forbidden to send text messages. Therefore, the 
highways will become safer.
	
6.	 If the sun is a variable star, then its energy will drop drastically at some point 
in the future. If the sun’s energy drops drastically at some point in the future, 
then the Earth will become a giant iceball. Therefore, if the sun is a variable 
star, then the Earth will become a giant ice ball.
	
★7.	 Nano-thermite is present in the debris from the World Trade Center. But if 
that is so, then the buildings were brought down by controlled demolition. 
Therefore, the buildings were brought down by controlled demolition.
380   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
	
8.	 If TV viewing provides genuine relaxation, then TV enhances the quality of 
life. But TV viewing does not provide genuine relaxation. Therefore, TV does 
not enhance the quality of life.
	
9.	 If high school clinics are to stem the tide of teenage pregnancy, then they must 
dispense birth-control devices; but if they want to discourage illicit sex, then 
they must not dispense these devices. Since high school clinics must either  
dispense or not dispense birth-control devices, either they will not stem the 
tide of teenage pregnancy, or they will not discourage illicit sex.
	 ★10.	 If limits are imposed on medical-malpractice suits, then patients will not be 
adequately compensated for their injuries; but if the cost of malpractice insur-
ance continues to rise, then physicians will be forced out of business. Limits 
will not be imposed, and the cost of malpractice insurance will not continue 
to rise. Therefore, patients will be adequately compensated and physicians will 
not be forced out of business.
	
11.	 If Prohibition succeeded in the 1920s, then the war on drugs will succeed 
today. But Prohibition did not succeed in the 1920s. Therefore, the war on 
drugs will not succeed today.
	
12.	 If life is always better than death, then people do not commit suicide. People 
do commit suicide. Therefore, life is not always better than death.
	 ★13.	 If we want to arrest criminals, then police must engage in high-speed chases; 
but if we want to protect motorists, then police must not engage in high-speed 
chases. Since police must either engage or not engage in high-speed chases, 
either we will not arrest criminals or not protect motorists.
	
14.	 Either industrial pollutants will be more stringently controlled, or acid rain 
will continue to fall. Industrial pollutants will be more stringently controlled. 
Therefore, acid rain will not continue to fall.
	
15.	 Insurance companies contribute millions of dollars to political campaigns. 
But if that is so, then meaningful insurance reform is impossible. Therefore, 
meaningful insurance reform is impossible.
	 ★16.	 If Mexico does not get its population growth under control, then its unem-
ployment problem will never be solved. Mexico’s unemployment problem 
will never be solved. Therefore, Mexico will not get its population growth  
under control.
	
17.	 Either the dinosaurs were not cold blooded or they were not the ancestors of 
modern birds. The dinosaurs were the ancestors of modern birds. Therefore, 
the dinosaurs were not cold blooded.
	
18.	 If coal burning continues, then heavy metals will be released into the atmo-
sphere. If heavy metals are not released into the atmosphere, then nervous-
system damage will decrease. Therefore, if coal burning does not continue, 
then nervous-system damage will decrease.
	 ★19.	 If sea levels rise twenty feet worldwide, then coastal cities from New York 
to Sydney will be inundated. If the ice sheets on Antarctica slip into the sea, 
then sea levels will rise twenty feet worldwide. Therefore, if the ice sheets on  
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   381

6
Antarctica slip into the sea, then coastal cities from New York to Sydney will 
be inundated.
	
20.	 If tax credits are given for private education, then the government will be sup-
porting religion; but if tax credits are not given for private education, then 
some parents will end up paying double tuition. Either tax credits will or will 
not be given for private education. Therefore, either the government will be 
supporting religion, or some parents will end up paying double tuition.
	III.	Identify the following dilemmas as either constructive or destructive. Then sug-
gest a refutation for each by escaping between the horns, grasping by the horns, or 
constructing a counterdilemma.
	
★1.	 If Melinda spends the night studying, she will miss the party; but if she does 
not spend the night studying, she will fail the test tomorrow. Melinda must 
either spend the night studying or not studying. Therefore, she will either miss 
the party or fail the test.
	
2.	 If we build our home in the valley, it will be struck by floods; and if we build it 
on the hilltop, it will be hit by lightning. Since we must either build it in the val-
ley or on the hilltop, our home will either be struck by floods or hit by lightning.
	
3.	 If psychotherapists respect their clients’ right to confidentiality, then they will 
not report child abusers to the authorities; but if they have any concern for the 
welfare of children, then they will report them. Psychotherapists must either 
report or not report child abusers to the authorities. Therefore, psychothera-
pists either have no respect for their clients’ right to confidentiality or no con-
cern for the welfare of children.
	
★4.	 If corporations are to remain competitive, then they must not spend money 
to neutralize their toxic waste; but if the environment is to be preserved, then 
corporations must spend money to neutralize their toxic waste. Corporations 
either will or will not spend money to neutralize their toxic waste. Therefore, 
either they will not remain competitive, or the environment will be destroyed.
	
5.	 If physicians pull the plug on terminally ill patients, then they risk being 
charged with murder; but if they do not pull the plug, they prolong their pa-
tients’ pain and suffering. Since physicians with terminally ill patients must do 
one or the other, either they risk being charged with murder or they prolong 
their patients’ pain and suffering.
	
6.	 If the Mitchells get a divorce, they will live separately in poverty; but if they stay 
married, they will live together in misery. Since they must either get a divorce 
or stay married, they will either live separately in poverty or together in misery.
	
★7.	 If college students want courses that are interesting and rewarding, then they 
must major in liberal arts; but if they want a job when they graduate, then 
they must major in business. College students will either not major in liberal 
arts, or they will not major in business. Therefore, either they will not take 
courses that are interesting and rewarding, or they will not have a job when 
they graduate.
382   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
	
8.	 If merchants arrest suspected shoplifters, then they risk false imprisonment; 
but if they do not arrest them, they risk loss of merchandise. Merchants must 
either arrest or not arrest suspected shoplifters. Therefore, they will either risk 
false imprisonment or loss of merchandise.
	
9.	 If women threatened with rape want to avoid being maimed or killed, then 
they must not resist their assaulter; but if they want to ensure successful 
­prosecution of the assailant, they must resist him. Since women threatened 
with rape must do one or the other, either they will risk being maimed or 
killed or they will jeopardize successful prosecution of the assailant.
	 ★10.	 If we prosecute suspected terrorists, then we risk retaliation by other terror-
ists; but if we release them, then we encourage terrorism. Since we must either 
prosecute or release suspected terrorists, we either risk retaliation by other 
terrorists or we encourage terrorism.
	IV.	 The following dialogue contains at least fifteen arguments. Translate each into 
symbolic notation, and then interpret them in light of the eight argument forms 
presented in this section.
A Little Help from a Friend
“I can only talk for a minute,” Liz says to her friend Amy. “I have this bio midterm tomor-
row, and I’m afraid I’m going to fail it.” 
	
“Okay,” Amy replies. “I’ll cut out after a minute or two. But why are you so afraid?”
	
“Because I really haven’t studied at all. I figure if I don’t pull an all-nighter, I’ll fail the test. 
But I can’t fail the test, so I must pull the all-nighter.”
	
“I don’t envy you,” says Amy, digging in her purse. “But I have this little tablet of  
Adderall that might get you through.  As I see it, either you take the tab or you’ll fall asleep by  
midnight. But you can’t fall asleep, so you must take the tab.”
	
Liz stares at the little orange pill. “Adderall is for attention deficit disorder. You don’t 
have that, do you?”
	
“No,” says Amy. “I got the tab from my boyfriend, Zach, who talked the health clinic out 
of a whole bottle by faking ADD.”
	
“Wow,” says Liz. “Do you think it’s safe for me to take it?”
	
“Of course,” replies Amy. “Zach takes it all the time when he needs an extra spurt of en-
ergy, and he’s had no adverse reactions. I’ve even tried it once or twice. If it’s safe for Zach, 
then it’s safe for me, and if it’s safe for me, then it’s safe for you. The conclusion is obvious.”
	
“And do you really think the Adderall will help me pass the test?” asks Liz.
	
“Absolutely,” says Amy. “If you take it, you’ll be totally focused for the test, and you must 
be focused. Hence, you take it, girl.” 
	
“I don’t know,” Liz says as she takes a closer look at the little pill. “If I take it, then I’ll feel like 
an athlete who takes performance-enhancing drugs. I’ll feel like I’m putting myself at an unfair 
advantage over the other students. I don’t want to do that, so maybe I shouldn’t take it.” 
	
She thinks for a moment and sighs. “Either I take the Adderall or I don’t. If I take it, I’ll 
feel like I cheated, but if I don’t take it, I’ll fail the test. Thus, I’ll feel like I cheated, or I’ll fail 
the test. Either way, I lose.”
	
Amy smiles. “There’s another way of looking at it. Either you take the Adderall or 
you don’t. If you take it, you’ll pass the test, and if you don’t take it, you’ll have a clear  
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   383

6
conscience. Thus, you’ll either pass the test or you’ll have a clear conscience. Either way, 
you win.”
	
“Very clever,” says Liz, “but that really doesn’t solve my problem.” 
	
“Okay,” says Amy. “But maybe your problem isn’t as bad as you think. Consider this: 
Older people take drugs all the time to help their memory and their sex lives. If it’s okay 
for them to take those drugs—and it is—then it’s okay for you to take the Adderall. You 
shouldn’t sweat it.”
	
“That’s true,” says Liz, “but those older people suffer from a medical condition. If I had 
ADD, I’d be justified in taking the Adderall, but I don’t. So I’m not justified.”
	
“Let’s look at it another way,” says Amy. “You could get through the night with lots of 
coffee and Red Bull. If it’s okay to drink coffee and Red Bull—and it is—then it’s okay to 
take the Adderall. The conclusion is clear.”
	
“Not quite,” says Liz. “Coffee and Red Bull aren’t really comparable to Adderall—at 
least not if it’s as good as you say it is. Suppose that I’m faced with this option: Either I drink 
lots of coffee and Red Bull, or I take the Adderall. I would say no to the coffee and Red Bull 
because it’s less effective, and it leaves me frazzled. Thus, I would take the Adderall. See, the 
two are not the same.”
	
“Maybe not,” says Amy, “but think about it this way. We take advantage of new technol-
ogy every day without giving it a second thought. We use cell phones instead of landlines 
because they’re more convenient. We use lightbulbs instead of candles because we see 
better with them. And we use Adderall instead of coffee because it makes us sharper. If it’s 
ethically okay to use cell phones, then it’s okay to use Adderall; and it’s certainly okay to 
use cell phones—just as it’s okay to use lightbulbs. Hence, it’s okay to use Adderall.”
	
“The problem with that line of reasoning,” Liz observes, “is that using lightbulbs and cell 
phones doesn’t put anyone at a competitive advantage. Everyone uses them, so we’re all 
on an equal footing. But not every student uses Adderall to pass a test. If everyone used it, 
I would have no problem with it. But not everyone uses it, so I do have a problem.”
	
“I can see your point,” Amy says. “At fifteen or twenty bucks a pop on the underground 
market, not every student can afford Adderall. If it were cheap, then everyone would use 
it. But it’s not cheap, so many students don’t.” 
	
Amy smiles again at her friend. “Messy stuff,” she says. “So, what do you think you’ll do?”
	
“I don’t know.” Liz groans and puts her face in her hands. “But leave that tab on my desk. 
I’ll see how it goes. . . . I’ll give myself until midnight.”
	V.	 The following selections were taken from letters-to-the-editors newspaper 
columns. Each contains one or more arguments, but the exact form of the argument 
may be hidden or ambiguous. Use the argument forms presented in this section to 
structure the selections as specifically named arguments.
	
★1.	 There is a simple way to put a big dent in the national human-organ shortage: 
Allocate organs first to the people who have agreed to donate their own. Giv-
ing organs first to registered donors would persuade more people to register, 
and that would make the allocation system fairer. People who aren’t willing to 
share the gift of life should go to the end of the waiting list.
(David J. Undis)
	
2.	 Okay, I’ve tried it for a week again this year, but I still don’t like daylight saving 
time. My grass is brown enough already—it doesn’t need another hour of daylight 
each day. Let’s turn the clocks back to the way God intended—­standard time.
( Jim Orr)
384   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic

6
	
3.	 The religious right, in its impassioned fervor to correct our alleged moral 
wrongs and protect the rights of our unborn “children,” may one day realize its 
ultimate goal of a constitutional amendment banning abortion. And what will 
the punishment be for those caught performing or receiving an abortion? The 
death penalty, of course.
(David Fisher)
 
★4.	 Most educators believe math instructors ought to emphasize group problem 
solving. If group problem solving is so important (and I think it is), why do we 
place such emphasis on individual testing? The national math test is a mistake.
(Frederick C. Thayer)
	
5.	 If voluntary school prayer for our children is going to make them more moral, 
then just think what mandatory church attendance on Sunday could do for 
the rest of us.
(Roderick M. Boyes)
	
6.	 A country that replaces the diseased hearts of old white men but refuses to 
feed schoolchildren, pay women adequately, educate adolescents, or care for 
the elderly—that country is doomed. We are acting as if there is no tomorrow. 
Where is our shame?
(Robert Birch)
 
★7.	 We cannot afford to close the library at Central Juvenile Hall. These 
young people, in particular, need to have access to ideas, dreams, and al-
ternative ways of living. It can make the difference for many students who 
might become interested in reading for the first time in their lives while in  
Juvenile Hall.
(Natalie S. Field)
	
8.	 If the death penalty deters one person from becoming a murderer, it is effec-
tive. There are also some other important reasons for having the death pen-
alty. First, the families and friends of innocent victims have the right to see 
effective retribution. Second, terminating the life of a killer is more economi-
cal than keeping him in jail at the taxpayer’s expense. Third, everyone will 
have greater respect for the judicial system when justice is carried out.
(Doug Kroker)
	
9.	 Regarding the bill to require parental consent for a minor’s abortion, I would 
like to point out that the pious platitudes about parental authority quickly fall 
by the wayside when the minor wants to keep the baby and the parents say, 
“Don’t be silly! You have an abortion and finish your education.” If the ­parents 
can veto a minor’s abortion, shouldn’t they also be able to require one? Better 
the choice, either pro or con, be left to the girl/woman herself.
( Jane Roberts)
	 ★10.	 More than a million adult videos are rented each week. Nor, as the propagan-
dists would have you believe, does viewing such material lead to violent sex 
crimes. If it did, there would be over one million such crimes per week.
(Lybrand P. Smith)
SECTION 6.6 Argument Forms and Fallacies   385
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

386   CHAPTER 6 Propositional Logic
6
	
Summary
Propositional Logic:
• The fundamental units are whole statements (propositions).
• Simple statements are represented by capital letters (A, B, C, etc.).
• These are combined via logical operators to form compound statements.
• The logical operators:
■
■
Tilde (∼) forms negations (“not,” “it is not the case that”).
■
■
Dot ( ) forms conjunctions (“and,” “also,” “moreover,” etc.).
■
■
Wedge (⋁) forms disjunctions (“or,” “unless”).
■
■
Horseshoe (⊃) forms conditionals (“if . . . then,” “only if,” etc.).
■
■
Triple bar (≡) forms biconditionals (“if and only if,” etc.).
Truth Table:
• An arrangement of truth values that shows in every possible case how the truth value of 
a compound statement is determined by the truth values of its components.
• Used to define the meaning of the five logical operators:
■
■
∼p is true only when p is false.
■
■
p  q is true only when both p and q are true.
■
■
p ⋁ q is false only when both p and q are false.
■
■
p ⊃ q is false only when p is true and q is false.
■
■
p ≡ q is true only when p and q have the same truth value.
• Used to classify individual compound statements:
■
■
Tautologous: Truth values under main operator are all true.
■
■
Self-contradictory: Truth values under main operator are all false.
■
■
Contingent: Under main operator : at least one true, at least one false.
• Used to compare one compound statement with another:
■
■
Logically equivalent: Truth values under main operators are the same on each line.
■
■
Contradictory: Truth values under main operators are opposite on each line.
■
■
Consistent: There is at least one line under main operators where all of the truth 
values are true.
■
■
Inconsistent: There is no line under main operators where all of the truth values  
are true.
• Used to test arguments for validity:
■
■
Invalid: There is a line on which all the premises are true and the conclusion false.
■
■
Valid: There is no such line.
Indirect Truth Table: A usually shorter truth table constructed by first assigning truth values 
to the main operators and then working backward to the simple components.
• Used to test arguments for validity:
■
■
Begin by assuming the premises true and the conclusion false.
■
■
Valid: Assumption necessarily leads to a contradiction.
■
■
Invalid: Assumption does not necessarily lead to a contradiction.

6
Summary   387
• Used to test a series of statements for consistency:
■
■
Begin by assuming all of the statements true.
■
■
Inconsistent: Assumption necessarily leads to a contradiction.
■
■
Consistent: Assumption does not necessarily lead to a contradiction.
Argument Forms and Fallacies:
• Valid forms:
■
■
Disjunctive syllogism: p ⋁ q / ∼p // q
■
■
Pure hypothetical syllogism: p ⊃ q / q ⊃ r // p ⊃ r
■
■
Modus ponens: p ⊃ q / p // q
■
■
Modus tollens: p ⊃ q / ∼q // ∼p
■
■
Constructive dilemma: (p ⊃ q)  (r ⊃ s) / p ⋁ r // q ⋁ s
■
■
Destructive dilemma ( p ⊃ q)  (r ⊃ s) / ∼q ⋁ ∼s // ∼p ⋁ ∼r
• Invalid forms (fallacies):
■
■
Affirming the consequent: p ⊃ q / q // p
■
■
Denying the antecedent: p ⊃ q / ∼p // ∼q
• Logical equivalencies:
■
■
p is logically equivalent to ∼∼p
■
■
p ⋁ q is logically equivalent to q ⋁ p

388
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.
7
7.1 	 Rules of Implication I
7.2	 Rules of Implication II
7.3	 Rules of Replacement I
7.4	 Rules of Replacement II
7.5	 Conditional Proof
7.6	 Indirect Proof
7.7	 Proving Logical Truths
7.1	
Rules of Implication I
PREVIEW
  Suppose you are going on a hike. The departure point and the ending point have been 
predetermined, as have the supplies you will take. You have been given a trail map with several alternate 
routes. Such a hike is similar to solving the problems in this section of the book. The departure point 
and supplies are like premises, the ending point is like the conclusion, and the alternate routes are like 
the intermediate steps linking the premises to the conclusion. In most cases the choice of routes allows 
for creativity.
Natural deduction is a method for deriving the conclusion of valid arguments  
expressed in the symbolism of propositional logic. The method consists in using 
sets of rules of inference (valid argument forms) to derive either a conclusion di-
rectly, or a series of intermediate conclusions that links the premises of an argument  
with the stated conclusion. Natural deduction gets its name from the fact that it resem-
bles the ordinary step-by-step reasoning process people use in daily life. It also resembles  
the method used in geometry to derive theorems relating to lines and figures; but 
whereas each step in a geometrical proof depends on some mathematical principle, 
each step in a logical proof depends on a rule of inference.
	
Natural deduction is similar in some respects to the truth table method for testing 
arguments. Both methods can be used to prove a valid argument valid; but natural de-
duction is largely useless for invalid arguments, so we still need truth tables. However, 
the method of natural deduction is more illuminating than truth tables are. Natural  
Natural Deduction 
in Propositional Logic

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   389
7
deduction shows how a conclusion “comes out” of the premises, whereas truth tables 
show nothing of the sort. Also, while truth tables are relatively automatic and mechanical,  
natural deduction requires insight and creativity. As a result, most students find that 
natural deduction is challenging and fun, while truth tables can be tedious, especially 
for long arguments.
	
The first eight rules of inference are called rules of implication because they consist 
of simple, valid argument forms whose premises imply their conclusions. The first four 
rules of implication should be familiar from Section 6.6. They are listed together with 
an illustration of their use as follows.
1.  Modus ponens (MP)
	 p ⊃ q	
	
If Su Lin is a panda, then Su Lin is cute.
	 p       	
	
Su Lin is a panda.	 	
	
  	
	 q	
	
Su Lin is cute.
2.  Modus tollens (MT )
	 p ⊃ q	
	
If Koko is a koala, then Koko is cuddly.
 
∼q  	
	
Koko is not cuddly.	
	
 
 
∼p  	
	
Koko is not a koala.
3.  Pure hypothetical syllogism (HS)
	 p ⊃ q	
	
If Leo is a lion, then Leo roars.
	 q ⊃ r	
	
If Leo roars, then Leo is fierce. 
	 p ⊃ r	
	
If Leo is a lion, then Leo is fierce.
4.  Disjunctive syllogism (DS)
	 p ⋁ q	
	
Scooter is either a mouse or a rat.
	 ∼p  	
	
Scooter is not a mouse.	
       
	 q	
	
Scooter is a rat.
Modus ponens says that given a conditional statement and its antecedent on lines 
by themselves, we can assert its consequent on a line by itself. Modus tollens says that  
given a conditional statement and the negation of its consequent on lines by them-
selves, we can assert the negation of its antecedent on a line by itself. Pure hypothetical 
syllogism (“hypothetical syllogism” for short) says that given two conditional state-
ments on lines by themselves such that the consequent of one is identical with the 
antecedent of the other, we can assert on a line by itself a conditional statement whose 
antecedent is the antecedent of the first conditional and whose consequent is the con-
sequent of the second conditional. Note in the rule that the two premises hook together 
like links of a chain.
	
Disjunctive syllogism says that given a disjunctive statement and the negation of the 
left-hand disjunct on lines by themselves, we can assert the right-hand disjunct on a line 
by itself. Because of the way this rule is written, only the right-hand disjunct can be assert-
ed as the conclusion. However, once we are supplied with the commutativity rule (see Sec-
tion 7.3), we will be able to switch the order of the disjuncts in the first line, and this will 
allow us to assert what was originally the left-hand disjunct as the conclusion. Disjunctive 
syllogism is otherwise called the method of elimination. The short premise eliminates one 
of the alternatives in the disjunctive premise, leaving the other as the conclusion.

390   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
These four rules will be sufficient to derive the conclusion of many simple argu-
ments in propositional logic. Further, once we are supplied with all eighteen rules to-
gether with conditional proof, the resulting system will be sufficient to derive the con-
clusion of any valid argument in propositional logic. Conversely, since each rule is a 
valid argument form unto itself, any conclusion derived from their correct use results 
in a valid argument.
Applying the rules of inference rests on the ability to visualize more- or less-complex 
arrangements of simple propositions as substitution instances of the rules. For a fairly 
simple substitution instance of modus ponens, consider the following:
1.  ∼A ⊃ B	
p ⊃ q
2.	 ∼A	
p       
3.	 B	
q
When ∼A and B are mentally substituted, respectively, in place of the p and q of the 
modus ponens rule, then you should be able to see that the argument on the left is an 
instance of the rule. The fact that A is preceded by a tilde is irrelevant.
Here is a more complex example:
1.	 (A
B) ⊃ (C ⋁ D)	
p ⊃ q
2.	 A
B	
p       
3.	 C ⋁ D	
q
In this case, if you mentally substitute A  B and C ⋁ D, respectively, in place of p and 
q in the rule, you can see that the argument on the left is an instance of modus ponens. 
This example illustrates the fact that any pair of compound statements can be uni-
formly substituted in place of p and q to produce a substitution instance of the rule.
Finally, the order of the premises never makes a difference:
1.	 A	
p
2.	 A ⊃ (B ⊃ C )	
p ⊃ q
3.	 B ⊃ C	
q
In this case, if you mentally substitute A and B ⊃ C in place of p and q, you can see, 
once again, that the argument on the left is an instance of modus ponens. The fact that 
the order of the premises is reversed makes no difference.
These arguments are all instances of modus ponens (MP):
Now let us use the rules of inference to construct a proof. Such a proof consists 
of a sequence of propositions, each of which is either a premise or is derived from  

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   391
7
preceding propositions by application of a rule of inference and the last of which is the 
conclusion of the original argument. Let us begin with the following example:
If the Astros switch leagues,then the Braves will not win the pennant. 
If the Cubs retain their manager, then the Braves will win the pennant. 
The Astros will switch leagues. Therefore, the Cubs will not retain their manager.
The first step is to symbolize the argument, numbering the premises and writing the 
intended conclusion to the right of the last premise, separated by a slash mark:
1.  A ⊃ ∼B
2.  C ⊃ B
3.  A	
/  ∼C
The next step is to derive the conclusion through a series of inferences. For this 
step, always begin by trying to “find” the conclusion in the premises. The conclu-
sion to be derived is ∼C, and we see that C appears in the antecedent of line 2.  
We could derive ∼C from line 2 by modus tollens if we had ∼B, so now we look for 
∼B. Turning our attention to line 1, we see that we could derive ∼B by modus ponens 
if we had A, and we do have A on line 3. Thus, we have now thought through the 
entire proof, and we can begin to write it out. First, we derive ∼B by modus ponens 
from lines 1 and 3:
1.  A ⊃ ∼B
2.  C ⊃ B
3.  A	
/  ∼C
4.  ∼B	
1, 3, MP
The justification for line 4 is written to the right, directly beneath the slash mark. If you 
have trouble understanding how line 4 was derived, imagine substituting A and ∼B in 
place of p and q in the modus ponens rule. Then you can see that lines 1, 3, and 4 con-
stitute a substitution instance of that rule.
The final step is to derive ∼C from lines 2 and 4 by modus tollens:
1.  A ⊃ ∼B
2.  C ⊃ B
3.  A	
/  ∼C
4.  ∼B	
1, 3, MP
5.  ∼C	
2, 4, MT
The proof is now complete. The justification for line 5 is written directly beneath the 
justification for line 4.
These arguments are all instances of modus tollens (MT):
(D v F) 
K
K
(D v F)
G 
(M v N)
(M v N)
G
T
[(H v K) (L v N)] 
T
[(H v K) (L v N)]

392   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
The next example is already translated into symbols:
1.  A ⊃ B
2.  ∼A ⊃ (C ⋁ D)
3.  ∼B
4.  ∼C	
/  D
Once again, to derive the conclusion, always begin by trying to “find” it in the premises. 
The intended conclusion is D, and after inspecting the premises we find D in line 2. 
If we had the consequent of that line, C ⋁ D, on a line by itself, we could derive D by 
disjunctive syllogism if we had ∼C. And we do have ∼C on line 4. Also, we could derive  
C ⋁ D by modus ponens if we had ∼A, so now we look for ∼A. Turning our attention to 
line 1, we see that we could derive ∼A by modus tollens if we had ∼B, and we do have ∼B 
on line 3. Thus, we have now thought through the entire proof, and we can write it out:
1.  A ⊃ B
2.  ∼A ⊃ (C ⋁ D)
3.  ∼B
4.  ∼C	
/  D
5.  ∼A	
1, 3, MT
6.  C ⋁ D	
2, 5, MP
7.  D	
4, 6, DS
As usual, the justification for each line is written directly beneath the slash mark 
preceding the intended conclusion. If you have trouble understanding line 6, imagine 
substituting ∼A and C ⋁ D in place of p and q in the modus ponens rule. Then you can 
see that lines 2, 5, and 6 constitute a substitution instance of that rule.
 
These arguments are all instances of pure hypothetical syllogism (HS):
Here is another example.
1.  F ⊃ G
2.  F ⋁ H
3.  ∼G
4.  H ⊃ (G ⊃ I )	
/  F ⊃ I
The intended conclusion is F ⊃ I. When we attempt to find it in the premises, we 
see no such statement. This tells us that we should adopt “Plan B” and look at the 
main operator of the conclusion, a strategy that often gives us a clue as to how the  
conclusion can be built up. In this case the main operator is a horseshoe, so we ask: 
What rule gives us a horseshoe—that is, a conditional statement? The answer is: pure 
hypothetical syllogism. 

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   393
7
	
Having tentatively settled on pure hypothetical syllogism for deriving the conclu-
sion, we now look for two conditional statements, which, when combined, will yield  
F ⊃ I. In line 1 we find F ⊃ G and in line 4 we find G ⊃ I, but before we can apply 
pure hypothetical syllogism, we must obtain G ⊃ I on a line by itself. Examining line 
4, we see that G ⊃ I could be derived by modus ponens, if we had H on a line by itself,  
and examining line 2, we see that H could be derived by disjunctive syllogism if we had 
∼F on a line by itself. Turning to line 1, we see that ∼F could be derived by modus tol-
lens if we had ∼G on a line by itself, and we do have ∼G on line 3. Thus, we have now 
thought through the entire proof, and we can write it out: 
1.  F ⊃ G
2.  F ⋁ H
3.  ∼G
4.  H ⊃ (G ⊃ I )	
/  F ⊃ I
5.  ∼F	
1, 3, MT
6.  H	
2, 5, DS
7.  G ⊃ I	
4, 6, MP
8.  F ⊃ I	
1, 7, HS
	
In addition to adopting Plan B, which involves looking at the conclusion’s main op-
erator for a clue about deriving the conclusion, this proof teaches another important 
lesson about every proof. Every line in a proof can be used multiple times. In line 5, we 
used line 1 in conjunction with the modus tollens rule, and in line 8 we used that same 
line again in conjunction with pure hypothetical syllogism. Any line can be used as 
many times as we need it.
These arguments are all instances of disjunctive syllogism (DS):
The next example is more complex:
1.  ∼(A
B) ⋁ [∼(E
F ) ⊃ (C ⊃ D)]
2.  ∼ ∼(A
B)
3.  ∼(E
F )
4.  D ⊃ G	
/  C ⊃ G
Again, when we attempt to find the intended conclusion in the premises, we see no such 
statement. But then we notice that the main operator of the conclusion is a horseshoe, 
and we find C ⊃ D on line 1 and D ⊃ G on line 4. We could derive the conclusion by pure 
hypothetical syllogism if we could obtain C ⊃ D on a line by itself. Examining line 1, we 
see that we could derive C ⊃ D by modus ponens if we could obtain both ∼(E  F ) ⊃ 
(C ⊃ D) and ∼(E  F ) on lines by themselves, and we see that ∼(E   F ) appears on 
line 3. Also, examining line 1, we see that we could derive ∼(E   F ) ⊃ (C ⊃ D) by  

394   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
disjunctive syllogism if we had ∼ ∼(A  B) on a line by itself, and we do have it on  
line 2. Thus, we can now write out the proof:
1.  ∼(A
B) ⋁ [∼(E
F ) ⊃ (C ⊃ D)]
2.  ∼ ∼(A
B)
3.  ∼(E
F )
4.  D ⊃ G	
/  C ⊃ G
5.  ∼(E
F ) ⊃ (C ⊃ D)	 1, 2, DS
6.  C ⊃ D	
3, 5, MP
7.  C ⊃ G	
4, 6, HS
If you have trouble seeing how lines 5 and 6 are derived, for line 5 imagine substitut-
ing ∼(A  B) and ∼(E  F ) ⊃ (C ⊃ D), in place of the p and q of the disjunctive syl-
logism rule. Then you can see that lines 1, 2, and 5 constitute a substitution instance of 
that rule. For line 6, imagine substituting ∼(E  F ) and (C ⊃ D) in place of p and q in 
the modus ponens rule. Then you can see that lines 5, 3, and 6 constitute a substitution 
instance of that rule.
In applying the four rules of inference introduced in this section, we have noted that 
various expressions first had to be obtained on lines by themselves. If this procedure 
is not followed, the resulting proof will likely be invalid. For an example of an invalid 
application of modus ponens, consider the following:
1.  A ⊃ (B ⊃ C )
2.  B
3.  C	
1, 2, MP (invalid)
This inference is invalid because B ⊃ C must first be obtained on a line by itself. In 
deriving the conclusion of an argument we always assume the premises are true. But if 
we assume line 1 of this proof is true, this does not entail that B ⊃ C is true. What line 1 
says is that if A is true, then B ⊃ C is true. Thus, B ⊃ C cannot be treated as a premise. 
We do not know if it is true or false.
Here are some additional examples of invalid inferences:
	
1.  A ⋁ B
	
2.  A
	
3.  ∼B	
	
1, 2, HS (invalid—line 2 must negate A in line 1, not assert it )
	
1.  A ⊃ B
	
2.  B	
	
3.  A	
	
1, 2, MP (invalid—line 2 must assert the antecedent of line 1,  
	
	
	
	
not the consequent )
	
1.  A ⊃ B
	
2.  A ⊃ C
	
3.  B ⊃ C	
	
1, 2, HS (invalid—the consequent of one conditional must be  
	
	
	
	
identical with the antecedent of the other)
	
1.  A ⊃ B
	
2.  ∼A    	
	
3.  ∼B	
	
1, 2, MT (invalid—line 2 must negate the consequent of line  
	
	
	
	
1, not the antecedent )

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   395
7
	
1.  (A ⊃ B) ⊃ C
	
2.  ∼B              
	
3.  ∼A	
1, 2, MT (invalid—A ⊃ B must first be obtained on a line by itself )
	
1.  A ⊃ (B ⊃ C )
	
2.  C ⊃ D       
	
3.  B ⊃ D	
1, 2, HS (invalid—B ⊃ C must first be obtained on a line by itself )
	
1.  (A ⋁ B) ⊃ C
	
2.  ∼A             
	
3.  B	
1, 2, DS (invalid—A ⋁ B must first be obtained on a line by itself )
We conclude this section with some strategies for applying the first four rules of 
inference.
Strategy 1:  Always begin by attempting to “find” the conclusion in the premises. If the 
conclusion is not present in its entirety in the premises, look at the main 
operator of the conclusion. This will provide a clue as to how the conclu-
sion should be derived.
Strategy 2:  If the conclusion contains a letter that appears in the consequent of a con­ditional 
statement in the premises, consider obtaining that letter via modus ponens:
1.	 A ⊃ B
2.	 C ⋁ A
3.	 A	
/  B
4.	 B	
1, 3, MP
Strategy 3:  If the conclusion contains a negated letter and that letter appears in the 
antecedent of a conditional statement in the premises, consider obtaining 
the negated letter via modus tollens:
1.	 C ⊃ B
2.	 A ⊃ B
3.	 ∼B	
/  ∼A
4.	 ∼A	
2, 3, MT
Strategy 4:  If the conclusion is a conditional statement, consider obtaining it via pure 
hypothetical syllogism:
1.	 B ⊃ C
2.	 C ⊃ A
3.	 A ⊃ B	
/  A ⊃ C
4.	 A ⊃ C	
1, 3, HS
Strategy 5:  If the conclusion contains a letter that appears in a disjunctive statement in 
the premises, consider obtaining that letter via disjunctive syllogism:
1.	 A ⊃ B
2.	 A ⋁ C
3.	 ∼A	
/  C
4.	 C	
2, 3, DS
Of course, these strategies apply to deriving any line prior to the conclusion, just as 
they apply to deriving the conclusion. 

EXERCISE 7.1	
	
I.	 For each of the following lists of premises, derive the conclusion and supply the 
justification for it. There is only one possible answer for each problem.
 ★(1)	 1.	 G ⊃ F
	
	
2.	 ∼F
	
	
3.	 _______  ____
 
 (2)	 1.	 S
	
	
2.	 S ⊃ M
	
	
3.	 _______  ____
 
 (3)	 1.	 R ⊃ D
	
	
2.	 E ⊃ R
	
	
3.	 _______  ____
 ★(4)	 1.	 B ⋁ C
	
	
2.	 ∼B
	
	
3.	 _______  ____
 
 (5)	 1.	 N
	
	
2.	 N ⋁ F
	
	
3.	 N ⊃ K
	
	
4.	 _______  ____
 
 (6)	 1.	 ∼J ⋁ P
	
	
2.	 ∼J
	
	
3.	 S ⊃ J
	
	
4.	 _______  ____
 ★(7)	 1.	 H ⊃ D
	
	
2.	 F ⊃ T
	
	
3.	 F ⊃ H
	
	
4.	 _______  ____
 
 (8)	 1.	 S ⊃ W
	
	
2.	 ∼S
	
	
3.	 S ⋁ N
	
	
4.	 _______  ____
 
(9)	 1.	 F ⊃ ∼A
	
	
2.	 N ⊃ A
	
	
3.	 ∼F
	
	
4.	 ∼A
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
7
	 ★(10)	 1.	 H ⊃ A
	
	
2.	 A
	
	
3.	 A ⋁ M
	
	
4.	 G ⊃ H
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	
(11)	 1.	 W ⋁ B
	
	
2.	 W
	
	
3.	 B ⊃ T
	
	
4.	 W ⊃ A
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	
(12)	 1.	 K ⊃ ∼R
	
	
2.	 ∼R
	
	
3.	 R ⋁ S
	
	
4.	 R ⊃ T
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	 ★(13)	 1.	 ∼C ⊃ ∼F
	
	
2.	 L ⊃ F
	
	
3.	 ∼ ∼F
	
	
4.	 F ⋁ ∼L
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	
(14)	 1.	 N ⊃ ∼E
	
	
2.	 ∼ ∼S
	
	
3.	 ∼E ⋁ ∼S
	
	
4.	 ∼S ⋁ N
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	
(15)	 1.	 ∼R ⊃ ∼T
	
	
2.	 ∼T ⋁ B
	
	
3.	 C ⊃ ∼R
	
	
4.	 ∼C
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	 ★(16)	 1.	 ∼K
	
	
2.	 ∼K ⊃ ∼P
	
	
3.	 ∼K ⋁ G
	
	
4.	 G ⊃ Q
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
396   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   397
7
	
(17)	 1.	 F ⋁ (A ⊃ C )
	
	
2.	 A ⋁ (C ⊃ F )
	
	
3.	 A
	
	
4.	 ∼F
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	
(18)	 1.	 (R ⊃ M) ⊃ D
	
	
2.	 M ⊃ C
	
	
3.	 D ⊃ (M ⋁ E )
	
	
4.	 ∼M
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	II.	 The following symbolized arguments are missing a premise. Write the premise 
needed to derive the conclusion (last line ), and supply the justification for the 
conclusion. Try to construct the simplest premise needed to derive the conclusion.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 B ⋁ K
	
	 2.	 ______
	
	 3.	 K	
____
	
(2)	 1.	 N ⊃ S
	
	 2.	 ______
	
	 3.	 S	
____
	
(3)	 1.	 K ⊃ T
	
	 2.	 ______
	
	 3.	 ∼K	
____
	 ★(4)	 1.	 C ⊃ H
	
	 2.	 ______
	
	 3.	 R ⊃ H	 ____
	
(5)	 1.	 F ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 N ⊃ T
	
	 3.	 ______
	
	 4.	 ∼F	
____
	
(6)	 1.	 W ⋁ T
	
	 2.	 A ⊃ W
	
	 3.	 ______
	
	 4.	 A ⊃ T	 ____
	 ★(7)	 1.	 M ⊃ B
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ M
	
	 3.	 ______
	
	 4.	 M	
____
	
(8)	 1.	 C ⋁ L
	
	 2.	 L ⊃ T
	
	 3.	 ______
	
	 4.	 L	
____
	
(9)	 1.	 E ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 T ⋁ ∼E
	
	 3.	 S ⊃ E
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 E	
____
	 ★(10)	 1.	 H ⊃ A
	
	 2.	 S ⊃ H
	
	 3.	 ∼M ⋁ H
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 ∼H	
____
	
(11)	 1.	 T ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 G ⊃ T
	
	 3.	 H ⋁ T
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 F ⊃ T	 ____
	
(12)	 1.	 G ⊃ C
	
	 2.	 M ⋁ G
	
	 3.	 T ⋁ ∼G
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 G	
____
	 ★(13)	 1.	 ∼S ⊃ ∼B
	
	 2.	 R ⋁ ∼B
	
	 3.	 ∼B ⊃ ∼S
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 ∼ ∼B	
____
	
(14)	 1.	 ∼R ⊃ D
	
	 2.	 ∼J ⊃ ∼R
	
	 3.	 N ⋁ ∼R
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 ∼F ⊃ ∼R  ____
	 ★(19)	 1.	 (S ⋁ C ) ⊃ L
	
	
2.	 ∼S
	
	
3.	 ∼L
	
	
4.	 S ⊃ (K ⊃ L)
	
	
5.	 _______  ____
	
(20)	 1.	 (A ⋁ W ) ⊃ (N ⊃ Q)
	
	
2.	 Q ⊃ G
	
	
3.	 ∼A
	
	
4.	 (Q ⊃ G) ⊃ (A ⋁ N )
	
	
5.	 _______  ____

7
	
(15)	 1.	 ∼S ⋁ ∼P
	
	 2.	 ∼K ⊃ P
	
	 3.	 ∼P ⊃ F
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 ∼P	
____
	 ★(16)	 1.	 J ⊃ E
	
	 2.	 B ⋁ ∼J
	
	 3.	 ∼Z ⊃ J
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 J	
____
	
(17)	 1.	 (H ⊃ C ) ⊃ A
	
	 2.	 N ⊃ (F ⊃ K )
	
	 3.	 (E  R) ⊃ K
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 H ⊃ K	 ____
	
(18)	 1.	 (S ⊃ M) ⊃ G
	
	 2.	 S ⊃ (M  G )
	
	 3.	 G ⊃ (R ⊃ ∼S )
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 ∼S	
____
	 ★(19)	 1.	 (W ⋁ ∼F ) ⊃ H
	
	 2.	 (H ⋁ G ) ⊃ ∼F
	
	 3.	 T ⊃ (F ⊃ G )
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 ∼F	
____
	
(20)	 1.	 (H  A) ⋁ T
	
	 2.	 ∼S ⊃ (P ⊃ T )
	
	 3.	 (N ⋁ T ) ⊃ P
	
	 4.	 ______
	
	 5.	 T	
____
	III.	 Use the first four rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following sym-
bolized arguments.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 ∼C ⊃ (A ⊃ C )
	
	 2.	 ∼C	
  /  ∼A
	
(2)	 1.	 F ⋁ (D ⊃ T )
	
	 2.	 ∼F
	
	 3.	 D	
/  T
	
(3)	 1.	 (K  B) ⋁ (L ⊃ E )
	
	 2.	 ∼(K  B)
	
	 3.	 ∼E	
/  ∼L
	 ★(4)	 1.	 P ⊃ (G ⊃ T )
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ (T ⊃ E )
	
	 3.	 P
	
	 4.	 Q	
/  G ⊃ E
	
(5)	 1.	 ∼W ⊃ [∼W ⊃ (X ⊃ W )]
	
	 2.	 ∼W	
  /  ∼X
	
(6)	 1.	 J ⊃ (K ⊃ L)
	
	 2.	 L ⋁ J
	
	 3.	 ∼L	
/  ∼K
	 ★(7)	 1.	 ∼S ⊃ D
	
	 2.	 ∼S ⋁ (∼D ⊃ K )
	
	 3.	 ∼D	
/  K
	
(8)	 1.	 A ⊃ (E ⊃ ∼F )
	
	 2.	 H ⋁ (∼F ⊃ M )
	
	 3.	 A
	
	 4.	 ∼H	
/  E ⊃ M
	
(9)	 1.	 ∼G ⊃ (G ⋁ ∼A)
	
	 2.	 ∼A ⊃ (C ⊃ A)
	
	 3.	 ∼G	
  /  ∼C
	 ★(10)	 1.	 N ⊃ ( J ⊃ P )
	
	 2.	 ( J ⊃ P ) ⊃ (N ⊃ J )
	
	 3.	 N	
/  P
	
(11)	 1.	 G ⊃ [∼O ⊃ (G ⊃ D)]
	
	 2.	 O ⋁ G
	
	 3.	 ∼O	
/  D
	
(12)	 1.	 ∼M ⋁ (B ⋁ ∼T )
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ W
	
	 3.	 ∼ ∼M
	
	 4.	 ∼W	
/  ∼T
	 ★(13)	 1.	 R ⊃ (G ⋁ ∼A)
	
	 2.	 (G ⋁ ∼A) ⊃ ∼S
	
	 3.	 G ⊃ S
	
	 4.	 R	
/  ∼A
	
(14)	 1.	 (L ≡ N ) ⊃ C
	
	 2.	 (L ≡ N ) ⋁ (P ⊃ ∼E )
	
	 3.	 ∼E ⊃ C
	
	 4.	 ∼C	
/  ∼P
	
(15)	 1.	 ∼J ⊃ [∼A ⊃ (D ⊃ A)]
	
	 2.	 J  ⋁ ∼A
	
	 3.	 ∼J	
/  ∼D
398   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   399
7
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (B ⊃ ∼M ) ⊃ (T ⊃ ∼S )
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ K
	
	 3.	 K ⊃ ∼M
	
	 4.	 ∼S ⊃ N	      /  T ⊃ N
	
(17)	 1.	 H ⋁ (Q ⋁ F )
	
	 2.	 R ⋁ (Q ⊃ R)
	
	 3.	 R ⋁ ∼H
	
	 4.	 ∼R	
     /  F
	
(18)	 1.	 ∼A ⊃ (B ⊃ ∼C )
	
	 2.	 ∼D ⊃ (∼C ⊃ A)
	
	 3.	 D ⋁ ∼A
	
	 4.	 ∼D	
     /  ∼B
	 ★(19)	 1.	 ∼G ⊃ [G ⋁ (S ⊃ G )]
	
	 2.	 (S ⋁ L) ⊃ ∼G
	
	 3.	 S ⋁ L	
     /  L
	
(20)	 1.	 H ⊃ [∼E ⊃ (C ⊃ ∼D)]
	
	 2.	 ∼ D ⊃ E
	
	 3.	 E ⋁ H
	
	 4.	 ∼E	
     /  ∼C
	
(21)	 1.	 ∼B ⊃ [(A ⊃ K ) ⊃ (B ⋁ ∼K )]
	
	 2.	 ∼J ⊃ K
	
	 3.	 A ⊃ ∼J
	
	 4.	 ∼B	
     /  ∼A
	 ★(22)	 1.	 (C ⊃ M ) ⊃ (N ⊃ P )
	
	 2.	 (C ⊃ N ) ⊃ (N ⊃ M )
	
	 3.	 (C ⊃ P ) ⊃ ∼M
	
	 4.	 C ⊃ N       /  ∼C
	
(23)	 1.	 (R ⊃ F ) ⊃ [(R ⊃ ∼G) ⊃ (S ⊃ Q)]
	
	 2.	 (Q ⊃ F ) ⊃ (R ⊃ Q)
	
	 3.	 ∼G ⊃ F
	
	 4.	 Q ⊃ ∼G      /  S ⊃ F
	
(24)	 1.	 ∼A ⊃ [A ⋁ (T ⊃ R)]
	
	 2.	 ∼R ⊃ [R ⋁ (A ⊃ R)]
	
	 3.	 (T ⋁ D) ⊃ ∼R
	
	 4.	 T ⋁ D          /  D
	 ★(25)	 1.	 ∼N ⊃ [(B ⊃ D) ⊃ (N ⋁ ∼E )]
	
	 2.	 (B ⊃ E ) ⊃ ∼N
	
	 3.	 B ⊃ D
	
	 4.	 D ⊃ E          /  ∼D
	IV.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and use the first four rules 
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. The letters to be used for the simple 
statements are given in parentheses after each exercise. Use these letters in the 
order in which they are listed.
	
★1.	 If the average child watches more than five hours of television per day, then 
either his power of imagination is improved or he becomes conditioned to ex-
pect constant excitement. The average child’s power of imagination is not im-
proved by watching television. Also, the average child does watch more than 
five hours of television per day. Therefore, the average child is conditioned to 
expect constant excitement. (W, P, C )
	
2.	 If a ninth planet exists, then its orbit is perpendicular to that of the other plan-
ets. Either a ninth planet is responsible for the death of the dinosaurs, or its 
orbit is not perpendicular to that of the other planets. A ninth planet is not 
responsible for the death of the dinosaurs. Therefore, a ninth planet does not 
exist. (E, O, R)
	
3.	 If quotas are imposed on textile imports only if jobs are not lost, then the  
domestic textile industry will modernize only if the domestic textile industry 
is not destroyed. If quotas are imposed on textile imports, the domestic textile 
industry will modernize. The domestic textile industry will modernize only 
if jobs are not lost. Therefore, if quotas are imposed on textile imports, the 
domestic textile industry will not be destroyed. (Q, J, M, D)

7
	
★4.	 If teachers are allowed to conduct random drug searches on students only if 
teachers are acting in loco parentis, then if teachers are acting in loco parentis, 
then students have no Fourth Amendment protections. Either students have 
no Fourth Amendment protections or if teachers are allowed to conduct ran-
dom drug searches on students, then teachers are acting in loco parentis. It 
is not the case that students have no Fourth Amendment protections. There-
fore, teachers are not allowed to conduct random drug searches on students.  
(R, L, F )
	
5.	 Either funding for nuclear fusion will be cut or if sufficiently high tempera-
tures are achieved in the laboratory, nuclear fusion will become a reality. 
Either the supply of hydrogen fuel is limited, or if nuclear fusion becomes 
a reality, the world’s energy problems will be solved. Funding for nuclear fu-
sion will not be cut. Furthermore, the supply of hydrogen fuel is not limited. 
Therefore, if sufficiently high temperatures are achieved in the laboratory, the 
world’s energy problems will be solved. (C, H, R, S, E )
	
6.	 Either the continents are not subject to drift or if Antarctica was always lo-
cated in the polar region, then it contains no fossils of plants from a temperate 
climate. If the continents are not subject to drift, then Antarctica contains no 
fossils of plants from a temperate climate. But it is not the case that Antarctica 
contains no fossils of plants from a temperate climate. Therefore, Antarctica 
was not always located in the polar region. (D, L, F )
	
★7.	 If terrorists take more hostages, then terrorist demands will be met if and only if 
the media give full coverage to terrorist acts. Either the media will ­voluntarily 
limit the flow of information or if the media will recognize they are being ex-
ploited by terrorists, they will voluntarily limit the flow of information. Either 
the media will recognize they are being exploited by terrorists or terrorists will 
take more hostages. The media will not voluntarily limit the flow of informa-
tion. Therefore, terrorist demands will be met if and only if the media give full 
coverage to terrorist acts. (H, D, A, V, R)
	
8.	 Either we take recycling seriously or we will be buried in garbage. If we incin-
erate our garbage only if our health is jeopardized, then we do not take recy-
cling seriously. If our landfills are becoming exhausted, then if we incinerate 
our garbage, then toxic ash will be produced. If toxic ash is produced, then 
our health is jeopardized. Our landfills are becoming exhausted. Therefore, 
we will be buried in garbage. (R, B, I, H, L, T )
	
9.	 If the drug interdiction program is strengthened only if cocaine becomes 
more readily available, then either the number of addicts is decreasing or the 
war on drugs is failing. If the drug interdiction program is strengthened, then 
smugglers will shift to more easily concealable drugs. If smugglers shift to 
more easily concealable drugs, then cocaine will become more readily avail-
able. Furthermore, the number of addicts is not decreasing. Therefore, the war 
on drugs is failing. (D, C, N, W, S)
	 ★10.	 If the death penalty is not cruel and unusual punishment, then either it is cruel 
and unusual punishment or if society is justified in using it, then it will deter 
400   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

SECTION 7.2 Rules of Implication II   401
7
other criminals. If the death penalty is cruel and unusual punishment, then it 
is both cruel and unusual and its use degrades society as a whole. It is not the 
case that both the death penalty is cruel and unusual and its use degrades soci-
ety as a whole. Furthermore, the death penalty will not deter other criminals. 
Therefore, society is not justified in using the death penalty. (C, J, D, U )
7.2	
Rules of Implication II
PREVIEW    While on your hike, you encounter a stream, about 20 feet wide, that you must cross. 
The stream has several rocks protruding above the surface for 100 feet or so. To get across you must 
select a series of stepping-stones, placed fairly close together, starting near one bank and ending near the 
other. Crossing the stream illustrates the kind of strategic thinking you must use in constructing proofs. 
Continued practice with these proofs is guaranteed to improve your capacity for strategic thinking in 
many areas of life.
Four additional rules of implication are listed here. Constructive dilemma should be 
familiar from Chapter 6. The other three are new. They are listed together with an il-
lustration of their use as follows.*
	
5.  Constructive dilemma (CD)	
	
	
(p ⊃ q
r ⊃ s)	
If Oscar is a dog, then you’ll have fleas, and 
	
	
	
  if Oscar is a cat, then you’ll have fur balls.
	
	
p ⋁ r                 	
Oscar is either a dog or a cat.	
         
	
	
q ⋁ s	
You’ll have either fleas or fur balls.
	
6.  Simplification (Simp)
	
	
p
q	
Eliza has long legs and runs fast.
	
	
p	
Eliza has long legs.
	
7.  Conjunction (Conj )
	
	
p	
Roxy has big eyes.
	
	
q     	
Roxy has a tail.	          
	
	
p
q	
Roxy has big eyes and a tail.
	
8. Addition (Add)
	
	
p      	
Theo has spots.	 	
     
	
	
p ⋁ q	
Theo has either spots or stripes.
*Some textbooks include a rule called absorption by which the statement form p ⊃
⊃ q. 
This rule is necessary only if conditional proof is not presented. This textbook opts in favor of conditional proof, to be 
introduced shortly.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

402   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
Like the previous four rules, these are fairly easy to understand, but if there is any doubt 
about them their validity may be proven by means of a truth table.
Constructive dilemma can be understood as involving two modus ponens steps. 
The first premise states that if we have p then we have q, and if we have r then we have s.  
But since, by the second premise, we do have either p or r, it follows by modus ponens 
that we have either q or s. Constructive dilemma is the only form of dilemma that will 
be included as a rule of inference. By the rule of transposition, which will be presented 
in Section 7.4, any argument that is a substitution instance of the destructive dilemma 
form can be easily converted into a substitution instance of constructive dilemma. De-
structive dilemma, therefore, is not needed as a rule of inference.
These arguments are both instances of constructive dilemma (CD):
Simplification states that if two propositions are given as true on a single line, then 
each of them is true separately. According to the strict interpretation of the simplifica-
tion rule, only the left-hand conjunct may be stated in the conclusion. Once the com-
mutativity rule for conjunction has been presented, however (see Section 7.3), we will 
be justified in replacing a statement such as H  K with K  H. Once we do this, the K 
will appear on the left, and the appropriate conclusion is K.
These arguments are all instances of simpliﬁcation (Simp):
Conjunction states that two propositions—for example, H and K—asserted  
separately on different lines may be conjoined on a single line. The two propositions 
may be conjoined in whatever order we choose (either H  K or K  H ) without appeal 
to the commutativity rule for conjunction.
These arguments are all instances of conjunction (Conj):
Addition states that whenever a proposition is asserted on a line by itself it may be 
joined disjunctively with any proposition we choose. In other words, if G is asserted to 

7
be true by itself, it follows that G ⋁ H is true. This may appear somewhat puzzling at 
first, but once one realizes that G ⋁ H is a much weaker statement than G by itself, the 
puzzlement should disappear. The new proposition must, of course, always be joined 
disjunctively (not conjunctively) to the given proposition. If G is stated on a line by 
itself, we are not justified in writing G  H as a consequence of addition.
These arguments are all instances of addition (Add):
The use of these four rules may now be illustrated. Consider the following argument:
	
1.  A ⊃ B
	
2.  (B ⋁ C ) ⊃ (D
E )
	
3.  A	
/  D
As usual, we begin by looking for the conclusion in the premises. D appears in the 
consequent of the second premise, which we can derive via simplification if we first 
obtain B ⋁ C. This expression as such does not appear in the premises, but from lines 1 
and 3 we see that we can derive B by itself via modus ponens. Having obtained B, we can 
derive B ⋁ C via addition. The proof has now been thought through and can be written 
out as follows:
	
1.	 A ⊃ B
	
2.	 (B ⋁ C ) ⊃ (D
E )
	
3.	 A	
/  D
	
4.	 B	
1, 3, MP
	
5.	 B ⋁ C	
4, Add
	
6.	 D
E	
2, 5, MP
	
7.	 D	
6, Simp
Another example:
	
1.	 K ⊃ L
	
2.	 (M ⊃ N 
S
	
3.	 N ⊃ T
	
4.	 K ⋁ M	
/  L ⋁ T
Seeing that L ⋁ T does not appear as such in the premises, we look for the separate 
components. Finding L and T as the consequents of two distinct conditional statements 
causes us to think that the conclusion can be derived via constructive dilemma. If a 
constructive dilemma can be set up, it will need a disjunctive statement as its second 
premise, and such a statement appears on line 4. Furthermore, each of the compo-
nents of this statement, K and M, appears as the antecedent of a conditional statement,  
exactly as they both should for a dilemma. The only statement that is missing now 
is M ⊃ T. Inspecting line 2 we see that we can obtain M ⊃ N via simplification, and 
SECTION 7.2 Rules of Implication II   403

404   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
­putting this together with line 3 gives us M ⊃ T via hypothetical syllogism. The com-
pleted proof may now be written out:
	
1.	 K ⊃ L
	
2.	 (M ⊃ N 
S
	
3.	 N ⊃ T
	
4.	 K ⋁ M	
/  L ⋁ T
	
5.	 M ⊃ N	
2, Simp
	
6.	 M ⊃ T	
3, 5, HS
	
7.	 (K ⊃ L
M ⊃ T )	
1, 6, Conj
	
8.	 L ⋁ T	
4, 7, CD
Another example:
	
1.	 ∼M
N
	
2.	 P ⊃ M
	
3.	 Q
R
	
4.	 (∼P
Q ) ⊃ S	
/  S ⋁ T
When we look for S ⋁ T in the premises we find S in the consequent of line 4 but no 
T at all. This signals an important principle: Whenever the conclusion of an argument 
contains a letter not found in the premises, addition must be used to introduce the 
missing letter. Addition is the only rule of inference that can introduce new letters.  
To introduce T by addition, however, we must first obtain S on a line by itself. S can 
be derived from line 4 via modus ponens if we first obtain ∼P  Q. This, in turn, can  
be derived via conjunction, but first ∼P and Q must be obtained individually on sepa-
rate lines. Q can be derived from line 3 via simplification and ∼P from line 2 via modus 
tollens, but the latter step requires that we first obtain ∼M on a line by itself. Since this 
can be derived from line 1 via simplification, the proof is now complete. It may be writ-
ten out as follows:
	
1.	 ∼M
N
	
2.	 P ⊃ M
	
3.	 Q
R
	
4.	 (∼P
Q ) ⊃ S	
/  S ⋁ T
	
5.	 ∼M	
1, Simp
	
6.	 ∼P	
2, 5, MT
	
7.	 Q	
3, Simp
	
8.	 ∼P
Q	
6, 7, Conj
	
9.	 S	
4, 8, MP
	
10.	 S ⋁ T	
9, Add
Addition is used together with disjunctive syllogism to derive the conclusion of  
arguments having inconsistent premises. As we saw in Chapter 6, such arguments are 
always valid. The procedure is illustrated as follows:
	
1.	 S
	
2.	 ∼S	
/  T
	
3.	 S ⋁ T	
1, Add
	
4.	 T	
2, 3, DS

7
With arguments of this sort the conclusion is always introduced via addition and then 
separated via disjunctive syllogism. Since addition can be used to introduce any letter 
or arrangement of letters we choose, it should be clear from this example that inconsis-
tent premises validly entail any conclusion whatever.
To complete this presentation of the eight rules of implication, let us consider some 
of the typical ways in which they are misapplied. Examples are as follows:
	
1.	 P ⋁ (S
T )
	
2.	 S	
1, Simp (invalid—S
T must first be obtained on a line by itself )
	
1.	 K    
	
2.	 K
L	
1, Add (invalid—the conclusion must be a disjunctive statement)
	
1.	 M ⋁ N
	
2.	 M	
1, Simp (invalid—simplification is possible only with a conjunctive  
	premise; line 1 is a disjunction )
	
1.	 G ⊃ H       
	
2.	 G ⊃ (H ⋁ J )	
1, Add (improper—J must be added to the whole line, not just to the  
	consequent of line 1)
	
1.	 L ⊃ M
	
2.	 L ⊃ N
	
3.	 M
N	
1, 2, Conj (invalid—M and N must first be obtained on lines  
	by themselves)
	
1.	 ∼(P
Q)
	
2.	 ∼P	
1, Simp (invalid—parentheses must be removed first )
	
1.	 ∼(P ⋁ Q)
	
2.	 ∼P       
	
3.	 Q	
1, 2, DS (invalid—parentheses must be removed first )
The use of addition in the G ⊃ H example is called “improper” because the letter 
that is added is not added to the whole line. It turns out, ­however, that even though the 
addition rule is not correctly applied here, the inference is still valid. Hence, this infer-
ence is not called “invalid,” as the others are. As for the last two examples, a rule will be 
presented in the next section (De Morgan’s rule) that will allow us to remove parenthe-
ses preceded by negation signs. But even after the parentheses have been removed from 
these examples, the inferences remain invalid.
Like the previous section, this one ends with a few strategies for applying the last 
four rules of implication:
Strategy 6:  If the conclusion contains a letter that appears in a conjunctive statement  
	
	
  in the premises, consider obtaining that letter via simplification:
	
1.	 A ⊃ B
	
2.	 C
B
	
3.	 C ⊃ A	
/  C
	
4.	 C	
2, Simp
SECTION 7.2 Rules of Implication II   405

7
Strategy 7:  If the conclusion is a conjunctive statement, consider obtaining it via  
conjunction by first obtaining the individual conjuncts:
	
1.	 A ⊃ C
	
2.	 B
	
3.	 ∼C	
/  B
∼C
	
4.	 B
∼C	
2, 3, Conj
Strategy 8:  If the conclusion is a disjunctive statement, consider obtaining it via construc-
tive dilemma or addition:
	
1.	 (A ⊃ B)  (C ⊃ D)
	
2.	 B ⊃ C
	
3.	 A ⋁ C	
/  B ⋁ D
	
4.	 B ⋁ D	
1, 3, CD
	
1.	 A ⋁ C
	
2.	 B
	
3.	 C ⊃ D	
/  B ⋁ D
	
4.	 B ⋁ D	
2, Add
Strategy 9:  If the conclusion contains a letter not found in the premises, addition must 
be used to introduce that letter.
Strategy 10:  Conjunction can be used to set up constructive dilemma:
	
1.	 A ⊃ B
	
2.	 C ⊃ D
	
3.	 A ⋁ C	
/  B ⋁ D
	
4.	 (A ⊃ B )  (C ⊃ D)	
1, 2, Conj
	
5.	 B ⋁ D	
3, 4, CD
EXERCISE 7.2	
	 I.	 For each of the following lists of premises, derive the indicated conclusion and 
complete the justification. In problems 4 and 8 you can add any statement you 
choose.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 S ⋁ H
	
	 2.	 B  E
	
	 3.	 R ⊃ G
	
	 4.	 _____  ____ , Simp
	
(2)	 1.	 (N ⊃ T )  (F ⊃ Q)
	
	 2.	 (N ⊃ R) ⋁ (F ⊃ M )
	
	 3.	 N ⋁ F
	
	 4.	 _______________  ____ , CD
	
(3)	 1.	 D
	
	 2.	 W
	
	 3.	 ____  ____ , Conj
	 ★(4)	 1.	 H
	
	 2.	 ____  ____ , Add
	
(5)	 1.	 R  (N ⋁ K )
	
	 2.	 (G  T ) ⋁ S
	
	 3.	 (Q  C ) ⊃ ( J  L)
	
	 4.	 _____________  ____ , Simp
406   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

7
	
(6)	 1.	 ∼R ⋁ P
	
	 2.	 (P ⊃ ∼D)  (∼R ⊃ S )
	
	 3.	 (∼R ⊃ A)  (P ⊃ ∼N )
	
	 4.	 _____________     ____ , CD
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (Q ⋁ K )  ∼B
	
	 2.	 (M  R) ⊃ D
	
	 3.	 (W  S ) ⋁ (G  F )
	
	 4.	 _____________  ____ , Simp
	
(8)	 1.	 E  G	
	
	 2.	 ______  ____ , Add
	
(9)	 1.	 ∼B
	
	 2.	 F ⋁ N
	
	 3.	 ____  ____ , Conj
	 ★(10)	 1.	 S ⋁ ∼C
	
	 2.	 (S ⊃ ∼L)  (∼C ⊃ M )
	
	 3.	 (∼N ⊃ S )  (F ⊃ ∼C )
	
	 4.	 ________________  ____ , CD
	II.	 In the following symbolized arguments, derive the line needed to obtain the  
conclusion (last line), and supply the justification for both lines.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 G ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 G  K
	
	 3.	 ______  ____
	
	 4.	 G ⋁ T       ____
	
(2)	 1.	 ∼A
	
	 2.	 A ⋁ E
	
	 3.	 ______  ____
	
	 4.	 ∼A  E      ____
	
(3)	 1.	 B ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 B ⋁ K
	
	 3.	 K ⊃ R
	
	 4.	 _____  ____
	
	 5.	 N ⋁ R     ____
	 ★(4)	 1.	 T
	
	 2.	 T ⊃ G
	
	 3.	 (T ⋁ U ) ⊃ H
	
	 4.	 ___________  ____
	
	 5.	 H                ____
	
(5)	 1.	 S ⊃ E
	
	 2.	 E ⋁ (S  P )
	
	 3.	 ∼E
	
	 4.	 ________  ____
	
	 5.	 S	
       ____
	
(6)	 1.	 N
	
	 2.	 N ⊃ F
	
	 3.	 (N ⊃ A)  (F ⊃ C )
	
	 4.	 ______________  ____
	
	 5.	 A ⋁ C                 ____
	 ★(7)	 1.	 J
	
	 2.	 ∼L
	
	 3.	 F ⊃ L
	
	 4.	 _____  ____
	
	 5.	 ∼F  J     ____
	
(8)	 1.	 (E ⊃ B)  (Q ⊃ N )
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ E
	
	 3.	 B ⊃ K
	
	 4.	 _______________  ____
	
	 5.	 E ⊃ K               ____
	
(9)	 1.	 G ⋁ N
	
	 2.	 ∼G
	
	 3.	 ∼G ⊃ (H  R)
	
	 4.	 ___________  ____
	
	 5.	 H                ____
	 ★(10)	 1.	 M
	
	 2.	 (M  E ) ⊃ D
	
	 3.	 E
	
	 4.	 __________  ____
	
	 5.	 D              ____
SECTION 7.2 Rules of Implication II   407

7
	III.	Use the first eight rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following  
symbolized arguments:
	 ★(1)	 1.	 ∼M ⊃ Q
	
	 2.	 R ⊃ ∼T
	
	 3.	 ∼M ⋁ R		
/  Q ⋁ ∼T
	
(2)	 1.	 N ⊃ (D  W )
	
 	2.	 D ⊃ K
	
 	3.	 N  	
	
/  N  K
	
(3) 	1.	 E ⊃ (A  C )
	
 	2.	 A ⊃ (F  E )
	
 	3.	 E	
	
/  F
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (H ⋁ ∼B) ⊃ R
	
 	2.	 (H ⋁ ∼M ) ⊃ P
	
 	3.	 H	
	
/  R  P
	
(5)	 1.	 G ⊃ (S  T )
	
 	2.	 (S ⋁ T ) ⊃ J
	
 	3.	 G	
	
/  J
	
(6)	 1.	 (L ⋁ T ) ⊃ (B  G )
	
 	2.	 L  (K ≡ R)	
/  L  B
	 ★(7)  	1.	 (∼F ⋁ X ) ⊃ (P ⋁ T )
	
  	2.	 F ⊃ P
	
 	3.	 ∼P	
	
/  T
	
(8)	 1.	 (N ⊃ B)  (O ⊃ C )
	
 	2.	 Q ⊃ (N ⋁ O)
	
 	3.	 Q	
	
/  B ⋁ C
	
(9)	 1.	 (U ⋁ W) ⊃ (T ⊃ R)
	
 	2.	 U  H
	
 	3.	 ∼R  ∼J	
/  U  ∼T
	 ★(10) 	1.	 (D ⋁ E ) ⊃ (G  H )
	
  	2.	 G ⊃ ∼D
	
 	3.	 D  F	
	
/  M
	
(11)	 1.	 (B ⋁ F ) ⊃ (A ⊃ G )
	
 	2.	 (B ⋁ E ) ⊃ (G ⊃ K )
	
 	3.	 B  ∼H	 	
/  A ⊃ K
	
(12)	 1.	 (P ⊃ R) ⊃ (M ⊃ P )
	
 	2.	 (P ⋁ M) ⊃ (P ⊃ R )
	
 	3.	 P ⋁ M	
	
/  R ⋁ P
	 ★(13)  	1.	 (C ⊃ N )  E
	
 	2.	 D ⋁ (N ⊃ D)
	
 	3.	 ∼D	
	
/  ∼C ⋁ P
408   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
	
(14)	 1.	 F ⊃ (∼T  A)
	
	 2.	 (∼T ⋁ G ) ⊃ (H ⊃ T )
	
	 3.	 F  O	
      /  ∼H  ∼T
	
(15)	 1.	 (∼S ⋁ B) ⊃ (S ⋁ K )
	
	 2.	 (K ⋁ ∼D) ⊃ (H ⊃ S )
	
	 3.	 ∼S  W	      /  ∼H
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (C ⋁ ∼G) ⊃ (∼P  L)
	
	 2.	 (∼P  C ) ⊃ (C ⊃ D)
	
	 3.	 C  ∼R	 	
/  D ⋁ R
	
(17)	 1.	 [A ⋁ (K  J )] ⊃ (∼E  ∼F )
	
	 2.	 M ⊃ [A  (P ⋁ R)]
	
	 3.	 M  U	 	
/  ∼E  A
	
(18)	 1.	 ∼H ⊃ (∼T ⊃ R)
	
	 2.	 H ⋁ (E ⊃ F )
	
	 3.	 ∼T ⋁ E
	
	 4.	 ∼H  D		
/  R ⋁ F
	 ★(19)	 1.	 (U  ∼∼P ) ⊃ Q
	
	 2.	 ∼O ⊃ U
	
	 3.	 ∼P ⊃ O
	
	 4.	 ∼O  T	 	
/  Q
	
(20)	 1.	 (M ⋁ N ) ⊃ (F ⊃ G )
	
	 2.	 D ⊃ ∼C
	
	 3.	 ∼C ⊃ B
	
	 4.	 M  H
	
	 5.	 D ⋁ F	
	
/  B ⋁ G
	
(21)	 1.	 (F  M) ⊃ (S ⋁ T )
	
	 2.	 (∼S ⋁ A) ⊃ F
	
	 3.	 (∼S ⋁ B) ⊃ M
	
	 4.	 ∼S  G	 	
/  T
	 ★(22)	 1.	 (∼K  ∼N ) ⊃
	
	 	
[(∼P ⊃ K )  (∼R ⊃ G )]
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ N
	
	 3.	 ∼N  B
	
	 4.	 ∼P ⋁ ∼R	
/  G
	
(23)	 1.	 (∼A ⋁ D) ⊃ (B ⊃ F )
	
	 2.	 (B ⋁ C ) ⊃ (A ⊃ E )
	
	 3.	 A ⋁ B
	
	 4.	 ∼A	
	
/  E ⋁ F

7
	
(24)	 1.	 ( J ⊃ K )  (∼O ⊃ ∼P )
	
	 2.	 (L ⊃ J )  (∼M ⊃ ∼O)
	
	 3.	 ∼K ⊃ (L ⋁ ∼M )
	
	 4.	 ∼K  G	 	
/  ∼P
	 ★(25)	 1.	 (∼M  ∼N ) ⊃ [(∼M ⋁ H ) ⊃ (K  L )]
	
	 2.	 ∼M  (C ⊃ D)
	
	 3.	 ∼N  (F ≡ G )	
/  K  ∼N
	
(26)	 1.	 (P ⋁ S ) ⊃ (E ⊃ F )
	
	 2.	 (P ⋁ T ) ⊃ (G ⊃ H )
	
	 3.	 (P ⋁ U ) ⊃ (E ⋁ G )
	
	 4.	 P	
	
/  F ⋁ H
	
(27)	 1.	 (S ⊃ Q)  (Q ⊃ ∼S)
	
	 2.	 S ⋁ Q
	
	 3.	 ∼Q	
	
/  P  R
	 ★(28)	 1.	 (D ⊃ B)  (C ⊃ D )
	
	 2.	 (B ⊃ D)  (E ⊃ C )
	
	 3.	 B ⋁ E	
	
/  D ⋁ B
	
(29)	 1.	 (R ⊃ H )  (S ⊃ I )
	
	 2.	 (∼H  ∼L) ⊃ (R ⋁ S )
	
	 3.	 ∼H  (K ⊃ T )
	
	 4.	 H ⋁ ∼L	 	
/  I ⋁ M
	
(30)	 1.	 (W  X ) ⊃ (Q ⋁ R)
	
	 2.	 (S ⋁ F ) ⊃ (Q ⋁ W )
	
	 3.	 (S ⋁ G ) ⊃ (∼Q ⊃ X )
	
	 4.	 Q ⋁ S
	
	 5.	 ∼Q  H		
/  R
	IV.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and use the first eight rules 
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Use the letters in the order in which 
they are listed.
	
★1.	 If topaz is harder than quartz, then it will scratch quartz and also feldspar. 
Topaz is harder than quartz and it is also harder than calcite. Therefore, either 
topaz will scratch quartz or it will scratch corundum. (T, Q, F, C, O)
	
2.	 If clear-cutting continues in primary forests and the Endangered Spe-
cies Act is not repealed, then either the Endangered Species Act will 
be repealed or thousands of animal species will become extinct. Clear-cut-
ting continues in primary forests. The Endangered Species Act will not be  
repealed. Therefore, thousands of animal species will become extinct. (C, E, T )
	
3.	 If either executive salaries are out of control or exorbitant bonuses are  
paid, then either shareholders will be cheated or ordinary workers will 
be paid less. Executive salaries are out of control and the rich are get-
ting richer. If shareholders are cheated, then future investors will stay 
away; also, if ordinary workers are paid less, then consumer spending will  
decline. If either future investors stay away or consumer spending  
declines, then the economy will suffer. Therefore, the economy will suffer.  
(S, B, C, P, R, F, D, E )
	
★4.	 Either animals are mere mechanisms or they feel pain. If either animals feel 
pain or they have souls, then they have a right not to be subjected to needless 
pain and humans have a duty not to inflict needless pain on them. It is not the 
case that animals are mere mechanisms. Therefore, animals have a right not to 
be subjected to needless pain. (M, P, S, R, D)
	
5.	 If half the nation suffers from depression, then if either the insurance compa-
nies have their way or the psychiatrists have their way, then everyone will be 
taking antidepressant drugs. If either half the nation suffers from depression 
SECTION 7.2 Rules of Implication II   409

7
or sufferers want a real cure, then it is not the case that everyone will be taking 
antidepressant drugs. Half the nation suffers from depression. Therefore, it is 
not the case that either the insurance companies or the psychiatrists will have 
their way. (H, I, P, E, W )
	
6.	 If either parents get involved in their children’s education or the school year is 
lengthened, then if the children learn phonics, their reading will improve and 
if they are introduced to abstract concepts earlier, their math will improve. If 
either parents get involved in their children’s education or nebulous subjects 
are dropped from the curriculum, then either the ­children will learn phonics 
or they will be introduced to abstract concepts earlier. Parents will get involved 
in their children’s education, and writing lessons will be integrated with other 
subjects. Therefore, either the children’s reading or their math will improve. 
(P, S, L, R, I, M, N, W )
	
★7.	 If either manufacturers will not concentrate on producing a superior product 
or they will not market their product abroad, then if they will not concentrate 
on producing a superior product, then the trade deficit will worsen. Either 
manufacturers will concentrate on producing a superior product or the trade 
deficit will not worsen. Manufacturers will not concentrate on producing a 
superior product. Therefore, today’s business managers lack imagination.  
(C, M, T, B )
	
8.	 If either medical fees or malpractice awards escape restrictions, then 
health care costs will soar and millions of poor will go uninsured. If the  
lawyers get their way, then malpractice awards will escape restrictions. If 
the doctors get their way, then medical fees will escape restrictions. Either  
the doctors or the lawyers will get their way, and insurance companies will 
resist reform. Therefore, health care costs will soar. (F, A, H, P, L, D, I )
	
9.	 If we are less than certain the human fetus is a person, then we must give it 
the benefit of the doubt. If we are certain the human fetus is a person, then 
we must accord it the right to live. If either we must give the fetus the benefit 
of the doubt or accord it the right to live, then we are not less than certain  
the fetus is human and it is not merely a part of the mother’s body. Either 
we are less than certain the human fetus is a person or we are certain about 
it. If we are certain the human fetus is a person, then abortion is immoral.  
Therefore, abortion is immoral. (L, G, C, A, M, I )
	 ★10.	 If the assassination of terrorist leaders violates civilized values and also is not 
effective in the long run, then if it prevents terrorist atrocities, then it is effec-
tive in the long run. If the assassination of terrorist leaders violates civilized 
values, then it is not effective in the long run. The assassination of terrorist 
leaders violates civilized values and is also illegal. If the assassination of ter-
rorist leaders is not effective in the long run, then either it prevents terrorist 
atrocities or it justifies acts of revenge by terrorists. Therefore, the assassina-
tion of terrorist leaders justifies acts of revenge by terrorists and also is not 
effective in the long run. (V, E, P, I, J )
410   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

7.3	
Rules of Replacement I
PREVIEW    After crossing the stream, you encounter a rocky cliff about 25 feet high that you must 
scale. You can now practice some of your rock-climbing skills. As you climb, you must find a series of 
crevices in the rock for your hands, and little ledges for your feet. The crevices and ledges must not be 
too far apart, and they must lead continuously upward. This involves a higher level of strategic thinking 
than crossing the stream required. The following section of the book will give you great practice for this 
kind of thinking.
Unlike the rules of implication, which are basic argument forms, the ten rules of  
replacement are expressed in terms of pairs of logically equivalent statement forms, 
either of which can replace the other in a proof sequence. To express these rules, a new 
symbol, called a double colon (::), is used to designate logical equivalence. This symbol 
is a metalogical symbol in that it makes an assertion not about things but about symbol-
ized statements: It asserts that the expressions on either side of it have the same truth 
value regardless of the truth values of their components. Underlying the use of the rules 
of replacement is an axiom of replacement, which asserts that within the context of 
a proof, logically equivalent expressions may replace each other. The first five rules of 
replacement are as follows:
  9.	 De Morgan’s rule (DM):
	
∼( p
q ) :: (∼p ⋁ ∼q)
	
∼( p ⋁ q ) :: (∼p
∼q)
10.	 Commutativity (Com):
	
( p ⋁ q ) :: (q ⋁ p)
	
( p
q ) :: (q
p)
11.	 Associativity (Assoc):
	
[ p ⋁ (q ⋁ r)] :: [(p ⋁ q) ⋁ r]
	
[ p
q
r)] :: [(p
q
r]
12.	 Distribution (Dist):
	
[ p
q ⋁ r)] :: [(p
q) ⋁ (p
r)]
	
[ p ⋁ (q
r)] :: [(p ⋁ q
p ⋁ r)]
13.	 Double negation (DN ):
	
p :: ∼∼p
De Morgan’s rule (named after the nineteenth-century logician Augustus De Morgan)  
was discussed in Section 6.1 in connection with translation. There it was pointed out 
that “Not both p and q” is logically equivalent to “Not p or not q,” and that “Not either p 
or q” is logically equivalent to “Not p and not q.” When applying De Morgan’s rule, one 
should keep in mind that it holds only for conjunctive and disjunctive statements (not for 
conditionals or biconditionals). The rule may be summarized as follows: When moving 
a tilde inside or outside a set of parentheses, a dot switches with a wedge and vice versa.
SECTION 7.3 Rules of Replacement I   411
7

412   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
Commutativity asserts that the truth value of a conjunction or disjunction is unaf-
fected by the order in which the components are listed. In other words, the ­component 
statements may be commuted, or switched for one another, without affecting the truth 
value. The validity of this rule should be immediately apparent. You may recall from 
arithmetic that the commutativity rule also applies to addition and ­multiplication and 
asserts, for example, that 3  +  5 equals 5  +  3, and that 2  ×  3 equals 3  ×  2. However, it 
does not apply to division; 2 ÷ 4 does not equal 4 ÷ 2. A similar ­lesson applies in logic: 
The commutativity rule applies only to conjunction and disjunction; it does not apply 
to implication.
Associativity states that the truth value of a conjunctive or disjunctive statement is 
unaffected by the placement of parentheses when the same operator is used through-
out. In other words, the way in which the component propositions are grouped, or 
associated with one another, can be changed without affecting the truth value.  
The validity of this rule is quite easy to see, but if there is any doubt about it, it may be 
readily checked by means of a truth table. You may recall that the associativity rule also 
applies to addition and multiplication and asserts, for example, that 3 + (5 + 7) equals 
(3 + 5) + 7, and that 2 × (3 × 4) equals (2 × 3) × 4. But it does not apply to division: 
(8 ÷ 4) ÷ 2 does not equal 8 ÷ (4 ÷ 2). Analogously, in logic, the associativity rule 
applies only to conjunctive and disjunctive statements; it does not apply to conditional 
statements. Also note, when applying this rule, that the order of the letters remains 
unchanged; only the placement of the parentheses changes.
Distribution, like De Morgan’s rule, applies only to conjunctive and disjunctive 
statements. When a proposition is conjoined to a disjunctive statement in parenthe-
ses or disjoined to a conjunctive statement in parentheses, the rule allows us to put 
that proposition together with each of the components inside the parentheses, and also 
to go in the reverse direction. In the first form of the rule, a statement is distributed 
through a disjunction, and in the second form, through a conjunction. While the rule 
may not be immediately obvious, it is easy to remember: The operator that is at first 
outside the parentheses goes inside, and the operator that is at first inside the parenthe-
ses goes outside. Note also how distribution differs from commutativity and associativ-
ity. The latter two rules apply only when the same operator (either a dot or a wedge) 
is used throughout a statement. Distribution applies when a dot and a wedge appear 
together in a statement.
Double negation is fairly obvious and needs little explanation. The rule states sim-
ply that pairs of tildes immediately adjacent to one another may be either deleted or 
introduced without affecting the truth value of the statement.
There is an important difference between the rules of implication, treated in the first 
two sections of this chapter, and the rules of replacement. The rules of implication de-
rive their name from the fact that each is a simple argument form in which the premises 
imply the conclusion. To be applicable in natural deduction, certain lines in a proof 
must be interpreted as substitution instances of the argument form in question. Stated 
another way, the rules of implication are applicable only to whole lines in a proof. For 
example, step 3 in the following proof is not a legitimate application of modus ponens, 
because the first premise in the modus ponens rule is applied to only a part of line 1.

7
1.	 A ⊃ (B ⊃ C )
2.	 B
3.	 C	
1, 2, MP ( invalid )
The rules of replacement, on the other hand, are not rules of implication but rules of 
logical equivalence. Since, by the axiom of replacement, logically equivalent statement 
forms can always replace one another in a proof sequence, the rules of replacement can 
be applied either to a whole line or to any part of a line. Step 2 in the following proof is 
a quite legitimate application of De Morgan’s rule, even though the rule is applied only 
to the consequent of line 1:
1.	 S ⊃ ∼(T
U )
2.	 S ⊃ (∼T ⋁ ∼U )	
1, DM (valid )
Another way of viewing this distinction is that the rules of implication are “one-way” 
rules, whereas the rules of replacement are “two-way” rules. The rules of implication 
allow us to proceed only from the premise lines of a rule to the conclusion line, but the 
rules of replacement allow us to replace either side of an equivalence expression with 
the other side.
Application of the first five rules of replacement may now be illustrated. Consider 
the following argument:
1.	 A ⊃ ∼(B
C )
2.	 A
C	
/  ∼B
Examining the premises, we find B in the consequent of line 1. This leads us to suspect 
that the conclusion can be derived via modus ponens. If this is correct, the tilde would 
then have to be taken inside the parentheses via De Morgan’s rule and the resulting ∼C 
eliminated by disjunctive syllogism. The following completed proof indicates that this 
strategy yields the anticipated result:
  1.	 A ⊃ ∼(B
C )
  2.	 A
C	
/  ∼B
  3.	 A	
2, Simp
  4.	 ∼(B
C )	
1, 3, MP
  5.	 ∼B ⋁ ∼C	
4, DM
  6.	 C
A	
2, Com
  7.	 C	
6, Simp
  8.	 ∼ ∼C	
7, DN
  9.	 ∼C ⋁ ∼B	
5, Com
10.	 ∼B	
8, 9, DS
The rationale for line 6 is to get C on the left side so that it can be separated via sim-
plification. Similarly, the rationale for line 9 is to get ∼C on the left side so that it can 
be eliminated via disjunctive syllogism. Line 8 is required because, strictly speaking, 
the negation of ∼C is ∼ ∼C—not simply C. Thus, C must be replaced with ∼ ∼C to 
set up the disjunctive syllogism. If your instructor permits it, you can combine com-
mutativity and double negation with other inferences on a single line, as the ­following 
SECTION 7.3 Rules of Replacement I   413

414   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
shortened proof illustrates. However, we will avoid this practice throughout the re-
mainder of the book.
1.	 A ⊃ ∼(B
C )
2.	 A
C	
/  ∼B
3.	 A	
2, Simp
4.	 ∼(B
C )	
1, 3, MP
5.	 ∼B ⋁ ∼C	
4, DM
6.	 C	
2, Com, Simp
7.	 ∼B	
5, 6, Com, DN, DS
Another example:
1.	 D
E ⋁ F )
2.	 ∼D ⋁ ∼F	
/  D
E
The conclusion requires that we get D and E together. Inspection of the first prem-
ise suggests distribution as the first step in achieving this. The completed proof is as  
follows:
1.	 D
E ⋁ F )
2.	 ∼D ⋁ ∼F	
/  D
E
3.	 (D
E ) ⋁ (D
F )	
1, Dist
4.	 (D
F ) ⋁ (D
E )	
3, Com
5.	 ∼(D
F )	
2, DM
6.	 D
E	
4, 5, DS
Some proofs require that we use distribution in the reverse manner. Consider  
this argument:
1.	 (G
H ) ⋁ (G
J )
2.	 (G ⋁ K ) ⊃ L	
/  L
The conclusion can be obtained from line 2 via modus ponens if we first obtain G ⋁ K on 
a line by itself. Since K does not occur in the first premise at all, it must be introduced 
by addition. Doing this requires in turn that we obtain G on a line by itself. Distribution 
applied to line 1 provides the solution:
1.	 (G
H ) ⋁ (G
J )
2.	 (G ⋁ K ) ⊃ L	
/  L
3.	 G
H ⋁ J )	
1, Dist
4.	 G	
3, Simp
5.	 G ⋁ K	
4, Add
6.	 L	
2, 5, MP
Application of the associativity rule is illustrated in the next proof:
1.	 M ⋁ (N ⋁ O)
2.	 ∼O	
/  M ⋁ N
3.	 (M ⋁ N ) ⋁ O	
1, Assoc
4.	 O ⋁ (M ⋁ N )	
3, Com
5.	 M ⋁ N	
2, 4, DS

7
Before O can be eliminated via disjunctive syllogism from line 1, it must be moved over 
to the left side. Associativity and commutativity together accomplish this objective.
In some arguments the attempt to “find” the conclusion in the premises is not im-
mediately successful. When confronted with such an argument, one should often begin 
by “deconstructing” the conclusion using the rules of replacement. In other words, one 
should first apply the rules of replacement to the conclusion to see how it is put to-
gether. After this is done, how the premises entail the conclusion may be evident. This 
procedure is justified by the fact that the rules of replacement are two-way rules. As a 
result, after the conclusion is deconstructed, it can be derived by using the same rules 
in reverse order. Here is an example of such an argument:
1.	 K ⊃ (F ⋁ B )
2.	 G
K	
/  (F
G ) ⋁ (B
G )
If immediate inspection does not reveal how the conclusion should be derived, we 
may begin by applying the rules of replacement to the conclusion. The form of the con-
clusion suggests the distribution rule, but first we must use commutativity to move the 
G’s to the left-hand side. The deconstruction proceeds as follows:
(F
G ) ⋁ (B
G )
(G
F ) ⋁ (B
G )	
Com
(G
F ) ⋁ (G
B )	
Com
G
F ⋁ B )	
Dist
Now we see that if we can obtain G on a line by itself, and F ⋁ B on a line by itself, we can 
combine them on a single line via the conjunction rule. We can then derive the conclu-
sion via distribution and commutativity. Inspection of the premises reveals that G can 
be derived from line 2 of the premises by simplification, and F ⋁ B can be derived from 
line 1 by modus ponens. The completed proof is as follows:
  1.	 K ⊃ (F ⋁ B)
  2.	 G
K	
/  (F
G ) ⋁ (B
G )
  3.	 G	
2, Simp
  4.	 K
G	
2, Com
  5.	 K	
4, Simp
  6.	 F ⋁ B	
1, 5, MP
  7.	 G
F ⋁ B)	
3, 6, Conj
  8.	 (G
F ) ⋁ (G
B)	
7, Dist
  9.	 (F
G ) ⋁ (G
B)	
8, Com
10.	 (F
G ) ⋁ (B
G )	
9, Com
Here are some strategies for applying the first five rules of replacement. Most of 
them show how these rules may be used together with other rules.
Strategy 11:  Conjunction can be used to set up De Morgan’s rule:
  1.	 ∼A
  2.	 ∼B
  3.	 ∼A
∼B	
1, 2, Conj
  4.	 ∼(A ⋁ B)	
3, DM
SECTION 7.3 Rules of Replacement I   415

416   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
P
rior to his death in the year 2000, Willard Van 
Orman Quine was widely considered to be, as 
Stuart Hampshire put it, “the most distinguished 
and influential of living philosophers.” At that time, 
over 2,000 scholarly articles had been written about 
his work.
Quine was born in Akron, Ohio, in 1908 to a  
father who founded a heavy equipment company and 
a mother who taught elementary school. He earned 
his bachelor’s degree in mathematics from Oberlin 
College, where he graduated summa cum laude in 
1930. He then entered Harvard University, where he 
switched to philosophy so he could study under Al-
fred North Whitehead. He earned his PhD in a record 
two years. Except for four years during World War II, 
when he served in the Navy decoding messages from  
German submarines, Quine remained affiliated with 
Harvard for the remainder of his life.
Quine wrote twenty-two books, the first five of which 
dealt with mathematical logic. One of the goals of the 
earlier books was to show how the foundations of math-
ematics could be laid out in less than a fourth of the space 
taken by Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica. 
One of his most famous publications was “Two Dog-
mas of Empiricism,” which shook the pillars of analytic  
philosophy by under-
mining the sacrosanct 
distinction 
between 
analytic and synthetic 
statements. As a res­
ult of this work, even 
the truths of logic and 
mathematics became 
subject to the dictates 
of empirical experience.
As a boy, Quine 
had a fascination with 
collecting stamps and 
drawing maps, which, as an adult, he translated into a 
zest for world travel. He visited 118 countries, became 
fluent in six different languages, delivered lectures all 
over the world, and was awarded the first Schock Prize 
(Stockholm, 1993) and the Kyoto Prize (Tokyo, 1996). 
He was married twice, raised two children from each 
marriage, loved Dixieland jazz, and played the banjo, 
mandolin, and piano. He was singularly unpretentious, 
had an unfailing curiosity about a vast range of top-
ics, and delighted in teaching freshman logic as well as 
advanced courses in philosophy. He died in Boston at 
the age of ninety-two.
Willard Van Orman Quine 1908–2000
AP Photo/Julia Malakie
7
Strategy 12:  Constructive dilemma can be used to set up De Morgan’s rule:
1.	 (A ⊃ ∼B
C ⊃ ∼D)
2.	 A ⋁ C
3.	 ∼B ⋁ ∼D	
1, 2, CD
4.	 ∼(B
D)	
3, DM
Strategy 13:  Addition can be used to set up De Morgan’s rule:
1.	 ∼A
2.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼B	
1,  Add
3.	 ∼(A
B)	
2, DM

EXERCISE 7.3	
	 I.	 For each of the following lists of premises, derive the indicated conclusion and  
complete the justification. For double negation, avoid the occurrence of triple tildes. 
Exercise 6 has two possible answers.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 ∼(E ⊃ H )
	
	 2.	 ∼(N ⋁ G )
	
	 3.	 ∼A ⋁ D
	
	 4.	 _______  ____ , DM
	
(2)	 1.	 G ⊃ (N ⊃ K )
	
	 2.	 R ⋁ (D ⊃ F )
	
	 3.	 S  (T ⋁ U )
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Dist
	
(3)	 1.	 M ⋁ (G ⋁ T )
	
	 2.	 P  (S ⊃ N )
	
	 3.	 D  (R ⋁ K )
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Assoc
	 ★(4)	 1.	 B ⊃ W
	
	 2.	 G ≡ F
	
	 3.	 S  A
	
	 4.	 ______  ____ , Com
7
Strategy 14:  Distribution can be used in two ways to set up disjunctive syllogism:
1.	 (A ⋁ B
A ⋁ C )
2.	 ∼A
3.	 A ⋁ (B
C )	
1, Dist
4.	 B
C	
2, 3, DS
1.	 A
B ⋁ C )
2.	 ∼(A
B)
3.	 (A
B) ⋁ (A
C )	
1, Dist
4.	 A
C	
2, 3, DS
Strategy 15:  Distribution can be used in two ways to set up simplification:
1.	 A ⋁ (B
C )
2.	 (A ⋁ B
A ⋁ C )	
1, Dist
3.	 A ⋁ B	
2, Simp
1.	 (A
B) ⋁ (A
C )
2.	 A
B ⋁ C )	
1, Dist
3.	 A	
2, Simp
Strategy 16:  If inspection of the premises does not reveal how the ­conclusion should 
be derived, consider using the rules of replacement to deconstruct the 
conclusion. (See the final example in this section.)
SECTION 7.3 Rules of Replacement I   417

7
	
(5)	 1.	 ∼ ∼R ⋁ T
	
	 2.	 ∼N ⋁ ∼B
	
	 3.	 ∼A ⊃ ∼H
	
	 4.	 ________  ____ , DN
	
(6)	 1.	 (F ⋁ N ) ⊃ (K  D)
	
	 2.	 (H  Z ) ⋁ (H  W )
	
	 3.	 (P ⊃ H ) ⋁ (P ⊃ N )
	
	 4.	 _______________  ____ , Dist
	 ★(7)	 1.	 ∼(G  ∼Q)
	
	 2.	 ∼(K ≡ ∼B)
	
	 3.	 ∼T ⊃ ∼F
	
	 4.	 _________  ____ , DM
	
(8)	 1.	 G ⊃ (∼L ⊃ T )
	
	 2.	 L ≡ (∼R ⊃ ∼C )
	
	 3.	 J ⊃ (S ⋁ ∼N )
	
	 4.	 ___________  ____ , Com
	
(9)	 1.	 S ⊃ (M ⊃ D)
	
	 2.	 (K  G ) ⋁ B
	
	 3.	 (E  H )  Q
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Assoc
	 ★(10)	 1.	 ∼R ⋁ ∼P
	
	 2.	 ∼F ⊃ ∼W
	
	 3.	 G  ∼A
	
	 4.	 ________  ____ , DM
	
(11)	 1.	 ∼B ⋁ E
	
	 2.	 ∼E  ∼A
	
	 3.	 ∼C ⊃ ∼R
	
	 4.	 ________  ____ , DN
	
(12)	 1.	 ∼G  (S ⊃ A)
	
	 2.	 ∼S ⊃ (B  K )
	
	 3.	 ∼Q ⋁ (T  R )
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Dist
	 ★(13)	 1.	 F ⊃ (∼S ⋁ M )
	
	 2.	 H ⊃ (∼L  ∼D)
	
	 3.	 N ⊃ (∼G ⊃ ∼C )
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , DM
	
(14)	 1.	 F ⊃ (P ⊃ ∼E )
	
	 2.	 C ⋁ (S  ∼B)
	
	 3.	 M  (R  ∼T )
	
	 4.	 ___________  ____ , Assoc
418   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

7
	
(15)	 1.	 (D ⋁ ∼K )  (D ⋁ ∼W )
	
	 2.	 (S ⋁ ∼Z ) ⋁ (P ⋁ ∼T )
	
	 3.	 (Q ⊃ ∼N )  (Q ⊃ ∼F )
	
	 4.	 _________________  ____ , Dist
	II.	 In the following symbolized arguments, derive the line needed to obtain the 
­conclusion (last line ), and supply the justification for both lines.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 K ⋁ C
	
	 2.	 ∼C
	
	 3.	 _____  ____
	
	 4.	 K        ____
	
(2)	 1.	 G ⊃ (R ⋁ N )
	
	 2.	 ∼R  ∼N
	
	 3.	 __________  ____
	
	 4.	 ∼G          ____
	
(3)	 1.	 H  T
	
	 2.	 _____  ____
	
	 3.	 T        ____
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (L  S )  F
	
	 2.	 ________  ____
	
	 3.	 L            ____
	
(5)	 1.	 ∼B ⋁ K
	
	 2.	 ________  ____
	
	 3.	 ∼(B  ∼K )     ____
	
(6)	 1.	 C ⊃ ∼A
	
	 2.	 A
	
	 3.	 ______  ____
	
	 4.	 ∼C       ____
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (D  M ) ⋁ (D  N )
	
	 2.	 ______________  ____
	
	 3.	 D                 ____
	
(8)	 1.	 (U ⋁ T ) ⊃ R
	
	 2.	 T ⋁ U
	
	 3.	 __________  ____
	
	 4.	 R              ____
	
(9)	 1.	 ∼L ⋁ M
	
	 2.	 L
	
	 3.	 ______  ____
	
	 4.	 M         ____
	 ★(10)	 1.	 D ⋁ (N  H )
	
	 2.	 __________  ____
	
	 3.	 D ⋁ N          ____
	
(11)	 1.	 (K ⋁ E )  (K ⋁ G )
	
	 2.	 ∼K
	
	 3.	 ______________  ____
	
	 4.	 E  G              ____
	
(12)	 1.	 (N ⊃ T )  (F ⊃ Q)
	
	 2.	 F ⋁ N
	
	 3.	 ______________  ____
	
	 4.	 T ⋁ Q               ____
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (M ⋁ G) ⋁ T
	
	 2.	 ∼M
	
	 3.	 __________  ____
	
	 4.	 G ⋁ T           ____
	
(14)	 1.	 (∼A ⊃ T )  (∼S ⊃ K )
	
	 2.	 ∼(A  S )
	
	 3.	 ______________  ____
	
	 4.	 T ⋁ K                ____
	
(15)	 1.	 ∼R
	
	 2.	 _______  ____
	
	 3.	 ∼(R  T )      ____
	III.	Use the first thirteen rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following 
symbolized arguments:
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (∼M ⊃ P)  (∼N ⊃ Q)
	
	 2.	 ∼(M  N )	
  /  P ⋁ Q
	
(2)	 1.	 ∼S	
	
  /  ∼(F  S)
	
(3)	 1.	 J ⋁ (K  L)
	
	 2.	 ∼K	
	
  /  J
SECTION 7.3 Rules of Replacement I   419
	 ★(4)	 1.	 ∼(N  T )
	
	 2.	 T	
      /  ∼N
	
(5)	 1.	 H ⊃ ∼A
	
	 2.	 A	
      /  ∼(H ⋁ ∼A)

7
	
(6)	 1.	 R ⊃ ∼B
	
	 2.	 D ⋁ R
	
	 3.	 B	
	
  /  D
	 ★(7)	 1.	 T ⊃ (B ⋁ E )
	
	 2.	 ∼E  T	 	
  /  B
	
(8)	 1.	 (O ⋁ M ) ⊃ S
	
	 2.	 ∼S	
	
  /  ∼M
	
(9)	 1.	 Q ⋁ (L ⋁ C )
	
	 2.	 ∼C	
	
  /  L ⋁ Q
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (K  H ) ⋁ (K  L)
	
	 2.	 ∼L	
	
  /  H
	
(11)	 1.	 ∼(∼E  ∼N ) ⊃ T
	
	 2.	 G ⊃ (N ⋁ E )	
  /  G ⊃ T
	
(12)	 1.	 H  (C  T )
	
	 2.	 ∼(∼F  T )	
  /  F
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (E  I ) ⋁ (M  U )
	
	 2.	 ∼E	
	
/  ∼(E ⋁ ∼M )
	
(14)	 1.	 ∼( J ⋁ K )
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ K
	
	 3.	 S ⊃ B	
	
  /  ∼S  ∼J
	
(15)	 1.	 (G  H ) ⋁ (M  G )
	
	 2.	 G ⊃ (T  A)	
  / A
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (Q  N ) ⋁ (N  T )
	
	 2.	 (Q ⋁ C ) ⊃ ∼N	   /  T
	
(17)	 1.	 ∼(U ⋁ R)
	
	 2.	 (∼R ⋁ N ) ⊃ (P  H)
	
	 3.	 Q ⊃ ∼H	
  /  ∼Q
	
(18)	 1.	 ∼(F  A)
	
	 2.	 ∼(L ⋁ ∼A)
	
	 3.	 D ⊃ (F ⋁ L)	
  /  ∼D
	 ★(19)	 1.	 [(I ⋁ M ) ⋁ G ] ⊃ ∼G
	
	 2.	 M ⋁ G	 	
  /  M
	
(20)	 1.	 E ⊃ ∼B
	
	 2.	 U ⊃ ∼C
	
	 3.	 ∼(∼E  ∼U )	   / ∼(B  C )
	
(21)	 1.	 ∼(K ⋁ F )
	
	 2.	 ∼F ⊃ (K ⋁ C )
	
	 3.	 (G ⋁ C ) ⊃∼H	
  /  ∼(K ⋁ H )
	 ★(22)	 1.	 S ⋁ (I  ∼J )
	
	 2.	 S ⊃ ∼R
	
	 3.	 ∼J ⊃ ∼Q	
	 /  ∼(R  Q)
	
(23)	 1.	 ( J ⋁ F ) ⋁ M
	
	 2.	 ( J ⋁ M ) ⊃ ∼P
	
	 3.	 ∼F	
	
/  ∼(F ⋁ P)
	
(24)	 1.	 (K  P ) ⋁ (K  Q )
	
	 2.	 P ⊃ ∼K		
/  Q ⋁ T
	 ★(25)	 1.	 E ⋁ ∼(D ⋁ C )
	
	 2.	 ( E ⋁ ∼D) ⊃ C	
/  E
	
(26)	 1.	 A  ( F  L)
	
	 2.	 A ⊃ (U ⋁ W )
	
	 3.	 F ⊃ (U ⋁ X )	
/ U ⋁ (W  X )
	
(27)	 1.	 (T  R) ⊃ P
	
	 2.	 (∼P  R)  G
	
	 3.	 (∼T ⋁ N ) ⊃ H	 /  H
	 ★(28)	 1.	 P ⋁ ( I  L )
	
	 2.	 ( P ⋁ I ) ⊃ ∼( L ⋁ C )
	
	 3.	 (P  ∼C ) ⊃ (E  F )	   /  F ⋁ D
	
(29)	 1.	 B ⋁ (S  N )
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ ∼S
	
	 3.	 S ⊃ ∼N		
/  B ⋁ W
	
(30)	 1.	 (∼M ⋁ E ) ⊃ (S ⊃ U )
	
	 2.	 (∼Q ⋁ E ) ⊃ (U ⊃ H )
	
	 3.	 ∼(M ⋁ Q)	
  /  S ⊃ H
	 ★(31)	 1.	 (∼R ⋁ D) ⊃ ∼(F  G )
	
	 2.	 (F  R) ⊃ S
	
	 3.	 F  ∼S	 	
  /  ∼(S ⋁ G)
	
(32)	 1.	 ∼Q ⊃ (C  B)
	
	 2.	 ∼T ⊃ (B  H )
	
	 3.	 ∼(Q  T )	
/  B
	
(33)	 1.	 ∼(A  G )
	
	 2.	 ∼(A  E )
	
	 3.	 G ⋁ E	
	
/  ∼(A  F )
	 ★(34)	 1.	 (M  N ) ⋁ (O  P)
	
	 2.	 (N ⋁ O) ⊃ ∼P	
/  N
	
(35)	 1.	 (T  K ) ⋁ (C  E )
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ ∼E
	
	 3.	 E ⊃ ∼C		
/  T  K
420   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

7
	IV.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and then use the first  
thirteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Use the translation  
letters in the order in which they are listed.
	
★1.	 Either health-care costs are skyrocketing and they are attributable to 
greedy doctors, or health-care costs are skyrocketing and they are attribut-
able to greedy hospitals. If health-care costs are skyrocketing, then both the  
government should intercede and health care may have to be rationed.  
Therefore, health-care costs are skyrocketing and health care may have to be 
rationed. (S, D, H, I, R)
	
2.	 Either the ancient Etruscans were experienced city planners and they invented 
the art of writing or they were highly skilled engineers and they invented the 
art of writing. If the ancient Etruscans were bloodthirsty numskulls (as schol-
ars once thought), they did not invent the art of writing. Therefore, the an-
cient Etruscans were not bloodthirsty numskulls (as scholars once thought).  
(C, I, H, B)
	
3.	 It is not the case that either the Earth’s molten core is stationary or that it con-
tains no iron. If it is not the case that both the Earth’s molten core is stationary 
and has a regular topography, then either the Earth’s core contains no iron or 
the direction of the Earth’s magnetic field is subject to change. Therefore, the 
direction of the Earth’s magnetic field is subject to change. (S, C, R, D)
	
★4.	 Either mosquito genes can be cloned or mosquitoes will become resistant to all 
insecticides and the incidence of encephalitis will increase. If either mosquito 
genes can be cloned or the incidence of encephalitis increases, then mosqui-
toes will not become resistant to all insecticides. Therefore, either mosquito 
genes can be cloned or mosquitoes will multiply out of control. (G, R, E, M )
	
5.	 Protein engineering will prove to be as successful as genetic engineering, and 
new enzymes will be developed for producing food and breaking down indus-
trial wastes. If protein engineering proves to be as successful as genetic engi-
neering and new enzymes are developed for breaking down industrial wastes, 
then it is not the case that new enzymes will be developed for producing food 
but not medicines. Therefore, protein ­engineering will prove to be as success-
ful as genetic engineering and new enzymes will be developed for producing 
medicines. (E, P, B, M )
	
6.	 If workers have a fundamental right to a job, then unemployment will be vir-
tually nonexistent but job redundancy will become a problem. If workers have 
no fundamental right to a job, then production efficiency will be maximized 
but job security will be jeopardized. Workers either have or do not have a fun-
damental right to a job. Therefore, either unemployment will be virtually non-
existent or production efficiency will be maximized. (F, U, R, P, S)
	
★7.	 If China is to reduce its huge trade surplus, then it must either convince its 
citizens to spend more or it must move its manufacturing facilities to other 
countries. It is not the case that China will either increase its imports or con-
vince its citizens to spend more. Furthermore, it is not the case that China will 
SECTION 7.3 Rules of Replacement I   421

7
either allow foreign construction companies to compete on an equal footing 
or move its manufacturing facilities to other countries. Therefore, China will 
not reduce its huge trade surplus. (R, C, M, I, A)
	
8.	 If women are by nature either passive or uncompetitive, then it is not the case 
that there are lawyers who are women. If men are by nature either insensitive 
or without the ability to nurture, then it is not the case that there are kinder-
garten teachers who are men. There are lawyers who are women and kinder-
garten teachers who are men. Therefore, it is not the case that either women 
by nature are uncompetitive or men by nature are without the ability to nur-
ture. (P, U, L, I, W, K )
	
9.	 It is not the case that either the sun’s interior rotates faster than its surface or 
Einstein’s general theory of relativity is wrong. If the sun’s interior does not 
rotate faster than its surface and eccentricities in the orbit of Mercury can be 
explained by solar gravitation, then Einstein’s general theory of relativity is 
wrong. Therefore, eccentricities in the orbit of Mercury cannot be explained 
by solar gravitation. (S, E, M )
	 ★10.	 Either school dropout programs are not as effective as they could be, or they 
provide basic thinking skills and psychological counseling to their students. 
Either school dropout programs are not as effective as they could be, or they 
adequately prepare their students for getting a job and working effectively 
with others. Either school dropout programs do not provide psychological 
counseling to their students or they do not provide adequate preparation for 
working effectively with others. Therefore, school dropout programs are not 
as effective as they could be. (E, B, P, G, W )
	V.	 The following dialogue contains eight arguments. Translate each into symbolic 
form and then use the first thirteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion  
of each.
With This Ring
“Hi. I didn’t expect to see you here,” says Ken as he catches sight of Gina on the steps of 
the church. “You must be friends with the bride.”
	
“I am,” she says, “and are you a friend of the groom?”
	
“A friend of a friend of the groom,” he replies. “So I don’t know too many people here.”
	
“Well, I’ll be happy to keep you company until the ceremony starts,” Gina says. “And 
it looks like things are running late, so we’ll have a few minutes.”
	
She looks around and sighs. “Every time I attend a wedding,” she says, “I feel sad for a 
lesbian couple I know who would give just about anything to get married. Unfortunately 
this state doesn’t allow same-sex marriage.”
	
“Well, I don’t think that’s unfortunate,” says Ken. “If marriage is sacred, then we 
shouldn’t tamper with it; and if that’s the case, then we shouldn’t allow same-sex mar-
riage. And I do think marriage is sacred, so we shouldn’t allow same-sex marriage.”
	
Gina looks shocked. Ken continues. “Look,” he says, “the Bible condemns homosexu-
ality. If either Leviticus or Romans is true, then homosexuality is an abomination and it 
must be avoided.  And if it must be avoided or it’s contrary to nature, then if it’s a sin, then 
422   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

7
it must not be allowed. Now, we know that Romans is true, and if the Bible condemns  
homosexuality, then it’s a sin. Thus, same-sex marriage must not be allowed.”
	
“Obviously you’re injecting religion into the issue,” Gina responds, as she waves to a 
friend in the gathering crowd. “But the First Amendment to the Constitution says that 
the state must not act either to establish a religion or to interfere with religious prac-
tices. If the state bars same-sex marriage for your reasons, it acts to establish a religion. 
So, it must not bar same-sex marriage for your reasons.”
	
Ken opens his mouth to object, but this time it’s Gina who’s on a roll. “Also,” she con-
tinues, “our country is based on the principle of equality. If straight couples can get mar-
ried, and obviously they can, then either same-sex couples can get married or same-sex 
couples are not equal to straight couples. And if same-sex couples can get married, then 
our law has to change and other state laws have to change as well. Now, if our country 
is based on the principle of equality, then same-sex couples are equal to straight couples. 
Thus, our law has to change.”
	
“Look,” says Ken, “Marriage has always been between a man and a woman. And if that 
is so and tradition is worth preserving, then if we allow same-sex marriage, then the very 
concept of marriage will change and gender roles will switch. Now tradition is worth 
preserving and gender roles shouldn’t switch. Thus, we cannot allow same-sex marriage.”
	
“Ha!” says Gina. “I can see why you don’t want gender roles to switch. You can’t see 
yourself in the kitchen preparing meals and washing dishes.”
	
“Well, I don’t really relish the idea,” Ken admits. “I think God wants us to keep things 
the way they are. But here’s another reason. One of the chief purposes of marriage is rais-
ing children, and if that is so, then it’s important that the children grow up well adjusted. 
But if the children are to be well adjusted, then they must have both a male role model 
and a female role model. If the parents are both men, then the children will have no fe-
male role model; if they’re both women, then the children will have no male role model. 
Clearly if the marriage is a same-sex marriage, then the parents are either both men or 
they are both women. Therefore, the marriage must not be a same-sex marriage.”
	
“Your reasoning is a bit shortsighted,” Gina says. “In a same-sex marriage with chil-
dren, the parents are either both men or they are both women. This much I grant you. 
But if they are both men, then surely they have close female friends, and if that is so, then 
the marriage has both male and female role models. If the parents are both women, then 
surely they have close male friends, and if that is so, then the marriage has both female 
and male role models. If a marriage has both male and female role models, then the chil-
dren will be well adjusted. Therefore, in a same-sex marriage with children, the children 
will be well adjusted. What do you think of that?”
	
“Well,” says Ken, as he scratches his head, “I wonder if those surrogate role models 
would be as effective as male and female parents. But in either event there is the option 
of civil unions. Why won’t that satisfy you?”
	
“Civil unions fall short of marriage in too many ways,” Gina replies. “They’re valid only 
in the state in which they are performed, and they don’t allow the partners either to file 
a joint federal tax return or to receive Social Security survivor benefits. If they’re valid 
only in the state in which they’re performed, then if the couple moves to a different state, 
then if one partner is hospitalized, the other partner will have no visitation rights. If the 
partners can’t file a joint federal tax return, then they must file as single taxpayers. And if 
that is so, then they might pay much more in taxes. If the partners don’t receive Social Se-
curity survivor benefits, then if a partner receiving Social Security benefits dies, then the 
SECTION 7.3 Rules of Replacement I   423

424   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
other will not receive anything as a survivor. Suppose that two partners in a civil union 
move to a different state, and that one partner, who receives Social Security benefits, is 
hospitalized and eventually dies. The conclusion is that the other partner will not have 
either visitation rights while the hospitalized partner is alive or survivor benefits after 
that partner dies, and the partners might pay much more in taxes. Does that seem like a 
fair substitute for marriage?”
	
“Maybe not,” Ken says, as he stretches to see above the crowd. “But I still think there’s 
something unnatural about same-sex marriage. Anyway, here are the bride and groom. 
Let’s go inside.”
	
“Good, let’s go,” says Gina.
7.4	
Rules of Replacement II
PREVIEW    Your hike comes to an end on the bank of a river with several Class 3 rapids. Fortu-
nately, before starting out on the hike you had arranged to have your kayak dropped off at this location. 
Kayaking down the river will pose an even greater—but more exhilarating—challenge than climbing 
the cliff. Selecting the best route through the rapids requires strategic vision, and negotiating the rocks 
without capsizing demands skill. You must be constantly aware of where you are and where you want to 
go. This section of the book supports further practice with this kind of thinking.
The remaining five rules of replacement are as follows:
14.	 Transposition (Trans):	
17.	 Exportation (Exp):
	
( p ⊃ q) :: (∼q ⊃ ∼p)	
	
[( p
q) ⊃ r] :: [ p ⊃ (q ⊃ r)]
15.	 Material implication (Impl):	
18.	 Tautology ( Taut ):
	
( p ⊃ q) :: (∼p ⋁ q)	
	
p :: ( p ⋁ p)
16.	 Material equivalence (Equiv):	
	
p :: ( p
p)
	
( p ≡ q) :: [( p ⊃ q
q ⊃ p)]
	
( p ≡ q) :: [( p
q) ⋁ (∼p
∼q)]
Transposition asserts that the antecedent and consequent of a conditional statement 
may switch places if and only if tildes are inserted before both or tildes are removed 
from both. The rule is fairly easy to understand and is easily proved by a truth table.
Material implication is less obvious than transposition, but it can be illustrated by 
substituting actual statements in place of the letters. For example, the statement “ If you 
bother me, then I’ll punch you in the nose” (B ⊃ P ) is logically equivalent to “Either 
you stop bothering me or I’ll punch you in the nose” (∼B ⋁ P ). The rule states that a 
horseshoe may be replaced by a wedge if the left-hand component is negated, and the 
reverse replacement is allowed if a tilde is deleted from the left-hand component.
Material equivalence has two formulations. The first is the same as the definition of 
material equivalence given in Section 6.1. The second formulation is easy to remember 
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

7
SECTION 7.4 Rules of Replacement II   425
through recalling the two ways in which p ≡ q may be true. Either p and q are both  
true or p and q are both false. This, of course, is the meaning of [( p  q) ⋁ (∼p  ∼q)].
Exportation is also fairly easy to understand. It asserts that the statement “If we have 
both p and q, then we have r” is logically equivalent to “If we have p, then if we have q, 
then we have r.” As an illustration of this rule, the statement “If Bob and Sue told the 
truth, then Jim is guilty” is logically equivalent to “If Bob told the truth, then if Sue told 
the truth, then Jim is guilty.”
Tautology, the last rule introduced in this section, is obvious. Its effect is to ­eliminate 
redundancy in disjunctions and conjunctions.
The following proofs illustrate the use of these five rules.
  1.	 ∼A	
/  A ⊃ B
In this argument the conclusion contains a letter not found in the premise. Obviously, addi­
tion must be used to introduce the B. The material implication rule completes the proof:
  1.	 ∼A	
/  A ⊃ B
  2.	 ∼A ⋁ B	
1, Add
  3.	 A ⊃ B	
2, Impl
Here is another example:
  1.	 F ⊃ G
  2.	 F ⋁ G	
/  G
To derive the conclusion of this argument, some method must be found to link the two 
premises together and eliminate the F. Hypothetical syllogism provides the solution, 
but first the second premise must be converted into a conditional. Here is the proof:
  1.	 F ⊃ G
  2.	 F ⋁ G	
/  G
  3.	 ∼ ∼F ⋁ G	
2, DN
  4.	 ∼F ⊃ G	
3, Impl
  5.	 ∼F ⊃ ∼ ∼G	
4, DN
  6.	 ∼G ⊃ F	
5, Trans
  7.	 ∼G ⊃ G	
1, 6, HS
  8.	 ∼ ∼G ⋁ G	
7, Impl
  9.	 G ⋁ G	
8, DN
10.	 G	
9, Taut
Another example:
  1.	 J ⊃ (K ⊃ L)	
/  K ⊃ (  J ⊃ L)
The conclusion can be obtained by simply rearranging the components of the single 
premise. Exportation provides the simplest method:
  1.	 J ⊃ (K ⊃ L )	
/  K ⊃ (  J ⊃ L)
  2.	 (  J
K ) ⊃ L	
1, Exp
  3.	 (K
J ) ⊃ L	
2, Com
  4.	 K ⊃ (  J ⊃ L)	
3, Exp

426   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
Another example:
  1.	 M ⊃ N
  2.	 M ⊃ O	
/  M ⊃ (N
O)
As with the F and G example, some method must be found to link the two premises 
together. In this case, however, hypothetical syllogism will not work. The solution lies 
in setting up a distribution step:
  1.	 M ⊃ N
  2.	 M ⊃ O	
/  M ⊃ (N
O)
  3.	 ∼M ⋁ N	
1, Impl
  4.	 ∼M ⋁ O	
2, Impl
  5.	 (∼M ⋁ N 
∼M ⋁ O)	
3, 4, Conj
  6.	 ∼M ⋁ (N
O)	
5, Dist
  7.	 M ⊃ (N
O)	
6, Impl
Another example:
  1.	 P ⊃ Q
  2.	 R ⊃ (S
T )
  3.	 ∼R ⊃ ∼Q
  4.	 S ⊃ (T ⊃ P )	
/  P ≡ R
The conclusion is a biconditional, and there are only two ways that a biconditional 
can be obtained from such premises—namely, via the two formulations of the mate-
rial equivalence rule. The fact that the premises are all conditional statements suggests 
the first formulation of this rule. Accordingly, we must try to obtain P ⊃ R and R ⊃ P. 
Again, the fact that the premises are themselves conditionals suggests hypothetical syl-
logism to accomplish this. Premises 1 and 3 can be used to set up one hypothetical 
syllogism; premises 2 and 4 provide the other. Here is the proof:
  1.	 P ⊃ Q
  2.	 R ⊃ (S
T )
  3.	 ∼R ⊃ ∼Q
  4.	 S ⊃ (T ⊃ P)	
/  P ≡ R
  5.	 Q ⊃ R	
3, Trans
  6.	 P ⊃ R	
1, 5, HS
  7.	 (S
T ) ⊃ P	
4, Exp
  8.	 R ⊃ P	
2, 7, HS
  9.	 (P ⊃ R
R ⊃ P)	
6, 8, Conj
10.	 P ≡ R	
9, Equiv
As we saw in Section 7.3, if it is not readily apparent how the conclusion should 
be derived, we can use the rules of replacement to deconstruct the conclusion. This 
will usually provide insight on how best to proceed. Again, this technique is justified 
because the rules of replacement are two-way rules. As a result, they can be applied in 
reverse order in the completed proof. Here is an example:
  1.	 ∼S ⊃ K
  2.	 S ⊃ (R ⋁ M )	
/  ∼R ⊃ (∼M ⊃ K )

7
In deconstructing the conclusion, the form of the conclusion suggests exportation, and 
the result of this step suggests De Morgan’s rule. For further insight, we apply transposi-
tion to the latter step. Each step follows from the one preceding it:
∼R ⊃ (∼M ⊃ K )
(∼R
∼M) ⊃ K	
Exp
∼(R ⋁ M) ⊃ K	
DM
∼K ⊃ ∼ ∼(R ⋁ M)	
Trans
∼K ⊃ (R ⋁ M)	
DN
Now, examining the premises in light of the deconstruction suggests that we begin by 
setting up a hypothetical syllogism. This will give us the last step in the deconstruction. 
We can then obtain the conclusion by repeating the deconstruction steps in reverse 
order. The completed proof is as follows:
1.	 ∼S ⊃ K
2.	 S ⊃ (R ⋁ M)	
/ ∼R ⊃ (∼M ⊃ K )
3.	 ∼K ⊃ ∼ ∼S	
1, Trans
4.	 ∼K ⊃ S	
3, DN
5.	 ∼K ⊃ (R ⋁ M)	
2, 4, HS
6.	 ∼(R ⋁ M) ⊃ ∼ ∼K	
5, Trans
7.	 ∼(R ⋁ M) ⊃ K	
6, DN
8.	 (∼R
∼M) ⊃ K	
7, DM
9.	 ∼R ⊃ (∼M ⊃ K )	
8, Exp
Here is another example:
1.	 K ⊃ M
2.	 L ⊃ M	
/  (K ⋁ L) ⊃ M
In deconstructing the conclusion, the form of the premises suggests that we use some 
procedure that will combine M separately with K and L. This, in turn, suggests distri- 
bution; but before we can use distribution, we must eliminate the horseshoe via mate-
rial implication. The deconstruction is as follows:
(K ⋁ L) ⊃ M
∼(K ⋁ L) ⋁ M	
Impl
(∼K
∼L) ⋁ M	
DM
M ⋁ (∼K
∼L)	
Com
(M ⋁ ∼K  
M ⋁ ∼L )	
Dist
(∼K ⋁ M  
M ⋁ ∼L )	
Com
(∼K ⋁ M 
∼L ⋁ M )	
Com
(K ⊃ M 
∼L ⋁ M )	
Impl
(K ⊃ M  
L ⊃ M )	
Impl
Now, examining the premises in light of the last line of the deconstruction suggests that 
we begin by joining the premises together via the conjunction rule. The conclusion can 
SECTION 7.4 Rules of Replacement II   427

428   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
then be obtained by reversing the steps of the deconstruction:
  1.	 K ⊃ M
  2.	 L ⊃ M	
/  (K ⋁ L) ⊃ M
  3.	 (K ⊃ M 
L ⊃ M )	
1, 2, Conj
  4.	 (∼K ⋁ M 
L ⊃ M )	
3, Impl
  5.	 (∼K ⋁ M 
∼L ⋁ M )	 4, Impl
  6.	 (M ⋁ ∼K 
∼L ⋁ M )	 5, Com
  7.	 (M ⋁ ∼K 
M ⋁ ∼L )	 6, Com
  8.	 M ⋁ (∼K
∼L)	
7, Dist
  9.	 (∼K
∼L) ⋁ M	
8, Com
10.	 ∼(K ⋁ L) ⋁ M	
9, DM
11.	 (K ⋁ L) ⊃ M	
10, Impl
Note that whenever we use this strategy of working backward from the conclusion, the 
rules of replacement are the only rules we may use. We may not use the rules of implica-
tion, because these rules are one-way rules.
This section ends with some strategies that show how the last five rules of replace-
ment can be used together with various other rules.
Strategy 17:	 Material implication can be used to set up hypothetical syllogism:
1.	 ∼A ⋁ B
2.	 ∼B ⋁ C
3.	 A ⊃ B	
1, Impl
4.	 B ⊃ C	
2, Impl
5.	 A ⊃ C	
3, 4, HS
Strategy 18:	 Exportation can be used to set up modus ponens:
1.	 (A
B) ⊃ C
2.	 A
3.	 A ⊃ (B ⊃ C )	
1, Exp
4.	 B ⊃ C	
2, 3, MP
Strategy 19:	 Exportation can be used to set up modus tollens:
1.	 A ⊃ (B ⊃ C )
2.	 ∼C
3.	 (A
B) ⊃ C	
1, Exp
4.	 ∼(A
B)	
2, 3, MT
Strategy 20:	 Addition can be used to set up material implication:
1.	 A
2.	 A ⋁ ∼B	
1, Add
3.	 ∼B ⋁ A	
2, Com
4.	 B ⊃ A	
3, Impl
Strategy 21:	 Transposition can be used to set up hypothetical syllogism:
1.	 A ⊃ B
2.	 ∼C ⊃ ∼B
3.	 B ⊃ C	
2, Trans
4.	 A ⊃ C	
1, 3, HS

EXERCISE 7.4	
	 I.	 For each of the following lists of premises, derive the indicated conclusion and 
complete the justification. For tautology, derive a conclusion that is simpler than 
the premise.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 H ⋁ F
	
	 2.	 N ⋁ ∼S
	
	 3.	 ∼G ⋁ Q
	
	 4.	 ______  ____ , Impl
	
(2)	 1.	 R ⊃ (S ⊃ N )
	
	 2.	 T ⊃ (U ⋁ M )
	
	 3.	 K  (L ⊃ W )
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Exp
	
(3)	 1.	 G ≡ R
	
	 2.	 H ⊃ P
	
	 3.	 ∼F ⋁ T
	
	 4.	 ______  ____ , Trans
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (B ⊃ N )  (N ⊃ B)
	
	 2.	 (R ⋁ F )  (F ⋁ R)
	
	 3.	 (K ⊃ C ) ⋁ (C ⊃ K )
	
	 4.	 _______________  ____ , Equiv
7
Strategy 22:	 Transposition can be used to set up constructive dilemma:
1.	 (A ⊃ B
C ⊃ D)
2.	 ∼B ⋁ ∼D
3.	 (∼B ⊃ ∼A
C ⊃ D)	
1,  Trans
4.	 (∼B ⊃ ∼A
∼D ⊃ ∼C )	
3,  Trans
5.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼C	
2,  4, CD
Strategy 23:	 Constructive dilemma can be used to set up tautology:
1.	 (A ⊃ C 
B ⊃ C )
2.	 A ⋁ B
3.	 C ⋁ C	
1, 2, CD
4.	 C	
3,  Taut
Strategy 24:	 Material implication can be used to set up tautology:
1.	 A ⊃ ∼A
2.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼A	
1, Impl
3.	 ∼A	
2,  Taut
Strategy 25:	 Material implication can be used to set up distribution:
1.	 A ⊃ (B
C )
2.	 ∼A ⋁ (B
C )	
1, Impl
3.	 (∼A ⋁ B
∼A ⋁ C )	
2, Dist
SECTION 7.4 Rules of Replacement II   429

7
	
(5)	 1.	 E ⋁ ∼E
	
	 2.	 A ⋁ A
	
	 3.	 G  ∼G
	
	 4.	 ______  ____ , Taut
	
(6)	 1.	 S ⋁ ∼M
	
	 2.	 ∼N  ∼T
	
	 3.	 ∼L ⊃ Q
	
	 4.	 _______  ____ , Trans
	 ★(7)	 1.	 ∼C ⊃ ∼F
	
	 2.	 D ⋁ ∼P
	
	 3.	 ∼R  Q
	
	 4.	 ________  ____ , Impl
	
(8)	 1.	 E ⊃ (R  Q)
	
	 2.	 (G  N ) ⊃ Z
	
	 3.	 (S ⊃ M ) ⊃ P
	
	 4.	 ___________  ____ , Exp
	
(9)	 1.	 (D  H ) ⋁ (∼D  ∼H )
	
	 2.	 (F ⊃ J )  (∼F ⊃ ∼J )
	
	 3.	 (N ⋁ T )  (∼N ⋁ ∼T )
	
	 4.	 ________________  ____ , Equiv
	 ★(10)	 1.	 L ⊃ (A ⊃ A)
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ (R ⋁ ∼R )
	
	 3.	 S ⊃ (G  G )
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Taut
	
(11)	 1.	 K  (S ⋁ B )
	
	 2.	 ∼F ⊃ ∼J
	
	 3.	 ∼E ⋁ ∼M
	
	 4.	 _________  ____ , Trans
	
(12)	 1.	 H ⊃ (K  J )
	
	 2.	 (N ⋁ E ) ⊃ B
	
	 3.	 C ⊃ (H ⊃ A)
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Exp
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (A ⊃ ∼C )  (C ⊃ ∼A)
	
	 2.	 (W ⊃ ∼T )  (∼T ⊃ W )
	
	 3.	 (M ⊃ ∼E )  (∼M ⊃ E )
	
	 4.	 _________________  ____ , Equiv
	
(14)	 1.	 (∼K ⋁ M) ≡ S
	
	 2.	 T ⋁ (F  G )
	
	 3.	 R ≡ (N  ∼H )
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Impl
	
(15)	 1.	 (S ⋁ S) ⊃ D
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ (T  ∼T )
	
	 3.	 (Q ⊃ Q) ⊃ M
	
	 4.	 __________  ____ , Taut
430   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

7
	II.	 In the following symbolized arguments, derive the line needed to obtain the  
conclusion (last line), and supply the justification for both lines.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 ∼J ⋁ M
	
	 2.	 M ⊃ B
	
	 3.	 ______  ____
	
	 4.	 J ⊃ B       ____
	
(2)	 1.	 ( J  F ) ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 J
	
	 3.	 ______  ____
	
	 4.	 F ⊃ N        ____
	
(3)	 1.	 C ⊃ A
	
	 2.	 A ⊃ C
	
	 3.	 _____  ____
	
	 4.	 C ≡ A      ____
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (G ⊃ K )  (T ⊃ K )
	
	 2.	 G ⋁ T
	
	 3.	 _______________  ____
	
	 4.	 K                  ____
	
(5)	 1.	 (G ⊃ B)  (∼C ⊃ ∼H )
	
	 2.	 G ⋁ H
	
	 3.	 _________________  ____
	
	 4.	 B ⋁ C                    ____
	
(6)	 1.	 J ⊃ (M ⊃ Q)
	
	 2.	 J  M
	
	 3.	 __________  ____
	
	 4.	 Q              ____
	 ★(7)	 1.	 H ⊃ (∼C ⋁ R)
	
	 2.	 ___________  ____
	
	 3.	 (H  C ) ⊃ R       ____
	
(8)	 1.	 ∼G ⊃ ∼T
	
	 2.	 G ⊃ N
	
	 3.	 __________  ____
	
	 4.	 T ⊃ N           ____
	
(9)	 1.	 K ⊃ (A ⊃ F )
	
	 2.	 ∼F
	
	 3.	 __________  ____
	
	 4.	 ∼(K  A)        ____
	 ★(10)	 1.	 H ⊃ ∼H
	
	 2.	 _______  ____
	
	 3.	 ∼H        ____
	
(11)	 1.	 ∼S
	
	 2.	 ______  ____
	
	 3.	 S ⊃ K       ____
	
(12)	 1.	 M ⊃ (M ⊃ D)
	
	 2.	 ___________  ____
	
	 3.	 M ⊃ D         ____
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (N ⊃ A)  (∼N ⊃ ∼A)
	
	 2.	 _________________  ____
	
	 3.	 N ≡ A                    ____
	
(14)	 1.	 E  R
	
	 2.	 _____  ____
	
	 3.	 E ≡ R        ____
	
(15)	 1.	 Q ⊃ (∼W ⊃ ∼G )
	
	 2.	 _____________  ____
	
	 3.	 (Q  G) ⊃ W        ____
	III.	Use the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following sym-
bolized arguments.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (S  K ) ⊃ R
	
	 2.	 K	
	
/  S ⊃ R
	
(2)	 1.	 T ⊃ (F ⋁ F )
	
	 2.	 ∼(F  F )	
/  ∼T
	
(3)	 1.	 G ⊃ E
	
	 2.	 H ⊃ ∼E	
/  G ⊃ ∼H
	 ★(4)	 1.	 S ≡ Q
	
	 2.	 ∼S	
	
/  ∼Q
	
(5)	 1.	 ∼N ⋁ P
	
	 2.	 (N ⊃ P) ⊃ T	
/  T
SECTION 7.4 Rules of Replacement II   431

7
	
(6)	 1.	 F ⊃ B
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ (B ⊃ J )	
	
/  F ⊃ J
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (B ⊃ M)  (D ⊃ M )
	
	 2.	 B ⋁ D	
	
	
/  M
	
(8)	 1.	 Q ⊃ (F ⊃ A)
	
	 2.	 R ⊃ (A ⊃ F )
	
	 3.	 Q  R	
	
	
/  F ≡ A
	
(9)	 1.	 T ⊃ (∼T ⋁ G )
	
	 2.	 ∼G	
	
	
/  ∼T
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (B ⊃ G )  (F ⊃ N )
	
	 2.	 ∼(G  N )	
	
/  ∼(B  F )
	
(11)	 1.	 ( J  R) ⊃ H
	
	 2.	 (R ⊃ H ) ⊃ M
	
	 3.	 ∼(P ⋁ ∼J )	
	
/  M  ∼P
	
(12)	 1.	 T	
	
	
/  S ⊃ T
	 ★(13)	 1.	 K ⊃ (B ⊃ ∼M )
	
	 2.	 D ⊃ (K  M )	
	
/  D ⊃ ∼B
	
(14)	 1.	 (O ⊃ C )  (∼S ⊃ ∼D)
	
	 2.	 (E ⊃ D)  (∼E ⊃ ∼C )	
/  O ⊃ S
	
(15)	 1.	 ∼(U  W ) ⊃ X
	
	 2.	 U ⊃ ∼U	
	
/  ∼(U  ⋁  ∼X )
	 ★(16)	 1.	 T ⊃ R
	
	 2.	 T ⊃ ∼R		
	
/  ∼T
	
(17)	 1.	 S ⋁ ∼N
	
	 2.	 ∼S ⋁ Q	 	
	
/  N ⊃ Q
	
(18)	 1.	 M ⊃ (U ⊃ H )
	
	 2.	 (H ⋁ ∼U ) ⊃ F	 	
/  M ⊃ F
	 ★(19)	 1.	 ∼R ⋁ P
	
	 2.	 R ⋁ ∼P	 	
	
/  R ≡ P
	
(20)	 1.	 ∼H ⊃ B
	
	 2.	 ∼H ⊃ D
	
	 3.	 ∼(B  D)	
	
/  H
	
(21)	 1.	 J ⊃ (G ⊃ L)	
	
/  G ⊃ ( J ⊃ L)
	 ★(22)	 1.	 S ⊃ (L  M )
	
	 2.	 M ⊃ (L ⊃ R)	
	
/  S ⊃ R
	
(23)	 1.	 F ⊃ (A  K )
	
	 2.	 G ⊃ (∼A  ∼K )
	
	 3.	 F ⋁ G	
	
	
/  A ≡ K
432   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   433
7
	
(24)	 1.	 (I ⊃ E ) ⊃ C
	
	 2.	 C ⊃ ∼C		
	
/  I
	 ★(25)	 1.	 T ⊃ G
	
	 2.	 S ⊃ G	 	
	
/  (T ⋁ S) ⊃ G
	
(26)	 1.	 H ⊃ U	 	
	
/  H ⊃ (U ⋁ T )
	
(27)	 1.	 Q ⊃ (W  D)	
	
/  Q ⊃ W
	 ★(28)	 1.	 P ⊃ (∼E ⊃ B)
	
	 2.	 ∼(B ⋁ E )	
	
/  ∼P
	
(29)	 1.	 (G ⊃ J ) ⊃ (H ⊃ Q)
	
	 2.	 J  ∼Q	 	
	
/  ∼H
	
(30)	 1.	 I ⋁ (N  F )
	
	 2.	 I ⊃ F	
	
	
/  F
	 ★(31)	 1.	 K ≡ R
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ (R ⊃ P )
	
	 3.	 ∼P	
	
	
/  ∼R
	
(32)	 1.	 C ⊃ (∼L ⊃ Q)
	
	 2.	 L ⊃ ∼C
	
	 3.	 ∼Q	
	
	
/  ∼C
	
(33)	 1.	 (E ⊃ A)  (F ⊃ A)
	
	 2.	 E ⋁ G
	
	 3.	 F ⋁ ∼G	 	
	
/  A
	 ★(34)	 1.	 (F  H ) ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 F ⋁ S
	
	 3.	 H	
	
	
/  N ⋁ S
	
(35)	 1.	 T ⊃ (H  J )
	
	 2.	 (H ⋁ N ) ⊃ T	
	
/  T ≡ H
	
(36)	 1.	 T ⊃ ∼(A ⊃ N )
	
	 2.	 T ⋁ N	
	
	
/  T ≡ ∼N
	 ★(37)	 1.	 (D ⊃ E ) ⊃ (E ⊃ D)
	
	 2.	 (D ≡ E ) ⊃ ∼(G  ∼H )
	
	 3.	 E  G	
	
	
/  G  H
	
(38)	 1.	 (O ⊃ R) ⊃ S
	
	 2.	 (P ⊃ R) ⊃ ∼S	
	
/  ∼R
	
(39)	 1.	 (L ⋁ P) ⊃ U
	
	 2.	 (M ⊃ U ) ⊃ I
	
	 3.	 P	
	
	
/  I
	 ★(40)	 1.	 A ≡ W
	
	 2.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼W
	
	 3.	 R ⊃ A	 	
	
/  ∼(W ⋁ R)
SECTION 7.4 Rules of Replacement II   433

7
	
(41)	 1.	 (S ⋁ T ) ⊃ (S ⊃ ∼T )
	
	 2.	 (S ⊃ ∼T ) ⊃ (T ⊃ K )
	
	 3.	 S ⋁ T	
	
	
	
/  S ⋁ K
	
(42)	 1.	 G ≡ M
	
	 2.	 G ⋁ M
	
	 3.	 G ⊃ (M ⊃ T )	
	
	
/  T
	 ★(43)	 1.	 O ⊃ (Q  N )
	
	 2.	 (N ⋁ E ) ⊃ S	
	
	
/  O ⊃ S
	
(44)	 1.	 H ≡ I
	
	 2.	 H ⊃ (I ⊃ F )
	
	 3.	 ∼(H ⋁ I ) ⊃ F	
	
	
/  F
	 ★(45)	 1.	 P ⊃ A
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ B	 	
	
	
/  (P ⋁ Q) ⊃ (A ⋁ B)
	IV.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and then use the eighteen 
rules of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Use the translation letters in the 
order in which they are listed.
	
★1.	 If sports-shoe manufacturers decline to use kangaroo hides in their products, 
then Australian hunters will cease killing millions of kangaroos yearly. It is 
not the case that both Australian hunters will cease killing millions of kanga-
roos yearly and the kangaroo will not be saved from extinction. Therefore, if 
sports-shoe manufacturers decline to use kangaroo hides in their products, 
then the kangaroo will be saved from extinction. (D, C, S )
	
2.	 If there is a direct correlation between what a nation spends for health care 
and the health of its citizens, then America has the lowest incidence of disease 
and the lowest mortality rates of any nation on Earth. But America does not 
have the lowest mortality rates of any nation on Earth. Therefore, there is not a 
direct correlation between what a nation spends for health care and the health 
of its citizens. (C, D, M )
	
3.	 It is not the case that strict controls exist on either the manufacture or the sale 
of handguns. Therefore, if strict controls exist on the sale of handguns, then 
the use of handguns in the commission of crimes has decreased. (M, S, U )
	
★4.	 If birth-control devices are made available in high school clinics, then the  
incidence of teenage pregnancy will decrease. Therefore, if both birth-control 
information and birth-control devices are made available in high school clin-
ics, then the incidence of teenage pregnancy will decrease. (D, P, I )
	
5.	 If Congress enacts a law that either establishes a religion or prohibits the  
free exercise of religion, then that law is unconstitutional. Therefore, if  
Congress enacts a law that establishes a religion, then that law is unconstitu-
tional. (E, P, U )
	
6.	 If cigarette smokers are warned of the hazards of smoking and they continue 
to smoke, then they cannot sue tobacco companies for any resulting lung can-
cer or emphysema. Cigarette smokers are warned of the hazards of smoking. 
434   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

SECTION 7.1 Rules of Implication I   435
7
Therefore, if cigarette smokers continue to smoke, they cannot sue tobacco 
companies for any resulting lung cancer or emphysema. (W, C, S )
	
★7.	 If grade-school children are assigned daily homework, then their achieve-
ment level will increase dramatically. But if grade-school children are assigned 
daily homework, then their love for learning may be dampened. Therefore, if 
grade-school children are assigned daily homework, then their achievement 
level will increase dramatically but their love for learning may be dampened. 
(G, A, L)
	
8.	 If a superconducting particle collider is built, then the data yielded will ben-
efit scientists of all nations and it deserves international funding. Either a su-
perconducting particle collider will be built, or the ultimate nature of matter 
will remain hidden and the data yielded will benefit scientists of all nations. 
Therefore, the data yielded by a superconducting particle collider will benefit 
scientists of all nations. (S, D, I, U )
	
9.	 If parents are told that their unborn child has Tay–Sachs disease, then if they 
go ahead with the birth, then they are responsible for their child’s pain and 
suffering. Therefore, if parents are not responsible for their child’s pain and 
suffering, then if they go ahead with the birth, then they were not told that 
their unborn child had Tay–Sachs disease. (T, G, R)
	 ★10.	 Vitamin E is an antioxidant and a useless food supplement if and only if it 
does not reduce heart disease. It is not the case either that vitamin E does not 
reduce heart disease or is not an antioxidant. Therefore, vitamin E is not a  
useless food supplement. (A, U, R)
	V.	 The following dialogue contains ten arguments. Translate each into symbolic form 
and then use the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion of each.
Is This the End?
Brian and Molly are at the memorial service of a mutual friend who had died suddenly 
the week before. “I’m still shocked to think that Karl is gone,” Molly says.
	
“I know you were quite close to him,” Brian says. “But do you think in some sense 
Karl could still be with us? I mean do you think there could be such a thing as postmor-
tem persistence of consciousness—life after death, as most people say?”
	
“I wish there were,” Molly replies, “and that’s what makes death so tragic. As I see it, 
the mind is totally dependent on the brain, and if that’s so, when the brain dies, the mind 
dies. If the mind dies, then consciousness dies, too. Thus, if the brain dies, then conscious-
ness dies—which means there’s no life after death.”
	
“But what makes you think that the mind is totally dependent on the brain?” Brian asks.
	
“Our day-to-day experience provides lots of evidence,” Molly replies. “If you drink 
alcohol, your mind is affected. If you smoke marijuana, your mind is affected. If your mind 
is affected by these things, then you have firsthand experience that the mind is dependent 
on the brain. Thus, if you either smoke marijuana or drink alcohol, then you have first-
hand experience that the mind is dependent on the brain.”
SECTION 7.4 Rules of Replacement II   435

7
	
“So the mind is affected by the brain. Anyone with ordinary sensation knows that,” 
Brian retorts. “If your eye receives a visual stimulus, then that stimulus is sent to the 
brain and your mind is affected. If your ear receives an auditory stimulus, then your mind 
is affected. Thus, if either your eye or your ear receives a stimulus, then your mind is 
affected. But that doesn’t prove that the mind is necessarily dependent on the brain. And 
there are lots of reasons for saying that it isn’t.”
	
“What reasons are those?” Molly asks.
	
“Well, we learned about Plato in Introduction to Philosophy,” Brian replies. “And 
Plato held that the mind can conceive ideal objects such as perfect justice and perfect  
triangularity. Now, if either of these concepts came through the senses, then perfect 
ideals exist in nature. But no perfect ideals exist in nature. And if the concept of triangu-
larity did not come through the senses, then the mind produced it independently of the 
brain. But if that is the case or the concept of triangularity is innate, then the mind is not  
necessarily dependent on the brain. I’ll leave the conclusion up to you”
	
“Very interesting,” Molly replies, “but I question whether the mind is really capable 
of conceiving ideal objects such as perfect justice and perfect triangularity. For me, these 
things are just words. But there are other reasons for thinking that the mind is necessarily 
dependent on the brain. Consider the visual cortex. The visual cortex is part of the brain. 
If the visual cortex isn’t stimulated, there is no visual sensation. But if visual sensation 
occurs only if the visual cortex is stimulated, and if the visual cortex is part of the brain, 
then visual sensation is dependent on the brain. And if that is true and visual sensation is 
a function of the mind, then the mind is necessarily dependent on the brain. Therefore, 
if visual sensation is a function of the mind, then the mind is necessarily dependent on  
the brain.”
	
 “Furthermore,” Molly continues, “there are many cases where strokes have caused 
loss of memory, and also loss of speech. But if remembering is a mental function, then 
if the mind is not necessarily dependent on the brain, then strokes do not cause loss of 
memory. Therefore, if remembering is a mental function, then the mind is necessarily 
dependent on the brain.”
	
“It may indeed be the case,” Brian replies, “that memory—or at least certain kinds 
of memory—are dependent on the brain. And the same may be true of sensation. But 
that doesn’t prove that consciousness as such is brain dependent. It seems to me that 
consciousness as such is a nonmaterial process, and that it can occur only in a non­
material entity, such as a soul. And if those two claims are true and the soul is immortal, 
then consciousness survives the death of the body. Thus, if the soul is immortal, then 
consciousness survives the death of the body.”
	
“If memory goes with the brain,” Molly replies, “then I wonder if the consciousness 
you speak of is in any way your consciousness. But setting that aside, are there any rea-
sons for thinking that the soul is immortal?”
	
“I think there are,” Brian replies. “If the soul is nonmaterial, then it has no parts, and if 
it has no parts, then it can’t come ‘a-part’—in other words it can’t disintegrate. And if it 
can’t disintegrate, then if nothing can destroy it, then it is immortal. But the soul can be 
destroyed only if God destroys it, and God does not destroy souls. Therefore, if the soul 
is nonmaterial, then it is immortal. I think Leibniz invented that argument.”
	
 “Fine,” Molly says. “But what makes you think that you have a nonmaterial soul in the 
first place?”
436   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

SECTION 7.5 Conditional Proof   437
7
	
“Well,” Brian replies, “according to Descartes, I am essentially either a mind or a 
body. But if I can doubt that I have a body, then I am not essentially a body. And I can 
doubt that I have a body. For example I can imagine that I am in The Matrix, and that all 
of my sensations are illusions. If I am essentially a mind, then if the essence of mind is 
to be nonextended, then I am a nonextended substance. But the essence of mind, being 
different from the essence of body, is to be nonextended. And if I am a nonextended 
substance, then I am (or have) a nonmaterial soul. Therefore, I am (or have) a nonmate-
rial soul.”
	
“Your argument is so abstruse that I don’t find it very persuasive,” says Molly, as she 
scratches her head. “I think the evidence is overwhelming that humans are the product 
of biological evolution, and if that is true and humans have souls, then there is a point in 
the course of evolution where humans either received or developed a soul. But there is 
no evidence that humans ever received a soul. Also, there is no evidence that humans 
ever developed a soul. Therefore, humans do not have souls.”
	
“Wow, that sounds pretty far out,” Brian replies. “Well, it looks like the service is 
ready to start, so we’ll have to hang this up. But maybe we can continue it at a later date.”
	
“Maybe we can,” Molly replies.
7.5	
Conditional Proof
PREVIEW    Returning to our hiking metaphor, suppose, while in the middle of your hike, you 
come to a fork in the trail. You consult your trail map but find no reference to it. Since the left fork seems 
to lead off in the direction you want to go, you formulate the assumption that this fork is a shortcut that 
connects with the main trail. You take the left fork and find that you were correct. Then you alter your 
trail map to show the existence of the fork and the alternate route. Making this alteration resembles 
conditional proof.
Conditional proof is a method for deriving a conditional statement (either the conclu-
sion or some intermediate line) that offers the usual advantage of being both shorter 
and simpler to use than the direct method. Moreover, some arguments have conclu-
sions that cannot be derived by the direct method, so some form of conditional proof 
must be used on them. Conditional proof may thus be seen as completing the rules of 
inference. The method consists of assuming the antecedent of the required conditional 
statement on one line, deriving the consequent on a subsequent line, and then “dis-
charging” this sequence of lines in a conditional statement that exactly replicates the 
one that was to be obtained.
Any argument whose conclusion is a conditional statement is an immediate candi-
date for conditional proof. Consider the following example:
1.	 A ⊃ (B
C )
2.	 (B ⋁ D) ⊃ E	 	
  /  A ⊃ E
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

438   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
Using the direct method to derive the conclusion of this argument would require  
a proof having at least twelve lines, and the precise strategy to be followed in con-
structing it might not be immediately obvious. Nevertheless, we need only give 
­cursory ­inspection to the argument to see that the conclusion does indeed follow from  
the premises. The conclusion states that if we have A, we then have E. Let us suppose, 
for a moment, that we do have A. We could then derive B  C from the first prem-
ise via modus ponens. Simplifying this expression we could derive B, and from this  
we could get B ⋁ D via addition. E would then follow from the second premise via 
modus ponens. In other words, if we assume that we have A, we can get E. But this is 
exactly what the conclusion says. Thus, we have just proved that the conclusion follows 
from the premises.
The method of conditional proof consists of incorporating this simple thought pro-
cess into the body of a proof sequence. A conditional proof for this argument requires 
only eight lines and is substantially simpler than a direct proof:
1.	 A ⊃ (B
C )
2.	 (B ⋁ D) ⊃ E	
/  A ⊃ E
	
   3. A	
ACP
	
   4. B
C	
1, 3, MP
	
   5. B	
4, Simp
	
   6. B ⋁ D	
5,  Add
	
   7. E	
2, 6, MP
8.	 A ⊃ E	
3–7, CP
Lines 3 through 7 are indented to indicate their hypothetical character: They all depend 
on the assumption introduced in line 3 via ACP (assumption for conditional proof ). 
These lines, which constitute the conditional proof sequence, tell us that if we assume 
A (line 3), we can derive E (line 7). In line 8 the conditional sequence is discharged in 
the conditional statement A ⊃ E, which simply reiterates the result of the conditional 
sequence. Since line 8 is not hypothetical, it is written adjacent to the original margin, 
under lines 1 and 2. A vertical line is added to the conditional sequence to emphasize 
the indentation.
The first step in constructing a conditional proof is to decide what should be as-
sumed on the first line of the conditional sequence. While any statement whatsoever 
can be assumed on this line, only the right statement will lead to the desired result. The 
clue is always provided by the conditional statement to be obtained in the end. The 
antecedent of this statement is what must be assumed. For example, if the statement 
to be obtained is (K   L) ⊃ M, then K  L should be assumed on the first line. This line 
is always indented and tagged with the designation “ACP. ” Once the initial assump-
tion has been made, the second step is to derive the consequent of the desired condi-
tional statement at the end of the conditional sequence. To do this, we simply apply the 
ordinary rules of inference to any previous line in the proof (including the assumed 
line), writing the result directly below the assumed line. The third and final step is to 
discharge the conditional sequence in a conditional statement. The antecedent of this 
conditional statement is whatever appears on the first line of the conditional sequence, 

T
he German mathematician, logician, and phi-
losopher Gottlob Frege (pronounced fray-ga) 
was born in Wismar, a small town in northern 
Germany on the Baltic Sea. His parents taught at a pri-
vate girls’ school, which his father had helped to found. 
Frege attended the local gymnasium, where he studied 
mathematics, and then the University of Jena, where 
he studied mathematics, philosophy, and chemistry. 
After two years he transferred to the University of 
Göttingen, earning a doctor’s degree in mathematics 
at age twenty-four. He then returned to the University 
of Jena, where he taught until retiring in 1917. While 
there he married Margaret Liesburg, who bore him at 
least two children. The children died young, but years 
later the couple adopted a son, Alfred.
Frege spent his entire life analyzing the concept of 
number, developing theories of logic and language, and 
attempting to reduce arithmetic to logic. In 1879 he 
published the Begriffsschrift (“Concept-Script”), a work 
written in the tradition of Leibniz that develops a purely  
formal symbolic language to express any proposition in 
any area of human discourse. Five years later he pub-
lished Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (“The Foundations 
of Arithmetic”), a less technical work containing few 
symbols that outlined his goal of reducing arithmetic 
to logic. Then, nine years later he published Volume 1 
of Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (“Basic Laws of Arith-
metic”), which attempted to accomplish the first phase 
of this reduction.
None of these works were well received, for 
several reasons: They were ahead of their time, the 
symbolic notation of the technical works struck 
readers as bizarre, and they were written in Ger-
man, whereas most of the new work in logic was be-
ing done by English speakers. In fact, the last of these 
works was so badly reviewed that Frege was forced 
to publish Volume 2 at his own expense. To make 
matters worse, in 
1902, while Vol­
ume 2 was in proof, 
Fre­ge received a 
letter from Ber-
trand Russell that 
left him “thunder-
struck.” He was lat-
er to remark that it 
had destroyed his 
entire life’s work.
Basic Law 5 of 
the Grundgesetze 
provides for the 
creation of classes of things merely by describing the 
properties of their members. So Russell invited Frege 
to create the class of all classes that are not members 
of themselves, and he then asked whether this very 
class is a member of itself. If it is a member of itself, 
then it is one of those classes that are not members of 
themselves; but if is not a member of itself, then, again, 
it is one of those classes, and it is a member of itself. 
The derivation of this contradiction (which has come 
to be called Russell’s paradox) meant that the axioms 
of the Grundgesetze were fatally inconsistent. Frege at-
tempted a last-­minute modification of his system, but 
the change proved unworkable.
Despite this setback, Frege is universally recog-
nized today as one of the most important logicians 
and philosophers of all time. Single-handedly he de-
veloped quantification theory and predicate logic, and 
his analysis of the concept of number led to a general 
theory of meaning that introduced the important 
distinction between Sinn (“sense”) and Beduetung 
(“reference” ). Also, his work on concept clarification 
initiated the current movement known as analytic 
philosophy.
Gottlob Frege 1848–1925
eminentlogicians
Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy
7
SECTION 7.5 Conditional Proof   439

7
440   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
and the consequent is whatever appears on the last line. For example, if A ⋁ B is on the 
first line and C  D is on the last, the sequence is discharged by (A ⋁ B) ⊃ (C  D). This 
discharging line is always written adjacent to the original margin and is tagged with the 
designation “CP” (conditional proof ) together with the numerals indicating the first 
through the last lines of the sequence.
Conditional proof can also be used to derive a line other than the conclusion of an 
argument. The following proof, which illustrates this fact, incorporates two conditional 
sequences one after the other within the scope of a single direct proof:
  1.	 G ⊃ (H
I )
  2.	 J ⊃ (K
L)
  3.	 G ⋁ J	
/  H ⋁ K
	
  4.	 G	
ACP
	
  5. 	H
I	
1, 4, MP
	
  6. 	H	
5, Simp
  7.	 G ⊃ H	
4 – 6, CP
	
  8. 	J	
ACP
	
  9. 	K
L	
2, 8, MP
	
10. 	K	
9, Simp
11.	 J ⊃ K	
8–10, CP
12.	 (G ⊃ H   
J ⊃ K )	
7, 11, Conj
13.	 H ⋁ K	
3, 12, CD
The first conditional proof sequence gives us G ⊃ H, and the second J ⊃ K. These two 
lines are then conjoined and used together with line 3 to set up a constructive dilemma, 
from which the conclusion is derived.
This proof sequence provides a convenient opportunity to introduce an impor-
tant rule governing conditional proof. The rule states that after a conditional proof 
sequence has been discharged, no line in the sequence may be used as a justification for 
a subsequent line in the proof. If, for example, line 5 in the proof just given were used 
as a justification for line 9 or line 12, this rule would be violated, and the corresponding 
inference would be invalid. Once the conditional sequence is discharged, it is sealed off 
from the remaining part of the proof. The logic behind this rule is easy to understand. 
The lines in a conditional sequence are hypothetical in that they depend on the as-
sumption stated in the first line. Because no mere assumption can provide any genuine 
support for anything, neither can any line that depends on such an assumption. When 
a conditional sequence is discharged, the assumption on which it rests is expressed as 
the antecedent of a conditional statement. This conditional statement can be used to 
support subsequent lines because it makes no claim that its antecedent is true. The 
conditional statement merely asserts that if its antecedent is true, then its consequent is 
true, and this, of course, is what has been established by the conditional sequence from 
which it is obtained.
Just as a conditional sequence can be used within the scope of a direct proof to 
derive a desired statement, one conditional sequence can be used within the scope of 
another to derive a desired statement. The following proof provides an example:

7
EXERCISE 7.5	
	 I.	 Use conditional proof and the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusions 
of the following symbolized arguments. Having done so, attempt to derive the con-
clusions without using conditional proof.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 N ⊃ O
	
	 2.	 N ⊃ P	 	
	
	
/  N ⊃ (O  P)
	
(2)	 1.	 F ⊃ E
	
	 2.	 (F  E ) ⊃ R	
	
	
/  F ⊃ R
	
(3)	 1.	 G ⊃ T
	
	 2.	 (T ⋁ S) ⊃ K	
	
	
/  G ⊃ K
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (G ⋁ H ) ⊃ (S  T )
	
	 2.	 (T ⋁ U ) ⊃ (C  D)	
	
/  G ⊃ C
	
(5)	 1.	 A ⊃ ∼(A ⋁ E )	
	
	
/  A ⊃ F
  1.	 L ⊃ [M ⊃ (N ⋁ O)]
  2.	 M ⊃ ∼N	
/  L ⊃ (∼M ⋁ O)
	
  3.	 L	
ACP
	
  4.	 M ⊃ (N ⋁ O)	
1, 3, MP
	
	
  5.	 M	
ACP
	
	
  6.	 N ⋁ O	
4, 5, MP
	
	
  7.	 ∼N	
2, 5, MP
	
	
  8.	 O	
6, 7, DS
	
  9.	 M ⊃ O	
5–8, CP
	
10.	 ∼M ⋁ O	
9, Impl
11.	 L ⊃ (∼M ⋁ O)	
3–10, CP
The rule introduced in connection with the previous example applies unchanged to 
examples of this sort. No line in the sequence 5–8 could be used to support any line 
subsequent to line 9, and no line in the sequence 3–10 could be used to support any 
line subsequent to line 11. Lines 3 or 4 could, of course, be used to support any line in 
the sequence 5–8.
One final reminder regarding conditional proof is that every conditional proof must 
be discharged. It is absolutely improper to end a proof on an indented line. If this rule 
is ignored, any conclusion one chooses can be derived from any set of premises. The 
following invalid proof illustrates this mistake:
  1.	 P	
/  Q ⊃ R
	
  2. ∼Q	
ACP
	
  3. ∼Q ⋁ R	
2,  Add
	
  4. Q ⊃ R	
2, Impl
SECTION 7.5 Conditional Proof   441

7
	
(6)	 1.	 J ⊃ (K ⊃ L)
	
	 2.	 J ⊃ (M ⊃ L)
	
	 3.	 ∼L	
	
	
	
/  J ⊃ ∼(K ⋁ M )
	 ★(7)	 1.	 M ⋁ (N  O)	
	
	
/  ∼N ⊃ M
	
(8)	 1.	 P ⊃ (Q ⋁ R)
	
	 2.	 (P ⊃ R) ⊃ (S  T )
	
	 3.	 Q ⊃ R	 	
	
	
/  T
	
(9)	 1.	 H ⊃ (I ⊃ N )
	
	 2.	 (H ⊃ ∼I ) ⊃ (M ⋁ N )
	
	 3.	 ∼N	
	
	
	
/  M
	 ★(10)	 1.	 C ⊃ (A  D)
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ (A  E )	
	
	
/  (C ⋁ B) ⊃ A
	
(11)	 1.	 M ⊃ (K ⊃ L)
	
	 2.	 (L ⋁ N ) ⊃ J	
	
	
/  M ⊃ (K ⊃ J )
	
(12)	 1.	 F ⊃ (G  H )	
	
	
/  (A ⊃ F ) ⊃ (A ⊃ H )
	 ★(13)	 1.	 R ⊃ B
	
	 2.	 R ⊃ (B ⊃ F )
	
	 3.	 B ⊃ (F ⊃ H )	
	
	
/  R ⊃ H
	
(14)	 1.	 (F  G) ≡ H
	
	 2.	 F ⊃ G	 	
	
	
/  F ≡ H
	
(15)	 1.	 C ⊃ (D ⋁ ∼E )
	
	 2.	 E ⊃ (D ⊃ F )	
	
	
/  C ⊃ (E ⊃ F )
	 ★(16)	 1.	 Q ⊃ (R ⊃ S)
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ (T ⊃ ∼U )
	
	 3.	 U ⊃ (R ⋁ T )	
	
	
/  Q ⊃ (U ⊃ S)
	
(17)	 1.	 N ⊃ (O  P )
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ (R  S )	
	
	
/  (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ (N ⊃ S)
	
(18)	 1.	 E ⊃ (F ⊃ G )
	
	 2.	 H ⊃ (G ⊃ I )
	
	 3.	 (F ⊃ I ) ⊃ ( J ⋁ ∼H )	
	
/  (E  H) ⊃ J
	 ★(19)	 1.	 P ⊃ [(L ⋁ M) ⊃ (N  O)]
	
	 2.	 (O ⋁ T ) ⊃ W	
	
	
/  P ⊃ (M ⊃ W )
	
(20)	 1.	 A ⊃ [B ⊃ (C  ∼D)]
	
	 2.	 (B ⋁ E ) ⊃ (D ⋁ E )	
	
/  (A  B) ⊃ (C  E )
	II.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form, using the letters in the 
order in which they are listed. Then use conditional proof and the eighteen rules 
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Having done so, attempt to derive the 
conclusion without using conditional proof.
	
★1.	 If high-tech products are exported to Russia, then domestic industries will 
benefit. If the Russians can effectively utilize high-tech products, then their 
standard of living will improve. Therefore, if high-tech products are exported 
442   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic

7
to Russia and the Russians can effectively utilize them, then their standard of 
living will improve and domestic industries will benefit. (H, D, U, S )
	
2.	 If the police take you into custody, then if they inform you that you have the 
right to remain silent, then whatever you say will be used against you. If the 
police inform you that you have the right to remain silent, then if whatever 
you say will be used against you, then you should not say anything. Therefore, 
if the police take you into custody, then if they inform you that you have the 
right to remain silent, then you should not say anything. (P, I, W, S )
	
3.	 A doctor must disconnect a dying patient from a respirator if and only if the 
fact that patients are self-determining implies that the doctor must follow the 
patient’s orders. If a dying patient refuses treatment, then the doctor must 
disconnect the patient from a respirator and the patient will die peacefully. 
Patients are self-determining. Therefore, if a dying patient refuses treatment, 
then the doctor must follow the patient’s orders. (D, S, F, R, P )
	
★4.	 If jails are overcrowded, then dangerous suspects will be released on their own 
recognizance. If jails are overcrowded and dangerous suspects are released on 
their own recognizance, then crime will increase. If no new jails are built and 
crime increases, then innocent victims will pay the price of increased crime. 
Therefore, if jails are overcrowded, then if no new jails are built, then innocent 
victims will pay the price of increased crime. (J, D, C, N, I )
	
5.	 If astronauts attempt interplanetary space travel, then heavy shielding will be 
required to protect them from solar radiation. If massive amounts of either 
fuel or water are carried, then the spacecraft must be very large. Therefore, if 
heavy shielding is required to protect the astronauts from solar radiation only 
if massive amounts of fuel are carried, then if astronauts attempt interplan-
etary space travel, then the spacecraft must be very large. (A, H, F, W, L )
SECTION 7.6 Indirect Proof   443
7.6	
Indirect Proof
PREVIEW    Let us return to the fork in the trail that we talked about earlier. Suppose you take the 
left fork but after hiking some distance you reach a dead end. You then alter your trail map showing that 
Such a procedure resembles indirect proof. In an indirect proof you formulate an assumption inside a 
proof sequence, and when it leads to a contradiction, you conclude that the assumed statement is false, 
so its negation is true.
Indirect proof is a technique similar to conditional proof that can be used on any 
argument to derive either the conclusion or some intermediate line leading to the 
conclusion. It consists of assuming the negation of the statement to be obtained,  
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

444   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
using this assumption to derive a contradiction, and then concluding that the original 
assumption is false. This last step, of course, establishes the truth of the statement to be 
obtained. The following proof sequence uses indirect proof to derive the conclusion:
  1.	 (A ⋁ B) ⊃ (C
D)
  2.	 C ⊃ ∼D	
/  ∼A
	
  3. A	
AIP
	
  4. A ⋁ B	
3,  Add
	
  5. C
D	
1, 4, MP
	
  6. C	
5, Simp
	
  7. ∼D	
2, 6, MP
	
  8. D
C	
5, Com
	
  9. D	
8, Simp
	
10. D
∼D	
7, 9, Conj
11.	 ∼A	
3–10, IP
The indirect proof sequence (lines 3–10) begins by assuming the negation of the 
­conclusion. Since the conclusion is a negated statement, it shortens the proof to assume 
A instead of ∼ ∼A. This assumption, which is tagged “AIP” (assumption for indirect 
proof ), leads to a contradiction in line 10. Since any assumption that leads to a contradic-
tion is false, the indirect sequence is discharged (line 11) by asserting the negation of the 
assumption made in line 3. This line is then tagged with the designation “IP” (indirect 
proof ) together with the numerals indicating the scope of the indirect sequence from 
which it is obtained.
Indirect proof can also be used to derive an intermediate line leading to the  
conclusion. Example:
  1.	 E ⊃ [(F ⋁ G ) ⊃ (H
J )]
  2.	 E
∼(  J ⋁ K )	
/  ∼(F ⋁ K )
  3.	 E	
2, Simp
  4.	 (F ⋁ G ) ⊃ (H
J )	
1, 3, MP
  5.	 ∼(  J ⋁ K 
E	
2, Com
  6.	 ∼(  J ⋁ K )	
5, Simp
  7.	 ∼J
∼K	
6, DM
	
  8. F	
AIP
	
  9. F ⋁ G	
8,  Add
	
10. H
J	
4, 9, MP
	
11.  J
H	
10, Com
	
12.  J	
11, Simp
	
13. ∼J	
7, Simp
	
14.  J
∼J	
12, 13, Conj
15.	 ∼F	
8–14, IP
16.	 ∼K
∼J	
7, Com
17.	 ∼K	
16, Simp
18.	 ∼F
∼K	
15, 17, Conj
19.	 ∼(F ⋁ K )	
18, DM

7
The indirect proof sequence begins with the assumption of F (line 8), leads to a 
contradiction (line 14), and is discharged (line 15) by asserting the negation of the 
­assumption. One should consider indirect proof whenever a line in a proof appears 
difficult to obtain.
As with conditional proof, when an indirect proof sequence is discharged, no 
line in the sequence may be used as a justification for a subsequent line in the proof. 
In ­reference to the last proof, this means that none of the lines 8–14 could be used 
as a justification for any of the lines 16–19. Occasionally, this rule requires ­certain 
priorities in the derivation of lines. For example, for the purpose of deriving the 
­contradiction, lines 6 and 7 could have been included as part of the indirect se-
quence. But this would not have been advisable, because line 7 is needed as a jus-
tification for line 16, which lies outside the indirect sequence. If lines 6 and 7 had 
been included within the indirect sequence, they would have had to be repeated 
after the sequence had been discharged to allow ∼K to be derived on a line outside 
the sequence.
Just as a conditional sequence may be constructed within the scope of another  
conditional sequence, so a conditional sequence may be constructed within the scope 
of an indirect sequence, and, conversely, an indirect sequence may be constructed 
within the scope of either a conditional sequence or another indirect sequence. The 
next example illustrates the use of an indirect sequence within the scope of a condi-
tional sequence:
  1.	 L ⊃ [∼M ⊃ (N
O)]
  2.	 ∼N
P	
/  L ⊃ (M
P )
	
  3. L	
ACP
	
  4. ∼M ⊃ (N
O)	
1, 3, MP
	
      5. ∼M	
AIP
	
      6. N
O	
4, 5, MP
	
      7. N	
6, Simp
	
      8. ∼N	
2, Simp
	
      9. N
∼N	
7, 8, Conj
	
10. ∼ ∼M	
5–9, IP
	
11. M	
10, DN
	
12. P
∼N	
2, Com
	
13. P	
12, Simp
	
14. M
P	
11, 13, Conj
15.	 L ⊃ (M
P )	
3–14, CP
The indirect sequence (lines 5–9) is discharged (line 10) by asserting the negation of 
the assumption made in line 5. The conditional sequence (lines 3–14) is discharged 
(line 15) in the conditional statement that has the first line of the sequence as its ante-
cedent and the last line as its consequent.
Indirect proof provides a convenient way for proving the validity of an argument 
having a tautology for its conclusion. In fact, the only way in which the conclusion of 
many such arguments can be derived is through either conditional or indirect proof.
SECTION 7.6 Indirect Proof   445

446   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
For the following argument, indirect proof is the easier of the two:
1.	 S	 	
	
	
 /  T ⋁ ∼T
	
2.  ∼(T ⋁ ∼T  )	
AIP
	
3.  ∼T
∼ ∼T	
2, DM
4.	 ∼ ∼(T ⋁ ∼T  )	
2–3, IP
5.	 T ⋁ ∼T	
4, DN
Here is another example of an argument having a tautology as its conclusion. In this 
case, since the conclusion is a conditional statement, conditional proof is the easier 
alternative:
1.	 S	 	
	
	
 / T ⊃ T
	
2.  T	
ACP
	
3.  T ⋁ T	
2,  Add
	
4.  T	
3, Taut
5.	 T ⊃ T	
2 – 4, CP
The similarity of indirect proof to conditional proof may be illustrated by return-
ing to the first example presented in this section. In the proof that follows, conditional 
proof—not indirect proof—is used to derive the conclusion:
  1.	 (A ⋁ B) ⊃ (C
D)
  2.	 C ⊃ ∼D	
/ ∼A
	
  3. A	
ACP
	
  4. A ⋁ B	
3,  Add
	
  5. C
D	
1, 4, MP
	
  6. C	
5, Simp
	
  7. ∼D	
2, 6, MP
	
  8. D
C	
5, Com
	
  9. D	
8, Simp
	
10. D ⋁ ∼A	
9,  Add
	
11. ∼A	
7, 10, DS
12.	 A ⊃ ∼A	
3–11, CP
13.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼A	
12, Impl
14.	 ∼A	
13,  Taut
This example illustrates how a conditional proof can be used to derive the conclu-
sion of any argument, whether or not the conclusion is a conditional statement. Simply  
begin by assuming the negation of the conclusion, derive contradictory statements on 
separate lines, and use these lines to set up a disjunctive syllogism yielding the nega-
tion of the assumption as the last line of the conditional sequence. Then, discharge 
the sequence and use tautology to derive the negation of the assumption outside the 
sequence.
Indirect proof can be viewed as a variety of conditional proof in that it amounts to a 
modification of the way in which the indented sequence is discharged, resulting in an 
overall shortening of the proof for many arguments. The indirect proof for the argu-
ment just given is repeated as follows, with the requisite changes noted in the margin:

EXERCISE 7.6	
	 I.	 Use either indirect proof or conditional proof (or both) and the eighteen rules 
of inference to derive the conclusions of the following symbolized arguments.  
Having done so, attempt to derive the conclusions without using indirect proof or 
conditional proof.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (S ⋁ T ) ⊃ ∼S	
	
/  ∼S
	
(2)	 1.	 (K ⊃ K ) ⊃ R
	
	
2.	 (R ⋁ M ) ⊃ N	
	
/  N
	
(3)	 1.	 (C  D) ⊃ E
	
	
2.	 (D  E ) ⊃ F	
	
/  (C  D) ⊃ F
	 ★(4)	 1.	 H ⊃ (L ⊃ K )
	
	
2.	 L ⊃ (K ⊃ ∼L)	 	
/  ∼H ⋁ ∼L
	
(5)	 1.	 S ⊃ (T ⋁ ∼U )
	
	
2.	 U ⊃ (∼T ⋁ R )
	
	
3.	 (S  U ) ⊃ ∼R	
	
/  ∼S ⋁ ∼U
	
(6)	 1.	 ∼A ⊃ (B  C )
	
	
2.	 D ⊃ ∼C	
	
/ D ⊃ A
  1.	 (A ⋁ B) ⊃ (C
D)
  2.	 C ⊃ ∼D	
/ ∼A
	
  3.  A	
AIP
	
  4.  A ⋁ B	
3,  Add
	
  5.  C
D	
1, 4, MP
	
  6.  C	
5, Simp
	
  7.  ∼D	
2, 6, MP
	
  8.  D
C	
5, Com
	
  9.  D	
8, Simp
	
10.  D
∼D	
7, 9, Conj  __________ changed
11.	 ∼A	
3–10, IP
The reminder at the end of the previous section regarding conditional proof per-
tains to indirect proof as well: It is essential that every indirect proof be discharged. 
No proof can be ended on an indented line. If this rule is ignored, indirect proof, like 
conditional proof, can produce any conclusion whatsoever. The following invalid proof 
illustrates such a mistake:
1.	
 P		
	
	
 /  Q
	
2.  Q	
AIP
	
3.  Q ⋁ Q	
2,  Add
	
4.  Q	
3, Taut
SECTION 7.6 Indirect Proof   447
7
}

448   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (E ⋁ F ) ⊃ (C  D)
	
	
2.	 (D ⋁ G) ⊃ H
	
	
3.	 E ⋁ G	
	
	
/  H
	
(8)	 1.	 ∼M ⊃ (N  O)
	
	
2.	 N ⊃ P
	
	
3.	 O ⊃ ∼P	
	
/  M
	
(9)	 1.	 (R ⋁ S) ⊃ T
	
	
2.	 (P ⋁ Q) ⊃ T
	
	
3.	 R ⋁ P	
	
	
/  T
	 ★(10)	 1.	 K	
	
	
     /  S ⊃ (T ⊃ S)
	
(11)	 1.	 (A ⋁ B) ⊃ C
	
	
2.	 (∼A ⋁ D) ⊃ E	
/  C ⋁ E
	
(12)	 1.	 (K ⋁ L) ⊃ (M  N )
	
	
2.	 (N ⋁ O) ⊃ (P  ∼K )	
/  ∼K
	 ★(13)	 1.	 [C ⊃ (D ⊃ C )] ⊃ E	
   /  E
	
(14)	 1.	 F	
	
	
   /  (G ⊃ H) ⋁ (∼G ⊃ J )
	
(15)	 1.	 B ⊃ (K  M )
	
	
2.	 (B  M ) ⊃ (P ≡ ∼P )	
/  ∼B
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (N ⋁ O) ⊃ (C  D)
	
	
2.	 (D ⋁ K ) ⊃ (P ⋁ ∼C )
	
	
3.	 (P ⋁ G ) ⊃ ∼(N  D)	
/  ∼N
	
(17)	 1.	 (R  S) ≡ (G  H )
	
	
2.	 R ⊃ S
	
	
3.	 H ⊃ G	 	
	
   /  R ≡ H
	
(18)	 1.	 K ⊃ [(M ⋁ N ) ⊃ (P  Q)]
	
	
2.	 L ⊃ [(Q ⋁ R) ⊃ (S  ∼N )]	
/  (K  L) ⊃ ∼N
	 ★(19)	 1.	 A ⊃ [(N ⋁ ∼N ) ⊃ (S ⋁ T )]
	
	
2.	 T ⊃ ∼(F ⋁ ∼F )	 	
	
      /  A ⊃ S
	
(20)	 1.	 F ⊃ [(C ⊃ C ) ⊃ G]
	
	
2.	 G ⊃ {[H ⊃ (E ⊃ H )] ⊃ (K  ∼K )} 	
/  ∼F
	II.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form, using the letters in the 
order in which they are listed. Then use indirect proof and the eighteen rules of 
inference to derive the conclusion of each. Having done so, attempt to derive the 
conclusion without using indirect proof.
	
★1.	 If government deficits continue at their present rate and a recession sets in, 
then interest on the national debt will become unbearable and the government 
will default on its loans. If a recession sets in, then the government will not 
default on its loans. Therefore, either government deficits will not continue at 
their present rate or a recession will not set in. (C, R, I, D)

7
	
2.	 If either the sea turtle population continues to decrease or rescue efforts are 
commenced to save the sea turtle from extinction, then nesting sanctuar-
ies will be created and the indiscriminate slaughter of these animals will be 
halted. If either nesting sanctuaries are created or poachers are arrested, then 
if the indiscriminate slaughter of these animals is halted, then the sea turtle 
population will not continue to decrease. Therefore, the sea turtle population 
will not continue to decrease. (C, R, N, I, P)
	
3.	 If asbestos workers sue their employers, then if punitive damages are awarded, 
then their employers will declare bankruptcy. If asbestos workers sue their em-
ployers, then punitive damages will be awarded. If asbestos workers ­contract 
asbestosis, then either they will sue their employers or their employers will 
declare bankruptcy. Therefore, either asbestos workers will not contract as-
bestosis or their employers will declare bankruptcy. (S, P, B, C )
	
★4.	 If astronauts spend long periods in zero gravity only if calcium is resorbed in 
their bodies, then astronauts on a Mars voyage will arrive with brittle bones. 
If astronauts attempt a voyage to Mars only if they spend long periods in zero 
gravity, then astronauts on a Mars voyage will arrive with brittle bones. There-
fore, astronauts on a Mars voyage will arrive with brittle bones. (Z, C, B, V )
	
5.	 Either deposits should be required on beer and soft-drink containers, or these 
containers will be discarded along highways and the countryside will look like 
a dump. If these containers will be discarded either in parks or along high-
ways, then deposits should be required on soft-drink containers. Therefore, 
deposits should be required on soft-drink containers. (B, S, H, C, P)
SECTION 7.7 Proving Logical Truths   449
7.7	
Proving Logical Truths
PREVIEW    Let us return to your hike one last time. Suppose that after walking for several hours 
you find that you are hopelessly lost, and you suspect that you are going in a circle. So, you break a 
branch off a fallen tree and poke it into the ground beside the trail. After walking another hour, you 
come upon the same branch. This proves it. Your procedure is a little like proving a tautology. You have 
proved that if you walk forward from this point you will reach the same point, but this tells you nothing 
about where you are on the map.
Both conditional and indirect proof can be used to establish the truth of a logical  
truth (tautology). Tautological statements can be treated as if they were the conclusions 
of arguments having no premises. Such a procedure is suggested by the fact that any 
argument having a tautology for its conclusion is valid regardless of what its premises 
are. As we saw in the previous section, the proof for such an argument does not use 
the premises at all but derives the conclusion as the exclusive consequence of either a  
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

450   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
conditional or an indirect sequence. Using this strategy for logical truths, we write the 
statement to be proved as if it were the conclusion of an argument, and we indent the 
first line in the proof and tag it as being the beginning of either a conditional or an 
indirect sequence. In the end, this sequence is appropriately discharged to yield the 
desired statement form.
Tautologies expressed in the form of conditional statements are most easily proved 
via a conditional sequence. The following example uses two such sequences, one within 
the scope of the other:
	
	 	
	
	
       /  P ⊃ (Q ⊃ P )
	
    1.  P	
     ACP
	
	
  2.  Q	
ACP
	
	
  3.  P ⋁ P	
      1,  Add
	
	
  4.  P	
      3, Taut
	
    5.   Q ⊃ P	
      2 – 4, CP
6.	 P ⊃ (Q ⊃ P )	
     1–5, CP
Notice that line 6 restores the proof to the original margin—the first line is indented 
because it introduces the conditional sequence.
Here is a proof of the same statement using an indirect proof. The indirect sequence 
begins, as usual, with the negation of the statement to be proved:
	
	 	
	
	
      /  P ⊃ (Q ⊃ P)
	
1.  ∼[P ⊃ (Q ⊃ P )]	
      AIP
	
2.  ∼[∼P ⋁ (Q ⊃ P )]	
     1, Impl
	
3.  ∼[∼P ⋁ (∼Q ⋁ P )]	
      2, Impl
	
4.  ∼ ∼P
∼(∼Q ⋁ P )	
      3, DM
	
5.  P
∼(∼Q ⋁ P )	
      4, DN
	
6.  P
∼ ∼Q
∼P )	
      5, DM
	
7.  P
∼P
∼ ∼Q)	
      6, Com
	
8.  (P
∼P 
∼ ∼Q	
      7,  Assoc
	
9.  P
∼P	
      8, Simp
10.	 ∼ ∼[P ⊃ (Q ⊃ P )]	
     1–9, IP
11.	 P ⊃ (Q ⊃ P )	
     10, DN
More-complex conditional statements are proved by merely extending the technique 
used in the first proof. In the following proof, notice how each conditional sequence 
begins by asserting the antecedent of the conditional statement to be derived:
	
	 	
	
	
	
/  [P ⊃ (Q ⊃ R)] ⊃ [(P ⊃ Q) ⊃ (P ⊃ R)]
	      1.  P ⊃ (Q ⊃ R)	
	
ACP
	 	
        2.  P ⊃ Q	
	
ACP
	 	
	
     3. P	
	
ACP
	 	
	
     4. Q ⊃ R	
	
1, 3, MP
	 	
	
     5. Q	
	
2, 3, MP
	 	
	
     6. R	
	
4, 5, MP
	 	
       7.  P ⊃ R	
	
3–6, CP
	      8.  (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ (P ⊃ R)	
	
2–7, CP
  9.	 [P ⊃ (Q ⊃ R)] ⊃ [(P ⊃ Q) ⊃ (P ⊃ R)]	 1–8, CP

EXERCISE 7.7	
Use conditional proof or indirect proof and the eighteen rules of inference to establish 
the truth of the following tautologies.
	
★1.	 P ⊃ [(P ⊃ Q) ⊃ Q]
	
2.	 (∼P ⊃ Q) ⋁ (P ⊃ R)
	
3.	 P ≡ [P ⋁ (Q  P)]
	
★4.	 (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ [(P  R) ⊃ (Q  R)]
	
5.	 (P ⋁ ∼Q) ⊃ [(∼P ⋁ R) ⊃ (Q ⊃ R)]
	
6.	 P ≡ [P  (Q ⋁ ∼Q)]
	
★7.	 (P ⊃ Q) ⋁ (∼Q ⊃ P)
	
8.	 (P ⊃ Q) ≡ [P ⊃ (P  Q)]
	
9.	 [(P ⊃ Q)  (P ⊃ R)] ⊃ [P ⊃ (Q  R)]
	 ★10.	 [∼(P  ∼Q)  ∼Q] ⊃ ∼P
	
11.	 (P ⊃ Q) ⋁ (Q ⊃ P)
	
12.	 [P ⊃ (Q ⊃ R)] ≡ [Q ⊃ (P ⊃ R)]
	 ★13.	 (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ [(P ⊃ ∼Q) ⊃ ∼P]
	
14.	 [(P ⊃ Q) ⊃ R] ⊃ [(R ⊃ ∼R) ⊃ P]
	
15.	 (∼P ⋁ Q) ⊃ [(P ⋁ ∼Q) ⊃ (P ≡ Q)]
	 ★16.	 ∼[(P ⊃ ∼P)  (∼P ⊃ P)]
7
Tautologies expressed as equivalences are usually proved using two conditional se-
quences, one after the other. Example:
	
	 	
	
	
	
/  P ≡ [P
Q ⊃ P)]
	
    1.  P	
	
ACP
	
    2.  P ⋁ ∼Q	
	
1,  Add
	
    3.  ∼Q ⋁ P	
	
2, Com
	
    4.  Q ⊃ P	
	
3, Impl
	
    5.  P
Q ⊃ P)	
	
1, 4, Conj
  6.	 P ⊃ [P
Q ⊃ P)]	
	
1–5, CP
	
    7.  P
Q ⊃ P)	
	
ACP
	
    8.  P	
	
7, Simp
  9.	 [P
Q ⊃ P)] ⊃ P	
	
7–8, CP			
11.	 P ≡ [P
Q ⊃ P)]	
	
10, Equiv
SECTION 7.7 Proving Logical Truths   451

452   CHAPTER 7 Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
7
	
17.	 P ⊃ [(Q  ∼Q) ⊃ R]
	
18.	 [(P  Q) ⋁ R] ⊃ [(∼R ⋁ Q) ⊃ (P ⊃ Q)]
	 ★19.	 P ≡ [P ⋁ (Q  ∼Q)]
	
20.	 P ⊃ [Q ≡ (P ⊃ Q)]
	
Summary
Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic:
• A step-by-step method for proving the validity of propositional type arguments.
• Shows exactly how the conclusion “comes out” of the premises.
• Consists in applying eighteen rules of inference to the premises and deriving the 
­conclusion as the last line in a sequence of lines.
• Success in using this method requires much practice.
Rules of Inference:
• Rules of implication (“one-way ” rules):
■
■
The premise(s) can be used to derive the conclusion.
■
■
The conclusion cannot be used to derive the premise(s).
• Rules of replacement (“ two-way ” rules):
■
■
Expressed as logical equivalencies.
■
■
Either side of the equivalence can replace the other.
■
■
Can be used to “deconstruct” the conclusion for insight into how to derive it.
Conditional Proof:
• A method for deriving a conditional statement.
• Assume the antecedent of the desired conditional on an indented line.
• Derive the consequent of the desired conditional statement.
• Discharge the indented sequence in a conditional statement having the first line of the 
sequence as the antecedent and the last line as the consequent.
• This method can greatly simplify many proofs.
Indirect Proof:
• A method for deriving any kind of statement.
• Assume the negation of the desired statement (often this is the conclusion ) on an 
indented line.
• Derive a contradiction.
• Any assumption that necessarily leads to a contradiction is false.
• Discharge the indented sequence in a statement consisting of the negation of the first 
line of the sequence.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

7
Summary   453
Proving Logical Truths (Tautologies):
• Use conditional proof to derive conditionals and biconditionals.
■
■
Assume the antecedent of the conditional statement on an indented line.
■
■
Derive the consequent.
■
■
Discharge the indented sequence in the usual way.
■
■
Biconditionals require two indented sequences.
• Use indirect proof to derive any logical truth:
■
■
Assume the negation of the logical truth on an indented line.
■
■
Derive a contradiction.
■
■
Discharge the indented sequence in the usual way.

Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.
8 
8.1 	 Symbols and Translation
8.2	 Using the Rules of Inference
8.3	 Quantifier Negation Rule
8.4	 Conditional and Indirect Proof
8.5	 Proving Invalidity
8.6	 Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantifiers
8.7	 Identity
8.1	
Symbols and Translation
PREVIEW    Suppose you are starting up a small business and want to construct a website to 
promote your product. First, you will assemble the individual web pages. The materials you will use 
include text, photos, and possibly some video. Constructing an argument in the language of predicate 
logic is a little like constructing a website. The individual pages are the symbolized premises and con-
clusion, and the materials you use for constructing them are the symbols introduced in this section of 
the chapter.
Techniques were developed in earlier chapters for evaluating two basically different 
kinds of arguments. The chapter on categorical syllogisms dealt with arguments such 
as the following:
All student hookups are quickie sexual encounters.
No quickie sexual encounters are committed relationships.
Therefore, no student hookups are committed relationships.
In such arguments the fundamental components are terms, and the validity of the argu-
ment depends on the arrangement of the terms within the premises and conclusion.
The chapter on propositional logic, on the other hand, dealt with arguments such as this:
If chronic stress is reduced, then relaxation increases and health improves.
If health improves, then people live longer.
Therefore, if chronic stress is reduced, then people live longer.
Predicate Logic
454
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

SECTION 8.1 Symbols and Translation   455
8
In such arguments the fundamental components are not terms but statements. The 
validity of these arguments depends not on the arrangement of the terms within the 
statements but on the arrangement of the statements themselves as simple units.
Not all arguments, however, can be assigned to one or the other of these two groups. 
There is a third type that is a kind of hybrid, sharing features with both categorical syl-
logisms and propositional arguments. Consider, for example, the following:
Catherine Zeta-Jones is rich and beautiful.
If a woman is either rich or famous, she is happy.
Therefore, Catherine Zeta-Jones is happy.
The validity of this argument depends on both the arrangement of the terms and the 
arrangement of the statements. Accordingly, neither syllogistic logic nor propositional 
logic alone is sufficient to establish its validity. What is needed is a third kind of logic 
that combines the distinctive features of syllogistic logic and propositional logic. This 
third kind is called predicate logic.
The fundamental component in predicate logic is the predicate, symbolized by up-
percase letters (A, B, C, . . . X, Y, Z ), called predicate symbols. Here are some examples 
of bare predicates:
English predicate
Symbolic predicate
___ is a rabbit
R __
___ is gigantic
G __
___ is a doctor
D __
___ is helpless
H __
The blank space immediately following the predicate letter is not part of the predicate; 
rather, it indicates the place for some lowercase letter that will represent the subject of 
the statement. Depending on what lowercase letter is used, and on the additional sym-
bolism involved, symbolic predicates may be used to translate three distinct kinds of 
statements: singular statements, universal statements, and particular statements.
A singular statement, you may recall from Section 4.7, is a statement that makes an 
assertion about a specifically named person, place, thing, or time. Translating a singular 
statement involves writing a lowercase letter corresponding to the subject of the state-
ment to the immediate right of the uppercase letter corresponding to the predicate. 
The letters that are allocated to serve as abbreviated names of individuals are the first 
twenty-three letters of the alphabet (a, b, c, . . . u, v, w). These letters are called individual 
constants. Here are some examples of translated statements:
Statement
Symbolic translation
Socrates is mortal.
Ms
Tokyo is populous.
Pt
The Sun-Times is a newspaper.
Ns
King Lear is not a fairy tale.
∼Fk
Berlioz was not a German.
∼Gb

456   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
Compound arrangements of singular statements may be translated by using the 
familiar connectives of propositional logic. Here are some examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
If Paris is beautiful, then Andre told the truth.
Bp ⊃ Ta
Irene is either a doctor or a lawyer.
Di ⋁ L i
Senator Wilkins will be elected only  
if he campaigns.
Ew ⊃ Cw
General Motors will prosper if either Nissan  
is crippled by a strike or Subaru declares  
bankruptcy.
(Cn ⋁ Ds) ⊃ Pg
Indianapolis gets rain if and only if Chicago  
and Milwaukee get snow.
R i ≡ (Sc
Sm)
Recall from Chapter 4 that a universal statement is a statement that makes an asser-
tion about every member of its subject class. Such statements are either affirmative or 
negative, depending on whether the statement affirms or denies that the members of the 
subject class are members of the predicate class. The key to translating universal state-
ments is provided by the Boolean interpretation of these statements (see Section 4.3):
Statement form
Boolean interpretation
All S are P.
If anything is an S, then it is a P.
No S are P.
If anything is an S, then it is not a P.
According to the Boolean interpretation, universal statements are translated as con-
ditionals. We have a symbol (the horseshoe) to translate conditional statements, so we 
may use it to translate universal statements. What is still needed, however, is a symbol 
to indicate that universal statements make an assertion about every member of the  
S class. This symbol is called the universal quantifier. It is formed by placing a lowercase  
letter in parentheses, (x), and is translated as “for any x.” The letters that are allocated for 
forming the universal quantifier are the last three letters of the alphabet (x, y, z). These 
letters are called individual variables. They can stand for any item at random in the 
universe, and they have individual constants as substitution instances.
The horseshoe operator and the universal quantifier are combined to translate uni-
versal statements as follows:
Statement form
Symbolic translation
Verbal meaning
All S are P.
(x)(Sx ⊃ Px)
For any x, if x is an S, then x is a P.
No S are P.
(x)(Sx ⊃ ∼Px)
For any x, if x is an S, then x is not a P.
Because an individual variable can stand for any item at random in the universe, the 
expression (x)(Sx ⊃ Px) means “If anything is an S, then it is a P.” Also (x)(Sx ⊃ ∼Px) 
means “If anything is an S, then it is not a P.” The fact that these expressions are equiva-
lent to the Boolean ­interpretation of universal statements may be seen by recalling how 

SECTION 8.1 Symbols and Translation   457
8
the Boolean interpretation is represented by Venn diagrams (see Section 4.3). The Venn 
diagrams corresponding to the two universal statement forms are as follows:
P
S
All S are P.
P
S
No S are P.
Where shading designates emptiness, the diagram on the left asserts that if anything is 
in the S circle, it is also in the P circle, and the one on the right asserts that if anything 
is in the S circle, it is not in the P circle. This is exactly what is asserted by the symbolic 
expressions just given. These symbolic expressions may therefore be taken as being 
exactly synonymous with the Boolean interpretation of universal statements.
A possible source of confusion at this point concerns the fact that both S and P in 
the symbolic expressions are predicates, whereas in the original statement forms S is the 
subject and P is the predicate. Any problem in this regard vanishes, however, once one 
understands what happens when universal statements are converted into condition-
als. When so converted, S becomes the predicate of the antecedent and P becomes the 
predicate of the consequent. In other words, in the conditional “If anything is an S, then 
it is a P,” both S and P are predicates. Thus, using predicate symbolism to translate uni-
versal statements leads to no difficulties. When translating these statements, the point 
to remember is simply this: The subject of the original statement is represented by a 
capital letter in the antecedent, and the predicate by a capital letter in the consequent. 
Here are some examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
All skyscrapers are tall.
(x)(Sx ⊃ Tx)
No frogs are birds.
(x)(Fx ⊃ ∼Bx)
All ambassadors are statesmen.
(x)(Ax ⊃ Sx)
No diamonds are rubies.
(x)(Dx ⊃ ∼Rx)
In these examples, the expressions Sx ⊃ Tx, Fx ⊃ ∼Bx, and so on are called statement 
functions. A statement function is the expression that remains when a quantifier is 
removed from a statement. It is a mere pattern for a statement. It makes no definite as-
sertion about anything in the universe, has no truth value, and cannot be translated as 
a statement. The variables that occur in statement functions are called free variables 
because they are not bound by any quantifier. In contrast, the variables that occur in 
statements are called bound variables.
In using quantifiers to translate statements, we adopt a convention similar to the 
one adopted for the tilde operator. That is, the quantifier governs only the expression 
­immediately following it. For example, in the statement (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx) the universal 
quantifier governs the entire statement function in parentheses—namely, Ax ⊃ Bx. But 

458   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
in the expression (x)Ax ⊃ Bx, the universal quantifier governs only the statement func-
tion Ax. The same convention is adopted for the existential quantifier, which will be 
introduced presently.
Recall from Chapter 4 that a particular statement is a statement that makes an 
assertion about one or more unnamed members of the subject class. As with univer-
sal statements, particular statements are either affirmative or negative, depending on 
whether the statement affirms or denies that members of the subject class are members 
of the predicate class. Also, as with universal statements, the key to translating particu-
lar statements is provided by the Boolean interpretation:
Statement form
Boolean interpretation
Some S are P.
At least one thing is an S and it is also a P.
Some S are not P.
At least one thing is an S and it is not a P.
In other words, particular statements are translated as conjunctions. Since we are 
already familiar with the symbol for conjunction (the dot), the only additional symbol 
that we need in order to translate these statements is a symbol for existence. This is 
provided by the existential quantifier, formed by placing a variable to the right of a 
backward E in parentheses, thus: (∃x). This symbol is translated “there exists an x such 
that.” The existential quantifier is combined with the dot operator to translate particu-
lar statements as follows:
Statement form
Translation
Symbolic verbal meaning
Some S are P.
(∃x)(Sx
Px)
There exists an x such that x is an S and x is a P.
Some S are not P.
(∃x)(Sx
∼Px)
There exists an x such that x is an S and x is not a P.
As in the symbolic expression of universal statements, the letter x is an individu-
al variable, which can stand for any item in the universe. Accordingly, the expression 
(∃x)(Sx  Px) means “Something exists that is both an S and a P,” and (∃x)(Sx  ∼Px) 
means “Something exists that is an S and not a P.” To see the equivalence of these ex-
pressions with the Boolean (and Aristotelian) interpretation of particular statements, it 
is again useful to recall how these statements are represented by Venn diagrams:
P
S
Some S are P.
P
S
Some S are not P.
X
X
Where the X designates at least one existing item, the diagram on the left asserts that 
something exists that is both an S and a P, and the one on the right asserts that ­something 
exists that is an S and not a P. In other words, these diagrams assert exactly the same 
thing as the symbolic expressions just given. These symbolic expressions, therefore, 

SECTION 8.1 Symbols and Translation   459
8
exactly express the Boolean (and Aristotelian) interpretation of particular statements. 
Here are some examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
Some men are paupers.
(∃x)(Mx
Px)
Some diseases are not contagious.
(∃x)(Dx
∼Cx)
Some jobs are boring.
(∃x)(  Jx
Bx)
Some vehicles are not motorcycles.
(∃x)(Vx
∼Mx)
The general rule to follow in translating statements in predicate logic is always to 
make an effort to understand the meaning of the statement to be translated. If the 
statement makes an assertion about every member of its subject class, a universal quan-
tifier should be used to translate it; but if it makes an assertion about only one or more 
members of this class, an existential quantifier should be used.
Many of the principles developed in syllogistic logic (see Section 4.7) may be carried 
over into predicate logic. Specifically, it should be understood that statements beginning 
with the words only and none but are exclusive propositions. When these statements are 
translated, the term occurring first in the original statement becomes the consequent 
in the symbolic expression, and the term occurring second becomes the antecedent. 
One of the few differences in this respect between predicate logic and syllogistic logic 
concerns singular statements. In syllogistic logic, singular statements are translated as 
universals, while in predicate logic, as we have seen, they are translated in a unique way. 
Here are some examples of a variety of statements:
Statement
Symbolic translation
There are happy marriages.
(∃x)(Mx
Hx)
Every pediatrician loses sleep.
(x)(Px ⊃ L x)
Animals exist.
(∃x)A x
Unicorns do not exist.
∼(∃x)Ux or (x)∼Ux
Anything is conceivable.
(x)Cx
Sea lions are mammals.
(x)(Sx ⊃ Mx)
Sea lions live in these caves.
(∃x)(Sx
L x)
Egomaniacs are not pleasant companions.
(x)(E x ⊃ ∼Px)
A few egomaniacs did not arrive on time.
(∃x)(E x
∼A x)
Only close friends were invited to the wedding.
(x)(Ix ⊃ Cx)
None but citizens are eligible to vote.
(x)(E x ⊃ Cx)
It is not the case that every Girl Scout sells cookies.
∼(x)(Gx ⊃ Sx)
or
(∃x)(Gx
∼Sx)
Not a single psychologist attended the convention.
∼(∃x)(Px
A x)
or
(x)(Px ⊃ ∼A x)

460   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
As these examples illustrate, the general procedure in translating statements in 
predicate logic is to render universal statements as conditionals preceded by a uni-
versal quantifier, and particular statements as conjunctions preceded by an existential 
quantifier. However, as the third and fifth examples indicate, there are exceptions to 
this procedure. A statement that makes an assertion about literally everything in the 
universe is translated in terms of a single predicate preceded by a universal quanti-
fier, and a statement that asserts that some class of things simply exists is translated in 
terms of a single predicate preceded by an existential quantifier. The last two examples 
illustrate that a particular statement is equivalent to a negated universal, and vice versa. 
The first of these is equivalent to “Some Girl Scouts do not sell cookies” and the second 
to “No psychologists attended the convention.” Actually, any quantified statement can 
be translated using either a universal or an existential quantifier, provided that one of 
them is negated. The equivalence of these two forms of expression will be analyzed 
further in Section 8.3.
More-complex statements may be translated by following the basic rules just pre-
sented. Examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
Only snakes and lizards thrive in the desert.
(x)[Tx ⊃ (Sx ⋁ L x)]
Oranges and lemons are citrus fruits.
(x)[(Ox ⋁ L x) ⊃ Cx]
Ripe apples are crunchy and delicious.
(x)[(Rx
A x) ⊃ (C x
Dx)]
Azaleas bloom if and only if they are fertilized.
(x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ≡ Fx)]
Peaches are edible unless they are rotten.
(x)[Px ⊃ (∼Rx ⊃ Ex)]
or
(x)[Px ⊃ (E x ⋁ R x)]
Cats and dogs bite if they are frightened  
or harassed.
(x){(Cx ⋁ Dx) ⊃ [(Fx ⋁ Hx) ⊃ Bx]}
Notice that the first example is translated in terms of the disjunction Sx ⋁ Lx even 
though the English statement reads “snakes and lizards.” If the translation were ren-
dered as (x)[Tx ⊃ (Sx  Lx)] it would mean that anything that thrives in the desert is 
both a snake and a lizard (at the same time). And this is surely not what is meant. For 
the same reason, the second example is translated in terms of the disjunction Ox ⋁ Lx 
even though the English reads “oranges and lemons.” If the statement were translated 
(x)[(Ox  Lx) ⊃ Cx], it would mean that anything that is simultaneously an orange and 
a lemon (and there are none of these) is a citrus fruit. The same principle is used in 
translating the sixth example, which, incidentally, reads “If anything is a cat or a dog, 
then if it is frightened or harassed, it bites.” The third example employs the conjunction 
Rx  Ax to translate ripe apples. This, of course, is correct, because such a thing is both 
ripe and an apple at the same time. The fifth example illustrates the fact that “unless” 
may be translated as either “if not” or “or.”
The operators of propositional logic can be used to form compound arrangements 
of universal and particular statements, just as they can be used to form compound 
arrangements of singular statements. Here are some examples:

8
SECTION 8.1 Symbols and Translation   461
Statement
Symbolic translation
If Elizabeth is a historian, then some women 
are historians.
He ⊃ (∃x)(Wx  Hx)
If some cellists are music directors, then  
some orchestras are properly led.
(∃x)(Cx  Mx) ⊃ (∃x)(Ox  Px)
Either everything is alive or Bergson’s theory  
is not correct.
(x)Ax ⋁ ∼Cb
All novels are interesting if and only if some 
Steinbeck novels are not romances.
(x)(Nx ⊃ Ix) ≡ (∃x)[(Nx
Sx
∼R x)]
Green avocados are never purchased unless  
all the ripe ones are expensive.
(x)[(Gx
A x) ⊃ ∼Px] ⋁ (x)[(R x
A x) ⊃ E x] 
We have seen that the general procedure is to translate universal statements as con-
ditionals preceded by a universal quantifier, and to translate particular statements as 
conjunctions preceded by an existential quantifier. Let us see what happens to these 
translations when they are preceded by the wrong quantifier. Consider the false state-
ment “No cats are animals.” This is correctly translated (x)(Cx ⊃ ∼Ax). If, however, it 
were translated (∃x)(Cx ⊃ ∼Ax), the symbolic statement would turn out to be true. 
This may be seen as follows. (∃x)(Cx ⊃ ∼Ax) is equivalent via material implication to 
(∃x)(∼Cx ⋁ ∼Ax), which in turn is equivalent via De Morgan’s rule to (∃x)∼(Cx  Ax).  
The latter statement, however, merely asserts that something exists that is not both a 
cat and an animal—for example, a dog—which is true. Again, consider the true state-
ment “Some cats are animals.” This is correctly translated (∃x)(Cx  Ax). If, however, it 
were translated (x)(Cx  Ax), the symbolic statement would assert that everything in 
the universe is both a cat and an animal, which is clearly false. Thus, as these examples 
illustrate, it is imperative that the two quantifiers not be confused with each other.
One final observation needs to be made. It was mentioned earlier that the letters  
x, y, and z are reserved for use as variables for translating universal and particular state-
ments. In accord with this convention, the other twenty-three lowercase letters (a, b,  
c, . . . u, v, w) may be used as names for translating singular statements. Thus, for example, 
“Albert is a scientist” is translated Sa. But a question naturally arises with statements 
such as “Xerxes was a king.” Should this statement be translated Kx? The answer is no. 
Some other letter, for example the second letter in the name, should be selected instead 
of x. Maintaining this alphabetical convention will help us avoid mistakes in the next 
section when we use natural deduction to derive the conclusions of arguments.
EXERCISE 8.1
	
Translate the following statements into symbolic form. Avoid negation signs preced-
ing quantifiers. The predicate letters are given in parentheses.
	
★1.	 Elaine is a chemist. (C )
	
2.	 Nancy is not a sales clerk. (S)

462   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
	
3.	 Neither Wordsworth nor Shelley was Irish. (I )
	
★4.	 Rachel is either a journalist or a newscaster. ( J, N )
	
5.	 Intel designs a faster chip only if Micron does. (D)
	
6.	 Belgium and France subsidize the arts only if Austria or Germany expand mu-
seum holdings. (S, E )
	
★7.	 All maples are trees. (M, T )
	
8.	 Some grapes are sour. (G, S )
	
9.	 No novels are biographies. (N, B)
	 ★10.	 Some holidays are not relaxing. (H, R)
	
11.	 If Gertrude is correct, then the Taj Mahal is made of marble. (C, M )
	
12.	 Gertrude is not correct only if the Taj Mahal is made of granite. (C, G )
	 ★13.	 Tigers exist. (T )
	
14.	 Anything that leads to violence is wrong. (L, W )
	
15.	 There are pornographic art works. (A, P )
	 ★16.	 Not every smile is genuine. (S, G )
	
17.	 Every penguin loves ice. (P, L)
	
18.	 There is trouble in River City. (T, R)
	 ★19.	 Whoever is a socialite is vain. (S, V )
	
20.	 Any caring mother is vigilant and nurturing. (C, M, V, N )
	
21.	 Terrorists are neither rational nor empathic. (T, R, E )
	 ★22.	 Nobody consumed by jealousy is happy. (C, H )
	
23.	 Everything is imaginable. (I )
	
24.	 Ghosts do not exist. (G )
	 ★25.	 A thoroughbred is a horse. (T, H )
	
26.	 A thoroughbred won the race. (T, W )
	
27.	 Not all mushrooms are edible. (M, E )
	 ★28.	 Not any horse chestnuts are edible. (H, E )
	
29.	 A few guests arrived late. (G, A)
	
30.	 None but gentlemen prefer blondes. (G, P )
	 ★31.	 A few cities are neither safe nor beautiful. (C, S, B)
	
32.	 There are no circular triangles. (C, T )
	
33.	 Snakes are harmless unless they have fangs. (S, H, F )
	 ★34.	 Some dogs bite if and only if they are teased. (D, B, T  )
462   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic

SECTION 8.1 Symbols and Translation   463
8
	
35.	 An airliner is safe if and only if it is properly maintained. (A, S, P )
	
36.	 Some companies go bankrupt if sales decline. (C, B, S)
	 ★37.	 Some children act up only if they are tired. (C, A, T )
	
38.	 The only musicians that are available are trombonists. (M, A, T )
	
39.	 Only talented musicians perform in the symphony. (T, M, P)
	 ★40.	 Any well-made car runs smoothly. (W, C, R)
	
41.	 Not every foreign car runs smoothly. (F, C, R)
	
42.	 A good violin is rare and expensive. (G, V, R, E )
	 ★43.	 Violins and cellos are stringed instruments. (V, C, S, I )
	
44.	 A room with a view is available. (R, V, A)
	
45.	 A room with a view is expensive. (R, V, E )
	 ★46.	 Some French restaurants are exclusive. (F, R, E )
	
47.	 Some French cafés are not recommended. (F, C, R)
	
48.	 Hurricanes and earthquakes are violent and destructive. (H, E, V, D)
	 ★49.	 Taylor is guilty if and only if all the witnesses committed perjury. (G, W, C )
	
50.	 If any witnesses told the truth, then either Parsons or Harris is guilty. (W, T, G )
	
51.	 If all mysteries are interesting, then Rebecca is interesting. (M, I )
	 ★52.	 If there are any interesting mysteries, then Rebecca is interesting. (M, I )
	
53.	 Skaters and dancers are energetic individuals. (S, D, E, I )
	
54.	 Swiss watches are not expensive unless they are made of gold. (S, W, E, M )
	 ★55.	 If all the buildings in Manhattan are skyscrapers, then the Chrysler building  
is a skyscraper. (B, M, S)
	
56.	 Experienced mechanics are well paid only if all the inexperienced ones are 
lazy. (E, M, W, L)
	
57.	 Balcony seats are never chosen unless all the orchestra seats are taken. (B, S, C, 
O, T )
	 ★58.	 Some employees will get raises if and only if some managers are overly gener-
ous. (E, R, M, O)
	
59.	 The physicists and astronomers at the symposium are listed in the program  
if they either chair a meeting or read a paper. (P, A, S, L, C, R)
	
60.	 If the scientists and technicians are conscientious and exacting, then some  
of the mission directors will be either pleased or delighted. (S, T, C, E, M, P, D)
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

464   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
8.2	
Using the Rules of Inference
PREVIEW    After you have finished constructing your website, you find that you don’t like the way 
certain items are organized on the pages. So, you go back into the site, dismantle the pages, rearrange the 
items, and then put everything back together again. Using natural deduction in predicate logic resembles 
this procedure. First, you dismantle the premises, and you then reorganize the parts to construct the 
conclusion. Developing a facility with this procedure will sharpen your skills for any task that involves 
organization.
The chief reason for using truth-functional operators (the dot, wedge, horseshoe, and 
so on) in translating statements into the symbolism of predicate logic is to allow for 
the application of the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion of arguments 
via natural deduction. Since, however, the first eight of these rules are applicable only 
to whole lines in an argument, as long as the quantifier is attached to a line these rules 
of inference cannot be applied—at least not to the kind of arguments we are about to 
consider. To provide for their application, four additional rules are required to remove 
quantifiers at the beginning of a proof sequence and to introduce them, when needed, 
at the end of the sequence. These four rules are called universal instantiation, universal 
generalization, existential instantiation, and existential generalization. The first two are 
used to remove and introduce universal quantifiers, respectively, and the second two to 
remove and introduce existential quantifiers.
Let us first consider universal instantiation. As an illustration of the need for this 
rule, consider the following argument:
All economists are social scientists.
Paul Krugman is an economist.
Therefore, Paul Krugman is a social scientist.
This argument, which is clearly valid, is symbolized as follows:
1.   (x)(E x ⊃ Sx)
2.   Ep	
/  Sp
As the argument now stands, none of the first eight rules of inference can be applied; 
as a result, there is no way in which the two premises can be combined to derive the 
conclusion. However, if the first premise could be used to derive a line that reads  
Ep ⊃ Sp, this statement could be combined with the second premise to yield the conclu-
sion via modus ponens. Universal instantiation serves exactly this purpose.
The first premise states that for any item x in the universe, if that item is an E, then it 
is an S. But since Paul Krugman is himself an item in the universe, the first premise im-
plies that if Paul Krugman is an E, then Paul Krugman is an S. A line stating exactly this 
can be derived by universal instantiation (UI). In other words, universal instantiation 
provides us with an instance of the universal statement (x)(Ex ⊃ Sx). In the completed 
proof, which follows, the p in line 3 is called the instantial letter: 

8
SECTION 8.2 Using the Rules of Inference   465
1.   (x)(Ex ⊃ Sx)
2.   Ep	
/  Sp
3.   Ep ⊃ Sp	
1, UI
4.   Sp	
2, 3, MP
At this point the question might arise as to why modus ponens is applicable to lines 
2 and 3. In Chapter 7 we applied modus ponens to lines of the form p ⊃ q, but are we 
justified in applying it to a line that reads Ep ⊃ Sp? The answer is yes, because Ep 
and Sp are simply alternate ways of symbolizing simple statements. As so understood, 
these symbols do not differ in any material way from the p and q of propositional 
logic.
We may now give a general definition of instantiation. Instantiation is an operation 
that consists in deleting a quantifier and replacing every variable bound by that quan-
tifier with the same instantial letter. For an example of an operation that violates the 
rule expressed in this definition, consider line 3 of the foregoing proof. If this line were 
instantiated as Ep ⊃ Sx, it would not be correct because the x in Sx was not replaced 
with the instantial letter p.
Let us now consider universal generalization. The need for this rule may be illus-
trated through reference to the following argument:
All psychiatrists are doctors.
All doctors are college graduates.
Therefore, all psychiatrists are college graduates.
This valid argument is symbolized as follows:
1.   (x)(Px ⊃ Dx)
2.   (x)(Dx ⊃ Cx)	
/  (x)(Px ⊃ Cx)
Once universal instantiation is applied to the two premises, we will have lines that 
can be used to set up a hypothetical syllogism. But then we will have to reintroduce 
a universal quantifier to derive the conclusion as written. This final step is obtained 
by universal generalization (UG). The justification for such a step lies in the fact that 
both premises are universal statements. The first states that if anything is a P, then it 
is a D, and the second states that if anything is a D, then it is a C. We may therefore 
conclude that if anything is a P, then it is a C. But because of the complete generality of 
this reasoning process, there is a special way in which we must perform the universal 
instantiation step. Instead of selecting a specifically named instance, as we did in the 
previous example, we must select a variable that can range over every instance in the 
universe. The variables at our disposal, you may recall from the previous section, are  
x, y, and z. Let us select y. The completed proof is as follows:
1.   (x)(Px ⊃ Dx)
2.   (x)(Dx ⊃ Cx)	
/  (x)(Px ⊃ Cx)
3.   Py ⊃ Dy	
1, UI
4.   Dy ⊃ Cy	
2, UI
5.   Py ⊃ Cy	
3, 4, HS
6.   (x)(Px ⊃ Cx)	
5, UG

466   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
As noted earlier, the expressions in lines 3, 4, and 5 are called statement functions. As 
such, they are mere patterns for statements; they have no truth value and cannot be 
translated as statements. Yet if we take certain liberties, we might characterize line 5 as 
saying “If it is a P, then it is a C, where “it” designates any item at random in the universe. 
Line 6 can then be seen as reexpressing this sense of line 5.
As the two previous examples illustrate, we have two ways of performing universal 
instantiation. On the one hand, we may instantiate with respect to a constant, such as a 
or b, and on the other, with respect to a variable, such as x or y. The exact way in which 
this operation is to be performed depends on the kind of result intended. If we want 
some part of a universal statement to match a singular statement on another line, as 
in the first example, we instantiate with respect to a constant. But if, at the end of the 
proof, we want to perform universal generalization over some part of the statement we 
are instantiating, then we must instantiate by using a variable. This latter point leads to 
an important restriction governing universal generalization—namely, that we cannot 
perform this operation when the instantial letter is a constant. Consider the following 
erroneous proof sequence:
1.   Ta
2.   (x)Tx	
1, UG (invalid)
If Ta means “Albert is a thief, ” then on the basis of this information, we have concluded 
(line 2) that everything in the universe is a thief. Clearly, such an inference is invalid. 
This illustrates the fact that universal generalization can be performed only when the 
instantial letter (in this case a) is a variable.
Let us now consider existential generalization. The need for this operation is illus-
trated through the following argument:
All tenors are singers.
Andrea Bocelli is a tenor.
Therefore, there is at least one singer.
This argument is symbolized as follows:
1.   (x)(Tx ⊃ Sx)
2.   Ta	
/  (∃x)Sx
If we instantiate the first line with respect to a, we can obtain Sa via modus ponens. 
But if it is true that Andrea Bocelli is a tenor, then it certainly follows that there is at 
least one singer (namely, Andrea Bocelli). This last step is accomplished by existential 
generalization (EG). The proof is as follows:
1.   (x)(Tx ⊃ Sx)
2.   Ta	
/  (∃x)Sx
3.   Ta ⊃ Sa	
1, UI
4.   Sa	
2, 3, MP
5.   (∃x)Sx	
4, EG
There are no restrictions on existential generalization, and the operation can be per-
formed when the instantial letter is either a constant (as in the Bocelli example) or a 
variable. As an instance of the latter, consider the following sequence:

8
1.   (x)(Px ⊃ Qx)
2.   (x)Px	
/  (∃x)Qx
3.   Py ⊃ Qy	
1, UI
4.   Py	
2, UI
5.   Qy	
3, 4, MP
6.   (∃x)Qx	
5, EG
Line 5 states in effect that everything in the universe is a Q. From this, the much weaker 
conclusion follows (line 6) that something is a Q. If you should wonder how an exis-
tential conclusion can be drawn from universal premises, the answer is that predicate 
logic assumes that at least one thing exists in the universe. Hence, line 2, which asserts 
that everything in the universe is a P, entails that at least one thing is a P. Without this 
assumption, universal instantiation in line 4 would not be possible.
We may now construct a definition of generalization that covers both varieties. 
Generalization in the inclusive sense is an operation that consists in (1) introducing a 
quantifier immediately prior to a statement, a statement function, or another quantifier, 
and (2) replacing one or more occurrences of a certain instantial letter in the statement 
or statement function with the same variable that appears in the quantifier. For uni-
versal generalization, all occurrences of the instantial letter must be replaced with the 
variable in the quantifier, and for existential generalization, at least one of the instantial 
letters must be replaced with the variable in the quantifier. Thus, both of the following 
cases of existential generalization are valid (although the one on the left is by far the 
more common version):
1. Fa
Ga	
	
	
1. Fa
Ga         
2. (∃x)(Fx
Gx )	 1, EG	
2. (∃x)(Fx
Ga )	
1, EG
On the other hand, only one of the following cases of universal generalization is 
valid:
1. Fx ⊃ Gx	
	
	
1. Fx ⊃ Gx       
2. (y)(Fy ⊃ Gy )	 1, UG	
2. (y)(Fy ⊃ Gx )	
1, UG (invalid)
The inference on the right is invalid because the x in Gx was not replaced with the vari-
able in the quantifier (that is, y).
Of course, it may happen that the instantial letter is the same as the variable that 
appears in the quantifier. Thus, the operation “Gx, therefore (x)Gx” counts as a gen-
eralization. Cases of generalization where a quantifier is introduced prior to another 
quantifier will be presented in Section 8.6.
The need for existential instantiation can be illustrated through the following 
argument:
All attorneys are college graduates.
Some attorneys are golfers.
Therefore, some golfers are college graduates.
The symbolic formulation is as follows:
1.   (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
2.   (∃x)(Ax
Gx)	
/  (∃x)(Gx
Cx)
SECTION 8.2 Using the Rules of Inference   467

468   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
If both quantifiers can be removed, the conclusion can be derived via simplification, 
modus ponens, and conjunction. The universal quantifier can be removed by universal 
instantiation, but to remove the existential quantifier we need existential instantiation. 
Line 2 states that there is something that is both an A and a G. Existential instantiation 
consists in giving this something a name, for example, “David.” We will call this name 
an “existential name” because it is obtained through existential instantiation. The com-
pleted proof is as follows:
1.   (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
2.   (∃x)(Ax
Gx)	
/  (∃x)(Gx
Cx)
3.   Ad
Gd	
2, EI
4.   Ad ⊃ Cd	
1, UI
5.   Ad	
3, Simp
6.   Cd	
4, 5, MP
7.   Gd
Ad	
3, Com
8.   Gd	
7, Simp
9.   Gd
Cd	
6, 8, Conj
10.  (∃x)(Gx
Cx)	
9, EG
Examination of this proof reveals an immediate restriction that must be placed on 
existential instantiation. The name that we have assigned to the particular something 
in line 2 that is both an A and a G is a hypothetical name. It would be a mistake to 
conclude that this something really has that name. Accordingly, we must introduce 
a restriction that prevents us from ending the proof with some line that includes the 
letter d. If, for example, the proof were ended at line 9, we would be concluding that the 
something that is a G and a C really does have the name d. This, of course, would not 
be legitimate, because d is an arbitrary name introduced into the proof for mere con-
venience. To prevent such a mistake, we require that the name selected for existential 
instantiation not appear to the right of the slanted line adjacent to the last premise that 
indicates the conclusion to be derived. Since the last line in the proof must be identi-
cal to this line, such a restriction prevents us from ending the proof with a line that 
contains the existential name.
Further examination of this proof indicates another important restriction on ex-
istential instantiation. Notice that the line involving existential instantiation is listed 
before the line involving universal instantiation. There is a reason for this. If the 
order were reversed, the existential instantiation step would rest on the illicit assump-
tion that the something that is both an A and a G has the same name as the name  
used in the earlier universal instantiation step. In other words, it would involve the 
assumption that the something that is both an A and a G is the very same something 
named in the line Ad ⊃ Cd. Of course, no such assumption is legitimate. To keep 
this mistake from happening, we introduce the restriction that the name introduced 
by existential instantiation be a new name not occurring earlier in the proof se-
quence. The following defective proof illustrates what can happen if this restriction 
is violated:

8
  1.   (∃x)(Fx
Ax)
  2.   (∃x)(Fx
Ox)	
/  (∃x)(Ax
Ox)
  3.   Fb
Ab	
1, EI
  4.   Fb
Ob	
2, EI (invalid)
  5.   Ab
Fb	
3, Com
  6.   Ab	
5, Simp
  7.   Ob
Fb	
4, Com
  8.   Ob	
7, Simp
  9.   Ab
Ob	
6, 8, Conj
10.   (∃x)(Ax
Ox)	
9, EG
To see that this proof is indeed defective, let F stand for fruits, A for apples, and O for 
oranges. The argument that results is:
Some fruits are apples.
Some fruits are oranges.
Therefore, some apples are oranges.
Since the premises are true and the conclusion false, the argument is clearly invalid. The 
defect in the proof occurs on line 4. This line asserts that the something that is both an 
F and an O is the very same something that is both an F and an A. In other words, the 
restriction that the name introduced by existential instantiation be a new name not oc-
curring earlier in the proof is violated.
The first restriction on existential instantiation requires that the existential name 
not occur in the line that indicates the conclusion to be derived, and the second restric-
tion requires that this name be a new name that has not occurred earlier in the proof. 
These two restrictions can easily be combined into a single restriction that requires that 
the name introduced by existential instantiation be a new name that has not occurred 
in any previous line, including the line adjacent to the last premise that indicates the 
conclusion to be derived.
One further restriction that affects all four of these rules of inference requires that 
the rules be applied only to whole lines in a proof. The following sequence illustrates a 
violation of this restriction:
1.   (x)Px ⊃ (x)Qx
2.   Py ⊃ Qy
1, UI (invalid)
In line 2 universal instantiation is applied to both the antecedent and consequent of 
the first line. To derive line 2 validly, the first line would have to read (x)(Px ⊃ Qx). 
With this final restriction in mind, the four new rules of inference, developed on the 
previous pages, may now be summarized. In the formulation that follows, the symbols 
ℱx and ℱy represent any statement function—that is, any symbolic arrangement con-
taining individual variables, such as Ax ⊃ Bx, Cy ⊃ (Dy ⋁ Ey), or Gz  Hz. The symbol 
ℱa represents any statement; that is, any symbolic arrangement containing individual 
constants (or names), such as Ac ⊃ Bc, Cm ⊃ (Dm ⋁ Em), or Gw  Hw. And the symbol 
ℱ is a predicate variable that represents any predicate such as F, G, or H.*
SECTION 8.2 Using the Rules of Inference   469
*Some textbooks use Greek letters such as φ (phi) χ (chi) and ψ (psi) in the place of ℱ to express these and other rules.

470   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
1.	 Universal instantiation (UI):
2.	 Universal generalization (UG):
	
        not allowed:
3.	 Existential instantiation (EI):
	
      not allowed:
Restriction: The existential name a must be a new name that does not appear in any 
previous line (including the conclusion line).
4.	 Existential generalization (EG):
The not allowed version of universal generalization recalls the already familiar fact 
that generalization is not possible when the instantial letter is a constant. In other 
words, the mere fact that the individual a is an ℱ is not sufficient to allow us to con-
clude that everything in the universe is an ℱ. At present this is the only restriction  
needed for universal generalization. In Sections 8.4 and 8.6, however, two additional 
restrictions will be introduced. The not allowed version of existential instantiation 
merely recalls the fact that this operation is a naming process. Because variables 
(x, y, and z) are not names, they cannot be used as instantial letters in existential 
instantiation.
Let us now investigate some applications of these rules. Consider the following 
proof:
1.   (x)(Hx ⊃ Ix)
2.   (x)(Ix ⊃ Hx)	
/  (x)(Hx ≡ Ix)
3.   Hx ⊃ Ix	
1, UI
4.   Ix ⊃ Hx	
2, UI
5.   (Hx ⊃ Ix
(Ix ⊃ Hx)	
3, 4, Conj
6.   Hx ≡ Ix	
5, Equiv
7.   (x)(Hx ≡ Ix)	
6, UG
Because we want to perform universal generalization on the last line of the proof, we 
instantiate lines 1 and 2 using a variable, not a constant. Notice that the variable selected 
for lines 3 and 4 is the same letter that occurs in lines 1 and 2. While a new letter (y or z) 
could have been selected, this is never necessary in such a step. It is necessary, however, 
since we want to combine lines 3 and 4, that the same variable be selected in deriving 
these lines. Another example:
(x)ℱx
     ℱy
(x)ℱx
     ℱa
   ℱy
(x)ℱx
   ℱa
(x)ℱx
(∃x)ℱx
     ℱa
(∃x)ℱx
     ℱy
     ℱa
(∃x)ℱx
     ℱy
(∃x)ℱx

8
1.   (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
2.   (∃x)Ax	
/  (∃x)Cx
3.   Am	
2, EI
4.   (Am ⋁ Bm) ⊃ Cm	
1, UI
5.   Am ⋁ Bm	
3,  Add
6.   Cm	
4, 5, MP
7.   (∃x)Cx	
6, EG
In conformity with the restriction on existential instantiation, the EI step is performed 
before the UI step. The same letter is then selected in the UI step as was used in the  
EI step. In line 5, Bm is joined disjunctively via addition to Am. This rule applies in 
predicate logic in basically the same way that it does in propositional logic. Any state-
ment or statement function we choose can be joined disjunctively to a given line.
Another example:
1.   (∃x)Kx ⊃ (x)(Lx ⊃ Mx)
2.   Kc
Lc	
/  Mc
3.   Kc	
2, Simp
4.   (∃x)Kx	
3, EG
5.   (x)(Lx ⊃ Mx)	
1, 4, MP
6.   Lc ⊃ Mc	
5, UI
7.   Lc
Kc	
2, Com
8.   Lc	
7, Simp
9.   Mc	
6, 8, MP
Since the instantiation (and generalization) rules must be applied to whole lines, it is 
impossible to instantiate line 1. The only strategy that can be followed is to use some 
other line to derive the antecedent of this line and then derive the consequent via 
modus ponens. Once the consequent is derived (line 5), it is instantiated using the same 
letter that appears in line 2.
The next example incorporates all four of the instantiation and generalization rules:
  1.   (x)(Px ⊃ Qx) ⊃ (∃x)(Rx
Sx)
  2.   (x)(Px ⊃ Sx
x)(Sx ⊃ Qx)	
/  (∃x)Sx
  3.   (x)(Px ⊃ Sx)
2, Simp
  4.   (x)(Sx ⊃ Qx
x)(Px ⊃ Sx)
2, Com
  5.   (x)(Sx ⊃ Qx)	
4, Simp
  6.   Py ⊃ Sy	
3, UI
  7.   Sy ⊃ Qy	
5, UI
  8.   Py ⊃ Qy	
6, 7, HS
  9.   (x)(Px ⊃ Qx)	
8, UG
10.   (∃x)(Rx
Sx)	
1, 9, MP
11.   Ra
Sa	
10, EI
12.   Sa
Ra	
11, Com
13.   Sa	
12, Simp
14.   (∃x)Sx	
13, EG
As with the previous example, line 1 cannot be instantiated. To instantiate the two con-
juncts in line 2, they must first be separated (lines 3 and 5). Because UG is to be used 
SECTION 8.2 Using the Rules of Inference   471

472   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
in line 9, lines 3 and 5 are instantiated using a variable. On the other hand, a constant is 
used to instantiate line 10 because the statement in question is a particular statement.
Another example:
  1.   [(∃x)Ax
∃x)Bx] ⊃ C j
  2.   (∃x)(Ax
Dx)
  3.   (∃x)(Bx
Ex)	
/  C j
  4.   Am
Dm	
2, EI
  5.   Bn
En	
3, EI
  6.   Am	
4, Simp
  7.   Bn	
5, Simp
  8.   (∃x)Ax	
6, EG
  9.   (∃x)Bx	
7, EG
10.   (∃x)Ax
∃x)Bx	
8, 9, Conj
11.   C j	
1, 10, MP
When line 2 is instantiated (line 4), a letter other than j, which appears in line 1, is selected. 
Then, when line 3 is instantiated (line 5), another new letter is selected. The conclusion is 
derived, as in earlier examples, via modus ponens by deriving the antecedent of line 1.
The following examples illustrate invalid or improper applications of the instantia-
tion and generalization rules:
1.   Fy ⊃ Gy
2.   (x)(Fx ⊃ Gy)	
1, UG	
(invalid — every instance of y must be  
replaced with x)
1.   (x)Fx ⊃ Ga	
2.   Fx ⊃ Ga	
1, UI	
(invalid — instantiation can be applied  
only to whole lines)
1.   (x)Fx ⊃ (x)Gx
2.   Fx ⊃ Gx	 	
1, UI	
(invalid —i nstantiation can be applied  
only to whole lines)
1.   Fc
2.   (∃x)Gx
3.   Gc	
2, EI	
(invalid — c appears in line 1)
1.   Fm ⊃ Gm	
2.   (x)(Fx ⊃ Gx)	
1, UG	
(invalid — the instantial letter must be a  
variable; m is a constant)
1.   (∃x)Fx
2.   (∃x)Gx
3.   Fe	
1, EI
4.   Ge	
2, EI	
(invalid — e appears in line 3)
1.   Fs
Gs	
2.   (∃x)Fx
Gs	
1, EG	
(improper — generalization can be  
applied only to whole lines)
1.   ∼(x)Fx
2.   ∼Fy	
1, UI	
(invalid — lines involving negated 
quantifiers cannot be instantiated; see 
Section 8.3)

8
EXERCISE 8.2	
	 I.	 Use the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following sym-
bolized arguments. Do not use either conditional proof or indirect proof.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
(2)	 1.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx)    /  (∃x)(Ax  Cx)
	
(3)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼Bm    /  (∃x)∼Ax
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (y)(Ay ⋁ ∼By)    / (x)(Ax ≡ Bx)
	
(5)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ⋁ Cx)]
	
	 2.	 Ag  ∼Bg    /  Cg
	
(6)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (∃y)(Ay  Dy)    /  (∃y)Cy
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (x)[ Jx ⊃ (Kx  Lx)]
	
	 2.	 (∃y)∼Ky    /  (∃z)∼Jz
 
(8)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ⋁ Cx)]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ax  ∼Cx)    /  (∃x)Bx
	
(9)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 Am  An    /  Bm  Bn
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 Am ⋁ An    /  Bm ⋁ Bn
	
(11)	 1.	 (x)(Bx ⋁ Ax)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Ax)    /  (x)Ax
	
(12)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (y)(By ⋁ ∼Ay)
	
	 2.	 An    / (∃y)By
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax  Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Bx  ∼Cx)    /  (∃x)∼Ax
	
(14)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Dx)
	
	 3.	 Ae ⋁ Ce    / (∃x)(Bx ⋁ Dx)
	
(15)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 Am  Bm    /  Cm
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)Bx
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (∃x)Dx
	
	 3.	 An  Cn    /  (∃x)(Bx  Dx)
SECTION 8.2 Using the Rules of Inference   473

474   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
474   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
	
(17)	 1.	 (x)(Ax  Bx)
	
	 2.	 Cr ⋁ ∼(x)Bx    / (∃x)(Cx  Ax)
	
(18)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ≡ Cx)]
	
	 2.	 An  Am
	
	 3.	 Cn  ∼Cm    / Bn  ∼Bm
	 ★(19)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Cx ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	
	 3.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Ax)    /  (x)(Cx ⊃ Ax)
	
(20)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Dx ⊃ (∃x)∼Cx
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Ax  Dx)     / (∃x)∼Bx
	
(21)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx) ⊃ (x)(Cx  Dx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 3.	 Ae              / (∃x)(Dx  Bx)
	 ★(22)	 1.	 (x)(Ax  ∼Bx)
	
	 2.	 An ⊃ [∼(∃x)Cx ⊃ Bc]
	
	 3.	 Am ⊃ (x)(Cx ⊃ Dx)    / (∃x)Dx
	
(23)	 1.	 (x)(Ax  Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)Ax ⊃ (Ce ⋁ ∼Be)
	
	 3.	 (x)Bx ⊃ [(∃x)Cx ⊃ (Dn ⋁ ∼An)]    / (∃x)Dx
	
(24)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)[(Ax ⋁ Ex) ⊃ Dx]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Dx ⊃ (x)[Dx ⊃ (Cx ⋁ ∼Bx)]
	
	 3.	 An  Bn    / (∃x)Cx
	 ★(25)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (x)∼(Dx  Bx)
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Ax  Cx)    / (∃x)∼Dx
	II.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use the eighteen rules of 
inference to derive the conclusion of each. Do not use conditional or indirect proof.
	
★1.	 Oranges are sweet. Also, oranges are fragrant. Therefore, oranges are sweet and 
fragrant. (O, S, F )
	
2.	 Tomatoes are vegetables. Therefore, the tomatoes in the garden are vegetables. 
(T, V, G )
	
3.	 Apples and pears grow on trees. Therefore, apples grow on trees. (A, P, G )
	
★4.	 Carrots are vegetables and peaches are fruit. Furthermore, there are carrots 
and peaches in the garden. Therefore, there are vegetables and fruit in the gar-
den. (C, V, P, F, G )
	
5.	 Beans and peas are legumes. There are no legumes in the garden. Therefore, 
there are no beans in the garden. (B, P, L, G )
	
6.	 There are some cucumbers in the garden. If there are any cucumbers, there are 
some pumpkins in the garden. All pumpkins are vegetables. Therefore, there 
are some vegetables in the garden. (C, G, P, V )

8
	
★7.	 All gardeners are industrious people. Furthermore, any person who is indus-
trious is respected. Therefore, since Arthur and Catherine are gardeners, it fol-
lows that they are respected. (G, I, P, R )
	
8.	 Some huckleberries are ripe. Furthermore, some boysenberries are sweet. If 
there are any huckleberries, then the boysenberries are edible if they are sweet. 
Therefore, some boysenberries are edible. (H, R, B, S, E )
	
9.	 If there are any ripe watermelons, then the caretakers performed well. Fur-
thermore, if there are any large watermelons, then whoever performed well 
will get a bonus. There are some large, ripe watermelons. Therefore, the care-
takers will get a bonus. (R, W, C, P, L, B )
	 ★10.	 If the artichokes in the kitchen are ripe, then the guests will be surprised. Fur-
thermore, if the artichokes in the kitchen are flavorful, then the guests will be 
pleased. The artichokes in the kitchen are ripe and flavorful. Therefore, the 
guests will be surprised and pleased. (A, K, R, G, S, F, P )
III.	The following dialogue contains nine arguments. Translate each into symbolic 
form and then use the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion of each. 
Some of them are quite challenging.
Where’s the Beef ?
	
“Have you decided what to order?” Paul says to Mindy, as he folds his menu and puts it 
on the table.
	
“I think I’ll have the tofu stir-fry,” she replies. “And you?”
	
“I’ll have the rib steak,” Paul says. “You know the rib steak is really good here, and so is 
the pork tenderloin.”
	
“I’m a vegetarian,” she says.
	
“Oh,” Paul says. He smiles sheepishly.
	
Mindy smiles too. “First date,” she says.
	
“Yeah,” says Paul. “What made you decide to become a vegetarian?”
	
“For one thing,” Mindy says, “I think a vegetarian diet is healthier. People who eat meat 
increase their intake of cholesterol and carcinogens. Those who increase their intake of 
cholesterol run a higher risk of heart attack, and those who increase their intake of car-
cinogens run a higher risk of cancer.  Anyone who runs a higher risk of heart attack and 
cancer is less healthy. Thus, people who eat meat are less healthy.
	
“I might add that if people who eat meat are less healthy, then if parents are respon-
sible, then they will refrain from feeding meat to children.  All parents love their children, 
and if they do, then they are responsible. But if parents refrain from feeding meat to 
children, then children will grow up to be vegetarians.  And if that happens, then nobody 
will eat meat in the future. Thus, we can look forward to a future where everyone is a 
vegetarian.”
	
“Well, I won’t hold my breath on that,” Paul says, as he offers Mindy a slice of bread 
from the basket on the table. “If children and teenagers fail to eat meat, then they become 
deficient in zinc.  And if children become deficient in zinc, then they risk a weakened im-
mune system.  And if that happens, then they are less healthy.  Also, if elderly people fail to 
eat meat, then they become deficient in iron.  And if elderly people become deficient in 
SECTION 8.2 Using the Rules of Inference   475

476   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
476   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
iron, then they risk becoming anemic, and if that happens, they are less healthy. Therefore, 
if children and elderly people fail to eat meat, then they are less healthy.”
	
Mindy smiles. “That’s what zinc tablets and iron supplements are for,” she says. 
 Any-
way, there are also moral reasons for being a vegetarian. Consider this.  Animals are 
sentient beings—they feel pain, fear, and joy—and they have an interest in preserving 
their lives. If animals are sentient, then if humans cause animals to suffer, then they act 
immorally.  And if animals have an interest in preserving their lives, then if humans exploit 
animals, then they act immorally. But if humans kill animals for food, then they cause ani-
mals to suffer or they exploit them. Therefore, if humans kill animals for food, then they 
act immorally.”
	
“I agree with you that animals should not be made to suffer,” Paul responds. “But 
if animals are raised under humane conditions, and some of them are, then they will 
not be caused to feel pain or distress.  And if animals are not caused to feel pain, then 
we are morally justified in eating them. Thus, we are morally justified in eating some  
animals.”
	
“I disagree,” says Mindy.
	
“That’s because you think that animals have rights,” Paul says. “If animals have rights, 
then they have moral judgment.  And if animals have moral judgment, then they respect the 
rights of other animals. But every animal pursues its own self-interest to the exclusion of 
other animals, and if that’s so, then it does not respect the rights of other animals. There-
fore, animals have no moral judgment and they also have no rights.”
	
“Well,” Mindy replies, “by that line of reasoning infants and mentally challenged adults 
have no rights. But everyone recognizes that they do have rights.  And if infants have 
rights, then some people who lack the capacity for moral judgment have rights. But if this 
is true, then animals have rights, and if they do, then surely they have the right to life. But if 
animals have the right to life, then if humans are moral, then they must respect that right 
and they cannot kill animals for food. Thus, if humans are moral, they cannot kill animals 
for food.”
	
“The question of infants and mentally challenged adults raises an interesting point,” 
Paul says. “I think what it comes down to is this: Something is considered to have rights if 
and only if it looks human. Infants and mentally challenged adults look human, so they are 
considered to have rights. But animals do not look human, so they are not considered to 
have rights.”
	
“That sounds awfully arbitrary,” says Mindy. “But I think what it really comes down to 
is power. Something is considered to have rights if and only if it has as much power as 
humans. Animals do not have as much power as humans, so animals are not considered 
to have rights. But that seems terribly wrong to me. It shouldn’t be a question of power. 
Anyway, now that our food has arrived, how’s your steak?”
	
Paul takes a bite. “It’s great,” he says. “And how’s your stir-fry?”
	
“Great,” Mindy says. She laughs. “And so is my conscience.”
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

8
8.3	
Quantifier Negation Rule
PREVIEW    Suppose you want to update your website, but when you try to log into your account, 
you find that someone has put a lock on the software program denying you access. A similar situation 
exists in a symbolized argument when a premise begins with a quantifier preceded by a tilde. The tilde 
acts like a lock. As long as the lock is there, you cannot apply the instantiation rules to the quantified 
expression. Learning how to remove these tildes may help you see how to remove obstacles to reasoning 
in other life pursuits.
The rules of inference developed thus far are not sufficient to derive the conclusion of 
every argument in predicate logic. For instance, consider the following:
∼(∃x)(Px
∼Qx)
∼(x)(∼Rx ⋁ Qx)
(∃x)∼Px
Both premises have tildes preceding the quantifiers. As long as they remain, neither 
statement can be instantiated; and if these statements cannot be instantiated, the con-
clusion cannot be derived. What is needed is a rule that will allow us to remove the 
negation signs. This rule, which we will proceed to develop now, is called the quantifier 
negation rule.
As a basis for developing the quantifier negation rule, consider the following state-
ments:
Everything is beautiful.
It is not the case that everything is beautiful.
Something is beautiful.
It is not the case that something is beautiful.
You should be able to see that these statements are equivalent in meaning to the follow-
ing statements, respectively:
It is not the case that something is not beautiful.
Something is not beautiful.
It is not the case that everything is not beautiful.
Everything is not beautiful.
If we generalize these English equivalencies symbolically, we obtain:
	
(x)ℱx    ::    ∼(∃x)∼ℱx
	
∼(x)ℱx      ::    (∃x)∼ℱx
	
(∃x)ℱx     ::    ∼(x)∼ℱx
	 ∼(∃x)ℱx     ::    (x)∼ℱx
These four expressions constitute the quantifier negation rule (QN). Since they are 
stated as logical equivalences, they apply to parts of lines as well as to whole lines. They 
can be summarized as follows:
( Text continues page 479.)
SECTION 8.3 Quantifier Negation Rule   477

478   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
Alfred North Whitehead 1861–1947 
Bertrand Russell 1872–1970
eminentlogicians
A
lfred North Whitehead and Bertrand 
Russell collaborated in writing Principia 
  Mathematica, which is generally con-
sidered the most important logical endeavor of 
the twentieth century. It represents an attempt 
to reduce all of mathematics to logic. Published 
in three volumes between 1910 and 1913, the 
manuscript was so huge that it required a “four 
wheeler” to transport it to the printer. The 
combined work comprises over 1,900 pages, 
nearly all of them filled with highly complex 
and technical notation. The American philoso-
pher Willard Van Orman Quine described the 
Principia as “one of the great intellectual monu-
ments of all time.”
Whitehead was born the son of an Anglican min-
ister in Ramsgate, England. He entered Trinity College, 
Cambridge, with a scholarship in mathematics, and 
after graduating, he was elected a Fellow of  Trinity. 
While there he published A Treatise on Universal 
Algebra, for which he was elected to the prestigious 
Royal Society. Whitehead’s most distinguished student 
at Trinity was Bertrand Russell. After Russell graduated 
he and Whitehead became close friends. At age thirty-
one Whitehead married Evelyn Wade, and they had 
three children, two sons and a daughter.
In 1910 Whitehead left Cambridge for London, 
where he taught at University College London and 
later at the Imperial College of Science and Technology. 
While in London he wrote books in the areas of phys-
ics and the philosophy of science. Then, in 1924 he was 
appointed professor of philosophy at Harvard Uni-
versity, where he wrote Process and Reality. The book 
became a cornerstone of what would later be called 
process ­philosophy and process theology. Whitehead 
died at age eighty-six in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Bertrand Russell, one of the world’s best-known 
intellectuals, was born in Wales to aristocratic parents. 
Both died when he was very young, and although they 
had requested that their son be raised an agnostic, the 
young Russell was brought up by a staunchly Victorian 
grandmother who fed him a steady dose of religion. 
As he grew older he became an atheist (or at best an 
agnostic) who considered religion little ­better than su-
perstition.  At Trinity College Russell studied mathemat-
ics and philosophy and befriended Ludwig Wittgenstein 
and G. E. Moore, as well as Whitehead.  After graduating 
he was elected fellow of Trinity College and later, fel-
low of the Royal Society. He was extremely prolific as a 
writer, and in 1950 he won the Nobel Prize in literature.
Russell was married four times, engaged in nu-
merous love affairs with prominent women, was im-
prisoned for six months for opposing conscription in 
World War I, and was later imprisoned for opposing 
nuclear weapons.  A staunch supporter of birth con-
trol, population control, democracy, free trade, and 
world government, he opposed communism, imperial-
ism, and every form of mind control. He died at age 
ninety-seven at his home in Wales.
© Hulton Archive/Getty Images
Eric Schaal/Pix Inc./Time Life Pictures/Getty Images
8

8
One type of quantifier can be replaced by the other type if and only if immediately 
before and after the new quantifier:
1.  Tilde operators that were originally present are deleted.
2.  Tilde operators that were not originally present are inserted.
To see how the quantifier negation rule is applied, let us return to the argument at 
the beginning of this section. The proof is as follows:
  1.   ∼(∃x)(Px
∼Qx)
  2.   ∼(x)(∼Rx ⋁ Qx)	
/  (∃x)∼Px
  3.   (x)∼(Px
∼Qx)	
1, QN
  4.   (∃x)∼(∼Rx ⋁ Qx)	
2, QN
  5.   ∼(∼Ra ⋁ Qa)	
4, EI
  6.   ∼(Pa
∼Qa)	
3, UI
  7.   ∼∼Ra
∼Qa	
5, DM
  8.   ∼Pa ⋁ ∼∼Qa	
6, DM
  9.   ∼Pa ⋁ Qa	
8, DN
10.   ∼Qa
∼∼Ra	
7, Com
11.   ∼Qa	
10, Simp
12.   Qa ⋁ ∼Pa	
9, Com
13.   ∼Pa	
11, 12, DS
14.   (∃x)∼Px	
13, EG
Before either line 1 or line 2 can be instantiated, the tilde operators preceding the quan-
tifiers must be removed. In accordance with the quantifier negation rule, tilde operators 
are introduced immediately after the new quantifiers in the expressions on lines 3 and 4.
Another example:
1.   (∃x)(Hx
Gx) ⊃ (x)Ix
2.   ∼Im	
/  (x)(Hx ⊃ ∼Gx)
3.   (∃x)∼Ix	
2, EG
4.   ∼(x)Ix	
3, QN
5.   ∼(∃x)(Hx
Gx)	
1, 4, MT
6.   (x)∼(Hx
Gx)	
5, QN
7.   (x)(∼Hx ⋁ ∼Gx)	
6, DM
8.   (x)(Hx ⊃ ∼Gx)	
7, Impl
The statement that m is not an I (line 2) intuitively implies that not everything is an 
I (line 4); but existential generalization and quantifier negation are needed to get the 
desired result. Notice that lines 7 and 8 are derived via De Morgan’s rule and material 
implication, even though the quantifier is still attached. Since these rules are rules of re-
placement, they apply to parts of lines as well as to whole lines. The following ­example 
illustrates the same point with respect to the quantifier negation rule:
1.   (∃x)Jx ⊃ ∼(∃x)Kx
2.   (x)∼Kx ⊃ (x)∼Lx	
/  (∃x)Jx ⊃ ∼(∃x)L x
3.   (∃x)Jx ⊃ (x)∼Kx	
1, QN
4.   (∃x)Jx ⊃ (x)∼Lx	
2, 3, HS
5.   (∃x)Jx ⊃ ∼(∃x)Lx	
4, QN
SECTION 8.3 Quantifier Negation Rule   479

480   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
EXERCISE 8.3	
	 I.	 Use the quantifier negation rule together with the eighteen rules of inference to 
derive the conclusions of the following symbolized arguments. Do not use either 
conditional proof or indirect proof.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)Bx
	
	 2.	 (x)∼Bx    /  (∃x)∼Ax
	
(2)	 1.	 (∃x)∼Ax ⋁ (∃x)∼Bx
	
	 2.	 (x)Bx    /  ∼(x)Ax
	
(3)	 1.	 ∼(∃x)Ax    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⋁ (∃x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)Bx    /  (∃x)Ax
	
(5)	 1.	 (x)(Ax  Bx) ⋁ (x)(Cx  Dx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(x)Dx    /  (x)Bx
	
(6)	 1.	 (∃x)∼Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(x)(Ax ⋁ Cx)    /  ∼(x)Bx
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(x)Cx ⋁ (x)Ax
	
	 3.	 ∼(x)Bx    /  (∃x)∼Cx
	
(8)	 1.	 (x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)∼Bx
	
	 2.	 ∼(x)Bx ⊃ (∃x)∼Cx    /  (x)Cx ⊃ (∃x)∼Ax
	
(9)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ (x)Cx
	
	 2.	 (∃x)∼Cx    /  ∼(∃x)Ax
	 ★(10)	 1.	 ∼(∃x)(Ax  ∼Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)(Bx  ∼Cx)    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
(11)	 1.	 ∼(∃x)(Ax  ∼Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)(Ax  ∼Cx)    /  (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx  Cx)]
	
(12)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax  Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 ∼(x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)    /  ∼(x)Bx
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (x)(Ax  ∼Bx) ⊃ (∃x)Cx
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)(Cx ⋁ Bx)    /  ∼(x)Ax
The quantifier negation rule is applied to only the consequent of line 1, yielding line 3. 
Similarly, the quantifier negation rule is then applied to only the consequent of line 4, 
yielding line 5.
480   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8

8
	
(14)	 1.	 (∃x)∼Ax ⊃ (x)∼Bx
	
	 2.	 (∃x)∼Ax ⊃ (∃x)Bx
	
	 3.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)    /  (x)Cx
	
(15)	 1.	 ∼(∃x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (∃x)Ax
	
	 3.	 (∃x)Dx ⊃ (∃x)Bx    /  ∼(∃x)(Cx ⋁ Dx)
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx) ⊃ (x)(Cx  Dx)
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Ex)  (Bx ⋁ Fx)]
	
	 3.	 ∼(x)Dx    / (x)(Ex ⋁ Fx)
	
(17)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx) ⋁ (∃x)(Cx ⋁ Dx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Cx) ⊃ (x)Ex
	
	 3.	 ∼En     / (∃x)Dx
	
(18)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ [(∃x)Bx ⋁ (x)Cx]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ax  ∼Cx)
	
	 3.	 ∼(x)Cx ⊃ [(x)Fx ⊃ (x)∼Bx]    / (∃x)∼Fx
	 ★(19)	 1. (∃x)(Ax  Bx) ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 Bn  ∼Cn    / ∼(x)Ax
	
(20)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ ∼(∃x)(Bx  Ax)
	
	 2.	 ∼(x)Bx ⊃ ∼(∃x)(Ex  ∼Bx)
	
	 3.	 An    / ∼(x)Ex
	II.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use the quantifier ne-
gation rule and the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Do 
not use either conditional proof or indirect proof.
	
★1.	 If all the physicians are either hematologists or neurologists, then there are no 
cardiologists. But Dr. Frank is a cardiologist. Therefore, some physicians are 
not neurologists. (P, H, N, C )
	
2.	 Either Dr. Adams is an internist or all the pathologists are internists. But it 
is not the case that there are any internists. Therefore, Dr. Adams is not a 
pathologist. (I, P )
	
3.	 If some surgeons are allergists, then some psychiatrists are radiologists. But no 
psychiatrists are radiologists. Therefore, no surgeons are allergists. (S, A, P, R)
	
★4.	 Either some general practitioners are pediatricians or some surgeons are en-
docrinologists. But it is not the case that there are any endocrinologists. There-
fore, there are some pediatricians. (G, P, S, E )
	
5.	 All physicians who did not attend medical school are incompetent. It is not the 
case, however, that some physicians are incompetent. Therefore, all physicians 
have attended medical school. (P, A, I )
SECTION 8.3 Quantifier Negation Rule   481

482   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8.4	
Conditional and Indirect Proof
PREVIEW    Designing a website is likely to be accompanied by various assumptions. You may 
assume that your customers will find one particular design more appealing than another, or one navi-
gation structure more useful than another. Assumptions can also be made in deriving conclusions in 
predicate logic. One type of assumption is used in conditional proof, the other in indirect proof. Devel-
oping a familiarity with these techniques will sharpen your skills in working with assumptions in other 
areas of interest.
Many arguments with conclusions that are either difficult or impossible to derive 
by the conventional method can be handled with ease by using either conditional 
or indirect proof. The use of these techniques on arguments in predicate logic is 
basically the same as it is on arguments in propositional logic. Arguments having 
conclusions expressed in the form of conditional statements or disjunctions (which 
can be derived from conditional statements) are immediate candidates for condi-
tional proof. For these arguments, the usual strategy is to put the antecedent of the 
conditional statement to be obtained in the first line of an indented sequence, to 
derive the consequent as the last line, and to discharge the conditional sequence 
	
6.	 It is not the case that some internists are not physicians. Furthermore, it is not 
the case that some physicians are not doctors of medicine. Therefore, all inter-
nists are doctors of medicine. (I, P, D)
	
★7.	 All pathologists are specialists and all internists are generalists. Therefore, 
since it is not the case that some specialists are generalists, it is not the case 
that some pathologists are internists. (P, S, I, G )
	
8.	 If some obstetricians are not gynecologists, then some hematologists are radi-
ologists. But it is not the case that there are any hematologists or gynecologists. 
Therefore, it is not the case that there are any obstetricians. (O, G, H, R)
	
9.	 All poorly trained allergists and dermatologists are untrustworthy specialists. 
It is not the case, however, that some specialists are untrustworthy. Therefore, 
it is not the case that some dermatologists are poorly trained. (P, A, D, U, S)
	 ★10.	 It is not the case that some physicians are either on the golf course or in the 
hospital. All of the neurologists are physicians in the hospital. Either some 
physicians are cardiologists or some physicians are neurologists. Therefore, 
some cardiologists are not on the golf course. (P, G, H, N, C )
8
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

8
SECTION 8.4 Conditional and Indirect Proof   483
in a conditional statement that exactly matches the one to be obtained. Here is an 
example of such a proof:
1.   (x)(Hx ⊃ Ix)	
/  (∃x)Hx ⊃ (∃x)Ix
	
2.   (∃x)Hx	
ACP
	
3.   Ha	
2, EI
	
4.   Ha ⊃ Ia	
1, UI
	
5.   Ia	
3, 4, MP
	
6.   (∃x)Ix	
5, EG
7.   (∃x)Hx ⊃ (∃x)Ix	
2–6, CP
In this argument the antecedent of the conclusion is a complete statement consisting of 
a statement function, Hx, preceded by a quantifier. This complete statement is assumed 
as the first line in the conditional sequence. The instantiation and generalization rules 
are used within an indented sequence (both conditional and indirect) in basically the 
same way as they are in a conventional sequence. When the consequent of the conclu-
sion is derived, the conditional sequence is completed, and it is then discharged in a 
conditional statement having the first line of the sequence as its antecedent and the last 
line as its consequent.
The next example differs from the previous one in that the antecedent of the conclu-
sion is a statement function, not a complete statement. With arguments such as this, 
only the statement function is assumed as the first line in the conditional sequence. The 
quantifier is added after the sequence is discharged.
1.   (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ C x]	
/  (x)(Ax ⊃ C x)
	
2.   Ax	
ACP
	
3.   Ax ⋁ Bx	
2,  Add
	
4.   (Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ C x	
1, UI
	
5.   C x	
3, 4, MP
6.   Ax ⊃ C x	
2–5, CP
7.   (x)(Ax ⊃ C x)	
6, UG
This example leads to an important restriction on the use of universal generalization. 
You may recall that the x in line 2 of this proof is said to be free because it is not bound 
by any quantifier. (In contrast, the x’s in lines 1 and 7 are bound by quantifiers.) The 
restriction is as follows:
UG:	
ℱy
	
(x)ℱx
	 Restriction: UG must not be used within the scope of an in-
dented sequence if the instantial variable y is free  
in the first line of that sequence.
The proof just given does not violate this restriction, because UG is not used with-
in the scope of the indented sequence at all. It is used only after the sequence 
has been ­discharged, which is perfectly acceptable. If, on the other hand, UG had 
been applied to line 5 to produce a statement reading (x)Cx, the restriction would 
have been violated because the instantial variable x is free in the first line of the 
sequence.

484   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
To understand why this restriction is necessary, consider the following defective 
proof:
1.   (x)Rx ⊃ (x)Sx	
/  (x)(Rx ⊃ Sx)
	
2.   Rx	
ACP
	
3.   (x)Rx	
2, UG (invalid)
	
4.   (x)Sx	
1, 3, MP
	
5.   Sx	
4, UI
6.   Rx ⊃ Sx	
2–5, CP
7.   (x)(Rx ⊃ Sx)	
6, UG
If Rx means “x is a rabbit” and Sx means “x is a snake,” then the premise translates “If 
everything in the universe is a rabbit, then everything in the universe is a snake.” This 
statement is true because the antecedent is false; that is, it is not the case that everything 
in the universe is a rabbit. The conclusion, on the other hand, is false, because it asserts 
that all rabbits are snakes. The argument is therefore invalid. If the restriction on UG 
had been obeyed, UG could not have been used on line 3 and, as a result, the illicit con-
clusion could not have been derived.
It is interesting to see what happens when the premise and the conclusion of this 
defective argument are switched. The proof, which is perfectly legitimate, is as follows:
1.   (x)(Rx ⊃ Sx)	
/  (x)Rx ⊃ (x)Sx
	
2.   (x)Rx	
ACP
	
3.   Rx	
2, UI
	
4.   Rx ⊃ Sx	
1, UI
	
5.   Sx	
3, 4, MP
	
6.   (x)Sx	
5, UG
7.   (x)Rx ⊃ (x)Sx	
2–6, CP
Notice in this proof that UG is used within the scope of a conditional sequence, but the 
restriction is not violated because the instantial variable x is not free in the first line of 
the sequence.
Let us now consider some examples of indirect proof. We begin an indirect sequence 
by assuming the negation of the statement to be obtained. When a contradiction is 
derived, the indirect sequence is discharged by asserting the denial of the original 
assumption. In the examples that follow, the negation of the conclusion is assumed 
as the first line of the sequence, and the quantifier negation rule is then used to 
eliminate the tilde. When the resulting statement is then instantiated, a new letter, m, 
is selected that has not appeared anywhere in a previous line. The same letter is then 
selected for the universal instantiation of line 1:
  1.   (x)[(Px ⊃ Px) ⊃ (Qx ⊃ Rx)]	
/  (x)(Qx ⊃ Rx)
	
2.   ∼(x)(Qx ⊃ Rx)	
AIP
	
3.   (∃x)∼(Qx ⊃ Rx)	
2, QN
	
4.   ∼(Qm ⊃ Rm)	
3, EI
	
5.   (Pm ⊃ Pm) ⊃ (Qm ⊃ Rm)	
1, UI
	
6.   ∼(Pm ⊃ Pm)	
4, 5, MT

8
	
7.   ∼(∼Pm ⋁ Pm)	
6, Impl
	
8.   ∼∼Pm
∼Pm	
7, DM
	
9.   Pm
∼Pm	
8, DN
10.   ∼∼(x)(Qx ⊃ Rx)	
2–9, IP
11.   (x)(Qx ⊃ Rx)	
10, DN
The next example has a particular statement for its conclusion:
  1.   (∃x)Ax ⋁ (∃x)Fx
  2.   (x)(Ax ⊃ Fx)	
/  (∃x)Fx
	
  3.   ∼(∃x)Fx	
AIP
	
  4.   (∃x)Fx ⋁ (∃x)Ax	
1, Com
	
  5.   (∃x)Ax	
3, 4, DS
	
  6.   Ac	
5, EI
	
  7.   Ac ⊃ Fc	
2, UI
	
  8.   Fc	
6, 7, MP
	
  9.   (x)∼Fx	
3, QN
	
10.   ∼Fc	
9, UI
	
11.   Fc
∼Fc	
8, 10, Conj
12.   ∼∼(∃x)Fx	
3–11, IP
13.   (∃x)Fx	
12, DN
Since indirect proof sequences are indented, they are subject to the same restriction on 
universal generalization as are conditional sequences. The following proof, which is similar 
to the previous one, violates this restriction because the instantial variable x is free in the 
first line of the sequence. The violation (line 4) allows a universal statement to be drawn for 
the conclusion, whereas only a particular statement is legitimate (as in the prior example):
  1.   (∃x)Ax ⋁ (∃x)Fx
  2.   (x)(Ax ⊃ Fx)	
/  (x)Fx
	
  3.   ∼Fx	
AIP
	
  4.   (x)∼Fx	
3, UG (invalid)
	
  5.   ∼(∃x)Fx	
4, QN
	
  6.   (∃x)Fx ⋁ (∃x)Ax	
1, Com
	
  7.   (∃x)Ax	
5, 6, DS
	
  8.   Ac	
7, EI
	
  9.   Ac ⊃ Fc	
2, UI
	
10.   Fc	
8, 9, MP
	
11.   ∼Fc	
4, UI
	
12.   Fc
∼Fc	
10, 11, Conj
13.   ∼∼Fx	
3–12, IP
14.   Fx	
13, DN
15.   (x)Fx	
14, UG
To see that this argument is indeed invalid, let Ax stand for “x is an apple” and Fx for “x 
is a fruit.” The first premise then reads “Either an apple exists or a fruit exists” (which is 
true), and the second premise reads “All apples are fruits” (which is also true). The con-
clusion, however, reads “Everything in the universe is a fruit,” and this, of course, is false.
SECTION 8.4 Conditional and Indirect Proof   485

486   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
As in propositional logic, conditional and indirect sequences in predicate logic may 
include each other. The following proof uses an indirect sequence within the scope of 
a conditional sequence.
  1.   (x)[(Px ⋁ Qx) ⊃ (Rx
Sx)]	
/  (∃x)(Px ⋁ Sx) ⊃ (∃x)Sx
	
  2.   (∃x)(Px ⋁ Sx)	
ACP
	
	
  3.   ∼(∃x)Sx	
AIP
	
	
  4.   (x)∼Sx	
3, QN
	
	
  5.   Pa ⋁ Sa	
2, EI
	
	
  6.   ∼Sa	
4, UI
	
	
  7.   Sa ⋁ Pa	
5, Com
	
	
  8.   Pa	
6, 7, DS
	
	
  9.   Pa ⋁ Qa	
8,  Add
	
	
10.   (Pa ⋁ Qa) ⊃ (Ra
Sa)	
1, UI
	
	
11.   Ra
Sa	
9, 10, MP
	
	
12.   Sa Ra	
11, Com
	
	
13.   Sa	
12, Simp
	
	
14.   Sa
∼Sa	
6, 13, Conj
	
15.   ∼∼(∃x)Sx	
3–14, IP
	
16.   (∃x)Sx	
15, DN
17.   (∃x)(Px ⋁ Sx) ⊃ (∃x)Sx	
2–16, CP
The conditional sequence begins, as usual, by assuming the antecedent of the condi-
tional statement to be derived. The objective, then, is to derive the consequent. This 
is accomplished by the indirect sequence, which begins with the negation of the 
­consequent and ends (line 14) with a contradiction.
EXERCISE 8.4	
	 I.	 Use either indirect proof or conditional proof to derive the conclusions of the fol-
lowing symbolized arguments.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)    /  (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx  Cx)]
	
(2)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Cx ⋁ Dx) ⊃ (x)Ex    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Ex)
	
(3)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)Cx    /  (x)∼Ax
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (∃x)(Bx  Dx)    /  (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)Bx
	
(5)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Ax  Bx) ⊃ Cx]    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
486   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8

8
	
(6)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)Bx
	
	 2.	 An ⊃ ∼Bn    /  ∼An
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Cx ⋁ Dx) ⊃ Ex]    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Ex)
	
(8)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ ∼(∃x)Ax    /  (x)∼Ax
	
(9)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Dx)    /  (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Cx) ⊃ (∃x)(Bx ⋁ Dx)
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 Am ⋁ An    /  (∃x)Bx
	
(11)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Cx ⋁ Dx) ⊃ ∼Ax]    /  (x)∼Ax
	
(12)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Dx ⊃ (x)∼Cx    /  (x)[(Ax  Dx) ⊃ ∼Bx]
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Dx ⊃ (∃x)Bx    /  (∃x)(Ax  Dx) ⊃ (∃x)Cx
	
(14)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⋁ (∃x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)    /  (∃x)Cx
	
(15)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (x)(Dx  Ex)    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Ex)
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(∼Ax ⋁ Dx) ⊃ (x)Ex    /  (x)Cx ⋁ (x)Ex
	
(17)	 1.	 (x)Ax ≡ (∃x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Bx)    /  (x)Ax ≡ (∃x)Cx
	
(18)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ≡ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ⊃ Cx)]
	
	 3.	 (∃x)Ax ⋁ (∃x)Bx    /  (∃x)Cx
	 ★(19)	 1.	 (x)[Bx ⊃ (Cx  Dx)]    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx) ⊃ (x)(Ax ⊃ Dx)
	
(20)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx  Cx)]
	
	 2.	 (x)[Dx ⊃ (Ex  Fx)]    /  (x)(Cx ⊃ Dx) ⊃ (x)(Ax ⊃ Fx)
	
(21)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Cx ⊃ Bx)
	
	 3.	 (∃x)Cx    /  (∃x)Bx
	 ★(22)	 1.	 (x)Ax ⋁ (x)Bx    / (x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	
(23)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Ex) ⊃ (x)(Bx  ∼Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Bx ⋁ Fx) ⊃ (x)(Cx ⋁ Dx)	
/ (x)(Ax ⊃ Dx)
SECTION 8.4 Conditional and Indirect Proof   487

488   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
	
(24)	 1. (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)(Cx  Dx)
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Dx ⋁ Ex) ⊃ (∃x)Bx    / (∃x)Bx
	 ★(25)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Dx ⊃ (x)(Ex ⊃ ∼Bx)
	
	 3.	 ∼(∃x)(Cx  ∼Ex)    / (∃x)(Ax  Dx) ⊃ ∼(∃x)Bx
	II.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use conditional or 
indirect proof to derive the conclusion of each.
	
★1.	 All ambassadors are wealthy. Furthermore, all Republicans are clever. There-
fore, all Republican ambassadors are clever and wealthy. (A, W, R, C )
	
2.	 All senators are well liked. Also, if there are any well-liked senators, then 
O’Brien is a voter. Therefore, if there are any senators, then O’Brien is a voter. 
(S, W, V )
	
3.	 If all judges are wise, then some attorneys are rewarded. Furthermore, if there 
are any judges who are not wise, then some attorneys are rewarded. Therefore, 
some attorneys are rewarded. ( J, W, A, R)
	
★4.	 All secretaries and undersecretaries are intelligent and cautious. All those who 
are cautious or vigilant are restrained and austere. Therefore, all secretaries are 
austere. (S, U, I, C, V, R, A)
	
5.	 All ambassadors are diplomats. Furthermore, all experienced ambassadors are 
cautious, and all cautious diplomats have foresight. Therefore, all experienced 
ambassadors have foresight. (A, D, E, C, F )
	
6.	 If there are any senators, then some employees are well paid. If there is anyone 
who is either an employee or a volunteer, then there are some legislative assis-
tants. Either there are some volunteers or there are some senators. Therefore, 
there are some legislative assistants. (S, E, W, V, L )
	
★7.	 If there are any consuls, then all ambassadors are satisfied diplomats. If no 
consuls are ambassadors, then some diplomats are satisfied. Therefore, some 
diplomats are satisfied. (C, A, S, D)
	
8.	 If there are any voters, then all politicians are astute. If there are any politi-
cians, then whoever is astute is clever. Therefore, if there are any voters, then 
all politicians are clever. (V, P, A, C )
	
9.	 Either no senators are present or no representatives are present. Furthermore, 
either some senators are present or no women are present. Therefore, none of 
the representatives who are present are women. (S, P, R, W )
	 ★10.	 Either some governors are present or some ambassadors are present. If anyone 
is present, then some ambassadors are clever diplomats. Therefore, some dip-
lomats are clever. (G, P, A, C, D)
488   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

8
SECTION 8.5 Proving Invalidity   489
8.5	
Proving Invalidity
PREVIEW    Suppose, while updating your website, you replace one entire page with a perfectly 
good new page. But after making the replacement you find that the site fails to operate properly. You 
then know that something is wrong with the underlying coding. Similarly, with an argument expressed 
in predicate logic, if its predicate symbols should be replaced with terms that make its premises true 
and its conclusion false, then you know that something is wrong with the argument’s structure. In other 
words, the argument is invalid.
In the previous chapter we saw that natural deduction could not be used with any 
facility to prove invalidity in propositional logic. The same thing can be said about 
natural deduction in predicate logic. But in predicate logic there is no simple and 
automatic technique such as truth tables or Venn diagrams to fall back on. However, 
there are two methods for proving invalidity in predicate logic that are just as effec-
tive as these other techniques, even though they may not be as convenient. One is 
the method used in Chapter 1 to prove the invalidity of various kinds of syllogisms—
namely, the counterexample method. The other is what we will call the finite universe 
method. Both appeal to the basic idea underlying most proofs of invalidity: Any argu-
ment is proved invalid if it is shown that it is possible for it to have true premises and 
a false conclusion. Both methods are aimed at disclosing a situation that fulfills this 
requirement.
Counterexample Method
Recall from Chapter 1 that applying the counterexample method consists in finding a 
substitution instance of a given invalid argument form (or, equally well, a given invalid 
symbolized argument) that has actually true premises and a false conclusion. For an 
example of its use, consider the following invalid symbolized argument:
(∃x)(Ax
∼Bx)
(x)(Cx ⊃ Bx)	
/  (∃x)(Cx
∼Ax)
In creating a substitution instance, beginning with the conclusion is often easiest. 
The conclusion is translated as “Some C are not A.” Thus, to make this statement false, 
we need to find an example of a class (for C ) that is included in another class (for 
A). Cats and animals will serve this purpose. A little ingenuity provides us with the 
following substitution instance:
Some animals are not mammals.
All cats are mammals.
Therefore, some cats are not animals.
When we produce such a substitution instance, the premises must turn out to be 
indisputably true in the actual world, and the conclusion indisputably false. Statements 
involving the names of animal classes are convenient for this purpose, because everyone 

490   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
agrees about cats, dogs, mammals, fish, and so on. Also, several different substitution 
instances can usually be produced that suffice to prove the argument invalid. Finally, 
any substitution instance that results in true premises and a true conclusion (or any ar-
rangement other than true premises and false conclusion) proves nothing.
Here is an example of an invalid symbolized argument that includes a singular 
statement:
(x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
∼Ac	
/  ∼Bc
This argument form commits the fallacy of denying the antecedent. Producing a sub-
stitution instance is easy:
All cats are animals.
Lassie is not a cat.
Therefore, Lassie is not an animal.
In selecting the name of an individual for the second premise, it is again necessary 
to pick something that everyone agrees on. Since everyone knows that Lassie is a dog, 
this name serves our purpose. But if we had selected some other name, such as Trixie or 
Ajax, this would hardly suffice, because there is no general agreement as to what these 
names denote.
Here is a slightly more complex example:
(x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ⋁ Cx)]
(x)[Bx ⊃ (Cx
Dx)]	
/  (x)(Ax ⊃ Dx)
A little ingenuity produces the following substitution instance:
All dogs are either sharks or animals.
All sharks are animals that are fish.
Therefore, all dogs are fish.
The counterexample method is effective with most fairly simple invalid arguments 
in predicate logic. Since its application depends on the ingenuity of the user, however, 
it is not particularly well suited for complex arguments. For those, the finite universe 
method is probably a better choice.
Finite Universe Method
The finite universe method can be used to establish the invalidity of any invalid ar-
gument expressed in terms of a single variable. It depends on the idea that a valid ar-
gument remains valid no matter how things in the actual universe might be altered. 
Accordingly, if we are given a valid argument, then that argument remains valid if it 
should happen that the universe is contracted so that it contains only a single member. 
On the other hand, if it should turn out that an argument has true premises and false 
conclusion in a universe consisting of only one or a few members, then that argument 
has been proved invalid.

8
To see how this method works, we need to understand what happens to the meaning 
of universal and particular statements when the universe is shrunk in size. Accord-
ingly, let us imagine that the universe contains only one thing instead of the billions 
of things that it actually contains. Let us name that one thing “Abigail.” The statement 
“Everything in the universe is perfect” is then equivalent to “Abigail is perfect” (because 
Abigail is all that there is), and the statement “Something in the universe is perfect” is 
also equivalent to “Abigail is perfect” (because Abigail is that “something”).
To represent this equivalence symbolically, we need a new metalogical symbol 
that asserts that the expressions on either side of it necessarily have the same truth 
value given a universe of a designated size. Although this equivalence bears a close 
resemblance to logical equivalence, it is not identical to it because logical equivalence 
holds independently of any alterations in the universe. The concept that we need to 
represent is a kind of conditional logical equivalence. Accordingly, we will select the 
double colon superscribed with a “c” (for “conditional”). For our purpose here, ::c has 
the same effect as ::.  does.Using the former symbol, we have for a universe consisting 
of one member:
(x)Px   ::c  Pa
(∃x)Px  ::c  Pa
Proceeding, if we imagine that the universe contains exactly two things—let us name 
them “Abigail” and “Beatrice”—the statement “Everything in the universe is perfect” is 
equivalent to “Abigail is perfect and Beatrice is perfect.” On the other hand, the state-
ment “Something in the universe is perfect” is equivalent to “Abigail is perfect or Beatrice 
is perfect” (because “some” means at least one). In other words, the universal statement 
is equivalent to a conjunction of singular statements, and the particular statement is 
equivalent to a disjunction of singular statements. In symbols:
(x)Px   ::c  (Pa
Pb)
(∃x)Px  ::c  (Pa ⋁ Pb)
If the universe is increased to three—let us call the new member “Charmaine”—we 
have
(x)Px   ::c  (Pa
Pb
Pc)
(∃x)Px  ::c  (Pa ⋁ Pb ⋁ Pc)
This equivalence continues indefinitely as more and more members are added to the 
universe.
Extending this treatment to the more typical kinds of universal and particular state-
ments, we have, for a universe of three:
(x)(Px ⊃ Qx)	
::c  [(Pa ⊃ Qa
Pb ⊃ Qb
Pc ⊃ Qc)]
(∃x)(Px
Qx)	
::c  [(Pa
Qa) ⋁ (Pb
Qb) ⋁ (Pc
Qc)]
For expressions involving combinations of quantified statements, each of the compo-
nent statements is translated separately and the resulting statement groups are linked 
SECTION 8.5 Proving Invalidity   491

492   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
together by means of the connective appearing in the original statement. Here are two 
examples for a universe of three:
[(x)Px ⊃ (∃x)Qx]   ::c   [(Pa
Pb
Pc) ⊃ (Qa ⋁ Qb ⋁ Qc)]
[(x)(Px ⊃ Qx) ⋁ (∃x)(Rx
Sx)]   ::c   {[(Pa ⊃ Qa
Pb ⊃ Qb
Pc ⊃ Qc)]  
⋁ [(Ra
Sa) ⋁ (Rb
Sb) ⋁ (Rc
Sc)]}
The method for proving an argument invalid consists in translating the premises 
and conclusion into singular statements, as per the above examples, and then testing 
the result with an indirect truth table (see Section 6.5). First a universe of one is tried. 
If it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false in this universe, the 
argument is immediately identified as invalid. If, on the other hand, a contradiction re-
sults from this assumption, a universe of two is then tried. If, in this second universe, it 
is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, the argument is invalid. 
If not, a universe of three is tried, and so on.
Consider the following symbolized argument:
(x)(Gx ⊃ Hx)
(∃x)Hx    /   (∃x)Gx
For a universe having one member—call this member “Abigail”—the argument trans-
lates into
Ga ⊃ Ha
Ha    /  Ga
Testing with an indirect truth table, we have
Ga  ⊃  Ha  /  Ha  /  /  Ga
 F   T  T	
T	
F
Because it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, the argument 
is invalid. Another example:
(x)(  Jx ⊃ Kx)
(∃x)Jx		
/  (x)Kx
For a universe having one member, the indirect truth table is as follows:
Ja  ⊃  Ka  /  Ja  /  /  Ka
T  T  F	
T	
F
Since it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false for this uni-
verse, we try a universe having two members, a and b:
( Ja  ⊃  Ka 
Jb  ⊃  Kb)  /  Ja  ⋁  Jb  /  /  
  T   T  T    T    F  T  F     T   T  F       T  F    F
Since it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false for this universe, 
the argument is invalid.

8
Here is an example involving compound statements:
(∃x)Hx ⊃ (x)(Fx ⊃ Gx)
(∃x)Fx	
/(∃x)Hx ⊃ (x)Gx
The indirect truth table for a universe having one member is as follows:
Ha  ⊃  (Fa  ⊃  Ga)  /  Fa  /  /  Ha  ⊃  Ga
 T  T   T 
F  F     T       T  F  F
A contradiction results, so we try a universe having two members. The resulting indi-
rect truth table proves the argument invalid:
(Ha  ⋁  Hb)  ⊃  [(Fa  ⊃  Ga
Fb  ⊃  Gb)]  /  Fa  ⋁  Fb  /  /  (Ha  ⋁  Hb)  ⊃  (Ga 
Gb)
     T       T    T  T   T  T    F  T  F      T   T   F            T       F    T   F     F
The next example involves singular statements:
(∃x)Mx
∃x)Nx
Md	
/ Nd
The second premise asserts that something named d is an M. For this argument, the 
assumption that the universe contains only one member entails that this one member 
is named d. Here is the indirect truth table for such a universe:
Md
Nd  /  Md  /  /  Nd
 T  T  F    T      F
When the universe is expanded to include two members, we are free to give any name 
we wish to the second member. Let us call it e. The resulting indirect truth table, which 
follows, shows that the argument is invalid. Notice that the second premise and the 
conclusion remain the same:
(Md  ⋁  Me
Nd  ⋁  Ne)  /  Md  /  /  Nd
     T     T       T    F     T  T        T       F
The basic concept behind this method of proving invalidity rests on the fact that a 
valid argument is valid in all possible universes. Consequently, if an argument fails in a 
universe consisting of one, two, or any number of members, it is invalid.
While this method is intended primarily for proving arguments invalid, theoretically 
it can also be used to prove arguments valid. Several years ago a theorem was proved 
to the effect that an argument that does not fail in a universe of 2n members, where 
n designates the number of different predicates, is valid.* According to this theorem, 
establishing the validity of an argument containing two different predicates requires 
a universe having four members, establishing the validity of an argument containing 
three different predicates requires a universe having eight members, and so on. For 
most arguments, however, a universe having four members is unwieldy at best, and a 
universe having eight members approaches the impossible (although a computer could 
handle it easily). Thus, while this method is usually quite convenient for proving inva-
lidity, practical limitations impede its usefulness in establishing validity.
SECTION 8.5 Proving Invalidity   493
*See Wilhelm Ackermann, Solvable Cases of the Decision Problem (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing, 1954), 
Chapter 4. This theorem, incidentally, holds only for monadic predicates.

494   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
EXERCISE 8.5	
	 I.	 Use the counterexample method to prove that the following symbolized argu-
ments are invalid.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ ∼Cx)    /  (x)(Cx ⊃ Bx)
	
(2)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Ax)    /  (∃x)(Cx  Bx)
	
(3)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 Bc    / Ac
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ax  Cx)    /  (∃x)[Ax  (Bx  Cx)]
	
(5)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⋁ (Bx ⋁ Cx)]    /  (x)Ax ⋁ [(x)Bx ⋁ (x)Cx]
	
(6)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ⋁ Cx)]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Bx  Cx) ⊃ Dx]    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Dx)
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Bx
	
	 3.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ ∼Cx)    /  (∃x)(Bx  ∼Cx)
	
(8)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Cx  Dx) ⊃ Ex]    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Ex)
	
(9)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax  Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Ax  Cx) ⊃ Dx]    /  (x)[(Ax  Dx) ⊃ Cx]
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Cx  ∼Bx)
	
	 3.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)    /  (∃x)[(Cx  Bx)  ∼Ax]
	II.	 Use the finite universe method to prove that the following symbolized arguments 
are invalid.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)    /  (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
(2)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼An    /  (x)Bx
	
(3)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⋁ (∃x)Bx
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax    /  (∃x)Bx
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax    /  (x)Bx
494   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8

8
	
(5)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ⋁ Cx)]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax    /  (∃x)Bx
	
(6)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Bx    /  (∃x)(Ax  Bx)
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Bx ⊃ (∃x)Cx    /  (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
(8)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx) ≡ (∃x)Cx
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)    /  (x)Ax ≡ (∃x)Cx
	
(9)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  ∼Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Bx  ∼Ax)    /  (x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(∼Ax  ∼Bx)    /  (x)(Ax ≡ Bx)
	III.	Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use either the 
­counterexample method or the finite universe method to prove that each is 
invalid.
	
★1.	 Violinists who play well are accomplished musicians. There are some 
violinists in the orchestra. Therefore, some musicians are accomplished.  
(V, P, A, M, O)
	
2.	 Pianists and harpsichordists are meticulous. Alfred Brendel is a pianist. There-
fore, everyone is meticulous. (P, H, M )
	
3.	 If there are any oboists, there are some bassoonists. If there are any clarinetists, 
there are some flutists. Amelia is both an oboist and a clarinetist. Therefore, 
some bassoonists are flutists. (O, B, C, F )
	
★4.	 All timpanists are haughty. If some timpanists are haughty, then some 
percussionists are overbearing. Therefore, all timpanists are overbearing.  
(T, H, P, O)
	
5.	 All cellists and violinists are members of the string section. Some violinists 
are not cellists. Also, some cellists are not violinists. Therefore, everyone is a 
member of the string section. (C, V, M )
8
SECTION 8.5 Proving Invalidity   495
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

496   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
8.6	
Relational Predicates  
and Overlapping Quantifiers
PREVIEW    You have so many Facebook friends that you can’t recall whether Mia Brady is one of 
them. So, you try to think it through. You know that all of your Facebook friends are Facebook friends 
of either Natalie or Ryan. Also, you know that no Facebook friends of Natalie are interesting, and no 
Facebook friends of Ryan are funny. But Mia is both funny and interesting. You conclude that Mia is 
not one of your Facebook friends. In this section you will learn how to prove the validity of arguments 
such as this.
Even the logical machinery developed thus far is not adequate for deriving the conclu-
sions of a number of arguments. Consider, for example, the following:
All dogs are animals. Therefore, whoever owns a dog owns an animal.
If there are any butterflies, then if all butterflies are free, they are free. There are butter- 
flies in the garden. Therefore, if all butterflies are free, something in the garden is free.
The first argument involves a relation—the relation of ownership—and we have yet 
to see how relations can be dealt with. The second argument, while not involving any 
relations, involves a quantifier that overlaps another quantifier. In this section the ap-
paratus of predicate logic will be extended to cover examples such as these.
The predicates we have used thus far are called monadic predicates, or one-place 
predicates, because they are used to assign an attribute to individual things. A relational 
predicate (or relation) is a predicate that is used to establish a connection between or 
among individuals.
Relations occur in varying degrees of complexity, depending on the number of in-
dividuals related. The simplest, called binary (or dyadic) relations, establish a connec-
tion between two individuals. Some examples are the relation of being taller than, as 
expressed in the statement “Steve is taller than David,” and the relation of being a friend, 
as expressed in “Sylvia is a friend of Olivia.” Trinary (or triadic) relations establish a 
connection among three individuals: for example, the relation of being between, as in 
“St. Louis is between Chicago and New Orleans,” and the relation of reading something 
to someone, as in “George read Othello to Madeline.” Quaternary (or tetradic) relations 
link four individuals together—for example, the relation of reading something to some-
one at a certain time, as in “George read Othello to Madeline on Thursday.” The com-
plexity increases until we have what are called n-ary (or n-adic) relations, which link n 
things together. In this section we will restrict our attention to binary relations.
Translating Relational Statements
Relations are symbolized like other predicates except that two lowercase letters, repre-
senting the two related individuals, are written to the immediate right of the uppercase 
letter representing the relation. Here are some examples of relational statements 
involving specifically named individuals:

8
SECTION 8.6 Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantifiers   497
Statement
Symbolic translation
Anthony is married to Cynthia.
Mac
Deborah loves physics.
Ldp
The Willis Tower is taller than 
the Empire State Building.
Twe
Donald is the father of Jim.
Fdj
Notice that the order in which the lowercase letters are listed often makes a dif-
ference. If the third statement were translated Tew, the symbolic statement would 
read “The Empire State Building is taller than the Willis Tower,” which is false. 
Quantifiers are attached to relational predicates in the same way they are to mo-
nadic predicates. Some examples of relational statements involving quantifiers are 
as follows:
Statement
Symbolic translation
Thomas knows everything.
(x)Kt x
Thomas knows something.
(∃x)Kt x
Everything is different from everything.
(x)( y)Dxy
Something is different from something.
(∃x)(∃y)Dxy
Everything is different from something (or other).
(x)(∃y)Dxy
Something is different from everything.
(∃x)( y)Dxy
The last four statements involve overlapping quantifiers. We may read these sym-
bols as follows:
(x)( y)	
For all x and for all y . . .
(∃x)(∃y)	
There exists an x such that there exists a y such that . . .
(x)(∃y)	
For all x there exists a y such that . . .
(∃x)( y)	
There exists an x such that for all y . . .
Applying this phraseology to the last statement given, for example, we have “There ex-
ists an x such that for all y, x is different from y”—which is simply another way of saying 
“Something is different from everything.”
When two quantifiers of the same sort appear adjacent to each other, the order in 
which they are listed is not significant. In other words, the statement (x)(y)Dxy is logi-
cally equivalent to (y)(x)Dxy, and (∃x)(∃y)Dxy is logically equivalent to (∃y)(∃x)Dxy. 
A little reflection on the meaning of these statements should justify this equivalence. 
But when different quantifiers appear adjacent to each other, the order does make a 
difference, sometimes even when the statement function is nonrelational. Accordingly,  
(x)(∃y)Dxy is not logically equivalent to (∃y)(x)Dxy. This fact can be seen more clearly 
in terms of a different example. If Lxy means “x loves y” and we imagine the universe 
of discourse restricted to people, then (x)(∃y)Lxy means “Everyone loves someone (or 
other),” while (∃y)(x)Lxy means “There is someone whom everyone loves.” Clearly 
these two statements are not equivalent.

498   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
Relational predicates can be combined with ordinary predicates to translate state-
ments having varying degrees of complexity. In the examples that follow, Px means “x is 
a person.” The meaning of the other predicates should be clear from the context:
Any heavyweight can defeat any lightweight.
(x)[Hx ⊃ ( y)(Ly ⊃ Dxy)]
Some heavyweights can defeat any lightweight.
(∃x)[Hx 
y)(Ly ⊃ Dxy)]
No heavyweight can defeat every lightweight.
(x)[Hx ⊃ (∃y)(Ly
∼Dxy)]
	
or
∼(∃x)[Hx 
y)(Ly ⊃ Dxy)]
Everyone cares for someone (or other).
(x)[Px ⊃ (∃y)(Py
Cxy)]
Someone does not care for anyone.
(∃x)[Px 
y)(Py ⊃ ∼Cxy)]
Anyone who cares for someone is cared for himself.
(x){[Px
∃y)(Py
Cxy)] ⊃ (∃z)(Pz
Czx)}
Not everyone respects himself.
(∃x)(Px
∼Rxx)
	
or
∼(x)(Px ⊃ Rxx)
Anyone who does not respect himself is not respected by anyone.
(x)[(Px
∼Rxx) ⊃ ( y)(Py ⊃ ∼Ryx)]
The same general rule applies in translating these statements as applies in translating 
any other statement in predicate logic: Universal quantifiers go with implications and 
existential quantifiers go with conjunctions. Every one of the eight symbolic expres-
sions given here follows this rule. For example, in the first statement, both quantifiers 
are universal and both operators are horseshoes. In the second statement, the main 
quantifier is existential and the subordinate quantifier universal; accordingly, the main 
operator is a dot and the subordinate operator is a horseshoe. Among these statements, 
the sixth is the most complex. The symbolic translation of this statement reads, “For all 
x, if x is a person and there exists a y such that y is a person and x cares for y, then there 
exists a z such that z is a person and z cares for x.” It should be clear that this is simply 
another way of expressing the original English statement.
Another important rule to keep in mind when translating statements of this kind 
is that every variable must be bound by some quantifier. If a variable is left dangling 
outside the scope of its intended quantifier, the translation is defective. For example, if 
the second statement were translated (∃x)Hx  (y)(Ly ⊃ Dxy), then the x in Dxy would 
not be bound by the existential quantifier. As a result, the translation would be defec-
tive. Instead, in our example, brackets provide for the existential quantifier to range 
over Dxy.

8
The same techniques used to translate these eight statements are also used to translate 
certain statements involving monadic predicates throughout. Consider the following:
If anything is good and all good things are safe, then it is safe.
(x){[Gx 
y)(Gy ⊃ Sy)] ⊃ Sx}
If anything is good and some good things are dangerous, then it is dangerous.
(x){[Gx
∃y)(Gy
Dy)] ⊃ Dx}
Since the “it” at the end of these statements refers to one of the “good” things mentioned 
at the beginning, the quantifier that binds the x in Gx must also bind the x in Sx and Dx. 
The set of braces in the symbolic expressions ensures this.
Another point to notice regarding statements such as these is that the quantified 
expression inside the brackets is expressed in terms of a new variable. This proce-
dure is essential to avoiding ambiguity. If instead of y, x had been used, the variable 
in this expression would appear to be bound by two different quantifiers at the same 
time.
In other statements, the one or more individuals mentioned at the end are not neces-
sarily the same ones mentioned at the beginning. In such cases the quantifier that binds 
the individuals at the beginning should not bind those at the end. Compare the next 
pair of statements with those we have just considered.
If anything is good and all good things are safe, then something is safe.
[(∃x)Gx 
y)(Gy ⊃ Sy)] ⊃ (∃z)Sz
If anything is good and some good things are dangerous, then something is dangerous.
[(∃x)Gx
∃y)(Gy
Dy)] ⊃ (∃z)Dz
In these cases the “something” at the end is not necessarily one of the “good” things 
mentioned at the beginning. Accordingly, the quantifier that binds the x in Gx does not 
range all the way to the end of the statement. Furthermore, the quantifier in question is 
now an existential quantifier. In the previous pair of statements the quantifier had to be 
universal because it ranged over the main operator, which was a horseshoe. In the new 
pair, however, no quantifier ranges over the implication symbol. As a result, the sense of 
these statements has shifted to mean “If something is good . . .”
Note that, although a different variable is used to express each of the three different 
components in the pair of statements just given, this is not required. Because in this 
case no quantifier ranges over any other quantifier, it would be perfectly appropriate to 
use the same variable throughout.
The next pair of statements involve relational predicates. As in the previous pair, no 
single quantifier ranges over the entire statement, because the individuals mentioned at 
the end are not necessarily the same ones mentioned at the beginning:
If everyone helps himself, then everyone will be helped.
(x)(Px ⊃ Hxx) ⊃ (x)[(Px ⊃ (∃y)Hyx)]
If someone helps himself, then someone will be helped.
(∃x)(Px
Hxx) ⊃ (∃x)(∃y)(Px
Hyx)
SECTION 8.6 Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantifiers   499

500   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
This completes our explanation of how to translate statements involving relational 
predicates and overlapping quantifiers. You may, if you wish, proceed directly to 
Exercise 8.6 part I before completing the remainder of this section.
Using the Rules of Inference
Let us now see how the various quantifier rules apply to overlapping quantifiers. The 
quantifier negation rule is applied in basically the same way as it is with single quanti-
fiers. The following short sequence illustrates its application:
1.   ∼(x)(∃y)Pxy
2.   (∃x)∼(∃y)Pxy	
1, QN
3.   (∃x)( y)∼Pxy	
2, QN
As the tilde operator is moved past a quantifier, the quantifier in question is switched 
for its correlative. With the exception of a restriction on universal generalization, which 
we will introduce presently, the instantiation and generalization rules are also used in 
basically the same way as they are with single quantifiers. Example:
1.   (∃x)(∃y)Pxy
2.   (∃y)Pay	
1, EI
3.   Pab	
2, EI
4.   (∃x)Pxb	
3, EG
5.   (∃y)(∃x)Pxy	
4, EG
With each successive instantiation the outermost quantifier drops off. Generalization 
restores the quantifiers in the reverse order.
This proof demonstrates our earlier observation that the order of the quantifiers is 
not significant when the same kind of quantifier is used throughout. We also observed 
that the order does make a difference when different quantifiers appear together. Ac-
cordingly, the statement (x)(∃y)Pxy is not logically equivalent to (∃y)(x)Pxy. As the 
instantiation and generalization rules now stand, however, it is quite possible, with a 
proof similar to the one just given, to establish the logical equivalence of these two ex-
pressions. Therefore, to keep this from happening we now introduce a new restriction 
on universal generalization:
UG:	
   ℱy   
	
(x)ℱx
	 Restriction: UG must not be used if the instantial variable y is 
free in any preceding line obtained by EI.
To see how this restriction applies, let us attempt to derive (∃x)(y)Mxy from 
(y)(∃x)Mxy:
1.   ( y)(∃x)Mxy
2.   (∃x)Mxy	
1, UI
3.   May	
2, EI
4.   ( y)May	
3, UG (invalid)
5.   (∃x)( y)Mxy	
4, EG
The proof fails on line 4 because the instantial variable y occurs free in line  3, 
which was obtained by EI. To see that line 4 is invalid, suppose that the universe of 

8
discourse is restricted to people, and that Mxy means “x is the mother of y.” Then line 1  
asserts that for every person y there exists a person x such that x is the mother of y—
which means that every person has a mother. On line 2 we select one of these people 
at random, and on line 3 we give the name Abigail to the mother of that person. Then 
on line 4 we draw the conclusion that Abigail is the mother of everyone in the universe. 
This inference is clearly invalid. The new restriction on UG prevents this kind of infer-
ence from being drawn.
In summary, we now have two restrictions on universal generalization. The first con-
cerns only conditional and indirect sequences and prevents UG from occurring within 
the scope of such a sequence when the instantial variable is free in the first line. The 
second restriction concerns only arguments involving overlapping quantifiers. With 
these two restrictions in hand, we may now proceed to examine the use of natural 
deduction in arguments involving relational predicates and overlapping quantifiers. 
The example that follows does not include any relational predicates, but it does involve 
overlapping quantifiers:
1.   (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)Bx	
/  (∃y)(x)(Ax ⊃ By)
	
2.   Ax	
ACP
	
3.   (∃x)Ax	
2, EG
	
4.   (∃x)Bx	
1, 3, MP
	
5.   Bc	
4, EI
6.    Ax ⊃ Bc	
2–5, CP
7.   (x)(Ax ⊃ Bc)	
6, UG
8.   (∃y)(x)(Ax ⊃ By)	
7, EG
Conditional and indirect proof are used in the same way with relational predicates 
and overlapping quantifiers as they are with monadic predicates and nonoverlapping 
quantifiers. The conditional proof just given begins, as usual, by assuming the anteced-
ent of the conclusion. When line 7 is reached, we must be careful that neither of the 
restrictions against universal generalization is violated. While the instantial variable x is 
free in the first line of the conditional sequence, line 7 does not lie within that sequence, 
so the first restriction is obeyed. And while line 5 was obtained by EI, x is not free in that 
line. Thus, the second restriction is obeyed as well.
The next proof involves a relational predicate. The proof shows that while (x)(∃y) 
Dxy is not logically equivalent to (∃y)(x)Dxy, it can be derived from that statement:
1.   (∃y)(x)Dxy	
/  (x)(∃y)Dxy
2.   (x)Dxm	
1, EI
3.   Dxm	
2, UI
4.   (∃y)Dxy	
3, EG
5.   (x)(∃y)Dxy	
4, UG
Notice that line 5 is derived by UG. Also notice that the instantial variable x occurs in 
line 2, which was derived by EI. However, x is not free in line 2. Thus, the second restric-
tion on UG is obeyed.
The next example concludes with a line in which an individual is related to itself. 
Since there are no restrictions on universal instantiation, the procedure leading up to 
SECTION 8.6 Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantifiers   501

502   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
this line is perfectly legitimate. Notice in line 4 that tautology is used with relational 
predicates in the same way that it is with monadic predicates:
1.   (∃y)(x)(Exy ⋁ Eyx)	
/ (∃z)E zz
2.   (x)(E xa ⋁ Eax)	
1, EI
3.   Eaa ⋁ Eaa	
2, UI
4.   Eaa	
3, Taut
5.   (∃z)Ezz	
4, EG
Sometimes the order in which instantiation steps are performed is critical. The fol-
lowing proof provides an example:
1.   (x)(∃y)(Fxy ⊃ Gxy)
2.   (∃x)( y)Fxy	
/  (∃x)(∃y)Gxy
3.   ( y)Fmy	
2, EI
4.   (∃y)(Fmy ⊃ Gmy)	
1, UI
5.   Fmo ⊃ Gmo	
4, EI
6.   Fmo	
3, UI
7.   Gmo	
5, 6, MP
8.   (∃y)Gmy	
7, EG
9.   (∃x)(∃y)Gxy	
8, EG
Line 2 must be instantiated before line 1 because the step introduces a new existential 
name. For the same reason, line 4 must be instantiated before line 3.
The next proof involves an indirect sequence. Such sequences often make use of the 
quantifier negation rule, as this proof illustrates:
  1.   (∃x)(∃y)(  Jxy ⋁ Kxy) ⊃ (∃x)Lx
  2.   (x)( y)(Lx ⊃ ∼Ly)	
/  (x)( y)∼Jxy
	
  3.   ∼(x)( y)∼Jxy	
AIP
	
  4.   (∃x)∼( y)∼Jxy	
3, QN
	
  5.   (∃x)(∃y)∼∼Jxy	
4, QN
	
  6.   (∃x)(∃y) Jxy	
5, DN
	
  7.   (∃y) Jmy	
6, EI
	
  8.   Jmn	
7, EI
	
  9.   Jmn ⋁ Kmn	
8,  Add
	
10.   (∃y)(  Jmy ⋁ Kmy)	
9, EG
	
11.   (∃x)(∃y)(  Jxy ⋁ Kxy)	
10, EG
	
12.   (∃x)Lx	
1, 11, MP
	
13.   Lo	
12, EI
	
14.   ( y)(Lo ⊃ ∼Ly)	
2, UI
	
15.   Lo ⊃ ∼Lo	
14, UI
	
16.   ∼Lo	
13, 15, MP
	
17.   Lo
∼Lo	
13, 16, Conj
18.   ∼∼(x)( y)∼Jxy	
3–17, IP
19.   (x)( y)∼Jxy	
18, DN
Because line 1 cannot be instantiated, the only strategy is to derive the antecedent of 
the conditional with the aim of deriving the consequent via modus ponens. This is 

8
accomplished on line 11 via indirect proof. Notice on line 9 that addition is used with 
relational predicates in the same way that it is with monadic predicates.
A final word of caution is called for regarding universal instantiation and the two gener-
alization rules. First, when UI is used to introduce variables into a proof, it is important that 
these variables end up free and that they not be captured in the process by other quanti-
fiers. The following examples illustrate both correct and incorrect applications of this rule:
1.   (x)(∃y)Pxy
2.   (∃y)Pyy	
1, UI  (invalid—the instantial variable y has been 
­captured by the existential quantifier)
1.   (x)(∃y)Pxy
2.   (∃y)Pxy	
1, UI  (valid—the instantial variable x is free)
1.   (x)(∃y)Pxy
2.   (∃y)Pzy	
1, UI  (valid—the instantial variable z is free)
An analogous caution applies to the two generalization rules. When UG and EG are 
used, it is important that the instantial letter be replaced by a variable that is captured 
by no previously introduced quantifier and that no other variables be captured by the 
newly introduced quantifier. The following examples illustrate both correct and incor-
rect applications of this rule:
1.   (∃x)Pxy      
2.   (x)(∃x)Pxx	
1, UG  (invalid—the new x has been captured by 
the existential quantifier)
1.   (∃x)Pxy         
2.   (∃x)(∃x)Pxx	
1, EG  (invalid—the new x has been captured by 
the old existential quantifier)
1.   (∃x)Pxy         
2.   (∃y)(∃x)Pxy	
1, EG  (valid )
1.   (x)(∃y)L xy
2.   (∃y)L xy	
1, UI
3.   L xa	
2, EI
4.   (∃x)L xx	
3, EG  (invalid—the quantifier has captured the x 
immediately adjacent to the L)
1.   (x)(∃y)L xy
2.   (∃y)L xy	
1, UI
3.   L xa	
2, EI
4.   (∃z)L xz	
3, EG  (valid—the x remains free)
1.   (x)(y)Kxy
2.   ( y)Kxy	
1, UI
3.   Kxx	
2, UI
4.   (x)Kxx	
3, UG  (valid )
SECTION 8.6 Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantifiers   503

504   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
To see that the fourth example is indeed invalid, let Lxy stand for “x is larger than 
y,” and let the variables range over the real numbers. The statement (x)(∃y)Lxy then 
means that there is no smallest number—which is true. But the statement (∃x)Lxx 
means that there is a number that is larger than itself—which is false.
EXERCISE 8.6	
	 I.	 Translate the following statements into symbolic form.
	
★1.	 Charmaine read Paradise Lost. (Rxy: x read y)
	
2.	 Whoever reads Paradise Lost is educated. (Rxy: x reads y; Ex: x is educated)
	
3.	 James is a friend of either Ellen or Connie. (Fxy: x is a friend of y)
	
★4.	 If James has any friends, then Marlene is one of them. (Fxy: x is a friend of y)
	
5.	 Dr. Jordan teaches only geniuses. (Txy: x teaches y; Gx: x is a genius)
	
6.	 Dr. Nelson teaches a few morons. (Txy: x teaches y; Mx: x is a moron)
	
★7.	 Every person can sell something or other. (Px: x is a person; Sxy: x can sell y)
	
8.	 Some people cannot sell anything.
	
9.	 No person can sell everything.
	 ★10.	 Some people can sell anything.
	
11.	 The Royal Hotel serves only good drinks. (Sxy: x serves y; Gx: x is good;  
Dx: x is a drink)
	
12.	 The Clark Corporation advertises everything it produces. (Axy: x advertises y; 
Pxy: x produces y)
	 ★13.	 Peterson can drive some of the cars in the lot. (Dxy: x can drive y; Cx: x is a car; 
Lx: x is in the lot)
	
14.	 Jones can drive any car in the lot.
	
15.	 Sylvia invited only her friends. (Ixy: x invited y; Fxy: x is a friend of y)
	 ★16.	 Christopher invited some of his friends.
	
17.	 Some people break everything they touch. (Px: x is a person; Bxy: x breaks y; 
Txy: x touches y)
	
18.	 Some people speak to whoever speaks to them. (Px: x is a person; Sxy: 
x speaks to y)
	 ★19.	 Every person admires some people he or she meets. (Px: x is a person; Axy: 
x admires y; Mxy: x meets y)
	
20.	 Some people admire every person they meet.
504   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic

SECTION 8.1 Symbols and Translation   505
8
	
21.	 Some policemen arrest only traffic violators. (Px: x is a policeman; Axy: x ar-
rests y; Tx: x is a traffic violator)
	 ★22.	 Some policemen arrest every traffic violator they see. (Px: x is a policeman; 
Axy: x arrests y; Tx: x is a traffic violator; Sxy: x sees y)
	
23.	 If there are cheaters, then some cheaters will be punished. (Cx: x is a cheater; 
Px: x will be punished)
	
24.	 If there are any cheaters, then if all the referees are vigilant they will be 
punished. (Cx: x is a cheater; Rx: x is a referee; Vx: x is vigilant; Px: x will 
be punished)
	 ★25.	 Every lawyer will represent a wealthy client. (Lx: x is a lawyer; Rxy: x will rep-
resent y; Wx: x is wealthy; Cx: x is a client)
	
26.	 Some lawyers will represent any person who will not represent himself. (Lx: 
x is a lawyer; Px: x is a person; Rxy: x represents y)
	
27.	 Some children in the third grade can read any of the books in the library. (Cx: 
x is a child; Tx: x is in the third grade; Rxy: x can read y; Bx: x is a book; Lx: x is 
in the library)
	 ★28.	 All children in the fourth grade can read any of the books in the library.
	
29.	 If there are any safe drivers, then if none of the trucks break down they will 
be hired. (Sx: x is safe; Dx: x is a driver; Tx: x is a truck; Bx: x breaks down;  
Hx: x will be hired)
	
30.	 If there are any safe drivers, then some safe drivers will be hired.
	II.	 Derive the conclusion of the following symbolized arguments. Use conditional 
proof or indirect proof as needed.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ ( y)Bxy]
	
	 2.	 Am    /  ( y)Bmy
	
(2)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ ( y)(By ⊃ Cxy)]
	
	 2.	 Am  Bn    /  Cmn
	
(3)	 1.	 (∃x)[Ax  ( y)(By ⊃ Cxy)]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ Bj    /  (∃x)Cxj
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (x)(∃y)(Ax ⊃ By)    /  (x)Ax ⊃ (∃y)By
	
(5)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃y)By    /  (∃y)(x)(Ax ⊃ By)
	
(6)	 1.	 (x)( y)(Ax ⊃ By)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)( y)(Ay ⊃ Cx)    /  (x)(∃y)[Ax ⊃ (By  Cy)]
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (∃x)[Ax  (y)(Ay ⊃ Bxy)]    /  (∃x)Bxx
	
(8)	 1.	 (∃x)[Ax  (y)(By ⊃ Cxy)]
	
	 2.	 (x)(∃y)(Ax ⊃ By)    /  (∃x)(∃y)Cxy
	
(9)	 1.	 (∃x)( y)(Axy ⊃ Bxy)
	
	 2.	 (x)(∃y)∼Bxy    /  ∼(x)( y)Axy
SECTION 8.6 Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantifiers   505

8
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (x)(∃y)Axy ⊃ (x)(∃y)Bxy
	
	 2.	 (∃x)( y)∼Bxy    /  (∃x)( y)∼Axy
	
(11)	 1.	 (∃x){Ax  [(∃y)By ⊃ Cx]}
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)    /  (∃x)Cx
	
(12)	 1.	 (∃x)( y)[(Ay  By) ⊃ Cxy]
	
	 2.	 ( y)(Ay ⊃ By)    /  ( y)[Ay ⊃ (∃x)Cxy]
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (∃x){Ax  ( y)[(By ⋁ Cy) ⊃ Dxy]}
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃y)By    /  (∃x)(∃y)Dxy
	
(14)	 1.	 (x){Ax ⊃ [(∃y)(By  Cy) ⊃ Dx]}
	
	 2.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)    /  (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx ⊃ Dx)]
	
(15)	 1.	 (∃x)( y)(Ayx ⊃ ∼Axy)    /  ∼(x)Axx
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Bx ⊃ ∼(∃x)(∃y)Cxy    /  (∃x)Ax ⊃ ∼Cmn
	
(17)	 1.	 (∃x)( y)(Axy ⊃ Byx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(∃y)(Byx ⊃ ∼Axy)    /  ∼(x)( y)Axy
	
(18)	 1.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (∃y)(By  Cxy)]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)[Ax  ( y)(By ⊃ Dxy)]    /  (∃x)(∃y)(Cxy  Dxy)
	 ★(19)	 1.	 (∃x)( y)Ayx ⋁ (x)(y)Bxy
	
	 2.	 (∃x)( y)(Cy ⊃ ∼Byx)    /  (x)(∃y)(Cx ⊃ Axy)
	
(20)	 1.	 (x)( y)[Axy ⊃ (Bx  Cy)]
	
	 2.	 (x)( y)[(Bx ⋁ Dy) ⊃ ∼Axy]    /  ∼(∃x)(∃y)Axy
	III.	 Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then derive the conclusion 
of each, using conditional proof or indirect proof when needed.
	
★1.	 Any professional can outplay any amateur. Jones is a professional but he can-
not outplay Meyers. Therefore, Meyers is not an amateur. (Px: x is a profes-
sional; Ax: x is an amateur; Oxy: x can outplay y)
	
2.	 Whoever is a friend of either Michael or Paul will receive a gift. If Michael 
has any friends, then Eileen is one of them. Therefore, if Ann is a friend of 
Michael, then Eileen will receive a gift. (Fxy: x is a friend of y; Rx: x will receive 
a gift)
	
3.	 A horse is an animal. Therefore, whoever owns a horse owns an animal. (Hx: x 
is a horse; Ax: x is an animal; Oxy: x owns y)
	
★4.	 O’Brien is a person. Furthermore, O’Brien is smarter than any person in 
the class. Since no person is smarter than himself, it follows that O’Brien 
is not in the class. (Px: x is a person; Sxy: x is smarter than y; Cx: x is in the 
class)
	
5.	 If there are any honest politicians, then if all the ballots are counted they will 
be reelected. Some honest politicians will not be reelected. Therefore, some 
506   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic

8
SECTION 8.7 Identity   507
8
ballots will not be counted. (Hx: x is honest; Px: x is a politician; Bx: x is a bal-
lot; Cx: x is counted; Rx: x will be reelected)
	
6.	 Dr. Rogers can cure any person who cannot cure himself. Dr. Rogers is a 
person. Therefore, Dr. Rogers can cure himself. (Px: x is a person; Cxy: x can 
cure y)
	
★7.	 Some people are friends of every person they know. Every person knows 
someone (or other). Therefore, at least one person is a friend of someone. (Px: 
x is a person; Fxy: x is a friend of y; Kxy: x knows y)
	
8.	 If there are any policemen, then if there are any robbers, then they will 
arrest them. If any robbers are arrested by policemen, they will go to jail. 
There are some policemen and Macky is a robber. Therefore, Macky will go 
to jail. (Px: x is a policeman; Rx: x is a robber; Axy: x arrests y; Jx: x will go 
to jail)
	
9.	 If anything is missing, then some person stole it. If anything is damaged, then 
some person broke it. Something is either missing or damaged. Therefore, 
some person either stole something or broke something. (Mx: x is missing; Px: 
x is a person; Sxy: x stole y; Dx: x is damaged; Bxy: x broke y)
	 ★10.	 If there are any instructors, then if at least one classroom is available they will 
be effective. If there are either any textbooks or workbooks, there will be in-
structors and classrooms. Furthermore, if there are any classrooms, they will 
be available. Therefore, if there are any textbooks, then some instructors will 
be effective. (Ix: x is an instructor; Cx: x is a classroom; Ax: x is available; Ex: x 
is effective; Tx: x is a textbook; Wx: x is a workbook )
8.7	
Identity
PREVIEW    Suppose your friend suggests you try to get a date with Jaden Smith. You reply that 
you’ll try to get a date with Jaden only if Jaden is not dating Alex. Your friend then replies that Jaden 
is dating somebody in the class who is tall and left-handed. You then recall that the only left-handed 
person in the class is Alex. From this information your friend draws the conclusion that you will not try 
to get a date with Jaden. Is your friend’s reasoning good? This section of the book will give you what you 
need to prove it.
Many arguments in ordinary language involve a special relation called identity, and 
translating this relation requires special treatment. Consider, for example, the following 
argument:
The only friend I have is Elizabeth. Elizabeth is not Nancy. Nancy is a Canadian. Therefore, 
there is a Canadian who is not my friend.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

508   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
The peculiar feature of this argument is that it involves special statements about indi-
viduals. To translate such statements, we adopt a symbol from arithmetic, the equal 
sign (=), to represent the identity relation. We can use this symbol to translate a large 
variety of statements, including simple identity statements, existential assertions about 
individuals, statements involving “only,” “the only,”  “no . . . except,” and “all except,” and 
statements involving superlatives, numerical claims, and definite descriptions. After 
seeing how the identity relation is used to translate such statements, we will see how 
natural deduction is used to derive the conclusions of arguments involving identity.
Simple Identity Statements
The simplest statements involving identity are those asserting that a named individual 
is identical to another named individual. Here are some examples:
Samuel Clemens is Mark Twain.	
s = m
Whoopi Goldberg is Caryn Johnson.	
w = c
Dr. Jekyll is Mr. Hyde.	
j = h
The first statement asserts that Samuel Clemens is identically the same person as Mark 
Twain, the second that Whoopi Goldberg is the same person as Caryn Johnson, and 
the third that Dr. Jekyll is the same person as Mr. Hyde. In other words, the statements 
claim that the names “Samuel Clemens” and “Mark Twain” designate the same person, 
“Whoopi Goldberg” and “Caryn Johnson” designate the same person, and so on.
To translate a negated identity statement, we simply draw a slash through the identity 
symbol. Thus, “Beethoven is not Mozart” is translated b ≠ m. The expression b ≠ m is 
just an abbreviated way of writing ∼(b = m). Here are some additional examples:
William Wordsworth is not John Keats.	
w ≠ j
Natalie Portman is not Rosie O’Donnell.	
n ≠ r
Brian Williams is not Katie Couric.	
b ≠ k
The kinds of statements we will consider next are more complicated, and to facili-
tate their translation a set of conventions governing conjunctions, disjunctions, and 
simple identity statements will now be introduced. Many of our translations will in-
volve lengthy strings of conjunctions, such as Pm  Km  Pn  Kn. Instead of intro-
ducing parentheses and brackets into these expressions, we may simply write them as 
a string of conjuncts. Lengthy disjunctions may be treated the same way. In simple 
identity statements, the identity symbol controls only the letters to its immediate left 
and right. Accordingly, instead of writing (c = n)  (e = p)  (s = t), we may write  
c = n  e = p  s = t, and instead of writing P ⊃ (a = m), we may write P ⊃ a = m. Let 
us now use these conventions to translate some special kinds of statements involving  
identity.
“Only,” “The Only,” and “No . . . Except”
Section 4.7 explained that the words “only,” “the only,” and “no . . . except” signal an or-
dinary categorical proposition when the word that follows is a plural noun or pronoun. 
For example, the statement “Only relatives are invited” means simply “All invited people 

8
are relatives,” and “The only animals in this canyon are skunks” means “All animals in 
this canyon are skunks.” However, when the word that follows “only,” “the only,” or “no . . . 
except” designates an individual, something more is intended. Thus the statement “Only 
Nixon resigned the presidency” means (1) that Nixon resigned the presidency and (2) 
that if anyone resigned the presidency, that person is Nixon. Thus, the general form 
of such statements is that a designated individual has a stated attribute and anything 
having that attribute is identical to the designated individual. Here are some examples:
Only Nolan Ryan has struck out 5,000 
batters.
Sn
x)(Sx ⊃ x = n)
The only opera written by Beethoven 
is Fidelio.
Of
Bf
x)[(Ox
Bx) ⊃ x = f  ]
No nation except Australia is a 
continent.
Na
Ca
x)[(Nx
Cx) ⊃ x = a]
The only presidents who were Whigs 
were Taylor and Fillmore.
Pt
Wt
Pf
Wf
x)[(Px
Wx) ⊃ 
(x = t ⋁ x = f  )]
The first translation may be read as “Nolan Ryan has struck out 5,000 batters, and if 
anyone has struck out 5,000 batters, then he is identical to Nolan Ryan.” The last part 
of the translation ensures that no other person has struck out 5,000 batters. The second 
translation may be read as “Fidelio is an opera, and Fidelio was written by Beethoven, 
and if anything is an opera written by Beethoven, then it is identical to Fidelio.” Analo-
gous remarks pertain to the other two statements. The third statement is equivalent to 
“The only nation that is a continent is Australia.”
“All Except”
Statements beginning with “all except” are similar to those beginning with “the only” in 
that they, too, assert something about a designated individual (or individuals). For ex-
ample, the statement “All presidents except Washington had a predecessor” means that 
Washington did not have a predecessor but all other presidents did. Thus, the general 
form of such statements is that a designated individual lacks a stated attribute and that 
anything not identical to the designated individual has the stated attribute. Examples:
All painters except Jackson 
Pollock make sense.
Pj
∼Mj
x)[(Px
x ≠ j ) ⊃ Mx]
All continents except Antarctica 
are heavily populated.
Ca
∼Ha
x)[(Cx
x ≠ a) ⊃ Hx]
All states except Alaska and 
Hawaii are contiguous with their 
sister states.
Sa
∼Ca
Sh
∼Ch
x)[(Sx
x ≠ a
x ≠ h) ⊃ Cx]
The first translation may be read as “Jackson Pollock is a painter who does not make 
sense, and every painter not identical to Jackson Pollock makes sense.”
SECTION 8.7 Identity   509

510   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
K
urt Gödel, generally considered to be the most 
important logician of the contemporary period, 
was born in what is today Brno, Czechoslovakia,  
to a father who managed a textile factory and a mother 
who was educated and cultured. After excelling at 
the gymnasium in Brno, Gödel entered the University 
of  Vienna, where he studied mathematics, physics, and 
philosophy. On completing his undergraduate degree 
he commenced graduate work in mathematics, earn-
ing his doctorate at age twenty-four. Four years later 
Gödel began teaching at the university as a Privatdoz-
ent. However, when the Nazis annexed Austria they 
abolished his teaching position in favor of one that re-
quired a political test, and one year later they found 
him qualified for military service.
In 1940, under threat of being drafted into the 
German army, Gödel and his wife Adel (whom he had 
married two years earlier) left for the United States, 
where he accepted a position at the famous Institute 
for Advanced Studies, in Princeton, New Jersey. Soon 
after arriving, he became best of friends with Albert 
Einstein, with whom he took daily walks. Gödel be-
came a permanent member of the institute in 1946, 
and five years later he received the first Albert Einstein 
Award. In 1974 he was awarded the National Medal 
of Science.
Gödel is most famous for developing incomplete-
ness theorems that relate to the efforts by logicians to 
reduce arithmetic to logic. Ordinary arithmetic rests 
on a set of axioms (called the Peano axioms), and for 
many years logicians thought (or hoped) that all of the 
theorems of arithmetic could be reduced to those axi-
oms. Such a system would be complete in that every 
theorem would be linked to the axioms by a logical 
proof sequence. Quite to the surprise of these logi-
cians, Gödel showed that every axiom system adequate 
to support arithmetic 
contains at least one 
assertion that is neither 
provable nor disprov-
able from the axioms. A 
second incom­pleteness 
theorem showed that 
the consistency of such 
a system cannot be 
proved within the sys-
tem itself.
As a philosopher 
Gödel was a Platonic 
realist and a Leibnizian 
rationalist. He thought that abstract concepts (such 
as number and figure) represented objects in an ideal 
realm that were perfect, changeless, and eternal. As 
a result he thought that mathematics is a science that 
describes this ideal realm, and not, as many think, a 
mere invention of the human mind. Following Leibniz, 
Gödel conceived the visible world as fundamentally 
beautiful, perfect , and thoroughly ordered. To com-
plete this perfect world he developed his own onto-
logical argument for the existence of God.
Tragically, from an early age, Gödel was troubled 
by emotional afflictions, including depression, and as 
he grew older he suffered from psychotic delusions. 
In the middle of the winter he would open wide all 
the windows of his house because he thought that 
malevolent forces intended to poison him with gas. 
He also feared they wanted to poison his food, so 
he ate only his wife’s cooking. When Adel became 
incapacitated from illness, Gödel stopped eating al-
together. At age seventy-one he died from malnutri-
tion, at which point his body weighed only sixty-five 
pounds.
Kurt Gödel 1906–1978
eminentlogicians
8
© Alfred Eisenstaedt/ Time Life Pictures/Getty Images

8
Superlatives
Statements containing superlative adjectives are yet another kind of statement that can 
be translated by using the identity relation. These are statements asserting that, of all 
the members of a class, something is the largest, tallest, smallest, heaviest, lightest, and 
so on. To translate these statements, first give the designated item the class attribute, 
and then say that, if anything else has that attribute, it is somehow exceeded by the 
designated item. Here are some examples:
The largest planet is 
Jupiter.
Pj
x)[(Px
x ≠ j ) ⊃ Ljx]
The deepest lake is Ozero 
Baykal.
Lo
x)[(Lx
x ≠ o) ⊃ Dox]
The highest peak in North 
America is Mt. McKinley.
Pm
Nm
x)[(Px
Nx
x ≠ m) ⊃ Hmx]
The first translation may be read as “Jupiter is a planet, and if anything is a planet and 
not identical to Jupiter, then Jupiter is larger than it.” The second may be read as “Ozero 
Baykal is a lake, and if anything is a lake and not identical to Ozero Baykal, then Ozero 
Baykal is deeper than it.”
Numerical Statements
One of the more interesting uses of the identity symbol is to translate certain kinds of nu-
merical statements, such as “There are three people in this room.” In particular, the iden-
tity symbol allows us to translate such statements without the use of numerals. There are 
three types of numerical statements: those that assert a property of at most n items, those 
that assert a property of at least n items, and those that assert a property of exactly n items.
The first group does not assert that there actually are any items that have the stated 
property but only that, if there are any with the stated property, then the maximum 
number is n. Accordingly, for “at most” statements we use universal quantifiers. Here 
are some examples:
There is at most one god.
(x)( y)[(Gx
Gy) ⊃ x = y]
There is at most one U.S. 
representative from Alaska.
(x)( y)[(Ux
Ax
Uy
Ay) ⊃ x = y]
There are at most two 
superpowers.
(x)( y)(z)[(Sx
Sy
Sz) ⊃ (x = y ⋁ x = z ⋁ y = z)]
There are at most two cities  
in Kuwait.
(x)( y)(z)[(Cx
Kx
Cy
Ky
Cz
Kz) ⊃  
  (x = y ⋁ x = z ⋁ y = z)]
It can be seen from these examples that to translate “at most n” is to say that, if there 
are n + 1 items that have the stated property, then at least one of them is identical to at 
least one of the “others.” The result is to limit the number of such items to n. Thus, to 
translate “at most one,” we need two quantifiers; to translate “at most two,” we need three 
SECTION 8.7 Identity   511

512   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
quantifiers; and so on. We could use this procedure to translate statements about any 
number of items, but because such translations become rather lengthy, this discussion 
is limited to statements about one or two items at most.
Unlike “at most” statements, statements that assert something about at least n items 
do claim that the items actually exist. Thus, to translate “at least” statements we need to 
use existential quantifiers. The number of quantifiers must be equal to the number of 
items asserted. Examples:
There is at least one city in Monaco.
(∃x)(Cx
Mx)
There are at least two women in  
Hamlet.
(∃x)(∃y)(Wx
Hx
Wy
Hy
x ≠ y)
There are at least three satellites  
of Neptune.
(∃x)(∃y)(∃z)(Sx
Sy
Sz
x ≠ y
x ≠ z
y ≠ z)
The first of these examples merely asserts that some city is in Monaco. Thus, it is translated 
without any inclusion of the identity relation. When the stated number is greater than 
1, however, the translation must incorporate one or more negative identity statements 
to ensure that the items referred to are distinct. Thus, in the second statement, if x and 
y should be identical, then there would actually be only one woman (at least) in Hamlet. 
To ensure that there are at least two distinct women, we must conjoin the assertion that 
x and y are not identical. Similarly, when we assert something about at least three items, 
we must conjoin the assertion that none of them is identical to either of the other two.
A statement about exactly n items can be seen to be the conjunction of a statement 
about at least n items and a statement about at most n items. For example, the statement 
“There are exactly three cars in the lot” means that there are at least three cars in the 
lot and at most three cars in the lot. Thus, a statement about exactly n items requires n 
existential quantifiers to ensure the existence of the items, one or more negated identity 
statements to ensure their distinctness (assuming n is greater than 1), and a universally 
quantified statement to limit the group to at most n items. Here are some examples:
There is exactly one city in Grenada.
(∃x){Cx
Gx 
y)[(Cy
Gy) ⊃ x = y]}
There are exactly two houses  
of Congress.
(∃x)(∃y){Hx
Hy
x ≠ y
 
  (z) [Hz ⊃ (z = x ⋁ z = y)]}
There are exactly two sopranos in  
La Boheme.
(∃x)(∃y){Sx
L x
Sy
Ly
x ≠ y
 
  (z)[(Sz
L z) ⊃ (z = x ⋁ z = y)]}
Definite Descriptions
The last form of phraseology considered here is the definite description. A definite 
description is a group of words of the form “the such-and-such” that identifies an 
individual person, place, or thing. Here are some examples:
The author of Evangeline
The capital of Nebraska
The mother of John F. Kennedy

8
The first designates Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, the second the city of Lincoln, and 
the third Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy. Definite descriptions are like names in that they 
identify only one thing, but unlike names they do so by describing a situation or rela-
tionship that only that one thing satisfies.
Statements incorporating definite descriptions have given rise to disputes in logic, 
because alternate interpretations of such statements can lead to conflicts in truth value. 
Suppose, for example, we are given the statement “The queen of the United States is a 
woman.” Should we consider this statement to be true, because every queen is a woman, 
or should we consider it to be false, because there is no queen of the United States? 
In response to this question, most logicians today accept an interpretation of definite 
descriptions originally proposed by Bertrand Russell. According to this interpretation, 
a statement that incorporates a definite description asserts three things: an item of a 
certain sort exists, there is only one such item, and that item has the attribute assigned 
to it by the statement. If we accept this interpretation, the statement about the queen of 
the United States is false, because no such person exists.
Here are some additional examples with their translations:
The inventor of the phonograph  
was an American.
(∃x)[Ixp 
y)(Iyp ⊃ y = x
Ax]
The author of Middlemarch was  
a Victorian freethinker.
(∃x)[Wxm 
y)(Wym ⊃ y = x
Vx
Fx]
The painter of The Starry Night  
was Van Gogh.
(∃x)[Pxs 
y)(Pys ⊃ y = x
x = v]
The first translation may be read as “There is someone who invented the phonograph, 
and if anyone invented the phonograph, then that person is identical to the first, and 
the first person is an American.” The second may be read as “There is someone who 
wrote Middlemarch, and if anyone wrote Middlemarch, then that person is identical to 
the first, and the first person is a Victorian freethinker.” The third may be read as “There 
is someone who painted The Starry Night, and if anyone painted The Starry Night, then 
that person is identical to the first, and the first person is identical to Van Gogh.”
This completes our explanation of how to translate statements involving the identity 
relation. At this point, you may, if you wish, proceed to Exercise 8.7 part I before com-
pleting the remainder of this section.
Using the Rules of Inference
Now that we have seen how to translate statements involving the identity relation, let us 
use natural deduction to derive the conclusions of arguments that include statements 
of this sort. Before doing so, however, some special rules governing the identity relation 
must be introduced. These rules, which are collectively designated “Id,” are as follows:
Id:  (1)  Prem.
x = x
	
(2)  x = y :: y = x
	
(3)  ℱx
x = y
 ℱy
SECTION 8.7 Identity   513

514   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
These rules are expressed in terms of individual variables (x and y), so obviously 
they hold for any individual variables. But since any individual constant (such as a or b)  
is a substitution instance of any individual variable, these rules hold for individual con-
stants as well. The first rule expresses the idea that anything is identical to itself; it as-
serts what is called the reflexive property of the identity relation. The rule allows us to 
insert a self-identity statement after any premise (that is, on any line in a proof).
The second rule is a rule of replacement; it expresses what is called the symmetric prop-
erty of the identity relation. It states, very simply, that the letters on either side of the equal 
sign can be switched. An immediate use of this rule is to prove that x ≠ y is logically 
equivalent to y ≠ x. Recall that x ≠ y is simply an abbreviation for ∼(x = y). If we apply the 
rule to the latter expression, we obtain ∼(y = x), which, in its abbreviated form, is y ≠ x.
The third rule expresses the intuitively obvious idea that, if something is true of x and x 
is identical to y, then that something is true of y. This rule is the basis of what is called the 
transitive property of identity, which allows us to infer from x = y and y = z that x = z. If 
we suppose that the ℱ in this rule stands for the expression “x =,” that x is y, and that y is z, 
then the first line of the rule reads x = y, the second line reads y = z, and the conclusion 
is x = z. This inference is used often in the derivation of the conclusions of arguments.
In general, the rules of inference used earlier apply to arguments containing identity 
statements in the same way they apply to any other arguments. Also, conditional proof 
and indirect proof are used in the same way. 
The following argument illustrates the first expression of the rule for identity.
No biologists are identical to Isabel. Therefore, Isabel is not a biologist.
If we use Bx to translate “x is a biologist,” and i for Isabel, this argument becomes
1.   (x)(Bx ⊃ x ≠ i )	
/  ∼Bi
The fact that the conclusion contains i suggests that we instantiate line 1 with respect to 
that letter. The proof is as follows:
1.   (x)(Bx ⊃ x ≠ i )	
/  ∼Bi
2.   Bi ⊃ i ≠ i	
1, UI
3.   i = i	
Id
4.   ∼(i ≠ i )	
3, DN
5.   ∼Bi	
2, 4, MT
Line 3 comes merely from the first expression of the identity rule, which allows us to 
insert any self-identity statement after any premise. Thus, no numeral is included in the 
justification for that line. Also note that line 4 is simply another way of writing ∼∼(i = i).
Now let us return to the argument given at the beginning of this section:
The only friend I have is Elizabeth. Elizabeth is not Nancy. Nancy is a Canadian. Therefore, 
there is a Canadian who is not my friend.
If we use Fx to translate “x is my friend” and Cx to translate “x is a Canadian,” this argu-
ment may be translated as follows:
1.   Fe
x)(Fx ⊃ x = e)
2.   e ≠ n
3.   Cn	
/  (∃x)(Cx
∼Fx)

8
Inspecting the second line, we see a negated identity statement involving e and n. This 
suggests that we instantiate the universal statement in the first line with respect to n. 
The proof is as follows:
  1.   Fe
x)(Fx ⊃ x = e)
  2.   e ≠ n
  3.   Cn	
/  (∃x)(Cx
∼Fx)
  4.   (x)(Fx ⊃ x = e
Fe	
1, Com
  5.   (x)(Fx ⊃ x = e)	
4, Simp
  6.   Fn ⊃ n = e	
5, UI
  7.   n ≠ e	
2, Id
  8.   ∼Fn	
6, 7, MT
  9.   Cn
∼Fn	
3, 8, Conj
10.   (∃x)(Cx
∼Fx)	
9, EG
Line 7 is justified by the second rule for identity. Also, since n ≠ e is simply an abbrevia-
tion for ∼(n = e), line 8 follows directly from lines 6 and 7.
Here is another example:
The only person who invested is Ms. Snyder. Cathy is one of the people who lost money. 
Some people who invested did not lose money. Therefore, Cathy is not Ms. Snyder.
The translation is as follows:
1.   Ps
Is
x)[(Px
Ix) ⊃ x = s]
2.   Pc
Lc
3.   (∃x)(Px
Ix
∼Lx)	
/  c ≠ s
Cursory inspection reveals no easy way to obtain the conclusion. This suggests indirect 
proof:
  1.   Ps
Is
x)[(Px
Ix) ⊃ x = s]
  2.   Pc
Lc
  3.   (∃x)(Px
Ix
∼L x)	
/  c ≠ s
	
  4.   c = s	
AIP
	
  5.   Pa
Ia
∼La	
3, EI
	
  6.   (x)[(Px
Ix) ⊃ x = s
Ps
Is	
1, Com
	
  7.   (x)[(Px
Ix) ⊃ x = s]	
6, Simp
	
  8.   Pa
Ia ⊃ a = s	
7, UI
	
  9.   Pa
Ia	
5, Simp
	
10.   a = s	
8, 9, MP
	
11.   s = c	
4, Id
	
12.   a = c	
10, 11, Id
	
13.   ∼La
Pa
Ia	
5, Com
	
14.   ∼La	
13, Simp
	
15.   ∼Lc	
12, 14, Id
	
16.   Lc
Pc	
2, Com
	
17.   Lc	
16, Simp
	
18.   Lc
∼Lc	
15, 17, Conj
19.   c ≠ s	
4 –18, IP
SECTION 8.7 Identity   515

8
As usual, the existential statement is instantiated first, then the universal. Line 11 is 
derived by commuting line 4 by the second rule of identity, and line 12 is derived from 
lines 10 and 11 by applying the third rule of identity. Line 15 is derived by substituting c 
in the place of a in line 14 according to the third rule of identity. The indirect sequence 
is discharged in line 19 in the normal way.
In arguments involving identity, especially more-complicated ones, it is often dif-
ficult or impossible to see by mere inspection how to obtain the conclusion. A good 
general procedure is to begin with instantiation. Always instantiate the existential state-
ments first, then the universals. When instantiating the universal statements, normally 
pick the letter (or one of the letters) used to instantiate the existential statement(s). If 
there are no existential statements, pick one of the letters appearing in the singular 
statements. If the conclusion is still not apparent, try indirect proof. In general, when-
ever the conclusion is a complicated statement, it is best to start out with indirect proof. 
Developing facility in proving arguments involving identity requires a little practice, 
but adequate skill should not take too long to acquire.
Translation hints
Only i is F.
Fi
(x)[Fx . x 5 i]
The only F that is G is i.
Fi  Gi
(x)[(Fx  Gx) . x 5 i]
No F except i is G.
Fi  Gi
(x)[(Fx  Gx) . x 5 i]
All F except i are G.
Fi  ,Gi
(x)[(Fx  x Þ i ) . Gx]
i is the F that is most so-and-so.
Fi
(x)[(Fx  x Þ i ) . i is more 
so-and-so than x]
There is at most one F.
(x)(y)[(Fx  Fy) . x 5 y]
There are at least two F’s.
( x)( y)[Fx  Fy  x Þ y]
There are exactly two F’s.
( x)( y){Fx  Fy  x Þ y
(z)[Fz . (z 5 x v z 5 y)]}
The F is G
(
.
x)[Fx
(y)(Fy . y 5 x) Gx]
EXERCISE 8.7	
	 I.	 Translate the following statements.
	
	 Simple identity statements
	
★1.	 Dr. Seuss is Theodore Geisel. (s, g)
	
2.	 Auguste Renoir is not Claude Monet. (r, m)
	
3.	 Marilyn Monroe is Norma Jean Baker. (m, b)
	
★4.	 Hermann Hesse is not André Gide. (h, g)
516   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic

8
	
	 Statements involving “only,” “the only,” and “no . . . except”
	
★5.	 Only Linus Pauling has won two Nobel prizes. (Wx: x has won two Nobel 
prizes; p: Linus Pauling)
	
6.	 Only Don Larsen has pitched a perfect World Series game. (Px: x has pitched a 
perfect World Series game; l: Don Larsen)
	
7.	 The only national park in Maine is Acadia. (Nx: x is a national park; Mx: x is in 
Maine; a: Acadia)
	
★8.	 The only nation having a maple-leaf flag is Canada. (Nx: x is a nation; Mx: x 
has a maple-leaf flag; c: Canada)
	
9.	 The only U.S. presidents who were Federalists were Washington and Adams. 
(Ux: x is a U.S. president; Fx: x is a Federalist; w: Washington; a: Adams)
	
10.	 No state except Hawaii is surrounded by water. (Sx: x is a state; Wx: x is sur-
rounded by water; h: Hawaii)
	 ★11.	 No sport except hockey uses a puck. (Sx: x is a sport; Px: x uses a puck; 
h: hockey)
	
	 Superlative statements
	 ★12.	 Hydrogen is the lightest element. (Ex: x is an element; Lxy: x is lighter than y; 
h: hydrogen)
	
13.	 The smallest planet in our solar system is Mercury. (Px: x is a planet in our 
solar system; Sxy: x is smaller than y; m: Mercury)
	
14.	 Harvard is the oldest American university. (Ax: x is American; Ux: x is a uni-
versity; Oxy: x is older than y; h: Harvard)
	 ★15.	 Death Valley is the lowest region in North America. (Rx: x is a region; Nx: x is 
in North America; Lyx: x is lower than y; d: Death Valley)
	
	 Statements involving “all except”
	 ★16.	 Every city except Istanbul is situated on a single continent. (Cx: x is a city; Sx: x 
is situated on a single continent; i: Istanbul)
	
17.	 Every U.S. president except Ford won a national election. (Ux: x is a U.S. 
president; Wx: x won a national election; f : Ford)
	
18.	 All metals except mercury are solids at room temperature. (Mx: x is a metal; 
Sx: x is a solid at room temperature; m: mercury)
	 ★19.	 Every pitcher except Cy Young has won fewer than 500 games. (Px: x is a 
pitcher; Wx: x has won fewer than 500 games; c: Cy Young)
	
	 Numerical statements
	 ★20.	 There is at most one city in Belize. (Cx: x is a city; Bx: x is in Belize)
	
21.	 There are at most two national parks in South Dakota. (Nx: x is a national 
park; Sx: x is in South Dakota)
	
22.	 There is at most one national holiday in July. (Nx: x is a national holiday; Jx: x 
is in July)
SECTION 8.7 Identity   517

518   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
	 ★23.	 There are at most two cities in Malta. (Cx: x is a city; Mx: x is in Malta)
	
24.	 There is at least one quarterback on a football team. (Qx: x is a quarterback; 
Fx: x is on a football team)
	
25.	 There are at least two atoms in a water molecule. (Ax: x is an atom; Wx: x is in 
a water molecule)
	 ★26.	 There are at least three carbon allotropes. (Cx: x is a carbon allotrope)
	
27.	 There is exactly one U.S. Supreme Court. (Ux: x is a U.S. Supreme Court)
	
28.	 There is exactly one natural satellite of the Earth. (Sx: x is a satellite of the 
Earth; Nx: x is natural)
	 ★29.	 There are exactly two bright stars in Gemini. (Sx: x is a star; Bx: x is bright; 
Gx: x is in Gemini)
	
	 Statements containing definite descriptions
	 ★30.	 The author of Vanity Fair was born in India. (Wxy: x wrote y; Bx: x was born 
in India; v: Vanity Fair)
	
31.	 The wife of Othello is Desdemona. (Wxy: x is the wife of y; o: Othello; 
d: Desdemona)
	
32.	 The man who composed The Nutcracker was Russian. (Mx: x is a man; Cxy:  
x composed y; Rx: x was Russian; n: The Nutcracker)
	 ★33.	 The artist who painted the Allegory of Spring was Botticelli. (Ax: x is an artist; 
Pxy: x painted y; a: the Allegory of Spring; b: Botticelli)
	
34.	 The capital of Georgia is not Savannah. (Cxy: x is the capital of y, g: Georgia; s: 
Savannah)
	
	 Assorted statements
	 ★35.	 The smallest state is Rhode Island. (Sx: x is a state; Sxy: x is smaller than y; 
r: Rhode Island)
	
36.	 There is at least one newspaper in St. Louis. (Nx: x is a newspaper; Sx: x is in  
St. Louis)
	
37.	 Lady Gaga is Stefani Germanotta. (l: Lady Gaga; s: Stefani Germanotta)
	 ★38.	 The only American president elected to a fourth term was Franklin  
D. Roosevelt. (Ax: x is an American president; Ex: x was elected to a fourth 
term; r: Franklin D. Roosevelt)
	
39.	 There are at least two cities in Qatar. (Cx: x is a city; Qx: x is in Qatar)
	
40.	 Only George Blanda has played 340 professional football games. (Px: x has 
played 340 professional football games; b: George Blanda)
	 ★41.	 Hamlet had at most one sister. (Sxy: x is a sister of y; h: Hamlet)
	
42.	 No major league baseball player has hit 73 home runs except Barry Bonds. (Mx: 
x is a major league baseball player; Hx: x has hit 73 home runs; b: Barry Bonds)
	
43.	 There are at most two senators from New Hampshire. (Sx: x is a senator; Nx: 
x is from New Hampshire)
518   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic

8
	 ★44.	 Gustav Mahler is not Anton Bruckner. (m: Gustav Mahler; b: Anton 
Bruckner)
	
45.	 The explorer who discovered the North Pole was Admiral Peary. (Ex: x is an 
explorer; Dxy: x discovered y; n: the North Pole; a: Admiral Peary)
	
46.	 Hinduism is the oldest religion. (Rx: x is a religion; Oxy: x is older than y; 
h: Hinduism)
	 ★47.	 There are exactly two tenors in Carmen. (Tx: x is a tenor; Cx: x is in Carmen)
	
48.	 Every Speaker of the House except Nancy Pelosi has been a man. (Sx: x is 
Speaker of the House; Mx: x is a man; n: Nancy Pelosi)
	
49.	 The person who discovered relativity theory was an employee in the Swiss 
patent office. (Px: x is a person; Dxy: x discovered y; Ex: x is an employee in the 
Swiss patent office; r : relativity theory)
	 ★50.	 There are at least three stars in Orion. (Sx: x is a star; Ox: x is in Orion)
	II.	 Derive the conclusion of the following symbolized arguments. Use conditional 
proof or indirect proof as needed.
	 ★(1)	 1.	 (x)(x = a)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Rx    /  Ra
	
(2)	 1.	 Ke
	
	 2.	 ∼Kn    /  e ≠ n
	
(3)	 1.	 (x)(x = c ⊃ Nx)    /  Nc
	 ★(4)	 1.	 (∃x)(x = g)
	
	 2.	 (x)(x = i)    /  g = i
	
(5)	 1.	 (x)(Gx ⊃ x = a)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Gx  Hx)    /  Ha
	
(6)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 Ac  ∼Bi    /  c ≠ i
	 ★(7)	 1.	 (x)(x = a)
	
	 2.	 Fa    /  Fm  Fn
	
(8)	 1.	 (x)(x = r)
	
	 2.	 Hr  Kn    /  Hn  Kr
	
(9)	 1.	 (x)(Lx ⊃ x = e)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Sx ⊃ x = i)
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Lx  Sx)    /  i = e
	 ★(10)	 1.	 (x)(Px ⊃ x = a)
	
	 2.	 (x)(x = c ⊃ Qx)
	
	 3.	 a = c    /  (x)(Px ⊃ Qx)
	
(11)	 1.	 (x)(y)(Txy ⊃ x = e)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Txi    / Tei
SECTION 8.7 Identity   519

520   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
	
(12)	 1.	 (x)[Rx ⊃ (Hx  x = m)]    /  Rc ⊃ Hm
	 ★(13)	 1.	 (x)(Ba ⊃ x ≠ a)
	
	 2.	 Bc    /  a ≠ c
	
(14)	 1.	 (∃x)Gx ⊃ (∃x)(Kx  x = i)    /  Gn ⊃ Ki
	
(15)	 1.	 (x)(Rax ⊃ ∼Rxc)
	
	 2.	 (x)Rxx    /  c ≠ a
	 ★(16)	 1.	 (x)[Nx ⊃ (Px  x = m)]
	
	 2.	 ∼Pm    /  ∼Ne
	
(17)	 1.	 (x)(Fx ⊃ x = e)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Fx  x = a)    /  a = e
	
(18)	 1.	 (x)[Ex ⊃ (Hp  x = e)]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ex  x = p)    /  He
	 ★(19)	 1.	 (x)(∃y)(Cxy ⊃ x = y)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(y)(Cxy  x = a)    /  Caa
	
(20)	 1.	 (x)[Fx ⊃ (Gx  x = n)]
	
	 2.	 Gn ⊃ (∃x)(Hx  x = e)    /  Fm ⊃ He
	III.	Derive the conclusion of the following arguments. Use conditional proof or indi-
rect proof as needed.
	
★1.	 Some of Jane Collier’s novels are interesting. The only novel Jane Collier wrote 
is The Cry. Therefore, The Cry is interesting. (Nx: x is a novel; Wxy: x wrote y; 
Ix: x is interesting; j: Jane Collier; c: The Cry)
	
2.	 Ronald Reagan was the oldest U.S. president. Woodrow Wilson was a U.S. 
president. Woodrow Wilson is not Ronald Reagan. Therefore, Ronald Reagan  
was older than Woodrow Wilson. (Ux: x is a U.S. president; Oxy: x is older than 
y; r: Ronald Reagan; w: Woodrow Wilson)
	
3.	 The artist who painted the Mona Lisa was a Florentine. Leonardo is the art-
ist who painted the Mona Lisa. Therefore, Leonardo was a Florentine. (Ax: 
x is an artist; Pxy: x painted y; Fx: x was a Florentine; m: the Mona Lisa; 
l: Leonardo)
	
★4.	 The novel on the table was written by Margaret Mitchell. The only novel 
Margaret Mitchell wrote is Gone with the Wind. Therefore, the novel on the 
table is Gone with the Wind. (Nx: x is a novel; Tx: x is on the table; Wxy:  
x wrote y; m: Margaret Mitchell; g: Gone with the Wind )
	
5.	 The author of King Lear was an English actor. John Milton was English but not 
an actor. Therefore, John Milton is not the author of King Lear. (Wxy: x wrote 
y; Ex: x is English; Ax: x is an actor; k: King Lear; m: John Milton)
	
6.	 The dog that bit the letter carrier is a large terrier. Ajax is a small dog. There-
fore, Ajax did not bite the letter carrier. (Dx: x is a dog; Bx: x bit the letter car-
rier; Lx: x is large; Tx: x is a terrier; a: Ajax)
520   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic

8
	
★7.	 Every member except Ellen sang a song. Every member except Nancy gave 
a speech. Ellen is not Nancy. Therefore, Ellen gave a speech and Nancy sang 
a song. (Mx: x is a member; Sx: x sang a song; Gx: x gave a speech; e: Ellen; 
n: Nancy)
	
8.	 The only person who ordered fish is Astrid. The only person who suffered 
indigestion is Ms. Wilson. Some person who ordered fish also suffered indi-
gestion. Therefore, Astrid is Ms. Wilson. (Px: x is a person; Ox: x ordered fish;  
Sx: x suffered indigestion; a: Astrid; w: Ms. Wilson)
	
9.	 The highest mountain is in Tibet. Therefore, there is a mountain in Tibet 
that is higher than any mountain not in Tibet. (Mx: x is a mountain; Hxy: x is 
higher than y; Tx: x is in Tibet)
	 ★10.	 The tallest building in North America is One World Trade Center. The tall-
est building in North America is located in New York City. If one thing is 
taller than another, then the latter is not taller than the former. Therefore, One 
World Trade Center is located in New York City. (Bx: x is a building in North 
America; Txy: x is taller than y; Nx: x is located in New York City; o: One 
World Trade Center.)
	
11.	 There are at least two philosophers in the library. Robert is the only French 
philosopher in the library. Therefore, there is a philosopher in the library who 
is not French. (Px: x is a philosopher; Lx: x is in the library; Fx: x is French; 
r: Robert)
	
12.	 The only dogs that barked were Fido and Pluto. Fido is not Pluto. Every 
dog except Fido ran on the beach. Therefore, exactly one barking dog ran 
on the beach. (Dx: x is a dog; Bx: x barked; Rx: x ran on the beach; f: Fido; 
p: Pluto)
	 ★13.	 There are at least two attorneys in the office. All attorneys are professionals. 
There are at most two professionals in the office. Therefore, there are exactly 
two professionals in the office. (Ax: x is an attorney; Ox: x is in the office; Px: x 
is a professional)
	
14.	 There are at most two scientists in the laboratory. At least two scientists in the 
laboratory are Russians. No Russians are Chinese. Therefore, if Norene is a 
Chinese scientist, then she is not in the laboratory. (Sx: x is a scientist; Lx: x is 
in the laboratory; Rx: x is Russian; Cx: x is Chinese; n: Norene)
	
15.	 Every candidate except Mary was elected. The only candidate who was elected 
is Ralph. Mary is not Ralph. Therefore, there were exactly two candidates.  
(Cx: x is a candidate; Ex: x was elected; m: Mary; r: Ralph)
	 ★16.	 Every student except Charles and Norman passed the course. The only 
student who was dismissed was Norman. Every student retook the course if  
and only if he or she was not dismissed and did not pass. Charles is not 
Norman. Therefore, exactly one student retook the course. (Sx: x is a student; 
Px: x passed the course; Dx: x was dismissed; Rx: x retook the course; c: 
Charles; n: Norman)
SECTION 8.7 Identity   521
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

522   CHAPTER 8 Predicate Logic
8
	
Summary
Predicate Logic: Combines the use of these symbols:
• The five operators of propositional logic: ∼
⋁, ⊃, ≡
• Symbols for predicates: G_, H_, K_, etc.
• Symbols for universal quantifiers: (x), ( y), (z)
• Symbols for existential quantifiers: (∃x), (∃y), (∃z)
• Symbols for individual variables: x, y, z
• Symbols for individual constants: a, b, c, . . . u, v, w
Statements:
• Singular statements combine predicate symbols with constants: Ga, Hc
Kc, etc.
• Universal statements are usually translated as conditionals: (x)(Px ⊃ Qx), etc.
• Particular statements are usually translated as conjunctions: (∃x)(Px
Qx), etc.
Using the Rules of Inference (modus ponens, modus tollens, etc.):
• Rules are used in basically the same way as in propositional logic.
• Using the rules usually requires that quantifiers be removed or inserted:
■
■
Universal instantiation (UI): Removes universal quantifiers.
■
■
Universal generalization (UG): Introduces universal quantifiers.
■
■
Existential instantiation (EI): Removes existential quantifiers.
■
■
Existential generalization (EG): Introduces existential quantifiers.
• Restrictions:
■
■
For EI, the existential name that is introduced must not appear in any previous line, 
including the conclusion line.
■
■
The instantiation and generalization rules can be applied only to whole lines—not 
parts of lines.
Quantifier Negation Rule:
• Is used to remove or insert tildes preceding quantifiers.
• The instantiation rules cannot be applied if a tilde precedes the quantifier.
• One type of quantifier can be replaced by the other type if and only if immediately 
before and after the new quantifier:
■
■
Tildes that were originally there are deleted, and
■
■
Tildes that were not originally there are inserted.
Conditional Proof and Indirect Proof:
• Used in basically the same way as in propositional logic.
• Restriction:
■
■
UG must not be used within an indented sequence if the instantial variable is free in 
the first line of that sequence.

8
Proving Invalidity:
• Counterexample method:
■
■
Produce a substitution instance of a symbolized argument that has indisputably true 
premises and an indisputably false conclusion.
• Finite universe method:
■
■
Reduce the universe of discourse to a finite number until an indirect truth table 
proves the resulting argument invalid.
■
■
Universal statements are rendered as conjunctions.
■
■
Particular statements are rendered as disjunctions.
■
■
Singular statements are kept as they are.
Relational Predicates:
• Symbols for relational predicates: G_ _, H_ _, K_ _ _, etc.
• Are used to translate relational statements.
• Example: “Paul is taller than Cathy”: Tpc
Overlapping Quantifiers:
• Quantifiers that fall within the scope of another quantifier.
• Example: (∃x)[Mx
y)(Wy ⊃ Txy)]
• Restriction:
■
■
UG must not be used if the instantial variable is free in any preceding line obtained by 
EI.
Identity:
• The symbol for the identity relation is the equal sign: =
• Used to assert that one thing is identical to another.
• Used to translate statements involving “only,”  “the only,”  “no . . . except,” and “all except” 
when these expressions are used with individuals.
• Used to translate superlative statements, numerical statements, and definite descriptions.
• The rule for identity (Id) allows the application of the other rules of inference.
Summary   523

524
9 
9.1 	 Analogical Reasoning
9.2	 Legal Reasoning
9.3	 Moral Reasoning
9.1	
Analogical Reasoning
Analogical reasoning may be the most fundamental and the most common of all ra-
tional processes. It stands at the basis of many ordinary decisions in life. For example, a 
woman wanting to buy a can of soup might deliberate between Campbell’s and Brand X 
and, after recalling that other varieties of Campbell’s were good, decide in favor of that 
brand. A man contemplating a haircut might recall that a friend got an especially good 
cut at the Golden Touch and as a result decide to go there himself. A woman selecting a 
plant for her garden might observe that gardenias grow well at the house next door and 
conclude that gardenias would grow well at her house, too. A man thinking of reading 
a novel by Stephen King might recall that King’s last three novels were thrilling and 
conclude that his latest novel would also be thrilling.
Analogical reasoning is reasoning that depends on a comparison of instances. If 
the instances are sufficiently similar, the decision reached in the end is usually a good 
one; but if they are not sufficiently similar, the decision may not be good. When such 
Analogy and Legal  
and Moral Reasoning
524
PREVIEW    While shopping at the local MegaMart, your eye catches a cool-looking hat on a  
display rack. You remove the hat you’re wearing and try on the new one. Just then you get a call on 
your cell phone, and after ending it, you forget that you’re still wearing the store’s hat. You pay for  
the items in your basket and leave the store. The store security guard promptly arrests you for shop-
lifting the hat. When you protest your innocence, the guard replies that you’re just like the guy who  
walked out of MegaMart with a flat-screen TV a week earlier. Is the guard’s analogy a good one?
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

9
SECTION 9.1 Analogical Reasoning   525
a reasoning process is expressed in words, the result is an argument from analogy  
(see Chapter 1). Simple arguments from analogy have the following structure:
Entity A has attributes a, b, c, and z.
Entity B has attributes a, b, c.
Therefore, entity B probably has attribute z also.
If the attributes a, b, and c are connected in some important way to z (that is, are 
relevant to z), the argument is usually strong. If they are not so connected (that is, are 
irrelevant to z), the argument is usually weak.
Analogical arguments are closely related to generalizations. In a generalization, the 
arguer begins with one or more instances and proceeds to draw a conclusion about all 
the members of a class. The arguer may then apply the generalization to one or more 
members of this class that were not noted earlier. The first stage of such an inference is 
inductive, and the second stage is deductive. For example, the man thinking of reading 
the latest Stephen King novel might argue that because the last three novels by King 
were thrilling, all King novels are thrilling (inductive argument). Applying this general-
ization to the latest novel, he might then conclude that it too will be thrilling (deductive 
argument). In an argument from analogy, on the other hand, the arguer proceeds di-
rectly from one or more individual instances to a conclusion about another individual 
instance without appealing to any intermediate generalization. Such an argument is 
purely inductive. Thus, the arguer might conclude directly from reading three earlier 
King novels that the latest one will be thrilling.
In any argument from analogy, the items that are compared are called analogues. 
Thus, if one should argue that Mariah Carey’s latest album is probably good because 
her two previous albums were good, the three albums are the analogues. The two earlier 
albums are called the primary analogues, and the latest album is called the secondary 
analogue. With these definitions in mind, we may now examine a set of principles that 
are useful for evaluating most arguments from analogy. They include (1) the relevance 
of the similarities shared by the primary and secondary analogues, (2) the number of 
similarities, (3) the nature and degree of disanalogy, (4) the number of primary ana-
logues, (5) the diversity among the primary analogues, and (6) the specificity of the 
conclusion.
1.	 Relevance of the similarities. Suppose a certain person—let us call her Lucy—is con-
templating the purchase of a new car. She decides in favor of a Chevrolet because 
she wants good fuel economy and her friend Tom’s new Chevy gets good fuel econ-
omy. To support her decision, Lucy argues that both cars have a padded steering 
wheel, tachometer, fabric upholstery, tinted windows, premium sound system, and 
white paint. Lucy’s argument is weak because these similarities are irrelevant to fuel 
economy. On the other hand, if Lucy bases her conclusion on the fact that both cars 
have the same-size engine, her argument is relatively strong, because engine size is 
relevant to fuel economy.
2.	
Number of similarities. Suppose, in addition to the same-size engine, Lucy notes 
further similarities between the car she intends to buy and Tom’s car: curb weight, 
aerodynamic body, gear ratio, and tires. These additional similarities, all of which are 

526   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING
9
relevant to fuel economy, tend to strengthen Lucy’s argument. If, in addition, Lucy 
notes that she and Tom both drive about half on city streets and half on freeways, her 
argument is strengthened even further.
3.	
Nature and degree of disanalogy. On the other hand, if Lucy’s car is equipped with a 
turbocharger, if Lucy loves to make jackrabbit starts and screeching stops, if Tom’s 
car has overdrive but Lucy’s does not, and if Lucy constantly drives on congested 
freeways while Tom drives on relatively clear freeways, Lucy’s ­argument is weakened. 
These differences are called disanalogies. Depending on how they relate to the con-
clusion, disanalogies can either weaken or strengthen an argument. If we suppose 
instead that Tom’s car has the turbocharger, that Tom loves jackrabbit starts, and so 
on, then Lucy’s argument is strengthened, because these disanalogies tend to reduce 
Tom’s fuel economy.
4.	
Number of primary analogues. Thus far, Lucy has based her conclusion on the sim-
ilarity between the car she intends to buy and only one other car—Tom’s. Now 
suppose that Lucy has three additional friends, that all of them drive cars of the 
same model and year as Tom’s, and that all of them get good fuel economy. These 
additional primary analogues strengthen Lucy’s argument because they lessen the 
likelihood that Tom’s good fuel economy is a freak incident. On the other hand, 
suppose that two of these additional friends get the same good fuel economy as 
Tom but that the third gets poor fuel economy. As before, the first two cases tend to 
strengthen Lucy’s argument, but the third now tends to weaken it. This third case 
is called a counteranalogy because it supports a conclusion opposed to that of the 
original analogy.
5.	
Diversity among the primary analogues. Suppose now that Lucy’s four friends (all of 
whom get good fuel economy) all buy their gas at the same station, have their cars 
tuned up regularly by the same mechanic, put the same friction-reducing additive 
in their oil, inflate their tires to the same pressure, and do their city driving on un-
congested, level streets at a fuel-maximizing 28 miles per hour. Such ­factors would 
tend to reduce the probability of Lucy’s conclusion, because it is possible that one or 
a combination of them is responsible for the good fuel economy and that this factor 
(or combination of them) is absent in Lucy’s case. On the other hand, if Lucy’s friends 
buy their gas at different stations, have their cars tuned up at different intervals by 
different mechanics, inflate their tires to different pressures, drive at different speeds 
on different grades, and have different attitudes toward using the oil additive, then it 
is less likely that the good fuel economy they enjoy is attributable to any factor other 
than the model and year of their car.
6.	
Specificity of the conclusion. Lucy’s conclusion is simply that her car will get “good” 
fuel economy. If she now changes her conclusion to state that her car will get fuel 
economy “at least as good” as Tom’s, then her argument is weakened. Such a conclu-
sion is more specific than the earlier conclusion and is easier to falsify. Thus, if her 
fuel economy were only one-tenth of a mile per gallon less than Tom’s, her conclu-
sion would turn out to be false. Now suppose that Lucy changes her conclusion to 
state that her car will get exactly the same fuel economy as Tom’s. This conclusion 

9
is even more specific than the “at least as good” conclusion, and it is easier still to 
falsify. Thus, such a conclusion renders Lucy’s argument much weaker than her 
original argument.
Summarizing these results, we have, 
The more relevant the similarities between primary and secondary analogues, the stron-
ger the argument.
The greater the number of similarities between primary and secondary analogues, the 
stronger the argument.
Differences between primary and secondary analogues are disanalogies, which can either 
strengthen or weaken the argument.
The greater the number of similar primary analogues, the stronger the argument; dis-
similar primary analogues are counteranalogies, which weaken the argument.
The more diverse the primary analogues, the stronger the argument.
The more specific the conclusion, the weaker the argument.
Let us now use these six principles to evaluate an argument from analogy. Suppose 
that you want to shade a bedroom window from the intense western sun. To accom-
plish this purpose, you decide to plant some trees, but the trees must be narrow ones 
that will grow approximately 25 feet tall. Recalling that a friend has some Italian 
cypresses that are almost exactly 25 feet tall, you conclude that this variety of tree will 
do the job. Thus far, your argument is based on a single similarity, the species of the 
tree. Because this similarity is very relevant to height, your argument is fairly strong. 
Now if, in addition, it turns out that your friend lives in the same city and has the same 
kind of soil as you, your argument is strengthened. However, if it happens that your 
friend has a knack for growing trees whereas you have a knack for killing them, your 
argument is weakened.
To this set of facts, suppose we add the observation that four of your neighbors 
have Italian cypresses and that all of their trees are approximately 25 feet tall. This 
fact tends to strengthen your argument. Also, if all four neighbors planted their trees 
in different years, use different kinds of fertilizers on them, and give them differ-
ent amounts of water, your argument is further strengthened. Finally, should you 
broaden your conclusion to state that your trees will grow between 22 and 28 feet 
tall, your argument is strengthened even further. But if you narrow your conclusion 
to state that your trees will grow to between 241∕2 and 251∕2 feet tall, your argument 
is weakened.
9.2	
Legal Reasoning
Many of the arguments used by lawyers in the United States and Canada to support a 
case at trial are analogical arguments. The reason is that the legal systems of these coun-
tries were derived many years ago from the English system, and an essential feature of 
the English system is its dependence on precedent. According to the requirement of 
precedent, similar cases must be decided similarly. Thus, in arguing a case, a lawyer will 
SECTION 9.2 Legal Reasoning   527

528   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING
9
often attempt to show that the case is analogous to some earlier case that was decided 
in a favorable way. Sometimes, even today, these precedents go back to early English law.
For example, suppose you own a factory and one of your machines, a drill press, 
breaks down, causing the entire operation to come to a halt. Urgently you call a repair 
company and explain the whole situation. The spokesperson for the company prom-
ises to have the drill press back in operation within two days. Unfortunately, there are 
delays, and two weeks elapse before the drill press is repaired. In the meantime your 
company loses an additional $10,000 in profits. Because you relied on the spokesper-
son’s assurance that the drill press would be fixed in two days, you demand that the 
repair company reimburse you for the additional lost profits. When the repair company 
refuses your demand, you file suit.
The lawyer who argues your case will probably make reference to a much earlier case, 
Hadley v. Baxendale, decided in Gloucester, England, in 1854. In that case the operation 
of a mill was halted because of a broken crankshaft, and the owner of the mill (Hadley) 
employed a shipping company (Baxendale) to return the crankshaft to the manufac-
turer. Hadley informed Baxendale that the broken crankshaft had interrupted the op-
eration of the mill, and Baxendale replied that the broken crankshaft would be in the 
hands of the manufacturer within one day. As it turned out, the shipment was delayed 
by several days, and Hadley incurred lost profits from the additional time the mill was 
shut down. Hadley demanded reimbursement from Baxendale, and when Baxendale 
refused, Hadley filed suit. The court ruled that Baxendale should pay only if he foresaw 
when he agreed to do the work that delays would result in lost profits for Hadley.
Applying this result to the drill-press case, your lawyer will argue that because the 
repair company was informed that delays in repairing the drill press would result in lost 
profits, it should reimburse you for the losses incurred.
In the early days, much of English law resulted directly from judges’ rendering deci-
sions in particular cases. This judge-made law is otherwise called common law. How-
ever, today many of our laws are not the direct product of judges but rather of legislative 
bodies. These laws, called statutes, are codified in books that are periodically revised. 
Can it be said that precedent plays a central role in decisions involving statutory law in 
the same way that it does in decisions involving common law? The answer is a definite 
yes. Statutory laws are invariably phrased in relatively general language, and precedent 
is required to determine how the statutes should be interpreted and applied.
Consider, for example, a “law” that we are all familiar with, the First Amendment to 
the U.S. Constitution, which provides for freedom of speech and religious expression. 
Suppose that you decide, in reliance on the First Amendment, to pass out religious 
pamphlets on a downtown street corner. Suppose further that most of the people you 
hand your pamphlets to merely glance at them and then throw them on the street and 
that the gathering litter makes the area look like a garbage dump. To prevent the litter, 
the police tell you that you can hand out your pamphlets only in the vicinity of public 
garbage cans, so that those who do not want the pamphlets can properly dispose of 
them. You object that such a restriction violates your First Amendment rights, and you 
take the issue to court.
In presenting your case, your lawyer will argue that the case is analogous to other 
cases where the state attempted to limit not the content of religious expression, but 

9
the time, place, and manner of its expression. Next, your lawyer will note that in such 
cases the state is allowed to restrict the expression only if the restriction is “narrowly 
tailored” to serve a “significant government interest.” Finally, your lawyer will attempt to 
show that your case is analogous to cases in which the government failed to prove that 
the restriction was so tailored.
As these examples illustrate, many of the arguments that occur in law are arguments 
from analogy, and the principles developed at the beginning of this section can be used 
to evaluate them. The first principle, which deals with the relevance of the similarities, 
has an obvious application to legal arguments. Suppose, for example, that two cases are 
similar in that each involves a burning building, the building in each case is located in 
Chicago, and in each case ten people died. The comparison is pointless if the issue in 
the first case is whether an insurance company is liable to pay damages whereas the 
issue in the second is whether somebody is guilty of arson.
The second and third principles, which deal with the number of similarities and 
the nature and degree of disanalogy, are also applicable. If a preceding case resembles 
the case at hand in virtually all important details, then the preceding case is said to 
be “on point” and, given certain other requirements (discussed shortly), will dictate 
the outcome of the case to be decided. As for the nature and degree of disanalogy, 
if a ­preceding case deals with fraud by a stockbroker while the case to be decided 
deals with fraud by a real estate broker, the precedent may be more or less controlling, 
depending on such circumstances as applicable statutory law.
As applied to legal analogies, the fourth principle (number of primary analogues) 
usually determines how well established a legal precedent is. If fifty previous courts 
have followed a certain rule, the precedent is stronger (everything else being equal) 
than if only two courts have followed that rule. The fifth principle (diversity among 
the primary analogues) is also applicable. If a certain rule turns up in a broad range of 
cases, it provides a stronger precedent (other things being equal) than a rule that turns 
up in a narrow range of cases. For example, the principle underlying the inadmissibil-
ity of hearsay testimony is well established because it appears in a broad cross section 
of cases.
Finally, the sixth principle states that the more specific a conclusion is, the weaker 
the argument becomes. Suppose, in an earlier case, a person is awarded half a million 
dollars for injuries inflicted by a surgeon who, during an appendix operation, left a 
stethoscope in the body opening. The argument that another person injured in the 
same way by another doctor should be awarded exactly the same amount of money is 
relatively weak in comparison with the argument that the person should be awarded 
approximately the same amount of money.
Analogical arguments that occur in law differ from the fairly simple analogies 
­considered earlier in at least two important ways. In the analogy dealing with fuel econ-
omy, the modes of similarity that linked the analogues (number of engine cylinders, 
curb weight, and the like) were clearly defined by conventional thinking, and their rel-
evance to the conclusion had been established by scientific principles. In law, however, 
clarity of this sort is seldom to be found. Modes of similarity between cases are often 
the result of highly creative thinking by lawyers and judges, and the relevance of these 
similarities to the proposed conclusion is nearly always debatable. These ­differences 
SECTION 9.2 Legal Reasoning   529

530   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING
9
render analogical arguments in law considerably more elusive than those dealing with 
subjects such as fuel economy.
The other difference between simple analogical arguments and those found in law 
is that the primary analogues in law (earlier cases) do not all have equal weight. The 
reason is that our courts operate in different jurisdictions. The system of federal courts 
is totally separate from the system of state courts. As a result, a case that might have 
considerable weight as a precedent in one system might have little or no weight in the 
other. In addition, within these systems there are different circuits, and a case that is 
controlling in one circuit may not be in another. Lastly, within these systems, the courts 
exist on different levels. For example, within the federal system there are the district 
courts, courts of appeals, and the U.S. Supreme Court. A case that is binding on a lower 
court may not be binding on a higher court.
Let us now illustrate the process of legal reasoning with a hypothetical example. Sup-
pose a certain vagrant—let us call him Blake—attempted to earn some pocket change 
by breaking into a soft-drink vending machine and stealing the cash. The police appre-
hended Blake in the act, and the district attorney charged him with burglary. Blake had 
one prior conviction for breaking into a soft-drink machine.
The first thing that any lawyer would do with this case is to recall the definition of 
“burglary.” According to the traditional definition, “burglary” means “the ­trespassory 
breaking and entering of a dwelling house of another at night with the intent to commit 
a felony therein.” Under many modern statutes, “dwelling house” has been replaced by 
“structure” and “at night” has been deleted.
There is little doubt that Blake has broken into a structure. The question is, is a soft-
drink machine the kind of structure intended by the statute? A second question is, did 
Blake intend to commit a felony when he broke into the soft-drink machine? To answer 
these questions a lawyer would consult additional statutes and relevant cases. Let us 
suppose that our jurisdiction has a statute that defines felony theft as theft of $400 or 
more. Also, let us suppose that the cash box of this particular machine contained $450 
but most similar machines can hold no more than $350.
As for cases, let us suppose that our jurisdiction has two controlling precedents. In 
People v. Harris, Harris broke into a warehouse with the intent of stealing its contents. 
The warehouse contained microwave ovens valued at $10,000, and Harris was found 
guilty of burglary. In People v. Sawyer, Sawyer broke into a newspaper vending machine 
with the intent to steal the cash in the cash box. The maximum capacity of the cash box 
was $20, and Sawyer was found not guilty of burglary.
Relying on these facts and preceding cases, the district attorney might present the 
following argument to the judge (or jury):
In breaking into the soft-drink machine, Blake is guilty of burglary for the following 
reasons. In People v. Harris, the defendant was found guilty of burglary for breaking 
into a warehouse. A soft-drink vending machine is like a warehouse in that it contains 
goods stored for resale. Furthermore, like a warehouse, people’s livelihoods depend on 
the goods stored therein.  Also, the vending machine contained over $400,  and Blake 
intended to steal this money. Stealing over $400 is a felony. Therefore, Blake intended 
to commit a felony when he broke into the machine. Also, by placing his hand into the 
machine, he “entered” it.  A soft-drink machine differs from a newspaper machine in that 

9
SECTION 9.3 MORAL REASONING   531
it can hold goods valued much more than a stack of newspapers. Thus, all the require-
ments are met for conviction.
Defense counsel, on the other hand, might argue as follows:
In breaking into the soft-drink machine, Blake is not guilty of burglary, for the follow-
ing reasons.  The original crime of burglary extended only to dwelling houses because 
people live in dwelling houses and it is important that their lives be protected. Modern 
law has extended the kind of structure requisite for burglary to include warehouses 
because people work and live in them.  A soft-drink machine is unlike a warehouse in 
that a person is not capable of working and living in it.  Also, for the crime of burglary to 
be committed, the burglar must enter the structure.   A soft-drink machine differs from a 
warehouse in that a person is not capable of entering it with his whole body.
On the contrary, a soft-drink vending machine is very similar to a newspaper vend-
ing machine in that it contains relatively small quantities of products for resale. In People 
v. Sawyer, the defendant was found not guilty of burglary in breaking into a newspaper 
vending machine. Finally, Blake was familiar with soft-drink machines (he broke into one 
once before), and he therefore knew that their cash boxes are usually limited to holding 
less than $400.  Therefore, when he broke into this ­particular machine, Blake intended to 
steal less than $400, and therefore he did not intend to commit a felony.
In deciding whether Blake is guilty, the judge or jury will have to evaluate these analogi-
cal arguments by determining which analogies are the strongest.
Sometimes lawyers and judges are confronted with cases for which there is no clear 
precedent. Such cases are called cases of first impression, and the attempt to deal with 
them by appeal to analogous instances involves even more creativity than does the at-
tempt to deal with ordinary cases. In deciding cases of first impression, judges often 
resort to moral reasoning, and they grope for any analogy that can shed light on the 
issue. The reasoning process in such a decision often involves a sequence of analogies 
followed by disanalogies and counteranalogies. These analogies present the issue in a 
continually shifting light, and the experience of coming to grips with them expands 
the outlook of the reasoner. New perspectives are created, attitudes are changed, and 
worldviews are altered.
9.3	
Moral Reasoning
As in law, arguments from analogy are also useful in deciding moral questions. Such 
arguments often occur in the context of a dialogue. As an example of a dialogue that 
includes several arguments from analogy, consider the following one between two 
­fictional characters, Jason and Deirdre. The dialogue deals with the morality and 
­legality of fetal abuse.
“Jason, I read an article in this morning’s newspaper about fetal abuse—you know, ex-
pectant mothers who take drugs or drink alcohol during pregnancy and cause damage 
to their fetus. The article said that 11 percent of all babies currently born in this country 
have traces of alcohol or illegal drugs in their blood. I think such women should be shot!”

532   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING
9
“I can see that you’re pretty worked up about this, Deirdre, but don’t you think you’re 
being a bit prudish? After all, what’s so bad about a little alcohol or a few drugs?”
“I can’t believe you said that!” Deirdre scolds. “The alcohol and drugs cause perma-
nent brain damage to the fetus and leave the child maimed for life. Many of these kids 
will grow up mentally challenged, and many will become criminals and end up in jail. The 
burden on society will be incredible! Women who treat their unborn child in this way 
are utterly immoral, and they ought to be sent to jail.”
“Let’s take these claims one at a time,” Jason responds. “First, why do you think 
­feeding alcohol or drugs to a fetus is immoral, Deirdre?”
“Because I think the fetus has rights.”
“But wait a minute,” counters Jason. “According to Roe v.  Wade, the mother can abort 
the fetus. That must mean the fetus has no right to life; and if it has no right to life, surely 
it has no rights at all.”
Deirdre scratches her head. “It seems to me you’re overlooking something,” she says. 
“When a mother intends to abort her fetus, it’s one thing. But when she intends 
to bring it to term, it’s quite another thing. It’s almost as if she has extended a 
­contract to the fetus. Look, suppose I tell a house painter, ‘You paint my house, 
and I’ll pay you $1,000.’ If the painter fulfills his end of the bargain but I refuse 
to pay, clearly I am doing something wrong. In the same way, the mother who intends to 
bear her child in effect tells the fetus, ‘You agree to grow and develop in a ­normal way, 
and I’ll ­provide you with a healthy environment.’ If the fetus grows and ­develops normally 
and then the mother feeds it drugs, she welches on the deal.”
“I agree with you about the house painter,” Jason answers. “But it seems to me that 
you can only enter into contracts with human beings. You don’t enter into contracts with 
dogs and cats, and you don’t enter into contracts with fetuses, either.”
“A fetus is very much like a complete human being, though,” Deirdre replies. “It’s 
made up of human flesh and blood, it has the same genetic code as a human being, and as 
it develops, it has the same organization of internal organs as a human being and it even 
looks like a human being. Isn’t this enough?”
“And because of these similarities you think the fetus has rights?”
“Yes, I do.”
“Well, I think your analogy is nice,” Jason replies, “but I don’t think the similarities you 
cite are relevant to your conclusion. The reason human beings have rights and can enter 
into contracts is because they are rational and have the power of speech. They demon-
strate these powers by proving theorems in geometry and engaging in conversations. I’ve 
never seen a fetus do either of these things.”
“No,” replies Deirdre, “but neither do people when they’re asleep. Do you think a sleep-
ing person is not human? Would you take a sleeping person and sweep him out the door 
like a clump of dust because he wasn’t at that moment demonstrating rational powers?”
“Of course not,” Jason replies. “But unlike a sleeping person, a fetus has never demon-
strated rational powers.”
“But neither has a newborn baby,” Deirdre argues. “When do you think a 
newborn baby becomes human? Does it happen at the moment it’s born? Was 
it not a human being one hour before birth? Isn’t a tomato growing on a vine 
as much a tomato one day before it ripens as it is when it’s ripe? Isn’t an apple growing 
on a tree as much an apple when it’s green as it is after it turns red?”
“That’s a good analogy,” says Jason.
When does a fetus 
become human?
Mom has a contract with 
her fetus.

9
“Also, even if a fetus can’t be proved beyond any uncertainty to be fully human, don’t 
you think it should be given the benefit of the doubt? When a person falls through the ice 
on a frozen lake, don’t the rescuers who pull the person out rush him to a hospital even 
though no signs of life remain? Isn’t the person, whether dead or alive, treated as if he 
were still alive? Similarly, shouldn’t a fetus, who shows no signs of rationality, be treated 
as if it had rationality?”
“Perhaps,” Jason answers, “but I have trouble attributing humanity or personhood to a 
mere lump of flesh.  This wart on the back of my hand is made of human flesh and blood, 
and its cells carry the same genetic code as I do. Of course it’s not shaped like a human  
being, but neither is a fetus in the early stages of development. Does this mean that  
I should consider this wart to be human or a person?”
“So what you’re saying,” Deirdre replies, “is that the fetus is just a part of its ­mother’s 
body, like that wart is part of yours?”
“Exactly,” he says. “And that means the fetus can have no rights or interests distinct 
from those of the mother, any more than someone’s liver can have rights distinct from 
the person who has the liver. When an alcoholic abuses his liver by excessive alcohol 
consumption, we don’t say that he is immoral and incarcerate him for liver abuse. Simi-
larly, we don’t say that smokers are immoral for abusing their lungs and put them in jail 
for lung abuse. Accordingly, we shouldn’t call pregnant women immoral and put them in 
jail for fetal abuse.”
“Your analogy has one fatal flaw,” Deirdre answers with a smile. “If the fetus is merely 
part of its mother’s body, then it would have exactly the same genetic code as the 
mother. Every ordinary body part—heart, liver, lungs, and so on—carries the 
same genes as the host organism. But the fetus has a unique genetic code.  Also, 
it’s meant to develop and separate from the body of its host, unlike a liver or a 
lung. Therefore, a fetus is not merely a part of the mother’s body.”
“Well, perhaps you’re right,” Jason says. “But I have a better analogy. The fetus is like a 
seed planted in the ground or a group of cells growing in a petri dish. Imagine you were 
walking down the street and a little seed shouted up at you, ‘Help! Get me out of this 
soil! It’s too acidic!’ What would you do? Would you reach down, lift the seedling up, and 
transplant it elsewhere? Of course not. You’d say to the seed, ‘Be quiet! It’s lucky you 
found any soil at all to grow in.’ Isn’t that what you’d say?”
“Maybe I would,” she says, “but not if I expected the seed to grow into a human being. 
And incidentally, don’t ever accuse me of anthropomorphizing! I think a far better analogy  
is that of someone who perpetrates a battery on another person. I was reading about a 
famous case where a man approached a woman in her sleep and gave her a kiss on the 
cheek. The man was someone the woman despised, and when she woke up and found 
out what had happened, she was so furious that she sued the man for battery—and she 
won.  A battery, you know, is any intentionally produced harmful or offensive contact. The 
case establishes the principle that the target of a battery need not be aware of it at the 
time it happens. Now if a kiss can be a battery, how much more so is being drowned in 
drugs and booze? The fetus might not be able to sue till after it’s born, but the battery 
was nevertheless committed before birth.”
“Very clever,” Jason responds. “However, I don’t think you can say someone’s asleep if 
that person has never been awake.  A fetus has never been awake.”
“I see you’re still harping on whether the fetus has human thought processes,” replies 
Deirdre. “Well, consider this.  After the child is born, everyone agrees it’s a ­full-fledged 
SECTION 9.3 MORAL REASONING   533
A fetus has its own genes.

534   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING
9
human being. When that child enters the world with drugs in its body, we can 
appropriately ask where those drugs came from. The answer, of course, is the 
mother. Thus, the mother has given drugs not to a mere fetus but to a real child. 
The situation would be exactly the same as if a common drug dealer had given drugs to 
the kid. Thus, the mother should be treated the same way as any drug dealer.”
“I think you’ve got me there,” Jason admits. “But your analogy holds only for kids who 
are actually born with drugs or alcohol in their system. What about fetuses who are fed 
drugs or alcohol weeks before birth but who are delivered without any trace of them?”
“Suppose,” replies Deirdre, “a doctor who is treating a pregnant woman periodically in-
jects cocaine into the fetus using a long hypodermic needle. Not only would everyone con-
sider the doctor fiendish and immoral, but the doctor would be liable for civil and criminal 
sanctions. Is the mother who feeds cocaine to her fetus any different from this doctor?”
“Interesting point,” says Jason. “I expect, however, that the doctor would be subject 
to liability for acting without the mother’s consent—not for acting without the fetus’s 
consent.”
“I hope you’re wrong,” says Deirdre. “But you know how I feel about these fetal 
­abusers? I see a child in a playpen near a window. Outside the window other kids are 
playing on the grass. The child in the playpen is excited and happy when it sees them and 
can’t wait until it’s big enough to go out and join them. Then one day the mother comes 
in with a baseball bat and smashes the child’s legs, and the child is never able to walk from 
that day on. That’s what fetal abuse does, as far as I’m concerned.”
“Getting a little emotional, aren’t we, Deirdre?”
“Maybe. But I don’t think morality is something devoid of feeling. Morality concerns 
life and life is feeling, and the two can’t be separated.”
“Well, even if I agreed with you that fetal abuse is immoral, that doesn’t mean I think 
it should be made illegal. I know our criminal laws are closely tied to public morality, but 
that’s true only up to a point. I think making fetal abuse a crime might be going too far.”
“Why is that?” asks Deirdre.
“Because it’s so invasive,” Jason responds. “Like a rapist, the state would be invading 
the most private aspects of a woman’s life. Also, it would be patronizing. The state would 
be treating the pregnant woman like an errant, recalcitrant child who’s done something 
wrong and needs to be punished.”
“But there is a long history of state intervention in the lives of people who are a 
danger to themselves or others,” Deirdre observes. “For example, people who attempt 
suicide are sometimes institutionalized to prevent them from killing themselves. 
Also, mental deviants are often committed to mental institutions for their own 
benefit. The theory is that, if these people were in their right minds, they would 
want the state to do exactly that. Women who abuse their fetuses are very similar to 
mental deviants. If these women were in their right minds, they would want the state to 
intercede and prevent them from injuring their fetuses.”
“Still,” replies Jason, “I think a law criminalizing fetal abuse would be unenforceable. 
It would be just like the law against alcohol during prohibition. That law was ­eventually 
repealed because, among other things, it was impossible to enforce. A law against fetal 
abuse would suffer the same fate. It would require that police officers snoop into the 
homes and bedrooms of every pregnant woman reasonably suspected of abusing her 
fetus. Such action would violate one of our most cherished values, the right to privacy, 
and it would require massive additions to our police force.”
Mom is like a drug dealer.
The state protects 
citizens from deviants.

“Yes,” answers Deirdre, “but the problem is so significant that I think something must 
be done. You can look at the whole of society as a single human body grown large.  Women  
who abuse their unborn children are like spiders who inject venom into the body of 
society. This venom creates a sore that lasts for seventy years or more. Now I ask you, 
what person threatened by such a spider would not go to any lengths to prevent its bite? 
What rational person would stand idle, let the ­spider inject its venom, and then tolerate 
the resulting canker for seventy years?”
“Yes,” agrees Jason, “but unfortunately, getting rid of fetal abuse is harder than simply 
brushing off a spider. I think the solution is to stress educational programs and provide 
prenatal care for every expectant mother. After all, you catch more flies with 
honey than you do with vinegar. Such programs might reduce the problem of 
fetal abuse to a point where it becomes tolerable.”
“I think any amount of fetal abuse is intolerable,” Deirdre replies.
“Society is like a water supply,” Jason says. “Public-health officials test it for contami-
nants and find microscopic amounts of this and microscopic amounts of that. If these 
amounts are within acceptable limits, they pronounce the water ­supply potable. Yes, the 
thought of any fetal abuse is disturbing, but we can never ­eliminate it entirely.  The best 
we can hope for is to reduce it to a point where it won’t cripple society as a whole.”
“Perhaps you’re right,” concludes Deirdre, “but the thought of that child in the ­playpen 
still bothers me.”
This dialogue contains numerous analogies and counteranalogies. The modes of 
similarity between the many primary analogues and the secondary analogues (the fetus, 
women who commit fetal abuse, laws against fetal abuse, and so on) are never relevant 
beyond dispute, and the nature and degree of disanalogy rarely has undisputed conse-
quences. However, the dialogue serves to illustrate the subtle effect that analogies have 
on our thought processes and the power they have to alter our attitudes and perspectives.
EXERCISE 9	
	 I.	 Evaluate the arguments from analogy contained in the dialogue between Jason and 
Deirdre. First, identify the primary and secondary analogues in each analogy and 
counteranalogy. Next, list the similarities between the primary and secondary ana-
logues and note their relevance to the conclusion. Add any additional similarities 
you can think of. Finally, identify the disanalogies associated with each ­analogy or 
counteranalogy and evaluate their effectiveness in destroying the ­original analogy.
	II.	 Work the following problems.
 
★1.	 Jessica has long admired Rachel’s near-perfect body, and she notes that Rachel 
works out on a Roboflex exercise machine. Jessica concludes that if she buys a 
Roboflex for herself, she will be able to duplicate Rachel’s results. How do the 
following facts bear on Jessica’s argument?
	
	 a.	 Roboflex recently changed its corporate headquarters from Ohio to Illinois.
	
	 b.	 Jessica and Rachel are siblings.
9
EXERCISES   535
Honey catches more flies 
than vinegar.

	
	 c.	 Rachel is 25 years old, but Jessica is 32.
	
	 d.	 Jessica is 40 pounds overweight, but Rachel was only 10 pounds overweight 
when she started using her Roboflex.
	
	 e.	 Whenever Jessica makes up her mind to do something, she always sticks 
with it longer than Rachel does.
	
	 f.	 Jessica knows of five other women who work out on a Roboflex, and these 
women all look as good as Rachel.
	
	 g.	 These women are all between the ages of 24 and 26.
	
	 h.	 Jessica discovers four additional women between the ages of 31 and 33 who 
work out on a Roboflex, and these women look nearly as good as Rachel.
	
	 i.	 Jessica changes her conclusion to state that she will look almost as good as 
Rachel.
	
	 j.	 Jessica changes her conclusion to state that she will look better than Rachel.
	
2.	 Harold needs to have his rugs cleaned, and his friend Veronica reports that 
Ajax Carpet Service did an excellent job on her rugs. From this, Harold con-
cludes that Ajax will do an equally good job on his rugs. How do the following 
facts bear on Harold’s argument?
	
	 a.	 Veronica hired Ajax several times, and Ajax always did an excellent job.
	
	 b.	 Veronica’s rugs are wool, whereas Harold’s are nylon.
	
	 c.	 Veronica’s carpets never had any stains on them before they were cleaned, 
but Harold’s have several large stains.
	
	 d.	 Veronica always had her rugs cleaned in mid-October, whereas Harold 
wants his done just a week before Easter.
	
	 e.	 Harold knows of six additional people who have had their carpets cleaned 
by Ajax, and all six have been very pleased.
	
	 f.	 All six own rugs made of different materials.
	
	 g.	 All six additional people were born in Massachusetts.
	
	 h.	 Ajax has recently undergone a change in management.
	
	 i.	 The Environmental Protection Agency recently banned the cleaning solu-
tion Ajax has used for many years.
	
	 j.	 Harold changes his conclusion to state that Ajax will get his carpets approx- 
imately as clean as it has gotten Veronica’s.
	
3.	 Kristin is president of a corporation that operates a chain of clothing stores, 
and she faces the task of hiring a manager to replace a man who retired from 
one of the stores. The former manager increased sales by 15 percent every year 
for the past five years. Kristin concludes that Roger Benson, a recent graduate 
of Wharton School of Business, will duplicate the former manager’s perfor-
mance. How do the following facts bear on Kristin’s argument?
9
536   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING

	
	 a.	 The manager who retired was a graduate of Wharton.
	
	 b.	 The manager who retired liked tennis and drove a Jaguar, whereas Benson 
dislikes tennis and drives a BMW.
	
	 c.	 Unlike the manager who retired, Benson formerly managed a shoe store, 
where he increased sales 20 percent for each of the two years he was there.
	
	 d.	 A labor dispute has recently erupted in the store Benson will manage.
	
	 e.	 The manager who retired was an alcoholic, whereas Benson is a moderate 
drinker.
	
	 f.	 The government has approved a 10 percent increase in federal income 
taxes that takes effect at the beginning of the year.
	
	 g.	 Three additional stores owned by Kristin’s company are managed by re-
cent Wharton graduates, and all three managers have increased sales by 
18 ­percent for each of the past three years.
	
	 h.	 These three stores are located in the city’s three wealthiest suburbs.
	
	 i.	 The store Benson will manage is located in a neighborhood that has re-
cently begun to decline.
	
	 j.	 Kristin changes her conclusion to state that Benson will increase sales by at 
least 10 percent for the first year.
	
★4.	 Sam has planned a one-day fishing trip in Alaska. He intends to fish off Rocky 
Point, where he fished last year. Because he caught five fish in a one-day ­outing 
last year, Sam concludes that he will catch five fish this year. How do the fol-
lowing facts bear on Sam’s argument?
	
	 a.	 Last year Sam used a wooden boat, but this year he will use a fiberglass 
boat.
	
	 b.	 Sam used herring for bait last year, but this year he will use anchovies.
	
	 c.	 Sam fished with four friends last year, and each of them caught more than 
five fish on that day.
	
	 d.	 This year Sam will fish on July 15, but last year he fished on August 1.
	
	 e.	 Last year these four friends caught an average of five fish per day from 
July 15 to August 1.
	
	 f.	 These four friends are women.
	
	 g.	 These four friends used various kinds of bait—herring, squid, anchovies, 
and artificial lures.
	
	 h.	 It is now July 12. Yesterday, ten people fished off Rocky Point, and none 
caught any fish.
	
	 i.	 A fleet of commercial fishing boats has been fishing the area near Rocky 
Point for the first time.
	
	 j.	 Sam changes his conclusion to state that he will catch at least one fish.
9
EXERCISES   537

	
5.	 Susan is considering a job as public relations specialist with the Chamber of 
Commerce. Her friend Terry took such a job one year ago, and within nine 
months her annual salary was $50,000. Susan argues that if she takes this job, 
then her annual salary will be at least $50,000 within nine months. How do the 
following facts bear on Susan’s argument?
	
	 a.	 Susan is beautiful and outgoing, whereas Terry is average looking and  
introverted.
	
	 b.	 Susan is a Democrat, but Terry is a Republican.
	
	 c.	 Like Terry, Susan is 5 feet 4 inches tall and has blonde hair.
	
	 d.	 Susan’s parents are elementary school teachers, but Terry’s parents are 
prominent businesspeople.
	
	 e.	 One year ago, Cindy, April, Elizabeth, and Jackie accepted jobs as ­public  
relations specialists with the Chamber of Commerce, and today all are 
earning $44,000.
	
	 f.	 April is a Republican, Cindy is a Democrat, Elizabeth is a Libertarian, and 
Jackie is a member of the Peace and Freedom Party.
	
	 g.	 Cindy, April, Elizabeth, and Jackie are beautiful and outgoing.
	
	 h.	 Susan has five years of experience as a public relations specialist, whereas 
Terry, when she was hired, had only two years of experience in that area.
	
	 i.	 There is a shortage of public relations specialists in the local job pool.
	
	 j.	 Susan changes her conclusion to state that after nine months she will be 
earning at least $47,000.
	
6.	 Paul is searching for a puppy that will grow up to be friendly with his ­children. 
His friend Barbara has an Airedale terrier that is good with her children. From 
this, Paul concludes that an Airedale puppy would make a good choice. How 
do the following facts bear on Paul’s argument?
	
	 a.	 Barbara’s dog is a female, but Paul plans to get a male.
	
	 b.	 Tim, Ed, and Irene have male Airedales that are friendly with their children.
	
	 c.	 Tim’s, Ed’s, and Irene’s dogs all came from the same litter.
	
	 d.	 Fran, Penny, and Bob have Airedales that snap at their children.
	
	 e.	 Fran’s, Penny’s, and Bob’s Airedales all came from different litters.
	
	 f.	 The puppy that Paul plans to get was born in the month of June, just as 
Barbara’s was.
	
	 g.	 The puppy that Paul plans to get is of the same subspecies as Barbara’s ­dog.
	
	 h.	 The puppy that Paul plans to get had a littermate that was vicious and had 
to be destroyed. Barbara’s dog had no such littermates.
	
	 i.	 Paul plans to give his dog special training, but Barbara’s dog received no 
such training.
9
538   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING

	
	 j.	 Paul changes his conclusion to state that if he gets an Airedale puppy, it will 
grow up to at least tolerate children.
	
★7.	 Laura is considering taking Calculus I from Professor Rogers. Her friend Gina 
took Professor Rogers for this class and got an A. Laura concludes that she, 
too, will get an A from Professor Rogers. How do the following facts bear on 
Laura’s argument?
	
	 a.	 Gina earned straight A’s in high school math, whereas Laura got B’s.
	
	 b.	 Laura took precalculus in high school, but Gina took no precalculus class.
	
	 c.	 Laura is a Buddhist, whereas Gina is a Protestant.
	
	 d.	 Kevin, Toni, and Samantha took precalculus in high school, and all of them 
received A’s in Professor Rogers’s Calculus I class.
	
	 e.	 Kevin, Toni, and Samantha all have different majors.
	
	 f.	 Kevin, Toni, and Samantha attended Franklin High School.
	
	 g.	 Laura attended Roosevelt High School.
	
	 h.	 Kevin, Toni, and Samantha took precalculus from different instructors.
	
	 i.	 Laura and Gina earned equal scores on the college math entrance exam.
	
	 j.	 Laura changes her conclusion to state that she will receive an A+ in 
Professor Rogers’s class.
	
8.	 Andrew is thinking about buying stock in E-Tron, a new company that sells 
­electronic equipment over the Internet. Six months ago, he bought shares in  
E-Boot, a new company that sells shoes over the Internet, and the price of the 
stock doubled in two months. Andrew argues that if he buys E-Tron, the stock will 
double in two months. How do the following facts bear on Andrew’s argument?
	
	 a.	 Stocks in Internet companies have been in a steep decline for the past two 
weeks, whereas they were rising six months ago.
	
	 b.	 E-Tron will be run by the same management team that runs E-Boot.
	
	 c.	 During the past year, the stock of five other new companies that sell over 
the Internet doubled within two months of their initial offering.
	
	 d.	 These five companies market Swiss chocolates, tires, appliances, furniture, 
and luggage.
	
	 e.	 A survey was taken of E-Boot customers, and 90 percent said they would 
not consider buying electronic equipment over the Internet.
	
	 f.	 Two other companies that market jewelry and lingerie over the Internet 
have done poorly.
	
	 g.	 Comcast, the most widely used Net service provider, just increased its 
monthly service charge by 50 percent.
	
	 h.	 E-Boot is incorporated in New Jersey, whereas E-Tron is incorporated in 
Delaware.
9
EXERCISES   539

	
	 i.	 E-Boot introduced its products with a major ad campaign, whereas E-Tron 
plans no such campaign.
	
	 j.	 Andrew changes his conclusion to state that E-Tron stock will triple within 
the next two months.
	
9.	 According to the doctrine of adverse possession, a person occupying a piece of 
land in a way that is open, notorious, and hostile to the owner’s rights can claim 
ownership of the land after a certain number of years of continuous ­occupancy. 
In this connection, Dr. Wacko, a mad scientist, hauled telescopes and radio an-
tennas to the top of Mica Peak every night for twenty years to detect extrater-
restrial life. At the end of the period he petitioned the court for a decree stating 
that he owned Mica Peak under the theory of adverse ­possession. Tom Bell, the 
owner of Mica Peak, attempts to defeat Dr. Wacko’s petition.
	
	 	
Construct two arguments, one supporting Dr. Wacko’s position, the other 
supporting Tom Bell’s position. The statutory period for adverse possession in 
this jurisdiction is twenty years, and there are two controlling cases:
Crick v. Hoskins: Crick occupied a house in Centerville that was owned by Hoskins. 
She lived in the house continuously, mowed the lawn weekly, and parked her car 
in front. After twenty years she petitioned the court for a decree stating that 
she owned the property under the theory of adverse possession, and the court 
granted the decree against the objections of Hoskins.
Raymond v. McBride: Raymond set up a large tent on a piece of rural property 
owned by McBride and lived in it for nine months each year. During the remain-
ing three months, heavy snow made the property inaccessible. After twenty years 
Raymond petitioned the court for a decree stating that he owned the property 
under the theory of adverse possession, and the court denied Raymond’s petition.
	 ★10.	 The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibits unreason-
able searches and seizures. A search is defined as a “violation of a person’s 
­reasonable expectation of privacy by the police.” Legal issues dealing with 
searches often turn on the question of whether the person who was searched 
had a reasonable expectation of privacy at the time and place the search was 
­conducted. In this connection, consider the following set of facts. Maxie 
was lining up drug contacts from his cell phone while he was driving on the 
­freeway. Without obtaining a search warrant, federal agents intercepted one of 
his messages and used it to locate Maxie’s car and arrest Maxie. Maxie argues 
that the federal agents violated his reasonable expectation of privacy, and the 
­government denies it.
	
	 	
Your task is to construct two arguments, one supporting Maxie’s position, 
the other supporting the position of the federal agents. There are three con-
trolling cases in this jurisdiction:
U.S. v. Taylor: Federal agents suspected Taylor of illegal distribution of firearms.  
Without obtaining a search warrant, they planted a listening device on the phone 
in Taylor’s home and used the evidence obtained to arrest Taylor. The court ruled 
that their action violated Taylor’s reasonable expectation of privacy and ­disallowed 
the evidence.
9
540   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING

U.S. v. Weber: Without obtaining a search warrant, federal agents operating inside 
U.S. borders intercepted a radio transmission from a plane flying over Mexico. The 
message mentioned drugs, and it disclosed the location of a landing strip inside 
the United States. Using this information, the agents met the plane and arrested its 
pilot for drug smuggling. The court ruled that their action did not violate the pilot’s 
reasonable expectation of privacy.
U.S. v. Robinson: Federal agents were using a telescope to conduct surveillance 
on the resident of a distant apartment building. Inadvertently they noticed some 
teenagers smoking crack in a car parked in the lot near the building, and they 
­proceeded to arrest them. The court ruled that their action did not violate the 
teenagers’ reasonable expectation of privacy.
	
11.	 The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution states that Congress shall make 
no law abridging the freedom of speech or the right to peaceable assembly. 
This “law” applies to states (and cities) as a result of the adoption of the Four-
teenth Amendment. In reliance on the First Amendment, a group of gays and 
lesbians apply for a permit to march on Gay Freedom Day. Similar parades in 
other cities have been calm and orderly, but the police chief denies a parade 
permit to this group.
	
	 	
Construct two arguments, one supporting the position of the group, the 
other supporting the position of the police chief. There are three controlling 
cases in this jurisdiction:
Lester v. City: Police seized an art collection displayed in a public park, because it de-
picted heterosexuals in nude poses. The court ruled that the display was protected 
by the First Amendment.
Byron v. City: Police denied a parade permit to a Nazi group that wanted to march 
on Hitler’s birthday. The court ruled that the denial violated the group’s rights 
under the First Amendment.
Stone v. City: Police closed down a theater showing an erotic gay film, because they 
claimed that the film promoted the spread of AIDS. The court ruled that the action 
of the police was allowed under the First Amendment.
	
12.	 Constructive eviction is a legal doctrine by which a landlord who substantially 
interferes with a tenant’s use and enjoyment of the premises will be considered 
to have evicted the tenant. Such a landlord cannot collect rent from the tenant. 
In this connection, Isabel signed a lease for an apartment owned by Carolyn. A 
clause in the lease stated that all tenants must keep noise to a ­minimum dur-
ing evening hours. After moving in, Isabel found that another tenant played 
his stereo all night long at ear-splitting levels. Carolyn declined to enforce the 
noise clause in the lease. After one week without sleep, Isabel moved out, and 
Carolyn now sues Isabel for rent.
	
	 	
Construct two arguments, one supporting Isabel’s position, the other 
­supporting Carolyn’s. There are two controlling cases in this jurisdiction:
Garvin v. Linder: Linder rented an apartment from Garvin, and the lease stated 
that Garvin would provide heat during the winter. When winter arrived, Garvin 
provided heat for only one hour per day, and the inside temperature sometimes 
9
EXERCISES   541

dropped to 50°F. Linder moved out, and Garvin sued Linder for rent. The court 
ruled in favor of Linder.
Quincy v. Fulton: Fulton rented a tenth-floor apartment from Quincy. Shortly there-
after, Quincy decided to have repairs made on the elevator, causing it to be shut 
down for a month. Because Fulton had arthritis, he had great difficulty climbing 
ten flights of stairs. Fulton moved out, and Quincy sued Fulton for rent. The court 
ruled in favor of Quincy.
	 ★13.	 A negligent person who causes an injury to another person is liable for the 
latter’s injuries. Because it is sometimes very difficult to determine the causal 
extent of a negligent action, courts have developed the theory of proximate 
cause, which limits the scope of liability. In this connection, Liz Shaffer negli-
gently failed to maintain the brakes on her car, and as a result her car crashed 
into one driven by Mary Vassar. Mary was taken to the hospital for bumps and 
bruises, but while she was there, doctors mistakenly amputated her ­perfectly 
healthy leg. Mary sues Liz for loss of her leg.
	
	 	
Construct two arguments, one supporting Mary’s position, the other sup-
porting Liz’s position. The only issue is whether Liz proximately caused the 
loss of the leg. There are two controlling cases in this jurisdiction:
Sacco v. Lane: Lane negligently used gasoline to light his barbecue in a strong wind. 
The flames from the barbecue ignited nearby trees and then spread to ten houses 
in the neighborhood, burning them to the ground. The court ruled that Lane was 
liable for damage to the houses.
Hunt v. Gomez: Hunt was a passenger in a taxi driven by Gomez. Gomez was drunk and 
negligently let Hunt out at the wrong corner.  While Hunt was walking home, a worker 
dropped a brick from a building that was under construction, injuring Hunt. Hunt sued 
Gomez for injury resulting from the falling brick. The court ruled in favor of Gomez.
	
14.	 Lynn Dodd, age twenty, has become a member of New Age Enlightenment, a re-
ligious cult group. The group has convinced Lynn to sell all her worldly posses-
sions and give the proceeds to the group. The group forbids any contact between 
Lynn and her relatives and friends. On one occasion Lynn’s parents encountered 
Lynn on a street corner, and they tried to persuade her to leave the group and 
return home, but she refused. The parents fear that some form of mind control 
is being used to keep Lynn in the group, and they plan a ­rescue operation.
	
	 	
Write a dialogue, similar to the one presented in this chapter, examining the 
morality and legality of such an operation. Include in your dialogue analogies 
between the proposed rescue operation and the following: rescuing an adult 
who has been hypnotized by captors, kidnapping someone against his or her 
will, rescuing a child who has been kidnapped, spiriting away a novice who has 
joined a Jesuit seminary or Franciscan convent, coercing an alcoholic to enter 
a detoxification center, forcing a child to attend a certain school, preventing 
someone from committing suicide, forcing a child to attend a certain church, 
rescuing an eighteen-year-old from a Nazi youth group, removing one’s daugh-
ter from the Girl Scouts, and any other pertinent analogy that comes to mind.
	
15.	 During fifteen years of marriage, James and Leslie Knox had not succeeded in 
having a baby. As a last resort, they tried in vitro fertilization. Doctors surgically 
9
542   CHAPTER 9 ANALOGY AND LEGAL AND MORAL REASONING

removed nine eggs from Leslie and fertilized them with James’s sperm. The 
embryos were then placed in a freezer until the proper time for them to  
be implanted in Leslie’s womb. In the meantime, James and Leslie came to 
realize that their marriage was going nowhere, and they decided to get a 
divorce. The couple has had no trouble arriving at a settlement concerning the 
house, cars, bank accounts, and other possessions, but they cannot agree on 
the disposition of the frozen embryos. James is adamant about not wanting to 
have any children by Leslie, and he wants the embryos destroyed. Leslie, on the 
other hand, realizing that she is getting older, thinks that the frozen embryos 
offer her the best chance of having a baby, and she wants them implanted.
	
	 	
Write a dialogue, similar to the one in this chapter, examining the moral 
and/or legal ramifications of this dispute. Include in your dialogue analogies 
between this situation and the following: killing a fetus, killing a baby, forcing 
your wife to have an abortion, having an abortion against the wishes of your 
husband, owning a dog or cat, owning a child, determining custody of a child 
upon divorce, dividing a bank account, determining ownership of a unique 
and valuable painting produced jointly by two people, implanting an embryo 
in a surrogate mother, and any other analogies that come to mind, including 
analogies that show that the embryos have or do not have rights and analogies 
that illustrate the investment that James and Leslie have in the embryos.
9
	
Summary
Argument from Analogy:
•  An inductive argument that rests on a similarity between two things.
•  The two things that are compared are called analogues.
■
■
Primary analogue: An analogue mentioned in the premise.
■
■
Secondary analogue: The analogue mentioned in the conclusion.
•  Principles for evaluating arguments from analogy:
■
■
Relevance of the similarities
■
■
Number of similarities
■
■
Nature and degree of disanalogy
■
■
Number of primary analogues
■
■
Diversity among the primary analogues
■
■
Specificity of the conclusion
Legal Reasoning:
•  Requirement of precedent: Similar cases are decided similarly.
•  The six principles for evaluating arguments from analogy apply to legal arguments.
Moral Reasoning:
•  Analogies are useful in constructing arguments about moral issues.
Summary   543
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

544
10 
10.1	 “Cause” and Necessary and Sufficient Conditions
10.2	 Mill’s Five Methods
10.3	 Mill’s Methods and Science
10.1	
“Cause” and Necessary  
and Sufficient Conditions
A knowledge of causal connections plays a prominent role in our effort to control the 
environment in which we live. We insulate our homes because we know insulation will 
prevent heat loss, we vaccinate our children because we know vaccination will protect 
them from polio and diphtheria, we practice the piano and violin because we know that 
by doing so we may become proficient on them, and we cook our meat and fish because 
we know that doing so will make them edible.
When the word “cause” is used in ordinary English, however, it is seriously affected 
by ambiguity. For example, when we say that sprinkling water on the flowers will cause 
them to grow, we mean that water is required for growth, not that water alone will do 
the job—sunshine and the proper soil are also required. On the other hand, when we 
say that going for a swim on a hot summer day will cause us to cool off, we mean that 
Causality and Mill’s Methods
544
PREVIEW    Evan picks up his date Maddie at their usual 7:00 p.m. They go to the same restaurant 
as they did the week earlier, and they order the same meals and the same desserts. Later they go for a 
walk on the same beach. But at the end of the evening, Maddie is sullen and dejected, whereas a week 
earlier she was bubbly and joyful. Evan is completely mystified. What happened? Could the answer be 
that during the meal he took a two-minute call on his cell phone from a former girlfriend? The current 
chapter analyzes situations like this.
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

SECTION 10.1 “Cause” and Necessary and Sufficient Conditions   545
10
the swim by itself will do the job; but we understand that other things will work just as 
well, such as taking a cold shower, entering an air-conditioned room, and so on.
To clear up this ambiguity affecting the meaning of “cause,” adopting the language of 
sufficient and necessary conditions is useful. When we say that electrocution is a cause 
of death, we mean “cause” in the sense of sufficient condition. Electrocution is sufficient 
to produce death, but there are other methods equally effective, such as ­poisoning, 
drowning, and shooting. On the other hand, when we say that the presence of clouds 
is a cause of rain, we mean “cause” in the sense of necessary condition. Without clouds, 
rain cannot occur, but clouds alone are not sufficient. Certain combinations of pressure 
and temperature are also required.
Sometimes “cause” is used in the sense of necessary and sufficient condition, as 
when we say that the action of a force causes a body to accelerate or that an increase 
in voltage causes an increase in electrical current. For a body to accelerate, nothing 
more and nothing less is required than for it to be acted on by a net force; and for an 
electrical current to increase through a resistive circuit, nothing more and nothing less 
is required than an increase in voltage.
Thus, as these examples illustrate, the word “cause” can have any one of three differ-
ent meanings:
1.	 Sufficient condition
2.	
Necessary condition
3.	
Sufficient and necessary condition 
Sometimes the context provides an immediate clue to the sense in which “cause” is 
being used. If we are trying to prevent a certain phenomenon from happening, we 
usually search for a cause that is a necessary condition, and if we are trying to pro-
duce a certain phenomenon, we usually search for a cause that is a sufficient condi-
tion. For example, in attempting to prevent the occurrence of smog around cities, 
scientists try to isolate a necessary condition or group of necessary conditions that, 
if removed, will eliminate the smog. And in their effort to produce an abundant 
harvest, farmers search for a sufficient condition that, given sunshine and rainfall, 
will increase crop growth.
Another important point is that whenever an event occurs, at least one sufficient 
condition is present and all the necessary conditions are present. The conjunction of 
the necessary conditions is the sufficient condition that actually produces the event. 
For example, the necessary conditions for lighting a match are heat (produced by strik-
ing) and oxygen. Combining these two necessary conditions gives the sufficient condi-
tion. In other words, striking the match in the presence of oxygen is sufficient to ignite 
it. In cases where the sufficient condition is also a necessary condition, there is only one 
necessary condition, which is identical with the sufficient condition.
We can now summarize the meaning of cause in the sense of a sufficient condition 
and a necessary condition:
A is a sufficient condition for B: A’s occurrence requires B’s occurrence.
A is a necessary condition for B: B’s occurrence requires A’s occurrence.

546   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
According to these statements, if A occurs and B does not occur, then A is not a suf-
ficient condition for B, and if B occurs and A does not occur, then A is not a necessary 
condition for B. Thus:
A is not a sufficient condition for B: A is present when B is absent.
A is not a necessary condition for B: A is absent when B is present.
These results will serve as important rules in the material that follows. 
10.2	
Mill’s Five Methods
In his System of Logic, the nineteenth-century philosopher John Stuart Mill compiled 
five methods for identifying causal connections between events. These he called the 
method of agreement, the method of difference, the joint method of agreement and dif-
ference, the method of residues, and the method of concomitant variation. In the years 
that have elapsed since the publication of Mill’s Logic, the five methods have received a 
good deal of philosophical criticism. Today most logicians agree that the methods fall 
short of the claims made for them by Mill, but the fact remains that the methods func-
tion implicitly in many of the inductive inferences we make in ordinary life.
In addition to criticizing these methods, modern logicians have introduced many 
variations that have multiplied their number beyond the original five. Some of these 
variations have resulted from the fact that Mill himself failed to distinguish causes that 
are sufficient conditions from causes that are necessary conditions. The account that 
follows introduces this distinction into the first three methods, but apart from that, it 
remains faithful to Mill’s own presentation.
Method of Agreement
Suppose that five people eat dinner in a certain restaurant, and a short while later all five 
become sick. Suppose further that these people ordered an assortment of items from 
the menu, but the only food that all of them ordered was vanilla ice cream for ­dessert. 
In other words, all of the dinners were in agreement only as to the ice cream. Such a 
situation suggests that the ice cream caused the sickness. The method of ­agreement 
consists in a systematic effort to find a single factor (such as the ice cream) that is com-
mon to several occurrences for the purpose of identifying that factor as the cause of a 
phenomenon present in the occurrences (such as the sickness).
The method of agreement identifies a cause in the sense of a necessary condition. To 
see how this method works, let us develop the restaurant example a bit further.
Five people eat dinner in a restaurant. Jack has salad, french fries, a hamburger, ice cream, 
and mixed vegetables; Bob has salad, french fries, soup, ice cream, fish, and mixed veg-
etables; Mary has a hamburger, soup, and ice cream; Tim has fish, mixed vegetables, ice 
cream, salad, and soup; and Gail has mixed vegetables, fish, ice cream, french fries, and 
salad. Afterwards, all of them became sick from something they ate. What food caused 
the sickness?

10
Now, since the method of agreement identifies a cause in the sense of a necessary 
condition, we begin by eliminating from this table the conditions that are not neces-
sary for the occurrence of the phenomenon. In doing so, we use the rule that a condi-
tion is not necessary for the occurrence of a phenomenon if that condition is absent 
when the phenomenon is present. Thus, occurrence 1 eliminates condition B and con-
dition E; occurrence 2 eliminates D; occurrence 3 eliminates A, C, E (again), and G;  
occurrence 4 eliminates C (again) and D (again); and occurrence 5 eliminates B (again) 
and D (again). This leaves only F (the ice cream) as a possible necessary condition. The 
conclusion is therefore warranted that the ice cream caused the sickness of the diners.
This conclusion follows only probably for two reasons. First, it is quite possible that 
some condition was overlooked in compiling conditions A through G. For example, if 
the ice cream was served with contaminated spoons, then the sickness of the diners 
could have been caused by that condition and not by the ice cream. Second, if more 
than one of the foods were contaminated (for example, both soup and french fries), 
then the sickness could have been caused by this combination of foods and not by the 
ice cream. Thus, the strength of the argument depends on the nonoccurrence of these 
two possibilities.
It is also important to realize that the conclusion yielded by Table 10.1 applies directly 
only to the five diners represented in the five occurrences, and not to everyone who may 
have eaten in the restaurant. Thus, if some food other than those listed in the table—for 
example, spaghetti—was contaminated, then only if they avoided both spaghetti and ice 
cream could the other diners be assured of not getting sick. But if, among all the foods 
in the restaurant, only the ice cream was contaminated, the ­conclusion would extend to 
the other patrons as well. This last point illustrates the fact that a conclusion reached by 
the method of agreement has limited generality. It applies directly only to those occur-
rences listed, and only indirectly, through a second inductive inference, to others.
Furthermore, because the conclusion yields a cause in the sense of a necessary condi-
tion, it does not assert that anyone who ate the ice cream would get sick. Many people 
SECTION 10.2 Mill’s Five Methods   547
If we let occurrences 1 through 5 stand for Jack, Bob, Mary, Tim, and Gail, respectively, 
and let A through G represent salad, soup, french fries, a hamburger, fish, ice cream, 
and mixed vegetables, respectively, we can construct a table that reflects what these five 
people ate (Table 10.1). In this table an asterisk means that a certain food was eaten, and 
a dash means that it was not eaten.
TABLE 10.1
Possible Necessary Conditions
Phenomenon 
(sickness)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
*
–
*
*
–
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
–
*
*
*
*
3
–
*
–
*
–
*
–
*
4
*
*
–
–
*
*
*
*
5
*
–
*
–
*
*
*
*

548   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
John Stuart Mill 1806–1873
eminentlogicians
J
ohn Stuart Mill, who would become the most  
important English-speaking philosopher of the 
nineteenth century, was born in London to the  
     philosopher and historian James Mill and his wife, 
Harriet Barrow. From a very early age the father took 
charge of his son’s education, imposing on him an un-
usually strict course of studies. The boy began study-
ing Greek at age three; he began Latin, geometry, and 
algebra at eight; and by fourteen he had read most of 
the Latin and Greek classics. Also, by that time he had 
developed a thorough knowledge of history, scholas-
tic and Aristotelian logic, and higher-level mathematics.  
At seventeen he accepted a position with the East  
India Company, a private corporation that virtually 
ruled all of India. He remained there for twenty-five 
years, eventually becoming chief examiner, which put 
him largely in charge of the company.
When he was twenty, Mill suffered an acute attack 
of depression that lasted for several months. Although 
he managed to continue his work, everything seemed 
worthless to him at that time. This condition was most 
likely brought on by the severity of his educational up-
bringing, which had attended to his intellect but left his 
emotional life a desert. Gradually he pulled himself out 
by reading the poetry of William Wordsworth. Four 
years later Mill met Harriet Taylor, with whom he be-
came emotionally but not sexually intimate (she was 
married at that time). Taylor would exert a profound 
influence on him for the rest of his life. After the death 
of her husband, nineteen years after she and Mill first 
met, they were married.
Today John Stuart Mill is widely known for his essay 
“On Liberty” and his book Utilitarianism. The essay is 
a sustained argument in favor of freedom of speech 
and the maximization of individual liberty against 
the strictures of 
government. Utili-
tarianism further 
develops the ethi-
cal theory pro-
moted by James 
Mill and Jeremy 
Bentham. As per-
fected 
by 
John 
Stuart Mill, this 
theory holds that 
we should always 
perform the ac-
tion that produces 
the greatest happiness for the greatest number of 
people. This work was important, among other rea-
sons, for creating an ethical theory that was not based 
on any theology or religion. Mill also wrote extensively 
on women’s rights, and when he was later elected to 
a three-year term in Parliament, he became the first 
member to urge that women receive the right to vote.
Mill’s greatest work was his System of Logic, which 
went through eight editions during his lifetime. In that 
book Mill argues that deductive argumentation, far 
from being the paradigmatic form of reasoning most 
philosophers take it to be, is largely bereft of value 
because it never yields any new knowledge. Also, it is 
essentially dependent on induction. Thus, it is really in-
duction that should be studied as the primary engine 
of scientific discovery.
In 1858 Harriet Taylor died from a lung infection 
while the couple were visiting Avignon, France. Nearly 
inconsolable, Mill bought a house there so he could be 
near her grave. He died in Avignon fifteen years later, 
and his body was buried alongside hers.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division  
[Williams, Sophus/LC-USZ62-76491]

10
have a natural immunity to food poisoning. What the conclusion says is that patrons who 
did not eat the ice cream would not get sick—at least not from the food. Thus, the method 
of agreement has a certain limited use. Basically what it says, in reference to the example, 
is that the ice cream is a highly suspect factor in the sickness of the patrons, and if investi-
gators want to track down the cause of the sickness, this is where they should begin.
An example of an actual use of the method of agreement is provided by the discov-
ery of the beneficial effects of fluoride on teeth. It was noticed several decades ago that 
people in certain communities were favored with especially healthy teeth. In research-
ing the various factors these communities shared, scientists discovered that all had a 
high level of natural fluoride in their water supply. The scientists concluded from this 
evidence that fluoride causes teeth to be healthy.
Method of Difference
For an example of how this method works, let us modify our earlier case of people be-
coming sick from eating food in a restaurant. Instead of five people, suppose that iden-
tical twins, who have identical susceptibilities to food poisoning, go to that restaurant 
for dinner. They both order identical meals except that one orders ice cream for dessert 
while the other does not. The ice cream is the only way that the two meals differ. Later 
the twin who ordered the ice cream gets sick, whereas the other twin does not. The 
natural conclusion is that the ice cream caused the sickness.
The method of difference consists in a systematic effort to identify a single factor 
that is present in an occurrence in which the phenomenon in question is present, and 
absent from an occurrence in which the phenomenon is absent. The method is con-
fined to investigating exactly two occurrences, and it identifies a cause in the sense of 
a sufficient condition. For a clearer illustration of how this method works, let us add a 
few details to the twin example:
A pair of twins, Jane and Jan, have dinner in a restaurant. The twins have identical suscep-
tibilities to food poisoning. Jane orders soup, salad, chicken, carrots, rice, and ice cream. 
Jan orders soup, salad, chicken, carrots, rice, and no ice cream. Later, Jane gets sick from 
something she ate, but Jan does not. What food caused Jane’s sickness?
If we let Jane and Jan stand for occurrences 1 and 2, respectively, and let A stand for 
the specific susceptibility to food poisoning shared by Jane and Jan, and B through G 
stand for soup, salad, chicken, carrots, rice, and ice cream, respectively, we can produce 
Table 10.2. Again, an asterisk indicates that a certain condition is present, and a dash 
indicates it is absent.
TABLE 10.2
Possible Sufficient Conditions
Phenomenon 
(sickness)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
–
–
SECTION 10.2 Mill’s Five Methods   549

550   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
As with the method of agreement, we proceed to eliminate certain conditions, but in 
this case we use the rule that a condition is not sufficient for the occurrence of a phe-
nomenon if it is present when the phenomenon is absent. Accordingly, occurrence 2  
eliminates A, B, C, D, E, and F. This leaves only G as the sufficient condition for the 
phenomenon. Thus, G (ice cream) is the cause of Jane’s sickness.
Since the result yielded by the method of difference applies to only the one 
­occurrence in which the phenomenon is present (in this case, Jane), it is often less 
susceptible to generalization than is the method of agreement, which usually applies 
to several occurrences. Thus, the mere fact that the ice cream may have caused Jane 
to become sick does not mean that it caused other patrons who ate ice cream to get 
sick. Perhaps these other people have a higher resistance to food poisoning than Jane 
or Jan. But given that the others are similar to Jane and Jan in relevant respects, the 
result can often be generalized to cover these others as well. At the very least, if others 
in the restaurant became sick, the fact that the ice cream is what made Jane sick sug-
gests that this is where investigators should begin when they try to explain what made 
the others sick.
The conclusion yielded by the method of difference is only probable, however, even 
for the one occurrence to which it directly applies. The problem is that it is impossible 
for two occurrences to be literally identical in every respect but one. The mere fact that 
two occurrences occupy different regions of space, that one is closer to the wall than the 
other, amounts to a difference. Such differences may be insignificant, but therein lies 
the possibility for error. It is not at all obvious how insignificant ­differences should be 
distinguished from significant ones. Furthermore, it is impossible to make an exhaus-
tive list of all the possible conditions; but without such a list there is no assurance that 
significant conditions have not been overlooked.
The objective of the method of difference is to identify a sufficient condition among 
those that are present in a specific occurrence. Sometimes, however, the absence of a 
factor can count as something positive that must be taken into account. Suppose, for ex-
ample, that both of the twins who dined in the restaurant are allergic to dairy products, 
but they can avoid an allergic reaction by taking Lactaid tablets. Suppose further that 
both twins ordered ice cream for dessert, but only Jan took the tablets. After the meal, 
Jane got sick. We can attribute Jane’s sickness to the absence of the Lactaid.
We can illustrate this situation by modifying Table 10.2 as follows. Let A stand for 
the allergy to dairy products, let B through G stand for the same foods as before, and let 
H stand for Lactaid tablets. Then ~H will stand for the absence of Lactaid (the ­symbol ~ 
means “not”). As before, let occurrence 1 stand for Jane, and occurrence 2 for Jan  
(see Table 10.3).
TABLE 10.3
Possible Sufficient Conditions
Phenomenon 
(sickness)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
~H
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
–
–

10
Using the same rule for elimination as with Table 10.2, we see that occurrence 2 
eliminates A through G as sufficient conditions. This leaves ~H (the absence of Lactaid) 
as the cause of Jane’s sickness. In this case, the ice cream is not identified as the cause, 
because Jan (occurrence 2) ate ice cream (G) but did not get sick.
The method of difference has a wide range of applicability. For example, a farmer 
might fertilize one part of a field but not the other part to test the benefit of using 
fertilizer. If the fertilized part of the crop turns out to be fuller and healthier than the 
nonfertilized part, then the farmer can conclude that the improvement was caused 
by the fertilizer. On the other hand, a cook might leave some ingredient out of a 
batch of biscuits to determine the importance of that ingredient. If the biscuits turn 
out dry and crunchy, the cook can attribute the difference to the absence of that 
ingredient.
Joint Method of Agreement and Difference
To illustrate the joint method, we can once again modify the example of the diners 
who got sick by eating food in a restaurant. In place of the original five diners and 
the pair of twins, suppose that six people eat dinner in the restaurant. Among the first 
three, suppose that a variety of meals are eaten but that only ice cream is consumed 
by all, and later all three get sick. And among the other three, suppose that a variety 
of meals are eaten but that none of these diners eats any ice cream, and later none of 
them gets sick. The conclusion is warranted that the ice cream is what made the first 
three diners sick.
The joint method of agreement and difference consists of a systematic effort to 
identify a single condition that is present in two or more occurrences in which the 
phenomenon in question is present and that is absent from two or more occurrences 
in which the phenomenon is absent. In addition, the condition must never be pres-
ent when the phenomenon is absent nor absent when the phenomenon is present. 
Stated briefly, the occurrence/nonoccurrence of the condition matches the occurrence/
nonoccurrence of the phenomenon. When the phenomenon is present, so is the condi-
tion, and when the phenomenon is absent, so is the condition. This condition is then 
taken to be the cause of the phenomenon in the sense of a necessary and sufficient 
condition. To see more clearly how this method works, let us add some details to the 
example:
Six people eat dinner in a restaurant. Liz has soup, a hamburger, ice cream, french fries, 
and mixed vegetables. Tom has salad, soup, fish, mixed vegetables, and ice cream. Andy 
has salad, a hamburger, french fries, and ice cream. Sue has french fries, a hamburger, and 
salad. Meg has fish and mixed vegetables. Bill has french fries, a hamburger, and soup. Later 
Liz, Tom, and Andy get sick from something they ate, but Sue, Meg, and Bill do not. What 
food made the first three diners sick?
Let occurrences 1 through 6 stand for Liz, Tom, Andy, Sue, Meg, and Bill, respectively. 
And let A through G stand for salad, soup, a hamburger, fish, ice cream, french fries, and 
mixed vegetables (see Table 10.4).
SECTION 10.2 Mill’s Five Methods   551

552   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
TABLE 10.4
Possible Necessary or Sufficient Conditions
Phenomenon 
(sickness)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
–
*
*
–
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
–
*
*
–
*
*
3
*
–
*
–
*
*
–
*
4
*
–
* 
–
–
*
–
–
5
–
–
–
*
–
–
*
–
6
–
*
*
–
–
*
–
–
In the first three occurrences the phenomenon is present, so we proceed by elimi-
nating possible necessary conditions. Using the rule that a condition is not necessary  
if it is absent when the phenomenon is present, occurrence 1 eliminates A and D, 
occurrence 2 eliminates C and F, and occurrence 3 eliminates B, D (again), and G. This 
leaves only E as the necessary condition. Next, in the last three occurrences the phe-
nomenon is absent, so we use the rule that a condition is not sufficient if it is present 
when the phenomenon is absent. Occurrence 4 eliminates A, C, and F; occurrence 5 
eliminates D and G; and occurrence 6 eliminates B, C (again), and F (again). This leaves 
only E as the sufficient condition. Thus, condition E (ice cream) is the cause in the sense 
of both a necessary and sufficient condition of the sickness of the first three diners.
Since the joint method yields a cause in the sense of both a necessary and sufficient 
condition, it is usually thought to be stronger than either the method of agreement by 
itself, which yields a cause in the sense of a necessary condition, or the method of differ-
ence by itself, which yields a cause in the sense of a sufficient condition. However, when 
any of these methods is used as a basis for a subsequent inductive generalization, the 
strength of the conclusion is proportional to the number of occurrences that are included. 
Thus, an application of the method of agreement that included, say, one hundred occur-
rences might offer stronger results than an application of the joint method that included, 
say, only six occurrences. By similar reasoning, multiple applications of the method of 
difference might offer stronger results than a single application of the joint method.
As with the other methods, the conclusion yielded by the joint method is only prob-
able because some relevant condition may have been overlooked in producing the table. 
If, for example, both salad and soup were contaminated, then the ice cream could not 
be identified as a necessary condition for the sickness, and if one of the last three diners 
was naturally immune, then the ice cream could not be identified as a sufficient condi-
tion. Obviously the attempt to extend the results of this example to other patrons of the 
restaurant who may have gotten sick is fraught with other difficulties.
Lastly, we note that even though the name of the joint method suggests that it results 
from a mere combination of the method of agreement with the method of difference, this 
is not the case. Such a combination would consist of one occurrence in which the phe-
nomenon is present, one occurrence in which the phenomenon is absent and which differs 
from the former occurrence as to only one condition, and one occurrence in which the 
phenomenon is present and which agrees with the first occurrence in only one condition. 

10
However, according to Mill, the joint method requires “two or more” occurrences in which 
the phenomenon is present, and “two or more” occurrences in which the phenomenon is 
absent.* His further description of the method accords with the foregoing account.
Method of Residues
This method and the one that follows are used to identify a causal connection between 
two conditions without regard for the specific kind of connection. Both methods may 
be used to identify conditions that are sufficient, necessary, or both sufficient and nec-
essary. The method of residues consists of separating from a group of causally con-
nected conditions and phenomena those strands of causal connection that are already 
known, leaving the required causal connection as the “residue.” Here is an example:
After occupying his new house Mr. Smith found it drafty. He traced the source of the 
draft to three conditions: a broken window in the garage, a crack under the front door, 
and a broken damper in the fireplace. When the window was replaced he noticed an 
improvement, and a further improvement when weather stripping was installed on the 
door. He concluded that the draft that remained was caused by the broken damper in 
the fireplace.
The method of residues as illustrated in this example may be diagramed as follows:
A B C
causes a b c.
A causes a.
B causes b.
Therefore, C causes c.
In reference to the draft example, A  B C  is the combination of possible conditions pro-
ducing   a  b  c , the total draft. When A (the broken window) is separated out, it is found 
to cause a (a portion of the draft). When B (the crack) is separated out, it is found to cause 
b (another portion of the draft). The conclusion is that C (the broken damper) causes c 
(the remaining portion of the draft). The conclusion follows only probably because it is 
quite possible that a fourth source of the draft was overlooked. Here is another example:
After realizing a loss of $100,000, a department store’s chief accountant could suggest 
only three causes: an excessive number of clerks, increases in utility rates, and damage to 
merchandise caused by a flood. These expenses were estimated at $25,000, $30,000, and 
$10,000, respectively. Since no other ordinary sources could be found, the accountant 
attributed the remaining $35,000 to shoplifting.
In this case A  B  C  D is the combination of conditions consisting of the number of 
clerks, the utility rate increases, the flood, and shoplifting; and a  b  c  d  is the total loss 
of $100,000. After A, B, and C are separated out, the conclusion is that D (shoplifting) 
caused d (the remaining loss). Because the estimates might have been incorrect and  
because additional sources of financial loss might have been overlooked, the ­conclusion 
is only probable.
*A System of Logic, Book 3, Chapter 8, Sect. 4, Third Canon.
SECTION 10.2 Mill’s Five Methods   553

554   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
Some procedures that, at least on the face of it, appear to use the method of residues 
come closer to being deductive than inductive. A case in point is the procedure used 
to determine the weight of the cargo carried by a truck. First, the empty truck is put on 
a scale and the weight recorded. Then the truck is loaded and the truck together with 
the cargo is put on the same scale. The weight of the cargo is the difference between the 
two weights. If, to this procedure, we add the rather unproblematic assumptions that 
weight is an additive property, that the scale is accurate, that the scale operator reads the 
indicator properly, that the truck is not altered in the loading process, and a few others, 
the conclusion about the weight of the cargo follows deductively.
To distinguish deductive from inductive uses of the method of residues, we must 
take into account such factors as the role of mathematics. If the conclusion depends 
on a purely arithmetical computation, the argument is probably best characterized as 
deductive. If not, then it is probably inductive.
Method of Concomitant Variation
The method of concomitant variation identifies a causal connection between two 
conditions by matching variations in one condition with variations in another. Accord-
ing to one formulation, increases are matched with increases and decreases with de-
creases. Example:
In attempting to diagnose Mrs. Thompson’s high blood pressure, a cardiologist noticed a 
correlation between fluctuations in blood pressure and certain brain waves. As the blood 
pressure increased, so did the intensity of the brain waves, and as the blood pressure 
decreased, the intensity of the brain waves decreased. The cardiologist concluded that 
the two conditions were causally related.
The method of concomitant variation as illustrated in this example may be diagrammed 
as follows:
A B C
is coincident with X Y Z .
A B C
is coincident with
X Y Z.
A B C
is coincident with
X Y Z.
Therefore, B is causally connected to Y.
Here, A B C  is a set of observable conditions such as cholesterol level, liver function, 
and basal metabolism, with B representing blood pressure; and X Y Z  is another set 
of observable conditions with Y representing certain brain waves. In the second and 
third rows, B+ and B− represent increases and decreases in blood pressure, and Y+ and 
Y− represent increases and decreases in the intensity of the brain waves. The conclusion 
asserts that either B causes Y, Y causes B, or B and Y have a common cause. Determining 
which is the case requires further investigation; of course, if B occurs earlier in time than 
Y, then Y does not cause B, and if Y occurs earlier in time than B, then B does not cause Y.
The blood pressure example matches increases in one condition with increases in 
another. For an example that matches increases in one condition with decreases in an-
other, consider the following:

10
A sociologist studying divorce noticed a correlation between changes in the national di-
vorce rate and fluctuations in the gross domestic product (GDP). As the GDP increases, 
the divorce rate decreases, and when the GDP sags, the divorce rate goes up. The soci-
ologist concluded that the two phenomena are causally connected.
This second version of the method of concomitant variation may be diagramed  
as follows:
A B C
is coincident with X Y Z .
is coincident with
is coincident with
Therefore, B is causally connected to Y.
X Y Z.
X Y Z.
A B C
A B C
In this example    A B C  is a set of economic conditions such as stock-exchange in-
dexes, interest rates, and commodity prices, with B representing gross domestic prod-
uct; and     X Y Z  is a set of social conditions such as birthrates, employment rates, and 
immigration numbers, with Y representing the national divorce rate. The conclusion 
is that B is somehow causally connected to Y. However, in this example an even stron-
ger conclusion could probably be drawn—namely, that decreases in the GDP cause 
increases in the divorce rate, and not conversely. That changes in economic prosperity 
(which is indicated by GDP) should affect the divorce rate is quite plausible, but the 
converse is less so.
At this point we should note that the existence of a mere correlation between two 
phenomena is never sufficient to identify a causal connection. In addition, the caus-
al connection suggested by the correlation must at least make sense. Consider the  
following example:
After an in-depth study, researchers discovered a correlation between the price of pork-
belly futures on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and earthquake activity in Japan. As 
the number and intensity of the quakes increased, the futures prices also increased, and 
vice versa. The researchers concluded that the two phenomena were causally connected.
The argument is clearly weak. Because it is virtually inconceivable that either phenom-
enon could cause a change in the other, or that changes in both could have a common 
cause, it is most likely that the correlation is purely coincidental.
The method of concomitant variation is useful when it is impossible for a condi-
tion to be either wholly present or wholly absent, as was required for the use of the 
first three of Mill’s methods. Many conditions are of this sort—for example, the tem-
perature of the ocean, the price of gold, the incidence of crime, the size of a mountain 
glacier, a person’s cholesterol level, and so on. If some kind of correlation can be 
detected between variations in conditions such as these, the method of concomitant 
variation asserts that the two are causally connected. The method has been used suc-
cessfully in the past to help establish the existence of causal connections between 
smoking and lung cancer, nuclear radiation and leukemia, and alcohol consumption 
and cirrhosis of the liver.
SECTION 10.2 Mill’s Five Methods   555

556   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
10.3	
Mill’s Methods and Science
Mill’s methods closely resemble certain scientific methods that are intended to es-
tablish causal connections and correlations. For example, the method of difference is 
virtually identical to the method of controlled experiment employed in such fields as 
biology, pharmacology, and psychology. A controlled experiment is one that involves 
two groups of subjects: an experimental group and a control group. The experimental 
group includes the subjects that receive a certain treatment, and the control group in-
cludes the subjects that do not receive the treatment but are otherwise subjected to the 
same conditions as the experimental group.
The simplest type of controlled experiment involves an experimental group and a 
control group each consisting of just one member. Example:
Two mice were used in a controlled experiment to determine whether a certain 
substance was carcinogenic. The two mice had identical genes, were the same age, 
were placed in identical cages in the same location, were subjected to the same en-
vironmental conditions, and were fed the same food over the same period of time. 
One mouse was injected with the suspected carcinogen, and the other was not. After 
two months, the injected mouse developed cancerous tumors but the other mouse 
did not.
To summarize the results of this experiment we can construct a table just like the one 
for the method of difference. If we let occurrence 1 represent the injected mouse and 
occurrence 2 the mouse that was not injected, and let A through F represent the condi-
tions common to the two mice (genes, age, cage, etc.) and G represent the injection, we 
have Table 10.5. Using the rule that a condition is not sufficient if it is present when the 
phenomenon is absent, occurrence 2 eliminates A through F, leaving G (the ­suspected 
carcinogen) as the cause of the phenomenon.
TABLE 10.5
Possible Sufficient Conditions
Phenomenon  
(tumors)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
–
–
The principal drawback of this experiment is that the suspected carcinogen was 
given to only one mouse. As a result, the experiment offers relatively weak evidence 
that any mouse injected with this substance would develop tumors. Perhaps the in-
jected mouse had some hidden defect that would have caused tumors even without 
the injection. Scientists address this problem by increasing the size of the experimental 
group and the control group. Thus, suppose the same experiment were performed on 
100 mice, of which 50 were injected and 50 were not. Suppose that after two months all 
50 injected mice developed tumors and none of the control subjects did. Such a result 
would constitute much stronger evidence that the injected substance was carcinogenic.

10
SECTION 10.3 Mill’s Methods and Science   557
This expanded experiment can be considered to be a case of multiple uses of Mill’s 
method of difference. Since the method of difference always involves just two occur-
rences, mouse #1 could be matched with mouse #51 for one use of the method, mouse #2  
with mouse #52 for a second use of the method, and so on. Although this expanded 
experiment might look like a case of the joint method, it is not (at least not a success-
ful one). Any successful application of the joint method includes occurrences in which 
certain conditions are absent when the phenomenon is present. Those conditions are 
then eliminated as possible necessary conditions. The expanded experiment with the 
mice includes no such occurrences.
This fact points to an important difference between Mill’s joint method and his 
method of difference. The purpose of the method of difference is to determine whether 
a preselected condition is the cause of a phenomenon. This preselected condition is 
present in one of the two occurrences and absent from the other. On the other hand, the 
purpose of the joint method is to determine which condition, among a selected class of 
conditions, is a cause of a phenomenon. The joint method applies rules for sufficient 
conditions and necessary conditions to (one hopes) reduce the class of conditions to 
just one.
Returning to the expanded experiment with the mice, let us suppose that only 
forty of the mice in the experimental group developed tumors, and none of those 
in the control group did. From Mill’s standpoint, this would be equivalent to forty 
uses of the method of difference yielding positive results and ten yielding negative 
results. On the basis of such an outcome, the experimenter might conclude that the 
likelihood of the suspected carcinogen producing tumors in mice was 80 percent  
(40 ÷ 50).
Controlled experiments such as the one involving 100 mice are often conducted on 
humans, but with humans it is never possible to control the circumstances to the degree 
that it is with mice. Humans cannot be put in cages or fed exactly the same food for any 
length of time, they are not genetically identical to other humans, and so forth. Also, 
humans react to their environment in ways that cannot be anticipated or controlled. To 
correct this deficiency, statistical methods are applied to the results to enable the draw-
ing of a conclusion.
For example, an experiment could be conducted to test the effectiveness of 
some new drug on children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).  
Fifty children with ADHD could be selected, with twenty-five being placed at random 
in the experimental group and twenty-five in the control group. The children in the  
experimental group would be given the drug, probably in a classroom situation, and 
the children in the control group would be given a placebo (sugar pill). This could be 
done on a “double blind” basis, so that neither the children nor the people conducting 
the experiment would know in advance who was getting the drug. The objective is to 
control the conditions as much as possible. Then the negative behavior of each of the 
fifty children would be recorded over a period, say, of an hour. Each time a child was out 
of his or her seat, disturbed others, fidgeted, failed to follow instructions, and so forth, 
the incident would be noted.
The results of such an experiment would be expected to follow what is called a 
normal probability distribution (bell-shaped curve). (Further discussion of normal  

558   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
Number of children
Number of negative behaviors
Experimental
group
Control
group
Figure 10.1
probability distribution is presented in Chapter 12.) One curve would represent the 
experimental group, another curve the control group. Assuming the drug is effective, 
the two curves would be displaced from one another, but they would probably overlap 
in part, as indicated in Figure 10.1. This means that certain children in the experimen-
tal group exhibited more negative behaviors than certain children in the control group, 
but most of the children in the experimental group exhibited fewer negative behaviors 
than most of the children in the control group. Then statistical methods would be 
applied to the two curves to determine the effectiveness of the drug. Such an experi-
ment is similar to Mill’s method of difference except that instead of the phenomenon 
(negative behavior) being wholly present in some occurrences, it is present in varying 
degrees. In this sense, the experiment resembles the method of concomitant variation.
In some kinds of scientific research on humans, controlling the circumstances to any 
significant degree is nearly impossible. Such research includes investigations that cover 
a long period or investigations in which the health of the subjects is at issue and legal or 
moral restrictions come into play. Example:
A nutritionist wanted to determine the effect of fifteen vitamin and mineral ­supplements 
on atherosclerosis (artery disease). Because the effect was expected to require several 
years to develop, the nutritionist ran an ad in a health publication for individuals who had 
ingested these substances on a regular basis for five years. Eighty people answered the 
ad and reported which substances they had taken and how much of each. These people 
were then examined. Some showed no evidence of the disease, while others manifested 
the disease in varying degrees. After analyzing the data, the nutritionist concluded that 
certain vitamins and minerals offer protection against atherosclerosis.
The procedure followed by the nutritionist is very similar to Mill’s joint method 
of agreement and difference. The objective is to identify a cause among a preselected  
class of possible conditions, some of which are accompanied by the phenomenon  
(atherosclerosis), and some of which are not. The major difference between the nu-
tritionist’s procedure and Mill’s joint method is that the nutritionist took account of 
© Cengage Learning

10
varying degrees in which the conditions and the phenomenon were present in the 
eighty occurrences. In this sense, again, the nutritionist’s procedure was similar to Mill’s 
method of concomitant variation. However, the nutritionist may also have taken into 
account various combinations of conditions, a consideration that lies beyond the power 
of the joint method by itself.
The procedure illustrated in this example is not an experiment but a study. More 
precisely, it is a retrospective study because it examines subjects who have already ful-
filled the requirements of the examination—as opposed to a prospective study, where 
the subjects are expected to fulfill the requirements in the future. For a prospective 
study, the nutritionist could select a group of subjects and follow their future vitamin 
and mineral intake for five years. Such a study, however, would be more costly, and if the 
nutritionist instructed the subjects to ingest certain vitamins and minerals and avoid 
others, the study could involve legal or moral implications.
Another kind of study found widely in the social sciences uses what is called the  
correlational method, which closely replicates Mill’s method of concomitant variation. 
Example:
A psychology professor was interested in the relationship between IQ scores and grade 
point average. The professor randomly selected 100 graduating seniors, obtained their 
GPAs from the registrar, and asked them to take an IQ test. All of them complied. Then 
the professor compared the scores of each student with his or her GPA. The professor 
found that, in general, higher IQ scores corresponded with higher GPAs.
The results of this study indicate a positive correlation between IQ score and GPA. 
If the study showed that students with higher IQs had, in general, lower GPAs, this 
would indicate a negative correlation. Once a study of this sort is done, the next step 
is to compute the correlation coefficient, which is a number between +1.00 and −1.00 
that expresses the degree of correlation. If it turned out that the student with the high-
est IQ score also had the highest GPA, the student with the next highest IQ score had 
­proportionately the next highest GPA, and so on, so that the IQ–GPA graph was a 
straight line, then the correlation coefficient would be +1.00. This would reflect a 
­perfect positive correlation.
On the other hand, if it turned out that the student with the highest IQ score had the 
lowest GPA, the student with the next highest IQ score had proportionately the next 
lowest GPA, and so on, so that, once again, the IQ–GPA graph was a straight line, then 
the correlation coefficient would be −1.00. This would reflect a perfect negative cor-
relation. A correlation coefficient of 0.00 would mean that no correlation exists, which 
would be the case if the IQ scores corresponded randomly with the GPAs. A correlation 
coefficient of, say, +0.60 would mean that in general higher IQ scores ­corresponded 
positively with higher GPAs.
The outcome of this study can also be indicated graphically, with IQ score repre-
senting one coordinate on a graph, and GPA the other coordinate. The result for each 
student would then correspond to a point on the graph, such as the one in Figure 10.2.  
The graph of all the points is called a scatter diagram. A line that “best fits” the 
data can then be drawn through the scatter diagram. This line is called the regression 
line, and it can be used to produce a linear equation, y = bx + a, that describes the  
SECTION 10.3 Mill’s Methods and Science   559

560   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
GPA
IQ score
Correlation
coeﬃcient ≅ +0.60
y = bx + a
Regression line
x
y
Figure 10.2
approximate relation between IQ score (x) and GPA (y). This equation can then be used 
to predict future GPAs. For example, suppose that an entering freshman student has an 
IQ of 116. This student’s future GPA could be predicted to be approximately 116b + a.
Hundreds of studies such as this one have been conducted to detect correlations 
between such factors as TV violence and aggression in children, self-esteem and intel-
ligence, motivation and learning time, exposure to classical music and retention ability, 
and marijuana use and memory. However, such studies often fall short of establishing a 
causal connection between the two factors. For example, a positive correlation between 
exposure to TV violence and aggression in children does not necessarily mean that 
exposure to TV violence causes aggression. It might be the case that children who tend 
to be violent are naturally attracted to violent TV shows. Or perhaps a third factor is the 
cause of both. But a positive correlation can at least suggest a causal connection.
Once a correlation is established, a controlled experiment can often be designed that 
will identify a causal connection. For example, in the case of TV violence, a group of 
children could be randomly divided into an experimental group and a control group. 
The experimental group could then be exposed to violent TV shows for a certain pe-
riod, and the control group would be exposed to nonviolent shows for the same period. 
Later, the behavior of the children in both groups could be observed, with every act of 
aggression noted. If the experimental group displayed more acts of aggression than the 
control group, the conclusion might be drawn that TV violence causes aggression.
Experimental procedures resembling Mill’s method of concomitant variation have 
also been used in the physical sciences to identify causal connections. For example, in 
the early part of the nineteenth century, Hans Christian Oerstead noticed that a wire 
carrying a current of electricity could deflect a nearby compass needle. As the current 
was increased, the amount of deflection increased, and as the current was decreased, 
the amount of deflection decreased. Also, if the current were reversed, the deflection 
would be reversed. Oerstead concluded that a current of electricity flowing through a 
wire causes a magnetic field to be produced around the wire.
Other applications of the method of concomitant variation have been used not so 
much to detect the existence of a causal connection (which may have already been 
known) as to determine the precise nature of a causal law. For example, in the latter 
part of the sixteenth century Galileo performed experiments involving spheres rolling 
© Cengage Learning

10
down inclined planes. As the plane was incrementally lifted upward, the sphere covered 
greater and greater distances in a unit of time. Recognizing that the downward force 
on the sphere is proportional to the pitch of the plane, Galileo derived the law that the 
acceleration imparted to a body is directly proportional to the force acting on it. Galileo  
also noticed that whatever the angle of the plane, the distance covered by the ball in-
creased exponentially with the time in which it was allowed to roll. For example, if the 
time was doubled, the distance was quadrupled. From this correlation he derived the 
law that the distance traveled by a falling body is proportional to the square of the time 
that it falls.
In the seventeenth century, Robert Boyle conducted experiments involving the 
pressure and volume of gases. Boyle constructed an apparatus that allowed him to 
compute the volume of a gas as he varied the pressure. He noted that as the pressure 
increased, the volume decreased, and as the pressure decreased, the volume increased. 
From this correlation he derived the law that the volume of a gas is inversely propor-
tional to its pressure. A century later, Jacques Alexandre Charles observed a correla-
tion between the temperature of a gas and its volume. As the temperature increased, 
the volume increased, and vice versa. This correlation provided the basis for Charles’s 
law for gases.
Detecting correlations has also been important in astronomy. Early in the twen-
tieth century, Henrietta Swan Leavitt recognized a correlation between the average 
brightness of certain variable stars, called Cepheids (pronounced sef ʹ-ee-ids), and their  
periods of variation. Cepheids fluctuate in brightness over periods ranging from a day 
to several months, and Leavitt discovered that longer periods correspond with greater 
average brightness, and shorter periods with lesser average brightness. Once the dis-
tance of a few nearby Cepheids was determined, the distance of any Cepheid could 
then be computed from its average brightness and its period of variation. This cor-
relation provided the first method available to astronomers for measuring the distance 
between our planet and galaxies other than our own.
EXERCISE 10	
	 I.	 Identify the kind of causality intended by the following statements. Is the cause 
a sufficient condition, necessary condition, or both sufficient and necessary  
condition?
	
★1.	 Throwing a brick through a window will cause the window to break.
	
2.	 Heating an iron rod causes it to expand.
	
3.	 Slashing an inflated automobile tire with a knife will cause it to go flat.
 
★4.	 Releasing the shutter of a digital camera causes an image to appear on the  
sensor.
	
5.	 Pulling the trigger of a gun causes it to fire.
	
6.	 Wetting litmus paper with an acid causes it to turn red.
EXERCISES   561

562   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
	
★7.	 Pouring water on a wood fire will cause it to be extinguished.
	
8.	 Eating contaminated food will cause one to become ill.
	
9.	 Stretching a spring causes it to exert an opposing force.
	 ★10.	 Flipping the wall switch to the “up” position causes the overhead lights to 
go on.
	II.	 The following problems pertain to Mill’s methods. Answer each as directed.
	
★1.	 To determine the effectiveness of an oil additive, a testing firm purchased two 
cars of the same make, year, and model, and drove each a distance of 30,000 
miles using the same kind of gasoline, the same kind of oil, the same driver, 
under the same road conditions. The oil in one engine included the additive, 
whereas the oil in the other engine did not. At the end of the test, the engines of 
both cars were dismantled, and it was found that the engine that contained the 
additive had less wear. The testing firm concluded that the oil additive caused 
the reduced wear. Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which one 
of Mill’s methods did the testing firm use? What sense of causality is involved 
in the conclusion?
	
2.	 An eighth-grade teacher had five pupils who read very well. These pupils were 
distinguished by the following features. Tom came from a large family, had pro-
fessional parents who were not wealthy, had training in phonics, read novels,  
lived close to a library, and watched educational TV. Andy came froma family 
that was not large, had wealthy professional parents, watched educational TV, 
did not live close to a library, did not read novels, and had training in phonics. 
Cindy did not read novels, lived close to a library, had training in phonics, had 
wealthy professional parents, came from a large family, and did not watch edu-
cational TV. April had training in phonics, read novels, lived close to a library, 
watched educational TV, came from a large family, and had wealthy parents 
who were not professionals. Joe read novels, did not live close to a library, had 
professional parents who were not wealthy, had training in phonics, watched 
educational TV, and came from a large family. What can the teacher conclude 
caused these children to be good readers? Construct a table that supports this 
conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the teacher use? What sense of 
causality is involved in the conclusion?
	
3.	 An administrator for the Internal Revenue Service noticed that tax revenues 
for a certain year were down by 14 percent. Of this amount, the administrator 
attributed 6 percent to an economic slowdown that year, 3 percent to higher 
interest rates that led to higher write-offs, and 2 percent to changes in the tax 
code. Unable to attribute the remaining 3 percent to any lawful factor, the ad-
ministrator concluded that it resulted from increased cheating by the taxpay-
ers. Which one of Mill’s methods did the administrator use?
	
★4.	 The repair manager for a manufacturer of desktop computers noticed that a 
large number of units were being returned for repairs. The manager selected 
a sample of seven returned units and noticed that these units were distin-
guished by the following characteristics. Units 1 and 3 had type X circuitry 
562   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods

10
and were shipped to coastal regions. Units 2 and 7 were sold to business cus-
tomers, were manufactured in the Kansas City plant, and were shipped to 
coastal regions. Units 4 and 5 were used to play computer games and were 
manufactured in the Kansas City plant. Units 6 and 7 were shipped to large cit-
ies and had type X circuitry. Unit 4 was shipped to a large coastal city. Units 2 
and 3 were shipped to large cities. Unit 5 was shipped to a coastal region and 
had type X circuitry. Unit 3 was sold to a business customer who used it to 
play computer games. Unit 1 was used to play computer games and was manu-
factured in the Kansas City plant. Finally, Unit 6 was sold to a business cus-
tomer in a coastal region. Among these six distinguishing characteristics the 
manager concluded that salty air caused the computers to break down. Con-
struct a table that supports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did 
the manufacturer use? What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
	
5.	 A manufacturer of fishing equipment conducted a test of its products by giv-
ing them to eight fishermen who used them with the following results. Ed 
and Flo used a Hot Spot lure and caught no fish. Dan and Amy used a Trusty 
rod with a Husky reel, and Amy caught fish but Dan did not. Jake used a Sure 
Catch lure, a Best Bet rod, a Spiffy reel, and caught fish. Bill and Tim used a 
Husky reel, but only Bill caught fish. Kat used a Best Bet rod with a Husky reel 
and caught fish. Amy and Kat used a Sure Catch lure, but only Kat used mono-
filament line. Bill used a Trusty rod, monofilament line, and a Sure Catch lure. 
Flo and Tim used Best Bet rods, and both Tim and Dan used Dynamite lures. 
Finally, Flo used a Husky reel, Jake and Dan used monofilament line, and Ed 
used a Spiffy reel on a Trusty rod. What conclusion can the manufacturer draw 
about the power of this equipment to catch fish? Construct a table that sup-
ports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the manufacturer use? 
What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
	
6.	 Nancy was contemplating the purchase of a new oven for her kitchen, but she 
could not decide between an electric or a gas unit. Thus, she decided to con-
duct an experiment using the ovens—one gas, one electric—of two friends 
who live in adjoining apartments. She mixed up two identical batches of 
brownies under identical conditions of relative humidity and identical alti-
tudes, put them into identical baking dishes, and cooked them at the same 
temperature for exactly the same time. The brownies cooked in the electric 
oven came out moist, while the brownies cooked in the gas oven came out 
relatively dry. Nancy concluded that baking in the electric oven caused the 
brownies to be moist. Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which 
one of Mill’s methods did Nancy use? What sense of causality is involved in 
the conclusion?
	
★7.	 Mrs. Wilkins sometimes has trouble sleeping. In order to determine the cause, 
she decided to take note of her pre-bedtime behavior over the course of a 
week. On Monday she drank chamomile tea, had a late dinner, took a hot bath, 
read from a book, took a walk, and slept well. On Tuesday she had a late din-
ner, read from a book, and slept poorly. On Wednesday she drank a glass of 
wine, got a massage, took a walk, and slept poorly. On Thursday she had a late 
EXERCISES   563

564   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
dinner, drank a glass of wine, read from a book, took a hot bath, got a massage, 
and slept well. On Friday she read from a book, drank chamomile tea, got a 
massage, had a late dinner, took a walk, and slept well. On Saturday she drank 
a glass of wine, got a massage, took a walk, drank chamomile tea, took a hot 
bath, and slept well. On Sunday she read from a book, took a hot bath, drank 
chamomile tea, and slept poorly. What can Mrs. Wilkins conclude is the cause 
of sleeping well? Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which one of 
Mill’s methods did Mrs. Wilkins use? What sense of causality is involved in the 
conclusion?
	
8.	 From a comparison of statistics a criminologist detected what he thought was 
a correlation between fluctuations in the employment rate and in crimes of 
theft. For every 2 percent increase in the employment rate, the rate of theft 
decreased by 1 percent, and for every 2 percent decrease in the employment 
rate, the theft rate increased by 1 percent. The criminologist concluded that 
unemployment causes crimes of theft. Which one of Mill’s methods did the 
criminologist use?
	
9.	 A man developed an allergic reaction to an unknown food. His doctor asked 
him about foods that often cause allergic reactions, and the man replied that 
he had eaten coconut, chocolate, nuts, milk products, shellfish, peppers, eggs, 
and wheat products prior to suffering the reaction. The doctor told him to 
eliminate all of these foods from his diet; when he had done so, the reaction 
disappeared. The doctor then told him to introduce each of these foods back 
into his diet, one at a time. The man did so, and the reaction reappeared only 
when he ate milk products. The doctor concluded that milk products caused 
the allergic reaction. Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which 
one of Mill’s methods did the doctor use? What sense of causality is involved 
in the conclusion?
	 ★10.	 A psychiatrist had six adult women patients who suffered blurred ego bound-
aries. These patients were distinguished by the following characteristics. Meg 
and Sue had been subjected to corporal punishment as children and both had 
siblings. Dot and Jane were adopted, had a male parent ­figure, and experienced 
sexual abuse. Lynn and Flo had siblings and a male ­parent figure, but only Flo 
had a domineering mother. Also, Lynn and Meg had experienced sexual abuse 
and were adopted, but only Meg had a domineering mother. Jane and Dot 
were uprooted often as children. Flo and Sue had experienced sexual abuse, 
but only Sue was raised in day-care centers. Jane and Dot each had a domi-
neering mother, and each had been subjected to corporal punishment. Flo was 
uprooted often as a child and had been subjected to corporal punishment. 
Dot and Lynn were raised in day-care centers, Sue had a male parent figure, 
and Jane had siblings. What can the psychiatrist conclude is the cause of the 
blurred ego boundaries of these women? Construct a table that supports this 
conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the psychiatrist use? What sense 
of causality is involved in the conclusion?
	
11.	 A metallurgist added eight substances in various combinations to seven 
samples of molten aluminum for the purpose of producing aluminum alloys. 
564   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods

10
The metallurgist was interested in producing an alloy that had a special resis-
tance to corrosion. The samples were distinguished by the following charac-
teristics. Samples 1, 2, and 3 contained both tin and copper, but only samples 1 
and 2 were resistant. Samples 6 and 7 contained both silver and iron, but only 
sample 7 was resistant. Samples 4 and 5 contained sodium, but only sample 5 
was resistant. In addition, samples 1 and 7 contained zinc, silicon, and nickel. 
Sample 2 contained sodium, iron, and silicon, and sample 5 contained silicon 
and copper. Finally, sample 3 contained nickel, and sample 4 contained zinc. 
Assuming no interaction occurs among these eight additives, what conclusion 
can the metallurgist draw about these additives? Construct a table that sup-
ports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the metallurgist use? 
What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
	
12.	 A doctor has five patients who suffer from an unusual form of cancer. The 
patients are distinguished by the following living conditions. Davis, Jones, and 
Ellis live in a smoggy area near high-tension power lines, and Smith and Frank 
smoke cigarettes and live downwind from a company that produces chemi-
cal defoliants for the military. Frank also lives near the nuclear power plant. 
Davis, Smith, and Ellis eat red meat every day and live near the nuclear power 
plant. Jones smokes cigarettes and lives downwind from the chemical defoli-
ant company. Smith lives in a smoggy area, and Davis and Ellis live down-
wind from the defoliant company. What can the doctor conclude is the cause 
of the cancer? Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which one of 
Mill’s methods did the doctor use? What sense of causality is involved in the  
conclusion?
	 ★13.	 Two of Mr. Andrews’s rose bushes became infected with aphids. Mr. An-
drews proceeded to spray one of the bushes with malathion insecticide 
but left the other bush untouched. The two bushes are both American 
Beauty, are five years old, have virtually identical locations, receive the same 
amount of water and sunlight, are planted in the same kind of soil, and 
receive the same degree of cultivation and the same amount of Bandini 
rose food. Within three days the aphids disappeared from the bush that was 
sprayed, but they continued to thrive on the other bush. Mr. Andrews con-
cluded that the malathion killed the aphids on the bush that was sprayed. 
Construct a table that supports Mr. Andrews’s conclusion. Which one of 
Mill’s methods did Mr. Andrews use? What sense of causality is involved in 
the conclusion?
	
14.	 A sociologist conducted a study to determine if a correlation exists between 
grade point average at the time of graduation and income ten years after 
graduation. The sociologist visited the alumni office of a local university 
and obtained the names and addresses of those who had graduated ten years 
­earlier. The sociologist then contacted those graduates and asked them to 
disclose their income and give permission for the university to disclose their 
graduating GPAs. Two hundred students replied to this inquiry. The sociolo-
gist then applied statistical methods to compute the correlation coefficient, 
which turned out to be +0.2. How does this study relate to Mill’s methods? 
EXERCISES   565

566   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
What does a correlation coefficient of +0.2 say about the correlation between 
GPA and income? Is such a study called a prospective study or a retrospective 
study? How do the two differ?
	
15.	 A cosmetics manufacturer tested a new cleansing cream on forty rabbits. The 
rabbits were virtually the same genetically and were the same age. Twenty of 
the rabbits were randomly placed in the experimental group and the other 
twenty were placed in the control group. A patch containing the cream was 
applied to the skin of each rabbit in the experimental group, and an identical 
patch containing a harmless substance was applied to the skin of each rabbit 
in the control group. Then, all forty rabbits were kept in the same room, at 
the same temperature, and under the same lighting conditions and were fed 
the same food. After five days, two of the rabbits in the experimental group 
developed a rash where the patch was applied, but none of the other rabbits 
did. The manufacturer concluded that there is a 10 percent likelihood that 
the cleansing cream will cause a rash on the skin of rabbits. How does this 
experiment relate to Mill’s methods? What sense of causality is involved in 
the conclusion?
	III.	Identify the cause suggested by the information presented in the following tables. 
Is the cause a sufficient condition, necessary condition, or both sufficient and 
­necessary condition? Can you identify the method?
	
★1.
	
Possible Conditions
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
*
–
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
–
*
3
*
–
*
*
*
*
4
*
*
– 
*
*
*
5
–
*
*
*
–
*
	
2.
Possible Conditions
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
–
*
*
*
–
566   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods

10
	
3.
Possible Conditions
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
Phenomenon
1
*
–
–
*
–
–
–
2
–
*
*
*
–
–
*
3
*
–
*
*
*
–
*
4
–
*
– 
–
–
*
–
5
*
–
–
–
*
–
–
6
*
*
*
–
*
–
*
	
★4.
Possible Conditions
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
*
*
*
*
–
*
2
–
–
*
–
*
*
3
*
–
–
–
*
–
4
–
*
– 
*
*
*
5
*
*
–
–
–
–
6
–
*
*
–
–
–
	
5.
Possible Conditions
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
–
–
*
–
*
–
2
–
*
*
–
*
*
3
*
*
–
*
*
*
4
–
*
– 
–
*
–
5
*
–
*
*
–
–
6
*
*
*
–
–
*
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.
EXERCISES   567

568   CHAPTER 10 Causality and Mill’s Methods
10
	
Summary
Three Kinds of Cause:
• Sufficient condition
• Necessary condition
• Sufficient and necessary condition
Mill’s Methods:
• Method of agreement: Identifies necessary conditions.
• Method of difference: Identifies sufficient conditions.
• Joint method of agreement and difference: Identifies sufficient and necessary conditions.
• Method of residues: Identifies generic causal connections.
• Method of concomitant variation: Identifies generic causal connections.
Mill’s Methods and Science:
• The methods of agreement, difference, and concomitant variation resemble the ­methods 
used by scientists to identify causal connections.
• Controlled experiment and the method of difference.
• Experiment versus study (retrospective, prospective).
• Correlation versus causal connection.
• Scientists: Oerstead, Galileo, Boyle, Charles, Leavitt.

569
11 
11.1	 Theories of Probability
11.2	 The Probability Calculus
11.1	
Theories of Probability
Probability is a topic that is central to the question of induction, but like causality, it has 
different meanings. Consider the following statements:
The probability of picking a spade from a full deck of cards is one-fourth.
The probability that a twenty-year-old man will live to age seventy-five is .63.
There is a high probability that Margaret and Peter will get married.
In each statement the word “probability” is used in a different sense. This difference 
stems from the fact that a different procedure is used in each case to determine or 
estimate the probability. To determine the probability of picking a spade from a deck 
of cards, a purely mathematical procedure is used. Given that there are fifty-two cards 
in a deck and thirteen are spades, thirteen is divided by fifty-two to obtain one-fourth. 
A different procedure is used to determine the probability that a twenty-year-old  
Probability
PREVIEW    You hope to go to Cancun, Mexico, for spring break, but your decision rests on two 
contingencies: You have applied for a bank loan to tide you over between now and graduation, but there 
is only a 40 percent chance your loan will be approved. On top of that, meteorologists say there is a  
45 percent chance that a hurricane will hit Cancun during the time you plan to be there. You will buy 
a plane ticket only if the probability of getting the loan and there being no hurricane is greater than  
50 percent. What should you do? This chapter will give you the answer.
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

11
570   CHAPTER 11 Probability
man will live to age seventy-five. For this, one must sample a large number of twenty-year- 
old men and count the number that live fifty-five more years. Yet a different procedure 
is used to determine the probability that Margaret and Peter will get married. This 
probability can only be estimated roughly, and doing so requires that we become ac-
quainted with Margaret and Peter and with how they feel toward each other and toward 
marriage. These three procedures give rise to three distinct theories about probability: 
the classical theory, the relative frequency theory, and the subjectivist theory.
The classical theory of probability traces its origin to the work of the seventeenth-
century mathematicians Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat in determining the betting 
odds for a game of chance. The theory is otherwise called the a priori theory of prob-
ability because the computations are made independently of any sensory observation 
of actual events. According to the classical theory, the probability of an event A is given 
by the formula
P(A) = f
n
where f is the number of favorable outcomes and n is the number of possible outcomes. 
For example, in computing the probability of drawing an ace from a poker deck, the 
number of favorable outcomes is four (because there are four aces) and the number of 
possible outcomes is fifty-two (because there are fifty-two cards in the deck). Thus, the 
probability of that event is 4/52 or 1/13 (or .077).
It is important not to confuse the probability of an event’s happening with the bet-
ting odds of its happening. For events governed by the classical theory, the fair betting 
odds that an event A will happen is given by the formula
odds(A) = f : u
where f is the number of favorable outcomes, and u is the number of unfavorable 
­outcomes. For example, the fair betting odds of drawing an ace from a poker deck is 
4 to 48, or 1 to 12, since there are four aces and 48 cards that are not aces. Or suppose 
that five horses are running a race; three are yours, two are your friend’s, and there is 
an equal chance of any of the horses winning. The fair betting odds that one of your 
horses will win is 3 to 2, whereas the probability that one of your horses will win is 3/5.
Given that you and your friend accept these betting odds, if you bet $3 that one of 
your horses wins, and you win the bet, your friend must pay you $2. On the other hand, 
the odds that one of your friend’s horses will win is 2 to 3, so if your friend bets $2 that 
one of her horses wins, and she wins the bet, then you must pay her $3.
Two assumptions are involved in computing probabilities and betting odds accord-
ing to the classical theory: (1) that all possible outcomes are taken into account and  
(2) that all possible outcomes are equally probable. In the card example the first as-
sumption entails that only the fifty-two ordinary outcomes are possible. In other words, 
it is assumed that the deck has not been altered, that the cards will not suddenly self-
destruct or reproduce, etc. In the racing example, the first assumption entails that no 
other horses are running in the race, and that none of the horses will simply vanish.
The second assumption, which is otherwise called the principle of indifference, 
entails for the card example that there is an equal likelihood of selecting any card. 

11
SECTION 11.1 Theories of Probability   571
In other words, it is assumed that the cards are stacked evenly, that no two are glued  
together, and so on. For the horse-race example, the second principle entails that each 
of the horses has an equal chance of winning.
Whenever these two assumptions can be made about the occurrence of an event, 
the classical theory can be used to compute its probability or the odds of its happening. 
Here are some additional examples:
P (a fair coin turning up heads) = 1/2	
odds = 1:1
P (drawing a face card) = 12/52 = 3/13	
odds = 12:40 = 3:10
P (a single die coming up “3”) = 1/6	
odds = 1:5
P (a single die coming up even) = 3/6 = 1/2	
odds = 1:1
Strictly speaking, of course, the two assumptions underlying the classical theory 
are never perfectly reflected in any actual situation. Every coin is slightly off balance, 
as is every pair of dice. As a result, the probabilities of the various outcomes are never 
exactly equal. Similarly, the outcomes are never strictly confined to the normal ones 
entailed by the first assumption. When tossing a coin, there is always the possibility that 
the coin will land on edge, and in rolling dice there is the analogous possibility that one 
of them might break in half. These outcomes may not be possible in the practical sense, 
but they are logically possible in that they do not involve any contradiction. Because 
these outcomes are so unusual, however, it is reasonable to think that for all practical 
purposes the two assumptions hold and that therefore the classical theory is applicable.
There are many events, however, for which the two assumptions required by the 
classical theory obviously do not hold. For example, in attempting to determine the 
probability of a sixty-year-old woman dying of a heart attack within ten years, it would 
be virtually impossible to take account of all the possible outcomes. She might die of 
cancer, pneumonia, or an especially virulent case of the flu. She might be incapacitated 
by a car accident, or she might move to Florida and buy a house on the beach. Further-
more, none of these outcomes is equally probable in comparison with the others. To 
compute the probability of events such as these we need the relative frequency theory.
The relative frequency theory of probability originated with the use of mortality 
tables by life insurance companies in the eighteenth century. In contrast with the clas-
sical theory, which rests upon a priori computations, the relative frequency theory de-
pends on actual observations of the frequency with which certain events happen. The 
probability of an event A is given by the formula
P(A) = 
fono
where fo is the number of observed favorable outcomes and no is the total number of 
observed outcomes. For example, to determine the probability that a fifty-year-old man 
will live five more years, a sample of 1,000 fifty-year-old men could be observed. If 968 
were alive five years later, the probability that a fifty-year-old man will live an additional 
five years is 968/1000 or .968.
Similarly, if one wanted to determine the probability that a certain irregularly shaped 
pyramid with different-colored sides would, when rolled, come to rest with the green 
side down, the pyramid could be rolled 1,000 times. If it came to rest with its green side 
down 327 times, the probability of this event happening would be computed to be .327.

11
572   CHAPTER 11 Probability
The relative frequency method can also be used to compute the probability of the 
kinds of events that conform to the requirements of the classical theory. For example, the 
probability of a coin coming up heads could be determined by tossing the coin 100 times 
and counting the heads. If, after this many tosses, 46 heads have been recorded, one 
might assign a probability of .46 to this event. This leads us to an important point about 
the relative frequency theory: The results hold true only in the long run. It might be 
necessary to toss the coin 1,000 or even 10,000 times to get a close approximation. After 
10,000 tosses one would expect to count close to 5,000 heads. If in fact only 4,623 heads 
have been recorded, one would probably be justified in ­concluding that the coin is off 
balance or that something was irregular in the way it had been tossed.
Strictly speaking, neither the classical method nor the relative frequency method 
can assign a probability to individual events. From the standpoint of these approaches 
only certain kinds or classes of events have probabilities. But many events in the actual 
world are unique—for example, Margaret’s marrying Peter or Native Prancer’s winning 
the fourth race at Churchill Downs. To interpret the probability of these events we turn 
to the subjectivist theory.
The subjectivist theory of probability rests on the degrees of belief that people 
have about the occurrence of some event or the truth of some proposition. Such beliefs 
are grounded in the knowledge we have about the world in which we live. Because this 
knowledge is incomplete and fluctuates from day to day as we acquire new knowledge 
and forget the knowledge we once had, the probabilities we assign to things are subject 
to change. Also, since the knowledge acquired by one person differs from the knowl-
edge acquired by another (one person might know a lot about economics, another 
a lot about football), the probability that one person assigns to something will often 
differ from the probability that another assigns to it. The subjectivist theory is some-
times called the “epistemic theory of probability,” after the Greek word episteme, which 
means knowledge.
For an example of how a probability can change from day to day, suppose you are rum-
maging in the attic of a deceased great-grandparent and you happen to come across an 
old violin. When you peer through one of the openings in the face of the violin you read 
“Strad 1691.” You conclude with glee that the instrument is probably a Stradivarius. Then 
you do some investigating and find that “Strad 1691” means nothing at all, so you conclude 
that the violin is probably not a Stradivarius. After further research you discover that a true 
Stradivarius will have a circular logo bearing the initials of Antonio Stradivari beneath a 
cross. When you look through the other opening, you see “A+S” inside a circle. So, the violin 
is probably a Strad after all. Then you check with an expert who tells you that the logo in a 
genuine Stradivarius has the initials inside a double circle, but yours is set within a single 
circle. In the end, you conclude that the violin you found is probably not a genuine Strad.
As for how different people can assign different probabilities to the same thing, consider 
the stock market. Every trade involves a buyer and a seller. The buyer believes at a certain 
moment in time that a certain stock is probably a good investment, but the seller believes 
at the same moment that the same stock is probably not a good investment. If the buyer 
and seller did not assign different probabilities, there would be no trade. In fact, if looked 
at in this way, the entire economy (and practically every decision in life) rests on people as-
signing probabilities according to the subjectivist theory. You buy a certain kind of laundry 

11
SECTION 11.2 The Probability Calculus   573
soap or can of tuna because you believe that the product is probably a good value, or prob-
ably more environmentally friendly, or probably more healthy than some alternate brand.
The subjectivist theory of probability differs in important ways from the classi-
cal theory and the relative frequency theory. Whereas the classical theory assigns  
probabilities independently of the actual state of the world, the subjectivist theory  
requires empirical knowledge. In fact, the more extensive the knowledge, the more  
accurate the probability assigned. The relative frequency theory deals with similar 
events that are repeatable in some relevant way. The great majority of events that the 
subjectivist theory addresses are not repeatable. Also, the first two theories yield proba-
bilities that are highly precise, whereas the probabilities given by the subjectivist theory 
are often imprecise. Yet, the subjectivist theory is vastly more applicable than either of 
the other theories. Only the subjectivist theory can assign a probability to the claim that 
a certain person would make a good spouse, or the assertion that someone committed 
a crime, or the claim that one football team will defeat another.
The lack of precision affecting the subjectivist theory can sometimes be mitigated by 
averaging the probabilities that a large number people assign to a given event. This is  
exactly what happens when people make bets on the outcome of a sporting event. For ex-
ample, in horse racing, as the bets are placed, the odds of each horse winning are quickly 
computed. From these odds we can calculate what might be called the “true” probability 
that each horse will win. Similarly, the claim that the stock in some initial public offer-
ing is probably worth $10 per share is quickly settled once the stock begins trading. If no 
investors are willing to pay that amount, then the stock is probably worth less. Extending 
this idea, the probability that any product or service is worth a certain amount of money 
is arguably settled once that product or service is offered for sale in a free market.
The idea that probabilities can rest on people’s beliefs requires a proviso: The beliefs 
must be rational (or “coherent,” according to some accounts). But what is the meaning 
of rational? For an example of a belief that is not rational, suppose that a friend is will-
ing to give you 7 to 4 odds that Ajax will win in the fifth race. This corresponds to a 
probability of 7/(7 + 4) or 7/11. At the same time your friend will give you 5 to 4 odds 
that Ajax will lose in that race, which corresponds to a probability of 5/9. Obviously 
your friend believes that Ajax will both win and lose the same race. Such a belief is not 
rational. Given the 7 to 4 odds that Ajax will win, the best odds your friend can give that 
Ajax will lose is 4/7. It has been proved that any assignment of probabilities that satisfies 
the rules of the probability calculus is rational.
11.2	
The Probability Calculus
The three theories discussed thus far—the classical theory, the relative frequency the-
ory, and the subjectivist theory—provide separate procedures for assigning a prob-
ability to an event (or class of events). Sometimes one theory is more readily applica-
ble, sometimes another. But once individual events have been given a probability, the 
groundwork has been laid for computing the probabilities of compound arrangements 
of events. This is done by means of what is called the probability calculus. In this 

11
574   CHAPTER 11 Probability
respect the probability calculus functions analogously to the set of truth-functional 
rules in propositional logic. Just as the truth-functional rules allow us to compute the 
truth values of compound propositions from the individual truth values of the simple 
components, the rules of the probability calculus allow us to compute the probability 
of compound events from the individual probabilities of the simple events.
Two preliminary rules of the probability calculus are (1) the probability of an event 
that must necessarily happen is taken to be 1, and (2) the probability of an event that 
necessarily cannot happen is taken to be 0. For example, the event consisting of it  
either raining or not raining (at the same time and place) has a probability of 1, and 
the event consisting of it both raining and not raining (at the same time and place) 
has a probability of 0. These events correspond to statements that are tautological and 
self-­contradictory, respectively. Contingent events, on the other hand, have probabili-
ties greater than 0 but less than 1. For example, the probability that the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average will end a certain week at least five points higher than the previous 
week would usually be around 1/2, the probability that the polar ice cap will melt next 
year is very close to 0, and the probability that a traffic accident will occur somewhere 
tomorrow is very close to 1. Let us now consider six additional rules of the probability 
calculus.
1.  Restricted Conjunction Rule
The restricted conjunction rule is used to compute the probability of two events oc-
curring together when the events are independent of each other. Two events are said 
to be independent when the occurrence of one has no effect on the probability of the 
other one occurring. Examples include getting two heads from two tosses of a coin, 
drawing two hearts from a deck when the first is replaced before the second is drawn, 
and playing two sequential games of poker or roulette. The probability of two such 
events A and B occurring together is given by the formula
P(A and B) = P(A) × P(B)
For example, the probability of tossing two heads on a single throw of two coins is
P(H1 and H2) = 1/2 × 1/2 = 1/4
To determine
the probability
of simple
events, use:
Classical theory
Relative
frequency theory
Subjectivist theory
Probability
calculus
Probability of
compound events

11
This result may be checked very easily by listing all the possible outcomes and compar-
ing that number with the number of favorable outcomes:
Coin 1
Coin 2
H
H
H
T
T
H
T
T
Only one of the four possible outcomes shows both coins turning up heads.
Similarly, we may compute the probability of rolling two sixes with a pair of dice:
P(S1 and S2) = 1/6 × 1/6 = 1/36
Again, we may check the results by listing all the possible outcomes:
1-1
2-1
3-1
4-1
5-1
6-1
1-2
2-2
3-2
4-2
5-2
6-2
1-3
2-3
3-3
4-3
5-3
6-3
1-4
2-4
3-4
4-4
5-4
6-4
1-5
2-5
3-5
4-5
5-5
6-5
1-6
2-6
3-6
4-6
5-6
6-6
Since only one of the thirty-six possible outcomes shows two sixes together, the prob-
ability of this event is 1/36.
2.  General Conjunction Rule
The general conjunction rule is used to compute the probability of two events occur-
ring together whether or not the events are independent. When the events are inde-
pendent, the general conjunction rule reduces to the restricted conjunction rule. Some 
examples of events that are not independent (that is, that are dependent) are drawing 
two spades from a deck on two draws when the first card drawn is not replaced, and 
selecting two or more window seats on an airplane. After the first card is drawn, the 
number of cards available for the second draw is reduced, and after one of the seats is 
taken on the plane, the number of seats remaining for subsequent choices is reduced. In 
other words, in both cases the second event is dependent on the first. The formula for 
computing the probability of two such events occurring together is
P(A and B) = P(A) × P(B given A)
The expression P(B given A) is the probability that B will occur on the assumption 
that A has already occurred. Let us suppose, for example, that A and B designate the 
events of drawing two kings from a deck when the first card is not replaced before the 
second is drawn. If event A occurs, then only three kings remain, and the deck is also 
reduced to fifty-one cards. Thus, P(B given A) is 3/51. Since the probability of event A 
SECTION 11.2 The Probability Calculus   575

11
576   CHAPTER 11 Probability
is 4/52, the probability of both events happening is the product of these two fractions, 
or 12/2652 (= 1/221).
For another illustration, consider an urn containing five red balls, six green balls, 
and seven yellow balls. The probability of drawing two red balls (without replacement) 
is computed as follows:
P(R1 and R2) = 5/18 × 4/17 = 20/306 = 10/153
If a red ball is selected on the first draw, this leaves four red balls from a total of seventeen. 
Thus, the probability of drawing a second red ball if one has already been drawn is 4/17.
For another example, consider the same urn with the same contents, but let us  
compute the probability of drawing first a green ball and then a yellow ball (without 
replacement):
P(G and Y ) = 6/18 × 7/17 = 42/306 = 7/51
If a green ball is selected on the first draw, this affects the selection of a yellow ball on 
the second draw only to the extent of reducing the total number of balls to seventeen.
3.  Restricted Disjunction Rule
The restricted disjunction rule is used to compute the probability of either of two 
events occurring when the events are mutually exclusive—that is, when they cannot 
both occur. Examples of such events include picking either an ace or a king from a deck 
of cards on a single draw or rolling either a six or a one on a single roll of a die. The 
probability is given by the formula
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)
For example, the probability of drawing either a king or a queen (of any suit) from a 
deck of cards on a single draw is
P(K or Q) = 4/52 + 4/52 = 8/52 = 2/13
For another example, consider an urn containing six black balls, four white balls, and 
two red balls. The probability of selecting either a black or red ball on a single draw is
P(B or R) = 6/12 + 2/12 = 8/12 = 2/3
When the event in question is one that must necessarily occur, the probability is, of 
course, 1. Thus, the probability of obtaining either heads or tails on a single toss of a coin is
P(H or T ) = 1/2 + 1/2 = 1
The restricted disjunction rule may be combined with the restricted conjunction 
rule to compute the probability of getting either a five or a six on each of two consecu-
tive rolls of a single die:
P[(F or S)1 and (F or S)2]  = P(F or S)1 × P(F or S)2
	
	
	
= (1/6 + 1/6) × (1/6 + 1/6)
	
	
	
= 1/3 × 1/3
	
	
	
= 1/9
Since getting a five and getting a six on a single die are mutually exclusive events,  
P(F or S)1 is evaluated using the restricted disjunction rule. The same is true of P(F or S)2. 

11
Then, since two rolls of a die are independent events, the conjunction of the two dis-
junctive events is evaluated by the restricted conjunction rule.
4.  General Disjunction Rule
The general disjunction rule is used to compute the probability of either of two events 
whether or not they are mutually exclusive. The rule holds for any two events, but since 
its application is simplified when the events are independent, we will confine our at-
tention to events of this kind. Examples of independent events that are not mutually 
exclusive include obtaining at least one head on two tosses of a coin, drawing at least 
one king from a deck on two draws when the first card is replaced before the second 
card is drawn, and getting at least one six when rolling a pair of dice. The formula for 
computing the probability of either of two such events is
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) − P(A and B)
If the events are independent, P(A and B) is computed using the restricted conjunction 
rule, and the general disjunction formula reduces to
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) − [P(A) × P(B)]
The general disjunction rule may be proved as follows. When A and B are nonexclu-
sive, A occurs either with or without B, and B occurs either with or without A. Thus,
P(A) = P(A and B) + P(A and not-B)
P(B) = P(B and A) + P(B and not-A)
But A or B occurs in exactly three possible ways: A and not-B, B and not-A, and A and B.  
Thus,
P(A or B) = P(A and not-B) + P(B and not-A) + P(A and B)
Thus, when P(A and B) is subtracted from P(A) + P(B), the difference is equal to 
P(A or B). [Note: P(A and B) = P(B and A).]
For an example of the use of the general disjunction rule let us consider the prob-
ability of getting heads on either of two tosses of a coin. We have
P(H1 or H2) = 1/2 + 1/2 − (1/2 × 1/2)
	
= 1 − 1/4
	
= 3/4
For another example, consider the probability of getting at least one 6 when rolling a 
pair of dice. The computation is
P(S1 or S2) = 1/6 + 1/6 − (1/6 × 1/6)
	
= 2/6 − 1/36
	
= 11/36
The general disjunction rule may be combined with the restricted disjunction rule 
to compute the probability of getting either a three or a five when rolling a pair of dice. 
SECTION 11.2 The Probability Calculus   577

11
578   CHAPTER 11 Probability
This is the probability of getting either a three or a five on the first die or either a three 
or a five on the second:
P[(T or F )1 or (T or F )2] = P(T or F )1 + P(T or F )2 − [P(T or F )1 × P(T or F )2]
	
= (1/6 + 1/6) + (1/6 + 1/6) − [(1/6 + 1/6) × (1/6 + 1/6)]
	
= 2/6 + 2/6 − 4/36
	
= 20/36
	
= 5/9
Since getting a three or getting a five on a single throw are mutually exclusive events, 
P(T or F)1 is equal to the sum of the separate probabilities. The same is true for  
P(T or F)2.
The general disjunction rule may be combined with the general conjunction rule to 
compute the probability of drawing first a red ball and then a black ball on pairs of draws 
from either of two urns (without replacement). Suppose that the first urn contains two 
red balls, two black balls, and one green ball, and that the second urn contains three red 
balls, one black ball, and one white ball. The probability, giving two draws per urn, is
P[(R and B)1 or (R and B)2]
	
= P(R and B)1 + P(R and B)2 − [P(R and B)1 × P(R and B)2]
	
= (2/5 × 2/4) + (3/5 × 1/4) − [(2/5 × 2/4) × (3/5 × 1/4)]
	
= 4/20 + 3/20 − (4/20 × 3/20)
	
= 7/20 − 12/400
	
= 8/25
5.  Negation Rule
The negation rule is useful for computing the probability of an event when the prob-
ability of the event not happening is either known or easily computed. The formula is 
as follows:
P(A) = 1 − P(not-A)
The formula can be proved very easily. By the restricted disjunction rule the probability 
of A or not-A is
P(A or not-A) = P(A) + P(not-A)
But since A or not-A happens necessarily, P(A or not-A) = 1. Thus,
1 = P(A) + P(not-A)
Rearranging the terms in this equation gives us the negation rule. For an example of the 
use of this rule, consider the probability of getting heads at least once on two tosses of 
a coin. The probability of the event not happening, which is the probability of getting 
tails on both tosses, is immediately computed by the restricted conjunction rule to be 
1/4. Then, applying the negation rule, we have
P(H1 or H2) = 1 − 1/4
	
= 3/4

11
The negation rule may also be used to compute the probabilities of disjunctive 
events that are dependent. In presenting the general disjunction rule we confined our 
attention to independent events. Let us suppose we are given an urn containing two 
black balls and three white balls. To compute the probability of getting at least one black 
ball on two draws (without replacement), we first compute the probability of the event 
not happening. This event consists in drawing two white balls, which, by the general 
conjunction rule, has the probability
P(W1 and W2) = 3/5 × 2/4 = 6/20
Now, applying the negation rule, the probability of getting at least one black ball on 
two draws is
P(B1 or B2) = 1 − 6/20
	
= 14/20
	
= 7/10
For an example that is only slightly more complex, consider an urn containing two 
white, two black, and two red balls. To compute the probability of getting either a white 
or black ball on two draws (without replacement) we first compute the probability of 
the event not happening. This is the probability of getting red balls on both draws, 
which is
P(R1 and R2) = 2/6 × 1/5 = 2/30 = 1/15
Now, by the negation rule the probability of drawing either a white or black ball is
P(W or B) = 1 − 1/15
	
= 14/15
6.  Bayes’s Theorem
Bayes’s theorem, named after the eighteenth-century English clergyman Thomas 
Bayes, is a useful rule for evaluating the conditional probability of two or more mutu-
ally exclusive and jointly exhaustive events. The conditional probability of an event 
is the probability of that event happening given that another event has already hap-
pened, and it is expressed P(A given B). You may recall that an expression of this form  
occurred in the formulation of the general conjunction rule. When the number of mu-
tually exclusive and jointly exhaustive events is limited to two, which we will designate 
A1 and A2, Bayes’s theorem is expressed as follows:
P(A1 given B) =                                              
This limited formulation of Bayes’s theorem may be proved as follows. Applying the 
general conjunction rule to the events A1 and B, we have
P(A1 and B) = P(A1) × P(B given A1)
P(A1) × P(B given A1)
[P(A1) × P(B given A1)] + [P(A2) × P(B given A2)]
SECTION 11.2 The Probability Calculus   579

11
580   CHAPTER 11 Probability
Applying the same rule to the same events written in the reverse order, we have
P(B and A1) = P(B) × P(A1 given B)
Now, since P(A1 and B) is equal to P(B and A1), we may set the right-hand side of these 
two equations equal to each other:
P(B) × P(A1 given B) = P(A1) × P(B given A1)
Dividing both sides of this equation by P(B), we have
P(A1 given B) =                   	
(*)
Now, it can be easily proved using a truth table that B is logically equivalent to the 
expression [(A1 and B) or (not-A1 and B)]. Furthermore, since A1 and A2 are mutually 
exclusive and jointly exhaustive, one and only one of them will happen. Thus, A2 is 
simply another way of writing not-A1. Accordingly, the former expression in brack-
ets can be written [(A1 and B) or (A2 and B)], and since this expression is logically  
equivalent to B,
P(B) = P[(A1 and B) or (A2 and B)]
Now, applying the general conjunction rule and the restricted disjunction rule to the 
right-hand side of this equation, we have
P(B) = [P(A1) × P(B given A1)] + [P(A2) × P(B given A2)]
Finally, substituting the right-hand side of this equation in place of P(B) in the earlier 
equation marked (*), we have Bayes’s theorem:
P(A1 given B) =                                                
For an illustration of the use of Bayes’s theorem, suppose we are given one beige urn 
and four gray urns in a dimly lit room, so we cannot distinguish one color from the 
other. The beige urn contains eight red and two white balls, and each of the gray urns 
contains three red and seven white balls. Suppose that a red ball is drawn from one of 
these five urns. What is the probability that the urn was beige? In other words, we want 
to know the probability that the urn was beige given that a red ball was drawn. The 
events A1 and A2 in Bayes’s theorem correspond to drawing a ball from either a beige 
urn or a gray urn. Substituting B and G for A1 and A2  , respectively, we have
           
P(B) × P(R given B)
[P(B) × P(R given B)] + [P(G) × P(R given G )]
Now, since there are a total of five urns, the probability of randomly selecting the beige 
urn is 1/5, and the probability of randomly selecting one of the gray urns is 4/5. Finally, 
since each urn contains ten balls, the probability of drawing a red ball from the beige urn 
is 8/10, and the probability of drawing a red ball from the gray urn is 3/10. Thus, we have
P(A1) × P(B given A1)
P(B)
P(A1) × P(B given A1)
[P(A1) × P(B given A1)] + [P(A2) × P(B given A2)]
P(B given R) =

11
P(B given R) =  
1/5 × 8/10
(1/5 × 8/10) + (4/5 × 3/10)
	
= 
8/50
8/50 + 12/50 = 8/50
20/50 = 8/20 = .40
Bayes’s theorem is quite practical because it allows us to change our probability esti-
mates of ordinary events as new information is acquired. For an example of how Bayes’s 
theorem is used for this purpose, consider the following example:
Mr. Jones became seriously ill from ingesting defectively manufactured tablets of the 
painkiller novaprine. He intends to file a lawsuit against the most probable ­manufacturer 
of the tablets. After a brief investigation, he finds that 70 percent of the novaprine sold in 
this country is manufactured by Alpha Pharmaceuticals, and 30 percent is manufactured 
by Beta Pharmaceuticals.
From this information the probability that Alpha Pharmaceuticals manufactured 
the tablets is .70, in comparison with .30 for Beta Pharmaceuticals. Thus, Mr. Jones 
tentatively decides to file his lawsuit against Alpha. However, on further investigation 
Mr. Jones discovers the following:
Of the novaprine manufactured by Alpha, 10 percent is sold on the East Coast and 90 per-
cent on the West Coast, while 80 percent of Beta’s novaprine is sold on the East Coast and 
20 percent on the West Coast. Furthermore, Mr. Jones recalls that he purchased his 
novaprine on the East Coast.
Clearly this new information affects Mr. Jones’s original probability estimate. We use 
Bayes’s theorem to recompute the probability that Alpha manufactured the defective 
tablets given that the tablets were purchased on the East Coast as follows:
		
 
P(A) × P(E given A)
[P(A) × P(E given A)] + [P(B) × P(E given B)]
For P(A) and P(B) we use the original probabilities of .70 and .30, respectively. The 
probability that the tablets were purchased on the East Coast given that they were man-
ufactured by Alpha is .10, and the probability that they were purchased on the East 
Coast given that they were manufactured by Beta is .80. Thus, we have
	
	
.70 × .10
(.70 × .10) + (.30 × .80)  = 
.07
.07 + .24 = .07/.31 = .23
The new information that Mr. Jones acquired has significantly affected the prob-
ability that Alpha manufactured the defective tablets. The probability has dropped from 
.70 to .23. With this new information, it is more likely that Beta manufactured the  
tablets, so Mr. Jones should now file his lawsuit against Beta. The probability for Beta 
is 1 − .23, or .77.
The earlier probability for Alpha (.70) is called the prior probability, and the later 
figure (.23) is called the posterior probability. If Mr. Jones should acquire even more 
information, the posterior probability becomes a new prior, and it is used as the value 
for P(A) in a subsequent application of Bayes’s theorem.
P(A given E ) =
P(A given E ) = 
SECTION 11.2 The Probability Calculus   581

582   CHAPTER 11 Probability
Additional Applications
Most of the examples considered thus far have used the classical theory to determine 
the probability of the component events. But as was mentioned earlier, the probability 
calculus can also be used in conjunction with the relative frequency theory and the 
subjectivist theory. If we apply the relative frequency theory to the mortality tables used 
by insurance companies, we find that the probability of a twenty-five-year-old man liv-
ing an additional forty years is .82, and the probability of a twenty-five-year-old wom-
an living the same number of years is .88. To compute the probability of such a man 
and woman both living that long, we use the restricted conjunction rule and obtain  
.82 × .88 = .72. For the probability that either of these people would live that long,  
we use the general disjunction rule and obtain
.82 + .88 − (.82 × .88) = .98
Let us suppose that these two people are married and both would give 9 to 1 odds 
on their staying married for forty years. This translates into a probability of 9/(9 + 1) 
or .90. Using the restricted conjunction rule, the probability of this event happening is 
the product of the latter figure and the probability of their both living that long, or .65.
For an example involving the subjectivist theory, if the Philadelphia Eagles are given 
7 to 5 odds of winning the NFC championship, and the New England Patriots are given 
3 to 2 odds of winning the AFC championship, the probability that at least one of these 
teams will win is computed using the general disjunction rule. The odds translate re-
spectively into probabilities of 7/12 and 3/5, and so the probability of the disjunction 
is 7/12 + 3/5 − (7/12 × 3/5) = 5/6. The probability that the two teams will meet in 
the Super Bowl (that both will win their conference championship) is, by the restricted 
conjunction rule, 7/12 × 3/5 = 21/60, or 7/20. The probability that neither will play in 
the Super Bowl is, by the negation rule, 1 − 5/6 = 1/6.
The probability calculus can also be used to evaluate the strength of inductive argu-
ments. Consider the following:
The Philadelphia Eagles are given 7 to 5 odds of winning the NFC championship. The 
New England Patriots are given 3 to 2 odds of winning the AFC championship. Therefore, 
the Eagles and the Patriots will meet in the Super Bowl.
On the assumption that the premises are true, that is, on the assumption that the odds 
are reported correctly, the conclusion follows with a probability of 7/20 or .35. Thus, 
the argument is not particularly strong. But if the odds given in the premises should 
increase, the strength of the argument would increase proportionately. The premises of 
the following argument give different odds:
The Philadelphia Eagles are given 7 to 2 odds of winning the NFC championship. The 
New England Patriots are given 8 to 3 odds of winning the AFC championship. Therefore, 
the Eagles and the Patriots will meet in the Super Bowl.
In this argument, if the premises are assumed true, the conclusion follows with a prob-
ability of 7/9 × 8/11 = 56/99, or .57. Thus, the argument is at least moderately strong.
Lest this procedure be misinterpreted, however, we should recall a point raised in 
Chapter 1. The strength of an inductive argument depends not merely on whether 
11

EXERCISE 11	
	 I.	 Compute probabilities or odds for the following simple events.
	
★1.	 What is the probability of rolling a five on a single roll of a die? What are the 
odds for this event?
	
2.	 From a sample of 9,750 Ajax trucks, 273 developed transmission problems 
within the first two years of operation. What is the probability that an Ajax 
truck will develop transmission problems within the first two years?
	
3.	 If the standard odds are 8 to 5 that the Chargers will beat the Lions, what is the 
probability that this event will happen?
	
★4.	 From a sample of 7,335 seventy-five-year-old women, 6,260 lived an addi-
tional five years. What is the probability that a seventy-five-year-old woman 
will live to age eighty?
	
5.	 What is the probability of picking a black jack from a poker deck (without  
jokers) on a single draw?
11
the conclusion is probably true but on whether the conclusion follows probably from 
the premises. As a result, to evaluate the strength of an inductive argument it is not  
sufficient merely to know the probability of the conclusion on the assumption that the 
premises are true. One must also know whether the probability of the conclusion rests 
on the evidence given in the premises. If the probability of the conclusion does not rest 
on this evidence, the argument is weak regardless of whether the conclusion is probably 
true. The following argument is a case in point:
All dogs are animals. Therefore, probably a traffic accident will occur somewhere tomorrow.
The conclusion of this argument is probably true independently of the premises, so the 
argument is weak.
In this connection the analogy between deductive and inductive arguments breaks 
down. As we saw in Chapter 6, any argument having a conclusion that is necessarily 
true is deductively valid regardless of the content of its premises. But any inductive 
argument having a probably true conclusion is not strong unless the probability of the 
conclusion rests on the evidence given in the premises.
A final comment is in order about the material covered in this chapter. Probability is 
one of those subjects about which there is little agreement among philosophers. Some 
philosophers defend each of the theories we have discussed as providing the only accept-
able approach, and there are numerous views regarding the fine points of each. However, 
some philosophers argue that there are certain uses of “probability” that none of these 
theories can interpret. The statement “There is high probability that Einstein’s theory of 
relativity is correct” may be a case in point. In any event, the various theories about the 
meaning of probability, as well as the details of the probability calculus, are highly com-
plex subjects, and the brief account given here has merely scratched the surface.
EXERCISEs   583

584   CHAPTER 11 Probability
	
6.	 If the probability of the Red Sox beating the Tigers is 6/17, what are the odds 
for this event?
	
★7.	 Given an urn containing three red balls, four green balls, and five yellow balls, 
what is the probability of drawing a red ball on a single draw?
	
8.	 If the odds of the Broncos beating the Dolphins is 5 to 4, and you bet $10 on 
the Broncos, how much do you stand to win?
	
9.	 Given an urn containing four red balls, three green balls, and five yellow balls, 
what are the odds of drawing a red ball on a single draw?
	 ★10.	 Suppose you give 1:6 odds that you can roll a “1” with a single fair die. If some-
one accepts your bet, how much could you expect to win after 100 rolls if you 
bet $1 on each roll?
	II.	 Compute probabilities for the following compound events:
	
★1.	 What is the probability of getting either a six or a one from a single roll of a die?
	
2.	 What is the probability of getting heads on three successive tosses of a coin?
	
3.	 What is the probability of drawing either a king or a queen from a poker deck 
(no jokers) on a single draw?
	
★4.	 What is the probability of drawing two aces from a poker deck in two draws
	
	 a.	 If the first card is replaced before the second is drawn?
	
	 b.	 If the first card is not replaced before the second is drawn?
	
5.	 What is the probability of drawing at least one ace from a poker deck on two 
draws if the first card is replaced before the second is drawn?
	
6.	 What is the probability of getting at least one head on three tosses of a coin?
	
★7.	 What is the probability of getting at least one 6 on three rolls of a die?
	
8.	 If a pair of dice are rolled, what is the probability that the points add up to
	
	 a.	 5?
	
	 b.	 6?
	
	 c.	 7?
	
9.	 Given two urns, one containing two red, three green, and four yellow balls, the 
other containing four red, two green, and three yellow balls, if a single ball is 
drawn from each urn, what is the probability that
	
	 a.	 Both are red?
	
	 b.	 At least one is green?
	
	 c.	 One is red, the other yellow?
	
	 d.	 At least one is either red or yellow?
	
	 e.	 Both are the same color?
	 ★10.	 Given an urn containing three red, four green, and five yellow balls,  
if two balls are drawn from the urn (without replacement), what is the  
probability that
11
584   CHAPTER 11 Probability

SECTION 11.1 Theories of Probability   585
11
	
	 a.	 Both are red?
	
	 b.	 One is green, the other yellow?
	
	 c.	 One is either red or green?
	
	 d.	 At least one is green?
	
	 e.	 Both have the same color?
	
11.	 What is the probability of drawing either an ace or a king (or both) on three 
draws (without replacement) from a poker deck? (Hint: Use the negation rule.)
	
12.	 What is the probability of drawing an ace and a king on three draws (without 
replacement) from a poker deck? (Hint: Use the negation rule.)
	 ★13.	 The probability of a twenty-year-old man living to age seventy is .74, and 
the probability of a twenty-year-old woman living to the same age is .82. If a  
recently married couple, both age twenty, give 8 to 1 odds on their staying 
married for fifty years, what is the probability that
	
	 a.	 At least one will live to age seventy?
	
	 b.	 They will celebrate their golden wedding anniversary?
	
14.	 Assign a numerical value to the strength of the following argument: The odds 
are 5 to 3 that the Indians will win the American League pennant and 7 to 
5 that the Cardinals will win the National League pennant. Therefore, the  
Indians and the Cardinals will meet in the World Series.
	
15.	 Assign a numerical value to the strength of the following argument: The  
Wilson family has four children. Therefore, at least two of the children were 
born on the same day of the week.
	 ★16.	 We are given three new urns each containing seven red, five green, and three 
white balls, and two old urns each containing five red, three green, and seven 
white balls. The urns are identical except for an old or new date stamped 
beneath the base. If a single red ball is randomly drawn from one of these urns, 
was it most probably drawn from an old urn or a new urn? (Hint: For this 
exercise and the ones that follow, use Bayes’s theorem.)
	
17.	 Knowing that your friend Angella studies for her tests only 40 percent of the 
time, you place an even bet with a third party that Angella will not study for 
her upcoming test. Later, you just happen to hear that Angella passed the test. 
Should you retract your bet? Assume that Angella passes nine out of ten tests 
when she studies, and three out of ten when she does not.
	
18.	 A physician has diagnosed a patient as having either hepatitis or liver cancer 
(but not both). Statistics reveal that hepatitis occurs in the general population 
twice as frequently as liver cancer. Thus, the physician tentatively concludes 
that the patient probably has hepatitis. Later the physician conducts a test on 
the patient that turns out positive. On this test, nine out of ten cases of liver 
cancer trigger a positive outcome, and one out of six cases of hepatitis trig-
gers a positive outcome. What is the new probability that the patient has liver 
cancer?
EXERCISEs   585

11
586   CHAPTER 11 Probability
	 ★19.	 Ms. Jones, a bookstore owner, wishes to send out an advertisement to poten-
tial customers. She estimates that 20 percent of the town’s residents are recre-
ational readers, and she knows that all of the residents are either recreational 
readers or TV addicts (but not both). Also, a media expert has told her that two 
of ten TV addicts are newspaper subscribers, and from a survey of her own 
customers she has learned that seven of ten recreational readers are newspa-
per subscribers. If Ms. Jones places an ad in the local newspaper, how effective 
will the ad be? (That is, what is the probability that a newspaper subscriber is a 
recreational reader?)
	
20.	 Mr. Andrews, a grape merchant, inquires about a certain wine that he tastes at 
a party. The host tells him that from a total of ten bottles of that wine, six came 
from the north vineyard and four came from the south vineyard. From this in-
formation, the merchant concludes that he should visit the north vineyard for 
a sample of the grapes. Later, he discovers that the wine in question came from 
a bottle labeled Classic Reserve, and 30 of 100 barrels of north vineyard wine 
were bottled with that label, while 130 of 200 barrels of south vineyard wine 
were bottled with that label. Given this new information, what is the probabil-
ity that the wine came from the north vineyard?
	
Summary
Theories of Probability:
• Classical theory: Rests on a priori calculations.
• Relative frequency theory: Depends on empirical experimentation.
• Subjectivist theory: Rests on subjective beliefs of individual people.
Probability Calculus:
• Used to calculate the probability of compound events.
• Conjunction rule: Computes the probability of two events occurring together.
■
■
Restricted conjunction rule: The events are independent.
■
■
General conjunction rule: The events need not be independent.
• Disjunction rule: Computes the probability of either of two events occurring.
■
■
Restricted disjunction rule: The events are mutually exclusive.
■
■
General disjunction rule: The events need not be mutually exclusive.
• Negation rule: Computes the probability of an event not occurring.
• Bayes’s theorem: Computes the conditional probability of two or more mutually exclu-
sive and jointly exhaustive events.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

587
12.1	 Evaluating Statistics
12.2	 Samples
12.3	 The Meaning of “Average”
12.4	 Dispersion
12.5	 Graphs and Pictograms
12.6	 Percentages
12.1	
Evaluating Statistics
In our day-to-day experience, all of us encounter arguments that rest on statistical 
­evidence. The advertising industry is an especially prolific source of such arguments. We 
are constantly told that we ought to sign up with a certain mobile phone service because  
it has 30 percent fewer dropped calls, buy a certain kind of car because it gets 5 percent 
better fuel economy, and use a certain cold remedy because it is recommended by four 
out of five physicians. But the advertising industry is not the only source of these kinds 
of arguments. We often read in the newspapers that some union is asking for an increase 
in pay because its members earn less than the average, or that a certain region is threat-
ened with floods because rainfall has been more than the average.
To evaluate such arguments, we must be able to interpret the statistics on which they rest, 
but doing so is not always easy. Statements expressing averages and ­percentages are often 
ambiguous and can mean a variety of things, depending on how the average or percentage 
is computed. These difficulties are compounded by the fact that statistics provide a highly 
convenient way for people to deceive one another. Such deceptions can be effective even 
PREVIEW    The Alpha Beta Gamma fraternity, known for its wild parties, throws a New Year’s 
Eve bash, and afterward, 43 percent of the partiers get arrested for driving under the influence. A few 
weeks later you happen to be enjoying a couple of drinks with a friend in her apartment, and you begin 
to wonder about the likelihood of getting a DUI on your drive home. Recalling the fraternity incident, 
you conclude that the probability is 43 percent. Is this a good estimate? The current chapter explores this 
type of reasoning.
12 Statistical Reasoning
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

588   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12
though they fall short of being outright lies. Thus, to evaluate arguments based on statistics 
one must be familiar not only with the ­ambiguities that occur in the language but with the 
devices that unscrupulous individuals use to deceive others.
This chapter touches on five areas that are frequent sources of such ambiguity and 
deception: problems in sampling, the meaning of “average,” the importance of disper-
sion in a sample, the use of graphs and pictograms, and the use of percentages for the 
purpose of comparison. By becoming acquainted with these topics and with some of 
the misuses that occur, we improve our ability to determine whether a conclusion fol-
lows probably from a set of statistical premises.
12.2	
Samples
Much of the statistical evidence presented in support of inductively drawn conclusions is 
gathered from analyzing samples. When a sample is found to possess a certain character-
istic, it is argued that the group as a whole (the population) possesses that characteristic. 
For example, if we wanted to know what the student body at a certain university thought 
about a proposal to adopt an academic honor code, we could take a poll of 10 percent of the 
students. If the results of the poll showed that 80 percent of those sampled favored the code, 
we might draw the conclusion that 80 percent of the entire student body favored it. Such an 
argument would be classified as an inductive generalization.
The problem that arises with the use of samples has to do with whether the sample 
is representative of the population. Samples that are not representative are said to be 
biased samples. Depending on what the population consists of, whether machine parts 
or human beings, different considerations enter into determining whether a sample 
is biased. These considerations include (1) whether the sample is randomly selected, 
(2) the size of the sample, and (3) psychological factors.
A random sample is one in which every member of the population has an equal 
chance of being selected. The requirement that a sample be randomly selected applies 
to practically all samples, but sometimes it can be taken for granted. For example, when 
a physician draws a blood sample to test for blood sugar, there is no need to take a little 
bit from the finger, a little from the arm, and a little from the leg. Because blood is a 
circulating fluid, it can be assumed that it is homogenous in regard to blood sugar.
The randomness requirement demands more attention when the population ­consists 
of discrete units. Suppose, for example, that a quality-control engineer for a manufac-
turing firm needed to determine whether the components on a certain conveyor belt 
were within specifications. To do so, the engineer removed every tenth component for 
measurement. The sample obtained by such a procedure would not be random if the 
components were not randomly arranged on the conveyor belt. As a result of some mal-
function in the manufacturing process it is quite possible that every tenth component 
was perfect and the rest were imperfect. If the engineer happened to select only the per-
fect ones, the sample would be biased. A selection procedure that would be more likely 
to ensure a random sample would be to roll a pair of dice and remove every component 
corresponding to a roll of ten. Since the outcome of a roll of dice is a random event, 

12
SECTION 12.2 Samples   589
the selection would also be random. Such a procedure would be more likely to include 
defective components that turn up at regular intervals.
The randomness requirement presents even greater problems when the population 
consists of human beings. Suppose, for example, that a public-opinion poll is to be 
conducted on the question of excessive corporate profits. It would hardly do to ask 
such a question randomly of the people encountered on Wall Street in New York City. 
Such a sample would almost certainly be biased in favor of the corporations. A less 
biased sample could be obtained by randomly selecting phone numbers from the tele-
phone directory, but even this procedure would not yield a completely random sample. 
Among other things, the time of day in which a call is placed influences the kind of 
responses obtained. Most people who are employed full-time are not available during 
the day, and even if calls are made at night, a large percentage of the population have 
unlisted landline and cell phone numbers.
A poll conducted by mail based on the addresses listed in the city directory would 
also yield a fairly random sample, but this method, too, has shortcomings. Many apart-
ment dwellers are not listed, and others move before the directory is printed. Further-
more, none of those who live in rural areas are listed. In short, it is both ­difficult and 
expensive to conduct a large-scale public-opinion poll that succeeds in obtaining re-
sponses from anything approximating a random sample of individuals.
A classic case of a poll that turned out to be biased in spite of a good deal of effort 
and expense occurred when the Literary Digest magazine undertook a poll to predict 
the outcome of the 1936 presidential election. The sample consisted of a large number 
of the magazine’s subscribers together with other people selected from the telephone 
directory. Because four similar polls had picked the winner in previous years, the re-
sults of this poll were highly respected. As it turned out, however, the Republican can-
didate, Alf Landon, got a significant majority in the poll, but Franklin D. Roosevelt won 
the election by a landslide. The incorrect prediction is explained by the fact that the 
1936 election occurred in the middle of the Depression, at a time when many people 
could afford neither a telephone nor a subscription to the Digest. These were the people 
who were overlooked in the poll, and they were also the ones who voted for Roosevelt.
Size is also an important factor in determining whether a sample is representative. 
Given that a sample is randomly selected, the larger the sample, the more closely it 
replicates the population. In statistics, this degree of closeness is expressed in terms of 
sampling error. The sampling error is the difference between the relative frequency  
with which some characteristic occurs in the sample and the relative frequency 
with which the same characteristic occurs in the population. If, for example, a poll  
were taken of a labor union and 60 percent of the members sampled expressed their 
intention to vote for Smith for president but in fact only 55 percent of the whole union 
intended to vote for Smith, the sampling error would be 5 percent. If a larger sample 
were taken, the error would be smaller.
Just how large a sample should be is a function of the size of the population and of 
the degree of sampling error that can be tolerated. For a sampling error of, say, ­­5 ­percent, 
a population of 10,000 would require a larger sample than would a population of 100. 
However, the ratio is not linear. To obtain the same precision, the sample for the larg-
er population need not be 100 times as large as the one for the smaller population.  

590   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12
The figures in this table are based on a 95 percent level of confidence, which means 
that we can be 95 percent certain that a sample will accurately reflect the whole pop-
ulation within the margin of error for that sample. Thus, if from a random poll of  
9,604 people, 53 percent say they prefer Jones for governor, then we can be 95 percent 
certain that between 52 and 54 percent of the whole population prefers Jones. The 
figures in the table are based purely on mathematics and are not dependent on any em-
pirical measurement. For a 95 percent confidence level, the margin of error is approxi-
mately equal to .98/√n, where n is the size of the sample. For a 99 percent confidence 
level, the margin of error is approximately equal to 1.29/√n. Comparing these two 
expressions shows that as the confidence level increases, so does the margin of error.
In most polls, the margin of error is based on a 95 percent (or higher) confidence 
level. But if a much lower confidence level should be selected, and if this fact is not 
disclosed, then the results of a poll could be deceptive—even if the margin of error is 
stated. The reason for this is that the margin of error would be combined with a low 
likelihood that it covered any actual discrepancy between the sample and the popula-
tion. Also, of course, any poll that simply fails to disclose the margin of error can be 
deceptive. For example, if a poll should show Adams leading Baker for U.S. Senate by 
55 to 45 percent, this means virtually nothing if neither the size of the sample nor the 
margin of error is given. If the margin of error should be as high as 10 percent, then it 
could be the case that it is Baker who leads Adams by 55 to 45 percent.
Even when the margin of error is stated, however, incorrect conclusions are often 
drawn when comparing the results of one poll with the results of another. Suppose a 
poll shows Adams leading Baker by 55 to 45 percent. After an article critical of Adams 
appears in the newspaper, a second poll is taken that shows Adams trailing Baker by  
49 to 51 percent. Suppose further that the margin of error for both polls is 4 percent and 
TABLE 12.1 Sample Size and Margin of Error
Sample Size
Margin of Error
9,604
  ±1%
2,401
  ±2%
1,067
  ±3%
  600
  ±4%
  384
  ±5%
  267
  ±6%
  196
  ±7%
    96
±10%
When the population is very large, the size of the sample needed to ensure a certain 
precision levels off at a constant figure. For example, a random sample of 500 will yield 
results that are just as accurate whether the population is 100 thousand or 100 million.
When the population is very large, and the sample is random and less than 5 ­percent 
of the population, sampling error can be expressed in terms of a mathematical margin 
of error as per Table 12.1:

12
SECTION 12.2 Samples   591
the confidence level is 95 percent. From such polls people often draw the conclusion  
that Adams’s lead over Baker has disappeared, when in fact no such conclusion is war-
ranted. Taking into account the margin of error, it could be the case that in fact Adams’s 
lead over Baker has remained constant at, say, 53 to 47 percent.
Statements of sampling error are often conspicuously absent from surveys used to 
support advertising claims. Marketers of products such as patent medicines have been 
known to take rather small samples until they obtain one that gives the “right” result. For 
example, several polls of twenty-five people might be taken inquiring about the preferred 
brand of aspirin. Even though the samples might be randomly selected, one will eventu-
ally be found in which twenty of the twenty-five respondents indicate their preference 
for Alpha brand aspirin. Having found such a sample, the marketing firm proceeds to 
promote this brand as the one preferred by four out of five of those sampled. The results 
of the other samples are, of course, discarded, and no mention is made of sampling error.
Psychological factors can also have a bearing on whether the sample is representative. 
When the population consists of inanimate objects, such as cans of soup or machine 
parts, psychological factors are usually irrelevant, but they can play a significant role 
when the population consists of human beings. If the people composing the sample 
think that they will gain or lose something by the kind of answer they give, their in-
volvement will likely affect the outcome. For example, if the residents of a neighbor-
hood were to be surveyed for annual income with the purpose of determining whether 
the neighborhood should be ranked among the fashionable areas in the city, we would 
expect the residents to exaggerate their answers. But if the purpose of the study were to 
determine whether the neighborhood could afford a special levy that would increase 
property taxes, we might expect the incomes to be underestimated.
The kind of question asked can also have a psychological bearing. Questions such as 
“How often do you brush your teeth?” and “How many books do you read in a year?” 
can be expected to generate responses that overestimate the truth, while “How many 
times have you been intoxicated?” and “How many extramarital affairs have you had?” 
would probably receive answers that underestimate the truth. Similar exaggerations 
can result from the way a question is phrased. For example, “Do you favor a reduction 
in welfare benefits as a response to rampant cheating?” would be expected to receive 
more affirmative answers than simply “Do you favor a reduction in welfare benefits?”
Another source of psychological influence is the personal interaction between the 
surveyor and the respondent. Suppose, for example, that a door-to-door survey were 
taken to determine how many people believe in God or attend church on Sunday. If 
the survey were conducted by priests and ministers dressed in clerical garb, one might 
expect a larger number of affirmative answers than if the survey were taken by noncler-
ics. The simple fact is that many people like to give answers that they think will please 
the questioner.
To prevent this kind of interaction from affecting the outcome, scientific studies are 
often conducted under “double-blind” conditions in which neither the surveyor nor the 
respondent knows what the “right” answer is. For example, in a double-blind study to 
determine the effectiveness of a drug, bottles containing the drug would be mixed with 
other bottles containing a placebo (sugar tablet). The contents of each bottle would 
be matched with a code number on the label, and neither the person distributing the 

592   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12
bottles nor the person recording the responses would know what the code is. Under 
these conditions the people conducting the study would not be able to influence, by 
some smile or gesture, the response of the people to whom the drugs are given.
Most of the statistical evidence encountered in ordinary experience contains no ref-
erence to such factors as randomness, sampling error, or the conditions under which 
the sample was taken. In the absence of such information, the person faced with evalu-
ating the evidence must use his or her best judgment. If either the organization con-
ducting the study or the people composing the sample have something to gain by the 
kind of answer that is given, the results of the survey should be regarded as suspect. 
And if the questions that are asked concern topics that would naturally elicit distorted 
answers, the results should probably be rejected. In either event, the mere fact that 
a study appears scientific or is expressed in mathematical language should never in-
timidate a person into accepting the results. Numbers and scientific terminology are no 
substitute for an unbiased sample.
12.3	
The Meaning of “Average”
In statistics the word “average” is used in three different senses: mean, median, and 
mode. In evaluating arguments and inferences that rest on averages, we often need to 
know in precisely what sense the word is being used.
The mean value of a set of data is the arithmetical average. It is computed by divid-
ing the sum of the individual values by the number of values in the set. Suppose, for 
example, that we are given Table 12.2 listing the ages of a group of people. To compute 
the mean age, we divide the sum of the individual ages by the number of people:
mean age = (1 × 16) + (4 × 17 ) + (1 × 18) + (2 × 19) + (3 × 23) = 19
11
 The median of a set of data is the middle point when the data are arranged in as-
cending order. In other words, the median is the point at which there is an equal num-
ber of data above and below. In Table 12.2 the median age is 18 because there are five 
people above this age and five below.
TABLE 12.2
Number of People
Age
1
16
4
17
1
18
2
19
3
23

12
SECTION 12.3 The Meaning of “Average”   593
The mode is the value that occurs with the greatest frequency. Here the mode is 17, 
because there are four people of that age and fewer people of any other age.
In this example, the mean, median, and mode differ but are all fairly close together. 
The problem for induction occurs when a great disparity among these values occurs. 
This sometimes occurs in the case of salaries. Consider, for example, Table 12.3, which 
reports the salaries of a hypothetical architectural firm. Since there are twenty-one em-
ployees and a total of $1,365,000 is paid in salaries, the mean salary is $1,365,000/21, 
or $65,000. The median salary is $45,000 because ten employees earn less than this 
and ten earn more, and the mode, which is the salary that occurs most frequently, is 
$30,000. Each of these figures represents the “average” salary of the firm, but in differ-
ent senses. Depending on the purpose for which the average is used, different figures 
might be cited as the basis for an argument.
For example, if the senior engineer were to request a raise in salary, the president could 
respond that the engineer’s salary is already well above the average (in the sense of median 
and mode) and that therefore she or he does not deserve a raise. If the junior draftsmen 
were to make the same request, the president could respond that they are presently earning 
the firm’s average salary (in the sense of mode), and that for draftsmen, to be earning the 
average salary is excellent. Finally, if someone from outside the firm were to allege that the 
firm pays subsistence-level wages, the president could respond that the average salary of  
the firm is a hefty $65,000. All of the president’s responses would be true, but if the reader or 
listener were not sophisticated enough to distinguish the various senses of “average,” he or 
she might be persuaded by the arguments.
In some situations, the mode is the most useful average. Suppose, for example, 
that you are in the market for a three-bedroom house. Suppose further that a real  
estate agent assures you that the houses in a certain complex have an average of three  
bedrooms and that therefore you will certainly want to see them. If the agent has used 
“average” in the sense of mean, it is possible that half the houses in the complex are 
four-bedroom, the other half are two-bedroom, and there are no three-bedroom houses  
at all. A similar result is possible if the agent has used average in the sense of median. 
The only sense of average that would be useful for your purposes is mode: If the modal 
average is three bedrooms, there are more three-bedroom houses than any other kind.
TABLE 12.3
Capacity
Number of 
Personnel
Salary
President
  1
$275,000
Senior architect
  2
  150,000
Junior architect
  2
    80,000
Senior engineer
  1
    65,000
mean
Junior engineer
  4
    55,000
Senior draftsman
  1
    45,000
median
Junior draftsman
10
    30,000
mode
→
→
→

594   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12
On other occasions a mean average is the most useful. Suppose, for example, that 
you have taken a job as a pilot on a plane that has nine passenger seats and a maximum 
carrying capacity of 1,350 pounds (in addition to yourself). Suppose further that you 
have arranged to fly a group of nine passengers over the Grand Canyon and that you 
must determine whether their combined weight is within the required limit. If a repre-
sentative of the group tells you that the average weight of the passengers is 150 pounds, 
this by itself tells you nothing. If he means average in the sense of median, it could be 
the case that the four heavier passengers weigh 200 pounds and the four lighter ones 
weigh 145, for a combined weight of 1,530 pounds. Similarly, if the passenger repre-
sentative means average in the sense of mode, it could be that two passengers weigh 
150 pounds and that the others have varying weights in excess of 200 pounds, for a 
combined weight of over 1,700 pounds. Only if the representative means average in the 
sense of mean do you know that the combined weight of the passengers is 9 × 150 or 
1,350 pounds.
Finally, sometimes a median average is the most meaningful. Suppose, for example,  
that you are a manufacturer of a product that appeals to people under age 35. To 
increase sales you decide to run an ad in a national magazine, but you want some as-
surance that the ad will be read by the right age group. If the advertising director of 
a magazine tells you that the average age of the magazine’s readers is 35, you know 
virtually nothing. If the director means average in the sense of mean, it could be that  
90 percent of the readers are over 35 and that the remaining 10 percent bring the aver-
age down to 35. Similarly, if the director means average in the sense of mode, it could 
be that 3 percent of the readers are exactly 35 and that the remaining 97 percent have 
ages ranging from 35 to 85. Only if the director means average in the sense of median 
do you know that half the readers are 35 or less.
12.4	
Dispersion
 Although averages often yield important information about a set of data, there are 
many cases in which merely knowing the average, in any sense of the term, tells us 
very little. The reason for this is that the average says nothing about how the data are 
distributed. For this, we need to know something about dispersion, which refers to 
how spread out the data are in regard to numerical value. Three important measures of 
dispersion are range, variance, and standard deviation.
Let us first consider the range of a set of data, which is the difference between the 
largest and the smallest values. For an example of the importance of this parameter, 
suppose that after living for many years in an intemperate climate, you decide to re- 
locate in an area that has a more ideal mean temperature. On discovering that the annual 
mean temperature of Oklahoma City is 60°F you decide to move there, only to find 
that you roast in the summer and freeze in the winter. Unfortunately, you had ignored 
the fact that Oklahoma City has a temperature range of 130°, extending from a record 
low of −17° to a record high of 113°. In contrast, San Nicholas Island, off the coast 
of California, has a mean temperature of 61° but a range of only 40°, extending from  

12
SECTION 12.4 Dispersion   595
47° in the winter to 87° in the summer. The temperature ranges for these two locations 
are approximated in Figure 12.1.
Even granting the importance of the range of the data in this example, however, 
range really tells us relatively little because it comprehends only two data points, the 
maximum and minimum. It says nothing about how the other data points are distrib-
uted. For this we need to know the variance, or the standard deviation, which ­measure 
how every data point varies or deviates from the mean.
For an example of the importance of these two parameters in describing a set of 
data, suppose you have a four-year-old child and you are looking for a day-care center 
that will provide plenty of possible playmates about the same age as your child. After 
calling several centers on the phone, you narrow the search down to two: the Rumpus 
Center and the Bumpus Center. Both report that they regularly care for nine children, 
that the mean and median age of the children is four, and that the range in ages of the 
children is six. Unable to decide between these two centers, you decide to pay them 
a visit. Having done so, you see that the Rumpus Center will meet your needs better 
than the Bumpus Center. The reason is that the ages of the children in the two centers 
are distributed differently.
The ages of the children in the two centers are as follows:
Rumpus Center: 1, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5, 7
Bumpus Center: 1, 1, 2, 2, 4, 6, 6, 7, 7
To illustrate the differences in distribution, these ages can be plotted on a certain kind of 
bar graph, called a histogram, as shown in Figures 12.2a and 12.2b. Obviously the reason 
why the Rumpus Center comes closer to meeting your needs is that it has seven children 
within one year of your own child, whereas the Bumpus Center has only one such child. 
This difference in distribution is measured by the variance and the standard deviation. 
Computing the value of these parameters for the two centers is quite easy, but first we 
must introduce some symbols. The standard deviation is represented in statistics by the 
Temperature
100
60
20
–20
Oklahoma City
San Nicholas Island
J
D
F
S
M
A
J
Month
N
M
O
A
J
FIGURE 12.1*
* This example is taken from Darrell Huff, How to Lie with Statistics (New York: Norton, 1954), 52.

596   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12
lowercase Greek letter σ (sigma), and the variance, which is the square of the standard 
deviation, is represented by σ2. We compute the variance first, which is defined as follows:
σ2 = Σ (x − μ)2
       n
In this expression (which looks far more complicated than it is), ∑ (uppercase sigma) 
means “the sum of, ” x is a variable that ranges over the ages of the children, the lowercase 
Greek letter μ (mu) is the mean age, and n is the number of children. Thus, to compute the 
variance, we take each of the ages of the children, subtract the mean age (4) from each, square 
the result of each, add up the squares, and then divide the sum by the number of children 
(9). The first three steps of this procedure for the Rumpus Center are reported in Table 12.4.
Frequency
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Age
5
6
7
Rumpus Center
mean
median
Figure 12.2
Frequency
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Age
5
6
7
Bumpus Center
mean
median
TABLE 12.4
x
(x − μ)
(x − μ)2
1
−3
9
3
−1
1
3
−1
1
4
  0
0
4
  0
0
4
  0
0
5
+1
1
5
+1
1
7
+3
9
Total = 22
(a)
(b)
First, the column for x (the children’s ages) is entered, next the column for (x − μ), and 
last the column for (x − μ)2. After adding up the figures in the final column, we obtain 
the variance by dividing the sum (22) by n (9):
Variance = σ2 = 22
9  = 2.44
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning

12
SECTION 12.4 Dispersion   597
Finally, to obtain the standard deviation, we take the square root of the variance:
Standard deviation = σ = √2.44 = 1.56
Next, we can perform the same operation on the ages of the children in the Bumpus 
Center. The figures are expressed in Table 12.5.
Now, for the variance, we have
σ2 =  52
9   = 5.78
And for the standard deviation, we have
σ = √5.78 = 2.40
These figures for the variance and standard deviation reflect the difference in distribu-
tion shown in the two histograms. In the histogram for the Rumpus Center, the ages of 
most of the children are clumped around the mean age (4). In other words, they vary or 
deviate relatively slightly from the mean, and this fact is reflected in relatively small figures 
for the variance (2.44) and the standard deviation (1.56). On the other hand, in the his-
togram for the Bumpus center, the ages of most of the children vary or deviate relatively 
greatly from the mean, so the variance (5.78) and the standard deviation (2.40) are larger.
One of the more important kinds of distribution used in statistics is called the 
­normal probability distribution, which expresses the distribution of random phe-
nomena in a population. Such phenomena include (approximately) the heights of adult 
men or women in a city, the useful life of a certain kind of tire or lightbulb, and the daily 
sales figures of a certain grocery store. To illustrate this concept, suppose that a certain 
college has 2,000 female students. The heights of these students range from 57 inches to 
73 inches. If we divide these heights into one-inch intervals and express them in terms 
of a histogram, the resulting graph would probably look like the one in Figure 12.3a.
This histogram has the shape of a bell. When a continuous curve is superimposed on 
top of this histogram, the result appears in Figure 12.3b. This curve is called a ­normal 
curve, and it represents a normal distribution. The heights of all of the students fit 
under the curve, and each vertical slice under the curve represents a certain subset 
TABLE 12.5
x
(x − μ)
(x − μ)2
1
−3
9
1
−3
9
2
−2
4
2
−2
4
4
 0
0
6
+2
4
6
+2
4
7
+3
9
7
+3
9
Total = 52

598   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12
of these heights. The number of heights trails off toward zero at the extreme left and 
right ends of the curve, and it reaches a maximum in the center. The peak of the curve 
reflects the average height in the sense of mean, median, and mode.
The parameters of variance and standard deviation apply to normal distributions 
in basically the same way as they do for the histograms relating to the day-care cen-
ters. Normal curves with a relatively small standard deviation tend to be relatively 
narrow and pointy, with most of the population clustered close to the mean, while 
curves with a relatively large standard deviation tend to be relatively flattened and 
stretched out, with most of the population distributed some distance from the mean. 
This idea is expressed in Figure 12.4. As usual, σ represents the standard deviation, 
and μ ­represents the mean.
57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73
Figure 12.3
(a)
57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73
(b)
Figure 12.4
σ = 2
μ
μ
μ
σ = 1
σ = 1
2
For a final example that illustrates the importance of dispersion, suppose that you 
decide to put your life savings into a business that designs and manufactures women’s 
dresses. As corporation president you decide to save money by restricting production 
to dresses that fit the average woman. Because the average size in the sense of mean, 
median, and mode is 12, you decide to make only size 12 dresses. Unfortunately, you 
later discover that while size 12 is indeed the average, 95 percent of women fall outside 
this interval, as Figure 12.5 shows.
The problem is that you failed to take into account the standard deviation. If the 
standard deviation were relatively small, then most of the dress sizes would be ­clustered 
about the mean (size 12). But in fact the standard deviation is relatively large, so most 
of the dress sizes fall outside this interval.
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning

12
SECTION 12.5 Graphs and Pictograms   599
12.5	
Graphs and Pictograms
Graphs provide a highly convenient and informative way to represent statistical data, 
but they are also susceptible to misuse and misinterpretation. Here we will confine our 
attention to some of the typical ways in which graphs are misused.
First of all, if a graph is to represent an actual situation, it is essential that both the 
vertical and horizontal axes be scaled. Suppose, for example, that the profit level of a 
corporation is represented by a graph such as Figure 12.6. Such a graph is practically 
meaningless because it fails to show how much the profits increased over what pe-
riod of time. If the curve represents a 10 percent increase over twenty years, then, of 
course, the picture is not very bright. Although they convey practically no information, 
graphs of this kind are used quite often in advertising. A manufacturer of ­vitamins, for 
­example, might print such a graph on the label of the bottle to suggest that a person’s 
energy level is supposed to increase dramatically after taking the tablets. Such ads often 
make an impression because they look scientific, and the viewer rarely bothers to check 
whether the axes are scaled, or precisely what the curve is supposed to signify.
A graph that more appropriately represents corporate profits is given in Figure 12.7 
(the corporation is fictitious).
Proﬁts
Time
Figure 12.6
Number of women
4
8
12
16
Dress size
20
Women who can
wear size 12
Figure 12.5
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning

600   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12
Proﬁts (millions of dollars)
Quarter
Tangerine Computers, 2013
1
2
3
4
15
10
5
Figure 12.7
Inspection of the graph reveals that between January and December profits rose from $8 to 
$10 million, which represents a respectable 25 percent increase. This increase can be made 
to appear even more impressive by chopping off the bottom of the graph and altering the 
scale on the vertical axis while leaving the horizontal scale as is ­(Figure 12.8). Again, strictly 
speaking, the graph accurately represents the facts, but if the viewer fails to notice what has 
been done to the vertical scale, he or she is liable to derive the impression that the profits 
have increased by something like a hundred ­percent or more. Most of the graphs shown on 
CNBC, a widely watched business channel, are of this sort.
Proﬁts (millions of dollars)
Quarter
Tangerine Computers, 2013
1
2
3
4
10
9
8
Figure 12.8
The same strategy can be used with bar graphs. The graphs in Figure 12.9 compare sales 
volume for two consecutive years, but the one on the right conveys the ­message more dra-
matically. Of course, if the sales volume has decreased, the corporate ­directors would prob-
ably want to minimize the difference, in which case the design on the left is preferable.
An even greater illusion can be created with the use of pictograms. A pictogram is a 
diagram that compares two situations through drawings that differ either in size or in 
the number of entities depicted. Consider Figure 12.10, which illustrates the increase 
in production of an oil company between 2005 and 2013.
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning

12
SECTION 12.5 Graphs and Pictograms   601
Even though the actual production is stated adjacent to each drawing, this pictogram 
creates the illusion that production has much more than doubled. While the drawing 
on the right is exactly twice as high as the one on the left, it is also twice as wide. Thus, it 
occupies four times as much room on the page. Furthermore, when the viewer’s three-
dimensional judgment is called into play, the barrel on the right is perceived as having 
eight times the volume of the one on the left. Thus, when the third dimension is taken 
into account, the increase in consumption is exaggerated by 600 percent.
Total sales (thousands of units)
Tangerine
Computers
2012
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
2013
Total sales (thousands of units)
Tangerine
Computers
2012
8
7
6
   2013 
Figure 12.9
2005
1 million
barrels
2013
2 million
barrels
Figure 12.11
This pictogram accurately represents the increase because it unequivocally shows 
that the amount doubled between the years represented. But the effect is not especially 
­dramatic. The increase in production can be exaggerated by representing the 2013 level 
with an oil barrel twice as tall (Figure 12.11).
2005
1 million
barrels
2013
2 million
barrels
Figure 12.10
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning
© Cengage Learning

12
602   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning
12.6	
Percentages
The use of percentages to compare two or more situations or quantities is another 
source of illusion in statistics. A favorite of advertisers is to make claims such as “Zesty 
Cola has 20 percent fewer calories” or “The price of the new Vizio flat screen has been 
reduced by 15 percent.” These claims are virtually meaningless. The question is, 20 per-
cent less than what, and 15 percent reduced from what? If the basis of the comparison 
or reduction is not mentioned, the claim tells us nothing. Yet such claims are often 
effective because they leave us with the impression that the product is in some way 
superior or less expensive.
Another strategy sometimes used by governments and businesses involves playing 
sleight-of-hand tricks with the base of the percentages. Suppose, for example, that you 
are a university president involved with a funding drive to increase the university’s 
endowment. Suppose further that the endowment currently stands at $15 million and 
that the objective is to increase it to $20 million. To guarantee the success of the drive, 
you engage the services of a professional fund-raising organization. At the end of the 
allotted time the organization has increased the endowment to $16 million. They jus-
tify their effort by stating that, since $16 million of the $20 million has been raised, the 
drive was 80 percent successful (16/20 × 100%).
In fact, of course, the drive was nowhere near that successful. The objective was not 
to raise $20 million but only $5 million, and of that amount only $1 million has actually 
been raised. Thus, at best the drive was only 20 percent successful. Even this figure is 
probably exaggerated, though, because $1 million might have been raised without any 
special drive. The trick played by the fund-raising organization consisted in switching 
the numbers by which the percentage was to be computed.
This same trick, incidentally, was allegedly used by Joseph Stalin to justify the ­success 
of his first five-year plan.*  Among other things, the original plan called for an increase 
in steel output from 4.2 million tons to 10.3 million. After five years the actual output 
rose to 5.9 million, whereupon Stalin announced that the plan was 57 percent successful 
(5.9/10.3 × 100%). The correct percentage, of course, is much lower. The plan called 
for an increase of 6.1 million tons and the actual increase was only 1.7 ­million. Thus, at 
best, the plan was only 28 percent successful.
Similar devices have been used by employers on their unsuspecting employ-
ees. When business is bad, an employer may argue that salaries must be reduced by 
20 ­percent. Later, when business improves, salaries will be raised by 20 percent, thus 
restoring them to their original level. Such an argument, of course, is fallacious. If a 
person earns $10 per hour and that person’s salary is reduced by 20 percent, the ad-
justed salary is $8. If that figure is later increased by 20 percent, the final salary is $9.60. 
The problem, of course, stems from the fact that a different base is used for the two 
percentages. The fallacy committed by such arguments is a variety of equivocation. 
Percentages are relative terms, and they mean different things in different contexts.
*Stephen K. Campbell, Flaws and Fallacies in Statistical Thinking (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1974), 8.  
The original reference is to Eugene Lyons’s Workers’ Paradise Lost.

12
A different kind of fallacy occurs when a person attempts to add percentages as if they 
were cardinal numbers. Suppose, for example, that a baker increases the price of a loaf of 
bread by 50 percent. To justify the increase the baker argues that it was necessitated by ris-
ing costs: The price of flour increased by 10 percent, the cost of labor rose 20 ­percent, util-
ity rates went up 10 percent, and the cost of the lease on the building increased 10 percent.  
This adds up to a 50 percent increase. Again, the argument is fallacious. If everything had 
increased by 20 percent, this would justify only a 20 percent increase in the price of bread. 
As it is, the justified increase is less than that. The fallacy committed by such arguments 
would probably be best classified as a case of missing the point (ignoratio elenchi). The 
arguer has failed to grasp the significance of his own premises.
Statistical variations of the suppressed evidence fallacy are also quite common. One 
variety consists in drawing a conclusion from a comparison of two different things 
or situations. For example, people running for political office sometimes cite figures 
indicating that crime in the community has increased by, let us say, 20 percent during 
the past three or four years. What is needed, they conclude, is an all-out war on crime. 
But they fail to mention that the population in the community has also increased by 
20 percent during the same period. The number of crimes per capita, therefore, has not 
changed. Another example of the same fallacy is provided by the ridiculous argument 
that 90 percent more traffic accidents occur in clear weather than in foggy weather and 
that therefore it is 90 percent more dangerous to drive in clear than in foggy weather. 
The arguer ignores the fact that the vast percentage of vehicle miles are driven in clear 
weather, which accounts for the greater number of accidents.
A similar misuse of percentages is committed by businesses and corporations that, 
for whatever reason, want to make it appear that they have earned less profit than they 
actually have. The technique consists of expressing profit as a percentage of sales volume 
instead of as a percentage of investment. For example, during a certain year a corpora-
tion might have a total sales volume of $100 million, a total investment of $10 million,  
and a profit of $5 million. If profits are expressed as a percentage of investment, they 
amount to a hefty 50 percent; but as a percentage of sales they are only 5 percent. To 
appreciate the fallacy in this procedure, consider the case of the jewelry merchant who 
buys one piece of jewelry each morning for $9 and sells it in the evening for $10. At the 
end of the year the total sales volume is $3,650, the total investment $9, and the total 
profit $365. Profits as a percentage of sales amount to only 10 percent, but as a percent-
age of investment they exceed 4,000 percent.
EXERCISE 12	
	 I.	 Criticize the following arguments in light of the material presented in this chapter.
	
★1.	 To test the algae content in a lake, a biologist took a sample of the water at one 
end. The algae in the sample registered 5 micrograms per liter. Therefore, the 
algae in the lake at that time registered 5 micrograms per liter.
	
2.	 To estimate public support for a new municipality-funded convention cen-
ter, researchers surveyed 100 homeowners in one of the city’s fashionable  
EXERCISES   603

12
12
neighborhoods. They found that 89 percent of those sampled were enthusias-
tic about the project. Therefore, we may conclude that 89 percent of the city’s 
residents favor the convention center.
 	
3.	 A quality-control inspector for a food-processing firm needed assurance that 
the cans of fruit in a production run were filled to capacity. He opened every 
tenth box in the warehouse and removed the can in the left front corner of 
each box. He found that all of these cans were filled to capacity. Therefore, it is 
probable that all of the cans in the production run were filled to capacity.
	
★4.	 When a random sample of 600 voters was taken on the eve of the presidential 
election, it was found that 51 percent of those sampled intended to vote for the 
Democrat and 49 percent for the Republican. Therefore, the Democrat will 
probably win the popular vote.
	
5.	 To determine the public’s attitude toward TV soap operas, 1,000 people were 
contacted by telephone between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. The 
numbers were selected randomly from the phone directories of cities across 
the nation. The researchers reported that 43 percent of the respondents said 
that they were avid viewers. From this we may conclude that 43 percent of the 
public watches TV soap operas.
	
6.	 To predict the results of a U.S. Senate race in New York State, two polls were 
taken. One was based on a random sample of 600 voters, the other on a ran-
dom sample of 2,400 voters. Since the second sample was four times as large as 
the first, the results of the second poll were four times as accurate as the first.
	
★7.	 In a survey conducted by the manufacturers of Ultrasheen toothpaste, 65 per-
cent of the dentists randomly sampled preferred that brand over all others. 
Clearly, Ultrasheen is the brand preferred by most dentists.
	
8.	 To determine the percentage of adult Americans who have never read the U.S. 
Constitution, surveyors put this question to a random sample of 1,000 adults. 
Only 13 percent gave negative answers. Therefore, since the sampling error for 
such a sample is 3 percent, we may conclude that no more than 16 percent of 
American adults have not read the Constitution.
	
9.	 To determine the percentage of patients who follow the advice of their per-
sonal physician, researchers asked 200 randomly chosen physicians to put the 
question to their patients. Of the 2,400 patients surveyed, 98 percent replied 
that they did indeed follow their doctor’s advice. We may therefore conclude 
that at least 96 percent of the patients across the nation follow the advice of 
their personal physician.
	 ★10.	 Janet Ryan can afford to pay no more than $15 for a birthday gift for her eight-
year-old daughter. Since the average price of a toy at General Toy Company 
is $15, Janet can expect to find an excellent selection of toys within her price 
range at that store.
	
11.	 Anthony Valardi, who owns a fish market, pays $2 per pound to fishermen for 
coho salmon. A certain fisherman certifies that the average size of the salmon 
in his catch of the day is 10 pounds, and that the catch numbers 100 salmon. 
604   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning

12
Mr. Valardi is therefore justified in paying the fisherman $2,000 for the whole 
catch.
	
12.	 Pamela intends to go shopping for a new pair of shoes. She wears size 8. Since 
the average size of the shoes carried by the Bon Marche is size 8, Pamela can 
expect to find an excellent selection of shoes in her size at that store.
	 ★13.	 Tim Cassidy, who works for a construction company, is told to load a pile of 
rocks onto a truck. The rocks are randomly sized, and the average piece weighs 
50 pounds. Thus, Tim should have no trouble loading the rocks by hand.
	
14.	 The average IQ (in the sense of mean, median, and mode) of the students in 
Dr. Jacob’s symbolic logic class is 120. Thus, none of the students should have 
any trouble mastering the subject matter.
	
15.	 An insecticide manufacturer prints the following graph on the side of its 
spray cans:
Number of bugs killed
Time
After one application
	
	 Obviously, the insecticide is highly effective at killing bugs, and it keeps work-
ing for a long time.
	 ★16.	 A corporation’s sales for two consecutive years are represented in a bar graph. 
Since the bar for the later year is twice as high as the one for the previous year, 
it follows that sales for the later year were double those for the previous year.
	
17.	 Forced to make cutbacks, the president of a manufacturing firm reduced cer-
tain costs as follows: advertising by 4 percent, transportation by 5 percent, ma-
terials by 2 percent, and employee benefits by 3 percent. The president thus 
succeeded in reducing total costs by 14 percent.
	
18.	 During a certain year, a grocery store chain had total sales of $100 million and 
profits of $10 million. The profits thus amounted to a modest 10 percent for 
that year.
	 ★19.	 There were 20 percent more traffic accidents in 2013 than there were in 1995. 
Therefore, it was 20 percent more dangerous to drive a car in 2013 than it was 
in 1995.
	
20.	 An efficiency expert was hired to increase the productivity of a manufactur-
ing firm and was given three months to accomplish the task. At the end of the  
period the productivity had increased from 1,500 units per week to 1,700. 
EXERCISES   605

12
Since the goal was 2,000 units per week, the effort of the efficiency expert was 
85 percent successful (1,700/2,000).
	II.	 Compute the answers to the following questions:
	
★1.	 What figures should be written in the left-hand column of Table 12.1, in the text, 
to produce a similar table based on a confidence level of 99 percent? For a confi-
dence level of 99 percent, the margin of error is approximately equal to 1.29/√n.
	
2.	 Given the following group of people together with their weights, what is the 
average weight in the sense of mean, median, and mode?
Number of people
Weight
2
150
4
160
3
170
1
180
1
190
1
200
1
220
2
230
 	
3.	 Given the following group of people together with their salaries, what is the 
average salary in the sense of mean, median, and mode?
Number of people
Salary
1
$95,000
2
  85,000
1
  70,000
3
  40,000
1
  30,000
2
  20,000
5
  15,000
	
★4.	 A day-care center cares for ten children. Their ages are 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 6, 6.  
Construct a histogram that represents the distribution of ages. What is the 
mean age? What is the variance and standard deviation of these ages?
	
5.	 A small company has five employees who missed work during a certain month. 
The number of days missed were 1, 1, 2, 4, 7. What is the mean ­number of days 
missed? What is the variance and standard deviation of this set of data?
	
6.	 An instructor gave a ten-question multiple-choice quiz to twelve students.  
The scores were 10, 10, 9, 9, 8, 8, 8, 7, 7, 7, 7, 6. What is the mean score? What is 
the variance and standard deviation of these scores?
606   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning

12
	III.	Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
★1.	 If a sample is very large, it need not be randomly selected.
	
2.	 If a population is randomly arranged, a sample obtained by selecting every 
tenth member would be a random sample.
	
3.	 If a sample is randomly selected, the larger the sample is, the more closely it 
replicates the population.
	
★4.	 To ensure the same precision, a population of 1 million would require a much 
larger random sample than would a population of 100,000.
	
5.	 In general, if sample A is twice as large as sample B, then the sampling error for 
A is one-half that for B.
	
6.	 When a sample consists of human beings, the purpose for which the sample is 
taken can affect the outcome.
	
★7.	 The personal interaction between a surveyor and a respondent can affect the 
outcome of a survey.
	
8.	 The mean value of a set of data is the value that occurs with the greatest fre-
quency.
	
9.	 The median value of a set of data is the middle point when the data are ar-
ranged in ascending order.
	 ★10.	 The modal value of a set of data is the arithmetical average.
	
11.	 If one needed to know whether a sizable portion of a group were above or 
below a certain level, the most useful sense of average would be mode.
	
12.	 Data reflecting the results of a random sample conform fairly closely to the 
normal probability distribution.
	 ★13.	 If a set of data conforms to the normal probability distribution, then the mean, 
median, and mode have the same value.
	
14.	 Range, variance, and standard deviation are measurements of dispersion.
	
15.	 Statements about averages often present an incomplete picture, lacking infor-
mation about the dispersion.
	 ★16.	 Data reflecting the size of full-grown horses would exhibit greater dispersion 
than would data reflecting the size of full-grown dogs.
	
17.	 The visual impression made by graphs can be exaggerated by changing one of 
the scales while leaving the other unchanged.
	
18.	 Data reflecting a 100 percent increase in housing construction could be 
­accurately represented by a pictogram of two houses, one twice as high as the 
other.
	 ★19.	 If a certain quantity is increased by 10 percent and later decreased by 
10 ­percent, the quantity is restored to what it was originally.
	
20.	 Expressing profits as a percentage of sales volume presents an honest picture 
of the earnings of a corporation.
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.
EXERCISES   607

	
Summary
Statistical Reasoning:
• Includes any kind of argumentation based on statistical measurement.
• Such arguments can be misleading for several reasons:
■
■
Biased samples:
▶	 Not randomly selected
▶	 Too small (Note sampling error.)
▶	 Psychological factors
■
■
Different meaning for “average”:
▶	 Mean (the numerical average)
▶	 Median (the midpoint)
▶	 Mode (the value that occurs with the greatest frequency)
■
■
Failure to take dispersion into account:
▶	 Range (difference between largest and smallest values)
▶	 Variance (how much every data point varies from the mean)
▶	 Standard deviation (square root of the variance)
■
■
Illusory graphs:
▶	 Failure to scale the axes
▶	 Chopping off the bottom of the graph
▶	 Altering the scale of the axes
■
■
Illusory pictograms:
▶	 Illusions related to spatial dimensions
■
■
Improper percentages:
▶	 Failure to state the base of the percentage
▶	 Slight-of-hand tricks with the base
▶	 Numerical errors
12
608   CHAPTER 12 Statistical Reasoning

609
Hypothetical/Scientific 
Reasoning
13.1	 The Hypothetical Method
13.2	 Hypothetical Reasoning: Four Examples from Science
13.3	 The Proof of Hypotheses
13.4	 The Tentative Acceptance of Hypotheses 
13.1	
The Hypothetical Method
Hypothetical reasoning is most immediately applied to the production of explanations. 
You will recall from Chapter 1 of this book that an explanation is a kind of expression 
that purports to shed light on some event. Many explanations are grounded in our 
immediate experience or background knowledge. For example, if someone should ask 
you why the Titanic sank, you would answer that it sank because it hit an iceberg. Why 
did you fail the calculus test? Because I didn’t study. Why did President Kennedy die so 
young? Because he was assassinated. Why are you so jittery? Because I just drank three 
cups of coffee. No hypotheses are needed to produce explanations of this sort.
However, it often happens that the needed explanation is not so forthcoming. Sup-
pose you are faced with questions such as these: Why is the suicide rate for young men 
four times the rate for young women? Why has the incidence of autism exploded in 
the past twenty years? Why is the universe expanding more rapidly today than it was 
a million years ago? Why do animals sleep? No appeal to immediate experience or 
background knowledge will supply an answer. Clearly a different approach is needed. 
13
PREVIEW    Suppose you arrange to meet a friend for lunch at a downtown restaurant. You show 
up at the agreed upon time, but after a half hour there is still no sign of your friend. Was he delayed  
at the office? You call the office. He’s not there. Is he stuck in traffic? You check your mobile device for 
traffic congestion. No congestion. Did he get the date mixed up? You call his roommate and he says the 
lunch date is written in the calendar. These questions suggest hypotheses, and the actions you took are 
attempts to prove them true.
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

610   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
For a simpler example, suppose you try to open a window but find that it will not 
budge. Since it is impossible to see what is jamming it, you make a conjecture. Perhaps 
the window has been painted shut from the outside. If that is the case, then running a 
knife along the edge of the window from the outside should free it up. You do this, and 
the window opens. In solving the stuck-window problem, the informed conjecture that 
you made is a hypothesis, and the reasoning process you used to produce it, draw an 
implication, and test the implication is called hypothetical reasoning.
Hypothetical reasoning is used by nearly all of us in our day-to-day experience. The 
auto mechanic constructs hypotheses to determine why a vibration occurs at certain 
speeds, the motorist on the freeway or turnpike reasons hypothetically to determine 
why the traffic is backed up bumper-to-bumper even though it is not yet rush hour, 
the physician hypothesizes about the cause of a disease prior to prescribing medicine, 
the teacher hypothesizes about the best way to present a complicated subject in the 
classroom, and the prosecuting attorney suggests hypotheses to the jury in arguing 
about the motive for a crime. In all of these cases the evidence is not sufficient to indi-
cate exactly what is going on, what lies behind the scene, or what approach to take, so 
hypotheses are constructed to make sense of the situation and to direct future action.
Hypothetical reasoning is used most explicitly in philosophical and scientific 
inquiry. Every scientific theory can be viewed as a hypothesis for unifying and ratio-
nalizing events in nature. The Ptolemaic and Copernican theories about the sun and 
planets, Dalton’s atomic theory, Darwin’s theory of evolution, and Einstein’s theory of 
relativity are all hypotheses for making sense of the data of observation. The prob-
lem for the scientist is that the underlying structure of nature is hidden from view, 
and the data of observation by themselves are not sufficient to reveal this structure. 
In response, the scientist constructs hypotheses that provide ways of conceptualiz-
ing the data and that suggest specific questions to be answered through the design of 
­controlled experiments.
Analogously, every philosophical system can be viewed as a grand hypothesis for 
interpreting the content of experience. Plato’s theory of forms, Aristotle’s theory of sub-
stance, Leibniz’s monads, and Kant’s theory about the mind are all hypotheses aimed 
at illuminating various aspects of experience. Just as the structure of nature is hidden 
from the scientist, the meaning of experience is hidden from the philosopher, and or-
dinary common sense will not provide the answer. In response, the philosopher con-
structs hypotheses that can be used to shed light on the content of experience and to 
provide suggestions for further analysis.
Whether it is applied in philosophy, science, or ordinary life, the hypothetical method 
involves four basic stages:
1.	 Occurrence of a problem
2.	
Formulating a hypothesis
3.	
Drawing implications from the hypothesis
4.	
Testing the implications
These four stages may be illustrated through the procedure used by a detective in 
solving a crime. Suppose that a woman has been murdered in her apartment. Initially,  

SECTION 13.1 The Hypothetical Method   611
13
everything in the apartment is a potential clue: the empty wine glasses in the sink, the 
small container of cocaine on the coffee table, the automobile key found on the carpet, 
the strand of blond hair removed from the couch, and so on. To introduce an element 
of rationality into the situation, the detective formulates a hypothesis—let us say the 
hypothesis that the key found on the carpet fits the murderer’s car.
From this hypothesis several implications can be drawn. Suppose that the key is the 
kind that fits only late-model Cadillacs. It follows that the murderer drives a late-model 
Cadillac. Furthermore, if the key is the only one the murderer owns, it follows that the 
car may be parked nearby. A third implication is that the murderer’s name may be on 
record at the local Cadillac dealership. To test these implications, the detective con-
ducts a search of the streets in the vicinity and contacts the local Cadillac dealer for the 
names of recent buyers.
This example illustrates three additional points about hypotheses. The first is that 
a hypothesis is not derived from the evidence to which it pertains but rather is added 
to the evidence by the investigator. A hypothesis is a free, albeit educated, creation of 
the mind used to structure the evidence and unveil the pattern that lies beneath the 
surface. It may be that the detective’s hypothesis is completely false. Perhaps the key fits 
a car that was lent to the victim for the weekend. A wide variety of other possibilities 
are conceivable.
The second point is that a hypothesis directs the search for evidence. Without a hy-
pothesis for guidance, all facts are equally relevant. The mineral content of moon rocks 
and the temperature in the Sahara would be as relevant as the cars parked on the street 
outside the apartment. The hypothesis tells the investigator what to look for and what 
to ignore.
The third point concerns the proof of hypotheses. Let us suppose that the detective 
finds a late-model Cadillac parked outside the apartment building and that the key 
fits the ignition. Such a discovery might lend credibility to the hypothesis, but it would 
not in any sense prove it. Concluding that a hypothesis is proven true by the discovery 
that one of its implications is true amounts to committing the fallacy of affirming the 
consequent (see Section 6.6). Where H stands for a hypothesis and I for an implication, 
such an argument has the invalid form
If H, then I
I       
H
Let us suppose, on the other hand, that the murderer turns himself or herself in to the 
police and that the only car the murderer owns or drives is a Ford. Such a fact would 
prove the hypothesis false because it would falsify the implication that the murderer 
drives a Cadillac. The argument form involved in such an inference is modus tollens:
If H, then I
not I     
not H
For the hypothesis to be proved true, the car that the key fits would have to be found 
and the owner would have to confess to the crime.

612   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
As we have just shown, hypotheses and hypothetical reasoning play an impor-
tant role in many of life’s endeavors—from philosophy, to science, to the solution 
of ordinary day-to-day problems. An important final question is, How does the 
hypothetical reasoning that occurs in science differ from these other modes of hy-
pothetical reasoning? One answer relates to the kinds of tests that scientific hypoth-
eses are subjected to. Scientific tests always involve the measurement of something, 
and the results of that measurement are nearly always expressed in the language of 
mathematics. 
For example, physics and chemistry test hypotheses by measuring physical quanti-
ties such as mass, force, distance, time, motion, pressure, pH levels, heat, and so on. For 
this purpose, instruments are nearly always used—meter sticks, clocks, balance scales, 
microscopes, thermometers, and such. These instruments automatically yield a math-
ematical expression of the measurement—10 centimeters, 4 minutes, 20 grams. Many 
of these same kinds of measurements are also used in biology. For example, a biologist 
wanting to test the hypothesis that water temperature affects the color of fish would use 
a thermometer to measure the temperature of the water and a color spectrometer or 
color chart to measure the color of the fish.
Social scientists also use measurements to test hypotheses. Suppose a psycholo-
gist wanted to test the hypothesis that playing violent video games causes children to 
exhibit aggressive behaviors. The psychologist might first develop a scale to measure 
the violence levels of the games, and then construct a chart of aggressive behaviors to 
measure the aggression levels of the children. Similarly, a sociologist wanting to test 
the hypothesis that drug use on a college campus is correlated with date rape might 
begin by accumulating statistics for the phenomena in question, and then use statisti-
cal methods to prove the correlation. Collecting the initial statistics for such research 
amounts to a measurement of the degree to which the phenomenon occurs in the 
community. 
These types of test procedures differ from the kind of test undertaken in the stuck-
window example, where a knife was used to cut through dried paint. Most hypotheses 
formed in connection with ordinary life problems are like this one and do not require 
measurements as a test. But in science, the lack of precise measurements would under-
mine the credibility of most test procedures.
13.2	
Hypothetical Reasoning:  
Four Examples from Science
Some of the clearest illustrations of the hypothetical method of reasoning can be found 
in scientific discoveries. Four examples are the discovery of radium by Pierre and Marie 
Curie; the discovery of the planet Neptune by Adams, Leverrier, and Galle; the discov-
ery of atmospheric pressure by Torricelli; and Pasteur’s research concerning the spon-
taneous generation of life. Following is a consideration of each of these examples with 
special attention to the four stages of hypothetical inquiry.

13
SECTION 13.2 Hypothetical Reasoning: Four Examples from Science   613
Radium
In 1896 the French physicist Henri Becquerel discovered that crystals containing ura-
nium had the power to expose photographic plates. He found that when these crystals 
were placed on top of an unexposed plate and left for a certain time, dark blotches ap-
peared in their place when the plate was developed. Becquerel concluded that the crys-
tals emitted certain rays that penetrated the opaque covering of the plates and reacted 
with the photosensitive material underneath. Further investigation showed that these 
rays were not as strong as X-rays, which could be used to photograph bone structure, 
and so Becquerel’s interest in them lapsed.
A year later Marie Curie revived the question when she adopted it as the topic of 
her doctoral research at the University of Paris. In place of Becquerel’s photographic 
plates she substituted an electrometer, which was better suited to measuring the in-
tensity of the rays, and she proceeded to conduct various experiments with pure ura-
nium to determine the source of the rays that the metal emitted. When none of these 
experiments proved fruitful, she shifted her attention to the question of whether other 
metals or minerals emitted the same kind of rays as uranium. She tested hundreds of 
metals, compounds, and ores, but the only one that proved interesting was pitchblende, 
a certain ore of uranium. Because pitchblende contained uranium, she anticipated that 
it would emit rays; however, because it also contained a number of impurities, she ex-
pected the rays to be weaker than they were for pure uranium. Instead, they turned out 
to be stronger. This problem caught Madame Curie’s attention and provided the focus 
for her research in the months ahead.
In response to the problem, Madame Curie formulated the hypothesis that the im-
purities in the pitchblende somehow triggered the uranium to increase the emission of 
rays. One implication of this hypothesis was that mixing pure uranium with the kinds 
of impurities found in pitchblende would cause an increase in the emission of rays. 
To test this implication, Curie diluted pure uranium with various elements and mea-
sured the strength of the rays. The results were always the same: The ­emissions were al-
ways less than they were for pure uranium. Because of these results, she abandoned the  
hypothesis.
Madame Curie then formulated a second hypothesis: The intensified emissions were 
caused directly by some impurity in the pitchblende. The only other element besides 
uranium that was known to emit rays, however, was thorium, and the pitchblende that 
had been tested contained no thorium. Thus, an immediate implication of the hypoth-
esis was that the increased rays were caused by an unknown element. A second implica-
tion was that this element could be separated from the pitchblende through a process 
of refinement. At this point Marie Curie was joined by her husband, Pierre, and they 
began a combined effort to isolate the unknown element.
Because the element was present in only the most minute quantities, separating 
a measurable amount from the other impurities required a great deal of effort. The  
Curies began by grinding up some pitchblende and dissolving it in acid. Finally, after 
numerous stages of filtration and the addition of other chemicals, they obtained a pinch 
of white powder. By weight, this material was found to be 900 times more radioactive  

614   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
than pure uranium, but since the primary component in the powder was barium, the 
unknown element still had not been isolated.
Rather than continue with additional stages of refinement, the Curies decided to 
attempt a spectrographic analysis of the powder. Such analysis, they hoped, would re-
veal the characteristic spectrum line of the unknown element. This proposal, which 
amounted to a third implication of the hypothesis, was put to the test. When the pow-
der was burned in a spectrometer, a line appeared in the ultraviolet range that was 
­different from that for any other element. From the combined evidence of the spectrum 
line and the intense radiation, the Curies announced in 1898 the discovery of a new ele-
ment, which they called radium. After more processing and refinement, enough of the 
material was finally obtained to determine its atomic weight.
Neptune
In 1781 William Herschel discovered the planet Uranus. However, the production of a 
table giving the motion of the new planet had to wait until the gravitational interactions 
between Uranus, Jupiter, and Saturn had been worked out mathematically. The latter 
task was accomplished by Pierre Laplace in his Mechanique Celeste, and in 1820 Alexis 
Bouvard used this work to construct tables for all three planets. These tables predicted 
the orbital motions of Jupiter and Saturn very accurately, but within a few years Uranus 
was found to have deviated from its predicted path. A problem thus emerged: Why did 
the tables work for Jupiter and Saturn but not for Uranus?
In response to this problem, several astronomers entertained the hypothesis 
that an eighth planet existed beyond the orbit of Uranus and that the gravitational 
­interaction between these two planets caused Uranus to deviate from its predicted 
position. Not until 1843, however, did John Couch Adams, a recent graduate of Cam-
bridge, ­undertake the task of working out the mathematical implications of this 
­hypothesis. After two years’ work Adams produced a table of motions and orbital 
elements that predicted the location of the hypothetical planet, and his computations 
were so ­accurate that if anyone with a telescope had bothered to look, they would have 
found the new planet within two degrees of its predicted position. Unfortunately, no 
one looked for it.
At about the same time that Adams completed his work on the problem, the French 
astronomer U. J. J. Leverrier, working independently of Adams, reported a similar set of 
motions and orbital elements to the French Academy of Science. The close agreement 
between Adams’s and Leverrier’s predictions prompted a search for the planet, but be-
cause a rather broad section of sky was swept, the planet was missed.
Finally, Leverrier sent a copy of his figures to Johann Galle at the Berlin Ob-
servatory, where a set of star charts was being prepared. It was suggested that the 
region corresponding to Leverrier’s computations be observed and the results 
matched against the charts. This was done, and a small starlike object was found 
that was not on the charts. The next night the same object was sighted, and it was 
found to have moved. The new planet was thus identified. It was named Neptune 
after most astronomers outside France objected to the original suggestion that it 
be called Leverrier.

13
SECTION 13.2 Hypothetical Reasoning: Four Examples from Science   615
Atmospheric Pressure
Originated by Aristotle, the principle that nature abhors a vacuum was used for centu-
ries to explain the fact that in emptying a keg of wine an opening had to be made at the 
top as well as at the bottom. Because nature would not allow a vacuum to be created in-
side the keg, the wine would not drain from the bottom until air was let in at the top. It 
was thought that this principle held universally for all applications involving a vacuum, 
but in the sixteenth century it was found that suction pumps used to drain water from 
mine shafts would not work if the pump was situated over 30 feet above the water level. 
This caused people to wonder whether nature’s abhorrence of a vacuum, while holding 
true for kegs of wine, had certain limits for pumps.
In 1630 Giovanni Baliani of Genoa discovered a similar limitation in regard to si-
phons. When he attempted to siphon water from a reservoir over a 60-foot hill, he 
found that the siphon would not work. When the siphon was completely filled with 
water and the stoppers were removed from both ends, a vacuum seemed to be created 
in the uppermost parts of the pipe.
These findings were communicated to Gasparo Berti in Rome, who, around 1641, 
attempted to determine more scientifically whether a vacuum could actually be cre-
ated. Berti designed an apparatus consisting of a spherical glass vessel attached to a pipe 
about 40 feet long. The apparatus was affixed upright to the side of a tower and after the 
valve at the lower end of the pipe was closed, water was poured through the upper open-
ing in the glass vessel. When both the pipe and the glass vessel were completely filled, the 
opening in the vessel was sealed and the valve at the lower end of the pipe was opened. 
Immediately water rushed from the bottom of the pipe, creating a vacuum in the glass 
vessel. This experiment crystallized a problem that had been developing for many years: 
If nature abhorred a vacuum, why did it tolerate the creation of one in the glass vessel? 
Furthermore, why did the water always descend to the same level in the pipe?
The results of Berti’s experiment were communicated to Evangelista Torricelli in 
Florence, who was at that time Galileo’s assistant. Galileo himself thought that the water 
was supported in the pipe by the power of the vacuum, but after Galileo’s death in 1642, 
Torricelli formulated his own hypothesis: The water was supported in the pipe by the 
pressure of the atmosphere. Torricelli reasoned that we live “at the bottom of an ocean 
of air” and that the pressure of the air pushing against the bottom of the pipe supported 
the water at a certain height in the pipe. A point of equilibrium was reached, he thought, 
when the weight of the water remaining in the pipe equaled the weight of the air push-
ing down from above.
From this hypothesis Torricelli derived several implications. One was that the  
pressure of the atmosphere would support a column of mercury about 29 inches high 
in a tube sealed at the top. This followed from the fact that the atmosphere supports 
a column of water 33 feet high, that mercury is 13.6 times as dense as water, and that 
33/13.6 × 12 inches = 29 inches. A second implication was that such a tube filled with 
mercury could be used to measure fluctuations in atmospheric pressure. This second 
implication won Torricelli credit for formulating the theory of the barometer. Finally, 
Torricelli reasoned that if such a device were conveyed to a place where the air was 
more rarefied, such as on a mountaintop, the column of mercury would descend.

616   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
The first of these implications was tested by Torricelli’s associate, Vincenzo Viviani. 
Viviani obtained a 4-foot section of glass tube sealed at one end, enough mercury to 
completely fill it, and a dish to hold more mercury. After pouring the mercury into the 
tube Viviani placed his thumb over the open end, inverted the tube, and placed the open 
end in the dish of mercury. After he released his thumb he watched the column of mer-
cury descend to about 29 inches above the level of mercury in the dish. Thus was created 
the first barometer. Its successful use in measuring atmospheric pressure came later.
The test of Torricelli’s third implication was taken up in 1647 by the French philoso-
pher Blaise Pascal. Having received word of Torricelli’s experiments with the barometer,  
Pascal constructed one for himself. He readily became convinced of the correctness of 
Torricelli’s hypothesis, and to demonstrate its correctness in opposition to the vacuum 
principle, he requested that his brother-in-law, F. Perier, convey a barometer to the top 
of the Puy de Dôme, one of the highest mountains in Auvergne. A year later Perier was 
able to fulfill this request. He began the experiment by setting up two barometers in 
the monastery at the foot of the mountain. After noting that both columns of mercury 
rose to an identical height, he disassembled one of the barometers and instructed one 
of the friars to check the mercury level in the other throughout the day. Then Perier, 
accompanied by a group of witnesses, set off up the mountain with the other barom-
eter. On reaching the summit, he assembled the second barometer and discovered to 
the amazement of all that the mercury level was more than 3 inches lower than it had 
been at the foot of the mountain. As a double check the barometer was taken apart and 
reassembled at five different spots on the summit. Each time the results were the same.
At the midpoint of his descent Perier reassembled the barometer once again. He 
found that the mercury level was about midway between where it was at the bottom and 
at the top of the mountain. Finally, on returning to the monastery, the friar who had been 
watching the barometer there was questioned about what he had observed. He reported 
that the mercury level had not changed since early that morning when the group had 
departed. Pascal announced the results of this experiment to the educated world, and 
the announcement succeeded in abolishing the principle that nature abhors a vacuum.
Spontaneous Generation
The theory of spontaneous generation holds that living beings arise spontaneously 
from lifeless matter. The roots of the theory extend into ancient times. Aristotle held 
that worms, the larvae of bees and wasps, ticks, fireflies, and other insects developed 
continually from the morning dew and from dry wood and hair. He also held that 
crabs and various mollusks developed from moist soil and decaying slime. Extensions 
of this theory prevailed throughout the Middle Ages and well into modern times. In 
the seventeenth century it was widely held that frogs were produced from the slime of 
marshes and eels from river water, and the physician Van Helmont thought that mice 
were produced from the action of human sweat on kernels of wheat. All one needed to 
do, according to Van Helmont, was toss a dirty shirt into a container of wheat, and in  
21 days the container would be teeming with mice. Even Descartes and Newton 
accepted the theory of spontaneous generation. Descartes held that various plants and 

13
SECTION 13.2 Hypothetical Reasoning: Four Examples from Science   617
insects originated in moist earth exposed to sunlight, and Newton thought that plants 
were produced from emanations from the tails of comets.
The first systematic effort to abolish the belief in spontaneous generation was made 
by the Italian physician Francesco Redi. In response to the commonly held idea that 
worms were spontaneously generated in rotting meat, Redi hypothesized that the 
worms were caused by flies. An immediate implication was that if flies were kept away 
from the meat, the worms would not develop. To test this hypothesis Redi cut up a piece 
of meat and put part of it in sealed glass flasks and the other part in flasks open to the 
air. Flies were attracted to the open flasks, and in a short time worms appeared; but no 
worms developed in the flasks that were sealed.
When Redi published his findings in 1668, they immediately affected the theory of 
spontaneous generation. Within a few years, though, the microscope came into com-
mon use, and it was discovered that even though meat sealed in glass containers pro-
duced no worms, it did produce countless microorganisms. The theory of spontaneous 
generation was thus reawakened on the microbial level.
By the middle of the nineteenth century the theory had received considerable re-
finement. It was thought that spontaneous generation resulted from the direct action 
of oxygen on lifeless organic nutrients. Oxygen was thought to be essential to the pro-
cess because the technique of canning fruits and vegetables had come into practice, 
and people knew that boiling fruits and vegetables and sealing them in the absence of 
oxygen would cause them to be preserved. If they were left exposed to the air, however, 
microbes would develop in a short time.
One of the defenders of spontaneous generation at that time was the Englishman 
John Needham, an amateur biologist. Needham conducted an experiment in which 
flagons containing oxygen and a vegetable solution were buried in hot coals. The coals 
would have been expected to kill any life in the solution, but several days later the con-
tents of the flagons were alive with microbes. Needham concluded that the ­oxygen act-
ing alone on the nutrient solution caused the generation of the microbes. In response 
to this experiment, Lazzaro Spallanzani, an Italian physiologist, conducted a similar ex-
periment. To ensure that the nutrient solution was lifeless he boiled it for an hour. Later, 
no microbes could be found. To this Needham objected that in boiling the solution for a 
full hour Spallanzani had destroyed its “vegetative force.” In ­addition, Needham argued, 
he had polluted the small amount of oxygen in the containers by the fumes and heat. 
Thus, it was no wonder that microbes were not spontaneously generated.
To settle the issue once and for all, the French Academy of Science offered a prize for 
an experimental endeavor that would shed light on the question of spontaneous gener-
ation. This challenge drew Louis Pasteur into the controversy. Spontaneous generation 
presented a special problem for Pasteur because of his previous work with fermenta-
tion. He had discovered that fermentations, such as those involved in the production of 
wine and beer, required yeast; and yeast, as he also discovered, was a living organism. In 
view of these findings Pasteur adopted the hypothesis that life comes only from life. An 
immediate implication was that for life forms to develop in a sterile nutrient solution, 
they must first be introduced into the solution from the outside.
It was well known that life forms did indeed develop in sterile nutrient solutions 
exposed to the air. To account for this Pasteur adopted the second hypothesis that life 

618   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
forms are carried by dust particles in the air. To test this second hypothesis Pasteur 
took a wad of cotton and drew air through it, trapping dust particles in the fibers. Then 
he washed the cotton in a mixture of alcohol and examined drops of the fluid under a 
microscope. He discovered microbes in the fluid.
Returning to his first hypothesis, Pasteur prepared a nutrient solution and boiled 
it in a narrow-necked flask. As the solution boiled, the air in the neck of the flask 
was forced out by water vapor, and as it cooled the water vapor was slowly replaced 
by sterilized air drawn through a heated platinum tube. The neck of the flask was 
then closed off with a flame and blowpipe. The contents of the flask thus consisted 
of a sterilized nutrient solution and unpolluted sterilized air—all that was sup-
posedly needed for the production of life. Over time, however, no life developed 
in the flask. This experiment posed a serious threat to the theory of spontaneous 
generation.
Pasteur now posed the hypothesis that sterile nutrient solutions exposed to the air 
normally developed life forms precisely because these forms were deposited by dust 
particles. To test this third hypothesis Pasteur reopened the flask containing the nutri-
ent solution, and, using a special arrangement of tubes that ensured that only sterilized 
air would contact the solution, he deposited a piece of cotton in which dust particles 
had been trapped. The flask was then resealed, and in due course microbes developed 
in the solution. This experiment proved not only that dust particles were responsible 
for the life but that the “vegetative force” of the nutrient solution had not been de-
stroyed by boiling, as Needham was prone to claim.
Pasteur anticipated one further objection from the proponents of spontaneous gen-
eration: Perhaps the capacity of oxygen to generate life was destroyed by drawing it 
through a heated tube. To dispel any such notions Pasteur devised yet another experi-
ment. He boiled a nutrient solution in a flask with a long, narrow gooseneck. As the 
solution boiled, the air was forced out, and as it cooled, the air returned very slowly 
through the long neck, trapping the dust particles on the moist inside surface. No mi-
crobes developed in the solution. Then, after a prolonged wait, Pasteur sealed the flask 
and shook it vigorously, dislodging the particles that had settled in the neck. In a short 
time the solution was alive with microbes.
When Pasteur reported these experiments to the Academy of Science in 1860, he 
was awarded the prize that had been offered a year earlier. The experiments dealt a 
mortal blow to the theory of spontaneous generation, and although the theory was not 
abandoned immediately, by 1900 it had very little support.
13.3	
The Proof of Hypotheses
The four instances of hypothetical reasoning in science that we have investigated 
illustrate the use of two different kinds of hypotheses. The hypotheses involved in the 
discovery of Neptune and radium are sometimes called empirical hypotheses, and those 
relating to atmospheric pressure and spontaneous generation are sometimes called theo-
retical hypotheses. Empirical hypotheses concern the production of some thing or the 

13
SECTION 13.3 The Proof of Hypotheses   619
occurrence of some event that can be observed. When radium had finally been obtained 
as a pure metal it was something that could be seen directly, and when Neptune was fi-
nally sighted through the telescope, it, too, had been observed. Theoretical hypotheses, 
on the other hand, concern how something should be conceptualized. When Galileo ob-
served the water level rising in a suction pump, he conceived it as being sucked up by the 
vacuum. When Torricelli observed it, however, he conceived it as being pushed up by the 
atmosphere. Similarly, when Needham observed life emerging in a sterile nutrient solu-
tion, he conceived it as being spontaneously generated by the action of oxygen. But when 
Pasteur observed it, he conceived it as being implanted there by dust particles in the air.
The distinction between empirical and theoretical hypotheses has certain diffi-
culties, which we will turn to shortly, but it sheds some light on the problem of the 
verification or confirmation of hypotheses. Empirical hypotheses are for all practical 
purposes proved when the thing or event hypothesized is observed. Today practically 
all of us would agree that the hypotheses relating to radium and Neptune have been 
established. Theoretical hypotheses, on the other hand, are never proved but are only 
confirmed to varying degrees. The greater the number of implications that are found 
to be correct, the more certain we can be of the hypothesis. If an implication is found 
to be incorrect, however, a theoretical hypothesis can be disproved. For example, if it 
should happen some day that life is produced in a test tube from inorganic materials, 
Pasteur’s hypothesis that life comes only from life might be considered to be disproved.
The problem with the distinction between empirical and theoretical hypotheses 
is that observation is theory-dependent. Consider, for example, a man and a woman 
watching a sunrise. The man happens to believe that the sun travels around the 
Earth, as Ptolemy held, and the woman that the Earth travels around the sun, as 
Copernicus and Galileo contended. As the sun rises, the man thinks that he sees the 
sun moving upward, while the woman thinks she sees the Earth turning. The point 
is that all of us have a tendency to see what we think is out there to be seen. As a re-
sult, it is sometimes difficult to say when something has or has not been observed.
In regard to the discovery of Neptune, the unknown planet was observed two times 
in 1795 by J. J. Lalande, fifty-one years before it was “discovered” by Adams, Leverrier, 
and Galle. Lalande noted that his observations of the position of the small starlike ob-
ject were discordant, so he rejected one as erroneous. Because he thought he was ob-
serving a star, he received no credit for discovering a planet. Analogous remarks extend 
to Galle’s observations of the planet Neptune in 1846. If Leverrier’s computations had 
been erroneous, Galle might have seen what was really a comet. Thus, if we can never 
be sure that we really see what we think we see, is it ever possible for a hypothesis to be 
actually proved? Perhaps it is better to interpret the proof of empirical hypotheses as a 
high degree of confirmation.
Conversely, with theoretical hypotheses, would we want to say that Torricelli’s 
hypothesis relating to atmospheric pressure has not been proved? Granted, we can-
not observe atmospheric pressure directly, but might we not say that we observe it 
instrumentally? If barometers can be regarded as extensions of our sense organs, Tor-
ricelli’s hypothesis has been proved. Another example is provided by Copernicus’s 
hypothesis that the Earth and planets move around the sun, instead of the sun and 
planets around the Earth, as Ptolemy hypothesized. Can we consider this theoretical 

620   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
C
harles Sanders Peirce (pronounced “purse”) 
was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His 
father, Benjamin, was the leading mathemati-
cian of the day, and he took a special interest in his 
son’s intellectual development. Under his direction 
Charles was reading college-level material, including 
logic, at age twelve, and Benjamin would challenge the 
boy with highly complex problems that Charles would 
solve on his own. Although his most significant educa-
tion came from his father, Charles went on to attend 
Harvard University, where he received a BS in chem-
istry in 1863. Yet, he was not a successful student (he 
usually placed in the lower quarter of his class), partly 
because he showed disdain for his professors as inad-
equately qualified to teach him. This arrogance is likely 
the main reason Peirce lived a difficult life. He died in 
poverty at age seventy-four in the then-isolated town 
of Milford, Pennsylvania.
Throughout his life Peirce suffered a painful and debili-
tating neurological condition that may have been respon-
sible for his detached, depressed, and sometimes violent 
behavior. It may also have been the reason he could not 
obtain a tenured university position. In 1879 he did se-
cure a position as a lecturer at Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity, and in some ways, he proved himself a remarkable 
teacher—a collection of his students’ essays is considered 
a key work in the development of logic. Yet, despite his 
teaching, Peirce was discharged from his faculty position. 
He had recently separated from his wife and had lived 
with another woman before his divorce was finalized. This 
“immoral” behavior and other supposed transgressions 
were probably the chief factors leading to his dismissal. 
After that he never held another academic position.
Without an academic base, Peirce continued to write 
copiously, producing some 80,000 pages of material; yet 
he did not complete a single book in logic or philoso-
phy, which limited his influence while alive. Beginning 
in the late 1930s, his writings were collected and  
published, bring-
ing him the atten- 
tion he missed 
during his life-
time. 
As 
the 
founder of prag-
matism, America’s 
only unique phi-
losophy, 
Peirce 
is 
now 
con-
sidered to be 
America’s great-
est philos­opher 
and probably its 
greatest logician as well. Peirce’s own version of prag-
matism took the form of a thoroughly scientific enter-
prise according to which the meaning of a concept 
depends on the practical effect it has on how we lead 
our lives and conduct our inquiries.
In logic Peirce is best known for his work in the 
logic of relations and quantification theory. The theory  
of quantification that Peirce developed is the one 
that led ultimately to the writing of Principia Math-
ematica by Whitehead and Russell, and it closely  
resembles the system used today in most logic 
courses. In the logic of relations, Peirce extended the 
work done by De Morgan by applying the concepts 
of Boolean algebra to relative terms such as “friend 
of” or “enemy of.” This work has also significantly 
impacted the way we treat this subject today. In addi-
tion, Peirce was a leader in exploring the use of truth 
values, and he was the first to develop a three-valued 
logic incorporating true, false, and an intermediate 
or unknown value. In propositional logic Peirce suc-
ceeded in reducing all the connectives to one, and in 
inductive logic he rejected the subjectivist theory of 
probability in favor of an objectivist theory based on 
observed regularities.
Charles Sanders Peirce 1839–1914
eminentlogicians
NOAA’s People Collection
13

13
SECTION 13.4 The Tentative Acceptance of Hypotheses   621
hypothesis to be proved? If a motion picture camera were sent outside the solar sys-
tem and pictures were taken supporting the Copernican hypothesis, would we say 
that these pictures constituted proof? We probably would. Thus, while the distinction 
between theoretical and empirical hypotheses is useful, it is more a distinction in 
degree than in kind.
13.4	
The Tentative Acceptance  
of Hypotheses
A certain amount of time is required for a hypothesis to be proved or disproved. The 
hypotheses relating to the discovery of radium and Neptune required more than a year 
to prove. Theoretical hypotheses in science often take much longer, and theoretical 
hypotheses in philosophy may never be confirmed to the satisfaction of the major-
ity of philosophers. During the period that intervenes between the proposal of a hy-
pothesis and its proof, confirmation, or disproof, the question arises as to its tentative  
­acceptability. Four criteria that bear on this question are (1) adequacy, (2) internal  
coherence, (3) external consistency, and (4) fruitfulness.
Adequacy is the extent to which a hypothesis fits the facts it is intended to unify 
or explain. A hypothesis is said to “fit” the facts when each fact can be interpreted 
as an instance of some idea or term in the hypothesis. For example, before the 
Neptune hypothesis was confirmed, every fluctuation in the position of Uranus 
could be interpreted as an instance of gravitational interaction with an unknown 
planet. Similarly, before Torricelli’s hypothesis was confirmed, the fact that water 
would rise only 30 feet in suction pumps and siphons could be interpreted as an 
instance of equilibrium between the pressure of the water and the pressure of the 
atmosphere.
A hypothesis is inadequate to the extent that facts exist that the hypothesis cannot 
account for. The principle that nature abhors a vacuum was inadequate to explain the 
fact that water would rise no more than 30 feet in suction pumps and siphons. Noth-
ing in the hypothesis could account for this fact. Similarly, Needham’s hypothesis that 
life is generated by the direct action of oxygen on nutrient solutions was inadequate to 
account for the fact that life would not develop in Pasteur’s flask containing a sterilized 
nutrient solution and sterilized oxygen.
In scientific hypotheses a second kind of adequacy is the accuracy with which a 
hypothesis accounts for the data. If one hypothesis accounts for a set of data with greater 
accuracy than another, then that hypothesis is more adequate than the other. For exam-
ple, Kepler’s  hypothesis that the orbits of the planets were ellipses rather than circles, as  
Copernicus had hypothesized, accounted for the position of the planets with greater  
accuracy than the Copernican hypothesis. Similarly, Einstein’s theory of relativity  
accounted for the precise time of certain eclipses with greater accuracy than Newton’s 
theory did. For these reasons Kepler’s and Einstein’s theories were more adequate than 
the competing theories.

622   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
Internal coherence is the extent to which the component ideas of a hypothesis are 
rationally interconnected. The purpose of a hypothesis is to unify and interconnect a 
set of data and by so doing to explain the data. Obviously, if the hypothesis itself is not 
internally connected, there is no way that it can interconnect the data. After Adams and 
Leverrier had worked out the mathematical details of the Neptune hypothesis, it exhib-
ited a great deal of internal coherence. The hypothesis showed how all the fluctuations 
in the position of Uranus could be rationally linked in terms of the gravitational in-
teraction of an eighth planet. Similarly, Torricelli’s hypothesis showed how the various 
fluid levels could be rationally interconnected in terms of the equilibrium of pressures. 
Internal coherence is responsible for the features of elegance and simplicity that often 
attract scientists to a hypothesis.
An example of incoherence in science is provided by the theoretical interpretation 
of light, electricity, and magnetism that prevailed during the first half of the nineteenth 
century. During that period each of these phenomena was understood separately, but 
the interconnections between them were unknown. Toward the end of the century the 
English physicist James Clerk Maxwell showed how these three phenomena were in-
terconnected in terms of his theory of the electromagnetic field. Maxwell’s theory was 
thus more coherent than the ones that preceded it.
Similarly, in philosophy, Spinoza’s metaphysical theory is more internally coher-
ent than Descartes’s. Descartes postulated the existence of two kinds of substance 
to account for the data of experience. He introduced extended, material substance 
to explain the data of the visible world, and nonextended, immaterial substance to 
explain the phenomena of the invisible world, including the existence and activity of 
the human soul. But Descartes failed to show how the two kinds of substance were 
interconnected. In the wake of this disconnection the famous mind–body problem 
arose, according to which no account could be given of how the human body acted 
on the mind through the process of sensation or how the mind acted on the body 
through the exercise of free choice. Spinoza, on the other hand, postulated only one 
substance to account for everything. Spinoza’s theory is thus more internally coherent 
than Descartes’s.
External consistency occurs when a hypothesis does not disagree with other, 
well-confirmed hypotheses. Adams’s and Leverrier’s hypothesis of an eighth planet 
was perfectly consistent with the nineteenth-century theory of the solar system, and 
it was rendered even more attractive by the fact that the seventh planet, Uranus, 
had been discovered only a few years earlier. Similarly, Marie Curie’s hypothesis of 
the existence of a new element was consistent with Mendeleev’s periodic table and 
with the general hypothesis that elements could emit penetrating rays. In 1890 Men-
deleev’s table had certain gaps that were expected to be filled in by the discovery of 
new elements, and two ray-emitting elements, thorium and uranium, had already 
been discovered.
The fact that a hypothesis is inconsistent with other, well-confirmed hypotheses 
does not, however, immediately condemn it to obscurity. It often happens that a new 
hypothesis arises in the face of another, well-confirmed hypothesis and that the two 
hypotheses compete for acceptance in the future. Which hypothesis will win is deter-
mined by an appeal to the other three criteria. For example, Torricelli’s hypothesis was 

13
SECTION 13.4 The Tentative Acceptance of Hypotheses   623
inconsistent with the ancient hypothesis that nature abhors a vacuum, and Pasteur’s 
hypothesis was inconsistent with the equally ancient hypothesis of spontaneous gen-
eration. In the end, the newer hypotheses won out because they were more adequate, 
coherent, or fruitful than their competitors. For the same reason, the Copernican 
hypothesis eventually triumphed over the Ptolemaic, the theory of oxidation won 
out over the old phlogiston theory, and Einstein’s theory of relativity won out over  
Newton’s theory.
Fruitfulness is the extent to which a hypothesis suggests new ideas for future 
analysis and confirmation. Torricelli’s hypothesis suggested the design of an in-
strument for measuring fluctuations in the pressure of the atmosphere. Similarly, 
Pasteur’s hypothesis suggested changes in the procedures used to maintain sterile 
conditions in hospitals. After these latter changes were implemented, the death rate 
from surgical operations decreased dramatically. The procedure of pasteurization, 
used to preserve milk, was another outgrowth of the hypothesis that life comes only 
from life.
Newton’s theory of universal gravitation is an example of a hypothesis that proved 
especially fruitful. It was originated to solve the problem of falling bodies, but it also 
explained such things as the ebb and flow of the tides, the orbital motion of the moon 
and planets, and the fluctuations in planetary motion caused by a planet’s interaction 
with other planets. Einstein’s theory of relativity is another example. It was originated 
to account for certain features of Maxwell’s theory of electricity and magnetism, but it 
ushered in the atomic age forty years later.
The factors of coherence and fruitfulness together account for the overall ratio-
nality and explanatory power of a hypothesis. Suppose, for example, that someone 
formulated the hypothesis that the water level in suction devices is maintained 
by the action of demons instead of by atmospheric pressure. Such a hypothesis 
would be neither coherent nor fruitful. It would not be coherent because it would 
not explain why the maximum water level in these devices is consistently about  
30 feet, why the mercury level in barometers is much less, and why the mercury 
level in a barometer decreases when the instrument is carried to the top of a moun-
tain. Do the demons decide to maintain these levels by free choice or according 
to some plan? Because there is no answer to this question, the hypothesis exhibits 
internal disconnectedness, which leaves it open to the charge of being irrational. 
As for the fourth criterion, the demon hypothesis is unfruitful because it suggests 
no new ideas that experimenters can put to the test. The hypothesis that nature 
abhors a vacuum is hardly any more fruitful, which accounts in part for why it was 
so suddenly abandoned in favor of Torricelli’s ­hypothesis—it simply did not lead 
anywhere.
In summary, for any hypothesis to receive tentative acceptance it must cover the 
facts it is intended to interpret and it must rationally interconnect these facts—in other 
words, it must be adequate and coherent. After that, it helps if the hypothesis does not 
conflict with other, well-confirmed hypotheses. Finally, it is important that a hypothesis 
capture the imagination of the community to which it is posed. This it does by being 
fruitful—by suggesting interesting ideas and experiments to which members of the 
community can direct their attention in the years ahead.

624   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
EXERCISE 13	
	 I.	 For each of the following situations, invent at least three hypotheses aimed at ex-
plaining what went wrong or at solving the problem. Then, for each hypothesis, 
describe one or more experiments or inquiries that would confirm or disconfirm 
the hypothesis.
	
1.	 Someone you have been dating has a birthday coming up, so you call a flo-
rist and order flowers for the occasion. Two days later the person is cold and  
distant.
	
2.	 After settling in a new location you buy some seeds for a flower garden. When 
the flowers come up, they are stunted and of poor quality.
	
3.	 After mailing your paycheck to the bank, you write a check to pay your rent. 
The rent check bounces.
	
4.	 On a windy day you pick up the phone to call a friend, but you find that the 
line is dead. You live in a house and share phone expenses with a housemate.
	
5.	 After driving for miles on a dusty road, you park your car near the bank of a 
river and take a hike through the woods. Soon you become lost. In one direc-
tion you see a small stream, and in the other, a trail.
	
6.	 A close friend calls you on the phone and confides a personal secret. That 
night you write the secret in your diary. A few days later your friend is furi-
ous with you because the friend overheard someone on campus talking about  
the secret.
	
7.	 On a rainy evening you return to your ground-floor apartment and discover 
that you have been burglarized. You can’t believe it, because you are certain 
you locked the door when you went out. You share the apartment with a 
roommate.
	
8.	 You are a philosophy professor at a university, and while reading a set of term 
papers you discover that two of them are identical. Those two papers are also 
extremely well written.
	
9.	 You are a manager of a department store, and, although business has been 
brisk lately, your chief accountant informs you that the store is losing money.
	
10.	 A short time before final exams you lose your class notes. You recall having 
seen them four days ago. Use your own personal activities and movements 
during the past four days as the basis for formulating your hypotheses as to 
the whereabouts of the notes.
	II.	 For the four scientific discoveries presented in this chapter, identify the problem, 
the hypotheses that were formulated, the implications that were drawn, and the test 
procedure that was used. Include an account of measurements that were taken and 
possible instruments that were used.
624   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning

13
	III.	 The following article was written by a physician in the emergency room of a 
­hospital.* The article describes the difficulty that the author and other physicians 
faced in diagnosing the nature of a patient’s illness. Identify the problem, the hy-
potheses suggested, the implications drawn, and the tests conducted to confirm or 
disconfirm the hypotheses. You should be able to find fifteen hypotheses. Try to 
distinguish the tests and observations made to narrow down the problem from the 
tests and observations made to confirm or disconfirm the hypotheses.
An Unreasonable Sleep
by Elisabeth Rosenthal
The emergency room was unusually quiet early that Thursday morning, and rounds 
promised to be brief. “You have only one patient,” said the doctor I was relieving. 
“He’s a real winner, though. He’s basically unresponsive, but I can’t find anything wrong.”
	 “Well, you know,” I said dryly, “when a patient’s in a coma, there is usually a problem.”
	 “Look, I know it sounds weird, but all the tests are coming back normal. I’m beginning 
to think the guy’s faking. Well, not faking exactly. But I’m beginning to think the prob-
lem’s psychiatric. Hey, if you find something else, more power to you—you’re a better 
doc than I am.” And with that, he was out the door.
	 When I stopped by Mr. Gerard’s room, I found a handsome blond man in his early thirties 
lying motionless in bed. His eyes were closed and perfectly still; his arms lay crooked at his 
sides. When I pulled down his sheet I was slightly surprised to find his feet crossed at the 
ankles. Maybe the nurse’s aide had left him that way when she had put on his hospital gown.
	 He looked so perfectly peaceful, so perfectly asleep, that I suspected this coma ­business 
was some kind of practical joke. I tapped his arm and whispered to try to wake him up.
	 “Mr. Gerard.”
	 No stirring.
	 “Mr. Gerard!”—this time with a little nudge.
	 No reply.
	 “MR. GERARD!!” I took both his shoulders and shook as hard as I could. But again, 
no response. When I let go of his torso, he slumped back on the pillow. The only 
­movement I could detect was the perfectly rhythmic rise and fall of his chest 12 times a 
minute, the most normal of normal respiratory rates.
	
The chart at the foot of the bed recorded 14 hours of the most stable vital signs an 
ER doctor could ever hope to see. And my brief neurological exam suggested that every 
major brain pathway was intact: With his eyelids propped open, his pupils reacted nor-
mally to light. When I tapped on his knees and tickled his feet, his reflexes performed 
on cue. A man so profoundly unresponsive, with nothing obviously wrong? I retreated 
to the nurses’ station to pore over his chart.
	 Mr. Gerard had been brought in the previous evening by an ambulance his ­sister had 
summoned. He was a well-respected estate lawyer in a large city halfway across the 
country, she said, and had just made partner two years before. He had no real medical 
* From Discover, October 01, 1994 © Discover Media. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the 
Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of this Content without 
express written permission is prohibited.
The patient was  
in a coma.
But nothing 
appeared to 
be wrong.
EXERCISES   625

626   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
problems and, as far as she knew, had never seen a psychiatrist or had any mental ill-
ness. She was fairly certain that he didn’t drink or take drugs. But she ­confessed to the 
social worker that she and her brother had become close only in the past year, ­during 
his tumultuous breakup with a longtime girlfriend; before that they had done little more 
than exchange birthday cards.
	 Mr. Gerard had finished a major project the week before and had called her Friday 
night saying he had no plans for the Fourth of July and might he join her family for the 
week? He seemed fine for the first three days of his visit, even organizing a picnic in the 
park and a trip to a ballgame, she said. But on Wednesday he seemed depressed, and he 
retired to his room early because he didn’t feel well. On Thursday he hadn’t emerged 
by the time she left for work. When she got home at 6 p.m. the door was still closed, 
so she went in and found him, as she put it, “looking dead.” She called an ambulance 
and frantically searched her brother’s suitcase for clues. All she found were books and 
clothes—no pill bottles, liquor, or drug paraphernalia.
	
En route to the ER, Mr. Gerard had received the standard treatment for patients who 
are unresponsive. First the paramedics gave him a shot of Narcan—which reverses the 
effects of heroin and other narcotics by blocking opiate receptors in the brain. Then 
they gave him a shot of dextrose, which brings around patients who are comatose  
because of low blood sugar. But neither had helped. The ER staff was faced with a man 
who appeared absolutely healthy yet profoundly unresponsive.
	 There are only a handful of reasons for a coma in a young person: a drug overdose or 
poisoning, a massive hemorrhage in the head because of trauma or a premature stroke, a 
seizure, a metabolic abnormality, a brain tumor or abscess, or a rare ­overwhelming infec-
tion. By the time I arrived, the night staff had methodically tested Mr. Gerard and found 
no trace of these conditions.
	 Although overdoses are the most common cause of comas in young people, they  
almost always produce some other symptoms. With heroin, the pupils shrink. With 
Valium, the respiratory rate dips slightly. With many antidepressants, the heart races. 
But aside from Mr. Gerard’s absolute failure to respond to voices or even pain, his exam 
showed nothing wrong.
	 Just to be sure, the night doctors had put a tube down his throat and pumped out his 
stomach looking for pills. They had drawn blood to test for poisons and drugs. They had sent 
Mr. Gerard up for an emergency CT scan of the brain to rule out hemorrhage or a stroke. Still, 
they had come up empty-handed. At 5 a.m. they called a neurologist to see if she had any ideas.
	 Dr. Green wasn’t too pleased about being dragged out of bed, and she was immediately 
suspicious of this motionless body with an apparently normal neurological exam. She 
began a series of standard neurological tests designed to elicit signs of consciousness.
	 She started by shaking his shoulders but quickly adopted more-aggressive tactics to 
see if she could get him to react. She pressed the handle of her reflex hammer against his 
toenail with all her might. No response. She then pushed down hard on his breastbone. 
This move, the so-called sternal rub, is so unpleasant that it evokes at least a grimace 
from patients in pretty deep comas. But there was not a twitch from Mr. Gerard.
	 She even went so far as to squirt ice water into his ear, a technique neurologists use 
to find out if the brainstem—the primitive region of the brain that regulates basic brain 
function—is working. If it is intact, the eyes jiggle reflexively. And if the patient is con-
scious, he becomes dizzy and sick to his stomach. Dr. Green saw Mr. Gerard’s eyes jiggle. 
And she thought she saw him begin to retch. Her hunch was that he was awake.
626   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
The ER team got 
nowhere.
The patient was 
not responsive  
to pain.

13
	 She then tried to find out whether Mr. Gerard was capable of voluntary movement. 
Without giving any warning, she sprinkled ice water on his face. He seemed to wince 
slightly and sink back into his trance. She resorted to a neurologist’s ploy to distinguish 
the conscious from the comatose: She took his limp arm by the hand and raised it a 
foot above his face, then let it drop. Patients in true comas have no choice but to smack 
themselves, hard, in the face or chest. Every time she tried this, however, Mr. Gerard’s 
hand somehow veered right and glanced off his cheek.
	 Based on her observations and Mr. Gerard’s normal CT scan, Dr. Green pronounced 
that there was nothing neurologically wrong with the patient. Her note concluded: 
“Catatonia, of psychiatric origin. No evidence of neurological dysfunction.”
	 I agreed with her, but I had to admit the diagnosis made me nervous. True, catatonia 
can befall patients with psychiatric illnesses, producing movements that are frenzied, bi-
zarre, or slowed to the point of complete stupor. And if left untreated, the stupor can be 
deadly because the patient cannot eat or drink. But catatonia in someone with no previ-
ous psychiatric history was extremely rare—yet what else could explain this condition?
	 I called the psychiatrist at the mental hospital to which we would refer Mr. Gerard, 
described the case, and tentatively suggested that he be admitted. The doctor, as I sus-
pected, wouldn’t readily agree.
	 “I don’t know if we can take him,” he began, and then he proceeded to echo my own 
worst fears. “Are you sure he’s not an overdose? Maybe he’s taken something weird 
that’s not on our drug screen. Can you guarantee he’s not seizing? You know not all 
seizures involve obvious twitching. Will you write on the record that you’re positive he 
hasn’t had a stroke? They don’t always show up on the scan right away.”
	 “Look, I can’t promise you anything right now—come see him and we’ll talk. But it 
would be weird for a guy with an overdose or a stroke or a seizure to be so rock stable 
for over 12 hours.”
	 Within 20 minutes the psychiatrist was in the ER. He spent some time talking with  
Mr. Gerard’s relatives—some at the hospital, and some at their homes—and unearthed 
still more clues. What they had dismissed as eccentricity began to seem more like seri-
ous mental illness.
	 When he called Mr. Gerard’s mother, who lived on the opposite coast, she told him 
that her son’s behavior had been so erratic that she had been urging him to see a 
therapist for several years. In the past six months, however, she had stopped because 
her son had started accusing her of tapping his phone conversations and monitoring his 
mail—and she worried about feeding his escalating paranoia. A younger brother said he 
had been called to pick up Mr. Gerard at a hospital three months before. He had been 
brought there by the police after a security guard had found him in his office at 5 a.m. 
dressed in swim trunks. Although the ER doctors had thought he needed ­psychiatric 
help, Mr. Gerard had insisted on leaving without any care.
	 “I’m beginning to think he is a little nuts,” the psychiatrist said, as he relayed his new 
findings. “But I’m still not sure. You can torture the guy and he doesn’t react. How about 
a rush order on the drug tests that haven’t come back yet? And maybe an EEG and a 
better CT scan.”
	 Inside I groaned. That would be another six hours’ worth of tests and another $2,000. 
I called to arrange for an EEG to monitor the electrical patterns deep in his brain, which 
would guarantee 1,000 percent that he was not having a seizure. I also asked for a CT 
The patient was 
­eccentric.
EXERCISES   627

628   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
13
scan enhanced with a dye that might reveal some odd tumor or infection. And I left a 
message at the toxicology lab begging for the remaining results as soon as possible.
	 After much coaxing and cajoling, Mr. Gerard got his EEG and second CT scan. As I 
suspected, both tests were normal. But when the chief lab technician returned my call, it 
was bad news. “No way for today,” he said. “We sent the screen out to another state.”
	 By now, though, the evidence was all pointing in one direction. When I looked in on 
Mr. Gerard one last time, his feet were again crossed—and hadn’t they been crossed the 
other way before?
	 I called the psychiatrist. “He’s yours,” I began, mentioning the latest results to assuage 
his fears. “The tox screen won’t be back until tomorrow, but he’s been lying here rock 
stable for almost 24 hours and there’s no overdose that can explain it.”
	 My colleague started in with another round of questions. His temperature? Normal. 
His chest X-ray? Totally clear. His blood counts? Perfect. Had they been repeated? Yes, 
perfect again. His urine output?
	 I faltered. I tried to picture Mr. Gerard’s bed. I didn’t recall a urine bag hanging by its 
side, and he certainly hadn’t gotten up to use the men’s room. “I’ll have to check.”
	 I rummaged through the nursing charts trying to calculate how much fluid Mr. Gerard 
had gotten through his IV line—and how much he’d put out. With renewed trepidation I 
realized that there was no sign that he’d urinated at all. I looked around his stretcher for 
a urine bag that had not been emptied. Nothing there.
	 Evidently Mr. Gerard had gone almost 24 hours without urinating. How could I have 
missed this potentially critical clue? Were his kidneys failing? Was his bladder paralyzed 
by an unusual overdose that had left him in a coma? Or was he holding back voluntarily? 
I drew down his sheet to see if I could feel the outline of a bloated bladder under his 
skin—indeed, I thought I could. But as I pressed, there it was again: that slight grimace of 
a man who is awake and feeling pain.
	 Clearly, we needed one more test . I asked the nurse to accompany me, explaining, 
“Let’s stick a catheter in his bladder to see what’s in there.”
	 Working in an ER, you get in the habit of talking to unconscious patients because you 
never know what they may feel or understand. So as the nurse draped a sterile sheet 
across his pelvis, she said exactly what she would say to any patient:
	 “Mr. Gerard, you haven’t urinated in a while, so I’m going to put a tube in through 
your penis and up into your bladder to see if there’s any backup there.” By now she had 
cleansed the area with disinfectant, put on sterile gloves, and unwrapped the thin rubber 
catheter connected to a urine collection bag.
	 “Okay, Mr. Gerard,” she said, picking up the catheter and taking aim. “It’s going in.” As 
if those three small words had broken some deep trance, suddenly the sheets began to 
stir and the carefully cleaned equipment tumbled to the floor.
	 The nurse and I were speechless as Mr. Gerard sat bolt upright and said, “Excuse me, if 
you give me a urinal and close the curtains, I can handle this myself.” Stunned, not know-
ing what else to do or say, we granted his request and left.
	 What a way to clinch a diagnosis. We were finally certain that Mr. Gerard’s problem 
was not caused by some undetected neurological injury. “I should have known,” I said to 
the nurse, “that to a man, the threat of a catheter is the most noxious stimulus of all.”
	 When we returned to the room several minutes later, Mr. Gerard was once again  
lying on his stretcher, limp and silent, unresponsive to commands. But now we all agreed 
where he should spend the night.
628   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
The patient had 
not urinated.
The patient  
suddenly 
revived.

13
	 Over the next week, as Mr. Gerard went in and out of his stupor, doctors at the 
psychiatric hospital garnered a bit more information from him. Mr. Gerard was basically 
lucid, they said, but paranoid, and his thought patterns did not always follow normal logic. 
They suspected that he had a mild form of schizophrenia and started him on a low dose 
of an antipsychotic drug to treat that disease.
	 As the drug brought Mr. Gerard’s symptoms under control, however, a clearer picture 
of his condition began to emerge. In retrospect, it was obvious that Mr. Gerard had been 
suffering for months from mood swings, and his odd behavior more closely matched 
the symptoms of bipolar disorder, or what used to be called ­manic-depressive illness. 
Patients with this psychiatric disorder, which tends to run in families, suffer alternating 
bouts of hyperactivity and depression.
	 It had taken a catatonic episode to force Mr. Gerard into treatment for his illness, but 
his prognosis was good. Fortunately, treatment with lithium can prevent the destructive 
mood swings and permit the patient to lead a normal life. Not long after he was admit-
ted, Mr. Gerard was walking, talking—even gregarious, the psychiatrists said. Just two 
weeks later he was able to return home and resume his practice.
	IV.	 Write a short paper (3–5 pages) on one of the following scientific events. Discuss 
the problem, one or more hypotheses that were formulated, the implications that 
were drawn, and the test procedures that were used. Then evaluate the hypothesis 
in terms of adequacy, internal coherence, external consistency, and fruitfulness.
	
1.	 Isaac Newton: corpuscular theory of light
	
2.	 Christian Huygens: wave theory of light
	
3.	 Johannes Kepler: orbit of Mars
	
4.	 Nicolaus Copernicus: theory of the solar system
	
5.	 Count von Rumford: theory of heat
	
6.	 Charles Darwin: theory of natural selection
	
7.	 John Dalton: theory of atoms
	
8.	 William Harvey: circulation of the blood
	
9.	 Louis Pasteur: theory of vaccination
	
10.	 J. J. Thomson: discovery of the electron
	
11.	 André Marie Ampère: discovery of the electromagnet
	
12.	 Niels Bohr: structure of the atom
	
13.	 Alexander Fleming: discovery of penicillin
	
14.	 Henri Becquerel: radioactivity of uranium
	
15.	 Dmitri Mendeleev and Clemens Winkler: discovery of germanium
	
16.	 Amedeo Avogadro: Avogadro’s law
	
17.	 Johann Balmer: theory of the spectrograph
	
18.	 Alfred Wegener: theory of continental drift
EXERCISES   629

13
630   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning
	
19.	 James Watson and Francis Crick: structure of the DNA molecule
	
20.	 John Bardeen: theory of superconductivity
	
21.	 Albert Einstein: theory of Brownian motion
	
22.	 Edwin Hubble: recession of the galaxies
	
23.	 Jean Baptiste Lamarck: inheritance of acquired characteristics
	V.	 Write a short paper (2–3 pages) analyzing one or more of the hypotheses formu-
lated by Sherlock Holmes in one of the stories by Arthur Conan Doyle. Include a 
discussion of the problem, the hypothesis, the implications that were drawn, and 
the test procedures.
	VI.	 Answer “true” or “false” to the following statements:
	
★1.	 Hypothetical reasoning is useful when the evidence by itself does not provide 
the solution to the problem.
	
2.	 Hypotheses are derived directly from the evidence.
	
3.	 Hypotheses serve the purpose of directing the search for additional evidence.
	
★4.	 If the implications of a hypothesis are true, then we may conclude that the 
hypothesis is true.
	
5.	 If an implication of a hypothesis is false, then we may conclude that the  
hypothesis is false, at least in part.
	
6.	 In the episode pertaining to the discovery of radium, all of the hypotheses 
turned out to be true.
	
★7.	 In the Neptune episode, Adams and Leverrier deserve the credit for working 
out the implications of the hypothesis.
	
8.	 Torricelli’s hypothesis was consistent with the hypothesis that nature abhors a 
vacuum.
	
9.	 In Pasteur’s day, the theory of spontaneous generation held that life was pro-
duced by the direct action of oxygen on organic nutrients.
	 ★10.	 The hypotheses relating to the discoveries of radium and Neptune may be 
classified as empirical hypotheses.
	
11.	 Torricelli’s and Pasteur’s hypotheses may be classified as theoretical hypotheses.
	
12.	 Theoretical hypotheses concern how something should be conceptualized.
	 ★13.	 The problem with the distinction between empirical and theoretical hypoth-
eses is that observation is dependent on theory.
	
14.	 The adequacy of a hypothesis has to do with how well the ideas or terms in the 
hypothesis are rationally interconnected.
	
15.	 The coherence of a hypothesis has to do with how well the hypothesis fits the facts.
	 ★16.	 If a hypothesis is not externally consistent, then it must be discarded.
630   CHAPTER 13 Hypothetical/Scientific Reasoning

13
Summary   631
	
17.	 A hypothesis is fruitful to the extent that it suggests new ideas for future 
­analysis and confirmation.
	
18.	 If a theory is incoherent, it is deficient in rationality.
	 ★19.	 The theoretical interpretations of light, electricity, and magnetism during the 
first part of the nineteenth century illustrate a condition of inadequacy.
	
20.	 If a hypothesis gives rise to contradictory implications, it is incoherent.
	
Summary
Hypothetical Reasoning:
•  Used to solve a problem when the solution is not readily apparent.
•  Involves four basic stages:
■
■
Occurrence of a problem
■
■
Formulating a hypothesis
■
■
Drawing implications from the hypothesis
■
■
Testing the implications
•  Four examples taken from science:
■
■
Discovery of radium by Marie Curie
■
■
Discovery of Neptune by Adams and Leverrier
■
■
Discovery of atmospheric pressure by Torricelli
■
■
Refutation of spontaneous generation by Louis Pasteur
•  Kinds of hypotheses:
■
■
Empirical:
▶	 Can be proved true or false.
■
■
Theoretical:
▶	 Can only be confirmed in varying degrees.
•  Criteria that bear on the tentative acceptance of hypotheses:
■
■
Adequacy (Does the hypothesis fits the facts?)
■
■
Internal coherence (Are the component ideas interconnected?)
■
■
External consistency (Are there conflicts with other hypotheses?)
■
■
Fruitfulness (Are new ideas suggested for future analysis?)
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

632
14 
14.1	 Distinguishing Between Science and Superstition
14.2	 Evidentiary Support
14.3	 Objectivity
14.4	 Integrity
14.5	 Concluding Remarks
Science and Superstition
632
PREVIEW    You decide to pay a call on a friend, and since it’s raining you take your umbrella. As 
you enter your friend’s apartment, he says, “Whatever you do, don’t bring that open umbrella inside.” 
“Why not?” you ask. “Because it’s bad luck!” he replies. “And besides, it might attract a lightning bolt.” 
“How is that possible?” you ask. “It might act as a lightning rod,” he says. “Everyone knows that lightning 
rods attract lightning. It’s been verified by science.” This chapter explores the face-off between science 
and superstition.
PREVIEW    You decide to pay a call on a friend, and since it’s raining you take your umbrella. As 
you enter your friend’s apartment, he says, “Whatever you do, don’t bring that open umbrella inside.” 
“Why not?” you ask. “Because it’s bad luck!” he replies. “And besides, it might attract a lightning bolt.” 
“How is that possible?” you ask. “It might act as a lightning rod,” he says. “Everyone knows that lightning 
rods attract lightning. It’s been verified by science.” This chapter explores the face-off between science 
and superstition.
14.1	
Distinguishing Between Science  
and Superstition
The idea that the human mind is capable of operating on different levels in its effort to 
comprehend reality is as old as philosophy itself. Twenty-four centuries ago Plato drew 
a distinction between what he called opinion and knowledge. Opinion, he said, is a kind 
of awareness that is uncertain, confined to the particular, inexact, and subject to change, 
whereas knowledge is certain, universal, exact, and eternally true. Every human being 
starts out in life by operating on the level of opinion, and only through great struggle 
and effort can he or she escape it and rise to the level of knowledge. This struggle is 
called education, and it opens the eye of the mind to realities that cannot even be imag-
ined from the standpoint of opinion.
Today’s distinction between science and superstition is a modern equivalent of 
Plato’s distinction between knowledge and opinion. Everyone recognizes that science 
has revealed wonderful truths about the world of nature. It has put men on the moon, 
wiped out life-threatening diseases, and ushered in the computer age. Also, almost ev-
eryone recognizes that superstition is little better than foolishness. It leads people to fear 
Your personal learning experience—learn anywhere, anytime.

14
walking under ladders, breaking mirrors, and spilling salt. Practically everyone agrees 
that if some claim is grounded in science, then it is probably worthy of belief, while if it 
is grounded in superstition, then it should probably be ignored. Where ­people do not 
agree, however, is in what constitutes science and what constitutes superstition. What 
one person calls science another calls superstitious nonsense.
Both science and superstition involve hypotheses, so the four criteria developed in 
Chapter 13 for evaluating hypotheses are relevant to the distinction between science 
and superstition: adequacy, internal coherence, external consistency, and fruitfulness. 
But the distinction between science and superstition also involves psychological and 
volitional elements. It involves such factors as how the observer’s subjective states influ-
ence how he sees the world, and how his needs and desires play a role in the formation 
of his beliefs. Accordingly, to explore the distinction between science and superstition, 
we must introduce criteria that include these psychological and volitional elements. The 
criteria suggested here are evidentiary support, objectivity, and integrity. The follow-
ing account of evidentiary support encompasses adequacy and fruitfulness, and the ac-
count of integrity encompasses adequacy, internal coherence, and external consistency.
Science and superstition are, in large measure, polar opposites. Where scientific ac-
tivity recognizes the importance of evidentiary support, objectivity, and integrity, su-
perstition ignores them. Accordingly, these criteria can be used as a kind of measuring 
stick for sizing up the various beliefs people have about the world. To the extent that 
those beliefs are supported by evidence, are objective, and arise from research that re-
flects integrity, the closer they come to the ideal of science, and the more justified they 
are. Conversely, to the extent that our beliefs do not share in these characteristics, the 
closer they come to the “ideal” of superstition, and the less justified they are.
Note, however, that to say a belief is justified is not to say it is true in any absolute 
sense. As we saw in Chapter 13, all beliefs that arise from science are tentative at best. 
But such beliefs are the best ones we can have for now. Also, to say that a belief is not 
justified is not to say it is absolutely false. It is quite possible that a belief grounded in 
superstition today could tomorrow be grounded in science. But such a belief is not 
worthy of assent today. An analogy can be found in rolling dice. No sensible person 
would bet even money that a pair of dice will come up “snake eyes” on the next roll, 
even though he realizes that tomorrow it might be discovered that the dice were loaded 
in favor of this outcome.
SECTION 14.2 Evidentiary Support   633
14.2	
Evidentiary Support
In Chapter 13 we saw that hypotheses are conjectures—informed conjectures—but still 
conjectures. Before they can be believed by reasonable people they must be supported 
by evidence. We also saw that scientific evidence nearly always involves the measure-
ment of something such as force, mass, levels of aggression, social affluence, and so 
on,  and the result is expressed in the language of mathematics. Such measurement is 
nearly always accomplished through some kind of instrumentation. This requirement 

14
634   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
that scientific evidence includes measurements expressed mathematically is useful in 
distinguishing science from superstition. 
For example, in the sixteenth century Copernicus formulated the hypothesis that 
the sun is the center of our planetary system and that the Earth revolves around the 
sun—in opposition to the prevailing Ptolemaic hypothesis, which put the Earth at the 
center. In the years that followed, the telescope was invented, and thousands of precise 
measurements confirmed the Copernican hypothesis and disconfirmed the Ptolemaic 
hypothesis. Without these measurements, the Copernican hypothesis would never have 
been adopted.
In contrast, consider the superstition that breaking a mirror will bring bad luck. No 
evidence has ever been collected in support of this hypothesis. No tests have been con-
ducted and no experiments performed. Possibly on one occasion or other someone did 
break a mirror and later lost money on the stock exchange or was injured in a car ac-
cident, but surely it would be unreasonable to believe that breaking a mirror caused the 
loss or the accident. Such reasoning constitutes a classic case of the post hoc ergo propter 
hoc (false cause) fallacy. But in spite of the lack of evidence, many people believe the 
mirror hypothesis.
Before inquiring further into the need for evidence, however, we must first investigate 
what counts as evidence. Do books count as evidence? What about religious books such as 
the Torah, the Bhagavad Gita, the sutras of Buddhism, the Bible, and the Koran? If books 
are credible reports of measurements expressed mathematically, then 
they can be accepted as the conveyance of evidence. But because religious 
books report no such measurements, they count neither as evidence nor as 
the conveyance of evidence for scientific purposes. This does not imply, of course, that the 
content of such books automatically falls under the rubric of superstition. It simply means 
that it cannot be used as a source for confirming or disconfirming scientific hypotheses.
Another kind of evidence that is considered unreliable is anecdotal evidence. Sup-
pose that you have cancer and a friend advises you that eating garlic can cure it. You 
decide to take this advice, and after eating a clove of garlic every day for a year, the 
cancer goes into remission. Did the garlic cure the cancer? Evidence of this sort is called 
anecdotal, and science usually rejects it. The trouble with anecdotal evidence is that it 
is too isolated to establish any causal connection. Thus, the garlic evidence ignores the 
thousands of people with cancer who have eaten garlic and have not been cured, and it 
ignores the thousands of people who have experienced spontaneous remission of can-
cer and have not eaten any garlic. Also, there is no way to turn the clock back and try 
the experiment again.
One of the key features of scientific evidence gathering is that an experiment be 
replicable under controlled conditions. This means that the experiment must be repeat-
able by different scientists at different times and places. Replicability helps ensure that 
the outcome of the experiment did not result from anything peculiar to 
one certain experimenter operating at a single place and time. Also, the 
controlled conditions are designed to eliminate the influence of extrane-
ous factors. Perhaps, in reference to the garlic example, the cure was effected not by the 
garlic but by something else that was eaten, or by any one of a thousand other factors 
that occurred during this time, or by any combination of these factors.
Do books count as  
evidence?
Scientific experiments 
must be replicable.

14
The evidence offered in support of superstitious hypotheses is rarely replicable, and 
when it is, the outcome almost always fails to support the hypothesis. For example, the 
belief in ghosts is usually supported by what one or more individuals claim to have seen 
on some unique occasion. This occasion can never be repeated. And the belief in psy-
chic phenomena such as extrasensory perception is sometimes claimed to be ­supported 
by experiments involving Zener cards: cards imprinted with crosses, circles, wavy lines, 
stars, and squares whose image an observer might “transmit” to a psychic receiver. But 
when these experiments have been repeated under carefully controlled conditions, the 
outcome has never been other than what would have been expected to occur through 
mere chance.
Another defect found in superstitious hypotheses is that they are often framed so 
vaguely that it is virtually impossible to provide any kind of unequivocal confirmation. 
For example, according to feng shui (pronounced “fung-shway”), an ancient Chinese 
system of magic, bad luck travels in straight lines, whereas good luck does not. As a 
result, one invites bad luck by living in a house or apartment that has two (or, what is 
worse, three) doors lined up in a row. But what, exactly, is the meaning of bad luck? 
What is interpreted as bad luck today may turn out to be good luck tomorrow. If a per-
son loses $1,000 in the stock market today, that may lead her to be more cautious in the 
future, and that increased caution may save $10,000 later on.
In contrast, the hypotheses of science are often framed in the language of math-
ematics, or they can at least be translated into some mathematical expression. This 
fact provides for extremely accurate confirmations and is largely responsible for the 
extraordinary success science has enjoyed during the past 500 years. For 
example, in 1802 the French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac formu-
lated the hypothesis that if the temperature is raised 1 degree Celsius 
in a closed container of gas—any gas—the pressure of the gas will increase by 0.3663 
percent. The hypothesis has been tested thousands of times by chemists and students 
in chemistry labs, and it has been found to be correct.
Closely related to the problem of vagueness is the breadth with which a hypoth-
esis is framed. If a hypothesis is framed so broadly and comprehensively that even 
contradictory evidence serves to confirm it, then the hypothesis is not really con-
firmed by anything. Suppose, for example, that a health-care practitioner should 
invent a hypothesis involving diet: Practicing this diet is guaranteed to make you 
feel great, but before it has this effect it may make you feel either rotten or the same 
as usual. After following this diet for six months you report that you feel the same 
as before. The practitioner replies that your experience confirms the hypothesis, 
because this is what the diet is supposed to do. On the other hand, suppose that after 
six months you feel great, or perhaps rotten. Again the practitioner will report that 
your experience confirms the hypothesis. Hypotheses of this sort are not genuinely 
scientific.
In 1919 the philosopher Karl Popper discovered this very problem concerning  
hypotheses. In response, he argued that any genuinely scientific hypothesis must be 
framed narrowly enough so that it forbids certain things from happening. In other 
words, the hypothesis must be falsifiable. In the years following its announcement, 
many philosophers criticized Popper’s falsifiability criterion because, strictly speaking, 
Scientific hypotheses are 
phrased precisely.
SECTION 14.2 Evidentiary Support   635

14
636   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
hypotheses are rarely susceptible of being disproved. But, as we saw in Chapter 13,  
hypotheses can be disconfirmed (or rendered less plausible). Thus, we can retain Popper’s 
basic insight by requiring that any genuinely scientific hypothesis be disconfirmable. 
This means that the hypothesis must be framed narrowly enough so that it is possible for 
evidence to count against it. Newton’s gravitational hypothesis, for example, satisfies this 
criterion because the discovery of two large bodies that failed to attract each other would 
tend to disconfirm the hypothesis. But the dietary hypothesis just mentioned fails the 
disconfirmability criterion because no outcome could ever count against it.
A problem closely associated with excessively broad hypotheses arises in connection 
with what are called ad hoc modifications of hypotheses. For an example, suppose that 
you are a sociologist conducting research into alcoholism. You formulate a hypothesis 
that alcoholism is caused by cultural factors that present alcohol consumption in a  
favorable light. When you gather evidence to support this hypothesis, however, you  
find that relatively few people who come from such cultures are alcohol-
ics. Thus, you modify the hypothesis to say that alcoholism is caused by 
cultural factors but only when a genetic predisposition exists. But then 
you find that many alcoholics drink to ease the pain of depression and other psycho-
logical problems. Thus, you modify the hypothesis once again to take this fact into 
account. Further research shows that parental drinking patterns play a role, so you add 
another modification. These changes are called ad hoc (“to this”) modifications be-
cause they are introduced purely to cover some problem or anomaly that was not rec-
ognized when the hypothesis was first framed.
The problem with ad hoc modifications is that their purpose is to shore up a failure 
of evidentiary support in the original hypothesis. As more and more modifications are 
added, the hypothesis becomes self-supporting; it becomes a mere description of the 
phenomenon it is supposed to explain. For example, suppose that we introduce a cer-
tain hypothesis h to explain the occurrence of a certain phenomenon x among a group 
of entities A, B, C, D, E. As ad hoc modifications are added, we find that A has x because 
of some unique attribute a, B has x because of b, and so on. In the end our hypothesis 
states that anyone who has attributes a, b, c, d, e exhibits x. But the set of attributes  
a, b, c, d, e is simply a description of A, B, C, D, E. If we should ask why entity A has x, 
the answer is that A has x because of a, where a is just a unique something that A has. 
Applying this analysis to the alcoholism hypothesis, if we ask why a certain person (let 
us call him Smith) is an alcoholic, the answer is that Smith is an alcoholic because he 
has a certain attribute s that causes him to be an alcoholic. The explanation is vacuous.
Another problem with ad hoc modifications is that they result in hypotheses that 
are so complicated that applying them becomes difficult. Science has always favored 
simplicity over complexity. Given two hypotheses that explain the same phenomenon, 
the simpler of the two is always the preferable one. In part, this preference is aesthetic. 
The simpler hypothesis is more “beautiful” than the more complex one. But the prefer-
ence for simplicity also results from the application of what has been called “Ockham’s  
razor.” This is a principle, introduced by the fourteenth-century philosopher William of 
Ockham, that holds that theoretical entities are not to be multiplied needlessly. Why 
settle for a complicated theory when a simpler one works equally well? Besides, the sim-
pler one is easier to apply.
Ad hoc modifications can  
ruin hypotheses.

14
One consequence of Ockham’s razor is that naturalistic explanations are preferable, 
at least at the outset, to supernatural ones. For example, over the years there have been 
numerous reports of statues depicting Jesus or the Virgin Mary that are said to weep 
tears of water, or oil, or blood. After viewing these statues, thousands of faithful come 
away convinced that they have seen a miracle. However, Ockham’s razor says that we 
should look for naturalistic explanations first. Perhaps the tears came from condensa-
tion or from rainwater that may have leached into the statue from small surface cracks;  
another possible explanation could be that they are the work of prank-
sters. Scientists have shown how the appearance of such tears can be 
replicated by drilling a small hole in a statue’s head, pouring a liquid into 
the hole, and then scratching away a bit of lacquer or paint from the corner of the eyes. 
The liquid will percolate down through the porous substance of the statue and escape 
through the scratches.
Another, closely related consequence of Ockham’s razor is that explanations based 
on known realities are preferred to those based on the fantastic or the bizarre. For  
example, there is a region in Peru, high in the Andes mountains, known as the Nazca 
Desert. The floor of that desert features large drawings of geometrical figures and ani-
mals such as monkeys, hummingbirds, and lizards. The drawings were produced more 
than a thousand years ago by scraping away the iron oxide–coated pebbles that cover 
the land. But given their huge size, they can be recognized as coherent figures only from 
a position high above. One accepted explanation is that the Nazca Indians produced 
the drawings using simple tools and surveying equipment to impress the rain gods 
that dwell in the clouds. However, the best-selling author Erich von Däniken proposes 
that the lines represent landing strips for alien spacecraft, and it was those aliens who 
guided the Indians from overhead in producing the drawings. Given its far-fetched 
character, this explanation would seem to violate Ockham’s razor.
Returning to the question of evidentiary support, one of the surest ways to know 
that our hypotheses are supported by evidence is that they lead to predictions that turn 
out to be true. Each true prediction represents a pillar of support for the hypothesis. But 
some predictions are better than others, and the best ones are those that reveal ways of 
viewing the world that would never have been dreamed of apart from the hypothesis. 
If a hypothesis leads to predictions of this sort, and if those predictions are confirmed 
by evidence, then the hypothesis has earned a very special kind of support. Such a 
hypothesis reveals hidden truths about nature that would never have been ­recognized 
without it.
A classic example of a prediction of this kind resulted from the hypothesis underly-
ing Einstein’s general theory of relativity. One of the consequences predicted by this 
hypothesis is that light is affected by gravity. In particular, the hypothesis predicted 
that a light ray coming from a star and passing by the sun would be bent in the direc-
tion of the sun. As a result, the position of the star with respect to other stars would ap-
pear to be different from what it was usually observed to be. Of course, 
testing such a prediction under normal circumstances would be impos-
sible, because the light of the sun is so bright that it completely blocks 
out the light from stars. But it could be tested during a solar eclipse. Such an opportu-
nity arose on May 29, 1919, and scientists took advantage of it. The prediction turned 
SECTION 14.2 Evidentiary Support   637
Naturalistic explanations  
are preferred.
Science is progressive;  
superstition is not.

14
638   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
out to be true, and as a result Einstein’s theory was quickly adopted. Within a few years 
the theory led to the discovery of atomic energy.
Hypotheses that yield striking, novel predictions are largely responsible for progress 
in science. And it is precisely these kinds of predictions, argues the philosopher Imre 
Lakatos, that distinguish science from pseudoscience. Of course, not every scientific 
hypothesis leads to such startling predictions as Einstein’s, but this kind of hypothesis 
may at least be integrally connected to broader, umbrella hypotheses that have led to 
such predictions. In contrast, the hypotheses underlying astrology have been around 
for twenty-seven centuries, and they have produced not a single startling prediction 
that has been verified and not a single new insight into the course of human events. 
They have produced no master plan for future civilization and no hint about future 
discoveries in physics or medicine. This lack of progress over centuries is one reason 
that the philosopher Paul Thagard named astrology a pseudoscience.
Superstitions exist to 
satisfy emotional needs.
14.3	
Objectivity
Our beliefs about the world are objective to the extent that they are unaffected by 
conditions peculiar to the experiencing subject. Such conditions can be either moti-
vational or observational. For example, a belief that is motivated by the emotions of 
the experiencing subject and that exists for the primary purpose of satisfying those 
emotions tends to lack objectivity. Also, a belief that is grounded in observations  
peculiar to the experiencing subject, such as visual hallucinations, lacks objectivity. 
Even though objectivity is an ideal that can never be completely attained, practically 
everyone would agree that beliefs are more trustworthy if their content is not distorted 
by the experiencing subject. The scientist constantly strives to avoid such distortions, 
but the superstitious mind either revels in them or, in the more tragic cases, succumbs 
to them.
All superstitions exist at least in part to satisfy the emotional needs of the experi-
encing subject. The chief emotions that give rise to superstitious beliefs are fear and  
anxiety, and they are often reinforced by a disposition to fantasy and mental 
laziness. Much of the fear and anxiety is generated by the fact that everyone 
dies. Death can come suddenly, as in a freeway accident, a fall from a roof, 
or an avalanche, or it can come as a result of cancer, heart failure, or stroke. Short of death, 
everyone is subject to injury with its attendant pain, and most people at some time experi-
ence the mental suffering that accompanies rejection, loneliness, and failure.
People have little control over these facts of life, and to relieve the anxiety they pro-
duce, many resort to charms and amulets, the rosary beads dangling from the rearview 
mirror or the scapular or medal worn around the neck. If nothing else will protect us 
from the terrors of life, perhaps these objects will. After all, science has failed to conquer 
disease and death, and it offers to the believer nothing but tentative truths that may 
change tomorrow. To the person facing an uncertain future, dejection, or loneliness, it 
may seem more reasonable to dial up the Psychic Friends Network and buy a bit of im-
mediate consolation than to trust in science.

14
SECTION 14.3 Objectivity   639
A second element in the human condition that generates anxiety is freedom and the 
responsibility freedom entails. The idea that you, and you only, are in charge of your 
destiny can be an extremely frightening idea. Many people recoil from the thought and 
seek refuge in a leader or guru. They turn all their power of critical thinking over to 
this leader and blindly follow his or her instructions to the last detail. When the leader 
orders them to believe any form of nonsense, no matter how silly, they do so. The belief 
or practice ordered by the leader, they are told, is essential to their protection. But, fol-
lowing such orders can sometimes lead to tragedy, as it did in the Jonestown massacre 
in 1978 and the Heaven’s Gate suicides in 1997.
A disposition to magical ways of thinking and mental laziness greatly facilitates 
the flight to superstition. Many people, if not most, are fascinated by the mysterious, 
the arcane, and the occult, and some would rather believe an explanation clothed in 
magic than they would a scientifically grounded one. The psychologists Barry F. Singer  
and Victor A. Benassi performed a series of experiments on their students 
in which they had a magician pose as a “psychic” and perform demon-
strations of psychic feats. Before the demonstrations began, the students 
were told repeatedly in the clearest language that the magician was only pretending to 
be a psychic, and that what they were about to witness was really a series of conjurer’s 
tricks. Nevertheless, in spite of these warnings, a majority of students concluded, in one 
experiment after another, that the magician was really a psychic. Furthermore, many 
concluded that the magician was an agent of Satan.
The disposition toward the magical and the fantastic is greatly reinforced by the me-
dia, particularly television and motion pictures. The media are slavishly subservient to 
the entertainment desires of their audience, so, given a widespread fascination with the 
magical, the media issue a constant stream of movies, miniseries, and “news” stories de-
voted to that subject. These programs touch everything from vampires and disembodied 
spirits to irrational conspiracies and the intervention of angels. This persistent attention 
to the fantastical increases the public’s acceptance of superstitious explanations when-
ever realistic ones are not readily available, or even in the face of realistic explanations.
A disposition to mental laziness also assists in the formation of superstitious beliefs. 
It is, in fact, extremely difficult to ensure that one’s beliefs are supported by evidence 
and that they pass the test of internal coherence. Sloppy logic is so easy it is no won-
der people resort to it. Most of the informal fallacies treated in Chap-
ter 3 can arise from sloppy thinking. After old Mrs. Chadwicke hobbled 
past the church, lightning struck the steeple and burned the church to 
the ground. Obviously old Mrs. Chadwicke is a witch (false cause). Furthermore, old  
Mrs. Chadwicke wears a black cape and a black hood. It must be the case that all witches 
wear such clothing (hasty generalization). And of course witches exist because every-
body in the village believes in them (appeal to the people).
Another kind of sloppy thinking involves an appeal to what might be called false 
coherence. A farmer discovers that one of his cows has been killed. At the same time 
the farmer happens to read a story in a local tabloid saying that a satanic cult is operat-
ing in the vicinity. The cult practices its rites on the thirteenth day of each month. The 
cow was killed on the thirteenth. Thus, the farmer concludes that the cow was killed 
by Satan worshippers. This line of thinking involves many loose ends, but that rarely 
People are fascinated by 
the mysterious.
Superstitions are sup- 
ported by sloppy thinking.

14
640   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
deters people from drawing a conclusion. Becoming a clear, critical thinker is one of 
the primary goals of education, but unfortunately becoming educated is no less of a 
struggle for students today than it was for students in Plato’s day.
Thus far we have focused on emotions and dispositions in the experiencing subject 
that lead to superstitious beliefs. We now turn to some of the many ways that our ob-
servation of the world can be distorted. Such distortions constitute avenues in which 
conditions peculiar to the experiencing subject enter into the content of observation. 
When such distorted observations are combined with the emotions and dispositions 
mentioned earlier, superstitious beliefs are likely to arise. The distorted observations 
can occur in the same person who has the emotions and dispositions or they can be 
conveyed secondhand. In either case, the combination leads to superstition.
One well-documented phenonemon that influences our observation of our own 
bodily states is the so-called placebo effect. Recall that a placebo is any kind of “medi-
cine” or procedure that provides no medicinal or therapeutic benefit by itself but that 
can effect a cure when the patient is told that it has such benefit. For example, patients 
with knee pain have been told that an operation will cure them, and after 
they undergo a minor incision that, by itself, has no therapeutic effect, 
the pain often disappears. Also, patients who suffer from nervous ten-
sion or depression have been told that a little colored pill (which consists of nothing but 
sugar) will cure them, and after they take the pill, the tension or depression disappears. 
Obviously in these cases it is not the placebo alone that effects the cure but the placebo 
together with the suggestion implanted in the patients’ minds by their doctors.
The perceived efficacy of many treatments in Eastern medicine can probably be 
attributed to the placebo effect. For example, the widely held belief in China that tiger 
bones cure ulcers, malaria, and arthritis, and that rhinoceros horns cure fevers and 
convulsions and act as an aphrodisiac are almost certainly grounded in superstition. 
But they have led to the decimation of the tiger and rhino populations wherever these 
animals are found in the wild. Also, the belief that bear bile reduces fevers and improves 
eyesight is most likely an imagined cure, but it has led to the horribly inhumane treat-
ment of bears in Asia.
Another well-documented effect that influences our observation of the world around 
us is called pareidolia. This is the effect by which we can look at clouds, smoke, or the 
textured coatings on walls and ceilings and see animals, faces, trees, and so on. We project 
familiar visual images onto vague, relatively formless sensory stimuli and “see” that image 
as if it were really there. Pareidolia is responsible for a good deal of religious superstition. 
For example, a few years ago a woman making burritos saw the face of Jesus in the skil-
let burns on a tortilla. She built a shrine to house the tortilla, and thousands of believers 
came to pray before it. More recently, a grilled cheese sandwich that believers thought 
bore the image of the Virgin Mary sold on eBay for $28,000. But incidents of this sort are 
not confined to the Christian world. Followers of Islam have seen the Arabic words for 
“Allah” and “Muhammad” in such media as fish scales, eggshells, and lamb’s wool.
Closely related to pareidolia is the concept of the perceptual set, where “set” re-
fers to our tendency to perceive events and objects in a way that our prior experience 
has led us to expect. The idea of perceptual set is a product of Gestalt psychology,  
according to which perceiving is a kind of problem solving. When we are confronted  
Placebos can masquerade  
as cures.

14
with a problem, such as finding the solution to a riddle or puzzle, we 
enter into a state of mental incubation in which potential solutions are 
turned over in our minds. This state is followed by a flash of insight  
(assuming we are able to solve the puzzle), after which the solution seems obvious. 
When we consider the puzzle at a later time, the solution leaps into our minds. Such a 
solution is called a gestalt, from the German, for “form” or “configuration.” Analogously, 
every act of perception involves solving the puzzle of organizing sensory stimuli into 
meaningful patterns. Each such pattern is a perceptual gestalt, or set, and once such 
a set is formed, it serves to guide the processing of future perceptions. As a result, we 
perceive what we expect to perceive.
In 1949 the psychologists Jerome S. Bruner and Leo J. Postman performed a famous 
experiment in which subjects were shown replicas of ordinary playing cards—but some 
of the cards had been altered by reversing their color. For example, in some groups of 
cards, the three of hearts was black and the six of spades was red. Of twenty-eight sub-
jects, twenty-seven initially saw the altered cards as normal ones. One subject identified 
the black three of hearts as a three of spades on forty-four successive showings. This 
experiment clearly shows that we perceive what we expect to perceive and, indeed, this 
fact is familiar to nearly everyone. For example, we expect to receive a phone call, and 
while taking a shower we think we hear the phone ringing, only to be told by someone 
in the other room that the phone did not ring. Or, while driving, we might approach 
a red octagonal sign that reads ST_P (our view of the sign being partly blocked by a 
tree branch between the S and the P). However, we bring the car to a stop, because we 
perceived the sign to read STOP. In fact, what our sense of vision received was three 
consonants (S, T, P), meaningless until processed through perception.
Yet another factor that influences our sense of vision is the autokinetic effect.  
According to this effect a small, stationary light surrounded by darkness will often 
seem to move. One can prove the existence of this effect for oneself by looking at a 
bright star on a dark night, or by observing a small stationary point of light in a dark 
room. Psychologists speculate that the autokinetic effect results from small, involuntary 
Can you see the white triangle?
Is the white triangle really “there”?
(Taken from Kanizsa, 1979, 74.)
We perceive what we 
expect to perceive.
SECTION 14.3 Objectivity   641

14
642   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
motions of the eyeball of the observer, and they have shown that the effect is enhanced 
by the reports of other observers. If someone standing nearby says that she just saw the 
object move, others will often confirm this report. The autokinetic effect is thought to 
be responsible for many claims of UFO sightings.
Hallucinations of various sorts can also distort the content of perception. Two kinds of 
hallucination that affect many people in the drowsy moments between sleep and wakeful-
ness are hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations (Hines, 1988, 61–62). 
The former occur just before drifting off to sleep, when the brain’s alpha 
waves are switching to theta waves, and the latter occur just before awak-
ening. During these moments the subject may experience extremely vivid, emotionally 
charged images that seem very real. These hallucinations are thought to be responsible for 
the ghosts and other appearances that people sometimes see in bedrooms.
Collective hallucinations are another kind of perceptual distortion that can occur 
in large crowds of people. Before such hallucinations can happen, the crowd must be 
brought to a heightened emotional state, which may be brought on by the expectation 
of seeing something important or miraculous. An occurrence of this sort may have 
happened on October 13, 1917, when some 70,000 people gathered in the village of 
Fatima in Portugal expecting to see a miraculous sign from heaven. At midday, one 
of the children who was supposedly in contact with the Virgin Mary cried out to the 
people to look at the sun. They did so, whereupon thousands saw the sun swirl amid 
the clouds and plunge toward the earth. Of course, if the sun had actually moved, 
it would have triggered seismograph readings all over the globe. Also, many of the 
people there did not see anything unusual, but their reports were discounted. Never-
theless, even to this day many of the faithful take this observation of the swirling sun as  
evidence of a miracle.
Finally, the operation of memory can distort the way we recall our observations. 
Human memory is not like the process whereby a computer recalls information from 
its hard drive with total accuracy. Rather, it is a creative process susceptible to many 
influences. When images are recalled from human memory, they are retrieved in bits 
and pieces. The brain then fills in the gaps through a process called con-
fabulation. The brain naturally and unconsciously tries to produce a  
coherent account of what happened, but precisely how the gaps are filled 
in depends on such things as one’s feelings at the time of recall, other people’s sug-
gestions about the event recalled, and one’s own successive reports of what happened. 
Given that memory recall is selective to begin with and that many details are inevitably 
left out, the final picture recalled may range anywhere from a fairly accurate representa-
tion to a total fabrication.
These effects represent only a few of the ways the subjective state of the observer 
can influence human observation and memory. To avoid such distortions, scientific 
inquiry restricts human observation to circumstances in which known aberrations of 
perception and recall are least likely to occur. In the natural sciences, much if not most 
observation occurs through instruments, such as volt meters, Geiger counters, and tele-
scopes, the behavior of which is well known and highly predictable. The results are then 
recorded on relatively permanent media such as photographic film, or digital storage 
devices. In the social sciences, techniques such as double-blind sampling and statistical 
Hallucinations distort  
perception.
Confabulation produces 
false recollections.

14
analysis of data insulate the observer from the outcome of the experiment. Such proce-
dures provide considerable assurance that the data are not distorted by the subjective 
state of the experimenter.
SECTION 14.4 Integrity   643
Practitioners of supersti-
tion fake the evidence.
14.4	
Integrity
Our efforts to understand the world in which we live have integrity to the extent that 
they involve honesty in gathering and presenting evidence and honest, logical think-
ing in responding to theoretical problems that develop along the way. Most forms of 
superstition involve elements of dishonesty in gathering evidence or a failure of logic 
in responding to theoretical problems. Such failures of logic can be found in the lack 
of response by the community of practitioners to problems involving the adequacy,  
coherence, or external consistency of the hypotheses related to their practices.
The most severe lack of integrity arises when the evidence is faked. One of the more 
striking examples of faked evidence is found in the case of the Israeli entertainer Uri 
Geller. Beginning in the early 1970s, Geller presented himself in numer-
ous venues throughout the world as a psychic who could perform mar-
velous feats such as bending spoons, keys, nails, and other metal objects 
through the sheer power of his mind. Such objects would appear to bend when he 
merely stroked them with his finger, or even without his touching them at all. Scientists 
were called in to witness these feats, and many came away convinced of their authen-
ticity. But in fact Geller was just a clever trickster who duped his audiences. Geller’s 
trickery was exposed in large measure by the magician James Randi.
After watching videotapes of Geller’s performances, Randi discovered how Geller 
performed his tricks, and in no time he was able to perform every one of them himself. 
Sometimes Geller would prepare a spoon or key beforehand by bending it back and 
Donald Singleton, a reporter for the New York Daily News, was familiar with Uri
Geller’s alleged psychic ability to bend spoons and keys and identify handmade 
drawings that had been sealed inside two envelopes, one inside the other. He 
suspected that the latter trick was performed by holding the envelopes up to a 
strong light while the subject’s attention was diverted. Prior to writing a story on 
Geller, Singleton performed the following test:
       I went to a locksmith and got a duplicate of the strongest, thickest key on my key ring.
       I tried with all my might and I couldn’t bend it, even by pressing it against the corner
       of a steel desk. Then I made a simple drawing (of an eye), wrapped it in aluminum foil
       and put it into two envelopes.
            I went to see Geller the next afternoon.
            He tried for more than an hour, with me keeping the envelope in my sight every
       second, to get the drawing. And he failed.
            Then he made an eﬀort to bend the key, again with me keeping it in view every
       second. Again, nothing happened. Uri said that he was terribly disappointed, that this
       simply had been an all-around bad day for him (Quoted in Randi, 1982b, 29).

14
644   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
forth several times to the point where it was nearly ready to break. Later, by merely 
stroking it gently, he could cause it to double over. On other occasions Geller, or his  
accomplices, would use sleight-of-hand maneuvers to substitute bent objects in the 
place of straight ones. In yet another trick, Geller claimed to be able to deflect a compass 
needle by merely concentrating his attention on it. As he would wave his hands over the 
compass, the needle would spin—and his hands had been thoroughly examined earlier 
for hidden magnets. But Geller had concealed a powerful magnet in his mouth, and as 
he bent over the compass, the needle would spin in tune with his head gyrations.
For another example of faked evidence, let us look at fire walking. Practitioners of 
this art claim that their self-help seminars can alter a person’s body chemistry so as to 
allow him or her to walk barefoot over a bed of glowing coals without being burned. 
One of the leading gurus of this business is Tony Robbins of the Robbins Research 
Institute. Robbins uses what he calls “neurolinguistic ­programming” to cure all sorts 
of physical and psychological ailments, from irrational fears and impotence to drug  
addiction and tumors. As proof of the efficacy of this ­technique, he invites those who 
have taken his seminar to engage in a fire walk. By merely believing they will avoid 
burning their feet, he tells them, they will survive the ordeal unharmed.
The truth is that anyone, whether or not he has taken the seminar and regardless of 
what he believes, can, under controlled conditions, walk across burning coals and escape 
unharmed. The physicist Bernard J. Leikind proved this, at least to his own satisfaction, 
when he showed up at a Robbins seminar in the fall of 1984 (Frazier, 1991, 182–193). 
Even though he had not attended the sessions and he declined to think cool thoughts 
as per the instructions of the attendants, he found that he could perform the fire walk 
without even getting singed. He explained his success by noting certain basic laws of 
physics. In spite of their high temperature, wood coals contain a very low quantity of 
heat, and they conduct heat very poorly. Also, the foot is in contact with the coals for 
only a second at a time, thus allowing only a small quantity of heat energy to flow to the 
foot. As a result, the feet of fire walkers rarely sustain injury (or at least serious injury).
For a third example of faked evidence we need look no further than the thousands 
of fortune-tellers, palm readers, and mentalists who use the art of “cold reading” to 
divine all sorts of amazing truths about their clients’ lives. Most people who engage the 
services of these “readers” do so because they have problems concerning love, health, 
or finances. The reader knows this and often begins the reading with a 
flattering spiel that is tailored to fit practically everybody. This recital is 
intended to put the client at ease and condition him or her to open up to 
the reader. All the while the reader is taking in every detail: the client’s age, sex, weight, 
posture, speech patterns, grammar, eye contact, build, hands, clothing (style, age, neat-
ness, and cost), hairstyle, jewelry, and whatever the client might be holding or carrying 
(books, car keys, etc.). All of these provide clues to the personality, intelligence, line of 
work, socioeconomic status, religion, education, and political affiliation of the client.
The reader uses this information to formulate hypotheses that are then presented to 
the client in the form of subtle questions. Depending on the client’s reactions—facial 
expression, eye motion, pupil dilation, gestures—the reader can often tell if he or she 
is on the right track. Once the reader hits on something close to home, the client will  
usually react in amazement and begin revealing more personal details. After appropriate 
Cold readers deceive 
their clients.

14
If the deceptive techniques of the magician who pretends to be a psychic, the neuro- 
linguistic programmer, and the cold reader are accepted at face value, they appear to 
constitute evidence that really supports the hypotheses underlying these activities. But 
faking the evidence is not the only way in which the practitioners of superstition lack 
integrity. The other way concerns the reaction of the community of practitioners to 
problems that arise in connection with the adequacy, coherence, and external consis-
tency of those hypotheses.
Such problems arise in connection with scientific hypotheses no less often than they 
do with superstitious ones. When they arise in science, the community of scientists shifts 
to what the philosopher Thomas Kuhn (1970b) calls a puzzle-solving 
mode, and scientists work on them with great persistence until the prob-
lems are solved. This puzzle-solving activity occupies the attention of the 
vast majority of scientists for the greatest part of their careers, and it constitutes what 
Kuhn calls “normal science.” Furthermore, it is precisely this puzzle-solving character of 
normal science, Kuhn argues, that distinguishes science from pseudoscience.
For example, after the Copernican hypothesis was introduced, a problem turned up 
in connection with stellar parallax. If, as the hypothesis held, the Earth travels around the 
sun, then, in the course of its orbit, the farthest stars should appear to shift in position with 
respect to the nearer ones. An analogous phenomenon can be observed as you change 
your position in a room. The distant lamp, which originally appeared to the left of the 
chair in the foreground, now appears to the right of it. In the case of the stars, however, 
SECTION 14.4 Integrity   645
Scientists are puzzle  
solvers.
The psychologist Ray Hyman, who as a teenager read palms to supplement his 
income, has studied the art of cold reading in some depth.  He relates a story about 
a young woman who visited a mind reader during the 1930s:
She was wearing expensive jewelry, a wedding band, and a black dress of cheap material. 
The observant reader noticed that she was wearing shoes that were currently being adver-
tised for people with foot trouble. He assumed that this client came to see him, as did most 
of his female customers, because of a love or ﬁnancial problem. The black dress and the 
wedding band led him to reason that her husband had died recently. The expensive 
jewelry suggested that she had been ﬁnancially comfortable during marriage, but the 
cheap dress indicated that her husband’s death had left her penniless. The therapeutic 
shoes signiﬁed that she was now standing on her feet more than she used to, implying 
that she was working to support herself since her husband’s death.
 
The reader’s shrewdness led him to the following conclusion—which turned out to 
be correct: The lady had met a man who had proposed to her. She wanted to marry the 
man to end her economic hardship. But she felt guilty about marrying so soon after her 
husband’s death. The reader told her what she had come to hear—that it was all right to 
marry without further delay (Frazier, 1981, 85–86).
intervals, the reader will then rephrase this information in a different sequence and feed 
it back to the client, to the client’s ever-increasing amazement. The client then provides 
even more details, which the reader weaves together with everything else learned to that 
point. The use of a crystal ball, satin cape, or tarot cards combined with a polished sense 
of confidence convey to the client that the reader can literally read the client’s mind.

14
646   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
no parallax could be observed. The explanation given at the time was that the stars were 
too far away for any parallax to be detectable. Nevertheless, stellar parallax constituted 
an adequacy problem that the community of astronomers regarded as a puzzle, and they 
worked on it for 300 years. Eventually more-powerful telescopes were produced that did 
indeed detect a change in position of the stars as the Earth orbited the sun.
In contrast, when an astrological prediction fails to materialize, the community of 
astrologers never sets to work to figure out what went wrong. Astrologers never recheck 
the location and birth time of the client or the exact position of the planets at the time 
of his birth. They merely charge forward and issue more predictions. Similarly, when 
the bumps on a person’s head fail to indicate essential features of that person’s person-
ality, or when the lines on her palm fail to reveal features of her life, the community of 
phrenologists and the community of palm readers never try to account for the failures. 
They just ignore them and move on to the next batch of clients. Such a response reveals 
a lack of integrity on the part of these practitioners toward their respective hypotheses. 
Something is clearly wrong with the hypotheses or with the measurements, but no one 
cares enough to do anything about it.
A similar response occurs in connection with coherence problems. Most supersti-
tions involve serious incoherencies, many of which arise from the lack of known causal 
connections. For example, if astrology claims that the planets influence our lives, then 
there must be some causal connection between the planets and individual humans. But 
what could this connection be? Is it gravity? If so, then astrologers need to show how in-
finitesimally small gravitational fluctuations can affect people’s lives. On the other hand, 
if some other causal influence is at work, the astrologers need to pin it down. What kind 
of laws govern it? Is it an inverse square law, like the law of gravity, or some other kind of 
law? Analogously, if the lines on a person’s palms indicate something about the person’s 
life, then what form of causality is at work here? Do the lines ­influence the life, or is it the 
other way around? And what laws does this form of causality obey?
Any absence of a causal connection is a defect in coherence, because it signals the lack 
of a connection between ideas functioning in a hypothesis. However, such a lack of coher-
ence need not be fatal to a hypothesis. Physicians from the time of Hippocrates knew that 
willow leaves, which contain the essential ingredient of aspirin, had the power to relieve 
pain, but they failed to understand the causal connection until relatively recently. What 
distinguishes the biomedical community from the community of astrologers lies in their 
respective reactions to such problems. The members of the biomedical community recog-
nized the aspirin problem as a puzzle, and they worked on it until they found the solution, 
but members of the astrological community are unconcerned with identifying the causal 
mechanism by which the planets influence human lives. Similarly, members of the com-
munity of palm readers and members of the community of phrenologists care nothing 
about identifying the essential causal connections implied by their respective hypotheses.
An even more serious problem is posed by hypotheses that are inconsistent with 
established theories or laws. A case in point may be found in claims 
made by promoters of the Transcendental Meditation (TM) movement. 
The practice of TM was popularized in the 1960s by the late Maharishi  
Mahesh Yogi, and since then it has attracted thousands of adherents. It consists in the 
silent repetition of a mantra, which induces a mental state similar to self-hypnosis.  
Levitation is a puzzle no 
one wants to solve.

14
For many who have tried it, the benefits are mental and physical relaxation leading to 
a sense of rejuvenation. But with further instruction in TM (at considerable cost to the 
student), longer and deeper trances can be induced that, the Maharishi claimed, allow 
the meditator to levitate—to hover in the air without any physical support. Thousands 
of disciples, he claimed, have learned how to do this, and he released photographs that 
purported to verify this claim. But of course if levitation actually occurs, it constitutes a 
violation of, or a suspension of, the law of gravity.
The inconsistency of the Maharishi hypothesis with such a well-confirmed theory 
as the law of gravity is probably sufficient reason to assign it to the category of super-
stition. But the reaction of the community of TM practitioners to this inconsistency 
leaves little room for doubt. In 1971 the Maharishi bought the grounds and buildings 
of what was formerly Parsons College in Fairfield, Iowa, and he converted the site into 
Maharishi International University. The university then became the home of the Inter-
national Center for Scientific Research, which, one would think, would be the perfect 
forum for investigating levitation. Given the availability of scores of alleged levitators, 
the “scientists” in residence could conduct in-depth studies into this phenomenon. 
Their findings could provide the basis for interplanetary space travel, to say nothing of 
what they might do to achieve safer airplanes. However, from its inception, the Interna-
tional Center has conducted not a shred of research on levitation. No experiments have 
been performed and no scholarly papers have been written. This response is inconceiv-
able for any bona fide center of scientific research.
SECTION 14.5 Concluding Remarks   647
14.5	
Concluding Remarks
The foregoing observations about integrity should not be taken to imply that no scien-
tist has ever faked the evidence. Fraud has occurred and it results chiefly from changes 
that have taken place in the last fifty years or so. First, science today is a multibillion-
dollar industry funded by grants from the government, private foundations, and cor-
porations. To get funding, scientists are under constant pressure to produce definitive 
results, and sometimes the “right” results. This pressure has led a number of scientists, 
particularly in the biomedical and life sciences, it seems, to fudge the data. Another 
motivation for fraud is the pressure in academia to “publish or perish.” Without a solid 
publishing record, a graduate student in the sciences will never be awarded a PhD, never 
secure a postdoctoral appointment, and never hold down a position on a university  
faculty. Again, sometimes the pressure can be too much for some individuals.
A prime example of a scientist who has faked the evidence is Dr. Scott Reuben, for-
mer Professor of Anesthesiology at Tufts University and former chief of acute pain at 
Baystate Medical Center in Springfield, Massachusetts. Over a period of nearly thirteen 
years, Dr. Reuben wrote or co-wrote twenty-one articles that were published in scientific 
journals and that he claimed were supported by clinical trials, The so-called research 
had been funded by grants from the pharmaceutical company Pfizer and it reported 
favorable results for Pfizer’s Bextra, Celebrex, and Lyrica, as well as Merck’s Vioxx. Reu-
ben’s work led to the sale of billions of dollars of these drugs. After his work became 

14
648   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
suspect, Reuben admitted that every one of the clinical trials had been fabricated, the 
names of many patients invented, and the signatures of coauthors forged. In the end,  
Dr. Reuben was sentenced to prison for fraud and his practice of medicine was terminated.
For our purposes, the lesson here is that Reuben was sent to prison and his career 
was ended. Fraud in science, when it does occur, is not acceptable, to say the least. 
When fraud is discovered, the scientist is often fired—or worse. Quite to the contrary, 
no astrologer has ever been sent to prison for casting fraudulent horoscopes, and no 
palm reader has ever been sanctioned for negligently interpreting the lines on a client’s 
hands. In these endeavors, fraud makes no difference.
Granted that some scientific work is tainted with fraud, the next question is, how 
extensive is this abuse? One way of approaching this question is to look at the num-
ber of articles in scientific journals that are retracted each year—that is, permanently 
withdrawn from the literature. The highly respected scientific journal Nature published 
such a study in its October 6, 2011, issue.* The author concluded that out of approxi-
mately 1,400,000 scientific articles published that year, perhaps 400 would be retracted, 
and half of those would involve some form of misconduct. That amounts to less than 
.02 percent. This may be only the tip of the iceberg, but even if the number of contami-
nated articles is ten times that amount, the resulting figure is still less than 0.2 percent. 
Thus, the rare occurrence of fraudulent work in science cannot begin to erode the dis-
tinction between science and superstition.
Distinguishing science from superstition is no idle preoccupation of armchair 
philosophers, as some have suggested, but an issue vital to the future of civilization. 
In Stalinist Russia responsible scientists were shipped off to the gulag for refusing to 
knuckle under to the state’s ideas as to what was scientific. And in the United States, 
court battles have been fought over what counts as science for curriculum reform in 
the public schools. Also, the attempt to distinguish science from superstition has long-
standing roots in the history of philosophy. It can be taken as a modern equivalent of 
the same question Plato asked long ago; numerous philosophers since then have ad-
dressed the question from their own perspectives.
On the foregoing pages we have examined some features that are characteristic of 
scientific inquiry and some contrasting features that are characteristic of superstition. 
Key ideas introduced in this chapter
anecdotal evidence
replicability
falsiﬁable/disconﬁrmable
ad hoc modiﬁcations
Ockham’s razor
placebo eﬀect
pareidolia
perceptual set
autokinetic eﬀect
hypnagogic hallucinations
hypnopompic hallucinations
collective hallucinations
confabulation
scientiﬁc progress
striking predictions
vague hypotheses
*For another article on this topic, see “Misconduct Accounts for the Majority of Retracted Scientific Publications.” In 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 110, issue 3, p. 1137 (2013).

The purpose of this exposition has not been to provide the sufficient and necessary 
conditions for a bright demarcation line between science and superstition. Rather, the 
purpose has been the more modest one of setting forth a group of family resemblances 
that a fair-minded inquirer may use in rendering a judgment that a set of beliefs is more 
probably scientific or more probably superstitious.
To the extent that a set of beliefs rests on hypotheses that are coherent, precisely tai-
lored, narrowly formulated, supported by genuine evidence, and productive of new in-
sights, these beliefs can be considered scientifically grounded. This judgment is reinforced 
by the conscientious response of the scientific community to problems that develop con-
cerning the adequacy, coherence, and external consistency of those hypotheses. But to the 
extent that a set of beliefs rests on hypotheses that are incoherent, inconsistent with well-
established theories, vague, overly broad, motivated by emotional needs, and supported 
by evidence that fails to be trustworthy, as well as leading to no new insights, then those 
beliefs tend to be superstitious. Such a judgment is reinforced by a reaction of oblivious 
unconcern on the part of the community of practitioners to problems that arise in con-
nection with the adequacy, coherence, and external consistency of those hypotheses.
EXERCISE 14	
	 I.	 Engage in the following discussion exercises.
	
1.	 Discuss the evidentiary problems raised by the following questions:
	
	 a.	 After drinking tea made from tarragon leaves every day for a year, your 
grandfather reports that his bunions cleared up. Does this prove that tar-
ragon tea has the power to cure bunions?
	
	 b.	 You go to a psychotherapist who diagnoses your emotional condition as 
resulting from suppressed Oedipal tendencies. When these tendencies rise 
to the surface they can cause outbursts of emotion, but when they are held 
in check your behavior may be either normal or overly placid. Is the psy-
chotherapist’s hypothesis a good one?
	
	 c.	 Every time the star running back of your school’s football team makes a 
touchdown, he kneels for a quick prayer in the end zone. Is God blessing 
this player’s performance on the field?
	
	 d.	 In 1998, Rose Creek Health Products began marketing a product it called 
“Vitamin O,” for which it charged $10 per ounce. In newspaper and Internet 
ads the company published several testimonials from users. One of them, 
from a lung cancer victim, read, “Three days after starting the Vitamin O, 
I threw my cane away. In November we went to Arizona and I bought my-
self a bicycle.” Another, about a man who had suffered severe headaches for 
twenty years stated, “The day he began taking Vitamin O his headaches dis-
appeared.” Yet another said that a man received “very significant relief from 
his emphysema.” Do these testimonials prove that Vitamin O provides relief 
from disease and pain? In 2000 the Federal Trade Commission obtained 
14
EXERCISES   649

14
an injunction against Rose Creek after proving that Vitamin O is nothing 
more than ordinary salt water. Rose Creek still sells Vitamin O without 
making any beneficial claims for it.
	
	 e.	 Shortly before drifting off to sleep, your roommate reports that she heard 
someone call out her name in a loud, clear voice. Since no one else was in 
the room at that time, does this mean that the voice came from a ghost?
	
	 f.	 In 2002, the Hubble Space Science Institute released new high-resolution 
photographs of the Cone Nebula that were taken by the recently refurbished 
Hubble Space Telescope. On viewing these images, hundreds of Christians 
thought they could see the face of Jesus in the nebula, which they renamed 
the Jesus Nebula (see www.skyimagelab.com/jesus-nebula.html). Do these 
images prove that Jesus is alive in the cosmos?
	
2.	 Discuss the meaning of the following selections:
	
	 a.	 The universe is a macrocosm of creative energy and power, and every man, 
woman, and child is the epitome of this totality of the cosmos. Within your 
individualized energy field, the microcosm called you, are twenty-two 
Causal Powers, or angels, that control your conscious behavior and govern 
the manifestation of all forms and experiences in your personal life.
( John Randolph Price, The Angels Within Us)
	
	 b.	 What is remarkable about the nervous system of the human species is that 
it can command this infinite organizing power through conscious intent. 
Intent in the human species is not fixed or locked into a rigid network of 
energy and information. It has infinite flexibility. In other words, as long 
as you do not violate the other laws of nature, through your intent you can 
literally command the laws of nature to fulfill your dreams and desires.
( Deepak Chopra, The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success)
	
	 c.	 Every plant has an aura, the invisible charge of energy that exists around 
all things. It is the refracted and reflected light from electrical impulses, 
heat, and vapor of the object. Or put another way, it is simply light dancing 
around, inside, and off all things.
(Laurie Cabot, The Power of the Witch)
	
	 d.	 The Pleiadians are back from the future to give us a broader perspective on 
“the absurd times” we live in. They explain how we are fragmented and cut 
off from our connection to the whole of life. The crucial test for us will be 
to shift from lineal thinking to a multidimensional perspective and expand 
our understanding of the frequency of love—the gateway to freeing our-
selves.
(Advertisement for Family of Light, by Barbara Marciniak)
	
	 e.	 When advice from your angel is incorrect, it ain’t your angel. Messages that 
prove misleading or untrue are due to desire or fear that was not released 
before you began talking with your heavenly helper. You’re aware, of course, 
that any situation has the likelihood of multiple outcomes.
(Alma Daniel, Timothy Wyllie, and Andrew Ramer, Ask Your Angels)
650   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
14

14
	
3.	 Discuss the following reports from residents of Hong Kong (taken from “Hong 
Kong’s Feng Shui: Popular Magic in a Modern Urban Setting,” by Charles F. 
Emmons, Journal of Popular Culture, Summer 1992).
	
	 a.	 I have a little restaurant in Aberdeen, a seafood place facing the sea. I used 
to be on the other side of the street and had very bad business. The feng shui 
man told me that it should face the sea. Now I have very good business.
	
	 b.	 I am a guard at a dockyard. The Westerners there believe in feng shui. They 
changed the entrance to the place because the old one was unlucky. They 
also put out a [shiny] wok to deflect the bad luck, and a fok dzi [the Chinese 
Script character for good luck] upside down to bring luck in rather than 
out. All the workers there feel a lot better now and are in better health.
	
	 c.	 There were a lot of car accidents on the slope we faced, and even a murder 
upstairs from there, so we put up a fork and mirror to eliminate the killing 
atmosphere. The mirror faced east and reflected the morning sun. A guy 
across from us came over and said he had been sick since we had put the 
mirror up, and asked us to take it down. We did, and then he said he had 
been well after that. But we moved to another place then.
	
	 d.	 Feng shui is what causes radios to work better facing one way than another.
	
4.	 One of the early creationist theories advanced in opposition to Darwin’s the-
ory of natural selection was put forward by the nineteenth-century naturalist 
Philip Gosse. According to this theory, God created the world in about 4000 b.c.,  
and he did so in exactly six days, per the account in Genesis. To reconcile this 
story with indications that the world is much older, Gosse argued that God 
created the world with the appearance of a history. Adam was created with 
a navel, trees were created with rings, and fossils were implanted in geologic 
formations and in sea beds. Is Gosse’s theory plausible? Does his theory make 
God out to be a deceiver? Is a world with a fake history intrinsically better 
than one with no history? If we were to update Gosse’s theory, we would have 
to add that God created the world complete with light rays that appear to have 
been emitted by distant galaxies more than 10 billion years ago, as well as with 
fossils having ratios of carbon-12 to carbon-14 that ­indicate (by ­carbon-dating 
techniques) the fossils are millions of years old. Given these provisions, is 
there any way of disproving Gosse’s theory? In other words, is the theory dis-
confirmable? If not, does this fact make the theory unscientific?
	
5.	 The modern creationist theory, called “scientific creationism,” propounded by 
Duane Gish and Henry Morris, accounts for geologic formations and fossils 
by appealing to the great flood of Noah. This flood allegedly killed numerous 
mammals, birds, fish, and insects, and their carcasses settled in different strata 
amid the swirling waters, thus producing the fossils. But is it plausible that all 
the animals that populate the Earth today were saved on Noah’s ark? These 
would include 25,000 species of birds, 15,000 species of mammals, 2,500 spe-
cies of amphibians, 6,000 species of reptiles, including dinosaurs, and a million 
species of insects. How large must the ark have been, in comparison, say, with 
14
EXERCISES   651

14
the Titanic, to house these animals together with sufficient food for a 300-day 
voyage? Based on the number of human hours it took to build the Titanic (do 
some research on this), how long do you think it would have taken Noah, his 
wife, and three sons to build the ark? Assuming the ark was made of wood, ap-
proximately how many board feet of lumber would have been needed to build 
it (include enough wood for walls and floors between the animals)? How long 
would it have taken Noah and his family to collect and load the animals on the 
ark? How much time would it have taken to provide one meal for the animals? 
Is scientific creationism a plausible theory?
	
6.	 Suppose you are a fortune-teller. You have a small shop in Milwaukee com-
plete with a crystal ball, beads hanging in the doorway, incense, and a shelf of 
books devoted to the dark arts. At about 4:00 in the afternoon in early March a 
couple in their mid-thirties comes into your shop. They are apparently healthy, 
and both are well dressed and wearing slightly worn gold wedding bands. 
They are obviously affectionate, and as they take a seat on your couch, the 
woman gives the man a quick kiss. You notice that their faces and arms are 
well tanned, and the man is holding a key ring with two keys. One is stamped 
with the word “Porsche.” When you glance through the front window, you no-
tice a small, two-seat sports car of that make parked on the street. You intro-
duce yourself as a fortune-teller famous throughout the world, and as you gaze 
into your crystal ball, you say, “I see . . .” (Do a cold reading of this couple.)
	
	 	
At about 10:00 the next morning a woman in her mid-forties comes 
through the front door. She looks tired, her makeup is slightly smeared, and 
behind dark glasses you notice that her eyes look puffy. Her clothing is rum-
pled, and you detect a slight scent of alcohol on her breath. As she takes a seat 
on your couch, you notice that she is agitated and nervous, and she fidgets  
with the wedding ring on her finger. In a subdued tone of voice she says that 
she wants her fortune told. You reply that she has come to the right place, 
and as you wave your hands over your crystal ball, you begin with the words  
“I see . . .” (Do a cold reading of this woman.)
	
7.	 Psychic phenomena include psychokinesis, telepathy, clairvoyance, and pre-
cognition. Psychokinesis is the ability to move objects through the direct 
power of the mind, telepathy is the power to perceive the thoughts of others 
without the use of the senses, clairvoyance is the ability to perceive distant 
objects without the use of the senses, and precognition is the ability to see the 
future without the use of the senses.
	
	 	
The psychologist Terence Hines (Hines, 1988, 83) argues that gambling ca-
sinos and government-run lotteries provide a real-world test for the existence 
of psychic phenomena. Every roll of a pair of dice, every spin of a roulette 
wheel, every game of poker or blackjack, and every purchase of a lottery ticket 
is an opportunity for the operation of psychokinesis, telepathy, clairvoyance, 
or precognition. If these phenomena actually occurred, then one would expect 
that the earnings of casinos and lotteries would be affected. But in fact these 
earnings are exactly as the laws of chance predict. Does this fact provide a 
fair test for the existence of psychic phenomena? Some defenders of psychic 
652   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
14

14
phenomena argue that psychic powers cannot be used for personal gain. Does 
this argument amount to an ad hoc modification of the hypothesis underlying 
psychic phenomena? Is the argument plausible?
	
8.	 In 1975 James Randi offered $10,000 (later increased to $1,000,000) to any 
person who could perform a paranormal feat (including any demonstration 
of psychic power) in his presence under controlled conditions. (This offer was 
still open as of the printing of this book.) Since that time, hundreds of people 
have tried to win the prize, but not a single one has succeeded. Does the failure 
of such people to collect the prize constitute a fair test of the existence of psy-
chic phenomena?
	
	 	
During the past hundred years, thousands of experiments have been per-
formed to demonstrate unequivocally the existence of psychic phenomena, 
but thus far none has succeeded. To account for the negative results of some of 
these experiments, Gertrude Schmeidler invented the “sheep-goat” hypothesis, 
according to which such experiments are influenced by the attitudes of the 
experimenters. If the experimenters doubt the existence of psychic phenom-
ena, then the experiment is doomed to failure; but if the experimenters are 
believers, then the experiment will succeed. Is this hypothesis believable? Does 
it qualify as an ad hoc modification? How might the attitude of the experi-
menters affect the outcome of the experiment? Could James Randi’s presence 
account for the inability of performers such as Uri Geller to demonstrate their 
alleged psychic powers? (G. R. Schmeidler, “Separating the Sheep from the 
Goats,” Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 39, no. 1 [1945], 
47–50.)
	
9.	 In 1970, the physicist David Simpson and his colleague Norman Foxwell per-
formed an experiment involving a group of UFO buffs in England. On a Satur-
day evening about thirty of these individuals had gathered on a remote hilltop 
where they thought there was a good chance of sighting a UFO. Simpson po-
sitioned himself on another hilltop, about three-quarters of a mile away, and 
he pointed a purple spotlight, connected to a 12-volt battery, in the direction 
of the group. At 11:00 p.m. he switched on the light for 5 seconds, and after a 
5-second pause he switched it on again for 25 seconds. Mr. Foxwell, Simpson’s 
accomplice, was stationed among the observers, and to enhance the emotional 
effect, shortly after the purple light was sighted, Foxwell switched on a buzzer 
that was attached to a bogus magnetic-field sensor. According to UFO lore, 
UFOs are supposed to generate intense magnetic fields, so the buzzer signaled 
to the crowd that a UFO was operating nearby. To further enhance the effect, 
Foxwell had loaded a camera with a roll of film, two frames of which had been 
doctored with a fake latent image of a UFO. Foxwell proceeded to take two  
additional snapshots in the general direction of the purple light (which by 
then had been turned off), and he then gave the film to one of the members of 
the group for processing.
	
	 	
When the film was developed, sure enough, a tiny image of what appeared 
to be a UFO was visible on two frames. But those two frames (which were 
taken a year earlier) also contained geographic features that were inconsis-
tent with the other two (genuine) frames. These inconsistencies were so 
14
EXERCISES   653

14
glaring that anyone who examined all four frames closely would detect that 
at least two of them had been faked. However, when the photographs were  
examined in the laboratory of the Flying Saucer Review, an international pub-
lication devoted to UFO sightings, the experts announced that the negatives 
were “genuine beyond all doubt.” Later, the director of research at the Astro-
physical Institute of the French National Centre for Scientific Research pub-
lished a “tentative interpretation” of the photographs, stating “In my opinion 
there is no question of the object photographed being in any possible way the 
result of faking.”
	
	 	
Four months after the sighting, a report of the incident was published in 
the Flying Saucer Review. As you read the following selection from the report, 
remember that the purple light was turned on for a total of 30 seconds, that it 
was absolutely stationary, and that it was located on the horizon, at zero de-
grees of elevation from the observers:
At 11:02 p.m. an object was seen at an elevation of approximately 20 degrees in the 
eastern sky. The object appeared very suddenly as if it came through the clouds, and 
appeared to the eye as a very bright ovoid light—purple in colour with a periphery 
of white. Two members of my group who observed the object through binoculars 
both remarked they could see a crimson light in the centre; this was also attested to 
by witnesses with good vision.
	
The object remained stationary for approximately 30 seconds, during which time 
Mr. Foxwell was able to take the first of his photographs. The object then moved 
slowly to the right—towards the town—and lost a little altitude in the process. At 
one stage in the movement it dimmed considerably as though obscured by a low 
cloud. The object continued moving for approximately 20 to 30 seconds, and then 
stopped again. The light then increased considerably in intensity, though we could 
not be sure if the object was ­moving directly toward the observation point, or if it 
remained stationary. At this point the alarm of a detector sounded and a witness ran 
to switch it off. After 10 to 20 seconds the light dimmed and went out as though 
concealed by a cloud. However we were all certain that the object had not moved 
once more. The sighting had lasted for approximately one to one and a half minutes.
	
	 	
Why do you think the observers saw the purple light move? Was it because 
they associated the light with the faked UFO images (the second of which ap-
peared slightly below and to the right of the first)? Why did the observers see 
the light as elevated 20 degrees off the horizon? (The faked UFO images ap-
peared approximately on the horizon.) Do you think that the expectations of 
the observers affected what they reportedly saw? Do you think that confabula-
tion played a role in the report? How about the autokinetic effect? Or perceptual 
sets? Why do you think the specialists who examined the photographs failed 
to detect the inconsistencies? Could emotions have played a role in this over-
sight? (From “A Controlled UFO Hoax: Some Lessons,” by David I. Simpson, in  
Frazier, 1981.)
	
10.	 On the basis of a person’s natal chart (horoscope cast according to the per-
son’s date, time, and place of birth), astrologers claim to be able to analyze that 
person’s character and personality and make predictions about his or her life 
654   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
14

14
course. To test the claims of astrology about character analysis, UCLA physi-
cist Shawn Carlson conducted a study involving thirty American and Euro-
pean astrologers considered by their peers to be among the best in the field. 
To complete the study Carlson selected 116 “clients,” who were then given the 
California Personality Inventory (CPI), a widely used and scientifically ac-
cepted test that measures personality traits. The results of the CPI were then 
used to compile a personality profile for each of the clients. The astrologers 
were informed about the nature of the CPI, and to prevent any anti-astrology 
bias, many of their suggestions were incorporated into the study.
	
	 	
The astrologers were then given each client’s natal chart together with three 
personality profiles. One of the profiles matched the client in question, and the 
other two were chosen at random from a separate batch of personality profiles 
composed in the same way as the true one. No astrologer was able to con-
front any client face-to-face, and the study was done on a double-blind basis 
so that neither the astrologer nor the experimenters knew which profile cor-
responded with which natal chart. The astrologers predicted that they would 
be able to match a chart with the correct profile at least 50 percent of the time. 
However, as it turned out, only one out of three matches was correct—exactly 
what would be expected by chance. The results of Carlson’s study were pub-
lished in the widely respected scientific journal Nature.
	
	 	
Do you think that Carlson’s study tends to disprove the claim that astrology 
can analyze personality features? Do you think that if the astrologers were al-
lowed to meet the clients face-to-face, the results would have been different? 
Why? (From “Double-Blind Test of Astrology . . .” in Frazier, 1991.)
	
	 	
Astrologers also claim the ability to make predictions. In 1978,  
R. N. Hunter and J. S. Durr of the U.S. Geological Survey invited astrolo-
gers to submit predictions about earthquakes. Hunter and Durr analyzed  
240 predictions made by 27 astrologers and found that their accuracy was 
worse than would have been the case had they simply guessed. Also, in 1985, 
G. Chatillon analyzed 30 predictions for North America made by Huguette 
Hirsig, one of Montreal’s most famous astrologers. Only two were found to  
be correct. Do studies of this sort tend to disprove the claims that astrologers 
are able to make true predictions?
	
11.	 The first step in providing an astrological reading is to cast the chart. This is 
followed by an analysis of interacting chart factors, which in turn is followed 
by the astrologer’s interpretation of these factors. In regard to the third step,  
D. Hamblin, former chairman of the United Kingdom Astrological Associa-
tion, wrote:
If I find a very meek and unaggressive person with five planets in Aries, this does not 
cause me to doubt that Aries means aggression. I may be able to point to his Pisces 
Ascendant, or to his Sun conjunct Saturn, or to his ruler in the twelfth house; and if 
none of these alibis are available, I can simply say that he has not yet fulfilled his Aries 
potential. Or I can argue (as I have heard argued) that, if a person has an excess of 
planets in a particular sign, he will tend to suppress the characteristics of that sign 
because he is scared that, if he reveals them, he will carry them to excess. But if on 
14
EXERCISES   655

14
the next day I meet a very aggressive person who also has five planets in Aries, I will 
change my tune: I will say that he had to be like that because of his planets in Aries.
	
	 	
Does this statement indicate that the step involving chart interpretation is 
not subject to disconfirmation and is therefore unscientific? Is Hamblin say-
ing here that the interpretation is not of the chart but of the face-to-face en-
counter with the client? (From “Does Astrology Need to Be True?” by Geoffrey 
Dean, in Frazier, 1991.)
	
12.	 In 1955, the psychologist N. D. Sundburg gave the Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory, a commonly used personality test, to forty-four stu-
dents. Next he had two highly experienced psychologists draw up personality 
sketches for each student based on the results of the test. He then presented 
the individualized personality sketch to each student, together with a univer-
sal faked sketch—one provided for all the men and another for all the women. 
Fifty-nine percent of the students picked the faked sketch as describing their 
true personality. What do these findings imply about self-knowledge and the 
accuracy of personal validation? Are people prone to accept descriptions of 
themselves that are flattering? Do people tend to find some specific feature in 
their makeup that fits any generalization?
	
	 	
Specifically, Sundburg found that the following sketch was acceptable as 
describing the majority of college men:
You are a person who is very normal in his attitudes, behavior and relationships with 
people. You get along well without effort. People naturally like you, and you are not 
overly critical of them or yourself. You are neither overly conventional nor overly 
individualistic. Your prevailing mood is one of optimism and constructive effort, and you 
are not troubled by periods of depression, psychosomatic illness, or nervous symptoms.
	
	 	
The following sketch was found to be acceptable as describing the majority 
of college women:
You appear to be a cheerful, well-balanced person. You may have some alternation of 
happy and unhappy moods, but they are not extreme now. You have few or no prob-
lems with your health. You are sociable and mix well with others. You are adaptable 
to social situations. You tend to be adventurous. Your interests are wide. You are 
fairly confident and usually think clearly.
	
	 	
Do you find that either of these descriptions fits you fairly well? If so, what 
implications does this have for the astrologer, the tarot-card reader, or the for-
tune-teller?
	
13.	 On June 24 and 26, 1981, six children in the little village of Medjugorje in Bos-
nia (former Yugoslavia) claimed to have had a vision of the Virgin Mary. In the 
days and weeks that followed, more alleged visions occurred, and reports began 
to attract visitors anxious for a vision of their own. From 1981 until 2010, ap-
proximately 30 million people, many from the United States, visited Medju-
gorje, and many reported that their hopes were fulfilled. By the time these visits 
began, claims of visions were popping up everywhere, to the obvious glee of 
the charismatic pastor of the local church. However, not everyone accepted the 
656   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
14

14
authenticity of these visions. Among the detractors was the local bishop, Pavao 
Zanic, who, on July 25, 1987, issued a declaration that included the following:
The Madonna, they say, started to appear on the Podbrdo [a hamlet] of the Mountain 
Crnica, but when the militia forbade going there, she came into homes, into forests, 
fields, vineyards and tobacco fields; she appeared in the church, on the altar, in the 
sacristy, in the choir loft, on the roof, on the church steeple, on the roads, on the way 
to Cerno, in a car, on buses, in classrooms, in several places in Mostar and Sarajevo, 
in monasteries in Zagreb, Verazdin, Switzerland, Italy, once again in the Podbrdo, atop 
Krizevac, in the parish, in the rectory, etc. It is certain that not even half of the alleged 
places where the apparitions have taken place have been mentioned. . . .
	
	 	
In 1991, after a lengthy inquiry, the Yugoslavian Bishops Conference issued 
a statement that nothing miraculous had occurred at Medjugorje; neverthe-
less, thousands of pilgrims continue to stream into the village even to this day. 
Also, the original six visionaries continue to claim apparitions of the Virgin.
	
	 	
How do you think all these visions are best explained? Do you think they 
are evidence of miracles? Or, could collective hallucination be responsible? Do 
people see what they want to see? What is your estimate of the average annual 
economic benefit that 30 million visitors would bring to a small village over a 
span of twenty-nine years? Do you think that this benefit has anything to do 
with the motives of the original six visionaries? Do you think that the pilgrims 
to Medjugorje are prone to superstition?
	
	 	
The philosopher Paul Kurtz suggests that religion, with its emphasis on 
miracles and the supernatural, sensitizes people to believe in the superstitious 
and the paranormal. Do you think that Kurtz is correct in this assessment? Is 
there any essential difference between the miraculous and the superstitious? 
If so, is there any evidence to support this difference? (Paul Kurtz, “Reflections 
on the ‘Transcendental Temptation, ’ ” in Frazier, 1991, 13–16.)
	II.	 Design or perform the following experiments, as directed.
	
1.	 Psychic phenomena include psychokinesis, telepathy, clairvoyance, and pre-
cognition (see Exercise I, 7). Design an experiment to test for the existence 
of one or more forms of these phenomena. The experiment might use Zener 
cards, dice, remote-viewing tests, or Ganzfield (sensory deprivation) condi-
tions. (For Ganzfield studies, see Frazier, 1991, 143–148.) Be sure to build 
­sufficient precautions into the experiment to prevent cheating.
	
2.	 Iridology is a diagnostic procedure that depends on the hypothesis that each 
organ of the body is represented by a specific part of the iris. By examining the 
eyes of a patient, the iridologist is supposed to be able to detect disease. Design an 
experiment to test this hypothesis. Employ proper restrictions to prevent cheating.
	
3.	 Dowsing involves the use of a forked tree branch (“dowsing rod”) to find un-
derground water. Sometimes a pair of metal rods are used, and sometimes oil, 
minerals, and metal objects are claimed to have been found. When the dowser 
feels sudden jerks from the dowsing rod, he knows he is standing over a source 
of water (or oil, etc.). The practice depends on the hypothesis that water exerts 
some kind of magnetic influence over the rod or engages the psychic abilities 
14
EXERCISES   657

14
of the dowser (or both). Design an experiment to test for the existence of this 
phenomenon. (See the references to dowsing in Randi, 1982a.)
	
4.	 Try your hand at cold reading. Have an assistant select some “clients” who are 
willing to come in for a reading. They should be told in advance that you have 
genuine abilities in this area. In preparation read Ray Hayman’s article in Fra-
zier, 1981, 79–96.
	
5.	 Set up an experiment to test for the autokinetic effect. The experiment might 
involve a small point of light in a large, dark room, or a flashlight some dis-
tance away on a dark night. Select a small group of observers for this experi-
ment, and include a test for the claim that one observer’s insistence that the 
light is moving influences what the others see.
	
6.	 Design an experiment to test whether people are prone to believing fantastical 
explanations of things they do not understand (including conjurer’s tricks.) 
Consider repeating the experiment (described in the text) that Singer and  
Benassi performed.
	
7.	 Design an experiment to test the claims of astrology. You might begin by se-
lecting ten “clients”; obtain the exact time and location of their births and have 
an astrologer do a reading for each. Then see if the clients can recognize which 
reading (out of, say, a total of five) pertains to them. Or, alternately, for each 
reading you might prepare a “reverse reading” in which the character descrip-
tion is the exact reverse of the “true” reading. Then give each client a copy of 
both readings (true and reverse) and see if he or she can distinguish the true 
one. (See Geoffrey Dean’s two articles in Frazier, 1991, 279–319.)
	III.	After researching one of the following topics, write an essay of eight to ten pages 
evaluating the plausibility of the underlying hypothesis.
	
1.	 The existence of UFOs
	
2.	 Extraterrestrial abductions
	
3.	 Scientific creationism
	
4.	 Darwin’s theory of natural selection
	
5.	 Biorhythms
	
6.	 Phrenology
	
7.	 Séances and channeling
658   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
14
Visit Aplia for 
section-specific 
problem sets.

14
	
Summary
Criteria that bear on the distinction between science and superstition:
• Evidentiary support:
■
■
Superstitious hypotheses tend to lack supporting evidence.
■
■
Evidence is based on measurements expressed in mathematical terms.
■
■
Anecdotal evidence is usually not acceptable.
■
■
Experiments must be replicable at other times and places.
■
■
Hypotheses must be framed in precise language.
■
■
Hypotheses must be disconfirmable.
■
■
Ad hoc modifications must be avoided.
■
■
Simple explanations are better than complex ones.
■
■
The best hypotheses lead to predictions that turn out to be true.
■
■
Superstitious hypotheses never lead to striking, new insights that turn out to be true.
• Objectivity:
■
■
Beliefs grounded in emotion are not well founded.
■
■
Well-founded beliefs are not rooted in the preachings of a guru.
■
■
Mental laziness and magical thinking must be avoided.
■
■
The media are complicit in reinforcing magical thinking.
■
■
The placebo effect is responsible for many apparent cures.
■
■
Perceptions are affected by expectations.
■
■
Hallucinations can distort the content of perception.
■
■
Confabulation can distort the content of memory.
• Integrity:
■
■
Superstition often rests on faked evidence.
■
■
Practitioners of superstition ignore bad predictions that arise in connection with  
their practice.
■
■
They ignore coherence problems in their hypotheses.
■
■
They ignore conflicts between their hypotheses and other, well-confirmed 
hypotheses.
■
■
Scientists work on such problems until they are solved.
• Concluding Remarks:
■
■
Fraudulent work occurs occasionally in science, but it is not sufficient to erode the 
distinction between science and superstition.
■
■
Distinguishing science from superstition is crucial to the future of civilization.
Selected Readings
Best, John B. 1986. Cognitive Psychology. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing.
Bruner, Jerome S., and Leo J. Postman. 1973. “On the Perception of Incongruity: A Paradigm.”  
  In Beyond the Information Given, by Jerome S. Bruner. New York: W. W. Norton.
Feyerabend, Paul. 1975. Against Method. London: New Left Books.
S u m m a ry    659

14
660   CHAPTER 14 Science and Superstition
Frazier, Kendrick (ed.). 1981. Paranormal Borderlines of Science. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
       (ed.). 1991. The Hundredth Monkey, and Other Paradigms of the Paranormal. Buffalo, 
  NY: Prometheus Books.
Gardner, Martin. 1957. Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science. New York: Dover.
Guthrie, Stewart. 1993. Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion. Oxford, UK: Oxford  
  University Press.
Hines, Terence. 1988. Pseudoscience and the Paranormal. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Kanizsa, Gaetano. 1979. Organization in Vision. New York: Praeger Publishers.
Kitcher, Philip. 1982. Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism. Cambridge, MA: MIT  
  Press.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1970a. “Logic of Discovery or Psychology of Research.” In Criticism and the  
  Growth of Knowledge. Edited by Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge  
  University Press, 4–10.
      . 1970b. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago  
  Press.
Lakatos, Imre. 1977. Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Popper, Karl. 1963. Conjectures and Refutations. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Radner, Daisie, and Michael Radner. 1982. Science and Unreason. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Randi, James. 1982a. Flim Flam. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
      . 1982b. The Truth About Uri Geller. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
Schick, Theodore, and Lewis Vaughn. 1995. How to Think About Weird Things. Mountain View,  
  CA: Mayfield Publishing Co. 
Singer, Barry, and Victor A. Benassi. 1980–81. “Fooling Some of the People All of the Time.”  
  The Skeptical Inquirer, Winter, 17–24.
Thagard, Paul. 1978. “Why Astrology Is a Pseudoscience.” In Proceedings of the Philosophy of  
  Science Association, Vol. 1, 223–234.

Answers to Selected Exercises   661
661
Exercise 1.1
I.
  1.	P:	 Carbon monoxide molecules happen to be just 
the right size and shape, and happen to have just 
the right chemical properties, to fit neatly into 
cavities within hemoglobin molecules in blood 
that are normally reserved for oxygen molecules.
	
C:	 Carbon monoxide diminishes the oxygen- 
carrying capacity of blood.
  4.	P:	 When individuals voluntarily abandon property, 
they forfeit any expectation of privacy in it that 
they might have had.
	
C:	 A warrantless search and seizure of abandoned 
property is not unreasonable under the Fourth 
Amendment.
  7.	P1:	 We need sleep to think clearly, react quickly, and 
create memories.
	
P2:	 Studies show that people who are taught men-
tally challenging tasks do better after a good 
night’s sleep.
	
P3:	 Other research suggests that sleep is needed for 
creative problem solving.
	
C:	 It really does matter if you get enough sleep.
10.	P1:	 Punishment, when speedy and specific, may 
suppress undesirable behavior.
	
P2:	 Punishment cannot teach or encourage desirable 
alternatives.
	
C:	 It is crucial to use positive techniques to model 
and reinforce appropriate behavior that the 
person can use in place of the unacceptable 
­response that has to be suppressed.
13.	P1:	 Private property helps people define themselves.
	
P2:	 Private property frees people from mundane 
cares of daily subsistence.
	
P3:	 Private property is finite.
	
C:	 No individual should accumulate so much prop-
erty that others are prevented from accumulat-
ing the necessities of life.
16.	P1:	 The nations of planet earth have acquired 
­nuclear weapons with an explosive power equal 
to more than a million Hiroshima bombs.
	
P2:	 Studies suggest that explosion of only half these 
weapons would produce enough soot, smoke, 
and dust to blanket the earth, block out the 
sun, and bring on a nuclear winter that would 
threaten the survival of the human race.
	
C:	 Radioactive fallout isn’t the only concern in the 
­aftermath of nuclear explosions.
19.	P1:	 Antipoverty programs provide jobs for middle-
class professionals in social work, penology, and 
public health.
	
P2:	 Such workers’ future advancement is tied to the 
continued growth of bureaucracies dependent 
on the existence of poverty.
	
C:	 Poverty offers numerous benefits to the nonpoor.
22.	P:	 Take the nurse who alleges that physicians 
­enrich themselves in her hospital through 
­unnecessary surgery; the engineer who discloses 
safety defects in the braking systems of a fleet of 
new rapid-transit vehicles; the Defense Depart-
ment official who alerts Congress to military 
graft and overspending: All know that they pose 
a threat to those whom they denounce and that 
their own careers may be at risk.
	
C:	 The stakes in whistle-blowing are high.
25.	P1:	 It is generally accepted that by constantly swim-
ming with its mouth open, the shark is simply 
avoiding suffocation.
	
P2:	 This assures a continuous flow of oxygen-laden 
water into the shark’s mouth, over its gills, and 
out through the gill slits.
	
C:	 Contrary to the tales of some scuba div-
ers, the toothy, gaping grin on the mouth 
of an ­approaching shark is not necessarily 
antici­patory.
28.	P1:	 Anyone familiar with our prison system knows 
that there are some inmates who behave little 
better than brute beasts.
	
P2:	 If the death penalty had been truly effective as 
a deterrent, such prisoners would long ago have 
vanished.
	
C:	 The very fact that these prisoners exist is a tell-
ing argument against the efficacy of capital pun-
ishment as a deterrent.
Answers
to Selected Exercises

662   Answers to Selected Exercises
II.
  1.	College sports are as much driven by money as are 
professional sports.
  4.	Business majors are robbing themselves of the true 
purpose of collegiate academics, a sacrifice that out-
weighs the future salary checks.
  7.	A person cannot reject free will and still insist on 
criminality and codes of moral behavior.
10.	Protecting the environment requires that we limit 
population growth.
Exercise 1.2
I.
  1.		Nonargument; explanation.
  4.	Nonargument; illustration.
  7.	Argument (conclusion: If stem-cell research is 
­restricted, then people will die prematurely).
10.	Nonargument; report.
13.	Nonargument; illustration.
16.	Nonargument; piece of advice.
19.	Argument (conclusion: For organisms at the sea 
surface, sinking into deep water usually means 
death).
22.	Argument (conclusion: Atoms can combine to form 
molecules whose properties generally are very dif-
ferent from those of the constituent atoms).
25.	Nonargument; explanation.
28.	Argument (conclusion: A person never becomes 
truly self-reliant).
31.	This passage could be both an argument and an 
­explanation (conclusion: In areas where rats are a 
problem, it is very difficult to exterminate them with 
bait ­poison).
34.	Nonargument; loosely associated statements.
II.
  1.	Nonargument.
  4.	Nonargument.
  7.	Argument (conclusion: Creating a third political 
party—the independent party—is a good idea).
10.	Argument (conclusion: Strong anti-bullying pro-
grams are needed to provide a means to report bul-
lying anonymously, to train all school personnel 
to take reports of bullying seriously, and to offer 
workshops for children on how to respond to being 
­bullied).
VI.
  1.	Sufficient: If something is a tiger, then it is an animal.
  4.	Necessary: If a person has no racket, then he/she 
cannot play tennis. Or, If a person plays tennis, then 
he/she has a racket.
  7.	Sufficient: If leaves burn, then smoke is produced.
10.	Necessary: If a person does not utter a falsehood, 
then he or she does not tell a lie. Or, If a person tells 
a lie, then he or she utters a falsehood.
Exercise 1.3
I.
  1.	Deductive (argument based on mathematics; also, 
conclusion follows necessarily from the premises).
  4.	Deductive (categorical syllogism; also, conclusion 
follows necessarily from the premises).
  7.	Inductive (causal inference; also, conclusion follows 
only probably from the premise).
10.	Inductive (argument from analogy; also, conclusion 
follows only probably from the premise).
13.	Inductive (argument from authority; also, conclu-
sion follows only probably from the premise).
16.	Deductive (conclusion follows necessarily from the 
premise).
19.	Inductive (causal inference; also, conclusion follows 
only probably from the premises).
22.	Deductive (conclusion follows necessarily from the 
premise; this example might also be interpreted as 
an argument from definition—the definition of 
“refraction”).
25.	Inductive (causal inference: The dog’s familiarity 
with the visitor caused the dog to be silent).
28.	Inductive (causal inference; also, the word “may” 
suggests a probabilistic inference).
Exercise 1.4
I.
  1.	Valid, unsound; false premises, false conclusion.
  4.	Valid, sound; true premises, true conclusion.
  7.	Invalid, unsound; true premise, true conclusion.
10.	Valid, unsound; false premise, false conclusion.
13.	Invalid, unsound; true premises, true conclusion.
II.
  1.	Strong, cogent; true premise, probably true 
conclusion.
  4.	Weak, uncogent; true premise, probably false 
­conclusion.
  7.	Strong, uncogent; false premise, probably true 
­conclusion.
10.	Strong, cogent; true premise, probably true 
­conclusion.
13.	Weak, uncogent; true premises, probably false 
­conclusion.
1

Answers to Selected Exercises   663
III.
  1. 	Deductive, valid.
  4. 	Deductive, valid.
  7. 	Inductive, weak.
10. 	Deductive, invalid.
13. 	Inductive, weak. 
16. 	Deductive, invalid.
19. 	Inductive, strong.
Exercise 1.5
I.
  1.	All G are S.	
All cats are animals. (T)
	
All Q are S.	
All dogs are animals. (T)
	
All G are Q.	
All cats are dogs. (F)
  4.	No U are P.	
No fish are mammals. (T)
	
Some U are not F.	 Some fish are not cats. (T)
	
Some F are not P.	
Some cats are not mammals. (F)
  7.	No P are H.	
No dogs are fish. (T)
	
No C are H.	
No mammals are fish. (T) 
	
No P are C.	
No dogs are mammals. (F)
10.	Some S are not O.	
Some dogs are not fish. (T)
	
Some G are not O.	 Some animals are not fish. (T)
	
Some S are not G.	
Some dogs are not animals. (F)
13.	Some I are not E.	
Some animals are not  
	
mammals. (T)
	
All C are E.      	
All cats are mammals. (T)   
	
Some C are not I.	
Some cats are not animals. (F)
II.
  1.	If A then E.
	
Not A.         
	
Not E.
	
If George Washington was assassinated, then
	
George Washington is dead. (T)
	
George Washington was not assassinated. (T)
	
George Washington is not dead. (F)
  4.	If E, then either D or C.
	
If D, then I.                     
	
If E, then I.
	
If Tom Cruise is a man, then he is either a mouse  
or a human. (T)
	
If Tom Cruise is a mouse, then he has a tail. (T)           
	
If Tom Cruise is a man, then he has a tail. (F)
  7.	All C with L are either S or I.
	
All C are I.
	
All cats with fur are either mammals or dogs. (T)
	
All cats are dogs. (F)
10.	All R that are F are either L or H.
	
All R are H.                                     
	
All F are L.
	
All cats that are mammals are either dogs or ­animals. (T)
	
All cats are animals. (T)                                                     
	
	All mammals are dogs. (F)
Exercise 1.6
I.
  1.	
2
3
1
  4.	 3
2
4
1
  7.	 2
3
4
5
1
10.	
4
5
2
3
1
13.	
4
3
2
1
II.
  1.	 3
4
5
6
2
  4.	
2
1
7
6
3
5
4
1

664   Answers to Selected Exercises
  7.	 2
5
6
3
4
8
1
10.	
5
3
6
7
8
4
5
9
10
2
6
7
Note: Possible variations
exist for  ,  , and  .
13.	
7
8
6
11
12
4
5
10
13
1
2
Exercise 2.1
II.
  1.	In dog sled races the dogs are tortured.
	
Torturing animals is morally wrong.
	
Therefore, dog sled races are morally wrong.
  4.	Free ownership of guns is as noble as belief in God 
and intestinal fortitude.
	
Belief in God and intestinal fortitude made our 
country great and free.
	
Continued belief in God and intestinal fortitude are 
necessary to keep our country the way it is.
	
Free ownership of guns is no less important than 
God and intestinal fortitude.
	
Therefore, gun control is wrong.
  7.	The celebration of cultural diversity causes social 
fragmentation.
	
The celebration of cultural diversity is ­symptomatic 
of a split personality.
	
The people who set this country up framed one 
­nation, indivisible.
	
The celebration of cultural diversity works against 
the intention of these people.
	
The celebration of cultural diversity erodes ­national 
identity.
	
Therefore, the celebration of cultural diversity  
is wrong.
10.	Liberalism has excessively enlarged the welfare 
system.
	
Liberalism has made welfare recipients indolent and 
irresponsible.
	
The liberals refuse to acknowledge or correct the 
­defects in this system.
	
Liberalism has made the criminal justice system too 
sensitive to the criminal and too insensitive to the 
victim of crime.
	
Liberalism has given more rights to the criminal 
than to the ordinary citizen.
	
Liberalism has promoted sex and violence in the 
school system.
	
Liberals have opposed prayer in the schools.
	
Therefore, liberalism is bad.
III.
  1.	Probably verbal; ambiguity. Does “sound” designate 
a subjective perception or an objective disturbance 
of the air (or some other medium)?
  4.	Probably verbal; ambiguity. By “violence” do we 
mean intentional hostility exerted by one human 
against another, or the operation of blind physical 
forces? Possibly a combination of verbal and f­actual. 
Is human violence caused by the operation of physi-
cal forces just as other physical events are?
  7.	Factual. Did Paul go to Knoxville or Nashville?
10.	Factual. When was the Battle of Trafalgar fought, 
and when did Nelson die?
13.	Probably a combination of verbal (ambiguity) and 
factual. First, does “freedom” mean the absence 
of ­external constraint only, or the absence of both 
­internal and external constraint? Second, given the 
former, is it appropriate to punish the perpetrator of 
evil acts even though those acts might be internally 
compelled?
16.	Verbal; vagueness. What is the meaning of 
“overpaid”?
19.	Verbal; vagueness. What is the meaning of “poverty”?
Exercise 2.2
I.
4a.	Plant, tree, conifer, spruce, Sitka spruce.
Exercise 2.3
I.
  1.	Precising definition.
  4.	Lexical definition.
  7.	Persuasive definition.
10.	Theoretical definition.
2

Answers to Selected Exercises   665
13.	Stipulative definition.
16.	Persuasive definition.
19.	Lexical definition.
22.	Precising definition.
25.	Stipulative definition.
Exercise 2.4
I.
  1.	Definition by subclass.
  4.	Enumerative definition.
  7.	Demonstrative definition.
10.	Operational definition.
13.	Definition by genus and difference.
16.	Etymological definition.
19.	Enumerative definition.
22.	Synonymous definition.
25.	Definition by subclass.
28.	Definition by genus and difference.
II.
1a.	“Skyscraper” means the Empire State Building, 
Chrysler Building, Willis Tower, and so on. Nonsyn-
onymous term: building.
3a.	“Animal” means a horse, bear, lion, and so on. Non-
synonymous term: mammal.
5a.	“Intersection” means crossing.
6a.	A person is a “genius” if and only if that person can 
earn a score of 140 on an IQ test.
7a.	“Drake” means a male duck.
8a.	“Morphology” is derived from the Greek words 
­morphe, meaning “form,” and logos, meaning ­reason, 
speech, or account. The morphology of something 
(such as an animal or a plant) gives an account or 
­explanation of the form or structure of that thing.
Exercise 2.5
  1.	Rule 3: too narrow; the definiens excludes images 
made of bronze, wood, plaster, and so on.
  4.	Rule 6: figurative language.
  7.	Rule 5: negative.
10.	Rule 7: affective terminology.
13.	Rule 1: improper grammar.
16.	Rule 4: circular.
19.	Rule 6: vague.
22.	Rule 1: improper grammar; Rule 6: vague; Rule 3:  
too broad (the definiens also includes ketches, 
sloops, and yawls).
25.	Rule 3: too broad (the definiens also describes vio-
lins, violas, and string basses).
28.	Rule 2: fails to convey the essential meaning; the 
definition says nothing about the purpose of a 
clock, which is to tell the time; also too narrow: 
the definiens excludes twenty-four-hour clocks and 
clocks without twelve numerals on their face.
31.	 Rule 7: affective terminology.
34.	Rule 3: both too narrow and too broad; the defini-
ens excludes instruments used for writing on can-
vas, glass, metal, plastic, and so on, and it includes  
pencils, crayons, and so on.
Exercise 3.1
  1.	Formal fallacy.	
  7.  Informal fallacy.
  4.	Informal fallacy.	
10.  Formal fallacy.
Exercise 3.2
I.
  1.	Appeal to pity.
  4.	 Accident.
  7.	 Appeal to force.
10.	 Tu quoque 
	
(you, too).
13.	 Red herring.
16.  Ad hominem
	
 circumstantial.
19.  Straw man.
22.  Appeal to the people, 
	
 indirect variety.
25.  Missing the point
Exercise 3.3
I.
  1.	Hasty generalization	
10.  Appeal to unqualified 
	
(converse accident).	
       authority.
  4.	Slippery slope.	 	
13.  Weak analogy.
  7.	Appeal to ignorance.
III.
  1.	Hasty generalization.
  4.	Ad hominem 	
circumstantial.
  7.	False cause (gambler’s 
fallacy).
10.	Straw man.	
13.	Red herring.
16.  Missing the point.
19.  Weak analogy.
22.  No fallacy.
25.  Appeal to ignorance.
28.  False cause.
Exercise 3.4
I.
  1.	False dichotomy.	
16.  Suppressed evidence.
  4.	Amphiboly.	
19.  Division.
  7.	Begging the question.	
22.  Complex question.
10.	Equivocation.	
25.  Begging the question.
13.	Composition.
3

666   Answers to Selected Exercises
III.
  1.  Ad hominem 	
circumstantial.
  4.  Equivocation.
  7.  Begging the question.
10.  Division.
13.  False cause (over­
simplified cause).
16.  Appeal to ­unqualified 
authority.
19.  Composition.
22.  Weak analogy.
25.  Straw man.
28.  Accident.
31.  Red herring.
34.  Amphiboly.
37.  False cause 
	
(gambler’s fallacy).
40.  Begging the question.
43.  Missing the point or  
suppressed evidence.
46.  Hasty generalization.
49.  Composition.
Exercise 3.5
I.
  1.		Missing the point or begging the question.
  4.		Composition.
  7.		No fallacy? Weak analogy?
10.	Appeal to unqualified authority. The statement 
“Only a fool . . .” involves an ad hominem abusive.
13.	False cause, suppressed evidence, begging the ques-
tion. There is little or no evidence of any causal con-
nection between malpractice suits and the decision 
of some obstetricians to leave the field. An unmen-
tioned factor is the inconvenience of being on call 
twenty-four hours per day waiting for patients to de-
liver. There is also little or no evidence of any genu-
ine “lawsuit crisis.”
16.	Begging the question?	
19.  Slippery slope.
	
	(Strange argument!)
22.	False cause? No fallacy?	
25.  False cause.
28.	Suppressed evidence? Weak analogy? Begging the 
question? No fallacy? The Commerce Clause of the 
U.S. Constitution and pertinent federal legislation 
prohibit unfair trade practices between states. No 
equivalent regulations exist for international trade.
31.	Appeal to the people (direct variety). Also appeal  
to pity?
34.	Appeal to the people (direct variety)?
37.	False dichotomy? No fallacy?
40.	Appeal to unqualified authority, slippery slope.
43.	Several cases of weak analogy. Also, a possible case 
of ad hominem abusive.
46.	Begging the question; straw man.
49.	Appeal to unqualified authority. The last paragraph 
suggests a hasty generalization.
52.	Hasty generalization. Ad hominem abusive? Also, 
begging the question or red herring?
55.	Weak analogy.
58.	Weak analogy? No fallacy?
Exercise 4.1
1.	 Quantifier: some; subject term: executive pay pack-
ages; copula: are; predicate term: insults to ordinary 
workers.
4.	 Quantifier: some; subject term: preachers who are in-
tolerant of others’ beliefs; copula: are not; predicate 
term: television evangelists.
7.	 Quantifier: no; subject term: sex education courses 
that are taught competently; copula: are; predicate 
term: programs that are currently eroding public 
morals.
Exercise 4.2
I.
1.	 E proposition, universal, negative, subject and predi-
cate terms are distributed.
4.	 O proposition, particular, negative, subject term un-
distributed, predicate term distributed.
7.	 I proposition, particular, affirmative, subject and 
predicate terms undistributed.
II.
1.	 No drunk drivers are threats to others on the 
highway.
4.	 Some CIA operatives are champions of human 
rights.
III.
1.	 Some owners of pit bull terriers are people who can 
expect expensive lawsuits.
4.	 No residents of Manhattan are people who can af-
ford to live there.
IV.
1.	 Some oil spills are not events catastrophic to the 
environment.
4.	 All corporate lawyers are people with a social 
conscience.
Exercise 4.3
I.
1.	
L
H
4.	
X
R
F
4

Answers to Selected Exercises   667
7.	
X
H
C
II.
  1.  Invalid.	
10.  Valid.
  4.  Valid.	
13.  Invalid.
  7.  Invalid.	
III.
  1.	No S are B.	

 
S
B
	
All S are B.	

 
S
B
	
(invalid)
  4.	All M are C.	

 
M
C
	
False: Some  
M are not C.
M
C
	
(valid)
  7.	No F are S. 	

F
S
 
	
	False: All F are S.	

F
S
X
 
(invalid, existential fallacy)
10.	No V are A.	

V
A
 
	
False: Some V are A.	

V
A
 
(valid)
13.	False: Some S are	

S
O
 
not O.
	
Some S are O.	

X
S
O
 
(invalid,  
existential fallacy)
Exercise 4.4
I.
  1.	No non-B are A. (true)
  4.	All non-B are A. (false)
  7.	Contraposition. (undetermined)
10.	Obversion. (false)
II.
1a.	All storms intensified by global warming are hurri-
canes. (not logically equivalent)
2a.	No radically egalitarian societies are societies that 
preserve individual liberties. (logically equivalent)
3a.	All physicians eligible to practice are physicians with 
valid licenses. (logically equivalent)
III.
  1.	Invalid (illicit conversion). 
  4.	Invalid (illicit contraposition). 
  7.	Valid. 
10.	Valid.
13.	Invalid (illicit conversion).
16.	Invalid (illicit contraposition).
19.	Valid.
Exercise 4.5
I.
  1.	(a) False, (b) True, (c) False.
  4.	(a) Undetermined, (b) True, (c) Undetermined.
  7.	(a) False, (b) Undetermined, (c) Undetermined.
II.
  1.	Valid. 
  4.	Invalid (existential fallacy). 
  7.	Invalid (illicit contrary).
10.	Invalid (illicit subcontrary).
13.	Invalid (existential fallacy).
III.
  1.	Valid, unsound.
  4.	Valid, sound.
  7.	Invalid, unsound (existential fallacy).
10.	Invalid, unsound (illicit subcontrary).
IV.
  1.	All non-B are A. (true) 
  4.	Some non-A are B. (undetermined) 
  7.	No non-A are B. (false) 
10.	Some non-A are not non-B. (true)
4

668   Answers to Selected Exercises
13.	Obversion. (false)
16.	Contradiction. (true)
19.	Contrary. (undetermined)
V.
  1.	Valid. 
  4.	Invalid (illicit contraposition). 
  7.	Valid.
10.	Invalid (illicit contrary).
13.	Invalid (illicit subcontrary).
VI.
  1.	All I are C.
	
Some I are C. (subalternation) 
Some C are I. (conversion)
  4.	All E are A.
	
False: No E are A. (contrary)
	
False: No A are E. (conversion)
	
False: All A are non-E. (obversion)
  7.	Some P are not non-S.
	
Some P are S. (obversion)
	
Some S are P. (conversion)
	
False: No S are P. (contradiction)
10.	False: Some F are not A.
	
False: No F are A. (subalternation)
	
False: No A are F. (conversion)
	
False: All A are non-F. (obversion)
Exercise 4.6
I.
  1.	Some A are not B.	
 
A
B
X
	
No A are B.
A
B
 
(invalid) 
  4.	All A are B.
A
B
X
	
False: No A are B. 
A
B
X
 
(invalid, Boolean; conditionally 
valid, Aristotelian)
  7.	False: Some A are B. 
A
B
	
No A are B.	

A
B
 
(valid, Boolean)
10.	No A are B.
A
B
X
	
Some A are not B. 
A
B
X
	
(invalid, Boolean; conditionally 
valid, Aristotelian)
II.
  1.	No S are B.	

	
False: Some S are B.
 
	
(valid, Boolean)
  4. False: Some D are A.
 
      Some D are not A. 	 
D
A
X
 
(invalid, Boolean; valid, Aristotelian;  
existential fallacy, Boolean)
  7. All P are F.	

P
F
X
	
False: No P are F. 	

P
F
X
 
(invalid; existential fallacy,  
Boolean and Aristotelian)
10. False: Some T are Q.
 
T
Q
	
All T are Q.	

T
Q
 
(invalid)
13. False: Some P are T.	 
P
T
X
S
B
S
B
D
A
X
4

Answers to Selected Exercises   669
	
False: All P are T.	

P
T
X
 
(invalid, Boolean; valid, Aristotelian;  
existential fallacy, Boolean)
Exercise 4.7
I.
  1.	All banks that make too many risky loans are banks 
that will fail.
  4.	All substances identical to bromine are substances 
extractable from seawater.
  7.	No halogens are chemically inert elements.
10.	All ships that fly the Jolly Roger are pirate ships.
13.	All bachelors are unmarried men.
16.	Some organic silicones are things used as lubricants.
19.	Some giant stars are things in the Tarantula Nebula. 
Or All things identical to the Tarantula Nebula are 
things that contain a giant star.
22.	All people who require insulin treatments are diabetics.
25.	All cities identical to Berlin are cities that were the 
setting for the 1936 Olympic Games. Or All events 
identical to the 1936 Olympic Games are events that 
took place in Berlin.
28.	All places there is smoke are places there is fire.
31.	All ores identical to pitchblende are radioactive ores.
34.	All novels written by John Grisham are are novels 
about lawyers.
37.	All times a rainbow occurs are times the sun is shining.
40.	Some corporate raiders are people known for their 
integrity, and some corporate raiders are not people 
known for their integrity.
43.	All people identical to me are people who like straw-
berries. Or All things identical to strawberries are 
things I like.
46.	All places Cynthia wants to travel are places Cynthia 
travels.
49.	No physicists are people who understand the opera-
tion of superconductors.
52.	All measures that increase efficiency are measures 
that improve profitability.
55.	Some picnics are events entirely free of ants, and 
some picnics are not events entirely free of ants.
58.	Some contestants are people who won prizes.
II.
  1.	Some figure skating finalists are performers who 
may win medals.
  4.	No downhill skiers who suffer from altitude sickness 
are effective competitors.
  7.	No matadors are performers who succumb easily to 
fear.
10.	All hungry crocodiles are dangerous animals.
III.
  1.	No flu vaccines are completely effective medicines. 
Therefore, some flu vaccines are not completely ef-
fective medicines. (valid)
  4.	Some toy makers are businesses that want unre-
stricted online access to kids. Therefore, some toy 
makers are not businesses that want restricted on-
line access to kids. (valid, obvert either the premise 
or the conclusion)
  7.	No tax cuts are measures that please everyone.
Therefore, all tax cuts are measures that please ev-
eryone. (invalid, illicit contrary)
10.	Some fake artworks are items sold on eBay. There-
fore, some items sold on eBay are fake artworks. 
(valid, convert either the premise or the conclusion)
Exercise 5.1
I.
  1.	Major term: things that produce intense gravity.
	
Minor term: extremely dense objects.
	
Middle term: neutron stars.
	
Mood, figure: AAA-3; invalid.
  4.	Major term: good witnesses.
	
Minor term: hypnotized people.
	
Middle term: people who mix fact with fantasy.
	
Mood, figure: EIO-1; valid, Boolean.
II.
  1.	All B are D.
	
No R are D.
	
No R are B.
	
  AEE-2 
  valid, Boolean
  4.	No M are F.
	
All M are I.
	
Some I are not F.
	
  EAO-3
	
  invalid, Boolean;
	
  valid, Aristotelian
  7.	All P are E.
	
All L are P.
	
Some L are E.
	
  AAI-1
	
  invalid
10.	Some O are not C.
	
All S are O.
	
Some S are C.
	
  OAI-1
	
  invalid
5

670   Answers to Selected Exercises
III.
  1.	Some M are not P.
	
All M are S.
	
No S are P.
  4.	Some M are P.
	
All S are M.
	
No S are P.
  7.	All M are P.
	
All S are M.
	
All S are P.
10.	Some P are not M.
	
No M are S.
	
All S are P.
IV.
  1.	No dogmatists are scholars who encourage free 
thinking.
	
Some theologians are scholars who encourage free 
thinking.
	
Some theologians are not dogmatists.
  4.	Some viruses are not things capable of replicating by 
themselves.
	
All viruses are structures that invade cells.
	
Some structures that invade cells are not things 
­capable of replicating by themselves.
Exercise 5.2
I.
  1.	All C are U.
I
U
C
X
	
Some U are I.
	
Some I are C.
	
  AII-4
	
  invalid
  4.	All H are D.
P
D
H
X
	
Some D are not P.
	
Some P are not H.
	
  AOO-4
	
  invalid
  7.	No P are I.
F
I
P
	
All F are I.
	
No F are P.
	
  EAE-2
	
  valid, Boolean
10.	No C are O.	

D
O
C
X
	
Some D are not O.
	
Some D are not C.
	
  EOO-2
	
  invalid
13.	No P are W.
D
P
W
	
All D are P.
	
No D are W.
	
  EAE-1
	
  valid, Boolean	
16.	All C are G.
E
G
C
X
	
All G are E.
	
Some E are C.
	
  AAI-4
	
  invalid
19.	No T are R.
G
X
T
R
	
All T are G.
	
Some G are not R.
	
  EAO-3
	
  invalid, Boolean;
	
  valid, Aristotelian
II.
  1.	
	
S
M
P
Conclusion: No S are P.
  4.	
S
M
P
X
	
Conclusion: Some S are not P.
  7.	
S
M
P
	
Conclusion: All S are P.
10.	
S
M
P
	
Conclusion: None.
5

Answers to Selected Exercises   671
Exercise 5.3
I.
  1.	All M are P.	
 
S
M
P
	
All M are S.
	
All S are P.
	
  invalid;
	
  illicit minor
  4.	All P are M.
S
M
P
	
All S are M.
	
Some S are P.
	
  invalid;
	
  undistributed middle
  7.	No M are P.
S
M
P
	
All S are M.
	
All S are P.
	
 invalid;
	
  drawing affirmative
	
  conclusion from
	
  negative premise
10.	Some M are P.	 
	
All M are S.
	
Some S are not P.
	
  invalid;
	
  illicit major;
S
M
P
X
	
  drawing negative
	
  conclusion from
	
  affirmative premises
13.	All P are M.	

S
M
P
	
No M are S.	
	
No S are P.	
	
  valid, Boolean;	
	
  no rules broken	
16.	No M are P.
S
M
P
	
No S are M.
	
No S are P.
	
  invalid;
	
  exclusive premises
19.	All P are M.
S
M
P
X
	
Some S are not M.
	
Some S are not P.
	
  valid, Boolean;
	
  no rules broken
II.
  1.	Some N are C.	 
O
C
N
X
X
	
Some C are O.	
	
Some O are N.	
	
  invalid;
	
  undistributed middle
  4.	Some C are not M.
I
C
M
X
	
No C are I.
	
Some I are not M.
	
  invalid;
	
  exclusive premises
  7.	No S are V.
W
V
S
X
	
Some W are V.
	
Some W are not S.
	
  valid, Boolean;
	
  no rules broken
10.	All S are M.
P
M
S
X
	
All M are P.
	
Some P are S.
	
  invalid, Boolean;
	
  valid, Aristotelian;
	
  existential fallacy,
	
  Boolean 
Exercise 5.4
  1.	Some non-T are M. (convert, obvert)
	
All non-I are non-M. (contrapose)	
	
Some I are T.	
	
Some M are not T.
	
All M are I.
	
Some I are T.
	
  invalid; drawing affirmative conclusion
	
  from negative premise
  4.	Some I are C.	
	
All C are non-P.	
	
Some non-I are not P. (contrapose)
	
Some I are C.
	
All C are non-P.
	
Some non-P are not I.
	
  invalid; illicit major
  7.	All non-M are non-E. (contrapose)
	
Some P are not M.
	
Some P are non-E. (obvert)
	
All E are M.
	
Some P are not M.
	
Some P are not E.
	
  valid
10.	Some F are non-D. (obvert)
	
No D are V.
	
Some non-V are F. (convert, obvert)
	
Some F are not D.
	
No D are V.
	
Some F are not V.
	
  invalid; exclusive premises
5

672   Answers to Selected Exercises
Exercise 5.5
  1.	All scientists who theorize about the nature of time 
are physicists.
	
All people identical to Stephen Hawking are 
­scientists who theorize about the nature of time.
	
All people identical to Stephen Hawking are 
physicists.
	
  valid
  4.	All people who wrote the Declaration of Inde­
pendence are people who had a big impact on 
civilization.
	
All people identical to Thomas Jefferson are people 
who had a big impact on civilization.
	
All people identical to Thomas Jefferson are people 
who wrote the Declaration of Independence.
	
  invalid, undistributed middle
  7.	Some songs Shania Twain sings are country songs.
	
All songs Shania Twain wants to sing are songs  
Shania Twain sings.
	
Some songs Shania Twain wants to sing are country 
songs.
	
  invalid, undistributed middle
10.	All TV viewers who receive scrambled signals are 
viewers with a decoder.
	
All people who receive digital satellite signals are TV 
viewers who receive scrambled signals.
	
All people who receive digital satellite signals are 
viewers with a decoder.
	
  valid
13.	All diseases carried by recessive genes are diseases 
that can be inherited by offspring of two carriers.
	
All diseases identical to cystic fibrosis are diseases 
carried by recessive genes.
	
All diseases identical to cystic fibrosis are diseases 
that can be inherited by offspring of two carriers.
	
  valid
Exercise 5.6
I.
  1.	Premise missing: Some police chiefs fix parking 
tickets.
  4.	Conclusion missing: A few fraternities have no  
legitimate role in campus life.
  7.	Conclusion missing: Some phone calls are not from 
friends.
10.	Premise missing: Whenever there is no military 
draft, antiwar protests are feeble. 
13.	Premise missing: No one who thinks that every-
thing is governed by deterministic laws believes in  
free will.
II.
  1.	All people who fix parking tickets are people who 
­undermine the evenhanded enforcement of the law.
	
Some police chiefs are people who fix parking tickets.
	
Some police chiefs are people who undermine the 
evenhanded enforcement of the law.
	
  valid
  4.	No groups that have dangerous initiation rites are 
groups that have a legitimate role in campus life.
	
Some fraternities are groups that have dangerous 
initiation rites.
	
Some fraternities are not groups that have a legiti-
mate role in campus life.
	
  valid
  7.	All calls from friends are welcome calls.
	
Some phone calls are not welcome calls.
	
Some phone calls are not calls from friends.
	
  valid
10.	All times there is no military draft are times ­antiwar 
protests are feeble.
	
All recent years are times there is no military draft. 
	
All recent years are times antiwar protests are feeble.
	
  valid
13.	No people who think that everything is governed by 
deterministic laws are people who believe in free will.
	
All mechanistic materialists are people who think 
­everything is governed by deterministic laws.
	
No mechanistic materialists are people who believe 
in free will.
	
  valid
III.
  1.	No organizations that make alcohol readily available 
and acceptable are organizations that are serious 
about fighting alcohol abuse.
	
All organizations identical to the Defense Depart­
ment are organizations that make alcohol readily 
available and acceptable.
	
No organizations identical to the Defense Depart­
ment are organizations that are serious about fight-
ing alcohol abuse.
  4.	All efforts to ban books are efforts that ensure those 
books will be read.
	
All efforts by the fundamentalist families in Church 
Hill, Tennessee, to remove Macbeth, etc. from the 
­libraries are efforts to ban books.
	
All efforts by the fundamentalist families in Church 
Hill, Tennessee, to remove Macbeth, etc. from the 
­libraries are efforts that ensure those books will be read.
  7.	All policies that promote more college graduates 
­tomorrow are policies that result in higher tax rev-
enues tomorrow.
5

Answers to Selected Exercises   673
	
All policies that offer financial aid to college students 
today are policies that promote more college gradu-
ates tomorrow.
	
All policies that offer financial aid to college stu-
dents today are policies that result in higher tax rev-
enues tomorrow.
	
  and
	
All policies that result in higher tax revenues tomor-
row are good investments in the future.
	
All policies that offer financial aid to college stu-
dents today are policies that result in higher tax rev-
enues tomorrow.
	
All policies that offer financial aid to college stu-
dents today are good investments in the future.
10.	All people who act in ways that decrease their 
chances of survival are people who will die out 
through natural selection.
	
All smokers who continue smoking are people who 
act in ways that decrease their chances of survival.
	
All smokers who continue smoking are people who 
will die out through natural selection.
	
  and
	
All people who act in ways that increase their 
chances of survival are people who will survive 
through natural selection.
	
All smokers who quit are people who act in ways 
that increase their chances of survival.
	
All smokers who quit are people who will survive 
through natural selection.
V.
  1.	All average childless couples are couples who experi-
ence higher levels of emotional well-being.
	
All couples who experience higher levels of emo-
tional well-being are happier couples.
	
Therefore, all average childless couples are happier 
couples.
Exercise 5.7
I.
  1.	All A are B.
	
No B are C.  	
No C are A.
	
Some D are C.	
 
	
Some D are not A.
	
  valid
B
C
A
C
X
D
A
  4.	No K are N.
	
Some T are K.   Some T are not N.
	
All T are C. 
  	
	
Some C are Q. 
    
	
Some Q are not N.
	
  invalid
                     
K
X
T
N
T
C
N
X
C
Q
N
X
X
  7.	After contraposing the first premise, obverting the 
second premise and the conclusion, and rearranging 
the premises, we have
	
No X are W.
	
All U are W.  
No U are X. 	  No V are X.
	
All V are U. 
 	
	
All V are Y 
     
	
No Y are X.
	
  invalid
               
W
U
X
U
V
X
V
Y
X
10.	After converting and obverting the second and 
fourth premises, obverting the third and fifth 
premises and the conclusion, and rearranging the 
premises, we have
	 All P are Q. 
	 All Q are R.  
All P are R.
	 All R are S. 
  All P are S.
	 No T are S. 
   No P are T.
	 All T are V. 
 
	 No V are P.
	   invalid
         
Q
P
R
R
P
S
S
P
T
T
V
P
II.
  1.	Valid—no rules broken.
  4.	Invalid—breaks Rule 1: C is undistributed in both 
premises.
  7.	Invalid—breaks Rule 2: Y is distributed in the con-
clusion but not in the premise.
10.	Invalid—breaks Rule 2: V is distributed in the con-
clusion but not in the premise.
Some C
are not N.
5

674   Answers to Selected Exercises
III.
  1.	All things that produce oxygen are things that support human life.	
All O are S.
	
All rain forests are things that produce oxygen.	
All R are O.
	
No things that support human life are things that should be destroyed.	
No S are D.
	
No rain forests are things that should be destroyed.	
No R are D.
	
After rearranging the premises, we have
	
No S are D.
	
All O are S. 	
No O are D.
	
All R are O. 
   
	
No R are D.
	
  no rules broken
                   
S
O
D
O
R
D
  4.	No brittle things are ductile things.	
No B are D.
	
All superconductors are ceramics.	
All S are C.
	
All things that can be pulled into wires are ductile things.	
All P are D.
	
All ceramics are brittle things.                        	
All C are B.
	
No superconductors are things that can be pulled into wires.	
No S are P.
	
After rearranging the premises, we have
	
All P are D.
	
No B are D.  
No B are P.
	
All C are B. 
 	
No C are P.
	
All S are C. 
 
	
No S are P.
	
  no rules broken
D
B
P
B
C
P
C
S
P
  7.	All people who give birth to crack babies are people who 
	
increase future crime rates.	
All B are I.
	
Some pregnant women are pregnant crack users.	
Some P are U.
	
All people who increase future crime rates are criminals.	
All I are C.
	
No pregnant crack users are people who fail to give birth to crack babies.	
No U are non-B.
	
Some pregnant women are criminals.	
Some P are C.
	
After obverting the fourth premise and rearranging the premises, we have
	
All I are C.
	
All B are I. 	
All B are C.
	
All U are B. 
    
All U are C.
	
Some P are U. 
   
	
Some P are C.
	
  no rules broken
I
B
C
B
U
C
U
X
P
C
5

Answers to Selected Exercises   675
10.	All things that promote skin cancer are things that cause death.	
All S are C.
	
All things that preserve the ozone layer are things that prevent the release of CFCs.	
All O are non-R.
	
No things that resist skin cancer are things that increase UV radiation.	
No non-S are U.
	
All things that do not preserve the ozone layer are things that increase UV radiation.	
All non-O are U.
	
Some packaging materials are things that release CFCs.	
Some M are R.
	
No things that cause death are things that should be legal.                       	
No C are L.       
	
Some packaging materials are things that should not be legal.	
Some M are non-L.
	
After contraposing the second premise, converting and obverting the third  
premise, and obverting the ­conclusion, we have
	
No C are L.
	
All S are C. 	
No S are L.
	
All U are S. 
    
No U are L.  
	
All non-O are U. 
    
No non-O are L.  
	
All R are non-O. 
       
No R are L.  
	
Some M are R. 
 
	
Some M are not L.
	
  no rules broken
C
S
L
S
U
L
U
non-O L
non-O
R
L
R
X
M
L
 
IV.
  1.	No ducks are waltzers.	
No D are W.
	
No officers are non-waltzers.	
No O are non-W.
	
All poultry of mine are ducks.	
All P are D            
	
No poultry of mine are officers.	
No P are O.
	
After obverting the second premise and rearranging the premises, we have
	
All O are W.
	
No D are W. 	
No D are O.
	
All P are D. 
   
	
No P are O.
	
  no rules broken
	
		
	
W
D
O
D
P
O
  4.	All hummingbirds are richly colored birds.	
All H are R.
	
No large birds are birds that live on honey.	
No L are O.
	
All birds that do not live on honey are birds that are dull in color.	
All non-O are non-R.
	
All hummingbirds are small birds.	
All H are non-L.
5

676   Answers to Selected Exercises
	
After contraposing the third premise, obverting the conclusion, and  
rearranging the premises, we have
	
No L are O.
	
All R are O. 	
No L are R.
	
All H are R. 
 
	
No H are L.
	
  no rules broken
	
		
	
O
L
R
R
H
L
  7.	All books in this library that I do not recommend are books 
that are unhealthy in tone.	
All non-R are non-H.
	
All the bound books are well-written books.	
All B are W.
	
All the romances are books that are healthy in tone.	
All O are H.
	
All the unbound books are books in this library that I do not recommend.	
All non-B are non-R.
	
All the romances are well-written books.	
All O are W.
	
After contraposing the first and fourth premises, we have
	
All B are W.
	
All R are B. 	
All R are W.  
	
All H are R. 
     	
All H are W.
	
All O are H. 
   
	
All O are W.
	
  no rules broken
	 	 	
B
R
W
R
H
W
H
O
W
10.	All animals that belong to me are animals I trust.	
All A are T.
	
All dogs are animals that gnaw bones.	
All D are G.
	
All animals I admit to my study are animals that beg when told to do so.	
All S are B.
	
All the animals in the yard are animals that belong to me.	
All Y are A.
	
All animals I trust are animals I admit into my study.	
All T are S.
	
All animals that are willing to beg when told to do so are dogs.	
All B are D.
	
All the animals in the yard are animals that gnaw bones.	
All Y are G.
	
After rearranging the premises, we have
	
All D are G.
	
All B are D. 	
All B are G.
	
All S are B. 
   All S are G.
	
All T are S. 
     All T are G.
	
All A are T. 
     All A are G.
	
All Y are A. 
 
	
All Y are G.
	
  no rules broken
D
B
G
B
S
G
S
T
G
T
A
G
A
Y
G
5

Answers to Selected Exercises   677
Exercise 6.1
I.
  1.	∼C
  4.	H  B
  7.	M ≡ P
10.	P ⊃ A
13.	M  (E ⋁ D)
16.	∼J  ∼P
19.	∼(F ⋁ M) or ∼F  ∼M
22.	(B ⊃ C) ⊃ R
25.	∼R ⋁ (M ⊃ P)
28.	(∼P  ∼C) ⊃ M
31.	(T  B) ⋁ (∼Z  ∼K)
34.	B  [N ⊃ (C ⋁ J)]
37.	M ⊃ [N ⊃ (S  T)]
40.	∼[(K ⋁ S)  (C ⋁ M )]
43.	I ≡ P
46.	∼[(W ⊃ T)  (C ⊃ K)]
49.	[(C  J) ≡ K] ⊃ ∼(B ⋁ S)
II.
  1.	R ⋁ F
  4.	∼(H ⋁ S)
  7.	S ⊃ G
10.	A ⊃ (∼N ⊃ M)
13.	(C  K) ≡ P
16.	[(T  L) ⊃ H]  (H ⊃ I)
19.	(B ⊃ M)  [(M  I) ⊃ (C  P)]
Exercise 6.2
I.
  1.	Dot.	
  4.	Triple bar.
  7.	Horseshoe.
10.	Wedge.
II.
  1.	 ∼  H
 ○
F   T
  4.	H      ∼   N
	
T	 ○
F	 F	 T
  7.	W  ⊃   E
	
F	 ○
T	  F
10.	H   ⊃   (C    ⋁   E)
	
T	 ○
T	
T	 T	 F
13.	∼  (E  ⋁  F )  ⊃  (H     L)
	
T	
F	 F	F	 ○
T	 T	 T  T
III.
  1.	A      X
	
T ○
F  F
  4.	∼  C   ⋁   Z
	
  F  T  ○
F   F
  7.	∼  X  ⊃   Z
	
  T  F ○
F   F
10.	∼  (A     ∼  Z)
	 ○
F   T   T     T   F
13.	(A    Y )  ⋁  (∼  Z    C)
	
  T   F  F   ○
T     T  F  T  T
16.	(C  ≡   ∼  A)   ⋁  (Y  ≡   Z)
	
  T  F    F   T   ○
T    F   T   F
19.	∼  [∼  (X  ⊃  C)  ≡   ∼  (B  ⊃  Z)]
       ○
T    F     F   T   T    F    T     T  F    F
22.	  ∼ [(A   ≡   X)  ⋁  (Z  ≡  Y ) ] ⋁  [(∼  Y  ⊃  B)    (Z  ⊃  C)]
 F 	 T	 F	 F	 T	 F	T	 F	 ○
T	  T	 F	 T	  T	 T	  F	T	  T
25.	(Z  ⊃  C)  ⊃  {[(∼  X  ⊃  B)  ⊃  (C  ⊃  Y)]  ≡ 
F	 T	 T	 ○
T	
T	 F	 T	 T	 F	
T	 F	 F	
T
	
[(Z  ⊃  X)  ⊃  (∼  Y  ⊃  Z)]}
F	 T	 F	 F	 T	 F	 F	 F
IV.
  1.	A  ⋁  P
	
T ○
T  ?
  4.	Q    A
	
?  ○
?   T
  7.	A  ⊃  P
	
T ○
?    ?
10.	(P  ⊃  A)   ≡  (Q  ⊃  B)
	
   ?     T   T    ○
T      ?     T    T
13.	∼  (Q    Y)   ≡    ∼  (Q  ⋁  A)
	
 T      ?  F  F   ○
F      F       ?  T  T
Exercise 6.3
I.
  1.	N  ⊃  (N  ⊃  N)
	
T	 T	 T	 T	 T
	
F	   T	 F	 T	 F
	
tautologous
  4.	[(E  ⊃  F )  ⊃  F ]  ⊃  E
	
	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	 T
	
	 T	 F	 F	
T	 F	 T	 T
	
	 F	 T	 T	
T	 T	 F	 F
	
	 F	 T	 F	
F	 F	 T	 F
   contingent
  7.	[(Z  ⊃  X)    (X  ⋁  Z)]  ⊃  X
	
	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T
	
	 T	 F	 F	 F	 F	 T	 T	
T	 F
	
	 F	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 F	
T	 T
	
	 F	 T	 F	 F	 F	 F	 F	
T	 F
   tautologous
6

678   Answers to Selected Exercises
10.	[G  ⊃  (N  ⊃  ∼  G)]    [(N   ≡   G)    (N  ⋁  G)]
	
	 T	 F	
T	 F	 F	 T	
F	
T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T
	
	 T	 T	 F	 T	 F	 T	
F	
F	 F	 T	 F	 F	 T	 T
	
	 F	 T	 T	 T	 T	 F	
F	
T	 F	 F	 F	 T	 T	 F
	
	 F	 T	 F	 T	 T	 F	
F	
F	 T	 F	 F	 F	 F	 F
	
	 self-contradictory
13.	[U    (T  ⋁  S)]   ≡   [(∼  T  ⋁  ∼  U )    (∼  S  ⋁  ∼  U )]
	
	T	T	 T	 T	 T	
F	
F	 T	 F	 F	 T	 F	 F	 T	F	 F	 T
	
	T	T	 T	 T	 F	
F	
F	 T	 F	 F	 T	 F	 T	 F	T	 F	 T
	
	T	T	 F	 T	 T	
F	
T	 F	 T	 F	 T	 F	 F	 T	F	 F	 T
	
	T	F	 F	 F	 F	
F	
T	 F	 T	 F	 T	 T	 T	 F	T	 F	 T
	
	F	F	 T	 T	 T	
F	
F	 T	 T	 T	 F	 T	 F	 T	T	 T	 F
	
	F	F	 T	 T	 F	
F	
F	 T	 T	 T	 F	 T	 T	 F	T	 T	 F
	
	F	F	 F	 T	 T	
F	
T	 F	 T	 T	 F	 T	 F	 T	T	 T	 F
	
	F	F	 F	 F	 F	
F	
T	 F	 T	 T	 F	 T	 T	 F	T	 T	 F
   self-contradictory
II.
  1.	∼  D  ⋁  B	
∼  (D    ∼  B)
	
 F	 T	 T	 T	
T	
T	 F	 F	 T
	
 F	 T	 F	 F	
F	
T	 T	 T	 F
	
 T	 F	 T	 T	
T	
F	 F	 F	 T
	
 T	 F	 T	 F	
T	
F	 F	 T	 F
	
logically equivalent
  4.	R  ⋁  ∼  S	
S     ∼  R
	
T	 T	 F	 T	
T	 F	 F	 T
	
T	 T	 T	 F	
F	 F	 F	 T
	
F	 F	 F	 T	
T	 T	 T	 F
	
F	 T	 T	 F	
F	 F	 T	 F
	
contradictory
  7.	(E  ⊃  C)  ⊃  L	
E  ⊃ (C  ⊃  L)
	
	T	 T	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	 T	 T
	
	T	 T	 T	 F	 F	
T	 F	 T	 F	 F
	
	T	 F	 F	
T	 T	
T	 T	 F	 T	 T
	
	T	 F	 F	
T	 F	
T	 T	 F	 T	 F
	
	F	 T	 T	 T	 T	
F	 T	 T	 T	 T
	
	F	 T	 T	 F	 F	
F	 T	 T	 F	 F
	
	F	 T	 F	
T	 T	
F	 T	 F	 T	 T
	
	F	 T	 F	 F	 F	
F	 T	 F	 T	 F
	 consistent
10.	W   ≡   (B    T)	      W    (T  ⊃  ∼  B)
	 T	 T	 T	 T	T	
T	 F	 T	 F	 F	 T
	 T	 F	 T	 F	F	
T	 T	 F	 T	 F	 T
	 T	 F	 F	 F	T	
T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 F
	 T	 F	 F	 F	F	
T	 T	 F	 T	 T	 F
	 F	    F	 T	 T	T	
F	 F	 T	 F	 F	 T
	 F	    T	 T	 F	F	
F	 F	 F	 T	 F	 T
	 F	    T	 F	 F	T	
F	 F	 T	 T	 T	 F
	 F	    T	 F	 F	F	
F	 F	 F	 T	 T	 F
	 inconsistent
13.	H    (K  ⋁  J )	
( J    H )  ⋁  (H    K )
	
T	 T	 T	 T	T	
T	T	 T	
T	 T	 T	T
	
T	 T	 T	 T	F	
F	F	 T	
T	 T	 T	T
	
T	 T	 F	 T	T	
T	T	 T	
T	 T	 F	F
	
T	 F	 F	 F	F	
F	F	 T	
F	 T	 F	F
	
F	 F	 T	 T	T	
T	F	 F	
F	 F	 F	T
	
F	 F	 T	 T	F	
F	F	 F	
F	 F	 F	T
	
F	 F	 F	 T	T	
T	F	 F	
F	 F	 F	F
	
F	 F	 F	 F	F	
F	F	 F	
F	 F	 F	F
	
logically equivalent
III.
  1.	Carlson’s prediction is false (self-contradictory).
  4.	It is possible that both astronomers are correct. If 
they are, a supernova will not occur within 10 light 
years of the earth.
  7.	It is possible that both stockbrokers are correct. If 
they are, then Datapro will cut back its workforce. 
We can conclude nothing about Netmark and 
Compucel.
10.	It is possible that Nicole’s philosophy makes sense. 
If it does, then the mind is not identical to the brain, 
personal freedom exists, and humans are responsi-
ble for their actions.
Exercise 6.4
I.
  1.	N  ⊃  S  / /   ∼  N  ⊃  ∼  S
	
T	 T	 T	
F	 T	 T	 F	 T
	
T	 F	 F	
F	 T	 T	 T	 F
	
F  ○
T  	T	
T	 F  ○
F  	F	 T
	
F	 T	 F	
T	 F	 T	 T	 F
	
invalid
  4.	D  ⊃  W  /  D  / /  W
	
T	 T	 T	
T	
T
	
T	 F	 F	
T	
F
	
F	 T	 T	
F	
T
	
F	 T	 F	
F	
F
	
valid
  7.	Invalid (fails on first line).
10.	Valid.
II.
  1.	Valid.
  4.	Valid.
  7.	Invalid (fails on fourth line).
10.	Invalid (fails on fourth and sixth lines).
13.	Valid.
16.	Invalid (fails on third line).
19.	Valid.
6

Answers to Selected Exercises   679
Exercise 6.5
I.
  1.	D = True
  4.	N = Unknown
  7.	C = True
10.	J = Unknown
13.	C = True, P = False
16.	G = False, K = False
19.	L = True
22.	H = False, B = False
25.	C = Unknown, R = Unknown
II.
Note: Truth values may vary depending on how the 
problem is done.
  1.	B  ⊃  C   /  ∼  C  / /  ∼  B
	
T	 T	 F	
T	 F	
F	 T
	
valid
  4.	∼  (I    ≡   J )  / /  ∼  (I  ⊃  J )
	
T	
T	 F	 F	
F	 T	  F	 F
	
T	
F	 F	 T	
F	 F	  T	 T
	
invalid
  7.	G  ⊃  H  /  H  ⊃  I  /  ∼  J  ⊃  G  /  ∼  I  / /  J
	
T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	
T	 F	 T	 T	
T	 T	
F
	
valid
10.	(M  ⋁  N)  ⊃  O  /  O  ⊃  (N  ⋁  P)  /  M  ⊃  (∼  Q  ⊃  N)  /  (Q  ⊃  M)  ⊃  ∼  P  / /  N   ≡  O
	
	
T	 T	
T	 F	
T	
T	
T	
T	 F	 F
	
	
T	 T	
T	 T	 F	 T	 T	
F	 T	
T	 F	 F	
T	 F	 T	
F	 F	 T
	
invalid
13.	(A  ⋁  B)  ⊃  (C    D)  /  ( X  ⋁  ∼Y)  ⊃  (∼  C    ∼  W)  /  ( X  ⋁  Z)  ⊃  (A    E)  / /  ∼  X
	
	T	 T	
T	
F	F	
T	 T	
T	
T	 F	T	 T	 F	
T	 T	
T	
T	T	T	
F	 T
	
valid
III.
  1.	K   ≡  (R  ⋁  M)  /  K     ∼  R  /  M  ⊃  ∼  K
	
T	 T	 F	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	  F	
T	 T	 F	 T
	
inconsistent
  4.	(N  ⋁  C)   ≡  E  /  N  ⊃  ∼  (C  ⋁  H)  /  H  ⊃  E  /  C  ⊃  H
	 F	   T	 T	 T	 T	
F	 T	 F	
T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T
	
	 	
F	 T	 T
	
	 	
F	 T	 F
	
consistent
  7.	S  ⊃  (R   ≡   A) /  A  ⊃  (W    ∼  R)  /  R   ≡   (W  ⋁  T )  /  S    U  /  U  ⊃  T
	
T	 T	 T	 T	 F	
F	 T	
	
F	 F	 T	
T	 T	
	
T	 T	
T	T	 T	
T	 T	 T
	
inconsistent
10.	A  ⋁  Z  /  A  ⊃  (T    F )  /  Z  ⊃  (M    Q)  /  Q  ⊃  ∼  F  /  T  ⊃  ∼  M  /  M  ⊃  A
	
T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 F	F	F	
T	 T	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	 F	
F	 T	 F	 T	
T	 T	 T
	
T	 T	 F	
T	 T	 T	T	T	
F	 T	 F	 F	 F	
F	 T	 F	 T	
T	 T	 T	 F	
F	 T	 T
	
	
F	 T	 F
	
consistent
6

680   Answers to Selected Exercises
Exercise 6.6
I.
  1.	MT—valid.
  4.	CD—valid.
  7.	DD—valid.
10.	DA—invalid.
13.	DS—valid.
16.	AC—invalid.
19.	Invalid.
Numbers 7 and 13 must be rewritten as follows:
  7.	(E ⊃ N )  (∼L ⊃ ∼K )
∼N ⋁ ∼∼K
	
∼E ⋁ ∼∼L
13.	∼S ⋁ P
	
∼∼S
	
P
II.
  1.	B ⊃ G
	
∼G
	
∼B	
MT—valid
  4.	W ⋁ ∼M
	
∼W
	
∼M	
DS—valid
  7.	N
	
N ⊃ B
	
B	
MP—valid
10.	(L ⊃ ∼A)  (C ⊃ F)
	
∼L  ∼C
	
A  ∼F	
invalid
13.	(A ⊃ E)  (P ⊃ ∼E)
	
E ⋁ ∼E
	
∼A ⋁ ∼P
	
rewritten:
	
(A ⊃ E)  (P ⊃ ∼E)
	
∼E ⋁ ∼∼E
	
∼A ⋁ ∼P	
DD—valid
16.	∼M ⊃ U
	
U
	
∼M	
AC—invalid
19.	S ⊃ C
	
I ⊃ S
	
I ⊃ C	
HS—valid
III.
  1.	(S ⊃ M)  (∼S ⊃ F)
	
S ⋁ ∼S
	
M ⋁ F	
CD
	
Since the second premise is a tautology, it is impos-
sible to escape between the horns. The two avail-
able strategies are therefore grasping by the horns 
and constructing a counterdilemma. If Melinda 
adequately prepares for the test before the party, 
then she does not spend the party night studying 
and she does not fail the test. This would falsify the 
right-hand conjunct of the first premise, thus falsify-
ing the entire premise. Here is a counterdilemma:
If Melinda spends the night studying, she will 
pass the test tomorrow; and if she doesn’t spend 
the night studying, she will go to the party. 
She will either spend the night studying or not 
studying. Therefore, she will either pass the test 
or go to the party.
  4.	(C ⊃ ∼S)  (E ⊃ S)
	
S ⋁ ∼S
	
∼C ⋁ ∼E
	
rewritten:	
(C ⊃ ∼S)  (E ⊃ S)
	
∼∼S ⋁ ∼S
	
∼C ⋁ ∼E	
DD
The second premise is a tautology, so it is impossible 
to escape between the horns. One could grasp the 
dilemma by the horns by arguing that corporations 
could share the cost of neutralizing toxic waste, thus 
preserving the competitive edge. Here is a construc-
tive counterdilemma:
If corporations spend money to neutralize 
their toxic waste, then the environment will 
be preserved; but if corporations do not spend 
money to neutralize their toxic waste, then 
they will ­remain competitive. Corporations 
will do one or the other. Therefore, either the 
environment will be preserved or corporations 
will remain competitive.
  7.	(C ⊃ L)  (J ⊃ B)
	
∼L ⋁ ∼B
	
∼C ⋁ ∼J	
DD
Here the second premise is not a tautology, so it 
is possible to escape between the horns. Perhaps 
­students could take a double major in liberal arts 
and business. One could also grasp the dilemma by 
the horns by arguing that students could major in a 
liberal arts field where a job would be available upon 
graduation. Here is a constructive counterdilemma:
If students major in liberal arts, then they will 
take courses that are interesting and reward-
ing; but if they major in business, then they will 
have a job when they graduate. Students will 
­either major in liberal arts or business. There-
fore, ­either they will take courses that are in-
teresting and rewarding or they will have a job 
when they graduate.
10.	(P ⊃ R)  (T ⊃ E)
	
P ⋁ T
	
R ⋁ E	
CD
The second premise is not a tautology, so it is at least 
possible to escape between the horns. If we instructed 
counterterrorist squads to execute terrorists on the 
spot, we would neither prosecute them nor release 
6

Answers to Selected Exercises   681
them. Can you think of a way to grasp the dilemma 
by the horns? Here is a counterdilemma:
If we prosecute suspected terrorists, then we 
discourage terrorism; but if we release them, 
then we avoid the risk of retaliation by other 
terrorists. We must either prosecute or release 
suspected terrorists. Therefore, either we will 
discourage terrorism or we will avoid the risk of 
retaliation by other terrorists.
V.
  1.	If human organs are given first to registered ­donors, 
then more people will register as donors. If more 
people register as donors, then the supply of organs 
will increase. Therefore, if human organs are given 
first to registered donors, then the supply of organs 
will ­increase. (HS)
  4.	If group problem solving is important, then we 
should not emphasize individual testing. Group 
problem solving is important. Therefore, we should 
not ­emphasize individual testing. (MP)
  If we should not emphasize individual testing, then 
the national math test is a mistake. We should not em-
phasize individual testing. Therefore, the national math 
test is a mistake. (MP)
  7.	If we close the library at Central Juvenile Hall, then 
delinquents will be deprived of an opportunity to 
read. If delinquents are deprived of an opportu-
nity to read, then they will not have access to ideas, 
dreams, and alternative ways of living. Therefore, if 
we close the library at Central Juvenile Hall, then de-
linquents will not have access to ideas, dreams, and 
alternative ways of living. (HS)
	
  If we close the library at Central Juvenile Hall, 
then delinquents will not have access to ideas, 
dreams, and alternative ways of living. Delinquents 
must have ­access to ideas, dreams, and alternative 
ways of living. Therefore, we must not close the li-
brary at Central Juvenile Hall. (MT)
10.	If viewing adult videos led to violent sex crimes, then 
there would be over a million violent sex crimes per 
week. It is not the case that there are over a million 
violent sex crimes per week. Therefore, viewing adult 
videos does not lead to violent sex crimes. (MT)
Exercise 7.1
I.
  1.	∼G	
1, 2, MT
  4.	C	
1, 2, DS
  7.	F ⊃ D	
1, 3, HS
10.	G ⊃ A	
1, 4, HS
13.	∼∼C	
1, 3, MT
16.	∼P	
1, 2, MP
19.	∼(S ⋁ C)	
1, 3, MT
II.
  1.	∼B	
1, 2, DS
  4.	R ⊃ C	
1, 2, HS
  7.	Q	
2, 3, MP
10.	∼A	
1, 4, MT
13.	∼∼S	
3, 4, MT
16.	∼Z	
3, 4, MP
19.	H ⋁ G	
2, 4, MP
III.
	 (1)	 1.	 ∼C ⊃ (A ⊃ C)
	
	 2.	 ∼C	
/ ∼A
	
	 3.	 A ⊃ C	
1, 2, MP
	
	 4.	 ∼A	
2, 3, MT
	 (4)	 1.	 P ⊃ (G ⊃ T)
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ (T ⊃ E)
	
	 3.	 P
	
	 4.	 Q	
/ G ⊃ E
	
	 5.	 G ⊃ T	
1, 3, MP
	
	 6.	 T ⊃ E	
2, 4, MP
	
	 7.	 G ⊃ E	
5, 6, HS
	 (7)	 1.	 ∼S ⊃ D
	
	 2.	 ∼S ⋁ (∼D ⊃ K)
	
	 3.	 ∼D	
/ K
	
	 4.	 ∼∼S	
1, 3, MT
	
	 5.	 ∼D ⊃ K	
2, 4, DS
	
	 6.	 K	
3, 5, MP
(10)	 1.	 N ⊃ (J ⊃ P)
	
	 2.	 (J ⊃ P) ⊃ (N ⊃ J)
	
	 3.	 N	
/ P
	
	 4.	 J ⊃ P	
1, 3, MP
	
	 5.	 N ⊃ J	
2, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 N ⊃ P	
4, 5, HS
	
	 7.	 P	
3, 6, MP
(13)	 1.	 R ⊃ (G ⋁ ∼A)
	
	 2.	 (G ⋁ ∼A) ⊃ ∼S
	
	 3.	 G ⊃ S
	
	 4.	 R	
/ ∼A
	
	 5.	 G ⋁ ∼A	
1, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 ∼S	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 ∼G	
3, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 ∼A	
5, 7, DS
(16)	 1.	 (B ⊃ ∼M) ⊃ (T ⊃ ∼S)
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ K
	
	 3.	 K ⊃ ∼M
	
	 4.	 ∼S ⊃ N	
/ T ⊃ N
	
	 5.	 B ⊃ ∼M	
2, 3, HS
	
	 6.	 T ⊃ ∼S	
1, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 T ⊃ N	
4, 6, HS
(19)	 1.	 ∼G ⊃ [G ⋁ (S ⊃ G)]
	
	   2.   (S ⋁ L) ⊃ ∼G
	
	 3.	 S ⋁ L	
/ L
7

682   Answers to Selected Exercises
	
	 4.	 ∼G	
2, 3, MP
	
	 5.	 G ⋁ (S ⊃ G)	
1, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 S ⊃ G	
4, 5, DS
	
	 7.	 ∼S	
4, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 L	
3, 7, DS
(22)	 1.	 (C ⊃ M) ⊃ (N ⊃ P)
	
	 2.	
(C ⊃ N) ⊃ (N ⊃ M)
	
	 3.	
(C ⊃ P) ⊃ ∼M
	
	 4.	 C ⊃ N	
/ ∼C
	
	 5.	 N ⊃ M	
2, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 C ⊃ M	
4, 5, HS
	
	 7.	 N ⊃ P	
1, 6, MP
	
	 8.	 C ⊃ P	
4, 7, HS
	
	 9.	 ∼M	
3, 8, MP
	
	10.	 ∼C	
6, 9, MT
(25)	 1.	 ∼N ⊃ [(B ⊃ D) ⊃ (N ⋁ ∼E)]
	
   2.	 (B ⊃ E) ⊃ ∼N
	
   3.	 B ⊃ D
	
	 4.	 D ⊃ E	
/ ∼D
	
	 5.	 B ⊃ E	
3, 4, HS
	
	 6.	 ∼N	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 (B ⊃ D) ⊃ (N ⋁ ∼E)	
1, 6, MP
	
	 8.	 N ⋁ ∼E	
3, 7, MP
	
	 9.	 ∼E	
6, 8, DS
	
	10.	 ∼D	
4, 9, MT
IV.
  (1)	 1.	 W ⊃ (P ⋁ C)
	
   2.	 ∼P
	
	 3.	 W	
/ C
	
	 4.	 P ⋁ C	
1, 3, MP
	
	 5.	 C	
2, 4, DS
  (4)	 1.	 (R ⊃ L) ⊃ (L ⊃ ∼F)
	
   2.	 ∼F ⋁ (R ⊃ L)
	
   3.	 ∼∼F	
/ ∼R
	
	 4.	 R ⊃ L	
2, 3, DS
	
	 5.	 L ⊃ ∼F	
1, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 ∼L	
3, 5, MT
	
	 7.	 ∼R	
4, 6, MT
  (7)	 1.	 H ⊃ (D ≡ A)
	
   2.	 V ⋁ (R ⊃ V )
	
	 3.	 R ⋁ H
	
	 4.	 ∼V	
/ D ≡ A
	
	 5.	 R ⊃ V	
2, 4, DS
	
	 6.	 ∼R	
4, 5, MT
	
	 7.	 H	
3, 6, DS
	
	 8.	 D ≡ A	
1, 7, MP
(10)	 1.	 ∼C ⊃ [C ⋁ (J ⊃ D)]
	
   2.	
C ⊃ (C  U)
	
   3.	 ∼(C  U)
	
	 4.	 ∼D	
/ ∼J
	
	 5.	 ∼C	
2, 3, MT
	
	 6.	 C ⋁ (J ⊃ D)	
1, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 J ⊃ D	
5, 6, DS
	
	 8.	 ∼J	
4, 7, MT
Exercise 7.2
I.
	
	  1.	 B	
2
	
	  4.	 H ⋁ F	
1
	
	  7.	 Q ⋁ K	
1
	
	10.	 ∼L ⋁ M	
1, 2
II.
	
	  1.	 G	
2, Simp
	
	 	 	
3, Add
	
	  4.	 T ⋁ U	
1, Add
	
	 	 	
3, 4, MP
	
	  7.	 ∼F	
2, 3, MT
	
	 	 	
1, 4, Conj
	
	10.	 M  E	
1, 3, Conj
	
	 	 	
2, 4, MP
III.
  (1)	 1.	 ∼M ⊃ Q
	
   2.	 R ⊃ ∼T
	
	 3.	 ∼M ⋁ R	
/ Q ⋁ ∼T
	
	 4.	 (∼M ⊃ Q)  (R ⊃ ∼T)	
1, 2, Conj
	
	 5.	 Q ⋁ ∼T	
3, 4, CD
  (4)	 1.	 (H ⋁ ∼B) ⊃ R
	
	 2.	 (H ⋁ ∼M) ⊃ P
	
	 3.	 H	
/ R  P
	
	 4.	 H ⋁ ∼B	
3, Add
	
	 5.	 R	
1, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 H ⋁ ∼M	
3, Add
	
	 7.	 P	
2, 6, MP
	
	 8.	 R  P	
5, 7, Conj
  (7)	 1.	 (∼F ⋁ X ) ⊃ (P ⋁ T )
	
	 2.	 F ⊃ P
	
	 3.	 ∼P	
/ T
	
	 4.	 ∼F	
2, 3, MT
	
	 5.	 ∼F ⋁ X	
4, Add
	
	 6.	 P ⋁ T	
1, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 T	
3, 6, DS
(10)	 1.	 (D ⋁ E) ⊃ (G  H)
	
	 2.	 G ⊃ ∼D
	
	 3.	 D  F	
/ M
	
	 4.	 D	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 D ⋁ E	
4, Add
	
	 6.	 G  H	
1, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 G	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 ∼D	
2, 7, MP
	
	 9.	 D ⋁ M	
4, Add
	
	10.	 M	
8, 9, DS
(13)	 1.	 (C ⊃ N)  E
	
	 2.	 D ⋁ (N ⊃ D)
	
	 3.	 ∼D	
/ ∼C ⋁ P
7

Answers to Selected Exercises   683
	
	 4.	 N ⊃ D	
2, 3, DS
	
	 5.	 ∼N	
3, 4, MT
	
	 6.	 C ⊃ N	
1, Simp
	
	 7.	 ∼C	
5, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 ∼C ⋁ P	
7, Add
(16)	 1.	 (C ⋁ ∼G) ⊃ (∼P  L)
	
	 2.	 (∼P  C) ⊃ (C ⊃ D)
	
	 3.	 C  ∼R	
/ D ⋁ R
	
	 4.	 C	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 C ⋁ ∼G	
4, Add
	
	 6.	 ∼P  L	
1, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 ∼P	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 ∼P  C	
4, 7, Conj
	
	 9.	 C ⊃ D	
2, 8 MP
	
	10.	 D	
4, 9, MP
	
	11.	 D ⋁ R	
10, Add
(19)	 1.	 (U  ∼∼P) ⊃ Q
	
	 2.	 ∼O ⊃ U
	
	 3.	 ∼P ⊃ O
	
	 4.	 ∼O  T	
/ Q
	
	 5.	 ∼O	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 U	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 ∼∼P	
3, 5, MT
	
	 8.	 U  ∼∼P	
6, 7, Conj
	
	 9.	 Q	
1, 8, MP
(22)	 1.	 (∼K  ∼N) ⊃ [(∼P ⊃ K)  (∼R ⊃ G)]
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ N
	
	 3.	 ∼N  B
	
	 4.	 ∼P ⋁ ∼R	
/ G
	
	 5.	 ∼N	
3, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼K	
2, 5, MT
	
	 7.	 ∼K  ∼N	
5, 6, Conj
	
	 8.	 (∼P ⊃ K)  (∼R ⊃ G)	
1, 7, MP
	
	 9.	 K ⋁ G	
4, 8, CD
	
	10.	 G	
6, 9, DS
(25)	 1.	 (∼M  N) ⊃ [(∼M ⋁ H) ⊃ (K  L)]
	
	 2.	 ∼M  (C ⊃ D)
	
	 3.	 ∼N  (F ≡ G)	
/ K  ∼N
	
	 4.	 ∼M	
2, Simp
	
	 5.	 ∼N	
3, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼M  ∼N	
4, 5, Conj
	
	 7.	 (∼M ⋁ H) ⊃ (K  L)	
1, 6, MP
	
	 8.	 ∼M ⋁ H	
4, Add
	
	 9.	 K  L	
7, 8, MP
	
	10.	 K	
9, Simp
	
	11.	 K  ∼N	
5, 10, Conj
(28)	 1.	 (D ⊃ B)  (C ⊃ D)
	
	 2.	 (B ⊃ D)  (E ⊃ C)
	
	 3.	 B ⋁ E	
/ D ⋁ B
	
	 4.	 D ⋁ C	
2, 3, CD
	
	 5.	 B ⋁ D	
1, 4, CD
	
	 6.	 B ⊃ D	
2, Simp
	
	 7.	 D ⊃ B	
1, Simp
	
	 8.	 (B ⊃ D)  (D ⊃ B)	
6, 7, Conj
	
	 9.	 D ⋁ B	
5, 8, CD
IV.
  (1)	 1.	 T ⊃ (Q  F)
	
	 2.	 T  C	
/ Q ⋁ O
	
	 3.	 T	
2, Simp
	
	 4.	 Q  F	
1, 3, MP
	
	 5.	 Q	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 Q ⋁ O	
5, Add
  (4)	 1.	 M ⋁ P
	
	 2.	 (P ⋁ S) ⊃ (R  D)
	
	 3.	 ∼M	
/ R
	
	 4.	 P	
1, 3, DS
	
	 5.	 P ⋁ S	
4, Add
	
	 6.	 R  D	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 R	
6, Simp
  (7)	 1.	 (∼C ⋁ ∼M) ⊃ (∼C ⊃ T)
	
	 2.	 C ⋁ ∼T
	
	 3.	 ∼C	
/ B
	
	 4.	 ∼C ⋁ ∼M	
3, Add
	
	 5.	 ∼C ⊃ T	
1, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 T	
3, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 T ⋁ B	
6, Add
	
	 8.	 ∼T	
2, 3, DS
	
	 9.	 B	
7, 8, DS
(10)	 1.	 (V  ∼E) ⊃ (P ⊃ E)
	
	 2.	 V ⊃ ∼E
	
	 3.	 V  I
	
	 4.	 ∼E ⊃ (P ⋁ J)	
/ J  ∼E
	
	 5.	 V	
3, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼E	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 V  ∼E	
5, 6, Conj
	
	 8.	 P ⊃ E	
1, 7, MP
	
	 9.	 ∼P	
6, 8, MT
	
	10.	 P ⋁ J	
4, 6, MP
	
	11.	 J	
9, 10, DS
	
	12.	 J  ∼E	
6, 11, Conj
Exercise 7.3
I.
	
	  1.	 ∼N  ∼G	
2
	
	  4.	 A  S	
3
	
	  7.	 ∼G ⋁ ∼∼Q	
1
	
	10.	 ∼(R  P)	
1
	
	13.	 H ⊃ ∼(L ⋁ D)	
2
II.
	
	  1.	 C ⋁ K	
1, Com
	
	 	 	
2, 3, DS
	
	  4.	 L  (S  F)	
1, Assoc
	
	 	 	
2, Simp
	
	  7.	 D  (M ⋁ N)	
1, Dist
	
	 	 	
2, Simp
7

684   Answers to Selected Exercises
	
	10.	 (D ⋁ N)  (D ⋁ H)	
1, Dist
	
	 	 	
2, Simp
	
	13.	 M ⋁ (G ⋁ T)	
1, Assoc
	
	 	 	
2, 3, DS
III.
  (1)	 1.	 (∼M ⊃ P)  (∼N ⊃ Q)
	
	 2.	 ∼(M  N)	
/ P ⋁ Q
	
	 3.	 ∼M ⋁ ∼N	
2, DM
	
	 4.	 P ⋁ Q	
1, 3, CD
  (4)	 1.	 ∼(N  T)
	
	 2.	 T	
/ ∼N
	
	 3.	 ∼N ⋁ ∼T	
1, DM
	
	 4.	 ∼T ⋁ ∼N	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 ∼∼T	
2, DN
	
	 6.	 ∼N	
4, 5, DS
  (7)	 1.	 T ⊃ (B ⋁ E)
	
	 2.	 ∼E  T	
/ B
	
	 3.	 T  ∼E	
2, Com
	
	 4.	 T	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 B ⋁ E	
1, 4 MP
	
	 6.	 E ⋁ B	
5, Com
	
	 7.	 ∼E	
2, Simp
	
	 8.	 B	
6, 7, DS
(10)	 1.	 (K  H) ⋁ (K  L)
	
	 2.	 ∼L	
/ H
	
	 3.	 K  (H ⋁ L)	
1, Dist
	
	 4.	 (H ⋁ L)  K	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 H ⋁ L	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 L ⋁ H	
5, Com
	
	 7.	 H	
2, 6, DS
(13)	 1.	 (E  I) ⋁ (M  U)
	
	 2.	 ∼E	
/ ∼(E ⋁ ∼M)
	
	 3.	 ∼E ⋁ ∼I	
2, Add
	
	 4.	 ∼(E  I)	
3, DM
	
	 5.	 M  U	
1, 4, DS
	
	 6.	 M	
5, Simp
	
	 7.	 ∼∼M	
6, DN
	
	 8.	 ∼E  ∼∼M	
2, 7, Conj
	
	 9.	 ∼(E ⋁ ∼M)	
8, DM
(16)	 1.	 (Q  N) ⋁ (N  T)
	
	 2.	 (Q ⋁ C) ⊃ ∼N	
/ T
	
	 3.	 (N  Q) ⋁ (N  T)	
1, Com
	
	 4.	 N  (Q ⋁ T)	
3, Dist
	
	 5.	 N	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼∼N	
5, DN
	
	 7.	 ∼(Q ⋁ C)	
2, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 ∼Q  ∼C	
7, DM
	
	 9.	 ∼Q	
8, Simp
	
	10.	 (Q ⋁ T)  N	
4, Com
	
	11.	 Q ⋁ T	
10, Simp
	
	12.	 T	
9, 11, DS
(19)	 1.	 [(I ⋁ M) ⋁ G] ⊃ ∼G
	
	 2.	 M ⋁ G	
/ M
	
	 3.	 (M ⋁ G) ⋁ I	
2, Add
	
	 4.	 I ⋁ (M ⋁ G)	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 (I ⋁ M) ⋁ G	
4, Assoc
	
	 6.	 ∼G	
1, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 G ⋁ M	
2, Com
	
	 8.	 M	
6, 7, DS
(22)	 1.	 S ⋁ (I  ∼J)
	
	 2.	 S ⊃ ∼R
	
	 3.	 ∼J ⊃ ∼Q	
/ ∼(R  Q)
	
	 4.	 (S ⋁ I)  (S ⋁ ∼J)	
1, Dist
	
	 5.	 (S ⋁ ∼J)  (S ⋁ I)	
4, Com
	
	 6.	 S ⋁ ∼J	
5, Simp
	
	 7.	 (S ⊃ ∼R)  (∼J ⊃ ∼Q)	
2, 3, Conj
	
	 8.	 ∼R ⋁ ∼Q	
6, 7, CD
	
	 9.	 ∼(R  Q)	
8, DM
(25)	 1.	 E ⋁ ∼(D ⋁ C)
	
	 2.	 (E ⋁ ∼D) ⊃ C	
/ E
	
	 3.	 E ⋁ (∼D  ∼C)	
1, DM
	
	 4.	 (E ⋁ ∼D)  (E ⋁ ∼C)	
3, Dist
	
	 5.	 E ⋁ ∼D	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 C	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 (E ⋁ ∼C)  (E ⋁ ∼D)	
4, Com
	
	 8.	 E ⋁ ∼C	
7, Simp
	
	 9.	 ∼C ⋁ E	
8, Com
	
	10.	 ∼∼C	
6, DN
	
	11.	 E	
9, 10, DS
(28)	 1.	 P ⋁ (I  L)
	
	 2.	 (P ⋁ I) ⊃ ∼(L ⋁ C)
	
	 3.	 (P  ∼C) ⊃ (E  F)	
/ F ⋁ D
	
	 4.	 (P ⋁ I)  (P ⋁ L)	
1, Dist
	
	 5.	 P ⋁ I	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼(L ⋁ C)	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 ∼L  ∼C	
6, DM
	
	 8.	 ∼L	
7, Simp
	
	 9.	 (P ⋁ L)  (P ⋁ I)	
4, Com
	
	10.	 P ⋁ L	
9, Simp
	
	11.	 L ⋁ P	
10, Com
	
	12.	 P	
8, 11, DS
	
	13.	 ∼C  ∼L	
7, Com
	
	14.	 ∼C	
13, Simp
	
	15.	 P  ∼C	
12, 14, Conj
	
	16.	 E  F	
3, 15, MP
	
	17.	 F  E	
16, Com
	
	18.	 F	
17, Simp
	
	19.	 F ⋁ D	
18, Add
(31)	 1.	 (∼R ⋁ D) ⊃ ∼(F  G)
	
	 2.	 (F  R) ⊃ S
	
	 3.	 F  ∼S	
/ ∼(S ⋁ G)
	
	 4.	 ∼S  F	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 ∼S	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼(F  R)	
2, 5, MT
	
	 7.	 ∼F ⋁ ∼R	
6, DM
	
	 8.	 F	
3, Simp
	
	 9.	 ∼∼F	
8, DN
	
	10.	 ∼R	
7, 9, DS
	
	11.	 ∼R ⋁ D	
10, Add
	
	12.	 ∼(F  G)	
1, 11, MP
	
	13.	 ∼F ⋁ ∼G	
12, DM
	
	14.	 ∼G	
9, 13, DS
7

Answers to Selected Exercises   685
	
	15.	 ∼S  ∼G	
5, 14, Conj
	
	16.	 ∼(S ⋁ G)	
15, DM
(34)	 1.	 (M  N) ⋁ (O  P)
	
	 2.	 (N ⋁ O) ⊃ ∼P	
/ N
	
	 3.	 [(M  N ) ⋁ O]  [(M  N) ⋁ P]	
1, Dist
	
	 4.	 (M  N) ⋁ O	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 O ⋁ (M  N)	
4, Com
	
	 6.	 (O ⋁ M)  (O ⋁ N)	
5, Dist
	
	 7.	 (O ⋁ N)  (O ⋁ M)	
6, Com
	
	 8.	 O ⋁ N	
7, Simp
	
	 9.	 N ⋁ O	
8, Com
	
	10.	 ∼P	
2, 9, MP
	
	11.	 [(M  N) ⋁ P]  [(M  N) ⋁ O]	
3, Com
	
	12.	 (M  N) ⋁ P	
11, Simp
	
	13.	 P ⋁ (M  N)	
12, Com
	
	14.	 M  N	
10, 13, DS
	
	15.	 N  M	
14, Com
	
	16.	 N	
15, Simp
IV.
  (1)	 1.	 (S  D) ⋁ (S  H)
	
	 2.	 S ⊃ (I  R)	
/ S  R
	
	 3.	 S  (D ⋁ H)	
1, Dist
	
	 4.	 S	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 I  R	
2, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 R  I	
5, Com
	
	 7.	 R	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 S  R	
4, 7, Conj
  (4)	 1.	 G ⋁ (R  E)
	
	 2.	 (G ⋁ E) ⊃ ∼R	
/ G ⋁ M
	
	 3.	 (G ⋁ R)  (G ⋁ E)	
1, Dist
	
	 4.	 (G ⋁ E)  (G ⋁ R)	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 G ⋁ E	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼R	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 G ⋁ R	
3, Simp
	
	 8.	 R ⋁ G	
7, Com
	
	 9.	 G	
6, 8, DS
	
	10.	 G ⋁ M	
9, Add
  (7)	 1.	 R ⊃ (C ⋁ M)
	
	 2.	 ∼(I ⋁ C)
	
	 3.	 ∼(A ⋁ M)	
/ ∼R
	
	 4.	 ∼I  ∼C	
2, DM
	
	 5.	 ∼A  ∼M	
3, DM
	
	 6.	 ∼C  ∼I	
4, Com
	
	 7.	 ∼C	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 ∼M  ∼A	
5, Com
	
	 9.	 ∼M	
8, Simp
	
	10.	 ∼C  ∼M	
7, 9, Conj
	
	11.	 ∼(C ⋁ M)	
10, DM
	
	12.	 ∼R	
1, 11, MT
(10)	 1.	 ∼E ⋁ (B  P)
	
	 2.	 ∼E ⋁ (G  W)
	
	 3.	 ∼P ⋁ ∼W	
/ ∼E
	
	 4.	 (∼E ⋁ B)  (∼E ⋁ P)	
1, Dist
	
	 5.	 (∼E ⋁ P)  (∼E ⋁ B)	
4, Com
	
	 6.	 ∼E ⋁ P	
5, Simp
	
	 7.	 (∼E ⋁ G)  (∼E ⋁ W)	
2, Dist
	
	 8.	 (∼E ⋁ W)  (∼E ⋁ G)	
7, Com
	
	 9.	 ∼E ⋁ W	
8, Simp
	
	10.	 (∼E ⋁ P)  (∼E ⋁ W)	
6, 9, Conj
	
	11.	 ∼E ⋁ (P  W)	
10, Dist
	
	12.	 (P  W) ⋁ ∼E	
11, Com
	
	13.	 ∼(P  W)	
3, DM
	
	14.	 ∼E	
12, 13, DS
Exercise 7.4
I.
	
	  1.	 G ⊃ Q	
3
	
	  4.	 B ≡ N	
1
	
	  7.	 ∼∼C ⋁ ∼F	
1
	
	10.	 S ⊃ G	
3
	
	13.	 W ≡ ∼T	
2
II.
	
	  1.	 J ⊃ M	
1, Impl
	
	 	 	
2, 3, HS
	
	  4.	 K ⋁ K	
1, 2, CD
	
	 	 	
3, Taut
	
	  7.	 H ⊃ (C ⊃ R)	
1, Impl
	
	 	 	
2, Exp
	
	10.	 ∼H ⋁ ∼H	
1, Impl
	
	 	 	
2, Taut
	
	13.	 (N ⊃ A)  (A ⊃ N)	
1, Trans
	
	 	 	
2, Equiv
III.
  (1)	 1.	 (S  K) ⊃ R
	
	 2.	 K	
/ S ⊃ R
	
	 3.	 (K  S) ⊃ R	
1, Com
	
	 4.	 K ⊃ (S ⊃ R)	
3, Exp
	
	 5.	 S ⊃ R	
2, 4, MP
  (4)	 1.	 S ≡ Q
	
	 2.	 ∼S	
/ ∼Q
	
	 3.	 (S ⊃ Q)  (Q ⊃ S)	
1, Equiv
	
	 4.	 (Q ⊃ S)  (S ⊃ Q)	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 Q ⊃ S	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼Q	
2, 5, MT
  (7)	 1.	 (B ⊃ M)  (D ⊃ M)
	
	 2.	 B ⋁ D	
/ M
	
	 3.	 M ⋁ M	
1, 2, CD
	
	 4.	 M	
3, Taut
(10)	 1.	 (B ⊃ G)  (F ⊃ N)
	
	 2.	 ∼(G  N)	
/ ∼(B  F)
	
	 3.	 ∼G ⋁ ∼N	
2, DM
	
	 4.	 (∼G ⊃ ∼B)  (F ⊃ N)	
1, Trans
	
	 5.	 (∼G ⊃ ∼B)  (∼N ⊃ ∼F)	
4, Trans
	
	 6.	 ∼B ⋁ ∼F	
3, 5, CD
	
	 7.	 ∼(B  F)	
6, DM
7

686   Answers to Selected Exercises
(13)	 1.	 K ⊃ (B ⊃ ∼M)
	
	 2.	 D ⊃ (K  M)	
/ D ⊃ ∼B
	
	 3.	 K ⊃ (∼∼M ⊃ ∼B)	
1, Trans
	
	 4.	 K ⊃ (M ⊃ ∼B)	
3, DN
	
	 5.	 (K  M) ⊃ ∼B	
4, Exp
	
	 6.	 D ⊃ ∼B	
2, 5, HS
(16)	 1.	 T ⊃ R
	
	 2.	 T ⊃ ∼R	
/ ∼T
	
	 3.	 ∼∼R ⊃ ∼T	
2, Trans
	
	 4.	 R ⊃ ∼T	
3, DN
	
	 5.	 T ⊃ ∼T	
1, 4, HS
	
	 6.	 ∼T ⋁ ∼T	
5, Impl
	
	 7.	 ∼T	
6, Taut
(19)	 1.	 ∼R ⋁ P
	
	 2.	 R ⋁ ∼P	
/ R ≡ P
	
	 3.	 R ⊃ P	
1, Impl
	
	 4.	 ∼P ⋁ R	
2, Com
	
	 5.	 P ⊃ R	
4, Impl
	
	 6.	 (R ⊃ P)  (P ⊃ R)	
3, 5, Conj
	
	 7.	 R ≡ P	
6, Equiv
(22)	 1.	 S ⊃ (L  M)
	
	 2.	 M ⊃ (L ⊃ R)	
/ S ⊃ R
	
	 3.	 (M  L) ⊃ R	
2, Exp
	
	 4.	 (L  M) ⊃ R	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 S ⊃ R	
1, 4, HS
(25)	 1.	 T ⊃ G
	
	 2.	 S ⊃ G	
/ (T ⋁ S) ⊃ G
	
	 3.	 ∼T ⋁ G	
1, Impl
	
	 4.	 ∼S ⋁ G	
2, Impl
	
	 5.	 G ⋁ ∼T	
3, Com
	
	 6.	 G ⋁ ∼S	
4, Com
	
	 7.	 (G ⋁ ∼T)  (G ⋁ ∼S)	
5, 6, Conj
	
	 8.	 G ⋁ (∼T  ∼S)	
7, Dist
	
	 9.	 (∼T  ∼S) ⋁ G	
8, Com
	
	10.	 ∼(T ⋁ S) ⋁ G	
9, DM
	
	11.	 (T ⋁ S) ⊃ G	
10, Impl
(28)	 1.	 P ⊃ (∼E ⊃ B)
	
	 2.	 ∼(B ⋁ E)	
/ ∼P
	
	 3.	 ∼(E ⋁ B)	
2, Com
	
	 4.	 ∼(∼∼E ⋁ B)	
3, DN
	
	 5.	 ∼(∼E ⊃ B)	
4, Impl
	
	 6.	 ∼P	
1, 5, MT
(31)	 1.	 K ≡ R
	
	 2.	 K ⊃ (R ⊃ P)
	
	 3.	 ∼P	
/ ∼R
	
	 4.	 (K  R) ⋁ (∼K  ∼R)	
1, Equiv
	
	 5.	 (K  R) ⊃ P	
2, Exp
	
	 6.	 ∼(K  R)	
3, 5, MT
	
	 7.	 ∼K  ∼R	
4, 6, DS
	
	 8.	 ∼R  ∼K	
7, Com
	
	 9.	 ∼R	
8, Simp
(34)	 1.	 (F  H) ⊃ N
	
	 2.	 F ⋁ S
	
	 3.	 H	
/ N ⋁ S
	
	 4.	 (H  F) ⊃ N	
1, Com
	
	 5.	 H ⊃ (F ⊃ N)	
4, Exp
	
	 6.	 F ⊃ N	
3, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 ∼N ⊃ ∼F	
6, Trans
	
	 8.	 ∼∼F ⋁ S	
2, DN
	
	 9.	 ∼F ⊃ S	
8, Impl
	
	10.	 ∼N ⊃ S	
7, 9, HS
	
	11.	 ∼∼N ⋁ S	
10, Impl
	
	12.	 N ⋁ S	
11, DN
(37)	 1.	 (D ⊃ E) ⊃ (E ⊃ D)
	
	 2.	 (D ≡ E) ⊃ ∼(G  ∼H)
	
	 3.	 E  G	
/ G  H
	
	 4.	 E	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 E ⋁ ∼D	
4, Add
	
	 6.	 ∼D ⋁ E	
5, Com
	
	 7.	 D ⊃ E	
6, Impl
	
	 8.	 E ⊃ D	
1, 7, MP
	
	 9.	 (D ⊃ E)  (E ⊃ D)	
7, 8, Conj
	
	10.	 D ≡ E	
9, Equiv
	
	11.	 ∼(G  ∼H)	
2, 10, MP
	
	12.	 ∼G ⋁ ∼∼H	
11, DM
	
	13.	 ∼G ⋁ H	
12, DN
	
	14.	 G  E	
3, Com
	
	15.	 G	
14, Simp
	
	16.	 ∼∼G	
15, DN
	
	17.	 H	
13, 16, DS
	
	18.	 G  H	
15, 17, Conj
(40)	 1.	 A ≡ W
	
	 2.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼W
	
	 3.	 R ⊃ A	
/ ∼(W ⋁ R)
	
	 4.	 (A  W) ⋁ (∼A  ∼W)	
1, Equiv
	
	 5.	 ∼(A  W)	
2, DM
	
	 6.	 ∼A  ∼W	
4, 5, DS
	
	 7.	 ∼A	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 ∼R	
3, 7, MT
	
	 9.	 ∼W  ∼A	
6, Com
	
	10.	 ∼W	
9, Simp
	
	11.	 ∼W  ∼R	
8, 10, Conj
	
	12.	 ∼(W ⋁ R)	
11, DM
(43)	 1.	 O ⊃ (Q  N)
	
	 2.	 (N ⋁ E) ⊃ S	
/ O ⊃ S
	
	 3.	 ∼O ⋁ (Q  N)	
1, Impl
	
	 4.	 (∼O ⋁ Q)  (∼O ⋁ N)	
3, Dist
	
	 5.	 (∼O ⋁ N)  (∼O ⋁ Q)	
4, Com
	
	 6.	 ∼O ⋁ N	
5, Simp
	
	 7.	 O ⊃ N	
6, Impl
	
	 8.	 ∼(N ⋁ E) ⋁ S	
2, Impl
	
	 9.	 (∼N  ∼E) ⋁ S	
8, DM
	
	10.	 S ⋁ (∼N  ∼E)	
9, Com
	
	11.	 (S ⋁ ∼N)  (S ⋁ ∼E)	
10, Dist
	
	12.	 S ⋁ ∼N	
11, Simp
	
	13.	 ∼N ⋁ S	
12, Com
	
	14.	 N ⊃ S	
13, Impl
	
	15.	 O ⊃ S	
7, 14, HS
(45)	 1.	 P ⊃ A
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ B	
/ (P ⋁ Q) ⊃ (A ⋁ B)
	
	 3.	 ∼P ⋁ A	
1, Impl
	
	 4.	 ∼Q ⋁ B	
2, Impl
7

Answers to Selected Exercises   687
	
	 5.	 (∼P ⋁ A) ⋁ B	
3, Add
	
	 6.	 (∼Q ⋁ B) ⋁ A	
4, Add
	
	 7.	 ∼P ⋁ (A ⋁ B)	
5, Assoc
	
	 8.	 (A ⋁ B) ⋁ ∼P	
7, Com
	
	 9.	 ∼Q ⋁ (B ⋁ A)	
6, Assoc
	
	10.	 ∼Q ⋁ (A ⋁ B)	
9, Com
	
	11.	 (A ⋁ B) ⋁ ∼Q	
10, Com
	
	12.	 [(A ⋁ B) ⋁ ∼P]  [(A ⋁ B) ⋁ ∼Q]	 8, 11, Conj
	
	13.	 (A ⋁ B) ⋁ (∼P  ∼Q)	
12, Dist
	
	14.	 (∼P  ∼Q) ⋁ (A ⋁ B)	
13, Com
	
	15.	 ∼(P ⋁ Q) ⋁ (A ⋁ B)	
14, DM
	
	16.	 (P ⋁ Q) ⊃ (A ⋁ B)	
15, Impl
IV.
  (1)	 1.	 D ⊃ C
	
	 2.	 ∼(C  ∼S)	
/ D ⊃ S
	
	 3.	 ∼C ⋁ ∼∼S	
2, DM
	
	 4.	 C ⊃ ∼∼S	
3, Impl
	
	 5.	 C ⊃ S	
4, DN
	
	 6.	 D ⊃ S	
1, 5, HS
  (4)	 1.	 D ⊃ P	
/ (I  D) ⊃ P
	
	 2.	 ∼D ⋁ P	
1, Impl
	
	 3.	 (∼D ⋁ P) ⋁ ∼I	
2, Add
	
	 4.	 ∼I ⋁ (∼D ⋁ P)	
3, Com
	
	 5.	 (∼I ⋁ ∼D) ⋁ P	
4, Assoc
	
	 6.	 ∼(I  D) ⋁ P	
5, DM
	
	 7.	 (I  D) ⊃ P	
6, Impl
  (7)	 1.	 G ⊃ A
	
	 2.	 G ⊃ L	
/ G ⊃ (A  L)
	
	 3.	 ∼G ⋁ A	
1, Impl
	
	 4.	 ∼G ⋁ L	
2, Impl
	
	 5.	 (∼G ⋁ A)  (∼G ⋁ L)	
3, 4, Conj
	
	 6.	 ∼G ⋁ (A  L)	
5, Dist
	
	 7.	 G ⊃ (A  L)	
6, Impl
(10)	 1.	 (A  U) ≡ ∼R
	
	 2.	 ∼(∼R ⋁ ∼A)	
/ ∼U
	
	 3.	 [(A  U ) ⊃ ∼R]  [∼R ⊃ (A  U )]	 1, Equiv
	
	 4.	 (A  U) ⊃ ∼R	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 ∼∼R  ∼∼A	
2, DM
	
	 6.	 ∼∼R	
5, Simp
	
	 7.	 ∼(A  U)	
4, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼U	
7, DM
	
	  9.	 ∼∼A  ∼∼R	
5, Com
	
	10.	 ∼∼A	
9, Simp
	
	11.	 ∼U	
8, 10, DS
Exercise 7.5
I.
  (1)	 1.	 N ⊃ O
	
	 2.	 N ⊃ P	
/ N ⊃ (O  P)
	
	
3.	N	
ACP
	
	
4.	O	
1, 3, MP
	
	
5.	P	
2, 3, MP
	
	
6.	O  P	
4, 5, Conj
	
	 7.	 N ⊃ (O  P)	
3–6, CP
  (4)	 1.	 (G ⋁ H) ⊃ (S  T )
	
	 2.	 (T ⋁ U ) ⊃ (C  D)	
/ G ⊃ C
	
		
  3.	 G	
ACP
	
		
  4.	 G ⋁ H	
3, Add
	
		
  5.	 S  T	
1, 4, MP
	
		
  6.	 T  S	
5, Com
	
		
  7.	 T	
6, Simp
	
		
  8.	 T ⋁ U	
7, Add
	
		
  9.	 C  D	
2, 8, MP
	
		
10.	 C	
9, Simp
	
11.		 G ⊃ C	
3–10, CP
  (7)	 1.	 M ⋁ (N  O)	
/ ∼N ⊃ M
	
		
2.	∼M	
ACP
	
		
3.	N  O	
1, 2, DS
	
		
4.	N	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 ∼M ⊃ N	
2–4, CP
	
	 6.	 ∼N ⊃ ∼∼M	
5, Trans
	
	 7.	 ∼N ⊃ M	
6, DN
(10)	 1.	 C ⊃ (A  D)
	
	 2.	 B ⊃ (A  E)	
/ (C ⋁ B) ⊃ A
	
	
	
3.	C ⋁ B	
	
ACP
	
	
	
4.	[C ⊃ (A  D)]  [B ⊃ (A  E )]	
	
	
	 	
	 	
1, 2, Conj
	
	
	
5.	 (A  D) ⋁ (A  E)	
	
3, 4, CD
	
	
	
6.	 A  (D ⋁ E)	
	
5, Dist
	
	
	
7.	 A	
	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 (C ⋁ B) ⊃ A	
3–7, CP
(13)	 1.	 R ⊃ B
	
	 2.	 R ⊃ (B ⊃ F)
	
	 3.	 B ⊃ (F ⊃ H)	
/ R ⊃ H
	
		
4.	 R	
ACP
	
		
5.	 B	
1, 4, MP
	
		
6.	 B ⊃ F	
2, 4, MP
	
		
7.	 F	
5, 6, MP
	
		
8.	 F ⊃ H	
3, 5, MP
	
		
9.	 H	
7, 8, MP
	
	10.	 R ⊃ H	
4–9, CP
(16)	 1.	 Q ⊃ (R ⊃ S)
	
	 2.	 Q ⊃ (T ⊃ ∼U)
	
	 3.	 U ⊃ (R ⋁ T)	
/ Q ⊃ (U ⊃ S)
	
		
4.	 Q	
ACP
	
	
	
	
  5.	 U	
ACP
	
	
	
	
  6.	 R ⊃ S	
1, 4, MP
	
	
	
	
  7.	 T ⊃ ∼U	
2, 4, MP
	
	
	
	
  8.	 ∼∼U	
5, DN
	
	
	
	
  9.	 ∼T	
7, 8, MT
	
	
	
	
10.	 R ⋁ T	
3, 5, MP
	
	
	
	
11.	 T ⋁ R	
10, Com
	
	
	
	
12.	 R	
9, 11, DS
	
	
	
	
13.	 S	
6, 12, MP
	
		
14.	 U ⊃ S	
5–13, CP
	
15.		 Q ⊃ (U ⊃ S)	
4–14, CP
(19)	 1.	 P ⊃ [(L ⋁ M) ⊃ (N  O)]
	
	 2.	 (O ⋁ T ) ⊃ W	
/ P ⊃ (M ⊃ W)
	
		
3.	 P	
ACP
	
	
	
	
4.	 M	
ACP
7

688   Answers to Selected Exercises
	
	
	
	
5.	 (L ⋁ M) ⊃ (N  O)	 1, 3, MP
	
	
	
	
6.	 M ⋁ L	
4, Add
	
	
	
	
7.	 L ⋁ M	
6, Com
	
	
	
	
8.	 N  O	
5, 7, MP
	
	
	
	
9.	 O  N	
8, Com
	
	
	
	
10.	 O	
9, Simp
	
	
	
	
11.	 O ⋁ T	
10, Add
	
	
	
	
12.	 W	
2, 11, MP
	
		
13.	 M ⊃ W	
4–12, CP
	
 14.	 P ⊃ (M ⊃ W)	
3–13, CP
II.
  (1)	 1.	 H ⊃ D
	
	 2.	 U ⊃ S	
/ (H  U) ⊃ (S  D)
	
		
3.	 H  U	
ACP
	
		
4.	 H	
3, Simp
	
		
5.	 D	
1, 4, MP
	
		
6.	 U  H	
3, Com
	
		
7.	 U	
6, Simp
	
		
8.	 S	
2, 7, MP
	
		
9.	 S  D	
5, 8, Conj
	
 10.	 (H  U ) ⊃ (S  D)	
3–9, CP
  (4)	 1.	 J ⊃ D
	
	 2.	 ( J  D) ⊃ C
	
	 3.	 (N  C) ⊃ I	
/ J ⊃ (N ⊃ I)
	
		
4.	 J	
ACP
	
	
	
	   5.	N	
ACP
	
	
	
	   6.	D	
1, 4, MP
	
	
	
	   7.	J  D	
4, 6, Conj
	
	
	
	   8.	C	
2, 7, MP
	
	
	
	   9.	N  C	
5, 8, Conj
	
	
	
	 10.	I	
3, 9, MP
	
		
11.	 N ⊃ I	
5–10, CP
	
 12.	 J ⊃ (N ⊃ I)	
4–11, CP
Exercise 7.6
I.
  (1)	 1.	 ( S ⋁ T ) ⊃ ∼S	
/ ∼S
	
		
2.	 S	
AIP
	
		
3.	 S ⋁ T	
2, Add
	
		
4.	 ∼S	
1, 3, MP
	
		
5.	 S  ∼S	
2, 4, Conj
	
	 6.	 ∼S	
2–5, IP
  (4)	 1.	 H ⊃ (L ⊃ K)
	
	 2.	 L ⊃ (K ⊃ ∼L)	
/ ∼H ⋁ ∼L
	
		
  3.	 H  L	
AIP
	
		
  4.	 H	
3, Simp
	
		
  5.	 L ⊃ K	
1, 4, MP
	
		
  6.	 L  H	
3, Com
	
		
  7.	 L	
6, Simp
	
		
  8.	 K ⊃ ∼L	
2, 7, MP
	
		
  9.	 K	
5, 7, MP
	
		
10.	 ∼L	
8, 9, MP
	
		
11.	 L  ∼L	
7, 10, Conj
	
12.		 ∼(H  L)	
3–11, IP
	
13.		 ∼H ⋁ ∼L	
12, DM
  (7)	 1.	 (E ⋁ F) ⊃ (C  D)
	
	 2.	 (D ⋁ G) ⊃ H
	
	 3.	 E ⋁ G	
/ H
	
		
  4.	 ∼H	
AIP
	
		
  5.	 ∼(D ⋁ G)	
2, 4, MT
	
		
  6.	 ∼D  ∼G	
5, DM
	
		
  7.	 ∼D	
6, Simp
	
		
  8.	 ∼D ⋁ ∼C	
7, Add
	
		
  9.	 ∼C ⋁ ∼D	
8, Com
	
		
10.	 ∼(C  D)	
9, DM
	
		
11.	 ∼(E ⋁ F)	
1, 10, MT
	
		
12.	 ∼E  ∼F	
11, DM
	
		
13.	 ∼E	
12, Simp
	
		
14.	 G	
3, 13, DS
	
		
15.	 ∼G  ∼D	
6, Com
	
		
16.	 ∼G	
15, Simp
	
		
17.	 G  ∼G	
14, 16, Conj
	
18.		 ∼∼H	
4–17, IP
	
19.		 H	
18, DN
(10)	 1.	 K	
/ S ⊃ (T ⊃ S)
	
		
2.	 S	
ACP
	
		
3.	 S ⋁ ∼T	
2, Add
	
		
4.	 ∼T ⋁ S	
3, Com
	
		
5.	 T ⊃ S	
4, Impl
	
	 6.	 S ⊃ (T ⊃ S)	
2–5, CP
(13)	 1.	 [C ⊃ (D ⊃ C)] ⊃ E	
/ E
	
		
2.	 C	
ACP
	
		
3.	 C ⋁ ∼D	
2, Add
	
		
4.	 ∼D ⋁ C	
3, Com
	
		
5.	 D ⊃ C	
4, Impl
	
	 6.	 C ⊃ (D ⊃ C)	
2–5, CP
	
	 7.	 E	
1, 6, MP
(16)	 1.	 (N ⋁ O) ⊃ (C  D)
	
	 2.	 (D ⋁ K) ⊃ (P ⋁ ∼C)
	
	 3.	 (P ⋁ G) ⊃ ∼(N  D)	
/ ∼N
	
		
  4.	 N	
AIP
	
		
  5.	 N ⋁ O	
4, Add
	
		
  6.	 C  D	
1, 5, MP
	
		
  7.	 D  C	
6, Com
	
		
  8.	 D	
7, Simp
	
		
  9.	 D ⋁ K	
8, Add
	
		
10.	 P ⋁ ∼C	
2, 9, MP
	
		
11.	 C	
6, Simp
	
		
12.	 ∼C ⋁ P	
10, Com
	
		
13.	 ∼∼C	
11, DN
	
		
14.	 P	
12, 13, DS
	
		
15.	 P ⋁ G	
14, Add
	
		
16.	 ∼(N  D)	
3, 15, MP
	
		
17.	 ∼N ⋁ ∼D	
16, DM
	
		
18.	 ∼∼N	
4, DN
	
		
19.	 ∼D	
17, 18, DS
	
		
20.	 D  ∼D	
8, 19, Conj
	
	21.	 ∼N	
4–20, IP
7

Answers to Selected Exercises   689
(19)	 1.	 A ⊃ [(N ⋁ ∼N) ⊃ (S ⋁ T)]
	
	 2.	 T ⊃ ∼(F ⋁ ∼F)	
/ A ⊃ S
	
	
	
  3.	 A  ∼S	
AIP
	
	
	
  4.	 A	
3, Simp
	
	
	
  5.	 (N ⋁ ∼N) ⊃ (S ⋁ T)	1, 4, MP
	
	
	
  6.	N	
ACP
	
	
	
  7.	N ⋁ N	
6, Add
	
	
	
  8.	N	
7, Taut
	
		
  9.	 N ⊃ N	
6–8, CP
	
		
10.	 ∼N ⋁ N	
9, Impl
	
		
11.	 N ⋁ ∼N	
10, Com
	
		
12.	 S ⋁ T	
5, 11, MP
	
		
13.	 ∼S  A	
3, Com
	
		
14.	 ∼S	
13, Simp
	
		
15.	 T	
12, 14, DS
	
		
16.	 ∼(F ⋁ ∼F)	
2, 15, MP
	
		
17.	 ∼F  ∼∼F	
16, DM
	
	18.	 ∼(A  ∼S)	
3–17, IP
	
	19.	 ∼A ⋁ ∼∼S	
18, DM
	
	20.	 ∼A ⋁ S	
19, DN
	
	21.	 A ⊃ S	
20, Impl
II.
(1)	  1.	 (C  R) ⊃ (I  D)
	
  2.	 R ⊃ ∼D	
/ ∼C ⋁ ∼R
	
		
  3.	 C  R	
AIP
	
		
  4.	 I  D	
1, 3, MP
	
		
  5.	 D  I	
4, Com
	
		
  6.	 D	
5, Simp
	
		
  7.	 R  C	
3, Com
	
		
  8.	 R	
7, Simp
	
		
  9.	 ∼D	
2, 8, MP
	
		
10.	 D  ∼D	
6, 9, Conj
	
	11.	∼(C  R)	
3–10, IP
	
	12.	∼C ⋁ ∼R	
11, DM
(4)		 1.	 (Z ⊃ C) ⊃ B
	
	 2.	 (V ⊃ Z ) ⊃ B	
/ B
	
		
  3.	 ∼B	
AIP
	
		
  4.	 ∼(Z ⊃ C)	
1, 3, MT
	
		
  5.	 ∼(∼Z ⋁ C)	
4, Impl
	
		
  6.	 ∼∼Z  ∼C	
5, DM
	
		
  7.	 ∼∼Z	
6, Simp
	
		
  8.	 ∼(V ⊃ Z)	
2, 3, MT
	
		
  9.	 ∼(∼V ⋁ Z)	
8, Impl
	
		
10.	 ∼∼V  ∼Z	
9, DM
	
		
11.	 ∼Z  ∼∼V	
10, Com
	
		
12.	 ∼Z	
11, Simp
	
		
13.	 ∼Z  ∼∼Z	
7, 12, Conj
	
14.		 ∼∼B	
3–13, IP
	
15.		 B	
14, DN
Exercise 7.7
(1)		
/ P ⊃ [(P ⊃ Q) ⊃ Q]
	
	
	 	
1.  P	 	
	
	   ACP
	
	
	
	 	2.	  P ⊃ Q	
ACP
	
	
	
	 	3.	 Q	
1, 2, MP
	
	
	 	
4.  (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ Q	
2–3, CP
	
	 5.	 P ⊃ [(P ⊃ Q) ⊃ Q]	
1–4, CP
(4)		
	 	
/ (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ [(P  R) ⊃ (Q  R)]
	
	
	
1.  P ⊃ Q	
ACP
	
	
	 	 2.	 P  R	
ACP
	
	
	 	 3.	 P	
2, Simp
	
	
	 	 4.	 Q	
1, 3, MP
	
	
	 	 5.	 R  P	
2, Com
	
	
	 	 6.	 R	
5, Simp
	
	
	 	 7.	 Q  R	
4, 6, Conj
	
	
	
8.	 (P  R) ⊃ (Q  R)	
2–7, CP
	
9.	   (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ [(P  R) ⊃ (Q  R)]	
1–8, CP
(7)	  	
/ (P ⊃ Q) ⋁ (∼Q ⊃ P)
	
	
	
1.	 ∼[(P ⊃ Q) ⋁ (∼Q ⊃ P)]	
AIP
	
	
	
2.	 ∼(P ⊃ Q)  ∼(∼Q ⊃ P)	
1, DM
	
	
	
3.	 ∼(P ⊃ Q)	
2, Simp
	
	
	
4.	 ∼(∼P ⋁ Q)	
3, Impl
	
	
	
5.	 ∼∼P  ∼Q	
4, DM
	
	
	
6.	 P  ∼Q	
5, DN
	
	
	
7.	 P	
6, Simp
	
	
	
8.	 ∼(∼Q ⊃ P)  ∼(P ⊃ Q)	
2, Com
	
	
	
9.	 ∼(∼Q ⊃ P)	
8, Simp
	
	
	
10.	 ∼(∼∼Q ⋁ P)	
9, Impl
	
	
	
11.	 ∼(Q ⋁ P)	
10, DN
	
	
	
12.	 ∼Q  ∼P	
11, DM
	
	
	
13.	 ∼P  ∼Q	
12, Com
	
	
	
14.	 ∼P	
13, Simp
	
	
	
15.	 P  ∼P	
7, 14, Conj
	
16.		 ∼∼[(P ⊃ Q) ⋁ (∼Q ⊃ P)]	
1–15, IP
	
17.		 (P ⊃ Q) ⋁ (∼Q ⊃ P)	
16, DN
(10)		
/ [∼(P  ∼Q)  ∼Q] ⊃ ∼P
	
	
	
1.	 ∼(P  ∼Q)  ∼Q	
ACP
	
	
	
2.	 ∼(P  ∼Q)	
1, Simp
	
	
	
3.	 ∼P ⋁ ∼∼Q	
2, DM
	
	
	
4.	 ∼P ⋁ Q	
3, DN
	
	
	
5.	 ∼Q  ∼(P  ∼Q)	
1, Com
	
	
	
6.	 ∼Q	
5, Simp
	
	
	
7.	 Q ⋁ ∼P	
4, Com
	
	
	
8.	 ∼P		
6, 7, DS
	
9.	 [∼(P  ∼Q)  ∼Q] ⊃ ∼P	
1–8, CP
(13)	 	
/ (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ [(P ⊃ ∼Q) ⊃ ∼P]
	
	
	
1.	 P ⊃ Q	
ACP
	
	
	 	 2.	 P ⊃ ∼Q	
ACP
	
	
	 	 3.	 ∼∼Q ⊃ ∼P	
2, Trans
	
	
	 	 4.	 Q ⊃ ∼P	
3, DN
	
	
	 	 5.	 P ⊃ ∼P	
1, 4, HS
	
	
	 	 6.	 ∼P ⋁ ∼P	
5, Impl
	
	
	 	 7.	 ∼P	
6, Taut
	
	
	
8.	 (P ⊃ ∼Q) ⊃ ∼P	
2–7, CP
	
9.	  (P ⊃ Q) ⊃ [(P ⊃ ∼Q) ⊃ ∼P]	
1–8, CP
(16)		
/ ∼[(P ⊃ ∼P)  (∼P ⊃ P)]
	
	
	 1.	(P ⊃ ∼P)  (∼P ⊃ P)	
AIP
	
	
	 2.	(∼P ⋁ ∼P)  (∼P ⊃ P)	
1, Impl
	
	
	 3.	∼P  (∼P ⊃ P)	
2, Taut
	
	
	 4.	∼P  (∼∼P ⋁ P)	
3, Impl
7

690   Answers to Selected Exercises
	
	
	 5.	∼P  (P ⋁ P)	
4, DN
	
	
	 6.	∼P  P	
5, Taut
	
	
	 7.	P  ∼P	
6, Com
	
8.	 ∼[(P ⊃ ∼P)  (∼P ⊃ P)]	
1–7, IP
(19)		
/ P ≡ [P ⋁ (Q  ∼Q)]
	
	
	
1.	 P	
ACP
	
	
	
2.	 P ⋁ (Q  ∼Q)	
1, Add
	
	 3.	 P ⊃ [P ⋁ (Q  ∼Q)]	
1–2, CP
	
	
	
4.	 P ⋁ (Q  ∼Q)	
ACP
	
	
	 	 5.	 ∼P	
AIP
	
	
	 	 6.	 Q  ∼Q	
4, 5, DS
	
	
	
7.	 ∼∼P	
5–6, IP
	
	
	
8.	 P	
7, DN
	
  9.		 [P ⋁ (Q  ∼Q)] ⊃ P	
4–8, CP
	
10.		 {line 3}  {line 9}	
3, 9, Conj
	
11.		 P ≡ [P ⋁ (Q  ∼Q)]	
10, Equiv
Exercise 8.1
  1.	
Ce
  4.	
Jr ⋁ Nr
  7.	
(x)(Mx ⊃ Tx)
10.	
(∃x)(Hx  ∼Rx)
13.	
(∃x)Tx
16.	
(∃x)(Sx  ∼Gx)
19.	
(x)(Sx ⊃ Vx)
22.	
(x)(Cx ⊃ ∼Hx)
25.	
(x)(Tx ⊃ Hx)
28.	
(x)(Hx ⊃ ∼Ex)
31.	
(∃x)[Cx  ∼(Sx ⋁ Bx)]
34.	
(∃x)[Dx  (Bx ≡ Tx)]
37.	
(∃x)[Cx  (Ax ⊃ Tx)]
40.	
(x)[(Wx  Cx) ⊃ Rx]
43.	
(x)[(Vx ⋁ Cx) ⊃ (Sx  Ix)]
46.	
(∃x)[(Fx  Rx)  Ex]
49.	
Gt ≡ (x)(Wx ⊃ Cx)
52.	
(∃x)(Ix  Mx) ⊃ Ir
55.	
(x)[(Bx  Mx) ⊃ Sx] ⊃ Sc
58.	
(∃x)(Ex  Rx) ≡ (∃x)(Mx  Ox)
Exercise 8.2
I.
  (1)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)	
/ (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
	 3.	 Ax ⊃ Bx	
1, UI
	
	 4.	 Bx ⊃ Cx	
2, UI
	
	 5.	 Ax ⊃ Cx	
3, 4, HS
	
	 6.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)	
5, UG
  (4)	  1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (y)(Ay ⋁ ∼By)	
/ (x)(Ax ≡ Bx)
	
	 3.	 Ax ⊃ Bx	
1, UI
	
	 4.	 Ax ⋁ ∼Bx	
2, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Bx ⋁ Ax	
4, Com
	
	 6.	 Bx ⊃ Ax	
5, Impl
	
	 7.	 Ax ≡ Bx	
3, 6, Equiv
	
	 8.	 (x)(Ax ≡ Bx)	
7, UG
  (7)    1.	 (x)[ Jx ⊃ (Kx  Lx)]
	
	 2.	 (∃y) ∼Ky	
/ (∃z) ∼Jz
	
	 3.	 ∼Km	
2, EI
	
	 4.	 Jm ⊃ (Km  Lm)	
1, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Km ⋁ ∼Lm	
3, Add
	
	 6.	 ∼(Km  Lm)	
5, DM
	
	 7.	 ∼Jm	
4, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 (∃z) ∼Jz	
7, EG
(10)	   1.	  (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 Am ⋁ An	
/ Bm ⋁ Bn
	
	 3.	 Am ⊃ Bm	
1, UI
	
	 4.	 An ⊃ Bn	
1, UI
	
	 5.	 (Am ⊃ Bm)  (An ⊃ Bn)	
3, 4, Conj
	
	 6.	 Bm ⋁ Bn	
2, 5, CD
(13)	  1.	 (x)[(Ax  Bx) ⊃ Cx]	
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Bx  ∼Cx)	
/ (∃x)∼Ax
	
	 3.	 Bm  ∼Cm	
2, EI
	
	 4.	 (Am  Bm) ⊃ Cm	
1, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Cm  Bm	
3, Com
	
	 6.	 ∼Cm	
5, Simp
	
	 7.	 ∼(Am  Bm)	
4, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 ∼Am ⋁ ∼Bm	
7, DM
	
	 9.	 Bm	
3, Simp
	
	10.	 ∼∼Bm	
9, DN
	
	11.	 ∼Bm ⋁ ∼Am	
8, Com
	
	12.	 ∼Am	
10, 11, DS
	
	13.	 (∃x)∼Ax	
12, EG
(16)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)Bx
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (∃x)Dx
	
	 3.	 An  Cn	
/ (∃x)(Bx  Dx)
	
	 4.	 An	
2, Simp
	
	 5.	 (∃x)Ax	
4, EG
	
	 6.	 (x)Bx	
1, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 Cn  An	
3, Com
	
	 8.	 Cn	
7, Simp
	
	 9.	 (∃x)Cx	
8, EG
	
	10.	 (∃x)Dx	
2, 9, MP
	
	11.	 Dm	
10, EI
	
	12.	 Bm	
6, UI
	
	13.	 Bm  Dm	
11, 12, Conj
	
	14.	 (∃x)(Bx  Dx)	
13, EG
(19)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Cx ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	
	 3.	 (x)(Bx  ⊃ Ax)	
/ (x)(Cx ⊃ Ax)
	
	 4.	 Am ⋁ Bm	
2, EI
	
	 5.	 Bm ⊃ Am	
3, UI
	
	 6.	 ∼∼ Am ⋁ Bm	
4, DN
	
	 7.	 ∼Am ⊃ Bm	
6, Impl
	
	 8.	 ∼Am ⊃ Am	
5, 7, HS
	
	 9.	 ∼∼Am ⋁ Am	
8, Impl
	
	10.	 Am ⋁ Am	
9, DN
	
	11.	 Am	
10, Taut
	
	12.	 (∃x)Ax	
11, EG
	
	13.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Bx)	
1, 12, MP
8

Answers to Selected Exercises   691
	
	14.	 Cx ⊃ Bx	
13, UI
	
	15.	 Bx ⊃ Ax	
3, UI
	
	16.	 Cx ⊃ Ax	
14, 15, HS
	
	17.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Ax)	
16, UG
(22)	 1.	 (x)(Ax  ∼Bx)
	
	 2.	 An ⊃ [∼(∃x)Cx ⊃ Bc]
	
	 3.	 Am ⊃ (x)(Cx ⊃ Dx)	
/ (∃x)Dx
	
	 4.	 An  ∼Bn	
1, UI
	
	 5.	 An	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 ∼(∃x)Cx ⊃ Bc	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 Am  ∼Bm	
1, UI
	
	 8.	 Am	
7, Simp
	
	 9.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Dx)	
3, 8, MP
	
	10.	 Ac  ∼Bc	
1, UI
	
	11.	 ∼Bc  Ac	
10, Com
	
	12.	 ∼Bc	
11, Simp
	
	13.	 ∼∼(∃x)Cx	
6, 12, MT
	
	14.	 (∃x)Cx	
13, DN
	
	15.	 Cs	
14, EI
	
	16.	 Cs ⊃ Ds	
9, UI
	
	17.	 Ds	
15, 16, MP
	
	18.	 (∃x)Dx	
17, EG
(25)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (x) ∼(Dx  Bx)
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Ax  Cx)	
/ (∃x) ∼Dx	
	 4.	 An  Cn	
3, EI
	
	 5.	 An	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 Cn  An	
4, Com
	
	 7.	 Cn	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 (∃x)Ax	
5, EG
	
	 9.	 (∃x)Cx	
7, EG
	
	10.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)	
1, 8, MP
	
	11.	 An ⊃ Bn	
10, UI
	
	12.	 Bn	
5, 11, MP
	
	13.	 (x)∼(Dx  Bx)	
2, 9, MP
	
	14.	 ∼(Dn  Bn)	
13,UI
	
	15.	 ∼Dn ⋁ ∼Bn	
14, DM
	
	16.	 ∼Bn ⋁ ∼Dn	
15, Com
	
	17.	 ∼∼Bn	
12, DN
	
	18.	 ∼Dn	
16, 17, DS
	
	19.	 (∃x) ∼Dx	
18, EG
II.
  (1)	 1.	 (x)(Ox ⊃ Sx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ox ⊃ Fx)	
/ (x)[Ox ⊃ (Sx  Fx)]
	
	 3.	 Ox ⊃ Sx	
1, UI
	
	 4.	 Ox ⊃ Fx	
2, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Ox ⋁ Sx	
3, Impl
	
	 6.	 ∼Ox ⋁ Fx	
4, Impl
	
	 7.	 (∼Ox ⋁ Sx)  (∼Ox  ⋁ Fx)	
5, 6, Conj
	
	 8.	 ∼Ox ⋁ (Sx  Fx)	
7, Dist
	
	 9.	 Ox ⊃ (Sx  Fx)	
8, Impl
	
	10.	 (x)[Ox ⊃ (Sx  Fx)]	
9, UG
  (4)	 1.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Vx)  (x)(Px ⊃ Fx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(Cx  Gx) 	
/ (∃x)(Vx  Gx)  
	
	 (∃x)(Px  Gx)	
(∃x)(Fx  Gx)
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Cx  Gx)	
 2, Simp
	
	 4.	 Cm  Gm	
 3, EI
	
	 5.	 (∃x)(Px  Gx)  (∃x)(Cx  Gx)	 2, Com
	
	 6.	 (∃x)(Px  Gx)	
 5, Simp
	
	 7.	 Pn  Gn	
 6, EI
	
	 8.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Vx)	
 1, Simp
	
	 9.	 Cm ⊃ Vm	
 8, UI
	
	10.	 Cm	
 4, Simp
	
	11.	 Vm	
 9, 10, MP
	
	12.	 Gm  Cm	
 4, Com
	
	13.	 Gm	
12, Simp
	
	14.	 Vm  Gm	
11, 13, Conj
	
	15.	 (∃x)(Vx  Gx)	
14, EG
	
	16.	 (x)(Px ⊃ Fx) 	
1, Com	
	
	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Vx)
	
	17.	 (x)(Px ⊃ Fx)	
16, Simp
	
	18.	 Pn ⊃ Fn	
17, UI
	
	19.	 Pn	
7, Simp
	
	20.	 Fn	
18, 19, MP
	
	21.	 Gn  Pn	
7, Com
	
	22.	 Gn	
21, Simp
	
	23.	 Fn  Gn	
20, 22, Conj
	
	24.	 (∃x)(Fx  Gx)	
23, EG
	
	25.	 (∃x)(Vx  Gx) 	
15, 24, Conj 
	
	 (∃x)(Fx  Gx)
  (7)	 1.	 (x)[Gx ⊃ (Ix  Px)]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Ix  Px) ⊃ Rx]
	
	 3.	 Ga  Gc	
/ Ra  Rc
	
	 4.	 Gx ⊃ (Ix  Px)	
1, UI
	
	 5.	 (Ix  Px) ⊃ Rx	
2, UI
	
	 6.	 Gx ⊃ Rx	
4, 5, HS
	
	 7.	 (x)(Gx ⊃ Rx)	
6, UG
	
	 8.	 Ga ⊃ Ra	
7, UI
	
	 9.	 Ga	
3, Simp
	
	10.	 Ra	
8, 9, MP
	
	11.	 Gc ⊃ Rc	
7, UI
	
	12.	 Gc  Ga	
3, Com
	
	13.	 Gc	
12, Simp
	
	14.	 Rc	
11, 13, MP
	
	15.	 Ra  Rc	
10, 14, Conj
(10)  1.	 (x)[(Ax  Kx) ⊃ Rx] ⊃ (x)(Gx ⊃ Sx)
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Ax  Kx) ⊃ Fx] ⊃ (x)(Gx ⊃ Px)
	
	 3.	 (x)[(Ax  Kx) ⊃ (Rx  Fx)]	 / (x)[Gx ⊃ (Sx  Px)]
	
	 4.	 (Ax  Kx) ⊃ (Rx  Fx)	
3, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼(Ax  Kx) ⋁ (Rx  Fx)	
4, Impl
	
	 6.	 [∼(Ax  Kx) ⋁ Rx]   
	
	 [∼(Ax  Kx) ⋁ Fx]	
5, Dist
	
	 7.	 ∼(Ax  Kx) ⋁ Rx	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 [∼(Ax  Kx) ⋁ Fx]  
	
	 [∼(Ax  Kx) ⋁ Rx]	
6, Com
	
	 9.	 ∼(Ax  Kx) ⋁ Fx	
8, Simp
	
	10.	 (Ax  Kx) ⊃ Rx	
7, Impl
	
	11.	 (Ax  Kx) ⊃ Fx	
9, Impl
	
	12.	 (x)[(Ax  Kx) ⊃ Rx]	
10, UG
	
	13.	 (x)[(Ax  Kx) ⊃ Fx]	
11, UG
	
	14.	 (x)(Gx ⊃ Sx)	
1, 12, MP
8

692   Answers to Selected Exercises
	
	15.	 (x)(Gx ⊃ Px)	
2, 13, MP
	
	16.	 Gx ⊃ Sx	
14, UI
	
	17.	 Gx ⊃ Px	
15, UI
	
	18.	 ∼Gx ⋁ Sx	
16, Impl
	
	19.	 ∼Gx ⋁ Px	
17, Impl
	
	20.	 (∼Gx ⋁ Sx)  (∼Gx ⋁ Px)	 18, 19, Conj
	
	21.	 ∼Gx ⋁ (Sx  Px)	
20, Dist
	
	22.	 Gx ⊃ (Sx  Px)	
21, Impl
	
	 23.	 (x)[Gx ⊃ (Sx  Px)]	
22, UG
Exercise 8.3
I.
  (1)  1.  (x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)Bx
	
	 2.	 (x)∼Bx	
/ (∃x)∼Ax
	
	 3.	 ∼(∃x)Bx	
2, QN
	
	 4.	 ∼(x)Ax	
1, 3, MT
	
	 5.	 (∃x)∼Ax	
4, QN
  (4)	  1.	 (∃x)Ax ⋁ (∃x)(Bx  Cx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)Bx	
/ (∃x)Ax
	
	 3.	 (x)∼Bx	
2, QN
	
	 4.	 ∼Bx	
3, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Bx ⋁ ∼Cx	
4, Add
	
	 6.	 ∼(Bx  Cx)	
5, DM
	
	 7.	 (x)∼(Bx  Cx)	
6, UG
	
	 8.	 ∼(∃x)(Bx  Cx)	
7, QN
	
	 9.	 (∃x)(Bx  Cx) ⋁ (∃x)Ax	
1, Com
	
	10.	 (∃x)Ax	
8, 9, DS
  (7)	  1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(x)Cx ⋁ (x)Ax
	
	 3.	 ∼(x)Bx	
/ (∃x)∼Cx
	
	 4.	 (∃x)∼Bx	
3, QN
	
	 5.	 ∼Bm	
4, EI
	
	 6.	 Am ⊃ Bm	
1, UI
	
	 7.	 ∼Am	
5, 6, MT
	
	 8.	 (∃x)∼Ax	
7, EG
	
	 9.	 ∼(x)Ax	
8, QN
	
	10.	 (x)Ax ⋁ ∼(x)Cx	
2, Com
	
	11.	 ∼(x)Cx	
9, 10, DS
	
	12.	 (∃x)∼Cx	
11, QN
(10)	  1.	 ∼(∃x)(Ax  ∼Bx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)(Bx  ∼Cx)	
/ (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
	 3.	 (x)∼(Ax  ∼Bx)	
1, QN
	
	 4.	 (x)∼(Bx  ∼Cx)	
2, QN
	
	 5.	 ∼(Ax  ∼Bx)	
3, UI
	
	 6.	 ∼(Bx  ∼Cx)	
4, UI
	
	 7.	 ∼Ax ⋁ ∼∼Bx	
5, DM
	
	 8.	 ∼Ax ⋁ Bx	
7, DN
	
	 9.	 ∼Bx ⋁ ∼∼Cx	
6, DM
	
	10.	 ∼Bx ⋁ Cx	
9, DN
	
	11.	 Ax ⊃ Bx	
8, Impl
	
	12.	 Bx ⊃ Cx	
10, Impl
	
	13.	 Ax ⊃ Cx	
11, 12, HS
	
	14.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)	
13, UG
(13)	   1.	 (x)(Ax  ∼Bx) ⊃ (∃x)Cx
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)(Cx ⋁ Bx)	
/ ∼(x)Ax
	
	 3.	 (x)∼(Cx ⋁ Bx)	
2, QN
	
	 4.	 ∼(Cx ⋁ Bx)	
3, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Cx  ∼Bx	
4, DM
	
	 6.	 ∼Cx	
5, Simp
	
	 7.	 (x)∼Cx	
6, UG
	
	 8.	 ∼(∃x)Cx	
7, QN
	
	 9.	 ∼(x)(Ax  ∼Bx)	
1, 8, MT
	
	10.	 (∃x)∼(Ax  ∼Bx)	
9, QN
	
	11.	 ∼(Am  ∼Bm)	
10, EI
	
	12.	 ∼Am ⋁ ∼∼Bm	
11, DM
	
	13.	 ∼Am ⋁ Bm	
12, DN
	
	14.	 ∼Bx  ∼Cx	
5, Com
	
	15.	 ∼Bx	
14, Simp
	
	16.	 (x)∼Bx	
15, UG
	
	17.	 ∼Bm	
16, UI
	
	18.	 Bm ⋁ ∼Am	
13, Com
	
	19.	 ∼Am	
17, 18, DS
	
	20.	 (∃x)∼Ax	
19, EG
	
	21.	 ∼(x)Ax	
20, QN
(16)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx) ⊃ (x)(Cx  Dx)
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Ex)  (Bx ⋁ Fx)]
	
	 3.	 ∼(x)Dx	
/ (x)(Ex ⋁ Fx)
	
	 4.	 (∃x)∼Dx	
3, QN
	
	 5.	 ∼Dn	
4, EI
	
	 6.	 ∼Dn ⋁ ∼Cn	
5, Add
	
	 7.	 ∼Cn ⋁ ∼Dn	
6, Com
	
	 8.	 ∼(Cn  Dn)	
7, DM
	
	 9.	 (∃x)∼(Cx  Dx)	
8, EG
	
	10.	 ∼(x)(Cx  Dx)	
9, QN
	
	11.	 ∼(∃x)(Ax  Bx)	
1, 10, MT
	
	12.	 (x)∼(Ax  Bx)	
11, QN
	
	13.	 ∼(Ax  Bx)	
12, UI
	
	14	 ∼Ax ⋁ ∼Bx	
13, DM
	
	15.	 (Ax ⋁ Ex)  (Bx ⋁ Fx)	
2, UI
	
	16.	 (∼∼Ax ⋁ Ex)  (Bx ⋁ Fx)	
15, DN
	
	17.	 (∼∼Ax ⋁ Ex)  (∼∼Bx  ⋁  Fx)	16, DN
	
	18.	 (∼Ax ⊃ Ex)  (∼∼Bx ⋁ Fx)	17, Impl
	
	19.	 (∼Ax ⊃ Ex)  (∼Bx ⊃ Fx)	 18, Impl
	
	20.	 Ex ⋁ Fx	
14, 19, CD
	
	21.	 (x)(Ex ⋁ Fx)	
20, UG
(19)	 1.	 (∃x)(Ax  Bx) ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 Bn  ∼Cn	
	
/ ∼(x)Ax
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Bx  ∼Cx)	
	
2, EG
	
	 4.	 (∃x)(∼∼Bx  ∼Cx)	
	
3, DN
	
	 5.	 (∃x)∼(∼Bx ⋁ Cx	
	
4, DM
	
	 6.	 (∃x)∼(Bx ⊃ Cx)	
	
5, Impl
	
	 7.	 ∼(x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)	
	
6, QN
	
	 8.	 ∼(∃x)(Ax  Bx)	
	
1, 7, MT
	
	 9.	 (x)∼(Ax  Bx)	
	
8, QN
	
	10.	 ∼(An  Bn)	
	
9, UI
	
	11.	 ∼An ⋁ ∼Bn	
	
10, DM
	
	12.	 ∼Bn ⋁ ∼An	
	
11, Com
	
	13.	 Bn	
	
2, Simp
	
	14.	 ∼∼Bn	
	
13, DN
8

Answers to Selected Exercises   693
	
	15.	 ∼An	
	
12, 14, DS
	
	16.	 (∃x)∼Ax	
	
15, EG
	
	17.	 ∼(x)Ax	
	
16, QN
II.
  (1)  1.	 (x)[Px ⊃ (Hx ⋁ Nx)] ⊃ ∼(∃x)Cx
	
	 2.	 Cf	
/ (∃x)(Px  ∼Nx)
	
	 3.	 (∃x)Cx	
2, EG
	
	 4.	 ∼∼(∃x)Cx	
3, DN
	
	 5.	 ∼(x)[Px ⊃ (Hx ⋁ Nx)]	
1, 4, MT
	
	 6.	 (∃x)∼[Px ⊃ (Hx ⋁ Nx)]	
5, QN
	
	 7.	 ∼[Pm ⊃ (Hm ⋁ Nm)]	
6, EI
	
	 8.	 ∼[∼Pm ⋁ (Hm ⋁ Nm)]	
7, Impl
	
	 9.	 ∼∼Pm  ∼(Hm ⋁ Nm)	
8, DM
	
	10.	 Pm  ∼(Hm ⋁ Nm)	
9, DN
	
	11.	 Pm  (∼Hm  ∼Nm)	
10, DM
	
	12.	 Pm	
11, Simp
	
	13.	 (Pm  ∼Hm)  ∼Nm	
11, Assoc
	
	14.	 ∼Nm  (Pm  ∼Hm)	
13, Com
	
	15.	 ∼Nm	
14, Simp
	
	16.	 Pm  ∼Nm	
12, 15, Conj
	
	17.	 (∃x)(Px  ∼Nx)	
16, EG
  (4)	 1.	 (∃x)(Gx  Px) ⋁ (∃x)(Sx  Ex)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)Ex	
/ (∃x)Px
	
	 3.	 (x)∼Ex	
2, QN
	
	 4.	 ∼Ex	
3, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Ex ⋁ ∼Sx	
4, Add
	
	 6.	 ∼Sx ⋁ ∼Ex	
5, Com
	
	 7.	 ∼(Sx  Ex)	
6, DM
	
	 8.	 (x)∼(Sx  Ex)	
7, UG
	
	 9.	 ∼(∃x)(Sx  Ex)	
8, QN
	
	10.	 (∃x)(Sx  Ex) ⋁ (∃x)(Gx  Px)	 1, Com
	
	11.	 (∃x)(Gx  Px)	
9, 10, DS
	
	12.	 Gm  Pm	
11, EI
	
	13.	 Pm  Gm	
12, Com
	
	14.	 Pm	
13, Simp
	
	15.	 (∃x)Px	
14, EG
  (7)	 1.	 (x)(Px ⊃ Sx)  (x)(Ix ⊃ Gx)
	
	 2.	 ∼(∃x)(Sx  Gx)	
/ ∼(∃x)(Px  Ix)
	
	 3.	 (x)∼(Sx  Gx)	
2, QN
	
	 4.	 ∼(Sx  Gx)	
3, UI
	
	 5.	 ∼Sx ⋁ ∼Gx	
4, DM
	
	 6.	 (x)(Px ⊃ Sx)	
1, Simp
	
	 7.	 (x)(Ix ⊃ Gx)  (x)(Px ⊃ Sx)	 1, Com
	
	 8.	 (x)(Ix ⊃ Gx)	
7, Simp
	
	 9.	 Px ⊃ Sx	
6, UI
	
	10.	 Ix ⊃ Gx	
8, UI
	
	11.	 ∼Sx ⊃ ∼Px	
9, Trans
	
	12.	 ∼Gx ⊃ ∼Ix	
10, Trans
	
	13.	 (∼Sx ⊃ ∼Px)  (∼Gx ⊃ ∼Ix)	11, 12, Conj
	
	14.	 ∼Px ⋁ ∼Ix	
5, 13, CD
	
	15.	 ∼(Px  Ix)	
14, DM
	
	16.	 (x)∼(Px  Ix)	
15, UG
	
	17.	 ∼(∃x)(Px  Ix)	
16, QN
(10)	 1.	 ∼(∃x)[Px  (Gx ⋁ Hx)]
	
	 2.	 (x)[Nx ⊃ (Px  Hx)]
	
	 3.	 (∃x)(Px  Cx) ⋁ (∃x)(Px  Nx)	 / (∃x)(Cx  ∼Gx)
	
	 4.	 (x)∼[Px  (Gx ⋁ Hx)]	
1, QN
	
	 5.	 ∼[Px  (Gx ⋁ Hx)]	
4, UI
	
	 6.	 ∼Px ⋁ ∼(Gx ⋁ Hx)	
5, DM
	
	 7.	 ∼Px ⋁ (∼Gx  ∼Hx)	
6, DM
	
	 8.	 (∼Px ⋁ ∼Gx)  (∼Px ⋁ ∼Hx)	 7, Dist
	
	 9.	 ∼Px ⋁ ∼Gx	
8, Simp
	
	10.	 (∼Px ⋁ ∼Hx)  (∼Px ⋁ ∼Gx)	 8, Com
	
	11.	 ∼Px ⋁ ∼Hx	
10, Simp
	
	12.	 ∼(Px  Hx)	
11, DM
	
	13.	 Nx ⊃ (Px  Hx)	
2, UI
	
	14.	 ∼Nx	
12, 13, MT
	
	15.	 ∼Nx ⋁ ∼Px	
14, Add
	
	16.	 ∼Px ⋁ ∼Nx	
15, Com
	
	17.	 ∼(Px  Nx)	
16, DM
	
	18.	 (x)∼(Px  Nx)	
17, UG
	
	19.	 ∼(∃x)(Px  Nx)	
18, QN
	
	20.	 (∃x)(Px  Nx) ⋁ (∃ x)(Px  Cx)	 3, Com
	
	21.	 (∃x)(Px  Cx)	
19, 20, DS
	
	22.	 Pm  Cm	
21, EI
	
	23.	 (x)(∼Px ⋁ ∼Gx)	
9, UG
	
	24.	 ∼Pm ⋁ ∼Gm	
23, UI
	
	25.	 Pm	
22, Simp
	
	26.	 ∼∼Pm	
25, DN
	
	27.	 ∼Gm	
24, 26, DS
	
	28.	 Cm  Pm	
22, Com
	
	29.	 Cm	
28, Simp
	
	30.	 Cm  ∼Gm	
27, 29, Conj
	
	31.	 (∃x)(Cx  ∼Gx)	
30, EG
Exercise 8.4
I.
  (1)  1.	
(x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
	 2.	    (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)	
/ (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx  Cx)]
	
	
	
3.	 Ax	
ACP
	
	
	
4.	 Ax ⊃ Bx	
1, UI
	
	
	
5.	 Ax ⊃ Cx	
2, UI
	
	
	
6.	 Bx	
3, 4, MP
	
	
	
7.	 Cx	
3, 5, MP
	
	
	
8.	 Bx  Cx	
6, 7, Conj
	
	 9.	 Ax ⊃ (Bx  Cx)	
3–8, CP
	
 10.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Bx  Cx)]	
9, UG
  (4)  1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (∃x)(Bx  Dx)	 / (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)Bx
	
	
	
  3.	 (∃x)Ax	
ACP
	
	
	
  4.	 Am	
3, EI
	
	
	
  5.	 Am ⊃ Cm	
1, UI
	
	
	
  6.	 Cm	
4, 5, MP
	
	
	
  7.	 (∃x)Cx	
6, EG
	
	
	
  8.	 (∃x)(Bx  Dx)	
2, 7, MP
	
	
	
  9.	 Bn  Dn	
8, EI
	
	
	
10.	 Bn	
9, Simp
	
	
	
11.	 (∃x)Bx	
10, EG
	
	12.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃x)Bx	
3–11, CP
8

694   Answers to Selected Exercises
  (7)  1.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Cx ⋁ Dx) ⊃ Ex]	
/ (x)(Ax ⊃ Ex)
	
	
	
  3.	 Ax	
ACP
	
	
	
  4.	 (Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx	
1, UI
	
	
	
  5.	 (Cx ⋁ Dx) ⊃ Ex	
2, UI
	
	
	
  6.	 Ax ⋁ Bx	
3, Add
	
	
	
  7.	 Cx	
4, 6, MP
	
	
	
  8.	 Cx ⋁ Dx	
7, Add
	
	
	
  9.	 Ex	
5, 8, MP
	
	10.	 Ax ⊃ Ex	
3–9, CP
	
	11.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Ex)	
10, UG
(10)  1.  (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
   2.  Am ⋁ An	
/ (∃x)Bx
	
	
	
  3.	 ∼(∃x)Bx	
AIP
	
	
	
  4.	 (x)∼Bx	
3, QN
	
	
	
  5.	 Am ⊃ Bm	
1, UI
	
	
	
  6.	 An ⊃ Bn	
1, UI
	
	
	
  7.	 (Am ⊃ Bm)  (An ⊃ Bn)	5, 6, Conj
	
	
	
  8.	 Bm ⋁ Bn	
2, 7, CD
	
	
	
  9.	 ∼Bm	
4, UI
	
	
	
10.	 Bn	
8, 9, DS
	
	
	
11.	 ∼Bn	
4, UI
	
	
	
12.	 Bn  ∼Bn	
10, 11, Conj
	
 13.	 ∼∼(∃x)Bx	
3–12, IP
	
	14.	 (∃x)Bx	
13, DN
(13)	 1.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Dx ⊃ (∃x)Bx	
/ (∃x)(Ax  Dx) ⊃  
	
	 	
(∃x)Cx
	
	
	
  3.	 (∃x)(Ax  Dx)	
ACP
	
	
	
  4.	 Am  Dm	
3, EI
	
	
	
  5.	 Am	
4, Simp
	
	
	
  6.	 (∃x)Ax	
5, EG
	
	
	
  7.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)	
1, 6, MP
	
	
	
  8.	 Dm  Am	
4, Com
	
	
	
  9.	 Dm	
8, Simp
	
	
	
10.	 (∃x)Dx	
9, EG
	
	
	
11.	 (∃x)Bx	
2, 10, MP
	
	
	
12.	 Bn	
11, EI
	
	
	
13.	 Bn ⊃ Cn	
7, UI
	
	
	
14.	 Cn	
12, 13, MP
	
	
	
15.	 (∃x)Cx	
14, EG
	
	16.	 (∃x)(Ax  Dx) ⊃ (∃x)Cx 	 3–15, CP
(16)	 1.	 (x)[(Ax ⋁ Bx) ⊃ Cx]
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(∼Ax ⋁ Dx) ⊃ (x)Ex	 / (x)Cx ⋁ (x)Ex
	
	
	
  3.	 ∼[(x)Cx ⋁ (x)Ex]	 AIP
	
	
	
  4.	 ∼(x)Cx  ∼(x)Ex	 3, DM
	
	
	
  5.	 ∼(x)Cx	
4, Simp
	
	
	
  6.	 (∃x)∼Cx	
5, QN
	
	
	
  7.	 ∼Cm	
6, EI
	
	
	
  8.	 (Am ⋁ Bm) ⊃ Cm	 1, UI
	
	
	
  9.	 ∼(Am ⋁ Bm)	
7, 8, MT
	
	
	
10.	 ∼Am  ∼Bm	
9, DM
	
	
	
11.	 ∼Am	
10, Simp
	
	
	
12.	 ∼Am ⋁ Dm	
11, Add
	
	
	
13.	 (∃x)(∼Ax ⋁ Dx)	
12, EG
	
	
	
14.	 (x)Ex	
2, 13, MP
	
	
	
15.	 ∼(x)Ex  ∼(x)Cx	
4, Com
	
	
	
16.	 ∼(x)Ex	
15, Simp
	
	
	
17.	 (x)Ex  ∼(x)Ex	
14, 16, Conj
	
	18.	 ∼∼[(x)Cx ⋁ (x)Ex]	
3–17, IP
	
	19.	 (x)Cx ⋁ (x)Ex	
18, DN
(19)	 1.	 (x)[Bx ⊃ (Cx  Dx)]	
/ (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx) ⊃  
	
	 	
(x)(Ax ⊃ Dx)
	
	
	
  2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)	
ACP
	
	
	
	
  3.	 Ax	
ACP
	
	
	
	
  4.	 Ax ⊃ Bx	
2, UI
	
	
	
	
  5.	 Bx	
3, 4, MP
	
	
	
	
  6.	 Bx ⊃ (C x  Dx)	 1, UI
	
	
	
	
  7.	 Cx  Dx	
5, 6, MP
	
	
	
	
  8.	 Dx  Cx	
7, Com
	
	
	
	
  9.	 Dx	
8, Simp
	
	
	
10.	 Ax ⊃ Dx	
3–9, CP
	
	
	
11.	(x)(Ax ⊃ Dx)	
10, UG
	
	12.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx) ⊃ (x)(Ax ⊃ Dx)	 2–11, CP
(22)	  1.	 (x)Ax ⋁ (x)Bx	
/ (x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)
	
	
	
  2.	 ∼(x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)	
AIP
	
	
	
  3.	 (∃x)∼(Ax ⋁ Bx)	
2, QN
	
	
	
  4.	 (∃x)(∼Ax  ∼Bx)	
3, DM
	
	
	
  5.	 ∼An  ∼Bn	
4, EI
	
	
	
  6.	 ∼An	
5, Simp
	
	
	
  7.	 (∃x)∼Ax	
6, EG
	
	
	
  8.	 ∼(x)Ax	
7, QN
	
	
	
  9.	 (x)Bx	
1, 8, DS
	
	
	
10.	 Bn	
9, UI
	
	
	
11.	 ∼Bn  ∼An	
5, Com
	
	
	
12.	 ∼Bn	
11, Simp
	
	
	
13.	 Bn  ∼Bn	
10, 12, Conj
	
	14. ∼∼(x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)	
2–13, IP
	
	15. (x)(Ax ⋁ Bx)	
14, DN
(25)	 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	 2. (∃x)Dx ⊃ (x)(Ex ⊃ ∼Bx)
	
	 3. ∼(∃x)(Cx  ∼Ex)	
/ (∃x)(Ax  Dx) ⊃  
	
	 	
∼(∃x)Bx
	
	
	
  4.	 (∃x)(Ax  Dx)	
ACP
	
	
	
  5.	 An  Dn	
4, EI
	
	
	
  6.	 An	
5, Simp
	
	
	
  7.	 (∃x)Ax	
6, EG
	
	
	
  8.	 (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)	
1, 7, MP
	
	
	
  9.	 Dn  An	
5, Com
	
	
	
10.	 Dn	
9, Simp
	
	
	
11.	 (∃x)Dx	
10, EG
	
	
	
12.	 (x)(Ex ⊃ ∼Bx)	
2, 11, MP
	
	
	
13.	 (x)∼(Cx  ∼Ex)	
3, QN
	
	
	
14.	 ∼(Cx  ∼Ex)	
13, UI
	
	
	
15.	 ∼Cx ⋁ ∼∼Ex)	
14, DM
	
	
	
16.	 ∼Cx ⋁ Ex	
15, DN
	
	
	
17.	 Cx ⊃ Ex	
16, Impl
	
	
	
18.	 Bx ⊃ Cx	
8, UI
	
	
	
19.	 Bx ⊃ Ex	
17, 18, HS
	
	
	
20.	 Ex ⊃ ∼Bx	
12, UI
	
	
	
21.	 Bx ⊃ ∼Bx	
19, 20, HS
	
	
	
22.	 ∼Bx ⋁ ∼Bx	
21, Impl
8

Answers to Selected Exercises   695
	
	
	
23.	 ∼Bx	
22, Taut
	
	
	
24.	 (x)∼Bx	
23, UG
	
	
	
25.	 ∼(∃x)Bx	
24, QN
	
	26.	 (∃x)(Ax  Dx) ⊃ ∼(∃x)Bx	 4–25, CP
II.
  (1)	 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Wx)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Rx ⊃ Cx)	
/ (x)[(Rx  Ax) ⊃ 
	
	 	
(Cx  Wx)]
	
	
	
  3.	 Rx  Ax	
ACP
	
	
	
  4.	 Rx	
3, Simp
	
	
	
  5.	 Ax  Rx	
3, Com
	
	
	
  6.	 Ax	
5, Simp
	
	
	
  7.	 Ax ⊃ Wx	
1, UI
	
	
	
  8.	 Rx ⊃ Cx	
2, UI
	
	
	
  9.	 Cx	
4, 8, MP
	
	
	
10.	 Wx	
6, 7, MP
	
	
	
11.	 Cx  Wx	
9, 10, Conj
	
	12.	 (Rx  Ax) ⊃ (Cx  Wx)	
3–11, CP
	
	13.	 (x)[(Rx  Ax) ⊃ (Cx  Wx)]	
12, UG
  (4)	 1.	 (x)[(Sx ⋁ Ux) ⊃ (Ix  Cx)]
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Cx ⋁ Vx) ⊃ (Rx  Ax)]	
/ (x)(Sx ⊃ Ax)
	
	
	
  3.	 Sx	
ACP
	
	
	
  4.	 Sx ⋁ Ux	
3, Add
	
	
	
  5.	 (Sx ⋁ Ux) ⊃ (Ix  Cx)	
1, UI
	
	
	
  6.	 Ix  Cx	
4, 5, MP
	
	
	
  7.	 Cx  Ix	
6, Com
	
	
	
  8.	 Cx	
7, Simp
	
	
	
  9.	 Cx ⋁ Vx	
8, Add
	
	
	
10.	 (Cx ⋁ Vx) ⊃ (Rx  Ax)	
2, UI
	
	
	
11.	 Rx  Ax	
9, 10, MP
	
	
	
12.	 Ax  Rx	
11, Com
	
	
	
13.	 Ax	
12, Simp
	
	14.	 Sx ⊃ Ax	
3–13, CP
	
	15.	 (x)(Sx ⊃ Ax)	
14, UG
  (7)	 1.	 (∃x)Cx ⊃ (x)[Ax ⊃ (Sx  Dx)]
	
	 2.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ ∼Ax) ⊃ (∃x)(Dx  Sx)	 / (∃x)(Dx  Sx)
	
	
	
  3.	 ∼(∃x)(Dx  Sx)	
AIP
	
	
	
  4.	 ∼(x)(Cx ⊃ ∼Ax)	
2, 3, MT
	
	
	
  5.	 (∃x)∼(Cx ⊃ ∼Ax)	
4, QN
	
	
	
  6.	 ∼(Cm ⊃ ∼Am)	
5, EI
	
	
	
  7.	 ∼(∼Cm ⋁ ∼Am)	
6, Impl
	
	
	
  8.	 ∼∼Cm  ∼∼Am	
7, DM
	
	
	
  9.	 Cm  ∼∼Am	
8, DN
	
	
	
10.	 Cm  Am	
9, DN
	
	
	
11.	 Cm	
10, Simp
	
	
	
12.	 (∃x)Cx	
11, EG
	
	
	
13.	 (x)[Ax ⊃ (Sx  Dx)]	
1, 12, MP
	
	
	
14.	 Am ⊃ (Sm  Dm)	
13, UI
	
	
	
15.	 Am  Cm	
10, Com
	
	
	
16.	 Am	
15, Simp
	
	
	
17.	 Sm  Dm	
14, 16, MP
	
	
	
18.	 Dm  Sm	
17, Com
	
	
	
19.	 (∃x)(Dx  Sx)	
18, EG
	
	
	
20.	 (∃x)(Dx  Sx) 	
3, 19, Conj 
	
	
	
∼(∃x)(Dx  Sx)
	
	21.	 ∼∼(∃x)(Dx  Sx)	
3–20, IP
	
	22.	 (∃x)(Dx  Sx)	
21, DN
(10)	 1.	 (∃x)(Gx  Px) ⋁ (∃x)(Ax  Px)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Px ⊃ (∃x) [Ax  (Cx  Dx)]	 / (∃x)(Dx  Cx)
	
	
	
  3.	 ∼(∃x)Px	
AIP
	
	
	
  4.	 (x)∼Px	
3, QN
	
	
	
  5.	 ∼Px	
4, UI
	
	
	
  6.	 ∼Px ⋁ ∼Gx	
5, Add
	
	
	
  7.	 ∼Gx ⋁ ∼Px	
6, Com
	
	
	
  8.	 ∼(Gx  Px)	
7, DM
	
	
	
  9.	 (x)∼(Gx  Px)	
8, UG
	
	
	
10.	 ∼(∃x)(Gx  Px)	
9, QN
	
	
	
11.	 (∃x)(Ax  Px)	
1, 10, DS
	
	
	
12.	 Am  Pm	
11, EI
	
	
	
13.	 Pm  Am	
12, Com
	
	
	
14.	 Pm	
13, Simp
	
	
	
15.	 ∼Pm	
4, UI
	
	
	
16.	 Pm  ∼Pm	
14, 15, Conj
	
17.		 ∼∼(∃x)Px	
3–16, IP
	
18.	 	 (∃x)Px	
17, DN
	
19.	 	 (∃x)[Ax  (Cx  Dx)]	
2, 18, MP
	
20.	 	 An  (Cn  Dn)	
19, EI
	
21.	 	 (Cn  Dn)  An	
20, Com
	
22.	 	 Cn  Dn	
21, Simp
	
23.	 	 Dn  Cn	
22, Com
	
24.	 	 (∃x)(Dx  Cx)	
23, EG
Exercise 8.5
I.
  1.	All cats are animals.
	
No cats are dogs.
	
No dogs are animals.
  4.	Some mammals are dogs.
	
Some mammals write books.
	
Some mammals are dogs that write books.
  7.	There are flowers.
	
There are dogs.
	
No flowers are animals.
	
Some dogs are not animals.
10.	Some mammals are felines.
	
Some animals are not felines.
	
All mammals are animals.
	
Some feline animals are not mammals.
II.
(1) 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)	
/ (x)(Bx ⊃ Cx)
	
	
For a universe consisting of one member, we have
	
	
Aa  ⊃  Ba  /  Aa  ⊃  Ca  //  Ba  ⊃  Ca
	
 	      F	 T	 T	
F	 T	  F	
T	 F	  F
8

696   Answers to Selected Exercises
(4)	1.  (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
2.	    (∃x)Ax	
/ (x)Bx
	
	   For a universe consisting of two members, we have
	
	    	  (Aa  ⊃  Ba)    (Ab  ⊃  Bb)  /  Aa  ⋁  Ab  //  Ba    Bb
	
	
T	 T	 T	
T	  F	 T	  F	
T	 T	 F	
T	 F	 F
(7) 1.  (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
2.  (∃x)Bx ⊃ (∃x)Cx	
/ (x)(Ax ⊃ Cx)
	
	   	 For a universe consisting of two members, we have
	
	
(Aa  ⊃  Ba)    (Ab  ⊃  Bb)  /  (Ba  ⋁  Bb)  ⊃  (Ca  ⋁  Cb)  //  (Aa  ⊃  Ca)    (Ab  ⊃  Cb)
	
	
T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	
T	
T	 T	 F	
T	 T	  T	 F	 T	 F	  F 
(10)  1.  (∃x)(Ax  Bx)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(∼Ax  ∼Bx)	
/ (x)(Ax ≡ Bx)
	
		
For a universe consisting of one member, we have
	
		
 Aa    Ba  /  ∼  Aa     ∼  Ba  //  Aa   ≡  Ba
	
	
T	 T	
F	 T	 T	
F
	
	For a universe consisting of two members, we have
	 	 (Aa    Ba)  ⋁  (Ab    Bb)  /  (∼  Aa    ∼  Ba)  ⋁  (∼  Ab    ∼  Bb)  //  (Aa  ≡   Ba)    (Ab   ≡  Bb)
	
	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 F	 F	
F	 T	 F	 F	 T	 T	 F	 T	 F	 T	 F	
T	 T	 T	
F	 T	 F	 F
	
	For a universe consisting of three members, we have
	
	(Aa    Ba)  ⋁  [(Ab    Bb)  ⋁  (Ac    Bc)]  /  (∼  Aa    ∼  Ba)  ⋁  [(∼  Ab    ∼  Bb)  ⋁  (∼  Ac    ∼  Bc)]
	
	 T	 T	 T	
T	
  T	 F	 F	
T	
F	 F	 F 	
F	 T	 F	 F	  T	
T	
F	 T	 F	 T	 F	
T	 T	 F	 T	 T	 F
	
	
	
//  (Aa  ≡  Ba)    [(Ab   ≡   Bb)      (Ac   ≡   Bc)]
	
	
	 	
T	 T	 T	 F	
T	 F	 F	 F	 F	 T	 F
III.
(1)	 1.	 (x)[(Vx  Px) ⊃ (Ax  Mx)]
	
	2.	 (∃x)(Vx  Ox)	
/ (∃x)(Mx  Ax)
	
For a universe consisting of one member, we have
	
(Va    Pa)  ⊃  (Aa    Ma)  /  Va    Oa  //  Ma    Aa
	
   T   F   F	
T	
F    F     T	
T    T    T	
T       F    F
(4)		1.  (x)(Tx ⊃ Hx)
	
	2.  (∃x) (Tx  Hx) ⊃ (∃x)(Px  Ox)    / (x)(Tx ⊃ Ox)
	
	For a universe consisting of two members, we have
	
	(Ta  ⊃  Ha)    (Tb  ⊃  Hb)  /  [(Ta    Ha)  ⋁  (Tb    Hb)]  ⊃  [(Pa    Oa)  ⋁  (Pb    Ob)]
	
	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	
T	 T	 T	 T	
T	
F	 F	 F	 T	
T	 T	 T
	
	//  (Ta  ⊃  Oa)    (Tb  ⊃  Ob)
	
	
T	 F	
F	 F	 T	 T	 T
Exercise 8.6
I.
  1.	Rcp
  4.	(∃x)Fxj ⊃ Fmj
  7.	(x)[Px ⊃ (∃y)Sxy]
10.	(∃x)[Px  (y)Sxy]
13.	(∃x)[(Cx  Lx)  Dpx]
16.	(∃x)(Fxc  Icx)
19.	(x){Px ⊃ (∃y)[Py  (Mxy ⊃ Axy)]}
22.	(∃x){Px  (y)[(Ty  Sxy) ⊃ Axy]}
25.	(x){Lx ⊃ (y)[(Wy  Cy) ⊃ Rxy]}
28.	(x){(Cx  Fx) ⊃ (y)[(By  Ly) ⊃ Rxy]}
II.
(1)	1.  (x)[Ax ⊃ (y)Bxy]
	
2.	 Am	
/ (y)Bmy
	
3.	 Am ⊃ (y)Bmy	
1, UI
	
4.	 (y)Bmy	
2, 3, MP
(4)	1.	
(x)(∃y)(Ax ⊃ By)	
/ (x)Ax ⊃ (∃y)By
	
	
	
2.	 (x)Ax	
ACP
	
	
	
3.	 Ax	
2, UI
	
	
	
4.	 (∃y)(Ax ⊃ By)	
1, UI
	
	
	
5.	 Ax ⊃ Bm	
4, EI
	
	
	
6.	 Bm	
3, 5, MP
	
	
	
7.	 (∃y)By	
6, EG
	
	 8.	 (x)Ax ⊃ (∃y)By	
2–7, CP
(7)		 1.	 (∃x)[Ax  (y)(Ay ⊃ Bxy)]	
/ (∃x)Bxx
	
	 2.	 Am  (y)(Ay ⊃ Bmy)	
1, EI
	
	 3.	 Am	
2, Simp
	
	 4.	 (y)(Ay ⊃ Bmy)  Am	
2, Com
	
	 5.	 (y)(Ay ⊃ Bmy)	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 Am ⊃ Bmm	
5, UI
	
	 7.	 Bmm	
3, 6, MP
	
	 8.	 (∃x)Bxx	
7, EG
8

Answers to Selected Exercises   697
(10)  1.	 (x)(∃y)Axy ⊃ (x)(∃y)Bxy
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(y)∼Bxy	
/ (∃x)(y)∼Axy
	
	 3.	 (∃x)∼(∃y)Bxy	
2, QN
	
	 4.	 ∼(x)(∃y)Bxy	
3, QN
	
	 5.	 ∼(x)(∃y)Axy	
1, 4, MT
	
	 6.	 (∃x)∼(∃y)Axy	
5, QN
	
	 7.	 (∃x)(y)∼Axy	
6, QN
(13)  1.	 (∃x){Ax  (y)[(By ⋁ Cy) ⊃ Dxy]}
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Ax ⊃ (∃y)By	
/ (∃x)(∃y)Dxy
	
	 3.	 Am  (y)[(By ⋁ Cy) ⊃ Dmy]	 1, EI
	
	 4.	 Am	
3, Simp
	
	 5.	 (∃x)Ax	
4, EG
	
	 6.	 (∃y)By	
2, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 Bn	
6, EI
	
	 8.	 (y)[(By ⋁ Cy) ⊃ Dmy]  Am	 3, Com
	
	 9.	 (y)[(By ⋁ Cy) ⊃ Dmy]	
8, Simp
	
	10.	 (Bn ⋁ Cn) ⊃ Dmn	
9, UI
	
	11.	 Bn ⋁ Cn	
7, Add
	
	12.	 Dmn	
10, 11, MP
	
	13.	 (∃y)Dmy	
12, EG
	
	14.	 (∃x)(∃y)Dxy	
13, EG
(16) 1.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
	
2.	 (∃x)Bx ⊃ ∼(∃x)(∃y)Cxy	
/ (∃x)Ax ⊃ ∼Cmn
	
	
	
3.	 (∃x)Ax	
ACP
	
	
	
4.	 Ae	
3, EI
	
	
	
5.	 Ae ⊃ Be	
1, UI
	
	
	
6.	 Be	
4, 5, MP
	
	
	
7.	 (∃x)Bx	
6, EG
	
	
	
8.	 ∼(∃x)(∃y)Cxy	
2, 7, MP
	
	
	
9.	 (x)∼(∃y)Cxy	
8, QN
	
	
	
10.	 (x)(y)∼Cxy	
9, QN
	
	
	
11.	 (y)∼Cmy	
10, UI
	
	
	
12.	 ∼Cmn	
11, UI
	
13.		 (∃x)Ax ⊃ ∼Cmn	
3–12, CP
(19) 1.	 (∃x)(y)Ayx ⋁ (x)(y)Bxy
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(y)(Cy ⊃ ∼Byx)	
/ (x)(∃y) 
	 	 	
(Cx ⊃ Axy)
	
	
	
3.	 Cx	
ACP
	
	
	
4.	 (y)(Cy ⊃ ∼Bym)	
2, EI
	
	
	
5.	 Cx ⊃ ∼Bxm	
4, UI
	
	
	
6.	 ∼Bxm	
3, 5, MP
	
	
	
7.	 (∃y)∼Bxy	
6, EG
	
	
	
8.	 (∃x)(∃y)∼Bxy	
7, EG
	
	
	
9.	 (∃x)∼(y)Bxy	
8, QN
	
	
	
10.	 ∼(x)(y)Bxy	
9, QN
	
	
	
11.	 (x)(y)Bxy ⋁ (∃x)(y)Ayx		1, Com
	
	 		 	 12.	 (∃x)(y)Ayx	
10, 11, DS
	
	 		 	 13.	 (y)Ayn	
12, EI
	
	 		 	 14.	 Axn	
13, UI
	
15.		 Cx ⊃ Axn	
3–14, CP
	
16.		 (∃y)(Cx ⊃ Axy)	
15, EG
	
17.		 (x)(∃y)(Cx ⊃ Axy)	
16, UG
III.
  (1)	1.	 (x)[Px ⊃ (y)(Ay ⊃ Oxy)]
	
	 2.	 Pj  ∼Ojm	
/ ∼Am
	
	 3.	 Pj ⊃ (y)(Ay ⊃ Ojy)	
1, UI
	
	 4.	 Pj	
2, Simp
	
	 5.	 (y)(Ay ⊃ Ojy)	
3, 4, MP
	
	 6.	 Am ⊃ Ojm	
5, UI
	
	 7.	 ∼Ojm  Pj	
2, Com
	
	 8.	 ∼Ojm	
7, Simp
	
	 9.	 ∼Am	
6, 8, MT
  (4)	1.	 Po
	
	 2.	 (x)[(Px  Cx) ⊃ Sox]
	
	 3.	 (x)(Px ⊃ ∼Sxx)	
/ ∼Co
	
	
4.	
Co	
AIP
	
	
5.	
(Po  Co) ⊃ Soo	
2, UI
	
	
6.	
Po  Co	
1, 4, Conj
	
	
7.	
Soo	
5, 6, MP
	
	
8.	
Po ⊃ ∼Soo	
3, UI
	
	
9.	
∼Soo	
1, 8, MP
	
	
10.	
Soo  ∼Soo	
7, 9, Conj
	
11.		 ∼Co	
4–10, IP
(7)   1.	 (∃x){Px  (y)[(Py  Kxy) ⊃ Fxy]}
	
	 2.	 (x)[Px ⊃ (∃y)(Py  Kxy)]	
/ (∃x)(∃y) 
	 	

[(Px  Py)  Fxy]
	
	 3.	 Pm  (y)[(Py  Kmy) ⊃ Fmy]	
1, EI
	
	 4.	 Pm ⊃ (∃y)(Py  Kmy)	
2, UI
	
	 5.	 Pm	
3, Simp
	
	 6.	 (∃y)(Py  Kmy)	
4, 5, MP
	
	 7.	 Pn  Kmn	
6, EI
	
	 8.	 (y)[(Py  Kmy) ⊃ Fmy]  Pm	
3, Com
	
	 9.	 (y)[(Py  Kmy) ⊃ Fmy]	
8, Simp
	
10.	 (Pn  Kmn) ⊃ Fmn	
9, UI
	
11.	 Fmn	
7, 10, MP
	
12.	 Pn	
7, Simp
	
13.	 Pm  Pn	
5, 12, Conj
	
14.	 (Pm  Pn)  Fmn	
11, 13, Conj
	
15.	 (∃y)[(Pm  Py)  Fmy]	
14, EG
	
16.	 (∃x)(∃y)[(Px  Py)  Fxy]	
15, EG
(10)	1.	 (x){Ix ⊃ [(∃y)(Cy  Ay) ⊃ Ex]}
	
	 2.	 [(∃x)Tx ⋁ (∃x)Wx] ⊃ [(∃x)Ix  (∃x)Cx]
	
	 3.	 (x)(Cx ⊃ Ax)	
/ (∃x)Tx ⊃ (∃x)(Ix  Ex)
	
	
	
4.	 (∃x)Tx	
ACP
	
	
	
5.	 (∃x)Tx ⋁ (∃x)Wx	
4, Add
	
	
	
6.	 (∃x)Ix  (∃x)Cx	
2, 5, MP
	
	
	
7.	 (∃x)Ix	
6, Simp
	
	
	
8.	 Im	
7, EI
	
	
	
9.	 Im ⊃ [(∃y)(Cy  Ay) ⊃ Em]	1, UI
	
	
	
10.	 (∃y)(Cy  Ay) ⊃ Em	
8, 9, MP
	
	
	
11.	 (∃x)Cx  (∃x)Ix	
6, Com
	
	
	
12.	 (∃x)Cx	
11, Simp
	
	
	
13.	 Cn	
12, EI
	
	
	
14.	 Cn ⊃ An	
3, UI
	
	
	
15.	 An	
13, 14, MP
	
	
	
16.	 Cn  An	
13, 15, Conj
	
	
	
17.	 (∃y)(Cy  Ay)	
16, EG
	
	
	
18.	 Em	
10, 17, MP
	
	
	
19.	 Im  Em	
8, 18, Conj
	
	
	
20.	 (∃x)(Ix  Ex)	
19, EG
	
21.		 (∃x)Tx ⊃ (∃x)(Ix  Ex)	
4–20, CP
8

698   Answers to Selected Exercises
Exercise 8.7
I.
  1.	  s = g
  4.	  h ≠ g
  5.	  Wp  (x)(Wx ⊃ x = p)
  8.	  Nc  Mc  (x)[(Nx  Mx) ⊃ x = c]
11.	  Sh  Ph  (x)[(Sx  Px) ⊃ x = h]
12.	  Eh  (x)[(Ex  x ≠ h) ⊃ Lhx]
15.	  Rd  Nd  (x)[(Rx  Nx  x ≠ d) ⊃ Ldx]
16.	  Ci  ∼Si  (x)[(Cx  x ≠ i) ⊃ Sx]
19.	  Pc  ∼Wc  (x)[(Px  x ≠ c) ⊃ Wx]
20.	  (x)(y)[(Cx  Bx  Cy  By) ⊃ x = y]
23.	  (x)(y)(z)[(Cx  Mx  Cy  My  Cz  Mz) ⊃ 
	
  (x = y ⋁ x = z ⋁ y = z)]
26.	  (∃x)(∃y)(∃z)(Cx  Cy  Cz  x ≠ y  x ≠ z  y ≠ z)
29.	  (∃x)(∃y){Sx  Bx  Gx  Sy  By  Gy  x ≠ y 
	
  (z)[(Sz  Bz  Gz) ⊃ (z = x ⋁ z = y)]}
30.	  (∃x)[Wxv  (y)(Wyv ⊃ y = x)  Bx]
33.	  (∃x){Ax  Pxa  (y)[(Ay  Pya) ⊃ y = x]  x = b}
35.	  Sr  (x)[(Sx  x ≠ r) ⊃ Srx]
38.	  Ar  Er  (x)[(Ax  Ex) ⊃ x = r]
41.	  (x)(y)[(Sxh  Syh) ⊃ x = y]
44.	  m ≠ b
47.	  (∃x)(∃y){Tx  Cx  Ty  Cy  x ≠ y  (z)[(Tz  Cz) ⊃ 
	
  (z = x ⋁ z = y)]}
50.	  (∃x)(∃y)(∃z)(Sx  Ox  Sy  Oy  Sz  Oz  x ≠ y  
	
  x ≠ z  y ≠ z)
II.
  (1)	 1.	 (x)(x = a)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)Rx	
/ Ra
	
	 3.	 Ri	
2, EI
	
	 4.	 i = a	
1, UI
	
	 5.	 Ra	
3, 4, Id
  (4)	 1.	 (∃x)(x = g)
	
	 2.	 (x)(x = i)	
/ g = i
	
	 3.	 n = g	
1, EI
	
	 4.	 n = i	
2, UI
	
	 5.	 g = n	
3, Id
	
	 6.	 g = i	
4, 5, Id
  (7)	 1.	 (x)(x = a)
	
	 2.	 Fa	
/ Fm  Fn
	
	 3.	 m = a	
1, UI
	
	 4.	 a = m	
3, Id
	
	 5.	 Fm	
2, 4, Id
	
	 6.	 n = a	
1, UI
	
	 7.	 a = n	
6, Id
	
	 8.	 Fn	
2, 7, Id
	
	 9.	 Fm  Fn	
5, 8, Conj
(10)	 1.	 (x)(Px ⊃ x = a)
	
	 2.	 (x)(x = c ⊃ Qx)
	
	 3.	 a = c	
/ (x)(Px ⊃ Qx)
	
	
	
4.	 Px	
ACP
	
	
	
5.	 Px ⊃ x = a	
1, UI
	
	
	
6.	 x = a	
4, 5, MP
	
	
	
7.	 x = c	
3, 6, Id
	
	
	
8.	 x = c ⊃ Qx	
2, UI
	
	
	
9.	 Qx	
7, 8, MP
	
	10.	 Px ⊃ Qx	
4–9, CP
	
	11.	 (x)(Px ⊃ Qx)	
10, UG
(13)	 1.	 (x)(Ba ⊃ x ≠ a)
	
	 2.	 Bc	
/ a ≠ c
	
		
3.	 a = c	
AIP
	
		
4.	 c = a	
3, Id
	
		
5.	 Ba	
2, 4, Id
	
		
6.	 Ba ⊃ c ≠ a	
1, UI
	
		
7.	 c ≠ a	
5, 6, MP
	
		
8.	 c = a  c ≠ a	
4, 7, Conj
	
	 9.	 a ≠ c	
3–8, IP
(16)	 1.	 (x)[Nx ⊃ (Px  x = m)]
	
	 2.	 ∼Pm	
/ ∼Ne
	
		
3.	 Ne	
AIP
	
		
4.	 Ne ⊃ (Pe  e = m)	
1, UI
	
		
5.	 Pe  e = m	
3, 4, MP
	
		
6.	 Pe	
5, Simp
	
		
7.	 e = m  Pe	
5, Com
	
		
8.	 e = m	
7, Simp
	
		
9.	 Pm	
6, 8, Id
	
		
10.	 Pm  ∼Pm	
2, 9, Conj
	
	11.	 ∼Ne	
3–10, IP
(19)	 1.	 (x)(∃y)(Cxy ⊃ x = y)
	
	 2.	 (∃x)(y)(Cxy  x = a)	
/ Caa
	
	 3.	 (y)(Cny  n = a)	
2, EI
	
	 4.	 (∃y)(Cay ⊃ a = y)	
1, UI
	
	 5.	 Cam ⊃ a = m	
4, EI
	
	 6.	 Cnm  n = a	
3, UI
	
	 7.	 Cnm	
6, Simp
	
	 8.	 n = a  Cnm	
6, Com
	
	 9.	 n = a	
8, Simp
	
	10.	 Cam	
7, 9, Id
	
	11.	 a = m	
5, 10, MP
	
	12.	 m = a	
11, Id
	
	13.	 Caa	
10, 12, Id
III.
(1)	1.	 (∃x)(Nx  Wjx  Ix)
	
	2.	 Nc  Wjc  (x)[(Nx  Wjx) ⊃  
	 	 x = c]	
/ Ic
	
	3.	 Na  Wja  Ia	
1, EI
	
	4.	 (x)[(Nx  Wjx) ⊃ x = c]   
	 	 Nc  Wjc	
2, Com
	
	5.	 (x)[(Nx  Wjx) ⊃ x = c]	
4, Simp
	
6.	 (Na  Wja) ⊃ a = c	
5, UI
	
7.	 Na  Wja	
3, Simp
	
8.	 a = c	
6, 7, MP
	
9.	 Ia  Na  Wja	
3, Com
	  10.	 Ia	
9, Simp
	  11.	 Ic	
8, 10, Id
8

Answers to Selected Exercises   699
  (4)  1.  (∃x){Nx  Tx   
	
(y)[(Ny  Ty) ⊃ y = x]  Wmx}
	
	 2.	 Ng  Wmg 	
/ (∃x){Nx  Tx  
	
	 (x) [(Nx  Wmx) ⊃ x = g]	
(y)[(Ny  Ty) ⊃ y = x]  
	
	 	
x = g}
	
	 3.	 Na  Ta  
	 	
(y)[(Ny  Ty) ⊃ y = a]   
	 	
Wma	
1, EI
	
	 4.	 (x)[(Nx  Wmx) ⊃ x = g]  
	 	
Ng  Wmg	
2, Com
	
	 5.	 (x)[(Nx  Wmx) ⊃ x = g]	
4, Simp
	
	 6.	 (Na  Wma) ⊃ a = g	
5, UI
	
	 7.	 Na	
3, Simp
	
	 8.	 Wma  Na  Ta   
	 	
(y)[(Ny  Ty) ⊃ y = a]	
3, Com
	
	 9.	 Wma	
8, Simp
	
 10.	 Na  Wma	
7, 9, Conj
	
 11.	 a = g	
6, 10, MP
	
 12.	 Na  Ta   
	 	
(y)[(Ny  Ty) ⊃ y = a]	
3, Simp
	
 13.	 Na  Ta  (y)[(Ny   
	 	
Ty) ⊃ y = a]  a = g	
11, 12, Conj
	
 14.	 (∃x){Nx  Tx  (y)[(Ny  Ty) ⊃ 
	 	
y = x]  x = g}	
13, EG
  (7)  1.	 Me  ∼Se   
	
(x)[(Mx  x ≠ e) ⊃ Sx]
	
   2.	 Mn  ∼Gn  (x)[(Mx  x ≠ n) ⊃ Gx]
	
   3.	 e ≠ n	
/ Ge  Sn
	
   4.	 (x)[(Mx  x ≠ e) ⊃ Sx]   
	
Me  ∼Se	
1, Com
	
   5.	 (x)[(Mx  x ≠ e) ⊃ Sx]	
4, Simp
	
   6.	 (Mn  n ≠ e) ⊃ Sn	
5, UI
	
   7.	 Mn	
2, Simp
	
   8.	 n ≠ e	
3, Id
	
   9.	 Mn  n ≠ e	
7, 8, Conj
	
 10.	 Sn	
6, 9, MP
	
 11.	 (x)[(Mx  x ≠ n) ⊃ Gx]   
	
Mn  ∼Gn	
2, Com
	
 12.	 (x)[(Mx  x ≠ n) ⊃ Gx]	
11, Simp
	
 13.	 (Me  e ≠ n) ⊃ Ge	
12, UI
	
 14.	 Me	
1, Simp
	
 15.	 Me  e ≠ n	
3, 14, Conj
	
 16.	 Ge	
13, 15, MP
	
 17.	 Ge  Sn	
10, 16, Conj
(10)  1.	 Bw  (x)[(Bx  x ≠ w) ⊃ Twx]
	
	  2.	 (∃x){Bx  (y)[(By  y ≠ x) ⊃ Txy]  Cx}
	
	  3.	 (x)(y)(Txy ⊃ ∼Tyx)	
/ Cw
	
	  4.	 Ba  (y)[(By  y ≠ a) ⊃  
	
	 Tay]  Ca	
2, EI
	
	  5.	 (x)[(Bx  x ≠ w) ⊃ Twx]  Bw	
1, Com
	
	  6.	 (x)[(Bx  x ≠ w) ⊃ Twx]	
5, Simp
	
	  7.	 (Ba  a ≠ w) ⊃ Twa	
6, UI
	
	 	
8.	 a ≠ w	
AIP
	
	
9.	 Ba	
4, Simp
	
	
	
10.	 Ba  a ≠ w	
8, 9, Conj
	
	
	
11.	 Twa	
7, 10, MP
	
	
	
12.	 (y)[(By  y ≠ a) ⊃  
	
	
	 Tay]  Ca  Ba	
4, Com
	
	
	
13.	 (y)[(By  y ≠ a) ⊃ Tay]	
12, Simp
	
	
	
14.	 (Bw  w ≠ a) ⊃ Taw	
13, UI
	
	
	
15.	 Bw	
1, Simp
	
	
	
16.	 w ≠ a	
8, Id
	
	
	
17.	 Bw  w ≠ a	
15, 16, Conj
	
	
	
18.	 Taw	
14, 17, MP
	
	
	
19.	 (y)(Tay ⊃ ∼Tya)	
3, UI
	
	
	
20.	 Taw ⊃ ∼Twa	
19, UI
	
	
	
21.	 ∼Twa	
18, 20, MP
	
	
	
22.	 Twa  ∼Twa	
11, 21, Conj
	
23.		 ∼(a ≠ w)	
8–22, IP
	
24.		 a = w	
23, DN
	
25.		 Ca  Ba  (y)[(By  y ≠ a) ⊃ Tay]	 4, Com
	
26.		 Ca	
25, Simp
	
27.		 Cw	
24, 26, Id
(13)  1.	 (∃x)(∃y)(Ax  Ox  Ay  Oy  x ≠ y)
	
	 2.	 (x)(Ax ⊃ Px)
	
	 3.	 (x)(y)(z)[(Px  Ox  Py  Oy  Pz   
	
	 Oz) ⊃ (x = y ⋁ x = z ⋁ y = z)]
	

/ (∃x)(∃y){Px  Ox  Py  Oy  x ≠ y  
	

(z)[(Pz  Oz) ⊃ (z = x ⋁ z = y)]}
	
	 4.	 (∃y)(Aa  Oa  Ay  Oy  a ≠ y)	
1, EI
	
	 5.	 Aa  Oa  Ab  Ob  a ≠ b	
	
4, EI
	
	 6.	 Aa ⊃ Pa	
	
	
2, UI
	
	 7.	 Aa	
	
	
5, Simp
	
	 8.	 Pa	
	
	
6, 7, MP
	
	 9.	 Ab ⊃ Pb	
	
	
2, UI
	
	10.	 Ab  Ob  a ≠ b  Aa  Oa	
	
5, Com
	
	11.	 Ab	
	
	
10, Simp
	
	12.	 Pb	
	
	
9, 11, MP
	
	13.	 Oa  Ab  Ob  a ≠ b  Aa	
	
10, Com
	
	14.	 Oa	
	
	
13, Simp
	
	15.	 Ob  a ≠ b  Aa  Oa  Ab	
	
5, Com
	
	16.	 Ob	
	
	
15, Simp
	
	17.	 a ≠ b  Aa  Oa  Ab  Ob	
5, Com
	
	18.	 a ≠ b	
17, Simp
	
	19.	 Pa  Oa  Pb  Ob  a ≠ b	
8, 14, 12, 16, 
	
	 	
18, Conj
	
	
	
20.	 ∼(z)[(Pz  Oz) ⊃  
	
	
	 (z = a ⋁ z = b)]	
AIP
	
	
	
21.	 (∃z)∼[(Pz  Oz) ⊃  
	
	
	 (z = a ⋁ z = b)]	
20, QN
	
	
	
22.	 ∼[(Pc  Oc) ⊃ (c = a ⋁ c = b)]	 21, EI
	
	
	
23.	 ∼[∼(Pc  Oc) ⋁ (c = a ⋁ c = b)]	22, Impl
	
	
	
24.	 ∼∼(Pc  Oc)  ∼(c = a ⋁ c = b)	 23, DM
	
	
	
25.	 Pc  Oc  ∼(c = a ⋁ c = b)	
24, DN
	
	
	
26.	 (y)(z)[(Pa  Oa  Py  Oy  Pz  Oz) ⊃ 
	
	
	 (a = y ⋁ a = z ⋁ y = z)]	
3, UI
	
	
	
27.	 (z)[(Pa  Oa  Pb  Ob  Pz  Oz) ⊃ 
	
	
	 (a = b ⋁ a = z ⋁ b = z)]	
26, UI
	
	
	
28.	 (Pa  Oa  Pb  Ob  Pc  Oc) ⊃  
	
	
	 (a = b ⋁ a = c ⋁ b = c)	
27, UI
	
	
	
29.	 Pc  Oc	
25, Simp
	
	
	
30.	 Pa  Oa  Pb  Ob	
19, Simp
8

700   Answers to Selected Exercises
	
	
	
31.	 Pa  Oa  Pb  Ob  Pc  Oc	
29, 30, Conj
	
	
	
32.	 a = b ⋁ a = c ⋁ b = c	
28, 31, MP
	
	
	
33.	 a = c ⋁ b = c	
18, 32, DS
	
	
	 	 34.	 ∼(c = a ⋁ c = b)  Pc  Oc	
25, Com
	
	
	 	 35.	 ∼(c = a ⋁ c = b)	
34, Simp
	
	
	 	 36.	 ∼(a = c ⋁ c = b)	
35, Id
	
	
	 	 37.	 ∼(a = c ⋁ b = c)	
36, Id
	
	
	 	 38.	 (a = c ⋁ b = c)  ∼(a = c ⋁ b = c)	33, 37, Conj
	
39.		 ∼∼(z)[(Pz  Oz) ⊃ z = a ⋁ z = b)]	20–38, IP
	
40.		 (z)[(Pz  Oz) ⊃ (z = a ⋁ z = b)]	
39, DN
	
41.		 Pa  Oa  Pb  Ob  a ≠ b  
	
	 	(z)[(Pz  Oz) ⊃ (z = a ⋁ z = b)]	
19, 40, Conj
	
42.		 (∃y){Pa  Oa  Py  Oy  a ≠ y   
	
	 	(z)[(Pz  Oz) ⊃ (z = a ⋁ z = y)]}	
41, EG
	
43.		 (∃x)(∃y){Px  Ox  Py  Oy  x ≠ y   
	
	 	(z)[(Pz  Oz) ⊃ (z = x ⋁ z = y)]}	
42, EG
(16)	 1.	 Sc  ∼Pc  Sn  ∼Pn   
	
	 (x)[(Sx  x ≠ c  x ≠ n) ⊃ Px]
	
	 2.	 Sn  Dn  (x)[(Sx  Dx) ⊃ x = n]
	
	 3.	 (x){Sx ⊃ [Rx ≡ (∼Dx  ∼Px)]}
	
	 4.	 c ≠ n	
/ (∃x){Sx  Rx  (y)[(Sy  Ry) ⊃ y = x]}
	
	 5.	 Sc	
1, Simp
	
	 6.	 Sc ⊃ [Rc ≡ (∼Dc  ∼Pc)]	
3, UI
	
	 7.	 Rc ≡ (∼Dc  ∼Pc)	
5, 6, MP
	
	 8.	 [Rc ⊃ (∼Dc  ∼Pc)]   
	
	 [(∼Dc  ∼Pc) ⊃ Rc]	
7, Equiv
	
	 9.	 [(∼Dc  ∼Pc) ⊃ Rc]  
	
	 	[Rc ⊃ (∼Dc  ∼Pc)]	
8, Com
	
	10.	 (∼Dc  ∼Pc) ⊃ Rc	
9, Simp
	
	11.	 (x)[(Sx  Dx) ⊃ x = n]  Sn  Dn	
2, Com
	
	12.	 (x)[(Sx  Dx) ⊃ x = n]	
11, Simp
	
	13.	 (Sc  Dc) ⊃ c = n	
12, UI
	
	14.	 ∼(Sc  Dc)	
4, 13, MT
	
	15.	 ∼Sc ⋁ ∼Dc	
14, DM
	
	16.	 ∼∼Sc		
5, DN
	
	17.	 ∼Dc	 	
15, 16, DS
	
	18.	 ∼Pc  Sn  ∼Pn  
	
	 (x)[(Sx  x ≠ c  x ≠ n) ⊃ Px]  Sc	 1, Com
	
	19.	 ∼Pc		 	
18, Simp
	
	20.	 ∼Dc  ∼Pc	
17, 19, Conj
	
	21.	 Rc	 	 	
10, 20, MP
	
	22.	 Sc  Rc	
5, 21, Conj
	
	
	
23.	 ∼(y)[(Sy  Ry) ⊃ y = c]	
AIP
	
	
	
24.	 (∃y)∼[(Sy  Ry) ⊃ y = c]	
23, QN
	
	
	
25.	 ∼[(Sa  Ra) ⊃ a = c]	
24, EI
	
	
	
26.	 ∼[∼(Sa  Ra) ⋁ a = c]	
25, Impl
	
	
	
27.	 ∼∼(Sa  Ra)  a ≠ c	
26, DM
	
	
	
28.	 Sa  Ra  a ≠ c	
27, DN
	
	
	
29.	 Sa ⊃ [Ra ≡ (∼Da  ∼Pa)]	 3, UI
	
	
	
30.	 Sa	
28, Simp
	
	
	
31.	 Ra ≡ (∼Da  ∼Pa)	
29, 30, MP
	
	
	
32.	 [Ra ⊃ (∼Da  ∼Pa)]   
	
	
	
[(∼Da  ∼Pa) ⊃ Ra]	
31, Equiv
	
	
	
33.	 Ra ⊃ (∼Da  ∼Pa)	
32, Simp
	
	
	
34.	 Ra  a ≠ c  Sa	
28, Com
	
	
	
35.	 Ra	
34, Simp
	
	
	
36.	 ∼Da  ∼Pa	
33, 35, MP
	
	
	
37.	 (x)[(Sx  x ≠ c  x ≠ n) ⊃ Px]   
	
	
	
Sc  ∼Pc  Sn  ∼Pn	
1, Com
	
	
	
38.	 (x)[(Sx  x ≠ c  x ≠ n) ⊃ Px]	 37, Simp
	
	
	
39.	 (Sa  a ≠ c  a ≠ n) ⊃ Pa	
38, UI
	
	
	
40.	 (Sa  a ≠ c) ⊃ (a ≠ n ⊃ Pa)	 39, Exp
	
	
	
41.	 a ≠ c  Sa  Ra	
28, Com
	
	
	
42.	 a ≠ c	
41, Simp
	
	
	
43.	 Sa  a ≠ c	
30, 42, Conj
	
	
	
44.	 a ≠ n ⊃ Pa	
40, 43, MP
	
	
	
45.	 ∼Pa  ∼Da	
36, Com
	
	
	
46.	 ∼Pa	
45, Simp
	
	
	
47.	 ∼(a ≠ n)	
44, 46, MT
	
	
	
48.	 a = n	
47, DN
	
	
	
49.	 n = a	
48, Id
	
	
	
50.	 Dn  (x)[(Sx  Dx) ⊃ x = n]  
	
	
	
Sn	
2, Com
	
	
	
51.	 Dn	
50, Simp
	
	
	
52.	 Da	
49, 51, Id
	
	
	
53.	 ∼Da	
36, Simp
	
	
	
54.	 Da  ∼Da	
52, 53, Conj
	
55.		 ∼∼(y)[(Sy  Ry) ⊃ y = c]	
23–54, IP
	
56.		 (y)[(Sy  Ry) ⊃ y = c]	
55, DN
	
57.		 Sc  Rc  (y)[(Sy  Ry) ⊃ y = c]	
22, 56, Conj
	
58.		 (∃x){Sx  Rx  
	
	 (y)[(Sy  Ry) ⊃ y = x]}	
57, EG
Exercise 9
II.
  1.	a.  Has no effect.	
f.	 Strengthens.
	
b.  Strengthens.	
g.	 Weakens.
	
c.  Weakens.	
h.	 Strengthens.
	
d.  Weakens.	
i.	 Strengthens.
	
e.  Strengthens.	
j.	 Weakens.
  4.	a.  Has no effect.	
f.	 Has no effect.
	
b.  Weakens.	
g.	 Strengthens.
	
c.  Strengthens.	
h.	 Weakens.
	
d.  Weakens.	
i.	 Weakens.
	
e.  Strengthens.	
j.	 Strengthens.
  7.	a.  Weakens.	
f.	 Weakens.
	
b.  Strengthens.	
g.	 Weakens.
	
c.  Has no effect.	
h.	 Strengthens.
	
d.  Strengthens.	
i.	 Strengthens.
	
e.  Strengthens.	
j.	 Weakens.
10.	Hint: For Maxie’s argument, concentrate on the simi-
larities between a home and a car (a car is an extended 
living space with heating, air conditioning, stereo, 
telephone, and so on), the dissimilarities between a 
plane and a car (greater difficulty in controlling, ease 
of crossing international borders, greater danger in op-
erating, and so on). Also, people outside U.S. borders 
are not accorded the same constitutional protections as 
people inside, and a phone message normally suggests 
greater privacy than a radio message. In addition, the 
9

Answers to Selected Exercises   701
teenagers parked in the lot were acting in plain view, 
and a telescope only enhances ordinary sense percep-
tion (so there was no search). Maxie, on the other hand, 
was talking while speeding down the freeway and was 
thus not acting in plain view (in the same sense), and 
a radio receiver (used by the agents) does not enhance 
­ordinary sense perception.
	
  For the agents’ argument, concentrate on the simi-
larities between a car and a plane (both are means of 
transportation, both can cross state lines, both are rela-
tively hard to keep track of, and so on) and the dissim-
ilarities between a car or plane and a house (houses do 
not move, so it will stay in place while a search war-
rant is obtained). Also, cell phones use radio transmit-
ters just like planes, both the cell phone message and 
the radio message from the plane were received inside 
U.S. borders, and the cell phone message was received 
inadvertently, just as the radio message from the plane 
and the image through the telescope were (thus mak-
ing it impossible to plan ahead for a search warrant). 
Also, in a sense, Maxie was acting in plain view: A lip 
reader traveling in an adjacent car might interpret his 
message. Lastly, controlling illicit drugs is a high prior-
ity for the government.
13.	Hint: Couch your arguments in terms of foresee- 
ability.
	
  For Liz’s argument note that there were several 
events that intervened between the car accident and 
the amputation: Mary’s being taken to the hospital, 
Mary’s being treated by doctors for bumps and bruises, 
Mary’s apparent mix-up with some other patient 
scheduled for leg amputation, the doctors’ failure to 
check Mary’s proper identity before operating, etc. 
Liz did not directly control any of these events, and 
therefore she could not have foreseen them. Liz could 
not have foreseen what hospital Mary would be taken 
to, the fact that Mary would be mixed up with another 
patient, etc. Because Liz should not be held liable for 
an event utterly unforeseen to her, she should not be 
liable for Mary’s amputated leg. The facts are similar 
to those in Gomez v. Hunt, where Gomez could not 
foresee the exact route that Hunt would take when 
walking home, the fact that a worker would drop a 
brick, the fact that the brick would strike Hunt, etc. 
The facts are dissimilar to those in Sacco v. Lane, 
where Lane was in direct control over the flames in 
the barbecue, and it was those very same flames that 
spread to the houses.
	
 
For Mary’s argument note that Liz initiated a 
chain of events that flowed naturally from the car 
accident to the amputation. Once the car accident 
occurred, it was foreseeable that Mary would be 
taken to the hospital; once Mary was in the hospital 
it was foreseeable that mix-ups would occur (after 
all, mix-ups occur in hospitals every day); given 
the nature of these mix-ups, it was foreseeable that 
Mary’s leg would be amputated. Granted, Liz might 
not have been able to foresee each event in the chain, 
but once an event occurred, someone familiar with it 
could have foreseen the next event. Therefore, given 
that each event was foreseeable by someone—at least 
some hypothetical person—Liz should be held liable. 
The events are similar to those in Sacco v. Lane. 
When the flames were leaping from the barbecue, 
it was foreseeable that they would ignite the trees; 
once the trees were aflame, it was foreseeable that 
a house would be ignited, then another house, etc. 
Lane would not have been able to foresee the whole 
chain of events at the time he was tending the 
barbecue, but once one event occurred, the next was 
foreseeable. Also, even though the wind constituted 
an intervening event, Lane was still held liable. 
Finally, the facts are dissimilar to those in Gomez 
v. Hunt. When Hunt was walking home, he was in 
complete control over his own actions. He freely 
chose to walk past the building under construction, 
and he should have been on the lookout for falling 
objects. The fact that he was struck by a falling brick 
was partly the result of his own failure to observe. 
On the contrary, from the time of the accident until 
the amputation, Mary was in the hands of others: 
the person who took her to the hospital, nurses  
in the hospital, etc. In no sense was the amputation 
the result of Mary’s free choices.
Exercise 10
I.
  1.	Sufficient condition. The window can also be broken by throwing a stone or baseball through it.
  4.	Necessary condition. For an image to appear on the sensor the camera must also be loaded and focused and there 
must be sufficient light.
  7.	Sufficient condition. The fire will also be extinguished if it is smothered.
10.	Necessary condition. Electricity must also be supplied from the main lines.
II.
1.	 A = a certain make, B = a certain year, C = a certain model, D = driven 30,000 miles, E = a certain gasoline, F = 
a certain oil, G = a certain driver, H = certain road conditions, I = the additive.
10

702   Answers to Selected Exercises
Possible Conditions
Phenomenon 
(less wear)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
–
–
	
Method of difference, sufficient condition.
4.	 A = type X circuitry, B = shipped to a coastal region, C = sold to a business customer, D = manufactured in the 
Kansas City plant, E = used to play computer games, F = shipped to a large city.
Possible Conditions
Phenomenon 
(returned)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
*
*
–
*
*
–
*
2
–
*
*
*
–
*
*
3
*
*
*
–
*
*
*
4
–
*
–
*
*
*
*
5
*
*
–
*
*
–
*
6
*
*
*
–
–
*
*
7
*
*
*
*
–
*
*
	
Coastal region (salty air) is the cause in the sense of a necessary condition.
	
Method of agreement.
7.	 A = camomile tea, B = late dinner, C = hot bath, D = read book, E = walk, F = wine, G = massage.
	
Possible Conditions
Phenomenon 
(slept well)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Mon
*
*
*
*
*
–
–
*
Tu
–
*
–
*
–
–
–
–
Wed
–
–
–
–
*
*
*
–
Th
–
*
*
*
–
*
*
*
Fri
*
*
–
*
*
–
*
*
Sat
*
–
*
–
*
*
*
*
Sun
*
–
*
*
–
–
–
–
	
None of the possible conditions is a cause of the phenomenon.
	
Joint method of agreement and difference.
10.	A = corporal punishment, B = siblings, C = adopted, D = male parent figure, E = sexual abuse, F = domineering 
mother, G = uprooted often, H = day-care center.
	
Possible Conditions
Phenomenon 
(blurred bound)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Meg
*
*
*
–
*
*
–
–
*
Sue
*
*
–
*
*
–
–
*
*
Dot
*
–
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Jane
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
–
*
Lynn
–
*
*
*
*
–
–
*
*
Flo
*
*
–
*
*
*
*
–
*
10

Answers to Selected Exercises   703
	
Sexual abuse is the cause of the phenomenon in the sense of a necessary condition.
	
Method of agreement.
13.	A = malathion, B = American Beauty, C = five years old, D = a certain location, E = a certain amount of water,  
F = a certain amount of sun, G = a certain kind of soil, H = a certain amount of cultivation, I = a certain amount 
of Bandini rose food.
	
Possible Conditions
Phenomenon 
(no aphids)
Occurrence
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
–
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
–
	
Method of difference, sufficient condition.
III.
  1.	By the method of agreement, D is the cause in the sense of a necessary condition.
  4.	By an unnamed method, D is the cause in the sense of a sufficient condition.
Exercise 11
I.
  1.	1/6
  4.	.853
  7.	1/4 or .25
10.	Approximately $17
II.
  1.	P(6 or 1) = P(6) + P(1) = 1/6 + 1/6 = 2/6 = 1/3
  4.	a.	 P(A1 and A2) = P(A1) × P(A2)
	
	
	
= 4/52 × 4/52
	
	
	
= 1/169 = .0059
	
b.	 P(A1 and A2) = P(A1) × P(A2 given A1)
	
	
	
= 4/52 × 3/51
	
	
	
= 1/221 = .0045
  7.	First compute the probability of getting no sixes:
	
	
P(no sixes) = 5/6 × 5/6 × 5/6
	
	
	
= 125/216
	
	
Then use the negation rule:
	
	
P(at least one six) = 1 − P(no sixes)
	
	
	
= 1 − 125/216
	
	
	
= 91/216 = .4213
10.	a.	 P(R1 and R2) = P(R1) × P(R2 given R1)
	
	
	
= 3/12 × 2/11
	
	
	
= 6/132 = .045
	
b.	 P(Y and G) = P(Y1 and G2) + P(G1 and Y2)
	
	
	
= (5/12 × 4/11) + (4/12 × 5/11)
	
	
	
= 20/132 + 20/132
	
	
	
= 10/33 = .303
	
c.	 P(R or G) = 1 − P(Y1 and Y2)
	
	
	
= 1 − (5/12 × 4/11)
	
	
	
= 1 − 20/132
	
	
	
= 28/33 = .848
	
d.	 P(G1 or G2) = 1 − P(not G)
	
	
	
= 1 − [P(R1 and R2) + P(R1 and Y2) 
+ P(Y1 and R2) + P(Y1 and Y2)]
	
	
	
= 1 − [(3/12 × 2/11) + (3/12 × 
5/11) + (5/12 × 3/11) + (5/12 × 
4/11)]
	
	
	
= 1 − [6/132 + 15/132 + 15/132 
+ 20/132]
	
	
	
= 1 − 56/132
	
	
	
= 19/33 = .57
	
e.	 P(same color) = P(R1 and R2) + P(G1 and G2) 
+ P(Y1 and Y2)
	
	
	
= (3/12 × 2/11) + (4/12 × 3/11) 
+ (5/12 × 4/11)
	
	
	
= 6/132 + 12/132 + 20/132
	
	
	
= 19/66 = .288
13.	a.	 P(M or W) = P(M) + P(W) − P(M and W)
	
	
	
= .74 + .82 − (.74 × .82)
	
	
	
= .95
	
b.	 P(M and W and S) = P(M) × P(W) × P(S)
	
	
	
= .74 × .82 × 8/9
	
	
	
= .54
11

704   Answers to Selected Exercises
16.	P(N given R) =  
P(N) × P(R given N)
[P(N) × P(R given N)] + [P(O) × P(R given O)]
= 
3/5 × 7/15
 =  
21/75
[3/5 × 7/15] + [2/5 × 5/15]
21/75 + 10/75
= 21/75 = 21/31 = .68
31/75
	
	
Answer: new urn.
19.	P(R given N) = 
P(R) × P(N given R)
[P(R) × P(N given R)] + [P(T ) × P(N given T)]
= 
.2 × .7
 = 
.14
 = .14/.30 = .47
(.2 × .7) + (.8 × .2)
.14 + .16
Exercise 12
I.
  1.	Since the water in the lake might not be circulating, 
the algae content of the water at one end might not 
be representative of the whole lake. Thus, the sample 
might be biased.
  4.	According to Table 12.1, the margin of error for a 
random sample of 600 is ± 5 percent. Since the sam-
ple taken indicates a difference of only 2 ­percent, the 
results of the sample are ­inconclusive.
  7.	Since no mention is made of the size of the sample or 
of the expected sampling error, the sample might be  
biased. The manufacturer might have taken 25 sepa-
rate samples consisting of ten dentists per sample and 
reported the results of only the most favorable one.
10.	The problem concerns the meaning of “average.” If 
the average is a mean, most of the toys could be over 
$15, and a few very cheap toys could bring the av-
erage down to $15. If the average is a mode, there 
might be a few toys priced at $15, and all the other 
toys might have varying prices exceeding $15. Only 
if the average is a median can one be assured that 
half the toys are $15 or less.
13.	Since no mention is made of the dispersion, the 
argument is weak. The rock pile might consist of 
several pieces weighing 500 pounds and enough 
weighing only 4 or 5 pounds to bring the average 
down to 50 pounds. If the range were only 
10 pounds or so, the conclusion would follow.
16.	If the scale on the vertical axis does not begin at 
zero, the conclusion does not follow.
19.	 Since there were many more cars on the road in 2005 
than there were in 1980, the comparison is faulty.
II.
  1.	Margin of error = 1.29/√n
	
Solving for n, n = (1.29/margin of error)2
	
For 1%, n = (1.29/.01)2 = 1292 = 16,641
	
For 2%, n = (1.29/.02)2 = 64.52 = 4,160
	
For 3%, n = (1/29/.03)2 = 432 = 1,849
	
For 4%, n = (1.29/.04)2 = 32.252 = 1,040
	
For 5%, n = (1.29/.05)2 = 25.82 = 666
	
For 6%, n = (1.29/.06)2 = 21.52 = 462
	
For 7%, n = (1.29/.07)2 = 18.432 = 340
	
For 10%, n = (1.29/.1)2 = 12.92 = 166
4.	
	
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Age
Frequency
Mean age = 3, variance = 3, standard deviation = 1.73.
III.
  1.	 False.
  4.	 False.
  7.	 True.
10.	 False.
13.	 True.
16.	 False.
19.	 False.
Exercise 13
VI.
  1.	 True.
  4.	 False.
  7.	 True.
10.	 True.
13.	 True.
16.	 False.
19.	 False.
13

Contents
705
Glossary/Index
A proposition:  A categorical propo-
sition having the form “All S are P,” 
204–205
Abelard, Peter, 6, 99
Absorption, 401n
Accident:  An informal fallacy that  
occurs when a general rule is wrongly 
applied to an atypical specific case, 
133–134, 173–174
Ackermann, Wilhelm, 493n
Ad hoc modifications, 636
Ad hominem. See Argument against  
the person
Ad hominem abusive:  A variety of the 
argument-against-the-person fal-
lacy that occurs when an arguer ver-
bally abuses a second arguer for the 
purpose of discrediting that person’s  
argument, 131, 182–183
Ad hominem circumstantial:  A variety 
of the argument-against-the-person 
fallacy that occurs when an arguer 
cites circumstances that affect a second 
arguer, for the purpose of discrediting 
that person’s argument, 131–132
Adams, John Couch, 612, 614, 619, 622
Addition:  A valid rule of inference:  
“p // p or q,” 401–406, 414, 428; with  
relational predicates, 503
Adequacy:  The extent to which a hy-
pothesis fits the facts it is intended to 
explain, 621, 623, 633, 645, 649
Adverbs, translation of, 253
Advice. See Piece of advice
Affective terminology and definitions, 
117
Affirmative proposition/statement:  A 
proposition/statement that asserts 
class membership, 204–205, 207
Affirming the consequent:  An invalid 
argument form: “If p then q / q // p,” 
370–371, 374–375, 378–379
Alexander the Great, 15
“All except,” “all but,” 257, 509
Ambiguity, fallacies of. See Fallacies 
of ambiguity
Ambiguous definitions, 117
Ambiguous expression:  An expres-
sion that can be interpreted as having 
more than one distinct meaning in a 
given context, 83–85, 98, 160
Ambrose, Alice, 202
Amphiboly:  An informal fallacy that 
occurs when the conclusion of an 
argument depends on the misinter-
pretation of a statement that is am-
biguous owing to some structural 
defect, 160, 169–171
Amyntas II, King, 15
Analogue, 525–527
Analogy, 524–535; argument from,  
37–38, 524–543
Anecdotal evidence, 634
Antecedent:  (1) The component of 
a conditional statement immedi-
ately following the word “if,” 22–23;  
(2) the component of a conditional state-
ment to the left of the horseshoe, 318
Appeal to force:  An informal fallacy 
that occurs when an arguer threatens 
a reader or listener for the purpose of 
getting him or her to accept a conclu-
sion, 125–126, 183–184
Appeal to ignorance:  An informal fal-
lacy that occurs when an arguer uses 
the fact that nothing has been proved 
about something, as evidence in sup-
port of some conclusion about that 
thing, 144–146
Appeal to pity:  An informal fallacy 
that occurs when an arguer attempts 
to evoke pity from a reader or listener 
for the purpose of getting him or her 
to accept a conclusion, 127, 184–185
Appeal to snobbery:  A variety of the 
appeal-to-the-people fallacy that oc-
curs when the arguer plays on the 
reader’s or listener’s need to feel su-
perior, 130
Appeal to the people:  An informal fal-
lacy that occurs when an arguer plays 
on certain psychological needs for the 
purpose of getting the reader or lis-
tener to accept a conclusion, 127–131, 
184, 639
Appeal to tradition:  A fallacy that oc-
curs when an arguer cites the fact 
that something has become a tradi-
tion as grounds for a conclusion, 130
Appeal to unqualified authority:  An 
informal fallacy that occurs when 
an arguer cites the testimony of an 
unqualified authority in support of a 
conclusion, 143–144, 185
Appeal to vanity:  A variety of the  
appeal-to-the-people fallacy that 
occurs when an arguer plays on the 
vanity of the reader or listener, 129
Argument:  A group of statements, one 
or more of which (the premises) are 
claimed to provide support for, or 
reasons to believe, one of the others 
(the conclusion), 1; cogent, 52–53; 
conditional statements and, 22–24; 
definitions and, 84, 91; explanation 
and, 20–21; extended, 66–71; form 
of, 59–64, 367–372, 374–379; in sci-
ence, 38–39; recognition of, 14, 16–
25; sound, 47–48, 53; strong, 48–53; 
valid, 45–47, 53, 59. See also Deduc-
tive argument; Inductive argument
Argument against the person:  An in-
formal fallacy that occurs when an 
arguer verbally attacks the person 
of a second arguer for the purpose 
of discrediting his or her argument, 
131–133, 182–184
Argument based on mathematics:  A 
deductive argument in which the 
conclusion depends on some purely 
arithmetic or geometric computation 
or measurement, 35–36
Argument based on signs:  An induc-
tive argument that proceeds from the 
knowledge of a sign to a claim about 
the thing or situation that the sign 
symbolizes, 37–38
Argument form:  (1) An arrangement 
of words and letters such that the 
uniform substitution of terms or 
statements in place of the letters re-
sults in an argument, 59–64; (2) an 
arrangement of statement variables 

706   Glossary/Index
and operators such that the uniform 
substitution of statements in place of 
the variables results in an argument, 
367–372, 374–379; invalid, 60–64, 
370–371, 374–375; valid, 59–60, 
368–372, 375–379
Argument from analogy:  An induc-
tive argument that depends on the 
existence of a similarity between 
two things or states of affairs, 37–38, 
524–543
Argument from authority:  An induc-
tive argument in which the conclusion 
rests on a statement made by some 
presumed authority or witness, 37
Argument from compassion, 127
Argument from definition:  A deduc-
tive argument in which the conclu-
sion is claimed to depend merely on 
the definition of some word or phrase 
used in the premise or conclusion, 36
Argument from example:  An argu-
ment that purports to prove some-
thing by giving one or more examples 
of it, 20
Argumentum ad bacculum. See Appeal 
to force
Argumentum ad hominem. See Argument 
against the person
Argumentum ad ignorantiam. See Appeal 
to ignorance
Argumentum ad miserecordiam. See 
Appeal to pity
Argumentum ad populum. See Appeal  
to the people
Argumentum ad verecundiam. See Appeal 
to unqualified authority
Aristotelian sorites, 307n
Aristotelian standpoint/interpretation 
(traditional standpoint), 209–210, 
212, 231–232, 234–236, 243–249, 
252, 267–268, 280–282, 289–291; in 
predicate logic, 458–459; Venn dia-
grams for, 243–249
Aristotle, 5–6, 15, 33, 39, 54, 124, 203, 
209, 285, 324, 610, 615–616
Associativity:  A valid rule of infer-
ence that allows for the relocation of 
parentheses in conjunctions and dis-
junctions, 411–412, 414–415
Atmospheric pressure, discovery of, 
615–616, 618–619, 623
Autokinetic effect, 641–642
Average, meaning of, 592–594
Avoiding fallacies, 183–188
Axiom of replacement:  An axiom that 
states that logically equivalent expres-
sions may replace one another in a 
proof sequence, 411
Babbage, Charles, 353
Baliani, Giovanni, 615
Bandwagon argument:  A variety of 
the appeal-to-the-people fallacy that 
occurs when the arguer plays on the 
reader’s or listener’s need to feel part 
of a group, 129
“Barbara” syllogism, 6, 268, 278, 298
Barcan formula, 35
Barometer, invention of, 616
Barrow, Harriet, 548
Bayes, Thomas, 579
Bayes’s theorem:  In probability theory, 
a rule for evaluating the conditional 
probability of two or more mutu-
ally exclusive and jointly exhaustive 
events, 579–581
“Because,” 3, 21
Becquerel, Henri, 613
Begging the question:  An informal 
fallacy that occurs when the arguer 
creates the illusion that inadequate 
premises provide adequate support 
for the conclusion—by leaving out a 
key premise, by restating the conclu-
sion as a premise, or by reasoning in 
a circle, 160–163, 182–183, 185–187
Benassi, Victor A., 639
Bentham, Jeremy, 548
Berti, Gasparo, 615
Biased sample:  A sample that is not 
representative of the population from 
which it was selected, 588
Biconditional statement (bicondi-
tional):  A statement having a triple 
bar as its main operator, 318, 321–322; 
comparison of with ordinary language, 
339; relating logically equivalent state-
ments, 347; subjunctive, 339; truth-
functional definition of, 333–334
Boethius, 6
Bolzano, Bernard, 6
Boole, George, 6, 210–211, 274
Boolean standpoint/interpretation 
(modern standpoint), 210, 212, 228, 
231, 235, 243–244, 246–249, 252, 
267–268, 275–279, 285–289, 290–291; 
in predicate logic, 457–459
“Both . . . not,” 323
Bound variable:  A variable that is 
bound by a quantifier, 457
Bouvard, Alexis, 614
Boyle, Robert, 561
Braces, 322
Brackets, 322–323
Broad definitions, 115–116
Broad hypotheses, 635–636
Bruner, Jerome S., 641
Bryan, William Jennings, 128
Byron, Ada, 353
Campbell, Stephen K., 602n
Carroll, Lewis, 312
Categorical proposition:  A proposition 
that relates two classes (or categories), 
200–263; letter names of, 204–205, 
207; standard form of, 201
Categorical syllogism:  A syllogism in 
which all three statements are cat-
egorical propositions, 36, 264–315; 
exceptive propositions in, 299; figure 
of, 266–267; form of, 266–267; in or-
dinary language, 297–299; mood of, 
266–267; proving the rules for, 290–
291; reconstruction of, from mood 
and figure, 268–269; reducing the 
number of terms in, 294–296; rules 
for, 285–291; standard form of, 265; 
Venn diagrams for, 272–282
Causal inference:  An inductive infer-
ence that proceeds from knowledge 
of a cause to a claim about an effect, 
or from knowledge of an effect to a 
claim about a cause, 38
Causality, 544–546
Charles, Jacques Alexandre, 561
Cicero, 54
Chrysippus, 5–6, 54
Circular definitions, 116
Circular reasoning. See Begging the 
question
Class complement, 223
Class statement, 172–173
Classical theory of probability:  The 
theory according to which probabili-
ties are computed a priori by dividing 
the number of favorable outcomes 
by the number of possible outcomes, 
570–571, 574, 582
Cleanthes, 54
Cogent argument:  An inductive argu-
ment that is strong, has all true prem-
ises, and meets the total evidence 
requirement, 52–53
Cognitive meaning:  The meaning by 
which terminology conveys informa-
tion, 81, 83–84
Coherence. See Internal coherence
Cold reading, 644–645
Collective hallucination, 642
Collective predication:  An attribute is 
predicated collectively when it is as-
signed to a class as a whole, 172–173
Common names, 91
Commutativity:  A valid rule of inference  
that provides for the rearrangement 
of conjunctions and disjunctions, 
377, 411–415

Glossary/Index   707
Complex question:  An informal fal-
lacy that occurs when a single 
question that is really two or more 
questions is asked, and a single an-
swer is applied to both questions, 
160, 164–165, 184
Composition:  An informal fallacy that 
occurs when the conclusion of an 
argument depends on the erroneous 
transference of an attribute from the 
parts of something onto the whole, 
160, 171–173
Compound statement:  A statement 
that contains at least one simple 
statement as a component, 317; truth 
values of, 330–335
Conclusion:  The statement in an argu-
ment that the premises are claimed to 
support or imply, 2–5; tautologous, 
353–354
Conclusion indicator:  A word that 
provides a clue to identifying a con-
clusion, 3
Conditional proof:  A method of proof 
that consists of assuming the antece­
dent of a required conditional state-
ment on the first line of an indented 
sequence, deriving the consequent on 
a subsequent line, and then discharg-
ing the indented sequence in a condi-
tional statement that exactly replicates 
the one to be obtained, 437–441; in 
predicate logic, 482–486, 501, 514;  
incorrect use of, 441; indirect proof 
and, 445; to prove logical truths, 
450–451
Conditional statement (conditional):  
(1) An “if . . . then” statement, 22–24; 
(2) a statement having a horseshoe as 
its main operator, 318, 320–321; com-
parison of with ordinary language, 
337–339; in propositional logic, 318, 
320–321, 332–333; subjunctive, 338; 
translating into categorical propo-
sitions, 255–256; truth-functional 
definition of, 332–333. See also Cor-
responding conditional
Conditionally valid:  Valid from the 
Aristotelian standpoint on condition 
that the subject term of the premise 
(or premises) denotes actually exist-
ing things; conditionally valid infer-
ences, 236, 247–249; conditionally 
valid syllogisms, 280–282; condition-
ally valid syllogistic forms, 267–268
Confabulation, 642
Confidence level, 590
Conjoint premises, 68
Conjunct:  The component in a conjunc-
tive statement on either side of the 
main operator, 318
Conjunction:  (1) A statement having 
a dot as its main operator, 318–319; 
(2) a valid rule of inference: “p / q // p 
and q,” 401–402, 404–406; compari-
son of with ordinary language, 336; 
truth-functional definition of, 331
Conjunctive statement (conjunction):  
A statement having a dot as its main 
operator, 318
Connectives:  Symbols used to connect 
or negate propositions in proposi-
tional logic, 316
Connotation:  Intensional meaning or 
intension, 92; conventional, 92
Connotative definition. See Intensional 
definition
Consequent:  (1) The component of a 
conditional statement immediately 
following the word “then”; the com-
ponent of a conditional statement 
that is not the antecedent, 22–23;  
(2) the component of a conditional 
statement to the right of the horse-
shoe, 318
Consistency, indirect truth tables for, 
362–363, 365; truth tables for, 346–348.  
See also External consistency
Consistent statements:  Statements for 
which there is at least one line on 
their truth tables in which all of them 
are true, 346–348, 362–363, 365
Constant. See Individual constant
Constructive dilemma:  A valid argu-
ment form/rule of inference: “If p 
then q, and if r then s / p or r // q or 
s,” 371, 375, 377–378, 401–403, 406; 
refuting, 372–373
Context, definitions and, 118
Contingent statement:  A statement 
that is neither necessarily true nor 
necessarily false, 345
Contradictory relation:  The relation 
that exists between statements that 
necessarily have opposite truth val-
ues, 215, 232, 234, 245
Contradictory statements:  Statements 
that necessarily have opposite truth 
values, 215, 232, 346–347
Contraposition:  An operation that 
consists in switching the subject and 
predicate terms in a standard-form 
categorical proposition and replac-
ing each with its term complement, 
226–228, 237; to reduce number of 
terms in a syllogism, 294–296
Contrapositive, 226–228
Contrary relation:  The relation that 
exists between two statements that 
are necessarily not both true, 232, 
235, 245
Controlled experiments, 556–558, 560
Conventional connotation:  The in-
tensional meaning conventionally 
agreed on by the members of the 
community who speak the language 
in question, 92
Converse, 221–222, 228
C onverse accident. See Hasty 
generalization
Conversion:  An operation that con-
sists in switching the subject and 
predicate terms in a standard-form 
categorical proposition, 221–223, 
227–228, 237; to reduce number of 
terms in a syllogism, 294–296
Copernicus, Nicholaus, 610, 619, 621, 
623, 634, 645
Copula:  In standard-form categorical 
propositions, the words “are” and 
“are not,” 201–202
Correlation coefficient, 559
Correlational method, 559–560
Correlations, 150, 559–561
Corresponding conditional:  The con-
ditional statement having the con-
junction of an argument’s premises as 
its antecedent and the conclusion as 
its consequent, 354
Counteranalogy, 526
Counterdilemma, 373
Counterexample method:  A method 
for proving invalidity; consists in 
constructing a substitution instance 
having true premises and false con-
clusion, 61–64; in predicate logic, 
489–490
Critical term:  The term in a categori-
cal syllogism which, when it denotes 
at least one existing thing, guarantees 
that the subject of the conclusion de-
notes at least one existing thing, 267, 
281, 289–290; of a sorites, 309
Curie, Marie, 612–614, 622
Curie, Pierre, 612–614
Daisy commercial, 128
Dalton, John, 610
Däniken, Erich von, 637
Darwin, Charles, 610
Decreasing extension:  The order of 
decreasing class size, 94
Decreasing intension:  The order of 
decreasing specificity or increasing 
generality, 93–94

708   Glossary/Index
Deduction. See Deductive argument; 
Natural deduction
Deductive argument:  An argument 
incorporating the claim that it is im-
possible for the conclusion to be false 
given that the premises are true, 33–
36, 38–39, 45–48; invalid, 45–47, 53; 
sound, 47–48, 53; unsound, 47–48, 
53; valid, 45–47, 53
Definiendum:  In a definition, the 
word or group of words that are pro-
posed to be defined, 96
Definiens:  In a definition, the word or 
group of words that do the defining, 96
Definite description, 512–513
Definition:  A group of words that as-
signs a meaning to a word or group 
of words, 96; argument and, 84; by  
genus and difference, 109–110, 
115–116; by subclass, 105–106, 110; 
circular, 116; criteria for, 114–118; 
demonstrative (ostensive), 105–106, 
110; enumerative, 105–106, 110; ety-
mological, 107–108, 110; extensional 
(denotative), 104–107, 115; inten-
sional, 107–110; lexical, 98, 106, 110, 
114–118; negative, 116; operational, 
108, 110, 115–116, persuasive, 101–
102, 106, 110; precising, 98, 100, 106, 
110; purposes of, 96–98, 100–102; 
stipulative, 97–98, 101, 106, 110; syn-
onymous, 107, 110, 115; theoretical, 
100–101, 106, 110
Definition by genus and difference:  A 
definition that assigns a meaning to a 
term by identifying a genus term and 
one or more difference words that, 
when combined, convey the same 
meaning as the term being defined, 
109–110, 115–116
Definition by subclass:  A definition 
that assigns a meaning to a term by 
naming subclasses of the class that 
the term denotes, 105–106, 110
Definitional techniques, 104–110
Definitions of the logical operators, 
330–334
Demonstrative (ostensive) defini-
tion:  A definition that assigns a 
meaning to a word by pointing to 
members of the class that the word 
denotes, 105–106, 110
De Morgan, Augustus, 6, 274, 353,  
364, 620
De Morgan, George, 364
De Morgan’s rule:  A valid rule of infer-
ence that allows tildes to be moved 
inside and outside of parentheses, 54, 
153, 323, 405, 411, 413–416, 461
Denotation:  Extensional meaning or 
extension, 92–93
Denotative definition. See Extensional 
(denotative) definition
Denying the antecedent:  An invalid 
argument form: “If p then q / not p // 
not q,” 371, 375, 377, 379
Dependent events, 575
Descartes, René, 616, 622
Descriptive phrases, 91
Destructive dilemma:  A valid argu-
ment form/rule of inference: “If p 
then q, and if r then s / not q or not s //  
not p or not r,” 371–372, 375; refut-
ing, 372–373
Detecting fallacies, 182–183
Difference, 109
Dilemma. See Constructive dilemma; 
Destructive dilemma
Disanalogy, 526
Disconfirmability, 636
Disjunct:  The component in a disjunc-
tive statement on either side of the 
main operator, 318
Disjunctive statement (disjunction):  
A statement having a wedge as its 
main operator, 318–320; comparison 
of with ordinary language, 336–337; 
exclusive, 319, 332, 336–337; inclu-
sive, 319, 332, 336–337, 369; truth-
functional definition of, 331–332
Disjunctive syllogism:  (1) A syllo-
gism having a disjunctive statement 
for one or both of its premises, 36;  
(2) a valid argument form/rule of in-
ference: “p or q / not p // q,” 368–369, 
375–378, 389, 392–395
Dispersion:  In statistics, an indicator 
of how spread out the data are in re-
gard to numerical value, 594–599
Disputes, 84–85
Distribution:  (1) An attribute pos-
sessed by a term in a categorical 
proposition if and only if the propo-
sition makes a claim about all the 
members of the class denoted by the 
term, 205–207, 286; (2) a valid rule 
of inference that allows a conjunct/
disjunct to be distributed through a 
disjunction/conjunction, 411–412, 
414–415, 417, 429
Distributive predication:  An attribute 
is predicated distributively when it is 
assigned to each and every member 
of a class, 172
Division:  An informal fallacy that oc-
curs when the conclusion of an ar-
gument depends on the erroneous 
transference of an attribute from a 
whole (or class) onto its parts (or 
members), 160, 173–174
Dot, 317–319; comparison of with ordi-
nary language, 336; truth-functional 
definition of, 331; use in predicate 
logic, 458
Double blind studies, 557, 591–592
Double colon:  The metalogical symbol 
that designates logical equivalence, 411
Double colon with superscribed “c,” 491
Double negation:  A valid rule of infer-
ence that allows the introduction or 
deletion of pairs of negation signs, 
377, 411–414
Drawing an affirmative/negative con-
clusion from negative/affirmative 
premises:  A formal fallacy that oc-
curs in a categorical syllogism when 
an affirmative conclusion is drawn 
from a negative premise or a negative 
conclusion is drawn from affirmative 
premises, 288
Duns Scotus, 148
E proposition:  A categorical proposi-
tion having the form “No S are P,” 
204–205
Edmonstone, Susanna Carnegie, 274
Einstein, Albert, 33, 510, 610, 621, 623, 
637–638
Eminent logicians, See Logicians
Emotional disposition and avoiding fal-
lacies, 184, 187–188
Emotive meaning:  The meaning by 
which terminology expresses or 
evokes feelings, 81–82
Empirical hypotheses:  Hypotheses 
that concern the production of some 
thing or the occurrence of some 
event that can be observed, 618–619
Empty extension:  The extension of a 
term that denotes something that 
does not exist; the null class, 93
Empty intension, 93
Enthymeme:  A categorical syllogism 
that is missing a premise or conclu-
sion, 301–303; an argument that is 
missing a premise or conclusion, 
23n, 301–303
Enumerative definition:  A definition 
that assigns a meaning to a word by 
naming the members of the class that 
the word denotes, 105–106, 110
Equivalence. See Biconditional state-
ment; Logically equivalent state-
ments; Material equivalence
Equivocation:  An informal fallacy that 
occurs because some word or group 
of words is used either implicitly or 

Glossary/Index   709
explicitly in two different senses, 160, 
168–169, 187, 602; division and, 174
Escaping between the horns of a  
dilemma, 372–373
Essential meaning, definitions and, 115
Etymological definition:  A definition 
that assigns a meaning to a word 
by disclosing the word’s ancestry in 
both its own language and other lan-
guages, 107–108, 110
Everest, Mary, 211
Evidentiary support, 633–638
Exceptive propositions, 257; in predicate 
logic, 509; syllogisms containing, 299
Exclusive disjunction, 319, 332, 336–337
Exclusive premises:  A formal fallacy 
that occurs when both premises of a 
categorical syllogism are negative, 287
Exclusive propositions, 256–257; in 
predicate logic, 459–460, 508–509
Existential fallacy:  A fallacy that oc-
curs whenever an argument is invalid 
merely because the premises lack ex-
istential import, 218–219, 235, 248–
249, 288–290
Existential generalization:  A rule of 
inference that introduces existential 
quantifiers, 464, 466–467, 470–472, 
500, 503; improper or invalid appli-
cations of, 472, 503
Existential import:   An attribute of 
a categorical proposition by which 
it implies that one or more things  
denoted by the subject term actually 
exist, 209–210, 212
Existential instantiation:  A rule of 
inference that removes existential 
quantifiers, 464, 467–470, invalid 
applications of, 469, 472; restrictions 
on, 468–470
Existential names, 468–469
Existential quantifier:  The quantifier 
used to translate particular state-
ments in predicate logic, 458–461
Explanandum:  The component of an 
explanation that describes the event 
or phenomenon to be explained, 
20–21
Explanans:  The component of an ex-
planation that explains the event or 
phenomenon indicated by the ex-
planandum, 20–21
Explanation:  An expression that pur-
ports to shed light on some event or 
phenomenon, 20–21
Exportation:  A valid rule of inference 
that allows conditional statements 
having conjunctive antecedents to be 
replaced with conditional statements 
having conditional consequents, and 
vice versa, 424–428
Expository passage:  A kind of dis-
course that begins with a topic 
sentence followed by one or more 
sentences that develop the topic sen-
tence, 18–19
Extended arguments, 66–71
Extensional (denotative) definition:  
A definition that assigns a meaning 
to a term by indicating the members 
of the class that the term denotes, 
104–107, 115
Extensional meaning (extension):  The 
members of the class that a term de-
notes, 92–94, 106; empty, 93
External consistency:  The extent to 
which a hypothesis agrees with other, 
well-confirmed hypotheses, 621–623, 
633, 645, 649
Factual disputes, 85
Fallacies of ambiguity:  A group of in-
formal fallacies that occur because of 
an ambiguity in the premises or con-
clusion, 160, 168–171
Fallacies of categorical syllogisms, 
285–290
Fallacies of illicit transference:  A 
group of informal fallacies that in-
volves the incorrect transference of 
an attribute from the parts of some-
thing onto the whole, or from the 
whole onto the parts, 161, 171–174
Fallacies of presumption:  A group of 
informal fallacies that occur when 
the premises of an argument pre-
sume what they purport to prove, 
160–168
Fallacies of relevance:  A group of in-
formal fallacies that occur because 
the premises of an argument are ir-
relevant to the conclusion, 125–138
Fallacies of weak induction:  A group 
of informal fallacies that occur be-
cause the connection between the 
premises and conclusion is not 
strong enough to support the conclu-
sion, 143–152, 154
Fallacy:  A defect in an argument that 
arises from a mistake in reasoning or 
the creation of an illusion that makes 
a bad argument appear good, 122. 
See also Fallacies (of various kinds); 
Formal fallacy; Informal fallacy
False cause:  An informal fallacy that 
occurs when the conclusion of an ar-
gument depends on some imagined 
causal connection that probably does 
not exist, 149–151, 185–187, 634, 
639; and appeal to the people, 129
False dichotomy:  An informal fallacy 
that is committed when an arguer 
presents two nonjointly exhaustive 
alternatives as if they were jointly 
exhaustive and then eliminates one, 
leaving the other as the conclusion, 
160, 165–166, 184–185
Falsifiability criterion, 635–636
Feng shui, 635
Fermat, Pierre de, 570
“Few,” “a few,” 254–255
Figurative definitions, 117
Figure:  An attribute of a categorical 
syllogism that specifies the location 
of the middle term, 266–267
Finite universe method:  A method 
for proving invalidity in predicate 
logic that consists in reducing the 
universe to a single object and then 
sequentially increasing it until one is 
found in which the premises of an ar-
gument turn out true and the conclu-
sion false, 490–493
“For the reason that,” 3–4
“For this reason,” 3–4
Form of a categorical syllogism, 
266–267
Form of an argument, 59–64, 367–372, 
374–379; invalid, 370–371
Formal fallacy:  A fallacy that can be 
identified by merely examining the 
form or structure of an argument, 
122–123. See also Fallacies (of vari-
ous kinds)
Free variable:  A variable that is not 
bound by a quantifier, 457
Frege, Gottlob, 7, 15, 439
Fruitfulness:  The extent to which a 
hypothesis suggests new ideas for fu-
ture analysis and confirmation, 621, 
623, 633
Fulbert, 99
Galen, 6
Galilei, Galileo, 560–561, 615, 619
Galle, Johann, 612, 614, 619
Gambler’s fallacy, 149
Gay-Lussac, Joseph Luis, 635
Geller, Uri, 643
General conjunction rule:  In probabil-
ity theory, a rule for computing the 
probability of two events occurring 
together whether or not they are in-
dependent, 575–576, 578
General disjunction rule:  In probabil-
ity theory, a rule for computing the 
probability of either of two events 
whether or not they are mutually  
exclusive, 577–578, 582

710   Glossary/Index
General statement:  A statement that 
makes a claim about all the members 
of a class, 39, 172–173
Generalization:  An inductive argument 
that proceeds from the knowledge of 
a selected sample to some claim about 
the whole group, 37–38; in predicate 
logic, 467. See also Existential general-
ization; Universal generalization
Genus, 109
Gestalt, 641
Goclenian sorites, 307n
Gödel, Kurt, 7, 510
Goldwater, Barry, 128
Gordon, George, 353
Grammar, definitions and, 114–115
Graphs, 599–601
Grasping a dilemma by the horns, 
372–373
Hallucination, 642
Hasty generalization:  An informal 
fallacy that occurs when a general 
conclusion is drawn from atypical 
specific cases, 146–147, 171–172, 
185, 639
Helmont, Jan Baptista Van, 616
Heloise, 99
Herschel, William, 614
Hippocrates, 646
Histogram, 595–598
History of logic, 5–7
Horizontal pattern, 68
Horns of a dilemma, 372
Horseshoe, 317–318, 320–321; compar-
ison of with ordinary language, 337–
339; truth-functional definition of, 
332–333; use in predicate logic, 456
Huff, Darrell, 595n
Hyman, Ray, 645
Hypnagogic hallucination, 642
Hypnopompic hallucination, 642
Hypotheses:  Conjectures offered as 
possible explanations for a phenom-
enon, 610–612; broad, 635–636; em-
pirical, 618–619; proof of, 618–619, 
621; tentative acceptance of, 621–
623; theoretical, 619, 621; vague, 635
Hypothetical reasoning:  The reason-
ing process used to produce hypoth-
eses, draw implications, and test the 
implications, 609–623
Hypothetical syllogism:  A syllogism 
having a conditional statement for 
one or both of its premises, 36. See 
also Pure hypothetical syllogism
I proposition:  A categorical proposi-
tion having the form “Some S are P,” 
204–205
Identity, 507–516; rules of, 513–516
Ignoratio elenchi. See Missing the point
Illicit contradictory, 234
Illicit contraposition:  A formal fal-
lacy that occurs when the conclu-
sion of an argument depends on the 
contraposition of an E or I statement, 
227–228
Illicit contrary:  A formal fallacy that 
occurs when the conclusion of an ar-
gument depends on an incorrect ap-
plication of the contrary relation, 234
Illicit conversion:  A formal fallacy that 
occurs when the conclusion of an ar-
gument depends on the conversion 
of an A or O statement, 223, 228
Illicit major:  A formal fallacy that oc-
curs when the major term in a cate-
gorical syllogism is distributed in the 
conclusion but not in the premise, 
286–287
Illicit minor:  A formal fallacy that oc-
curs when the minor term in a cate-
gorical syllogism is distributed in the 
conclusion but not in the premise, 
286–287
Illicit subalternation:  A formal fallacy 
that occurs when the conclusion of 
an argument depends on an incor-
rect application of the subalternation 
relation, 234
Illicit subcontrary:  A formal fallacy 
that occurs when the conclusion of 
an argument depends on an incorrect 
application of the subcontrary rela-
tion, 234
Illicit transference, See Fallacies of illicit 
transference
Illustration:  An expression involv-
ing one or more examples that is 
intended to show what something 
means or how it is done, 19–20
Immediate inference:  An argument 
having a single premise, 215–219, 
234–237, 246–249
Implication, rules of, 388–395, 401–406. 
See also Material implication
Inclusive disjunction, 319, 332, 336–
337, 369
Inconsistent premises, 352–353, 
404–405
Inconsistent statements:  Statements 
such that there is no line on their 
truth tables in which all of them are 
true, 346–348, 363, 365
Increasing extension:  The order of in-
creasing class size, 94
Increasing intension:  The order of in-
creasing specificity, 93–94
Independent events, 574
Indirect proof:  A method of proof that 
consists of assuming the negation of 
a required statement on the first line 
of an indented sequence, deriving a 
contradiction on a subsequent line, 
and then discharging the indented 
sequence by asserting the negation 
of the assumed statement, 443–447; 
in predicate logic, 482–486, 501–502, 
514–516; incorrect use of, 447; to 
prove logical truths, 450
Indirect truth tables, 358–365; for argu-
ments, 359–362; for series of state-
ments, 362–363, 365; in predicate 
logic, 492–493
Individual constant:  A lowercase letter 
(a, b, c . . . u, v, w) used to name indi-
viduals, 455
Individual variable:  A lowercase letter 
(x, y, z) used to represent anything at 
random in the universe, 456
Inductive argument:  An argument in-
corporating the claim that it is improb-
able that the conclusion is false given 
that the premises are true, 33–34, 37–
39; cogency of, 52–53; strong, 48–52
Inference:  The reasoning process ex-
pressed by an argument, 5; condi-
tional statements and, 23; rules of, 
388–395, 401–406, 411–417, 424–429
Informal fallacy:  A fallacy that can be 
detected only through analysis of the 
content of an argument, 123–124; 
avoiding, 183–188; detecting in or-
dinary language, 182–183; generally, 
122–199. See also Fallacies (of various 
kinds)
Instantial letter:  The letter (a variable 
or constant) introduced by universal 
instantiation or existential instantia-
tion, 464–465
Instantiation, 465. See also Existential 
instantiation; Universal instantiation
Integrity, 633, 643–647
Intensional definition:  A definition 
that assigns a meaning to a word by 
indicating the qualities or attributes 
that the word connotes, 107–110
Intensional meaning (intension):  The 
qualities or attributes that a term 
connotes, 91–94, 106–107
Intent, role of, in fallacies, 183–184, 187
Internal coherence:  The extent to 
which the ideas or terms in a hypoth-
esis are rationally interconnected, 
621–623, 633, 645, 649
Invalid argument forms, 60–64, 370–
371, 374–375
Invalid deductive argument:  A deduc-
tive argument in which it is possible 

Glossary/Index   711
for the conclusion to be false given 
that the premises are true, 45–47, 53
Invalidity, proving, 59–64; proving in 
predicate logic, 489–493
Jevons, William Stanley, 6
Johnson, Lyndon, 128
Joint method of agreement and dif-
ference:  A method for identifying a 
causal connection between an effect 
and a single factor that is present  
in two or more occurrences in which 
the effect is present and absent from 
two or more occurrences in which the  
effect is absent, but never present 
when the effect is absent nor absent 
when the effect is present, 551–553, 
558–559
Kant, Immanuel, 15, 610
Kepler, Johannes, 621
King, William, 353
Kripke, Saul, 295
Kuhn, Thomas, 645
Lakatos, Imre, 638
Lalande, J. J., 619
Laplace, Pierre, 614
Lazerowitz, Morris, 202
Leading question, 165
Leavitt, Henrietta Swan, 561
Legal reasoning, 527–531
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 6, 211, 324, 
439, 510, 610
Leikind, Bernard J., 644
Letter names of categorical proposi-
tions, 204–205, 207
Level of confidence, 590
Leverrier, U. J. J., 612, 614, 619, 622
Lexical definition:  A definition in-
tended to report the way a word is 
actually used in a language, 98, 106, 
110; criteria for, 114–118
Liesburg, Margaret, 439
Literary Digest poll, 589
Logic:  The science that evaluates argu-
ments, 1; history of, 5–7
Logical operators, definitions of, 
330–334
Logically equivalent statements:  
(1) Statements that necessarily have 
the same truth value, 222, 225, 227;  
(2) statements having the same truth 
value on each line under their main op-
erators, 346–347; consistency and, 348
Logically false statement:  A state-
ment that is necessarily false, a self- 
contradictory statement, 345–346
Logically true statement:  A statement 
that is necessarily true; a tautology, 
345–346; proving, 345–346, 449–451
Logically undetermined truth 
value:  A condition that exists when 
a certain statement is not necessarily 
either true or false, given the truth 
value of some related statement, 215, 
223, 227–228, 232–234, 245–246
Logicians (biographies):  Abelard, 99; 
Ambrose, 202; Aristotle, 15; Boole, 
211; Byron, 353; Chrysippus, 54; 
Frege, 439; Gödel, 510; Kripke, 295; 
Leibniz, 324; Marcus, 35; Mill, 548; 
Ockham, 148; Quine, 416; Russell, 
478; Venn, 274; Whitehead, 478
Loosely associated statements:  State-
ments that are about the same 
general subject and that lack an infer-
ential relationship, 17
Ludwig of Bavaria, 148
Lyons, Eugene, 602n
McCarthy, Joseph, 128
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 646–647
Main operator:  The operator (connec-
tive) in a compound statement that 
has as its scope everything else in the 
statement, 319, 334–335, 345–346
Major premise:  In a categorical syllo-
gism, the premise that contains the 
major term, 265
Major term:  In a standard-form cat-
egorical syllogism, the predicate of 
the conclusion, 264–265
Marcus, Jules Alexander, 35
Marcus, Ruth Barcan, 35
Margin of Error, 590–591
Material equivalence:  (1) The rela-
tion expressed by a truth-functional 
biconditional, 318, 321–322; com-
parison with ordinary language, 339; 
truth-functional definition of, 333–
334; (2) a valid rule of inference that 
allows an equivalence statement to be 
replaced by a conjunctive statement 
or a disjunctive statement, 424–426
Material implication:  (1) The rela-
tion expressed by a truth-functional 
conditional, 318, 320–321; com-
parison with ordinary language, 
337–339; truth-functional definition 
of, 332–333; (2) a valid rule of infer-
ence that allows an implication sign 
to be replaced by a disjunction sign if 
and only if the antecedent is negated, 
424–429
Maxwell, James Clerk, 622–623
Mean:  The arithmetical average, 
592–598
Meaning, 80–85, 91; cognitive, 81, 
83–85; emotive, 81–83; extensional, 
92–94, 106; intensional, 91–94, 107; 
varieties of, 80–85
Median:  The middle point when data 
are arranged in ascending order, 
592–596, 598
Mendeleev, Dmitri, 622
Mental carelessness, 184
Mention of a word, 91
Method of agreement:  A method for 
identifying a causal connection be-
tween an effect and a single factor 
that is present in several occurrences 
in which the effect is present, 546–
547, 549
Method of concomitant variation:  A 
method for identifying a causal con-
nection between two conditions by 
matching variations in one condition 
with variations in another, 554–555, 
559–561
Method of difference:  A method for 
identifying a causal connection be-
tween an effect and a single factor 
that is present in an occurrence in 
which the effect is present and ab-
sent from an occurrence in which the  
effect is absent, 549–550, 557–558
Method of residues:  A method of 
identifying a causal connection by 
subtracting already-known strands of 
causal connection from a compound 
causal connection, 553–554
Michael of Cesena, 153
Middle term:  In a standard-form cat-
egorical syllogism, the term that oc-
curs only in the premises, 264–265; 
of a sorites, 308–309
Milbanke, Annabella, 353
Mill, James, 548
Mill, John Stuart, 7, 274, 546, 548
Mill’s methods and science, 556–561
Mill’s methods of induction, 274, 
546–561
Minor premise:  In a categorical syllo-
gism, the premise that contains the 
minor term, 265
Minor term:  In a standard-form cat-
egorical syllogism, the subject of the 
conclusion, 264–265
Missing the point:  An informal fal-
lacy that occurs when the premise of 
an argument entails one particular 
conclusion but a completely different 
conclusion is actually drawn, 135–
136, 138, 185, 187–188, 603
Mnemonic device, for distribution, 207; 
for sufficient conditions, necessary 
conditions, 321
Mob mentality, 128–129
Modal logic:  A kind of logic that deals 
with concepts such as possibility, ne-
cessity, belief, and doubt, 5, 7, 295

712   Glossary/Index
Mode:  The value that occurs with the 
greatest frequency in a set of data, 
593–594, 598
Modern square of opposition:  A dia-
gram that illustrates the necessary re-
lations that prevail between the four 
kinds of standard-form categorical 
propositions as interpreted from the 
Boolean standpoint, 214–215
Modus ponens:  A valid argument 
form/rule of inference: “If p then q /  
p // q,” 36, 370, 374–376, 378–379, 
389–395; in predicate logic, 464–465
Modus tollens:  A valid argument form/
rule of inference: “If p then q / not q //  
not p,” 370, 375–378, 389, 391–395
Monadic predicate:  A predicate used 
to assign an attribute to individual 
things, 496
Mood:  An attribute of a categorical 
syllogism that specifies the kind of 
statements (A, E, I, O) that make it 
up, 266–267
Moore, G. E., 478
Moral reasoning, 531–535
Multiple conclusion, 68–69
Mutually exclusive events, 576
Names, 91, 93; existential, 468–469
Narrow definitions, 115–116
Natural deduction:  A proof procedure 
by which the conclusion of an argu-
ment is derived from the premises 
through use of rules of inference, 
388–389; in predicate logic, 464–523; 
in propositional logic, 388–453
Necessary and sufficient condition, 321; 
causality and, 545, 551–552
Necessary condition:  The condition 
represented by the consequent in a 
conditional statement, 24, 321; cau-
sality and, 545–546, 552
Needham, John, 617–619, 621
Negation:  A statement having a tilde 
as its main operator, 318; truth- 
functional definition of, 331
Negation rule:  A rule for computing 
the probability of an event from the 
probability of the event not happen-
ing, 578–579, 582
Negative definitions, 116
Negative proposition/statement:  A 
proposition/statement that denies 
class membership, 204–205, 207
“Neither . . . nor,” 323
Neptune, discovery of, 614, 618–619, 
621–622
Neurolinguistic programming, 643, 645
Newton, Isaac, 616–617, 621, 623, 636
“No . . . except,” 256, 508–509
Non causa pro causa, 148
Non sequitur, 122
Nonarguments, typical kinds of, 16–25
“None but,” 256; in predicate logic, 459
“None except,” 257
Nonstandard quantifiers, 254–255
Nonstandard verbs, translation of, 
251–252
Normal probability distribution:  A 
distribution of random phenomena 
that has the shape of a bell, 557–558, 
597–599
“Not both,” 323
“Not either,” 323
Numerical statement, 511–512
O proposition:  A categorical proposi-
tion having the form “Some S are not 
P,” 204–205
Objectivity, 633, 638–643
Obscure definitions, 117
Obverse, 224–225, 228
Obversion:  An operation that consists 
of changing the quality of a standard-
form categorical proposition and 
replacing the predicate term with 
its term complement, 223–225, 228, 
237; to reduce the number of terms 
in a syllogism, 294–296
Ockham, William of, 6, 148, 636
Ockham’s razor, 148, 636–637
Odds of an event happening, 570, 573, 582
Oerstead, Hans Christian, 560
“Only,” 256; in predicate logic, 459–460, 
508–509
“Only if,” 255, 317, 320
Operational definition:  A definition 
that assigns a meaning to a word by 
specifying experimental procedures 
that determine whether or not the 
word applies to a certain thing, 108, 
110, 115–116
Operators:  Symbols used to connect 
simple propositions in propositional 
logic, 316–318; truth-functional defi-
nitions of, 330–334
Opinion:  A kind of nonargument com-
posed of statements that express the 
personal conviction of a speaker or 
writer without giving any evidence in 
support of that conviction, 17
Ostensive definition. See Demonstrative 
(ostensive) definition
Overlapping quantifiers:  Quantifiers 
that lie within the scope of one an-
other, 497–504
Oversimplified cause, 148–149
Parameter:  A phrase that, when intro-
duced into a statement, affects the 
form but not the meaning, 252
Pareidolia, 640
Parentheses, 322–323
Particular proposition/statement:  A 
proposition/statement that makes a 
claim about one or more (but not all) 
members of a class, 39, 204–205, 207, 
216; in a restricted universe, 491–492; 
in predicate logic, 458–461
Pascal, Blaise, 570, 616
Pasteur, Louis, 612, 617–619, 621, 623
Peirce, Benjamin, 620
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 7, 211, 620
Percentages, 602–603
Perceptual set, 640–641
Perier, F., 616
Persuasive definition:  A definition 
intended to engender a favorable or 
unfavorable attitude toward what is 
denoted by the definiendum, 101–
102, 106, 110
Peter of Spain, 6
Petitio principii. See Begging the 
question
Philip of Macedonia, 15
Philo of Magara, 54
Pictogram:  A diagram that compares 
two situations through drawings 
that differ in either size or number, 
600–601
Piece of advice:  A form of expression 
that makes a recommendation about 
some future decision or course of 
conduct, 17
Placebo effect, 640
Plato, 15, 96, 510, 632, 640, 648
Pope John XXII, 153
Post, Emil, 7
Post hoc ergo propter hoc, 148, 634
Postman, Leo J., 641
Popper, Karl, 635–636
Precising definition:  A definition in-
tended to reduce the vagueness of a 
word, 98, 100, 106, 110
Predicate:  An expression of the form 
“is a bird,” “is a house,” and “are fish,” 
455; distinguished from predicate 
term, 202; monadic, 496, relational, 
496–504
Predicate logic:  A kind of logic that 
combines the symbolism of propo-
sitional logic with symbols used to 
translate predicates, 454–523
Predicate symbol:  An uppercase letter 
used to translate a predicate, 455; re-
lational, 497
Predicate term:  In a standard-form 
categorical proposition, the term that 
comes immediately after the copula, 
200–202

Glossary/Index   713
Predication. See Collective predication; 
Distributive predication
Prediction:  An inductive argument 
that proceeds from knowledge of 
some event in the relative past to a 
claim about some other event in the 
relative future, 37
Premise:  A statement in an argument 
that sets forth evidence, 2–5; ex-
clusive, 287; inconsistent, 352–353, 
404–405
Premise indicator:  A word that provides 
a clue to identifying a premise, 3–4
Presumption, fallacies of. See Fallacies 
of presumption
Presuppositions, 185–187
Primary analogue, 525–527
Principle of indifference:  In the 
classical theory of probability, the 
principle that the various possible 
outcomes are equally probable, 570
Probability, 569–583; classical theory of, 
570–571, 574, 582; relative frequency 
theory of, 570–572, 574, 582; subjec-
tivist theory of, 570, 572–574, 582
Probability calculus:  A set of rules for 
computing the probability of com-
pound events from the probabilities 
of simple events, 573–583
Probability of a necessary event, 574
Probability of an impossible event, 574
Progress in science, 638
Pronouns, translation of, 253
Proper names, 91; intension of, 93
Proposition:  The information con-
tent of a statement, 5; exceptive, 257, 
299, 509; exclusive, 256–257, 459–
460, 508–509. See also Categorical 
proposition
Propositional logic:  A kind of logic in 
which the fundamental components 
are whole statements or propositions, 
316
Prospective study, 559
Proving invalidity, 59–64, in predicate 
logic, 489–493
Proving logical truths, 449–451
Proving the rules for categorical syllo-
gisms, 290–291
Proving the traditional square of oppo-
sition, 244–246
Psychological factors affecting a sample, 
591
Ptolemy, 610, 619, 623, 634
Pure hypothetical syllogism:  A valid 
argument form/rule of inference: “If 
p then q / If q then r // If p then r,” 
369, 375, 377, 389, 392–395
Putnam, Hillary, 202
Quality:  The attribute of a categorical 
proposition by which it is either af-
firmative or negative, 203–205
Quantifier:  In standard-form categori-
cal propositions, the words “all,” “no,” 
and “some,” 201–202; existential, 
458–461; negated, 477–479, nonstan-
dard 254–255; overlapping, 497–504; 
unexpressed, 254; universal, 456, 
459–461
Quantifier negation rule:  A rule of 
inference that allows one kind of 
quantifier to be replaced by another, 
provided that certain negation signs 
are deleted or introduced, 477–479; 
with overlapping quantifiers, 500, 
502
Quantity:  The attribute of a categorical 
proposition by which it is either uni-
versal or particular, 203–205
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 416, 478
Radium, discovery of, 613–614, 618, 
621
Randi, James, 643
Random sample:  A sample in which 
every member of the population has 
an equal chance of being selected, 
588–589
Range:  In statistics, the difference be-
tween the largest and smallest values 
in a set of data, 594–595
Rawls, John, 202
Red herring:  A fallacy that occurs 
when the arguer diverts the attention 
of the reader or listener by address-
ing extraneous issues and finishes by 
presuming that some conclusion has 
been established, 136–138, 182–183
Redi, Francesco, 617
Reducing the number of terms in a cat-
egorical syllogism, 294–296
Reference, 92
Regression line, 559–560
Relation, 496
Relational predicate:  A predicate that 
expresses a connection between or 
among two or more individuals, 
496–504
Relative frequency theory of probabil-
ity:  The theory according to which 
probabilities are computed by divid-
ing the number of observed favorable 
events by the number of observed 
events, 570–572, 574, 582
Relevance, fallacies of. See Fallacies of 
relevance
Replacement, axiom of, 411; rules of, 
411–417, 424–429
Replicability, 634–635
Report:  A kind of nonargument con-
sisting of one or more statements that 
convey information about some topic 
or event, 17–18
Restricted conjunction rule:  In proba-
bility theory, a rule for computing the 
probability of two independent events 
occurring together, 574–575, 582
Restricted disjunction rule:  In proba-
bility theory, a rule for computing the 
probability of either of two mutually 
exclusive events, 576–577
Retrospective study, 559
Reuben, Scott, 647–648
Robbins, Tony, 644
Root, Elihu, 128
Rule of implication:  A rule consisting 
of a basic argument form by means 
of which the conclusion of an argu-
ment is derived from the premises, 
388–395, 401–406
Rule of inference:  A rule by means of 
which the conclusion of an argument 
is derived from the premises, 388–
395, 401–406, 411–417, 424–429; for 
identity, 513–516; for relational pred-
icates and overlapping quantifiers, 
500–504; in predicate logic, 464–472; 
misapplications of, 394–395, 405
Rule of replacement:  A rule consisting 
of two logically equivalent statement 
forms by means of which the conclu-
sion of an argument is derived from 
the premises, 411–417, 424–429
Rules for categorical syllogisms, 
285–291
Rules for sorites, 308–309
Russell, Bertrand, 7, 15, 202, 364, 416, 
439, 478, 620
Russell’s paradox, 439
Samples, 588–592
Sampling error:  The difference be-
tween the relative frequency with 
which some characteristic occurs in 
a sample and the relative frequency 
with which the same characteristic 
occurs in the population, 589–591
Scatter diagram, 559–560
Science and superstition, 632–649
Scientific arguments, 38–39
Scientific progress, 637–638
Scientific reasoning, 609–623
Secondary analogue, 525, 527
Self-contradictory statement:  A state-
ment that is necessarily false, a logi-
cally false statement, 345–346; and 
inconsistency, 348
Sense, 92
Shannon, Claude, 211

714   Glossary/Index
Sherwood, William of, 6
Shirt-collar model, 266
Sidgwick, Henry, 274
Simple identity statements, 508
Simple noninferential passages, 16–18
Simple statement:  A statement that 
does not contain any other statement 
as a component, 317
Simplification:  A valid rule of infer-
ence, “p and q // p,” 401–405, 417
“Since,” 3, 16
Singer, Barry F., 639
Singleton, Donald, 643
Singular proposition/statement:  A 
proposition/statement that makes an 
assertion about a specifically named 
person, place, thing, or time, 252–
253; in predicate logic, 455
Size of sample, 589–591
Slippery slope:  An informal fallacy 
that occurs when the conclusion 
of an argument rests on an alleged 
chain reaction, and there is not suf-
ficient reason to think that the chain 
reaction will actually take place, 151–
152, 185
“Some,” 62, 201, 210n
Sorites:  A chain of categorical syllo-
gisms in which the intermediate con-
clusions have been left out, 307–310; 
Aristotelian, 307n; Goclenian, 307n; 
rules for, 308–309; standard form of, 
308, Venn diagrams for, 308
Sound argument:  A deductive argu-
ment that is valid and has all true 
premises, 47–48, 53, 236–237
Spallanzani, Lazzaro, 617
Species, 109
Specific difference, 109
Spinoza, Benedict, 622
Spontaneous generation, 616–618
Square of opposition. See Modern 
square of opposition; Traditional 
square of opposition
Stalin, Joseph, 602, 648
Standard deviation:  In statistics, a 
measure of how far the data vary 
or deviate from the mean value; the 
square root of the variance, 595–599
Standard-form categorical proposi-
tion:  A proposition that has one of 
the following forms: “All S are P” “No 
S are P” “Some S are P” “Some S are 
not P,” 201
Standard-form categorical syllogism:  
A categorical syllogism in which 
all three statements are standard- 
form categorical propositions, the 
two occurrences of each term are 
identical, each term is used in the 
same sense throughout the argu-
ment, and the major premise is listed 
first, the minor premise second, and 
the conclusion last, 265
Standard-form sorites:  A sorites in 
which each of the component propo-
sitions is in standard form, each term 
occurs twice, the predicate of the 
conclusion is in the first premise, and 
each successive premise has a term in 
common with the preceding one, 308
Statement:  (1) A sentence that is either 
true or false, 2, 53; (2) in predicate 
logic, an expression involving bound 
variables or constants throughout, 
455–461, 469. See also Compound 
statement; General statement; Nu-
merical statement; Particular state-
ment; Simple statement; Singular 
proposition; Superlative statement; 
Universal statement
Statement form:  An arrangement of 
statement variables and operators 
such that the uniform substitution of 
statements in place of the variables 
results in a statement, 330
Statement function:  In predicate logic, 
the expression that remains when a 
quantifier is removed from a state-
ment, 457, 466, 469
Statement of belief:  A kind of non-
argument composed of statements 
that express the personal conviction 
of a speaker or writer without giv-
ing any evidence in support of that  
conviction, 17
Statement variable:  A lowercase letter, 
such as p or q, that can represent any 
statement, 330
Statistical reasoning, 587–608
Stellar parallax, 645–646
Stipulative definition:  A definition 
that assigns a meaning to a word for 
the first time, 97–98, 101, 106, 110
Stipulative use of a word, 98
Stoicism, 54
Straw man:  A fallacy that occurs when 
the arguer misinterprets an oppo-
nent’s position for the purpose of 
more easily attacking it, demolishes 
the misinterpreted argument, and 
then proceeds to conclude that the 
original argument has been demol-
ished, 134–135, 138, 182–185
Striking predictions, 638
Strong inductive argument:  An in-
ductive argument in which it is 
improbable that the conclusion be 
false given that the premises are true 
48–53
Study, 559
Subalternation relation:  The relation 
by which a true A or E statement 
necessarily implies a true I or O 
statement, respectively, and by which 
a false I or O statement necessarily 
implies a false A or E statement, re-
spectively, 232–235, 246
Subcontrary relation:  The relation 
that exists between two statements 
that are necessarily not both false, 
232–234, 246
Subject, 202
Subject term:  In a standard-form cat-
egorical proposition, the term that 
comes immediately after the quanti-
fier, 200–202
Subjectivist theory of probability:  The 
theory according to which probabili-
ties are computed from the odds that 
people would accept on a bet, 570, 
572–574, 582
Subjunctive biconditionals, 339
Subjunctive conditionals, 338
Substitution instance:  An argument or 
statement that has the same form as 
a given argument form or statement 
form; of an argument form, 59–64, 
368–372; of a statement form, 330
Sufficient and necessary condition, 321; 
causality and, 545, 551–552
Sufficient condition:  The condition 
represented by the antecedent in a 
conditional statement, 24, 321; cau-
sality and, 545–546, 549–553
Superfluous distribution rule, 289–290, 
308
Superlative statement, 511
Superstition, 632–649
Suppressed evidence:  A fallacy that 
occurs when the arguer ignores rel-
evant evidence that outweighs the 
presented evidence and entails a very 
different conclusion, 160, 166–168, 
184–185, 603
Syllogism:  A deductive argument 
consisting of two premises and one 
conclusion, 264. See also Categorical 
syllogism; Disjunctive syllogism; Hy-
pothetical syllogism; Pure hypotheti-
cal syllogism
Syllogistic logic:  The logic that deals 
with categorical propositions and 
categorical syllogisms, 5; predicate 
logic and, 454–455
Synonymous definition:  A defini-
tion in which the definiens is a 
single word that connotes the same 

Glossary/Index   715
attributes as the definiendum, 107, 
110, 115
Tautologous conclusion, 353–354
Tautologous statement:  A statement 
that is necessarily true; a logically 
true statement, 345–346
Tautology:  (1) A tautologous state-
ment, 346; (2) A rule of inference 
that eliminates redundancy in con-
junctions and disjunctions, 424–425, 
429; with relational predicates, 502
Taylor, Harriet, 548
Term:  A word or group of words that 
can serve as the subject of a state-
ment, 91. See also Predicate term; 
Subject term
Term complement:  The word or group 
of words that denotes the class com-
plement, 223–225
Terms without nouns, translation of, 251
Thagard, Paul, 638
“The only,” 257, 508–509
Theophrastus, 54
Theoretical definition:  A definition 
that assigns a meaning to a word by 
suggesting a theory that gives a certain 
characterization to the entities that the 
term denotes, 100–101, 106, 110
Theoretical hypotheses:  Hypotheses 
that concern how something should 
be conceptualized, 619, 621
“Thus,” 3, 14, 19–20
Tilde, 317–318, 323; truth-functional 
definition of, 331
Torricelli, Evangelista, 612, 615–616, 
619, 621–623
Total evidence requirement, 50
Traditional square of opposition:  A 
diagram that illustrates the necessary 
relations that prevail between the 
four kinds of standard-form categori-
cal propositions as interpreted from 
the Aristotelian standpoint, 231–237; 
proof of, 244–246
Traditional standpoint. See Aristotelian 
standpoint
Translating ordinary language argu-
ments into standard-form categorical 
syllogisms, 297–299
Translating relational statements, 
496–500
Translating statements in predicate 
logic, 455–461, 496–500
Translating statements in propositional 
logic, 317–325
Translating statements into categorical 
form, 251–258
Transposition:  A valid rule of infer-
ence that allows the antecedent and 
consequent of a conditional state-
ment to switch places if and only if 
both are negated, 424–429
Triple bar, 317–318, 321–322; com-
parison of with ordinary language, 
339; truth-functional definition of, 
333–334
Truth, and strength, 48–51; and validity, 
45–47, vacuous, 215. See also Logi-
cally true statement
Truth function:  A compound proposi-
tion whose truth value is completely 
determined by the truth values of its 
components, 330–339
Truth table:  An arrangement of truth 
values that shows in every possible 
case how the truth value of a com-
pound proposition is determined by 
the truth values of its simple com-
ponents, 330–331; for arguments, 
351–354; for propositions, 342–348. 
See also Indirect truth tables
Truth value:  The attribute by which 
a statement is either true or false, 2; 
of compound statements, 330–335; 
logically undetermined, 215, 223, 
227–228, 232–234, 245–246
Tu quoque:  A variety of the argument-
against-the-person fallacy that 
occurs when an arguer shifts the bur-
den of guilt onto a second arguer for 
the purpose of discrediting his or her 
argument, 132
Uncogent argument:  An inductive ar-
gument that is weak, has one or more 
false premises, fails to meet the total 
evidence requirement, or any combi-
nation of these, 52–53
Unconditionally valid:  Valid from the 
Boolean standpoint, 215; for imme-
diate inferences, 215, 236; for syllo-
gistic forms, 267–268
Undetermined truth value. See Logically 
undetermined truth value
Undistributed middle:  A formal fal-
lacy that occurs when the middle 
term in a categorical syllogism is un-
distributed in both premises, 286
Unexpressed quantifiers, 254
Uniformity of nature, 48
Universal generalization:  A rule of 
inference that introduces universal 
quantifiers, 464–467; invalid appli-
cations of, 466–467, 470, 472, 483, 
500–501, 503–504; restrictions on, 
467, 470, 472, 483–485, 500–501
Universal instantiation:  A valid rule 
of inference that removes universal 
quantifiers, 464, 467, 469–472, 503; 
invalid applications of, 469, 472, 503
Universal quantifier:  In predicate 
logic, the quantifier used to translate 
universal statements, 456, 459–461
Universal proposition/statement:  A 
proposition/statement that makes an 
assertion about every member of its 
subject class, 204, 205, 207, 217; in 
predicate logic, 456–457, 459–460; in 
a restricted universe, 491–492
“Unless,” 256, 319, 336–337
Unsound argument:  A deductive argu-
ment that is invalid, has one or more 
false premises, or both, 47–48, 53
Use of a word, 91–92
Vacuously true:  Truth that results 
merely from the fact that the subject 
class is empty, 215
Vague definitions, 117
Vague expression:  An expression that al-
lows for borderline cases in which it is 
impossible to tell if the expression ap-
plies or does not apply, 83–85, 98, 106
Vague hypotheses, 635
Valid argument forms, 59–60, 368–372, 
375–379. See also Rule of inference; 
Valid syllogistic forms
Valid deductive argument:  An argu-
ment in which it is impossible for the 
conclusion to be false given that the 
premises are true, 45–48, 53
Valid syllogistic forms, 267–268
Validity, 45–47; form of an argument 
and, 59–60, 368–372
Value claim:  A claim that something is 
good, bad, right, or wrong, 81
Variable, bound, 457; free, 457; individ-
ual, 456; statement, 330
Variance:  In statistics, a measure of 
how far the data vary from the mean 
value, 595–598
Venn diagram:  A diagram consisting 
of two or more circles used to rep-
resent the information content of 
categorical propositions, 212–214; 
and the Aristotelian (traditional) 
standpoint, 243–249; for categorical 
syllogisms, 272–282; for particular 
statements in predicate logic, 458; 
for proving the traditional square of 
opposition, 244–246; for sorites, 308; 
for testing immediate inferences, 
216–219, 246–249; for universal 
statements in predicate logic, 457
Venn, John, 6, 210, 274
Venn, John Archibald, 274
Verbal disputes, 85
Vertical pattern, 67
Viviani, Vincenzo, 616
Wade, Evelyn, 478

716   Glossary/Index
Warning:  A form of expression intended 
to put someone on guard against a 
dangerous or detrimental situation, 17
Weak analogy:  An informal fallacy 
that occurs when the conclusion of 
an argument depends on an anal-
ogy (or similarity) that is not strong 
enough to support the conclusion, 
152–154, 185, 187
Weak induction, fallacies of. See Falla-
cies of weak induction
Weak inductive argument:  An in-
ductive argument in which the con-
clusion does not follow probably 
from the premises even though it is 
claimed to do so, 48–53
Wedge, 317–318, 320; comparison with 
ordinary language, 336–337; truth-
functional definition of, 331–332
Well-formed formula (WFF):  A syn-
tactically correct arrangement of 
symbols, 325
Whitehead, Alfred North, 7, 15, 202, 
364, 416, 478, 620
William of Champeaux, 99
William of Ockham, 6, 148, 636
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 7, 80, 202, 478
Worldview, 185–188
Xeno of Citium, 54
uploaded by [stormrg]

