 

 
ADVANCED CONSTRUCTION
TECHNOLOGY
FOURTH EDITION
ROY CHUDLEY
MCIOB
and
ROGER GREENO
BA (HONS), FCIOB, FIPHE, FRSA

 
Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at:
www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Longman Group Limited 1976, 1977
© Longman Group UK Limited 1987
© Pearson Education Limited 1999, 2006
The rights of Roy Chudley and Roger Greeno to be identiﬁed as authors of this work have
been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in any retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise without either the prior written permission of the Publishers or a
licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP.
First published (as Construction Technology) 1976 (Volume 3), 1977 (Volume 4)
Second edition 1987
Third edition (published as a single volume, with revisions by Roger Greeno) 1999
Reprinted 1999, 2001, 2002 (twice), 2003, 2004 (twice)
Fourth edition 2006
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue entry for this title is available from the British Library
ISBN-10 0-132-01985-X
ISBN-13 978-0-13-201985-9
10
9
8
10
09
08
07
06
Set by 35 in 10/12pt Ehrhardt
Printed in Great Britain by Henry Ling Ltd, at the Dorset Press, Dorchester, Dorset

 
Preface to third edition
vi
Preface to fourth edition
vii
Acknowledgements
viii
INTRODUCTION
1
PART 1
SITE WORKS
3
1.1
Site layout
5
1.2
Electricity on building sites
22
1.3
Lighting building sites
28
1.4
Winter building
40
PART 2
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
51
2.1
Builders’ plant: general considerations
53
2.2
Small powered plant
58
2.3
Earth-moving and excavation plant
70
2.4
Plant for transportation
86
2.5
Concrete mixers and pumps
114
2.6
Scaffolding
124
PART 3
SUBSTRUCTURE: 1
133
3.1
Groundwater control
135
3.2
Deep trench excavations
148
3.3
Cofferdams and caissons
161
3.4
Tunnelling and culverts
179
CONTENTS

 
iv
Contents
PART 4
SUBSTRUCTURE: 2
191
4.1
Underpinning
193
4.2
Piled foundations
205
4.3
Subsoil analysis and foundations
231
4.4
Deep basements
248
PART 5
DEMOLITION AND TEMPORARY WORK
259
5.1
Shoring
261
5.2
Demolition
271
PART 6
PORTAL FRAMES
281
6.1
Portal frame theory
283
6.2
Concrete portal frames
287
6.3
Steel portal frames
294
6.4
Timber portal frames
299
PART 7
FIRE
305
7.1
The problem of ﬁre
307
7.2
Structural ﬁre protection
310
7.3
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
341
PART 8
CLADDINGS TO FRAMED STRUCTURES
367
8.1
Cladding panels
369
8.2
Inﬁll panels
375
8.3
Jointing
382
8.4
Mastics, sealants and gaskets
389
8.5
Curtain walling
392
8.6
Rainscreen cladding
402
8.7
Structural glass cladding
409
8.8
Sustainable construction
415
PART 9
FORMWORK SYSTEMS
417
9.1
Wall formwork
419
9.2
Patent formwork
430
9.3
Concrete surface ﬁnishes
439
PART 10
PRESTRESSED CONCRETE
445
10.1
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
447
10.2
Prestressed concrete systems
462

 
Contents
v
PART 11
BUILDINGS FOR INDUSTRIAL AND STORAGE USE
473
11.1
Factory buildings: roofs
475
11.2
Factory buildings: walls
491
11.3
Wind pressures
497
11.4
Driving rain
503
11.5
Roof structures
507
PART 12
STAIRS
535
12.1
Concrete stairs
537
12.2
Metal stairs
554
PART 13
INTERNAL COMPONENTS AND DECORATIONS
563
13.1
Partitions, doors and ceilings
565
13.2
Painting and decorations
580
PART 14
EXTERNAL WORKS
583
14.1
Roads, pavings and slabs
585
PART 15
ACCESS AND FACILITIES FOR DISABLED PEOPLE: 
BUILDINGS OTHER THAN DWELLINGS
603
15.1
Access to buildings
605
15.2
Access into buildings: entrances
610
15.3
Accessibility within buildings
613
15.4
Use of facilities
619
15.5
Sanitary accommodation
621
Bibliography
624
Index
626

 
Roy Chudley’s Construction Technology was ﬁrst published in four volumes, 
between 1973 and 1977. The material has since been continuously updated through
numerous reprints and full second editions in 1987. The books have gained a world-
wide readership, and their success – and their impact on construction education – is
a tribute to Roy Chudley’s experience in further and higher education and his
talents as a skilled technologist, illustrator and writer.
As a former colleague, it has been a privilege to once again work with Roy, on
this occasion revising his original work, and compiling the material into two books:
Construction Technology and Advanced Construction Technology. The content forms a
thorough study for all students of building, construction management, architecture,
surveying and the many other related disciplines within the diverse construction
profession.
The original presentation of comprehensive text matched by extensive
illustration is retained. Changes in legislation, such as the Building and
Construction Regulations, have been fully incorporated into the text; however, 
as much of the original work as possible has been purposely retained as it contains
many relevant examples of existing construction. Additional material discusses the
new developments and concepts of contemporary practice.
The two new volumes are complementary, as many of the topics introduced 
in Construction Technology are further developed here. Together the books 
provide essential reading for all students aspiring to management, technologist 
and professional qualiﬁcations. They should be read alongside the current local
building regulations and national standards, and where possible supplemented by
direct experience in the workplace.
Roger Greeno
Guildford 1998
PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION

 
Since the previous edition, reprint opportunities have permitted some amendments.
These have included new procedures, relative to legislative and practice changes.
This revised edition develops these further, with greater attention to information
and detail. It also incorporates more recent issues, especially aspects of the Building
Regulations that require buildings to be designed and constructed to higher energy-
efﬁcient standards. The responsibilities on building designers and owners with
regard to human rights are considered in a new chapter outlining the facilities
required for the convenience of the less able using buildings other than dwellings.
Notwithstanding contemporary requirements, the book’s established
construction principles are retained. These provide a useful reference to existing
building stock, and, where appropriate, modiﬁcations are included to illustrate
ongoing change.
The content represents the basic elements of construction practice. The book 
is neither extensive nor prescriptive, as there is insufﬁcient space in any book to
include every possible means for constructing commercial and industrial buildings.
However, the content is generally representative, and the reader is encouraged 
to develop their knowledge through experiential learning, observation in the
workplace, and reading manufacturer’s literature and technical articles in
professional journals. Reference sources for supplementary reading are provided
throughout.
In conjunction with this edition’s companion volume, Construction Technology,
the reader should gain an appreciation of the subject material to support progression
through any technical, academic or professional qualiﬁcation study programme that
includes construction as core or supplementary modules.
Roger Greeno
Guildford 2006
PREFACE TO FOURTH EDITION

 
This book originated in the 1970s as part of a four-volume series written by Roy
Chudley. As a result of its popularity, numerous reprints and a new edition
followed. In 1998 the series was rewritten by Roger Greeno as two separate
volumes: the initial two volumes formed the basis for the companion title,
Construction Technology, and the remainder, Advanced Construction Technology.
The book’s endurance is a tribute to Roy’s initial work in representing
construction practice with comprehensive illustrative guidance and supporting text.
I am particularly grateful to the founding author for allowing me the opportunity 
to continue this work and to emulate his unique presentation. I am also grateful to
the late Colin Bassett as general editor. It was his initiative and enthusiasm that
encouraged me to pursue this work.
No book can succeed without a good publisher, and Pearson Education have
fulﬁlled that role with their supportive editorial and production team. In particular,
Pauline Gillett has been a constant source of direction and help throughout the
preparation of the manuscript.
Roger Greeno
Guildford 2006
We are grateful to the Building Research Establishment and The Stationery Ofﬁce
Ltd for permission to reproduce material from the BRE Digests and various Acts,
Regulations and Statutory Instruments.
Extracts from British Standards are reproduced with the permission of BSI.
Complete copies can be obtained by post from BSI Customer Services, 389
Chiswick High Road, London W4 4AL.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

 
Advanced Construction Technology is a development of the relatively elementary
construction detailed in the associated volume, Construction Technology. This
volume augments the associated volume with further topics relating to domestic
buildings and lightweight-framed structures, in addition to concentrating primarily
on complex and specialised forms of construction.
It is designed to supplement a student’s lecture notes, projects and research
assignments as well as to provide a valuable professional reference. It also
complements the associated subjects of science, mathematics, materials technology,
design procedures, structural analysis, structural design, services, quantity
surveying, facilities management and management studies, and is therefore
appropriate for most undergraduate and higher-level construction study
programmes.
The format adopted follows that of Construction Technology, providing concise
notes and generous illustrations to elaborate on the text content. The reader should
appreciate that the illustrations are used to emphasise a point of theory and must
not be accepted as the only solution. A study of working drawings and details 
from building appraisals given in the various construction journals will add to
background knowledge and comprehension of construction technology.
No textbook or work of reference is ever complete. Therefore readers are
recommended to seek out all sources of reference on any particular topic of study,
to maximise information and to gain a thorough comprehension of the subject.
Construction technology is not purely academic; lectures and textbooks can only
provide the necessary theoretical background to the building processes of design
and site application. Practical experience and monitoring of work in progress are
essential components of any study programme involving the subject of construction
technology.
INTRODUCTION

 

 
SITE WORKS
PART
1

 

 
The construction of a building can be considered as production with a temporary
factory, the building site being the ‘factory’ in which the building contractor 
will make the product. To enable this activity to take place the builder requires
operatives, materials and plant, all of which have to be carefully controlled so 
that the operatives have the right machines in the most advantageous position, 
the materials stored so that they are readily available and not interfering with 
the general site circulation, and adequate storage space and site accommodation.
There is no standard size ratio between the free site space required to construct 
a building and the total size of the site on which the building is to be erected:
therefore each site must be considered as a separate problem in terms of allocating
space for operatives, materials and plant. To obtain maximum efﬁciency there is 
an optimum way of laying out the site and also a correct amount of expenditure 
to support the proposed site layout. Any planned layout should be reviewed
periodically and adjusted to suit the changing needs of the site activities. If this
aspect of building construction is carefully considered, planned and controlled, 
it will be reﬂected in the progress and proﬁtability of the contract.
Before any initial planning of the site layout can take place certain preliminary
work must be carried out, preferably at the pre-tender stage. The decision to tender
will usually be taken by the managing director or, for small works, by the senior
estimator up to a contract value laid down by the managing director. With given
designs and speciﬁcations the best opportunity for the contractor to prepare a
competitive and economic tender is in the programming and planning of the
construction activities. A thorough study of the bill of quantities will give an
indication of the amount and quality of the materials required and also of the
various labour resources needed to carry out the contract. A similar study of the
drawings, together with the bill of quantities and the speciﬁcation, will enable the
builder to make a preliminary assessment of the size and complexity of the contract,
the plant required, and the amount of money that can reasonably be expended on
1.1
SITE LAYOUT

 
6
Advanced Construction Technology
labour-saving items such as concrete mixing and placing alternatives, handling and
transporting equipment and off-site fabrication of such items as formwork and
reinforcement.
Before the estimator can make a start on calculating unit rates a site investigation
should be carried out, preferably by the site manager, who will supervise the
contract should the tender be successful. The manager’s report should include 
the following information:
n Access to site
On- and off-site access, road and rail facilities, distances
involved, rights of way restrictions, local authority or police restrictions and
bridge weight or height limitations on approach routes.
n Services
Available power and water supplies, together with rates of payment,
nuisance or value of services already on site, diversions required, and the time
element involved in carrying out any necessary diversions together with cost
implications.
n Layout
General site conditions such as nature of soil, height of water table,
ﬂooding risks, tidal waters, neighbouring properties, preservation orders, trees,
demolition problems and special insurance considerations.
n Staff
Travel distances, availability of local trade contractors, specialist
contractors, local rates of pay and facilities to be provided, e.g. site
accommodation, catering, health and safety equipment.
n Security
Local vandalism and pilfering record, security contractors’ facilities,
need for night security, fencing and hoarding requirements.
With the knowledge and data gained from contract documents, site
investigations, and any information gained from the police and local authority
sources the following pre-tender work can now be carried out:
n Pre-tender programme
Usually in a barchart form showing the proposed
time allowances for the major activities.
n Pre-tender health and safety plan
This is prepared by the project
coordinator (usually the architect) to enable tendering contractors to consider 
the practical and cost implications and adequacy of their resources with regard 
to assessment of risk in safety issues and provision of welfare requirements.
n Cost implications
Several programmes for comparison should be made to
establish possible break-even points giving an indication of required bank loan,
possible cash inﬂow and anticipated proﬁt.
n Plant schedule
This can be prepared in the form of a barchart and method
statements showing requirements and utilisation, which will help in deciding
how much site maintenance, equipment and space for plant accommodation 
will be needed on site. Consideration of whether to purchase or hire plant 
can be ascertained from these data, although this is only likely to affect smaller
items such as specialised tools, as few builders could justify owning large items 
of plant. However, a balance of buying and hiring will have to be established at
this stage.
n Materials schedule
Basic data can be obtained from the bill of quantities.
The buyer’s knowledge of the prevailing market conditions and future trends

 
Site layout
7
will enable usage and delivery periods and the amount of site space and/or
accommodation required to be predicted.
n Labour summary
Basic data obtained from the bill of quantities, site
investigation report and pre-tender barchart programme to establish number 
of subcontract trades required. Also the quantity and type of site personnel
accommodation required.
n Site organisation structure
This is a ‘family tree’ chart showing the
relationships and interrelationships between the various members of the 
site team, and is normally required only on large sites where the areas of
responsibility and accountability must be clearly deﬁned.
n Site layout
Site space allocation for materials storage, working areas, units of
accommodation, plant positions and general circulation areas. Access and egress
for deliveries and emergency services.
n Protection
Protection of adjacent buildings, structures (including trees) with
preservation orders and provision of fencing/hoarding to prevent trespass and to
protect people in the vicinity. Check adequacy of insurances.
nnn PLANNING SITE LAYOUTS
When planning site layouts the following must be taken into account:
n site activities;
n efﬁciency;
n movement;
n control;
n facilities for health, safety and welfare provision;
n accommodation for staff and storage of materials.
SITE ACTIVITIES
The time needed for carrying out the principal activities can be estimated from the
data obtained previously for preparing the material and labour requirements. With
repetitive activities estimates will be required to determine the most economical
balance of units that will allow simultaneous construction processes; this in turn 
will help to establish staff numbers, work areas and material storage requirements.
A similar argument can be presented for overlapping activities. If a particular
process presents a choice in the way the result can be achieved the alternatives 
must be considered: for example, the rate of placing concrete will be determined by
the output of the mixer and the speed of transporting the mix to the appropriate
position. Alternatives that can be considered are:
n more than one mixer;
n regulated supply of ready-mixed concrete;
n on large contracts, pumping the concrete to the placing position.
All alternative methods for any activity will give different requirements for staff
numbers, material storage, access facilities and possibly plant types and numbers.

 
8
Advanced Construction Technology
EFFICIENCY
To achieve maximum efﬁciency the site layout must aim at maintaining the desired
output of the planned activities throughout the working day, and this will depend
largely upon the following factors:
n Avoidance, as far as practicable, of double handling of materials.
n Proper storekeeping arrangements to ensure that the materials are of the correct
type, in the correct quantity, and available when required.
n Walking distances kept to a minimum to reduce the non-productive time spent
in covering the distances between working, rest and storage areas without
interrupting the general circulation pattern.
n Avoidance of loss by the elements by providing adequate protection for unﬁxed
materials on site, thereby preventing time loss and cost of replacing damaged
materials.
n Avoidance of loss by theft and vandalism by providing security arrangements in
keeping with the value of the materials being protected and by making the task
difﬁcult for the would-be thief or vandal by having adequate hoardings and
fences. Also to be avoided is the loss of materials due to pilfering by site staff,
who may consider this to be a perquisite of the industry. Such losses can be
reduced by having an adequate system of stores’ requisition and material
checking procedures. Engaging specialist subcontractors on a ‘supply and ﬁt’
basis may reduce the main contractor’s concern.
n Minimising on-site trafﬁc congestion by planning delivery arrivals, having
adequate parking facilities for site staff cars and mobile machinery when not in
use, and by having sufﬁcient turning circle room for the types of delivery vehicle
likely to enter the site.
MOVEMENT
Apart from the circulation problems mentioned above, the biggest problem is one 
of access. Vehicles delivering materials to the site should be able to do so without
difﬁculty or delay. Many of the contractors’ vehicles will be lightweight and will
therefore present few or no problems, but the weight and length of suppliers’
vehicles should be taken into account. For example, a fully laden ready-mix
concrete lorry can weigh 20 tonnes, and lorries used for delivering structural steel
can be 18.000 metres long, weigh up to 40 tonnes and require a large turning circle.
If it is anticipated that heavy vehicles will be operating on site it will be necessary 
to consider the road surface required. If the roads and paved areas are part of the
contract and will have adequate strength for the weight of the anticipated vehicles 
it may be advantageous to lay the roads at a very early stage in the contract, but if
the speciﬁcation for the roads is for light trafﬁc it would be advisable to lay only the
base hoggin or hardcore layer at the initial stages because of the risk of damage to
the completed roads by the heavy vehicles. As an alternative it may be considered 
a better policy to provide only temporary roadways composed of railway sleepers,
metal tracks or mats until a later stage in the contract, especially if such roads will
only be required for a short period. See also the Construction (Health, Safety and
Welfare) Regulations 15 to 17.

 
Site layout
9
CONTROL
This is concerned mainly with the overall supervision of the contract, including
staff, materials, and the movement of both around the site. This control should
form the hub of the activities, which logically develops into areas or zones of 
control radiating from this hub or centre. Which zone is selected for storage,
accommodation or speciﬁc activities is a matter of conjecture and the conditions
prevailing on a particular site, but as a rule the ﬁnal layout will be one of
compromise, with storage and accommodation areas generally receiving priority.
FACILITIES
These must be planned for each individual site, but certain factors will be common
to all sites – not least the implications of the Construction (Health, Safety and
Welfare) Regulations 1996, the Work at Height Regulations 2005 and the Health
and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. The main contractor is obliged to provide a safe,
healthy place of work, and safe systems of work, plant and equipment that are not a
risk to health. Equipment for the conduct of work must be provided with adequate
information for its safe use and, where appropriate, training in its application. Both
regulations are wide ranging and set goals or objectives relating to risk assessment to
ensure reasonably practicable steps are taken to ensure safety provision. Prescriptive
requirements for such provisions as scaffold guard rail heights and platform widths
are scheduled in the Work at Height Regulations.
The principal considerations under the Construction (Health, Safety and
Welfare) Regulations can be summarised as follows:
n Regulation 5: Safe places of work. This requires that people are provided with
properly maintained safe surroundings in which to work, along with safe means
of accessing and leaving that place of work. It is an overall requirement for
reasonable precautions to be taken, with the perceived and varying risk associated
with every place of work. Sufﬁcient and suitable working space should be
provided with regard to the activity being undertaken.
n Regulation 7: Precautions against falling through fragile material. This applies
mainly to work at heights in excess of 2 m, although potential for falls from any
height must be assessed. Requirements for sufﬁcient and adequate means of
guarding persons from fragile material must be in place, with a prominence of
warning notices displayed in the vicinity (see also Work at Height Regulations).
n Regulation 8: Falling objects. This requires sufﬁcient and suitable means for
preventing injury to persons from falling objects. Provisions may include guard
rails, toe boards and protective sheeting to scaffold systems. No material to be
tipped or thrown from height (see rubble chutes, Chapter 5.2). Material to be
stored or stacked in a stable manner to prevent collapse or unintentional
movement.
n Regulations 9 to 11: Work on structures. A large amount of work associated with
the construction of buildings is essentially temporary. Therefore potential for
structural collapse, e.g. inadequately supported formwork, is very real and must
be recognised and assessed by a competent person. The necessary precautions
must be taken to prevent danger. Demolition and dismantling are also high-risk

 
10
Advanced Construction Technology
areas, justifying thorough planning and risk analysis before and as work
proceeds.
n Regulations 12 and 13: Excavation, cofferdams and caissons. Substructural work
has an inherent danger of collapse. Suitable provision to prevent collapse of
trenches etc. must be designed and installed by competent specialists. Awareness
of water-table levels and possible variations, e.g. seasonal and tidal, is essential, 
as is location of underground cables and other services that could be a danger.
n Regulation 14: Prevention of drowning. This is not applicable to all sites, 
but if there is a danger from water or other liquids in any quantity then every
practical means possible must be taken to prevent people falling into it. Personal
protective and rescue equipment must be available, maintained in good order,
and water transport must be provided under the control of a competent person.
n Regulations 15 to 17: Trafﬁc routes, vehicles, doors and gates. These make
provision for segregation of vehicles and pedestrians, with deﬁnition of routes.
The regulations require adequate construction and maintenance of temporary
trafﬁc routes, control of unintended trafﬁc movement, warnings (audible or
otherwise) of vehicle movements, prohibition of misuse of vehicles, and
safeguards for people using powered doors and guards such as that on 
hoist facilities.
n Regulations 18 to 21: Prevention and control of emergencies. These make
provision for emergency routes, means of escape, evacuation procedures,
adequate signing, ﬁreﬁghting equipment, emergency lighting and associated
training for dealing with emergencies.
n Regulation 22: Welfare facilities. Minimum requirements apply even to the
smallest of sites. These include an adequate supply of drinking water, sanitary
and washing facilities, means to heat food and boil water, adequate outdoor
protection including personal protective equipment (PPE), rest accommodation
and facilities to eat meals, ﬁrst-aid equipment under the control of an appointed
person, and accommodation to change and store clothing.
n Regulations 23 to 27: Site-wide issues. General requirements to ensure fresh air
availability at each workplace, reasonable temperatures maintained at internal
workplaces, protection against inclement weather, adequate levels of lighting
(including emergency lights), reasonably clean and tidy workplaces, well-deﬁned
site boundaries, and maintenance of site equipment and plant for safe use by
operatives.
n Regulations 28 to 30: Training, inspection and reports. Specialised elements 
of work to be undertaken only by those appropriately qualiﬁed and/or trained.
Supervision of others by those suitably qualiﬁed may be acceptable. Places of
obvious danger and risk, such as excavations, cofferdams and caissons, to be
inspected regularly (at least daily and when changes are effected) by a competent
person. Written records/reports to be ﬁled after every inspection.
The principal considerations under the Work at Height Regulations apply to any
place at or below ground level as well as above ground. They also include the means
of gaining access and egress from that place of work. Measures taken by these
regulations are designed to protect a person from injury caused by falling any

 
Site layout
11
distance. This may be from plant and machinery or from equipment such as
scaffolding, trestles and working platforms, mobile or static. In summary:
n Regulation 4: Organisation and planning. It is the employer’s responsibility 
to ensure that work at height is planned, supervised and conducted in a safe
manner. This includes provisions for emergencies and rescues, and regard for
assessing risk to persons working during inclement weather.
n Regulation 5: Competence. Employer’s responsibility to ensure that persons
engaged in any activity relating to work at height are competent. Any person
being trained to be supervised by a competent person.
n Regulation 6: Risk avoidance. Re risk assessment under Regulation 3 of the
Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations. This is concerned
primarily with appraisal of the work task relative to its situation: that is, work
should not be undertaken at a height if it is safer to do it at a lower level, e.g.
cutting materials. Provisions to be in place for preventing persons sustaining
injury from falling.
n Regulation 7: Work at height equipment. Further requirements for assessment of
risk relative to the selection of plant and equipment suitable for collective rather
than individual use.
n Regulation 8: Speciﬁc work equipment.
Scaffold and working platforms:
n Top guard rail, min. 950 mm high.
n Intermediate guard rail, positioned so that no gap between it and top rail or
toe board exceeds 470 mm.
n Toe board, sufﬁcient to prevent persons or materials falling from the working
platform. Generally taken as 150 mm min. height. For practical purposes a
225 mm wide scaffold board secured vertically.
n Stable and sufﬁciently rigid for the intended purpose.
n Dimensions adequate for a person to pass along the working platform,
unimpeded by plant or materials.
n No gaps in the working platform.
n Platform surface resistant to slipping or tripping.
n Platform designed to resist anticipated loading from personnel, plant and
materials.
n Scaffold frame of sufﬁcient strength and stability.
n If the scaffold is unconventional in any way, calculations are required to prove
its structural integrity.
n Assembly, use and dismantling plan and instructions to be produced by a
competent designer. A standard procedure/plan is acceptable for regular
applications.
n During assembly, alteration, dismantling or non-use, suitable warning signs 
to be displayed as determined by the Health and Safety (Safety Signs and
Signals) Regulations. Means to prevent physical access also required.
n Assembly, alteration and dismantling under the supervision of a competent
person qualiﬁed by an approved training scheme.
Nets, airbags or other safeguards for arresting falls:

 
12
Advanced Construction Technology
Used where it is considered not reasonably practical to use other safer work
equipment without it. A safeguard and its means for anchoring must be of
adequate strength to arrest and contain persons without injury, where they are
liable to fall. Persons suitably trained in the use of this equipment, including
rescue procedures, must be available throughout its deployment. Where personal
fall protection equipment is considered necessary, it should be correctly ﬁtted to
the user, adequately anchored, and designed to prevent unplanned use by the
user’s normal movements.
Ladders:
n Used solely where a risk assessment indicates that it is inappropriate and
unnecessary to install more substantial equipment. Generally, this applies to
work of a short duration.
n The upper place of support is to be ﬁrm, stable and strong enough to retain
the ladder without movement. Position to be secured by rope lashing or other
mechanical ﬁxing.
n Inclination is recommended at approximately 75° to the vertical, i.e. in the
vertical to horizontal ratio of 4:1.
n A suspended ladder to be secured and attached to prevent displacement and
swinging.
n The extension of a ladder beyond a place of landing should be sufﬁcient for
safe bodily transfer – normally taken as 1.050 m min. measured vertically.
n Where a ladder ascends 9.000 m or more vertically, landing points to be
provided as rest platforms.
n Regulation 9: Fragile surfaces. It is the employer’s responsibility to ensure that
no person works on or near a fragile surface. Where it is impossible to avoid,
then sufﬁcient protection, e.g. platforms, guard rails etc., are to be provided.
Location of fragile surfaces is to be indicated by positioning of prominent
warning signs.
n Regulation 10: Falling objects. See also Regulation 8 under the Construction
(Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations. Suitable provisions, e.g. fan hoardings,
are required to prevent persons suffering injury from falling objects or materials.
Facilities are to be provided for safe collection and transfer of materials between
high and low levels, e.g. chutes. No objects to be thrown. Materials to be stacked
with regard to their stability and potential for movement.
n Regulation 11: Dangerous areas. Areas of work of speciﬁc danger, e.g.
demolition, to be isolated to ensure that persons not engaged in that particular
activity are excluded. Warning signs to be displayed.
n Regulations 12 and 13: Inspection. These regulations speciﬁcally apply to
scaffolding, ladders and fall protection equipment. After installation or assembly,
no equipment may be used until it has been inspected and documented as safe to
use by a competent person. Further inspections are required where conditions
may have caused deterioration of equipment, or alterations or changes have been
made. Following an interval, every place of work at height should be inspected
before work recommences.
n Regulation 14: Personnel duties. Persons working at height should notify their
supervisor of any equipment defect. If required to use personal safety/protective

 
Site layout
13
equipment (PPE), individuals should be adequately trained and instructed in 
its use.
Under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act employers must have deﬁned duties,
which include providing:
n a safe place of work;
n safe access to and egress from places of work;
n safe systems of work;
n safe items of plant and equipment;
n suitable and adequate training, supervision and instruction in the use of
equipment;
n suitable and appropriate PPE applicable to head, hands, feet, eyes and mouth;
n materials and substances that are safe to use (COSHH Regulations 1999);
n a statement of health and safety policy.
Employees and the self-employed have duties to ensure that they do not endanger
others while at work. This includes members of the public and other operatives on
site. They must cooperate with the health and safety objectives of their employer
(the main contractor), not interfere with any plant or equipment provided for their
use, other than its intended use, and report any defects to equipment and dangers
relating to unsafe conditions of work.
The preceding section on provision of facilities under the Construction Regulations,
the Work at Height Regulations and the Health and Safety at 
Work etc. Act is intended as summary comment for guidance only. For a full
appreciation, the reader is advised to consult each speciﬁc document. These are
published by The Stationery Ofﬁce, www.tso.co.uk.
ACCOMMODATION
Apart from legislative necessities, the main areas of concern will be sizing,
equipping and siting the various units of accommodation.
Mess huts
These are for the purposes of preparing, heating and consuming food, which may
require the following services: drainage, light, power, hot and cold water supply. 
To provide a reasonable degree of comfort a ﬂoor area of 2.0 to 2.5 m2 per person
should be allowed. This will provide sufﬁcient circulation space, room for tables
and seating, and space for the storage of any utensils. Consideration can also be
given to introducing a system of staggered meal breaks, thus reducing space
requirements. On large sites where full canteen facilities are being provided this 
will be subcontracted to a catering ﬁrm. Mess huts should be sited so that they do
not interfere with the development of the site but are positioned so that travel time
is kept to a minimum. On sites that by their very nature are large, it is worthwhile
considering a system whereby tea breaks can be taken in the vicinity of the work
areas. Siting mess huts next to the main site circulation and access roads is not of

 
14
Advanced Construction Technology
major importance. It is the principal contractor’s responsibility to ensure that
reasonable welfare facilities are available on site, although they do not necessarily
have to provide these. It may be part of subcontractors’ conditions of engagement
that they provide their own.
Drying rooms
Used for the purposes of depositing and drying wet clothes. Drying rooms generally
require a lighting and power supply, and lockers or racks for deposited clothes. A
ﬂoor area of 0.6 m2 per person should provide sufﬁcient space for equipment and
circulation. Drying rooms should be sited near or adjacent to the mess room.
Toilets
Contractors are required to provide at least adequate washing and sanitary facilities
as set out in Regulation 22 of the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare)
Regulations. All these facilities will require light, water and drainage services. 
If it is not possible or practicable to make a permanent or temporary connection 
to a drainage system, the use of chemical methods of disposal should be considered.
Sizing of toilet units is governed by the facilities being provided, and if female staff
are employed on site separate toilet facilities must be provided. Toilets should be
located in a position that is convenient to both ofﬁces and mess rooms, which may
mean providing more than one location on large sites.
First-aid rooms
Only required on large sites as a speciﬁc facility, otherwise a reasonably equipped
mess room will sufﬁce. The ﬁrst-aid room should be sited in a position that is
conveniently accessible from the working areas, and must be of such a size as to
allow for the necessary equipment and adequate circulation, which would indicate 
a minimum ﬂoor area of 6 m2. First-aid equipment must be under the charge of a
suitably trained, appointed person, with responsibility for accounting for the
contents and their use.
Before the proposed site layout is planned and drawn, the contracts manager and
the proposed site agent should visit the site to familiarise themselves with the
prevailing conditions. During this visit the position and condition of any existing
roads should be noted, and the siting of any temporary roads considered necessary
should be planned. Information regarding the soil conditions, height of water table,
and local weather patterns should be obtained by observation, site investigation, soil
investigation, local knowledge or from the local authority. The amount of money
that can be expended on this exercise will depend upon the size of the proposed
contract and possibly upon how competitive the tenders are likely to be for the
contract under consideration.
Figure 1.1.1 shows a typical small-scale general arrangement drawing, and needs
to be read in conjunction with Fig. 1.1.2, which shows the proposed site layout.

 
Site layout
15
Figure 1.1.1
Site layout example: general arrangement

 
16
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 1.1.2
Site layout example: proposed layout of accommodation and storage

 
Site layout
17
The following data have been collected from a study of the contract documents and
by carrying out a site investigation:
n Site is in a typical urban district within easy reach of the contractor’s head ofﬁce
and therefore will present no transport or stafﬁng problems.
n Subsoil is a ﬁrm sandy clay with a water table at a depth that should give no
constructional problems.
n Possession of site is to be at the end of April, and the contract period is 
18 months. The work can be programmed to enable the foundation and
substructure work to be completed before adverse winter weather conditions
prevail.
n Development consists of a single ﬁve-storey ofﬁce block with an in-situ
reinforced concrete structural frame, in-situ reinforced concrete ﬂoors and 
roof, precast concrete stairs, and inﬁll brick panels to the structural frame with
large hardwood timber frames ﬁxed into openings formed by the bricklayers.
Reduced-level dig is not excessive, but the topsoil is to be retained for
landscaping upon completion of the building contract by a separate contractor;
the paved area in front of the ofﬁce block, however, forms part of the main
contract. The existing oak trees in the north-east corner of the site are to be
retained and are to be protected during the contract period.
n Estimated maximum number of staff on site at any one time is 40, in the ratio of
1 supervisory staff to 10 operatives plus a resident clerk of works.
n Main site requirements are as follows:
1 ofﬁce for 3 supervisory staff.
1 ofﬁce for resident clerk of works.
1 ofﬁce for reception and materials checker/assistant site agent.
1 hutment as lock-up store.
1 mess room for 36 operatives.
1 drying room for 36 operatives.
Toilets.
Storage compound for major materials.
Timber store and formwork fabrication area.
Reinforcement store and fabrication area.
Scaffold store.
Car parking areas.
1 tower crane and area for concrete deliveries, sand and cement storage, and 
site mixer.
Sizing and location of main site requirements can be considered in the following
manner:
n Ofﬁces for contractor’s supervisory staff
Area required = 3 × 3.7 m2 =
11.1 m2. Using plastic-coated galvanised steel prefabricated cabins based on 
a 2.400 m wide module gives a length requirement of 11.1 ÷ 2.4 = 4.625 m:
therefore use a hutment 2.400 m wide × 4.800 m long, giving an area of 11.52 m2.
Other standard internal widths are 2.7 and 3.0 m, and standard internal lengths
range from 2.4 to 10.8 m in 1.2 m increments.

 
18
Advanced Construction Technology
n Ofﬁce for resident clerk of works
Allowing for one visitor area 
required = 2 × 3.7 m2 = 7.4 m2. Using same width module as for contractor’s
ofﬁce length required = 7.4 ÷ 2.4 = 3.08 m, therefore using a 2.400 m wide ×
3.600 m long cabin will give an area of 8.64 m2. The contractor’s ofﬁce and that
for the clerk of works need to be sited in a position that is easily and quickly
found by visitors to the site and yet at the same time will give a good view of 
the site operations. Two positions on the site in question seem to meet these
requirements: one is immediately to the south of the paved area and the other 
is immediately to the west of it. The second position has been chosen for both
ofﬁces because there is also room to accommodate visitors’ cars in front of the
ofﬁces without disturbing the circulation space given by the paved area.
n Ofﬁce for reception and materials checker
A hut based on the
requirements set out above for the clerk of works would be satisfactory. The
ofﬁce needs to be positioned near to the site entrance so that materials being
delivered can be checked, directed to the correct unloading point, and – most
important – checked before leaving to see that the delivery has been completed. 
It also needs to be easily accessible for site visitors, thus preventing unsupervised
wandering onto the site.
n Lock-up store
This needs to be ﬁtted with racks and storage bins to 
house valuable items, and a small unit of plan size 2.400 m × 2.400 m has been
allocated. Consideration must be given to security, and in this context it has been
decided to combine the lock-up store and the site manager’s/materials checker’s
ofﬁce, giving a total ﬂoor plan of 2.400 m × 6.000 m. This will enable the issue 
of stores only against an authorised and signed requisition to be carefully
controlled, the assistant site agent fulﬁlling the function of storekeeper.
n Mess room
Area required = 36 × 2.5 m2 = 90 m2, using a width module of
3.000 m, length required = 90 ÷ 3 = 30 m: therefore a number of combinations
based on the standard lengths listed are possible. Perhaps 3 modules of 
10.8 m = 32.4 m total length (97.2 m2) or 5 modules of 6 m length = 30 m 
total length (90 m2), the choice depending to some extent on the disposition of
the site staff, number and size of subcontractors involved. The mess room needs
to be sited in a fairly central position to all the areas of activity, and the east end
of the paved area has been selected.
n Drying room
Area required = 36 × 0.6 m2 = 21.6 m2, using a width module 
of 3.000 m, length required = 21.6 ÷ 3 = 7.2 m: therefore select a single length or
2 modules of 3.600 m. The drying room needs to be in close proximity to the
mess room and has therefore been placed at the east end of the mess room.
Consideration could be given to combining the mess room and drying room 
into one unit.
n Toilets
On this site it is assumed that connection can be made to existing
drains. If this is not convenient, temporary (or preferably permanent) drain
branches can be connected to a main sewer. Two such units are considered to 
be adequate, one to be sited near to the mess room and the other to be sited 
near to the ofﬁce complex. Adequate sanitary conveniences are required in the
Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1996. For the mess toilet
unit catering for 36 operatives two conveniences are considered minimum, but a

 
Site layout
19
three-convenience toilet unit will be used, having a plan size of 2.400 m × 3.600 m.
Similarly, although only one convenience is required for the ofﬁce toilet unit, a
two-convenience unit will be used with a plan size of 2.400 m × 2.400 m.
n Materials storage compound
An area to be deﬁned by a temporary plywood
hoarding 2.400 m high and sited at the east end of the paved area giving good
access for deliveries and within reach of the crane. Plan size to be allocated
12.000 m wide × 30.000 m long.
n Timber storage
Timber is to be stored in top-covered but open-sided racks
made from framed standard scaffold tubulars. Maximum length of timber to be
ordered is unlikely to exceed 6.000 m in length: therefore, allowing for removal,
cutting and fabricating into formwork units, a total plan size of 6.000 m wide ×
36.000 m long has been allocated. This area has been sited to the south of the
paved area, giving good access for delivery and within the reach of the crane.
n Reinforcement storage
The bars are to be delivered cut to length, bent 
and labelled, and will be stored in racks as described above for timber storage.
Maximum bar length to be ordered assumed not to exceed 12.000 m: therefore 
a storage and fabrication plan size of 6.000 m wide × 30.000 m long has been
allocated. This area has been sited to the north of the storage compound, giving
reasonable delivery access and within reach of the crane.
n Scaffold storage
Tube lengths to be stored in racks as described for timber
storage, with bins provided for the various types of coupler. Assuming a
maximum tube length of 6.000 m, a plan size of 3.000 m wide × 12.000 m long.
This storage area has been positioned alongside the west face of the proposed
structure, giving reasonable delivery access and within reach of the crane if
needed. The scaffold to be erected will be of an independent type around the
entire perimeter positioned 200 mm clear of the building face and of ﬁve-board
width, giving a total minimum width of 200 + (5 × 225) = 1.325, say 1.400 m 
total width.
n Tower crane
To be sited on the paved area in front of the proposed building
alongside the mixer and aggregate storage position. A crane with a jib length of
27.000 m, having a lifting capacity of 1.25 tonnes at its extreme position, has
been chosen so that the crane’s maximum radius will cover all the storage areas,
thus making maximum utilisation of the crane possible.
n Car parking
Assume 20 car parking spaces are required for operatives,
needing a space per car of 2.300 m wide × 5.500 m long, giving a total length of
2.3 × 20 = 46.000 m and, allowing 6.000 m clearance for manoeuvring, a width of
5.5 + 6.0 = 11.500 m will be required. This area can be provided to the south of
the mess room and drying room complex. Staff car-parking space can be sited in
front of the ofﬁce hutments, giving space for the parking of seven cars, which
will require a total width of 7 × 2.3 = 16.100 m.
n Fencing
The north and south sides of the site both face onto public footpaths
and highways. Therefore a close-boarded or sheet hoarding in accordance with
the licence issued by the local authority will be provided. A lockable double gate
is to be included in the south-side hoarding to give access to the site. The east
side of the site faces an undeveloped site, and the contract calls for a 2.000 m
high concrete post and chain-link fence to this boundary. This fence will be

 
20
Advanced Construction Technology
erected at an early stage in the contract to act as a security fence during the
construction period as well as providing the permanent fencing. The west side 
of the site has a 2.000 m high brick wall, which is in a good structural condition,
and therefore no action is needed on this boundary.
n Services
It has been decided that permanent connections to the foul drains
will be made for convenient site use, thus necessitating early planning of the
drain-laying activities. The permanent water supply to the proposed ofﬁce block
is to be laid at an early stage, and this run is to be tapped to provide the supplies
required to the mixer position and the ofﬁce complex. A temporary connection 
is to be made to supply the water service to the mess room complex, because 
a temporary supply from the permanent service would mean running the
temporary supply for an unacceptable distance. An electrical supply is to be
taken onto site, with a supply incoming unit housed in the reception ofﬁce along
with the main distribution unit. The subject of electrical supplies to building
sites is dealt with in Chapter 1.2. Telephones will be required to the contractor’s
and clerk of works’ ofﬁces. It has been decided that a gas supply is not required.
n Site identiﬁcation
A V-shaped board bearing the contractor’s name and
company symbol is to be erected in the south-west corner of the site in such a
manner that it can be clearly seen above the hoarding by trafﬁc travelling in both
directions, enabling the site to be clearly identiﬁed. The board will also advertise
the company’s name and possibly provide some revenue by including on it the
names of participating subcontractors. As a further public relations exercise it
might be worthwhile considering the possibility of including public viewing
panels in the hoarding on the north and south sides of the site.
n Health and safety
Attached to the hoarding at the site entrance is a board
displaying the employer’s policy for corporate site safety. Some examples of the
standard images that could be used are shown in Fig. 1.1.3.
Figure 1.1.3
Site safety board

 
Site layout
21
Note:
Sign colours
Geometric shape
Indication
Red on white background, black image
Circular with a diagonal line
Prohibition
Yellow with black border, black image
Triangular
Warning
Blue with white image
Circular
Mandatory
Green with white image
Oblong or square
Safe condition
References:
Health and Safety at Work etc. Act.
Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations.
Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations.
European Directive 92/58 EEC.
The extent to which the above exercise in planning a site layout would be carried
out in practice will depend upon various factors, such as the time and money that
can reasonably be expended and the beneﬁts that could accrue in terms of maximum
efﬁciency compared with the amount of the capital outlay. The need for careful 
site layout and site organisation planning becomes more relevant as the size and
complexity of the operation increase. This is particularly true for contracts where
spare site space is very limited.

 
A supply of electricity is usually required on construction sites to provide lighting
to the various units of accommodation. It may also be needed to provide the power
to drive small and large items of plant. Two sources of electrical supply to the site
are possible:
n portable self-powered generators;
n metered supply from the local section of the national grid distribution 
network.
As a supply of electricity will be required in the ﬁnal structure the second source 
is usually adopted, because it is generally possible to connect a permanent supply
cable to the proposed development for construction operations, thus saving the cost
of laying a temporary supply cable to the site.
To obtain a metered temporary supply of electricity a contract must be signed
between the main contractor and a local area electricity marketing company. They
will require the following information:
n Address of site.
n Site location plan.
n Maximum anticipated load demand in kW for the construction period. A
reasonable method of estimating this demand is to allow for a loading of 
10 W/m2 for the total ﬂoor area of the ﬁnished structure and to add for any 
high-load equipment such as cranes, pumps and drying-out heaters that are 
to be used.
n Final load demand of the completed building to ensure that the correct rating of
cable is laid for the permanent supply.
n Date on which temporary supply will be required.
n Name, address and telephone number of the building owner or their agent, and
of the main contractor.
1.2
ELECTRICITY ON BUILDING SITES

 
Electricity on building sites
23
To ensure that the supply and installation are available when required by the
builder it is essential that an application for a temporary supply of electricity is
made at the earliest possible date.
On any construction site it is possible that there may be existing electricity
cables, which can be advantageous or may constitute a hazard or nuisance.
Overhead cables will be visible, whereas the routes and depths of underground
cables can be ascertained only from the records and maps kept by local area supply
companies. Overhead cable voltages should be checked with the local area suppliers,
because these cables are usually uninsulated and are therefore classed as a hazard
due mainly to their ability to arc over a distance of several metres. High-voltage
cables of over 11 kV rating will need special care, and any of the following actions
could be taken to reduce or eliminate the danger:
n Apply to the local area supplier to have the cables re-routed at a safe distance 
or height.
n Apply to have the cable taken out of service.
n Erect warning barriers to keep site operatives and machines at a safe distance.
These barriers must be clearly identiﬁed as to their intention, and they may 
be required to indicate the safe distance in both the horizontal and vertical
directions. The local area supplier will advise on suitable safe distances according
to the type of cable and the load it is transmitting.
The position and depth of underground cables given by electricity suppliers must
be treated as being only approximate, because historical records show only the data
regarding the condition as laid, and since then changes in site levels may have taken
place. When excavating in the locality of an underground cable extreme caution
must be taken, which may even involve careful hand excavation to expose the cable.
Exposed cables should be adequately supported, and suitable barriers with warning
notices should be erected. Any damage, however minor, must be reported to the
electricity supplier for the necessary remedial action. It is worth noting that if a
contractor damages an underground electric cable that was known to be present,
and possibly caused a loss of supply to surrounding properties, the contractor can
be liable for negligence, trespass to goods and damages.
nnn SUPPLY AND INSTALLATION
In Great Britain electrical installations on construction sites are subject to the
requirements of the Electricity Supply Regulations 1988 and the Electricity at 
Work Regulations 1989. These impose duties and expectations on employers,
employees and the self-employed, for health and safety responsibilities with regard
to the use of electricity. Risk assessment and suitable precautions relating to
particular hazards, such as overhead lines and underground cables encountered 
on site, are contained by the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and the
Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1996. Installations should
follow rules given in BS 7671: Requirements for electrical installations (Institution 
of Electrical Engineers Wiring Regulations). Section 604 details provision for
temporary installations and installations on construction sites. See also, BS 7375:

 
24
Advanced Construction Technology
Code of practice for distribution of electricity on construction and building sites. The
supply distribution assemblies used in the installation should comply with the
recommendations of BS 4363: Speciﬁcation for distribution assemblies for reduced 
low voltage electricity supplies for construction and building sites. This covers the
equipment suitable for the control and distribution of electricity from a three-phase
four-wire a.c. system up to a voltage of 400 V with a maximum capacity of 300
A per phase. BS EN 60309-2 speciﬁes plugs, socket outlets and cable couplers for
the varying voltages recommended for use on construction sites.
The appliances and wiring used in temporary installations on construction sites
may be subject to extreme abuse and adverse conditions: therefore correct circuit
protection, earthing and frequent inspection are most important, and this work,
including the initial installation, should be entrusted to a qualiﬁed electrician or 
to a specialist electrical contractor.
Electrical distribution cables contain three line wires and one neutral, which 
can give either a 400 V three-phase supply or a 230 V single-phase supply. Records
of accidents involving electricity show that the highest risk is encountered when
electrical power is used in wet or damp conditions, which are often present on
construction sites. It is therefore generally recommended that wherever possible 
the distribution voltage on building sites should be 110 V. This is a compromise
between safety and efﬁciency, but it cannot be overstressed that a supply of this
voltage can still be dangerous and lethal.
The recommended voltages for use on construction sites are given below:
Mains voltage
400 V three-phase:
n supply to transformer unit, heavy plant such as cranes and movable plant fed via
a trailing cable;
n hoists and plant powered by electric motors in excess of a 3.75 kW rating.
230 V single-phase:
n supply to transformer unit;
n supply to distribution unit;
n installations in site accommodation buildings;
n ﬁxed ﬂoodlighting;
n small static machines.
Reduced voltage
110 V three-phase:
n portable and hand-held tools;
n small mobile plant up to 3.75 kW.
110 V single-phase:
n portable and hand-held tools;
n small items of plant;
n site ﬂoodlighting other than ﬁxed ﬂoodlighting;

 
Electricity on building sites
25
n portable hand-lamps;
n local lighting up to 2 kW.
50 V single-phase and 25 V single-phase:
n as listed for 110 V single-phase but being used in conﬁned and damp situations.
It is worth considering the use of 50 or 25 V battery-supplied hand-lamps if
damp situations are present on site. All supply cables must be earthed, and in
particular 110 V supplies should be centre-point earthed so that the nominal voltage
to earth is not more than 65 V on a three-phase circuit and not more than 55 V on a
single-phase circuit.
Protection to a circuit can be given by using bridge fuses, cartridge fuses and
circuit breakers. Adequate protection should be given to all main and sub circuits
against any short-circuit current, overload current and earth faults.
Protection through earthing may be attained in two distinct ways:
n Provision of a path of low impedence to ensure over-current device will operate
in a short space of time.
n Insertion in the supply of a circuit-breaker with an operating coil that trips the
breaker when the current due to earth leakage exceeds a predetermined value.
BS 4363 and BS EN 60309-2 recommend that plug and socket outlets are
identiﬁed by a colour coding as an additional safety precaution to prevent incorrect
connections being made. The recommended colours are:
25 V
– violet
50 V
– white
110 V
– yellow
230 V
– blue
400 V
– red
500/650 V – black
The equipment that can be used to distribute an electrical supply around a
construction site is as follows:
n Incoming site assembly (ISA)
Supply, control and distribution of mains
supply on site – accommodates supply company’s equipment and has one
outgoing circuit.
n Main distribution assembly (MDA)
Control and distribution of mains
supply for circuits of 400 V three-phase and 230 V single-phase.
n Incoming site distribution assembly (ISDA)
A combined ISA and MDA
for use on sites where it is possible to locate these units together.
n Transformer assembly
Transforms and distributes electricity at a reduced
voltage: can be for single-phase, three-phase or both phases and is abbreviated
TA/1, TA/3 or TA/1/3 accordingly.
n Socket outlet assembly (SOA)
Connection, protection and distribution of
ﬁnal subcircuits at a voltage lower than the incoming supply.
n Extension outlet assembly (EOA)
Similar to outlet assembly except that
outlets are not protected.

 
26
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 1.2.1
Typical distribution sequence of site electricity

 
Electricity on building sites
27
n Earth monitor unit (EMU)
Flexible cables supplying power at mains voltage
from the MDA to movable plant incorporate a separate pilot conductor in
addition to the main earth continuity conductor. A very-low-voltage current
passes along these conductors between the portable plant and the ﬁxed EMU. 
A failure of the earth continuity conductor will interrupt the current ﬂow, which
will be detected by the EMU, and this device will automatically isolate the main
circuit.
The cubicles or units must be of robust construction, strong, durable, rain resistant
and rigid to resist any damage that could be caused by transportation, site handling
or impact shocks likely to be encountered on a construction site. All access doors or
panels must have adequate weather seals. Figure 1.2.1 shows a typical supply and
distribution system for a construction site.
The routeing of the supply and distribution cables around the construction site
should be carefully planned. Cables should not be allowed to trail along the ground
unless suitably encased in a tube or conduit, and even this method should be used
only for short periods of time. Overhead cables should be supported by hangers
attached to a straining wire and suitably marked with ‘ﬂags’ or similar visual
warning. Recommended minimum height clearances for overhead cables are:
n 5.200 m in positions inaccessible to vehicles;
n 5.800 m where cable crosses an access road or any part of the site accessible to
vehicles.
Cables that are likely to be in position for a long time, such as the supply to a crane,
should preferably be sited underground at a minimum depth of 500 mm and
protected by tiles, or alternatively housed in clayware or similar pipes.
In the interest of safety, and to enable ﬁrst-aid treatment to be given in cases of
accident, all contractors using a supply of electricity on a construction site for any
purpose must display, in a prominent position, extracts from the Electricity at Work
Regulations. Pictographic safety signs for caution of the risk of electric shock are
applicable under the Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996.
Suitable placards giving instructions for emergency ﬁrst-aid treatment for persons
suffering from electrical shock and/or burns are obtainable from RoSPA, the 
St John Ambulance Association, and stockists of custom-made signs.

 
Inadequate light accounts for more than 50% of the loss of production on UK
construction sites between the months of November and February. Inadequate
lighting also increases the risks of accidents and lowers the security of the site. 
The initial costs of installing a system of artiﬁcial lighting for both internal and
external activities can usually be offset by higher output, better-quality work, a
more secure site, and apportioning the costs over a number of contracts on a use
and reuse basis.
The reasons for installing a system of artiﬁcial lighting on a construction site are
as follows:
n Inclement weather, particularly in winter, when a reduction of natural daylight is
such that the carrying out of work becomes impracticable.
n Without adequate light, all activities on construction sites carry an increased risk
of accident and injury.
n By enabling work to proceed, losses in productivity can be reduced.
n Reduces the wastage of labour and materials that often results from working in
poor light.
n Avoids short-time working due to the inability to see clearly enough for accurate
and safe working.
n Improves the general security of the site.
The following beneﬁts may be obtained by installing and using a system of
artiﬁcial lighting on a construction site:
n Site activities will be independent of the availability of natural daylight, and
therefore the activities can be arranged to suit the needs of the contract, the
availability of materials, and the personnel involved.
n Overtime and extra shifts can be worked to overcome delays that might occur
from any cause.
1.3
LIGHTING BUILDING SITES

 
Lighting building sites
29
n Deliveries and collection of materials or plant can be made outside normal site
working hours, thus helping to avoid delays and/or congestion.
n The amount of spoilt material and the consequent rectiﬁcation caused by
working under inadequate light can be reduced.
n It provides an effective deterrent to the would-be trespasser or pilferer.
n Contractual relationships will be improved by ensuring regular working hours
and thus regular earnings.
Planning the lighting requirements depends on site layout, size of site, shape 
of site, geographical location, availability of an electrical supply and the planned
activities for the winter period. Figure 1.3.1 shows two charts covering various
regions in the UK, giving an indication of the periods when external and internal
artiﬁcial lighting may be required on a construction site under normal conditions.
Any form of temporary artiﬁcial site lighting should be easy to install and modify 
as needs change, and should be easy to remove while works are still in progress.
The supply and distribution of an electrical service to a construction site has
already been covered in the previous chapter, and it is therefore necessary only to
stress again the need for a safe, reliable installation, designed and installed by a
specialist contractor.
nnn ILLUMINATION
Illumination can be considered as the measure of light or illuminance falling on 
a surface. It is expressed in lux, which is one lumen of light falling on 1 m2 of
surface, and this can be measured with a small portable lightmeter, which consists
of a light-sensitive cell generating a small current proportional to the light falling 
on it. The level of illuminance at which an operative can work in safety and carry
out tasks to an acceptable standard, in terms of both speed and quality, is quite low,
because the human eye is very adaptable and efﬁcient. Although the amount of
illuminance required to enable a particular activity to be carried out is a subjective
measure, depending largely upon the task, and the age and state of health of the
Table 1.3.1
Typical service values of illuminance
Activities
Illuminance (lux)
External lighting
Materials handling
200
Open circulation areas
100
Internal lighting
Circulation
100
Working areas
200
Reinforcing and concreting
300
Joinery, bricklaying and plastering
500
Painting and decorating
500
Fine craft work
1,000
Site ofﬁces
500
Drawing board positions
750

 
30
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 1.3.1
Approximate times for site lighting

 
Lighting building sites
31
operative concerned, Table 1.3.1 presents typical service values of illuminance. 
The values shown in the table do not allow for deterioration, dirt, bad conditions or
shadow effects. Therefore in calculating the illuminance required for any particular
situation a target value of twice the service value should be used.
When deciding on the type of installation to be used, two factors need to be
considered:
n type of lamp to be used;
n nature and type of area under consideration.
The properties of the various types of lamp available should be examined to
establish the most appropriate for any particular site requirement.
nnn LAMPS
n Tungsten ﬁlament lamp
Ideal for short periods, such as a total of 200 hours
during the winter period; main recommended uses are for general interior
lighting and low-level external movement. They are cheap to buy but are
relatively expensive to run.
n Tungsten halogen lamp
Compact ﬁtting with high light output, and suitable
for all general area ﬂoodlighting. They are easy to mount, and have a more
effective focused beam than the ﬁlament lamp. These lamps generally have 
a life of twice that of ﬁlament lamps, and quartz lamps have a higher degree 
of resistance to thermal shock than glass ﬁlament lamps. They are dearer than
ﬁlament lamps and are still relatively expensive to run but should be considered
if the running time is in the region of 1,500 hours annually.
n Mercury tungsten lamps
Compact, efﬁcient, with a good lamp life, and do
not need the expensive starting gear of the vapour discharge lamps. They can be
used for internal and external area lighting where lamps are not mounted above
9.000 m high. These are high-cost lamps but are cheap to run.
n Mercury discharge lamps
High-efﬁciency lamps with a long life; can be
used for area lighting where lamps are mounted above 9.000 m high. Costs for
lamps and control gear are high but the running costs are low.
n Tubular ﬂuorescent lamps
Uniformly bright in all directions; used when a
great concentration of light is not required; efﬁcient, with a range of colour
values. These lamps have a long life and are economical to run.
n High-pressure sodium discharge lamps
Compact, efﬁcient, with a long
life. For the best coverage without glare they should be mounted above 13.500 m
high. Cost for lamp and control gear is high but running costs are low, which
makes them suitable for area lighting.
Apart from the cost of the lamps and the running charges, consideration must 
be given to the cost of cables, controlling equipment, mounting poles, masts 
or towers. A single high tower may well give an overall saving against using a
number of individual poles or masts in spite of the high initial cost for the tower.
Consideration can also be given to using the scaffold, incomplete structure or the
mast of a tower crane for lamp-mounting purposes, each subject to earthing.

 
32
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn SITE LIGHTING INSTALLATIONS
When deciding upon the type and installation layout for construction site lighting,
consideration must be given to the nature of the area and work to be lit, and also to 
the type or types of lamp to be used. These aspects can be considered under the
following headings:
n external and large circulation areas;
n beam ﬂoodlighting;
n walkway lighting;
n local lighting.
EXTERNAL AND LARGE CIRCULATION AREAS
These areas may be illuminated by using mounted lamps situated around the
perimeter of the site or in the corners of the site; alternatively, overhead
illumination using dispersive ﬁttings can be used. The main objectives of area
lighting are to enable staff and machinery to move around the site in safety and to
give greater security to the site. Areas of local danger such as excavations and
obstructions should, however, be marked separately with red warning lights or
amber ﬂashing lamps. Tungsten ﬁlament, mercury vapour or tungsten halogen
lamps can be used, and these should be mounted on poles, masts or towers
according to the lamp type and wattage. Typical mounting heights for various
lamps and wattages are shown in Table 1.3.2.
Large areas are generally illuminated by using large, high-mounted lamps,
whereas small areas and narrow sites use a greater number of smaller ﬁttings. By
mounting the lamps as high as practicable above the working level glare is reduced,
and by lighting the site from at least two directions the formation of dense shadows
is also reduced. The spacing of the lamps is also important if under-lit and over-lit
areas are to be avoided. Figures 1.3.2 and 1.3.3 show typical lamps and the
recommended spacing ratios.
Dispersive lighting is similar to an ordinary internal overhead lighting 
system, and is suitable for both exterior and interior area lighting where overhead
Table 1.3.2
Mounting heights
Lamp type
Watts
Minimum height (m)
Tungsten ﬁlament
200
4.500
300
6.000
750
9.000
Mercury vapour
400
9.000
1,000
15.000
2,000
18.000
Tungsten halogen
500
7.500
1,000
9.000
2,000
15.000

 
Lighting building sites
33
Figure 1.3.2
Area lighting: lamps and spacing ratios: 1

 
34
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 1.3.3
Area lighting: lamps and spacing ratios: 2

 
Lighting building sites
35
suspension is possible. Ordinary industrial ﬁttings should not be used because of the
adverse conditions that normally prevail on construction sites. The ﬁttings selected
should therefore be protected against rust, corrosion and water penetration. To
obtain a reasonable spread of light the lamps should be suspended evenly over the
area to be illuminated, as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1.3.4. Tungsten ﬁlament,
mercury vapour and ﬂuorescent trough ﬁttings are suitable and should be
suspended at a minimum height according to their type and wattage. Typical
suspension heights are shown in Table 1.3.3.
Most manufacturers provide guidance as to the choice of lamps or combination
of lamps, but a simple method of calculating lamp requirements is as follows:
1. Decide upon the service illuminance required, and double this ﬁgure to obtain
the target value.
2. Calculate total lumens required =
3. Choose lamp type.
Number of lamps required =
4. Repeat stage 3 for different lamp types to obtain the most practicable and
economic arrangement.
5. Consider possible arrangements, remembering that:
n larger lamps give more lumens per watt and are generally more economic to run;
n fewer supports simplify wiring and aid overall economy;
n corner siting arrangements are possible;
n clusters of lamps are possible.
The calculations when using dispersive lighting are similar to those given above for
mounted area lighting except for the formula in stage 2, which has a utilisation
factor of 0.27 instead of 0.23.
BEAM FLOODLIGHTING
Tungsten ﬁlament or mercury vapour lamps can be used, but this technique is
limited in application on construction sites to supplementing other forms of
lighting. Beam ﬂoodlights are used to illuminate areas from a great distance. The
total lumens required
lumen output of chosen lamp
area (m2) × target value (lux)
0.23
Table 1.3.3
Suspension heights
Lamp type
Watts
Minimum height (m)
Tungsten ﬁlament
200
2.500
300
3.000
750
6.000
Mercury vapour
250
6.000
400
7.500
700
9.000
Fluorescent trough
40 to 125
2.500

 
36
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 1.3.4
Area lighting: overhead dispersive lamps

 
Lighting building sites
37
beam of light is intense, producing high glare, and it should therefore be installed to
point downwards towards the working areas. Generally the lamps are selected direct
from the manufacturer’s catalogue without calculations.
WALKWAY LIGHTING
Tungsten ﬁlament and ﬂuorescent lamps can be used to illuminate access routes
such as stairs, corridors and scaffolds. Bulkhead ﬁttings that can be safely installed
with adequate protection to the wiring can be run off a mains voltage of 230 V
single-phase, but if they are in a position where they can be handled a reduced
voltage of 110 V single-phase should be used. Festoon lighting, in which the ready-
wired lampholders are moulded to the cable itself, can also be used. A standard
festoon cable would be 100.000 m long with rainproof lampholders and protective
shades or guards at 3.000 m or 5.000 m centres using 40 W or 60 W tungsten
ﬁlament bulbs for the respective centres. See Fig. 1.3.5. For lighting to scaffolds 
of four- or ﬁve-board width 60 W lamps should be used, placed at not more than
6.000 m centres and preferably at least 2.400 to 3.000 m above the working platform
either to the wall side or centrally over the scaffold.
LOCAL LIGHTING
Clusters of pressed glass reﬂector ﬂoodlamps, tungsten ﬁlament lamps, festoons 
and adjustable ﬂuorescents can be used to increase the surface illumination at local
points, particularly where ﬁnishing trades are involved. These ﬁttings must be
portable so that shadow casting can be reduced or eliminated from the working
plane: therefore it is imperative that these lights are operated off a reduced voltage
of 110 V single-phase. Fluorescent tubes do not usually work at a reduced voltage,
so special ﬁttings working off a 110 V single-phase supply that internally increase
the voltage are used. Typical examples of suitable lamps are shown in Fig. 1.3.6.
As an alternative to a system of static site lighting connected to the site mains,
electrical supply mobile lighting sets are available. These consist of a diesel-
engine-driven generator and a telescopic tower with a cluster of tungsten iodine
lamps. These are generally cheaper to run than lamps operating off a mains supply.
Small two-stroke generator sets with a single lamp attachment suitable for small,
isolated positions are also available.
Another system that can be used for local lighting is ﬂame lamps, which 
normally use propane gas as the fuel. The ‘bulb’ consists of a mantle, and a reﬂector
completes the lamp ﬁtting, which is attached to the fuel bottle by a ﬂexible tube.
These lamps produce a great deal of local heat and water vapour; the latter may
have the effect of slowing down the drying out of the building. An alternative fuel
to propane gas is butane gas, but this fuel will not usually vaporise at temperatures
below −1 °C.
Whichever method of illumination is used on a construction site it is always
advisable to remember the axiom ‘A workman can only be safe and work well when
he can see where he is going and what he is doing.’

 
38
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 1.3.5
Typical walkway lighting ﬁttings

 
Lighting building sites
39
Figure 1.3.6
Local lighting: suitable lamps and ﬁttings

 
Approximately one-ﬁfth of the working force of the United Kingdom is employed
either directly or indirectly by the building industry. Therefore any ﬂuctuation in
productivity will affect a large number of people. The general loss in output in the
construction industry in normal circumstances during the winter period is about
10%, which can result in the underemployment of staff, plant and ﬁxed assets
together with the loss of good trading relations with suppliers due to goods ordered
not being called forward for delivery. A severe winter can treble the typical loss 
of output quoted above, resulting in loss of cash ﬂow to the main contractor and
subcontractors, plus reduced pay to employees. There will also be lower proﬁts, 
or a proﬁt loss for contractors, and many skilled operatives may leave the industry
in search of more secure occupations. The building owner also suffers by the delay
in completing the building, which could necessitate extending the borrowing 
period for the capital to ﬁnance the project or the loss of a prospective tenant 
or buyer.
The major factor in determining the progress of works on site during the 
winter period is the weather. Guidance as to the likely winter weather conditions 
for various areas of the United Kingdom can be obtained from maps, charts and
statistical data issued by the Meteorological Ofﬁce, and this is useful for long-term
planning, whereas in the short term reliance is placed upon local knowledge, daily
forecasts and the short-term monthly weather forecasts. The uncertain nature 
of the climate in the United Kingdom often discourages building contractors from
investing in plant and equipment for winter-building techniques and protective
measures that may prove to be unnecessary. Contractors must therefore assess 
the total cost of possible delays against the capital outlay required for plant and
equipment to enable them to maintain full or near-full production during the 
winter period.
1.4
WINTER BUILDING

 
Winter building
41
nnn EFFECTS OF WEATHER
Weather conditions that can have a delaying effect on building activities are rain,
high winds, low temperatures, snow and poor daylight levels; the worst effects
obviously occur when more than one of the above conditions occur simultaneously.
Rain
Rain affects site access and movement, which in turn increases site hazards,
particularly those associated with excavations and earth-moving works. It also
causes discomfort to operatives, thus reducing their productivity rate. Delays 
with most external operations, such as bricklaying and concreting, are usually
experienced, particularly during periods of heavy rainfall. Damage can be caused to
unprotected materials stored on site and in many cases to newly ﬁxed materials or
ﬁnished surfaces. The higher moisture content of the atmosphere will also delay the
drying out of buildings. If high winds and rain occur together, rain penetration and
site hazards are considerably increased.
High winds
Apart from the discomfort felt by operatives, high winds can also make activities such
as frame erection and the ﬁxing of sheet cladding very hazardous. They can also limit
the operations that can be carried out by certain items of plant such as tower cranes
and suspended cradles. Positive and negative wind pressures can also cause damage
to partially ﬁxed claddings, incomplete structures and materials stored on site.
Low temperatures
As the air temperature approaches freezing point many site activities are slowed
down. These include excavating, bricklaying, concreting, plastering and painting,
until they cease altogether at subzero temperatures; also, mechanical plant can be
difﬁcult to start, and stockpiles of materials can become frozen and difﬁcult to
move. General movement and circulation around the site becomes hazardous,
creating with the low temperatures general discomfort and danger for site
personnel. When high winds are experienced with low temperatures they 
will aggravate the above-mentioned effects.
Snow
This is one of the most variable factors in British weather, ranging from an average
of ﬁve days a year on which snow falls on low ground in the extreme south-west to
35 days in the north-east of Scotland. Snow will impair the movement of labour,
plant and materials, as well as create uncomfortable working conditions. Externally
stored materials will become covered with a layer of snow, making identiﬁcation
difﬁcult in some cases. This blanket of snow will also add to the 

 
42
Advanced Construction Technology
load to be carried by all horizontal surfaces. High winds encountered with falling
snow can cause drifting, which could increase the site hazards and personal
discomfort, and decrease general movement around the site.
It should be appreciated that the adverse conditions described above could have
an adverse effect on site productivity, even if they are not present on the actual site,
by delaying the movement of materials to the site from suppliers outside the
immediate vicinity.
nnn WINTER-BUILDING TECHNIQUES
The major aim of any winter-building method or technique is to maintain an
acceptable rate of productivity. Inclement weather conditions can have a very 
quick reaction on the transportation aspect of site operations, movement of vehicles
around the site and, indeed, off the site, which will be impaired or even brought to a
complete standstill unless ﬁrm access roads or routes are provided, maintained and
kept free of snow. These access roads should extend right up to the discharge points
to avoid the need for unnecessary double handling of materials. If the access roads
and hardstandings form part of the contract and are suitable, these could be
constructed at an early stage in the contract before the winter period. If the
permanent road system is not suitable in layout for contractual purposes, 
temporary roads of bulk timbers, timber or concrete sleepers, compacted 
hardcore or proprietary metal tracks could be laid.
Frozen ground can present problems with all excavating activities. Most
excavating plant can operate in frozen ground up to a depth of 300 mm, but at 
a reduced rate of output: this is particularly true when using machines having a
small bucket capacity. Prevention is always better than cure. Therefore if frost is
anticipated it is a wise precaution to protect the areas to be excavated by covering
with ﬁbre mats enclosed in a polythene envelope, insulating quilts of mineral wool
or glass ﬁbre incorporating electric heating elements for severe conditions. Similar
precautions can be taken in the case of newly excavated areas to prevent them
freezing and giving rise to frost-heave conditions. If it is necessary to defrost 
ground to enable excavating works to be carried out, this can usually be achieved 
by using ﬂame throwers, steam jet pipes or coils. Care must be taken to ensure 
that defrosting is complete and that precautions are taken to avoid subsequent 
re-freezing.
Water supplies should be laid below ground at such a depth as to avoid the
possibility of freezing. The actual depth will vary according to the locality of the site,
with a minimum depth of 750 mm for any area. If the water supply is temporary and
above ground the pipes should be well insulated and laid to falls so that they can be
drained at the end of the day through a drain cock incorporated into the service.
Electrical supplies can fail in adverse weather conditions because the vulnerable
parts such as contacts become affected by moisture, frost or ice. These components
should be fully protected in the manner advised by their manufacturer.
Items of plant that are normally kept uncovered on site – such as mixers, dumper
trucks, bulldozers and generators – should be protected as recommended by the
manufacturer to avoid morning starting problems. These precautions will include

 
Winter building
43
selecting and using the correct grades of oils, lubricants and antifreeze, as well as
covering engines and electrical systems, draining radiators where necessary, and
parking wheeled or tracked vehicles on timber runners to prevent them freezing to
the ground.
Under the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations, operatives
will also need protection from adverse winter conditions if an acceptable level of
production is to be maintained. Materials too will require shelter. Such protection
can be of one or more of the following types:
n temporary shelters;
n framed enclosures;
n air-supported structures;
n protective clothing.
TEMPORARY SHELTERS
These are the cheapest and simplest method of giving protection to the working
areas. They consist of a screen of reinforced or unreinforced polythene sheeting of
suitable gauge ﬁxed to the outside of the scaffold to form a windbreak. The sheeting
must be attached ﬁrmly to the scaffold standards so that it does not ﬂap or tear 
(a suitable method is shown in Fig. 1.4.2). To gain the maximum amount of use and
reuse out of the sheeting used to form the windbreaks the edges should be hemmed
or reinforced with a suitable adhesive tape with metal eyelets incorporated at the
tying positions. Eyelets can be made on site using a special kit; alternatively the
sheet can be supplied with prepared edges.
FRAMED ENCLOSURES
These consist of a purpose-made frame having a curved roof clad with a corrugated
material and polythene-sheeted sides; alternatively a frame enclosing the whole 
of the proposed structure can be constructed from standard tubular scaffolding
components (see Fig. 1.4.1). Framed enclosures should be clad from the windward
end to avoid a build-up of pressure inside the enclosure. It is also advantageous to
load the working platform before sheeting in the sides of the enclosure, because
loading at a later stage is more difﬁcult. The frame must be rigid enough to take 
the extra loading of the coverings and any imposed loading such as wind loadings.
Anchorage to the ground of the entire framing is also of great importance, and this
can be achieved by using a screw-type ground anchor as shown in Fig. 1.4.2.
AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURES
Sometimes called air domes, these are being increasingly used on building sites as
a protective enclosure for works in progress and for covered material storage areas.
Two forms are available:
n internally supported dome;
n air rib dome.

 
44
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 1.4.1
Protective screens and enclosures: typical framed enclosure

 
Winter building
45
Figure 1.4.2
Protective screens and enclosures: anchorages

 
46
Advanced Construction Technology
The internally supported dome is held up by internal air pressure acting against
the covering membrane of some form of PVC-coated nylon or rayon with access
through an air lock or air curtain door, whereas in the air rib dome the membrane 
is supported by air-inﬂated ribs to which the covering membrane is attached. The
usual shape for an air-supported structure is semi-cylindrical with rounded ends
through which daylight can be introduced by having a translucent membrane over
the crown of the structure. The advantages of air-supported structures are that 
they are low cost, light in weight and reusable; only a small amount of labour 
is required to erect and dismantle them, and with only a low internal pressure
(approximately 150 N/m2 above atmospheric pressure) workers inside are not
affected. Disadvantages are the need to have at least one fan in continuous 
operation to maintain the internal air pressure, the provision of an air lock or
curtain entrance, which will impede or restrict the general site circulation, and 
the height limitation, which is usually in the region of 45% of the overall span 
of the structure. The anchorage and sealing of the air-supported structure are 
also very important, and this can be achieved by using a concrete ring beam as
shown in Fig. 1.4.2.
OTHER PROTECTIVE MEASURES
Personal protective clothing/equipment (PPE) is another very important aspect 
of winter-building techniques. It must be provided to satisfy the health and safety
objectives of the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations. Statistics
show that the incidence of ailments usually associated with inclement weather, such
as rheumatism and bronchitis, is some 20% higher in the building industry when
compared with British industry as a whole. Labour costs on building sites are such
that maximum utilisation of all labour resources in all weathers must be the ultimate
aim, and therefore capital expended in providing protective clothing can be a
worthwhile investment. The ideal protective clothing consists of a suit in the form
of jacket and trousers made from a lightweight polyurethane-proofed nylon with a
removable jacket liner for extreme conditions. A strong lightweight safety helmet
and a strong pair of steel-toe-capped rubber boots with a good-grip tread would
complete the protective clothing outﬁt.
Heating equipment may be needed on a building site to offset the effects of 
cold weather on building operations, particularly where wet trades are involved
when the materials used could become frozen at an early stage in the curing process,
producing an unacceptable component or member. The main types of heater in use
are convectors, radiant heaters and forced-air heaters using electricity, gas or oil as
fuel. Electricity is usually too expensive in the context of building operations except
for the operation of pumps and fans included in many of the heating appliances
using the main other fuels. Gas and oil are therefore the most used fuels, and these
must be considered in the context of capital and running costs.
Convector heaters using propane or electricity with an output of 3 to 7 kW are
suitable only for small volumes such as site huts and drying rooms. Gas-burning
appliances will require a suitable ﬂue to convey the combustion fumes to the 
outside air.

 
Winter building
47
Radiant heaters using propane are an alternative to the convector heater: they
have the advantage of being mobile, making them suitable for site hut heating or for
local heating where personnel are working.
Forced-air heaters have high outputs of 30 to 70 kW: they are efﬁcient, versatile
and mobile. Two forms of heater are available: the direct forced-hot-air heater,
which discharges water vapour into the space being heated, and the vented forced-
air heater, where the combustion gases are discharged through a ﬂue to the outside 
air. Both forms of heater require a fan operated by electricity, propane or a petrol
engine. The usual fuels for the heater are propane, parafﬁn or light fuel oil, which
produces sufﬁcient heat for general area heating of buildings under construction 
and for providing heat to several parts of a building using plastic ducting to
distribute the hot air. When using a ducted distribution system it is essential 
that the air velocity at the nozzle is sufﬁcient to distribute the hot air throughout
the system.
The natural drying out of buildings after the wet trades is considerably slower 
in the winter months, and therefore to meet production targets this drying-out
process needs the help of suitable plant. The heaters described above are often 
used for this purpose, but they are generally very inefﬁcient. Effective drying out 
or the removal of excess moisture from a building requires the use of a dehumidiﬁer
and a vented space heater. Direct-ﬁred heaters are generally unsuitable, because
moisture is contained in the combustion gases discharged into the space being 
dried out. The dehumidiﬁer is used in conjunction with a heater to eliminate the
need to heat the cold air that would replace the warm moist air discharged to the
outside if only a vented heater was employed. Two basic types of dehumidiﬁer are
available:
n Refrigeration types, where the air is drawn over refrigeration coils that lower
the dewpoint, causing the excess moisture in the air to condense and discharge
into a container. According to the model used the extraction rate can be from 
10 to 150 litres per day.
n Chemical desiccant types, where the moist air is drawn over trays or 
drums containing hygroscopic chemicals that attract the moisture from 
the air; the extracted moisture is transferred to a bucket or other suitable
container. The advantages of these types are low capital and running costs 
and their overall efﬁciency, with an extraction rate between 45 and 110 litres 
per day according to the model being used. The only real disadvantage is 
the need periodically to replenish the chemicals in the dehumidiﬁer trays 
or drums.
The use of steam generators for defrosting plant and materials or heating water 
is also a possible winter-building technique. The steam generator can be connected
to steam coils, which can be inserted into stockpiles of materials; alternatively the
steam generator can be connected to a hand-held lance.
The use of artiﬁcial lighting on sites to aid production and increase safety on
building sites during the winter period when natural daylighting is often inadequate
has been fully covered in the previous chapter.

 
48
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn WORKING WITH TRADITIONAL MATERIALS
CONCRETE
This can be damaged by rain, sleet, snow, freezing temperatures and cooling winds
before it has matured, by slowing down the rate at which concrete hardens, or by
increasing to an unacceptable level the rate at which the water evaporates. The
following precautions should ensure that no detrimental effects occur when mixing
and placing in winter conditions:
n Storage of cement under cover and in perfectly dry conditions to prevent air setting.
n Defrosting of aggregates.
n Minimum of delay between mixing and placing.
n Minimum temperature of concrete when placed ideally should be 10 °C.
n Newly placed concrete to be kept at a temperature of more than 5 °C for at least
three days, because the rate at which concrete sets below this temperature is
almost negligible. It may be necessary to employ the use of covers with heating
elements to maintain this minimum temperature, or a polythene tent to provide
about 500 mm air space underneath. Warm air can be blown under the tent to
create an insulative layer.
n If special additives such as calcium chloride or calcium formate are applied to
mass concrete, the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations should be strictly observed.
Calcium chloride should not be used in concrete mixes containing steel-
reinforcing bars, as it will encourage corrosion. It may also contribute to 
the shrinkage of concrete.
n Do not use antifreeze solutions; these are incompatible with concrete mixes.
n Follow the recommendations of BS 8110: Structural use of concrete, for guidance
on the use of formwork and also the chloride ion content in different types of
concrete.
n Air-entraining mixtures (see BS EN’s 480 and 934: Admixtures for concrete 
and grout) are derived from wood resins, fatty acids and various other chemicals
to create minute air bubbles that adhere to the cement particles. Resistance to
frost is achieved, as the bubbles act as expansion chambers for ice formations.
Concrete design must allow for the effect of porosity, which can be as much as
15% strength loss.
n If special cements are used, the manufacturer’s instructions should be strictly
adhered to. Rapid-hardening Portland cement (RHPC) sets at the same rate as
ordinary Portland cement (OPC), but because of the extra ﬁneness of particles
has greater surface area for the hydration reaction. This provides a high rate of
heat evolution to help prevent frost damage and effect faster strength gain.
BRICKWORK
Brickwork can be affected by the same climatic conditions as given above for
concrete, resulting in damage to the mortar joints and possibly spalling of the
bricks. The following precautions should be taken when bricklaying under winter
weather conditions:

 
Winter building
49
n Bricks to be kept reasonably dry.
n Use a 1:1:6 mortar or a 1:5–6 cement: sand mortar with an air-entraining
plasticiser to form microscopic air spaces, which can act as expansion chambers
for the minute ice particles that may form at low temperatures.
n Cover up the brickwork upon completion with a protective insulating quilt or
similar covering for at least three days.
n During periods of heavy frost use a heated mortar by mixing with heated water
(approximately 50 °C) to form a mortar with a temperature of between 15 and 
25 °C.
n Do not use additives such as calcium chloride, because part of the solution could
be absorbed by the absorbent bricks, resulting in damage to the ﬁnished work. 
It can also corrode metal wall ties.
PLASTERING
Precautions that can be taken when plastering internally during cold periods are
simple: they consist of closing windows and doors or covering the openings with
polythene or similar sheeting, maintaining an internal temperature above freezing,
and if necessary using heated (maximum 50 °C) mixing water. Lightweight plasters
and aggregates are less susceptible to damage by frost than ordinary gypsum plasters
and should be speciﬁed whenever possible. External plastering or rendering should
be carried out only in dry weather when the air temperature is above freezing.
TIMBER
If the correct storage procedure of a covered but ventilated rack has been followed
and the moisture content of the ﬁxed joinery is maintained at the correct level few
or no problems should be encountered when using this material during winter
weather conditions.
If a contractor’s output falls below the planned target ﬁgures then ﬁxed charges 
for overheads, site on-costs and plant costs are being wasted to a proportionate
extent. Proﬁts will also be less because of the loss in turnover: therefore it is usually
worthwhile expending an equivalent amount on winter-building precautions and
techniques to restore full production. In general terms, a decrease of about 10% in
productivity is experienced by builders during the winter period, and by allocating
10% of ﬁxed charges and proﬁt to winter-building techniques a builder can bring
production back to normal. Cost analysis will show that the more exceptional the
inclement weather becomes the greater is the ﬁnancial reward for expended money
on winter-building techniques and precautions.

 

 
PLANT AND
EQUIPMENT
PART
2

 

 
The general aim of building is to produce a structure at reasonable cost and of
sound workmanship within an acceptable time period. To achieve this time period
and in many cases to overcome a shortage of suitable manpower the mechanisation
of many building activities must be considered. The range of plant now available 
to building contractors is very extensive, ranging from simple hand tools to very
expensive equipment that undertakes tasks beyond the capabilities of manual
labour. In a text of this nature it is possible only to consider the general classes of
plant and their uses; for a full analysis of the many variations, with the different
classiﬁcations, readers are advised to consult the many textbooks and catalogues
devoted entirely to contractors’ plant.
The main reasons for electing to use items of plant are as follows:
n Increase rate of output.
n Reduce overall building costs.
n Carry out activities that cannot be done manually or do them more 
economically.
n Eliminate heavy manual work, thus reducing fatigue and increasing the
productivity of manual workers.
n Maintain a planned rate of production where there is a shortage of either skilled
or unskilled operatives.
n Maintain the high standards often required by present-day designs and
speciﬁcations, especially when concerned with structural engineering works.
It must not be assumed that the introduction of plant to a contract will always
reduce costs. This may well be true with large contracts, but when carrying out
small contracts such as a traditionally built one-off house it is usually cheaper to
carry out the constructional operations by traditional manual methods: the main
exception to this is the mixing of concrete and cement mortar using a small mobile
batch mixer.
2.1
BUILDERS’ PLANT: 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

 
54
Advanced Construction Technology
The type of plant to be considered for selection will depend upon the tasks
involved, the time element, and the staff available. The person who selects the 
plant must be competent, the plant operator must be a trained person to obtain
maximum efﬁciency, the manufacturer’s recommended maintenance schedule for
the plant must be followed and, above all, the site layout and organisation must be
planned with a knowledge of the capabilities and requirements of the plant.
Having taken the decision to use plant and equipment, the contractor now has
the choice of buying, hiring or combining the two. The advantages of buying plant
are as follows:
n Plant is available when required.
n The cost of idle time caused by inclement weather, work being behind planned
programme or delay in deliveries of materials will generally be less on owned
plant than on hired plant.
n The builder can apportion the plant costs to the various contracts using the
plant, by his/her own chosen method.
n There is some resale value.
The advantages of hiring plant are as follows:
n Plant can be hired as required and for short periods.
n Hire ﬁrms are responsible for maintenance, repairs and replacements.
n The contractor is not left with unused expensive plant items after completion of
the contract.
n Hire rates can include operator, fuel and oil.
Quotations and conditions for hiring plant can be obtained from a plant-hiring
company. A full list of companies belonging to the Construction Plant-Hire
Association is contained in the CPA Annual Handbook. This Association was
formed in 1941 to represent the plant-hire industry in the United Kingdom to
negotiate general terms and conditions of hiring plant, to give advice, and to
promote a high standard of efﬁciency in the services given by its members. Against
plant-hire rates and conditions a contractor will have to compare the cost of buying
and owning a similar piece of plant. A comparison of costs can be calculated by the
simple straight-line method or by treating the plant as an investment and charging
interest on the capital outlay.
Straight-line method
Capital cost of plant
£45,000.00
Expected useful life
5 years
Yearly working, say 75% of total 
year’s working hours
= 50 weeks × 40 hours ×
= 1,500 hours per year
Assuming a resale value after 5 years of £7,500.00 
Annual depreciation
=
= £7,500
45,000 – 7,500
5
75
100

 
Builders’ plant: general considerations
55
Therefore hourly depreciation
= 
= £5.00
Net cost per hour
=
5.00
Add 2% for insurance, etc.
=
0.10
Add 10% for maintenance
=
0.50
£5.60 per hour
To the above costs must be added the running costs, which would include fuel,
operator’s wages and overheads.
Interest on capital outlay method
Capital cost of plant
£45,000.00
Compound interest on capital @ 6% for 5 years 
15,220.00
£60,220.00
Deduct resale value
7,500.00
£52,720.00
Add 2% of capital cost for insurance, etc.
900.00
Add 10% of capital cost for maintenance
4,500.00
£58,120.00
Therefore cost per hour
= 
= £7.75
To the above hourly rate must be added the running costs as given for the straight-
line method. This second method gives a more accurate ﬁgure for the actual cost 
of owning an item of plant than the straight-line method, and for this reason it is
widely used.
Vehicles such as lorries and vans are usually costed on a straight annual
depreciation of the yearly book value thus:
Cost of vehicle
£25,000.00
Estimated useful life, 5 years with 
an annual depreciation of 30%
Capital cost
£25,000.00
30% depreciation
7,500.00
Value after 1st year
17,500.00
30% depreciation
5,250.00
Value after 2nd year
12,250.00
30% depreciation
3,675.00
Value after 3rd year
8,575.00
30% depreciation
2,572.50
Value after 4th year
6,002.50
30% depreciation
1,800.75
Value at 5th year
£4,201.75
£58,120
5 × 1,500
7,500.00
1,500.00

 
56
Advanced Construction Technology
The percentages of insurance and maintenance together with the running costs 
can now be added on a yearly basis, taking the new book values for each year;
alternatively the above additional costs could be averaged over the ﬁve-year period.
To be an economic proposition large items of plant need to be employed
continuously and not left idle for considerable periods of time. Careful maintenance
of all forms of plant is of the utmost importance. This not only increases the working
life of a piece of plant, but if a plant failure occurs on site it can cause serious delays
and disruptions of the programme, and this in turn can affect the company’s 
future planning. To reduce the risk of plant breakdown a trained and skilled
operator should be employed to be responsible for the running, cleaning and daily
maintenance of any form of machinery. Time for the machine operator to carry out
these tasks must be allowed for in the site programme and the daily work schedules.
On a large contract where a number of machines are to be employed, a full-time
skilled mechanic could be engaged to be responsible for running repairs and
recommended preventive maintenance. Such tasks would include:
n checking oil levels – daily;
n greasing – daily or after each shift;
n checking engine sump levels – after 100 hours’ running time;
n checking gearbox levels – after 1,200 to 1,500 hours’ running time;
n checking tyre pressures – daily;
n inspecting chains and ropes – daily.
As soon as a particular item of plant has ﬁnished its work on site it should be
returned to the company’s main plant yard so that it can be re-allocated to another
contract. This is equally important for hired plant, which must be returned to the
hire company’s depot; otherwise excess charges may apply. On its return to the
main plant yard or hire depot an item of plant should be inspected and tested 
so that any necessary repairs, replacements and maintenance can be carried out
before it is re-employed on another site. A record of the machine’s history should
be accurately kept and should accompany the machine wherever it is employed so
that the record can be kept up to date.
The soil conditions and modes of access to a site will often inﬂuence the 
choice of plant items that could be considered for a particular task. Congested 
town sites may severely limit the use of many types of machinery and/or plant. 
If the proposed structure occupies the whole of the site, component and material
deliveries in modules or prefabricated format will eliminate the need and space 
for fabrication and assembly plant. Concrete-mixing plant will also be impractical:
therefore supplies will be delivered ready mixed. Wet sites usually require plant
equipped with caterpillar tracks, whereas dry sites are suitable for tracked and
wheeled vehicles or power units. On housing sites it is common practice to construct
the estate road sublayers at an early stage in the contract to provide ﬁrm access
routes for mobile plant and hardstanding for static plant such as cement mixers.
Sloping sites are usually unsuitable for rail-mounted cranes, but these cranes
operating on the perimeter of a building are more versatile than the static cranes.
The heights and proximity of adjacent structures or buildings may limit the use 
of a horizontal jib crane and may even dictate the use of a crane with a lufﬁng jib.

 
Builders’ plant: general considerations
57
For accurate pricing of a bill of quantities careful consideration of all plant
requirements must be undertaken with the preparation of a plant schedule at the
pre-tender stage. This should take into account plant types, plant numbers and
personnel needed. If the tender is successful a detailed programme should be
prepared in liaison with all those to be concerned in the supervision of the contract
so that the correct sequence of operations is planned and an economic balance of
labour and machines is obtained.
Apart from the factors previously discussed, consideration must also be given 
to safety and noise emission requirements when selecting items of plant for use 
on a particular contract. The aspects of safety that must be legally provided are
contained in various Acts of Parliament and Statutory Instruments such as the
Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974, the Construction (Health, Safety and
Welfare) Regulations 1996 and the Noise at Work Regulations 1989. These
requirements will be considered in the following chapters devoted to various
classiﬁcations of plant.
Although reaction to noise is basically subjective, excessive noise can damage 
a person’s health and/or hearing; it can also cause disturbance to working and 
living environments. Under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and its
subsidiary regulations provision is made for the protection of workers against noise.
If the maximum safe daily noise limits for the unprotected human ear are likely to
be exceeded, the remedies available are the issue of suitable ear protectors to the
workers, housing the plant in a sound-insulated compartment, or the use of quieter
plant or processes.
Local authorities have powers under the Control of Pollution Act 1974 to protect
the community against noise. Part III of this Act gives the local authority the power
to specify its own requirements as to the limit of construction noise acceptable by
serving a notice, which may specify:
n plant or machinery that is, or is not, to be used;
n hours during which the works may be carried out;
n level of noise emitted from the premises in question or from any speciﬁc point on
these premises, or the level of noise that may be emitted during speciﬁed hours.
The local authority is also allowed to make provisions in these notices for any
change of circumstance.
A contractor will therefore need to know the local authority requirements as 
to noise restrictions at the pre-tender stage to enable selection of the right plant
and/or processes to be employed. Methods for predicting site noise are given in 
BS 5228: Noise and vibration control on construction and open sites: see Parts 1, 2 and 4.
Part 1 recommends methods of noise control and provides guidance on:
n methods for predicting noise;
n measuring noise;
n minimising the impact noise on people in the vicinity of site work.
Part 2 provides guidance on noise control legislation. Part 4 provides
recommendations for noise and vibration control measures speciﬁcally for 
piling work.

 
A precise deﬁnition of builders’ small powered plant is not possible, because the
term ‘small’ is relative. For example, it is possible to have small cranes, but these,
when compared with a hand-held electric drill, would be considered as large plant
items. Generally, therefore, small plant can be considered to be hand-held or
operated power tools with their attendant power sources such as a compressor 
for pneumatic tools; one of the main exceptions is the small static pumps used 
in conjunction with shallow excavations.
Most hand-held power tools are operated by electricity or compressed air, either
to rotate the tool or drive it by percussion. Some of these tools are also designed 
to act as rotary/percussion tools. Generally, the pneumatic tools are used for the
heavier work and have the advantage that they will not burn out if a rotary tool
stalls under load. Electrically driven tools are, however, relatively quiet because
there is no exhaust noise, and they can be used in conﬁned spaces because there 
are no exhaust fumes.
nnn ELECTRIC HAND TOOLS
The most common hand-held tool is the electric drill for boring holes into 
timber, masonry and metals using twist drills. A wide range of twist drill capacities
are available with single- or two-speed motors for general-purpose work, the low
speed being used for boring into or through timber. Chuck capacities generally
available range from 6 to 30 mm for twist drills suitable for metals. Dual-purpose
electric drills are very versatile in that the rotary motion can be combined with or
converted into a powerful but rapid percussion motion, making the tool suitable for
boring into concrete provided that special tungsten-carbide-tipped drills are used 
(see Fig. 2.2.1).
A variation of the basic electric motor power units is the electric hammer,
which is used for cutting and chasing work, where the hammer delivers powerful
2.2
SMALL POWERED PLANT

 
Small powered plant
59
blows at a slower rate than the percussion drill described. Another variation is the
electric screwdriver, which has an adjustable and sensitive clutch that will operate
only when the screwdriver bit is in contact with the screw head and will slip when a
predetermined tension has been reached when the screw has been driven in. Various
portable electric woodworking tools such as circular saws, jigsaws, sanders, planes
and routers are also available and suitable for site use.
Electric hand-held tools should preferably operate off a reduced voltage supply
of 110 V and should conform to the recommendations of BS 2769 and BS EN
60745: Hand-held motor-operated electric tools. All these tools should be earthed
unless they bear the ‘two squares’ symbol indicating that they are ‘all insulated’ or
‘double insulated’ and therefore have their own built-in safety system. Plugs and
couplers should comply with BS EN 60309-2: Plugs, socket-outlets and couplers for
industrial purposes, so that they are not interchangeable and cannot be connected 
to the wrong voltage supply. Protective guards and any recommended protective
clothing such as goggles and ear protection should be used as instructed by the
manufacturers and as laid down in the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare)
Regulations 1996, the Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations 1992 
and the Noise at Work Regulations 1989. Electric power tools must never be
switched off while under load, because this could cause the motor to become
overstrained and burn out. If electrical equipment is being used on a site, the
Electricity at Work Regulations and relevant ﬁrst-aid placards should be displayed
in a prominent position.
Figure 2.2.1
Typical electric drill (courtesy: Stanley-Bridges)

 
60
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn PNEUMATIC TOOLS
These tools need a supply of compressed air as their power source, and on building
sites this is generally in the form of a mobile compressor powered by a diesel, 
petrol or electric motor, the most common power unit being the diesel engine.
Compressors for building works are usually of the piston or reciprocating type,
where the air is drawn into a cylinder and compressed by a single stroke of the
piston; alternatively two-stage compressors are available where the air is compressed
to an intermediate level in a large cylinder before passing to a smaller cylinder
where the ﬁnal pressure is obtained. Air receivers are usually incorporated with 
and mounted on the chassis to provide a constant source of pressure for the air 
lines and to minimise losses due to pressure ﬂuctuations of the compressor and/or
frictional losses due to the air pulsating through the distribution hoses.
One of the most common pneumatic tools used in building is the breaker, 
which is basically intended for breaking up hard surfaces such as roads. These
breakers vary in weight, ranging from 15 to 40 kg with air consumptions of 10 
to 20 m3/min. A variety of breaker points or cutters can be ﬁtted into the end 
of the breaker tool to tackle different types of surface (see Fig. 2.2.2). Chipping
hammers are a small lightweight version of the breaker described above, having a
low air consumption of 0.5 m3/min or less. Backﬁll tampers are used to compact
the loose spoil returned as backﬁll in small excavations, and weigh approximately 
23 kg with an air consumption of 10 m3/min. Compressors to supply air to these
tools are usually speciﬁed by the number of air hoses that can be attached and by
the volume of compressed air that can be delivered per minute. Other equipment
that can be operated by compressed air includes vibrators for consolidating
concrete, small trench sheeting or sheet pile-driving hammers, concrete-spraying
equipment, paint sprayers and hand-held rotary tools such as drills, grinders 
and saws.
Pneumatic tools are generally very noisy, and in view of the legal requirements of
the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and the Control of Pollution Act 1974
these tools should be ﬁtted with a suitable mufﬂer or silencer. Models are being
designed and produced with built-in silencers ﬁtted not only on the tool holder but
also on the compressor unit. The mufﬂers that can be ﬁtted to pneumatic tools such
as the breaker have no loss of power effect on the tool provided the correct mufﬂer
is used.
The risk of vibration damage to operators of hand-controlled machinery is
limited by the requirements of the Control of Vibration at Work Regulations 2005.
Several factors combine to deﬁne the limits of use. These include the extent of
exposure, the degree of exposure, and the operating direction or axis of operation.
Formulated values relate to equipment manufacturers’ measured vibration levels 
in metres per second squared (m/s2) against daily usage time (hours).
nnn CARTRIDGE HAMMERS
Cartridge hammers or guns are used for the quick ﬁxing together of components 
or for ﬁring into a surface a pin with a threaded head to act as a bolt ﬁxing. The 

 
Small powered plant
61
Figure 2.2.2
Typical pneumatic tools and compressor

 
62
Advanced Construction Technology
gun actuates a 0.22 cartridge that drives a hardened austempered steel pin into 
an unprepared surface. Holding power is basically mechanical, caused by the
compression of the material penetrated against the shank of the pin, although with
concrete the heat generated by the penetrating force of the pin causes the silicates 
in the concrete to fuse into glass, giving a chemical bond as well as the mechanical
holding power. BS 4078: Powder actuated ﬁxing systems. Code of practice for safe use,
speciﬁes the design, construction, safety and performance requirements for cartridge-
operated ﬁxing tools, and this standard also deﬁnes two basic types of tool:
n Direct-acting tools, in which the driving force on the pin comes directly from
the compressed gases from the cartridge. These tools are high-velocity guns with
high muzzle energy.
n Indirect-acting tools, in which the driving force is transmitted to the pin by
means of an intervening piston with limited axial movement. This common form
of cartridge-ﬁxing tool is trigger operated, having a relatively low velocity and
muzzle energy. A typical example is shown in Fig. 2.2.3.
Hammer-actuated ﬁxing tools working on the piston principle are also available, the
tool being hand held and struck with a hammer to ﬁre the cartridge.
The cartridges and pins are designed for use with a particular model of gun, and
should in no circumstances be interchanged between models or different makes of
gun. Cartridges are produced in seven strengths, ranging from extra low to extra
high, and for identiﬁcation purposes are colour coded in accordance with BS 4078.
A low-strength cartridge should be used ﬁrst for a test ﬁring, gradually increasing
the strength until a satisfactory result is obtained. If an over-strength cartridge is
used it could cause the pin to pass right through the base material. Fixing pins near
Figure 2.2.3
Typical cartridge hammer (courtesy: Douglas Kane Group)

 
Small powered plant
63
to edges can be dangerous because the pin is deﬂected towards the free edge by
following the path of low resistance. Minimum edge distances recommended for
concrete are 100 mm using a direct-acting tool and 50 mm using an indirect-acting
tool; for ﬁxing into steel the minimum recommended distance is 15 mm using any
type of ﬁxing tool.
The safety and maintenance aspects of these ﬁxing tools cannot be overstressed.
In particular, consideration must be given to the following points:
n Pins should not be driven into brittle or hard materials such as vitreous-faced
bricks, cast iron or marble.
n Pins should not be driven into base materials where there is a danger of the pin
passing through.
n Pins should not be ﬁred into existing holes.
n During ﬁring the tool should be held at right angles to the surface with the 
whole of the splinter guard ﬂush with the surface of the base material. Some
tools are designed so that they will not ﬁre if the angle of the axis of the gun to
the perpendicular exceeds 7°.
n Operatives under the age of 18 years should not be allowed to use cartridge-
operated tools.
n All operators should have a test for colour blindness before being allowed to use
these ﬁxing tools.
n No one apart from the operator and an assistant should be in the immediate vicinity
of ﬁring to avoid accidents due to ricochet, splintering or re-emergence of pins.
n Operators should receive instructions as to the manufacturer’s recommended
method of loading, ﬁring and the action to be taken in cases of misﬁring.
n Protective items such as goggles and earmuffs should be worn as recommended
by the manufacturers.
nnn VIBRATORS
After concrete has been placed it should be consolidated either by hand tamping or
by using special vibrators. The power for vibrators can be supplied by a small petrol
engine, an electric motor or in some cases by compressed air. Three basic forms of
vibrator are used in building works: poker vibrators, vibration tampers and clamp
vibrators. Poker vibrators are immersed into the wet concrete, and because of
their high rate of vibration they induce the concrete to consolidate. The effective
radius of a poker vibrator is about 1.000 m: therefore the poker or pokers should 
be inserted at approximately 600 mm centres to achieve an overall consolidation 
of the concrete.
Vibration tampers are small vibrating engines that are ﬁxed to the top of a
tamping board for consolidating concrete pavings and slabs. Clamp vibrators
are similar devices but are attached to the external sides of formwork to vibrate the
whole of the form. Care must be taken when using this type of vibrator to ensure
that the formwork has sufﬁcient in-built strength to resist the load of the concrete
and to withstand the vibrations.

 
64
Advanced Construction Technology
In concrete members that are thin and heavily reinforced, careful vibration will
cause the concrete to follow uniformly around the reinforcement, and this increased
ﬂuidity due to vibration will occur with mixes that in normal circumstances would
be considered too dry for reinforced concrete. Owing to the greater consolidation
achieved by vibration up to 10% more material may be required than with 
hand-tamped concrete.
Separation of the aggregates can be caused by over-vibrating a mix: therefore
vibration should be stopped when the excess water rises to the surface. Vibration 
of concrete saves time and labour in the placing and consolidating of concrete, but
does not always result in a saving in overall costs because of the high formwork
costs, extra materials costs and the cost of providing the necessary plant.
nnn POWER FLOATS
Power ﬂoats are hand-operated rotary machines powered by a petrol engine or an
electric motor that drives the revolving blades or a revolving disc. The objective 
of power ﬂoats is to produce a smooth, level surface ﬁnish to concrete beds and
slabs suitable to receive the ﬂoor ﬁnish without the need for a cement/sand screed.
The surface ﬁnish that can be obtained is comparable to that achieved by operatives
using hand trowels but takes only one-sixth of the time, giving a considerable saving
in both time and money. Most power ﬂoats can be ﬁtted with either a revolving disc
or blade head, and these are generally interchangeable.
The surfacing disc is used for surface planing after the concrete has been
vibrated and will erase any transverse tamping line marks left by a vibrator beam 
as well as ﬁlling in any small cavities in the concrete surface. The revolving blades
are used after the disc-planing operation to provide the ﬁnishing and polishing,
which can usually be achieved with two passings. The time at which disc planing
can be started is difﬁcult to specify: it depends on factors such as the workability 
of the concrete, temperature, relative humidity and the weight of the machine to be
used. Experience is usually the best judge but, as a guide, if imprints of not more
Figure 2.2.4
Typical power ﬂoat (courtesy: Construction Equipment and Machinery)

 
Small powered plant
65
than 2 to 4 mm deep are made in the concrete when walked upon it is generally
suitable for disc planing. If a suitable surface can be produced by a traditional
concrete placing method the disc planing operation prior to rotary blade ﬁnishing is
often omitted. Generally, blade ﬁnishing can be commenced once the surface water
has evaporated; a typical power ﬂoat is shown in Fig. 2.2.4. Power ﬂoats can also be
used for ﬁnishing concrete ﬂoors with a granolithic or similar topping.
nnn PUMPS
Pumps are among the most important items of small plant for the building
contractor, because they must be reliable in all conditions, easy to maintain, easily
transported and efﬁcient. The basic function of a pump is to move liquids vertically
or horizontally, or in a combination of the two directions. Before selecting a pump 
a builder must consider what task the pump is to perform, and this could be any of
the following:
n keeping excavations free from water;
n lowering the water table to a reasonable depth;
n moving large quantities of water such as the dewatering of a cofferdam;
n supplying water for general purposes.
Having deﬁned the task the pump is required to carry out, the next step is to choose
a suitable pump, taking into account the following factors:
n Volume of water to be moved.
n Rate at which water is to be pumped.
n Height of pumping, which is the vertical distance from the level of the water to
the pump and is usually referred to as suction lift or head. It should be the
shortest distance practicable to obtain economic pumping.
n Height and distance to outfall or discharge point, usually called the delivery head.
n Loss due to friction in the length of hose or pipe, which increases as the diameter
decreases. In many pumps the suction and delivery hoses are marginally larger in
diameter than the pump inlet to reduce these frictional losses.
n Power source for pump, which can be a petrol engine, diesel engine or electric
motor. Pumps powered by compressed air are available, but these are unusual 
on general building contracts.
Pumps in common use for general building works can be classiﬁed as follows:
n centrifugal;
n displacement;
n submersible.
CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS
These are classed as normal or self-priming. They consist of a rotary impeller that
revolves at high speed, forcing the water to the sides of the impeller chamber and
thus creating a vortex that sucks air out of the suction hose. Atmospheric pressure
acting on the surface of the water to be pumped causes the water to rise into the
pump, initiating the pumping operation. Normal centrifugal pumps are easy 

 
66
Advanced Construction Technology
to maintain, but they require priming with water at the commencement of each
pumping operation. Where continuous pumping is required, such as in a basement
excavation, a self-priming pump should be speciﬁed. These pumps have a reserve
supply of water in the impeller chamber so that if the pump runs dry the reserve
water supply will remain in the chamber to reactivate the pumping sequence if the
water level rises in the area being pumped.
DISPLACEMENT PUMPS
These are either reciprocating or diaphragm pumps. Reciprocating pumps work
by the action of a piston or ram moving within a cylinder. The action of the piston
draws water into the cylinder with one stroke and forces it out with the return
stroke, resulting in a pulsating delivery. Pumps of this type can have more than one
cylinder, forming what is called a duplex (two-cylinder) or triplex (three-cylinder)
pump. Some reciprocating pumps draw water into the cylinder in front of the
piston and discharge at the rear of the piston: these are called double-acting pumps,
as opposed to the single-acting pumps where the water moves in one direction only
with the movement of the piston. Although highly efﬁcient and capable of increased
capacity with increased engine speed, these pumps have the disadvantage of being
unable to handle water containing solids.
Displacement pumps of the diaphragm type can, however, handle liquids
containing 10–15% of solids, which makes them very popular. They work on 
the principle of raising and lowering a ﬂexible diaphragm of rubber or rubberised
canvas within a cylinder by means of a pump rod connected via a rocker bar to an
engine crank. The upward movement of the diaphragm causes water to be sucked
into the cylinder through a valve; the downward movement of the diaphragm closes
the inlet valve and forces the water out through another valve into the delivery 
hose. Diaphragm or lift and force pumps are available with two cylinders and 
two diaphragms, giving greater output and efﬁciency. Typical pump examples 
are shown in Fig. 2.2.5.
SUBMERSIBLE PUMPS
These are used for extracting water from deep wells and sumps (see Fig. 3.1.6), 
and are suspended in the water to be pumped. The power source is usually an
electric motor to drive a centrifugal unit, which is housed in a casing with an
annular space to allow the water to rise upwards into the delivery pipe or rising
main. Alternatively an electric submersible pump with a diaphragm arrangement
can be used where large quantities of water are not involved.
nnn ROLLERS
Rollers are designed to consolidate ﬁlling materials and to compact surface ﬁnishes
such as tarmacadam for paths and pavings. The roller equipment used by building
contractors is basically a smaller version of the large rollers used by civil engineering
contractors for roadworks. Rollers generally rely upon deadweight to carry out 

 
Small powered plant
67
Figure 2.2.5
Typical pumps (courtesy: Sykes Pumps and William R. Selwood)

 
68
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.2.6
Typical rollers (courtesy: Marshall Sons and Duomat)

 
Small powered plant
69
the consolidating operation or vibration as in the case of lightweight rollers.
Deadweight rollers are usually diesel powered and driven by a seated operator
within a cab. These machines can be obtained with weights ranging from 1 to 
16 tonnes, which is distributed to the ground through two large-diameter rear wheels
and a wider but small front steering wheel. Many of these rollers carry water tanks
to add to the dead load and to supply small sparge or sprinkler pipes ﬁxed over 
the wheels to dampen the surfaces, thus preventing the adhesion of tar or similar
material when being rolled. These rollers are also available ﬁtted with a scariﬁer to
the rear of the vehicle for ripping up the surfaces of beds or roads (see Fig. 2.2.6).
Vibrating rollers, which depend mainly upon the vibrations produced by the
petrol- or diesel-powered engine, can be hand guided or towed and are available
with weights ranging from 500 kg to 5 tonnes (see Fig. 2.2.6). These machines will
give the same degree of consolidation and compaction as their heavier deadweight
counterparts, but being lighter and smaller they can be manoeuvred into buildings
for consolidating small areas of hardcore or similar bed material. Single or double
rollers are available with or without water sprinkler attachments, and with
vibrations within the region of 3,000 vibrations per minute. Vibrating rollers are
particularly effective for the compaction and consolidation of granular soils.

 
The selection, management and maintenance of builders’ plant are particularly
important when considered in the context of earth-moving and excavation plant.
Before deciding to use any form of plant for these activities the site conditions 
and volume of work entailed must be such that it will be an economic venture. 
The difference between plant that is classiﬁed as earth-moving equipment and
excavating machines is very slight, because a piece of plant that is designed
primarily to excavate will also be capable of moving the spoil to an attendant
transporting vehicle, and, likewise, machines basically designed to move loose 
earth will also be capable of carrying out excavation works to some degree.
To browse through the catalogues of plant manufacturers and hirers to try 
and select a particular piece of plant is a bewildering exercise because of the wide
variety of choice available for all classes of plant. Final choice is usually based upon
experience, familiarity with a particular manufacturer’s machines, availability or
personal preference. There are many excellent works of reference devoted entirely
to the analysis of the various machines to aid the would-be buyer or hirer: therefore
in a text of this nature it is necessary only to consider the general classes of plant,
pointing out their intended uses and amplifying this with typical examples of the
various types without claiming that the example chosen is the best of its type but
only representative.
nnn BULLDOZERS AND ANGLEDOZERS
These machines are primarily a high-powered tractor with caterpillar or crawler
tracks and ﬁtted with a mould board or blade at the front for stripping and oversite
excavations up to a depth of 400 mm (depending upon machine speciﬁcation) by
pushing the loosened material ahead of the machine. For backﬁlling operations the
angledozer with its mould board set at an angle, in plan, to the machine’s centreline
can be used. Most mould boards can be set at an angle in either the vertical or the
2.3
EARTH-MOVING AND 
EXCAVATION PLANT

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
71
horizontal plane to act as an angledozer, and on some models the leading edge 
of the mould board can be ﬁtted with teeth for excavating in hard ground. 
These machines can be very large, with mould boards of 1.200 to 4.000 m in width
× 600 mm to 1.200 m in height and a depth of cut up to 400 mm. Most bulldozers
and angledozers are mounted on crawler tracks, although small bulldozers with a
wheeled base are available. The control of the mould board is hydraulic, as shown 
in Fig. 2.3.1. In common with other tracked machines one of the disadvantages of
this arrangement is the need for a special transporting vehicle such as a low loader
to move the equipment between sites.
Before any earth-moving work is started a drawing should be produced
indicating the areas and volumes of cut and ﬁll required to enable a programme 
to be prepared to reduce machine movements to a minimum. When large quantities
of earth have to be moved on a cut and ﬁll basis to form a predetermined level or
gradient it is good practice to draw up a mass haul diagram indicating the volumes
of earth to be moved, the direction of movement, and the need to import more 
spoil or alternatively remove the surplus spoil from site (see Fig. 2.3.2 for a typical
example).
nnn SCRAPERS
This piece of plant consists of a power unit and a scraper bowl, and is used to
excavate and transport soil where surface stripping, site levelling and cut and ﬁll
activities are planned. They are particularly appropriate where large volumes are
encountered over a wide area, typical of civil engineering projects such as airﬁelds
and highways. These machines are capable of producing a very smooth and accurate
formation level, and come in three basic types:
n crawler-drawn scraper;
n two-axle scraper;
n three-axle scraper.
The design and basic operation of the scraper bowl is similar in all three types. 
It consists of a shaped bowl with a cutting edge that can be lowered to cut the 
top surface of the soil up to a depth of 300 mm. As the bowl moves forward the
loosened earth is forced into the container, and when full the cutting edge is raised
to seal the bowl. To ensure that a full load is obtained, many contractors use a
bulldozer to act as a pusher over the last few metres of scrape. The bowl is emptied
by raising the front apron and ejecting the collected spoil or, on some models, by
raising the rear portion and spreading the collected spoil as the machine moves
forwards.
The crawler-drawn scraper consists of a four-wheeled scraper bowl towed
behind a crawler power unit. The speed of operation is governed by the speed of the
towing vehicle, which does not normally exceed 8 km/h when hauling and 3 km/h
when scraping. For this reason this type of scraper should be used only on small
hauls of up to 300.000 m. The two-axle scraper which has a two-wheeled bowl
pulled by a two-wheeled power unit, has advantages over its four-wheeled power
unit or three-axle counterpart in that it is more manoeuvrable, offers less rolling

 
72
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.3.1
Typical tractor-powered bulldozer details

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
73
Figure 2.3.2
Typical mass haul diagram

 
74
Advanced Construction Technology
resistance, and has better traction because the engine is mounted closer to the
driving wheels. The three-axle scraper, however, can use its top speed more
frequently, is generally easier to control, and the power unit can be used for other
activities, which is not possible with most two-axle scraper power units. Typical
examples are shown in Fig. 2.3.3. Scraper bowl heaped capacities of the machines
described above range from 5 to 50 m3.
To achieve maximum output and efﬁciency of scrapers the following should be
considered:
n When working in hard ground the surface should be pre-broken by a ripper or
scariﬁer, and assistance in cutting should be given by a pushing vehicle. Usually
one bulldozer acting as a pusher can assist three scrapers if the cycle of scrape,
haul, deposit and return is correctly balanced.
n Where possible, the cutting operation should take place downhill to take full
advantage of the weight of the unit.
n Haul roads should be kept smooth to enable the machine to obtain maximum
speeds.
n Recommended tyre pressures should be maintained, otherwise extra resistance to
forward movement will be encountered.
nnn GRADERS
These are similar machines to bulldozers in that they have an adjustable mould
blade either ﬁtted at the front of the machine or slung under the centre of the
machine’s body. They are used for ﬁnishing to ﬁne limits large areas of ground 
that have been scraped or bulldozed to the required formation level. These
machines can be used only to grade the surface because their low motive power 
is generally insufﬁcient to enable them to be used for oversite excavation work.
nnn TRACTOR SHOVEL
This machine, which is sometimes called a loading shovel, is basically a power
unit in the form of a wheeled or tracked tractor with a hydraulically controlled
bucket mounted in front of the vehicle. It is one of the most versatile pieces of 
plant available to the building contractor. Its primary function is to scoop up loose
material in the bucket, raise the loaded spoil and manoeuvre into a position to
discharge its load into an attendant lorry or dumper. The tractor shovel is driven
towards the spoil heap with its bucket lowered almost to ground level, and uses 
its own momentum to force the bucket to bite into the spoil heap, thus ﬁlling the
scoop or bucket.
Instead of the straight cutting edge to the lower lip of the bucket the shovel 
can be ﬁtted with excavating teeth, enabling the machine to carry out excavating
activities such as stripping topsoil or reduce-level digging in loose soils. Another
popular version of the tractor shovel is ﬁtted with a 4-in-1 bucket, which enables
the machine to perform the functions of bulldozing, excavating and loading (see
Fig. 2.3.4). Other alternatives to the conventional front-discharging machine are

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
75
Figure 2.3.3
Typical two- and three-axle scraper details (courtesy: Caterpillar)

 
76
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.3.4
Typical tractor shovel

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
77
shovels that discharge at the rear by swinging the bucket over the top of the tractor,
and machines equipped with shovels that have a side discharge facility enabling 
the spoil to be tipped into the attendant haul unit parked alongside, thus saving 
the time normally taken by the tractor in manoeuvring into a suitable position to
discharge its load. Output of these machines is governed largely by the bucket
capacity, which can be from 0.5 to 4 m3, and the type of soil encountered.
nnn EXCAVATING MACHINES
Most excavating machines consist of a power unit, which is normally a diesel
engine, and an excavating attachment designed to perform a speciﬁc task in a certain
manner. These machines can be designed to carry out one speciﬁc activity with the
excavating attachment hydraulically controlled, or the plant can consist of a basic
power unit capable of easy conversion by changing the boom, bucket and rigging
arrangement to carry out all the basic excavating functions. Such universal
machines are usually chosen for this adaptability because the bucket sizes and
outputs available of both versions are comparable.
nnn SKIMMER
These machines are invariably based on the universal power unit, and consist of 
a bucket sliding along a horizontal jib. The bucket slides along the jib, digging 
away from the machine. Skimmers are used for oversite excavation up to a depth 
of 300 mm where great accuracy in level is required, and they can achieve an output
of some 50 bucket loads per hour. To discharge the spoil the boom or jib is raised
and the power unit is rotated until the raised bucket is over the attendant haulage
vehicle, enabling the spoil to be discharged through the opening bottom direct 
into the haul unit (see Fig. 2.3.5).
nnn FACE SHOVEL
This type of machine can be used as a loading shovel or for excavating into the 
face of an embankment or berm. Universal power unit or hydraulic machines are
available with a wide choice of bucket capacities, achieving outputs in the region of
80 bucket loads per hour. The discharge operation is similar to that described above
for the skimmer except that in the universal machine the discharge opening is at the
rear of the bucket whereas in the hydraulic machines discharge is from the front of
the bucket (see Figs 2.3.4 and 2.3.6). These machines are limited in the depth to
which they can dig below machine level; this is generally within the range 300 mm
to 2.000 m.
nnn BACKACTER
This piece of plant is probably the most common form of excavating machinery
used by building contractors for excavating basements, pits and trenches. 
Universal power unit and hydraulic versions are available, the latter often 

 
78
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.3.5
Typical skimmer details (courtesy: Ruston-Bucyrus)

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
79
Figure 2.3.6
Typical face shovel details (courtesy: Ruston-Bucyrus)

 
80
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.3.7
Typical backacter details (courtesy: Ruston-Bucyrus)

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
81
Figure 2.3.8
Typical hydraulic backacter details (courtesy: Hymac)

 
82
Advanced Construction Technology
sacriﬁcing bucket capacity to achieve a greater reach from a set position. 
Discharge in both types is by raising the bucket in a tucked position and 
emptying the spoil through the open front end into the attendant haul unit 
or alongside the trench. Outputs will vary from 30 to 60 bucket loads per hour,
depending upon how conﬁned is the excavation area. Typical details are shown 
in Figs 2.3.7 and 2.3.8.
nnn DRAGLINE
This type of excavator is essentially a crane with a long jib to which is attached a
drag bucket for excavating in loose and soft soils below the level of the machine.
This machine is for bulk excavation where ﬁne limits are not of paramount
importance, because this is beyond the capabilities of the machine’s design. The
accuracy to which a dragline can excavate depends upon the skill of the operator.
Discharge of the collected spoil is similar to that of a backacter, being through the
open front end of the bucket (see Fig. 2.3.9). A machine rigged as a dragline can be
ﬁtted with a grab bucket as an alternative for excavating in very loose soils below 
the level of the machine. Outputs of dragline excavators will vary according to
operating restrictions from 30 to 80 bucket loads per hour.
nnn MULTI-PURPOSE EXCAVATORS
These machines are based upon a tractor power unit and are very popular with 
the small to medium-sized building contractor because of their versatility. The
tractor is usually a diesel-powered wheeled vehicle, although tracked versions are
available; both are ﬁtted with a hydraulically controlled loading shovel at the front
and a hydraulically controlled backacting bucket or hoe at the rear of the vehicle
(see Fig. 2.3.10). It is essential that the weight of the machine is removed from the
axles during a backacting excavation operation. This is achieved by outrigger jacks
at the corners or by jacks at the rear of the power unit working in conjunction with
the inverted bucket at the front of the machine.
nnn TRENCHERS
These are machines designed to excavate trenches of constant width with
considerable accuracy and speed. Widths available range from 250 to 450 mm with
depths up to 4.000 m. Most trenchers work on a conveyor principle, having a series
of small cutting buckets attached to two endless chains, which are supported by a
boom that is lowered into the ground to the required depth. The spoil is transferred
to a cross-conveyor to deposit the spoil alongside the trench being dug; alternatively
it is deposited onto plough-shaped deﬂection plates that direct the spoil into
continuous heaps on both sides of the trench being excavated as the machine digs
along the proposed trench run. With a depth of dig of some 1.500 m outputs of 
up to 2.000 m3 per minute can be achieved, according to the nature of the subsoil.
Some trenchers are ﬁtted with an angled mould blade to enable the machine to
carry out the backﬁlling operation (see Fig. 2.3.11 for a typical example).

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
83
Figure 2.3.9
Typical dragline details (courtesy: Ruston-Bucyrus)

 
84
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.3.10
Typical excavator/loader details (courtesy: JCB Sales)

 
Earth-moving and excavation plant
85
Figure 2.3.11
Typical trench-digging machine (courtesy: Davis Manufacturing)

 
Movement of materials and/or personnel around and between building sites can be
very time-consuming and non-productive: therefore wherever economically possible
most contractors will use some form of mechanical transportation. The movement
required can be horizontal, vertical, or a combination of both directions. In the case
of horizontal and vertical movement of large quantities of water the usual plant
employed is a pump (already described in Chapter 2.2 on small powered plant).
Similarly the transportation of large quantities of concrete can be carried out by
using special pumping equipment, and this form of material transportation will 
be considered in Chapter 2.5 on concreting plant.
nnn LORRIES AND TRUCKS
Transportation of operatives, machines and materials between sites is usually
carried out by using suitably equipped or adapted lorries or trucks, ranging 
from the small pickup vehicle weighing less than 800 kg unladen to the very long
low-loaders used to convey tracked plant such as cranes and bulldozers. The small
pickup vehicle is usually based upon the manufacturer’s private car range and has
the advantages of lower vehicle excise duty than heavier lorries and the fact that 
the driver does not require a heavy goods vehicle licence for trucks of less than 
7.5 tonnes gross vehicle weight. To satisfy EU regulations trucks will be ﬁtted 
with tachographs for general use and speciﬁcally where travel distances exceed 
50 km. These are particularly appropriate where the user is not regularly employed
as the driver, e.g. a roofer using the vehicle to transport tiles to a contract. Most
lorries designed and developed for building contractors’ use are powered by a diesel
engine, which is more economical and robust than the petrol engine although they
are heavier and dearer. With mileages in excess of 20,000 (32,000 km) per year
experienced by most contractors, diesel engines usually prove to be a worthwhile
proposition. A vast range of lorries are produced by the leading motor
2.4
PLANT FOR TRANSPORTATION

 
Plant for transportation
87
manufacturers, and are available with reﬁnements such as tipping, tailhoist and 
self-loading facilities using hydraulic lifting gear. Because lorries, trucks and 
vans are standard forms of transportation encountered in all aspects of daily 
living they will not be considered in detail in this text, but regulations made 
under the Road Trafﬁc Act, Vehicles (Excise) Act and Customs and Excise 
Act must be noted.
The above legislation is very extensive and complex, dealing in detail with such
requirements as: the minimum driving ages for various types of vehicle; limitations
of hours of duty; maximum speed limits of certain classes of vehicle; vehicle lighting
regulations; construction, weight and equipment of motor vehicles and trailers;
testing requirements; and the rear-marking regulations for vehicles over 13.000 m
long. Most of the statutory requirements noted above will be incorporated into 
the design and ﬁnish of the vehicle as purchased, but certain regulations regarding
such matters as projection of loads, maximum loading of vehicles and notiﬁcations
to be given to highway authorities, police forces and the Department for Transport
are the direct concern of the building contractor. Precise information on these
requirements can be found in the Road Trafﬁc (Authorisation of Special Types)
(General) Order 2002 together with any subsequent amendments. Note that 
excise regulations are the builder’s and vehicle supplier’s responsibility.
DUMPERS
These are one of the most versatile, labour-saving and misused pieces of plant
available to the builder for the horizontal movement of materials ranging from
bricks to aggregates, sanitary ﬁttings to scaffolding, and ﬂuids such as wet 
concrete. These diesel-powered vehicles require only one operative, the driver, 
and can traverse the rough terrain encountered on many building sites. Many 
sizes and varieties are produced, giving options such as two- or four-wheel 
drive, hydraulic- or gravity-operated container, side or high-level discharge, 
self-loading facilities and specially equipped dumpers for collecting and
transporting crane skips. Speciﬁcation for dumpers is usually given by 
quoting the container capacity in litres for heaped, struck and water levels 
(see Fig. 2.4.1 for typical examples).
FORKLIFT TRUCKS
Forklift trucks for handling mainly palleted materials quickly and efﬁciently around
building sites over the rough terrain normally encountered have rapidly gained in
popularity since their introduction in the early 1970s. This popularity was probably
promoted by the shortage and cost of labour at that time, together with the need for
the rapid movement of materials with a low breakage factor. Designs now available
offer the choice of front- or rear-wheel drive and four-wheel drive with various
mast heights and lifting capacities (typical details are shown in Fig. 2.4.2). Although
these machines can carry certain unpalleted materials, this activity will require hand
loading, which reduces considerably the economic advantages of machine-loading
palleted materials.

 
88
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.1
Typical diesel dumpers

 
Plant for transportation
89
Figure 2.4.2
Typical fork lift truck details (courtesy: Manitou)

 
90
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn ELEVATORS AND CONVEYORS
The distinction between an elevator and a conveyor is usually one of direction of
movement, in that elevators are considered as those belts moving materials mainly
in the vertical direction, whereas conveyors are a similar piece of plant moving
materials mainly in the horizontal direction. Elevators are not common on building
sites but, if used wisely, can be economical for such activities as raising bricks or
rooﬁng tiles to the ﬁxing position. Most elevators consist of an endless belt with
raised transverse strips at suitable spacings against which can be placed the
materials to be raised, usually to a maximum height of 7.000 m. Conveyors or
endless belts are used mainly for transporting aggregates and concrete and are
generally considered economic only on large sites where there may be a large
concrete-mixing complex.
HOISTS
Hoists are a means of transporting materials or passengers vertically by means 
of a moving level platform. Generally, hoists are designed speciﬁcally to lift
materials or passengers, but recent designs have been orientated towards 
the combined materials/passenger hoist. Note that under no circumstances 
should passengers be transported on hoists designed speciﬁcally for lifting 
materials only.
Materials hoists come in basically two forms, the static and mobile models. 
The static version consists of a mast or tower with the lift platform either
cantilevered from the small section mast or centrally suspended with guides on
either side within an enclosing tower. Both forms need to be plumb and tied to 
the structure or scaffold at the intervals recommended by the manufacturer to
ensure stability. Mobile hoists usually have a maximum height of 24.000 m and 
do not need tying to the structure unless extension pieces are ﬁtted, when they 
are then treated as a cantilever hoist. All mobile hoists should be positioned on a
ﬁrm level base and jacked to ensure stability (see Fig. 2.4.3). The operation of a
materials hoist should be entrusted to a trained driver who has a clear view from 
the operating position. Site operatives should be instructed as to the correct loading
procedures, such as placing barrows on the hoist platform at ground level with 
the handles facing the high-level exit so that walking onto the raised platform is
reduced to a minimum.
Passenger hoists, like the materials hoist, can be driven by a petrol, diesel or
electric motor, and can be of a cantilever or enclosed variety. The cantilever type
consists of one or two passenger hoist cages operating on one or both sides of the
cantilever tower; the alternative form consists of a passenger hoist cage operating
within an enclosing tower. Tying-back requirements are similar to those needed 
for the materials hoist. Passenger and material hoists should conform to the
recommendations of BS 7212: Code of practice for safe use of construction hoists.
Typical hoist details are shown in Fig. 2.4.4.

 
Plant for transportation
91
Figure 2.4.3
Typical materials hoist (courtesy: Wickham Engineering)

 
92
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.4
Typical passenger hoist (courtesy: Linden Alimark)

 
Plant for transportation
93
nnn THE LIFTING OPERATIONS AND LIFTING
EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS 1998
These regulations, known by the acronym LOLER, were made under the Health
and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. The regulations provide an extensive checklist
with regard to assessment of risk in the use of hoists. The following is a brief
summary of the main points:
n Wherever access can be gained, and wherever anyone at ground level could 
be struck by the platform or counterweight, enclosures and gates should be 
at least 2.000 m high. Access gates must be kept closed at all times except 
for the necessary loading and unloading of the platform. The platform 
itself must be ﬁtted with a device capable of supporting a full load in the 
event of the hoist ropes or hoisting gear failing. Furthermore, the hoist 
must be ﬁtted with an automatic device to prevent the platform or cage 
over-running.
n Hoist operation is to be from one point only at all times if not controlled from
the cage itself. The operator must have a clear view of the hoist throughout its
entire travel. If this is not possible, auxiliary visibility devices or a signaller or
banksman must be located to cover all landings.
n Winches and carriers must have independent devices to prevent free fall 
and an automatic braking system that is applied whenever the controls are 
not in the normal operating position. Also, multiple roping or cylinders
(hydraulic hoists) and equipment with high factors of safety should be a 
standard facility.
n Safe working loads (SWL) in terms of materials and/or maximum number 
of passengers to be carried must be displayed on all platforms and associated
equipment. Other acceptable terms that may be used include rated capacity
or working load limit.
n Examination and inspection include the engagement of appropriately trained 
and competent employees, capable of ensuring that a hoist is safe to use. 
Pre-use checks should be conducted at the beginning of each working day, 
after alterations to height and after repairs. Thorough and detailed examination
of all components will be necessary at periodic intervals determined by the
degree of exposure and nature of the work. All examinations and inspections
must be recorded and ﬁled.
n Passenger-carrying hoists speciﬁcally require the cages to be constructed in such
a manner that passengers cannot fall out, become trapped or struck by objects
falling down the hoistway. Other requirements include the need for gates that
will prevent the hoists being activated until they are closed and which can be
opened only at landing levels. Over-run devices must also be ﬁtted at the top 
and bottom of the hoistway.
n Facilities for the prevention of movement or tipping of materials during
transportation by hoist are essential. Security of loads such as loose materials
should be provided by suitable containers such as wheelbarrows that are scotched
or otherwise restrained.

 
94
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn CRANES
A crane may be deﬁned as a device or machine for lifting loads by means of a rope.
The use of cranes has greatly increased in the construction industry, mainly because
of the need to raise the large and heavy prefabricated components often used in
modern structures. The range of cranes available is very wide, and therefore actual
choice must be made on a basis of sound reasoning, overall economics, capabilities
of cranes under consideration, prevailing site conditions and the anticipated
utilisation of the equipment.
The simplest crane of all consists of a single-grooved wheel, over which the rope
is passed, suspended from a scaffold or beam, and is called a gin wheel. The gin
wheel is manually operated and always requires more effort than the weight of the
load to raise it to the required height. It is suitable only for light loads such as, for
example, a bucketful of mortar and is normally used only on very small contracts.
To obtain some mechanical advantage the gin wheel can be replaced by a pulley
block that contains more than one pulley or sheave; according to the number and
pattern of sheaves used the lesser or greater is the saving in effort required to move
any given load.
Another useful but simple crane that can be employed for small, low-rise
structures is the scaffold crane, which consists of a short jib counterbalanced 
by the small petrol or electric power unit. The crane is fastened to a specially
reinforced scaffold standard incorporated within the general scaffold framework,
with extra bracing to overcome the additional stresses as necessary. The usual
maximum lifting capacity of this form of crane is 200 kg.
Apart from these simple cranes for small loads most cranes come in the more
recognisable form. Subdivision of crane types can be very wide and varied, but one
simple method of classiﬁcation is to consider cranes under three general headings:
n mobile cranes;
n static or stationary cranes;
n tower cranes.
MOBILE CRANES
Mobile cranes come in a wide variety of designs and capacities, generally with a
360° rotation or slewing circle, a low pivot and lufﬁng jib, the main exception being
the mast crane. Mobile cranes can be classed into ﬁve groups:
n self-propelled cranes;
n lorry-mounted cranes;
n track-mounted cranes;
n mast cranes;
n gantry cranes.
Self-propelled cranes
These are wheel-mounted mobile cranes that are generally of low lifting capacities
of up to 10 tonnes. They can be distinguished from other mobile cranes by the fact

 
Plant for transportation
95
that the driver has only one cab position for both driving and operating the crane.
They are extremely mobile, but to be efﬁcient they usually require a hard, level
surface from which to work. Road speeds obtained are in the region of 30 km/h.
The small-capacity machines have a ﬁxed boom or jib length, whereas the high-
capacity cranes can have a sectional lattice jib or a telescopic boom to obtain various
radii and lifting capacities. In common with all cranes, the shorter the lifting radius
the greater will be the lifting capacity (see Fig. 2.4.5 for a typical example).
Lorry-mounted cranes
These consist of a crane mounted on a specially designed lorry or truck. The
operator drives the vehicle between sites from a conventional cab but has to 
operate the crane engine and controls from a separate crane-operating position. 
The capacity of lorry-mounted cranes ranges from 5 to 20 tonnes in the free-
standing position, but this can be increased by using the jack outriggers built into
the chassis. Two basic jib formats for this type of crane are available: the folding
lattice jib and the telescopic jib. Most cranes ﬁtted with folding jibs are designed for
travelling on the highway with the basic jib supported by a vertical frame extended
above the driving cab; extra jib lengths and ﬂy jibs can be added upon arrival on site
if required (see Fig. 2.4.6). Telescopic jib cranes are very popular because of the
short time period required to prepare the crane for use upon arrival on site, making
them ideally suitable for short-hire periods (see Fig. 2.4.7 for a typical example).
Mobile lorry cranes can travel between sites at speeds of up to 48 km/h, which
makes them very mobile, but to be fully efﬁcient they need a ﬁrm and level 
surface from which to operate.
Track-mounted cranes
This form of mobile crane is usually based upon the standard power unit capable 
of being rigged as an excavator. These cranes can traverse around most sites without
the need for a ﬁrm level surface, and have capacity ranges similar to those of the
lorry-mounted cranes. The jib is of lattice construction with additional sections 
and ﬂy jibs to obtain the various lengths and capacities required (see Fig. 2.4.8).
The main disadvantage of this form of mobile crane is the general need for a special
low-loading lorry to transport the crane between sites.
Mast cranes
These cranes are often confused with mobile tower cranes. The main 
differences are:
n The mast is mounted on the jib pivots and held in the vertical position by ties.
n Cranes are high-pivot machines with a lufﬁng jib.
n Operation is usually from the chassis of the machine.
Mast cranes can be either lorry- or track-mounted machines: see Fig. 2.4.9 for a
typical example. The main advantages of the high-pivot mast crane are that it is less

 
96
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.5
Typical self-propelled crane (courtesy: Jones Cranes)

 
Plant for transportation
97
Figure 2.4.6
Typical lorry-mounted crane (courtesy: Coles Cranes)

 
98
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.7
Lorry-mounted telescopic crane (courtesy: Coles Cranes)

 
Plant for transportation
99
Figure 2.4.8
Typical track-mounted crane (courtesy: Thomas Smith & Sons)

 
100
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.9
Typical mobile mast crane (courtesy: Manitou)

 
Plant for transportation
101
likely to foul the side of a building under construction, and it can approach closer to
the structure than a low-pivot machine of equivalent capacity and reach. This can
be of paramount importance on congested sites.
Gantry cranes
The gantry or portal crane is a rail-mounted crane consisting of a horizontal
transverse beam that carries a combined driver’s cab and hook-supporting saddle.
The beam is supported by rail-mounted ‘A’ frames on powered bogies situated 
on both sides of the building under construction. This is a particularly safe form 
of crane as it requires no ballast, gives the driver an excellent all-round view, 
and allows the hook three-way movement in vertical, horizontal and transverse
directions. Although limited in application, this special form of mobile crane can be
very usefully and economically employed on repetitive and partially prefabricated
blocks of medium-rise dwellings.
STATIC OR STATIONARY CRANES
These cranes are ﬁxed at their working position and are used primarily for 
lifting heavy loads such as structural steelwork. Although more common on 
civil engineering contracts they can be successfully and economically employed 
by building contractors.
Guyed derrick
This is a simple and inexpensive form of static crane powered by a diesel engine or
electric motor. It consists of a lattice mast with a pedestal bearing stabilised by ﬁve
or more anchored guy ropes. The jib is of the low-pivot type and is slightly shorter
in length than the mast height so that it can rotate through the whole 360° without
fouling the guy ropes if raised in the near-vertical position (see Fig. 2.4.10 for
typical details).
Scotch derrick
This consists of a slewing mast and a lufﬁng jib that is usually longer than the 
jib used on a similar-capacity guyed derrick. Stabilisation of a scotch derrick is
obtained by using lattice members called guys and stays. Two guys are ﬁxed to the
top of the slewing mast at an angle of 45° to the horizontal and at an angle of 90° in
plan; the lower ends of the guys are connected to the ends of horizontal stays ﬁxed
to the base of the mast, forming an angle of 90° in plan. A horizontal brace is ﬁxed
between the ends of the guys and stays, forming a complete triangulation of the
stabilising members together with the mast. Scotch derricks are capable of slewing
only 270°, being restricted in further rotational movement by the sloping lattice
guys. Resistance to overturning can be provided by kentledge applied to the struts
and brace, or these members can be bolted to temporary concrete bases. The power
can be supplied by a diesel engine, but the common power source is an electric
motor (for typical details see Fig. 2.4.10).

 
102
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.10
Typical static derrick cranes

 
Plant for transportation
103
Monotower cranes
These are basically an elevated scotch derrick crane consisting of a fabricated and
well-braced tower surmounted by a derrick crane, the mast of which extends to a
pivot bearing well down the height of the tower. The tower can be up to 60.000 m
in height with a jib length of some 40.000 m, capable of raising 2 tonnes at its
maximum radius. To be economic this form of crane needs to be centrally sited 
to give maximum site coverage.
TOWER CRANES
Since their introduction in 1950 by the then Department of Scientiﬁc and 
Industrial Research the tower crane has been universally accepted by the building
industry as a standard piece of plant required for construction of medium- to 
high-rise structures. These cranes are available in several forms with a horizontal 
jib carrying a saddle or a trolley, or alternatively with a lufﬁng or derricking jib 
with a lifting hook at its extreme end. Horizontal jibs can bring the load closer 
to the tower, whereas lufﬁng jibs can be raised to clear obstructions such as 
adjacent buildings, an advantage on conﬁned sites. The basic types of tower 
crane available are:
n self-supporting static tower cranes;
n supported static tower cranes;
n travelling tower cranes;
n climbing cranes.
Self-supporting static tower cranes
These cranes generally have a greater lifting capacity than other types of crane. The
mast of the self-supporting tower crane must be ﬁrmly anchored at ground level to a
concrete base with holding-down bolts or alternatively to a special mast base section
cast into a foundation. They are particularly suitable for conﬁned sites, and should
be positioned in front or to one side of the proposed building with a jib of sufﬁcient
length to give overall coverage of the new structure. Generally these cranes have a
static tower, but types with a rotating or slewing tower and lufﬁng jib are also
available (see Fig. 2.4.11 for a typical self-supporting crane example).
Supported static tower cranes
These are similar in construction to self-supporting tower cranes but are used 
for lifting to a height in excess of that possible with self-supporting or travelling
tower cranes. The tower or mast is ﬁxed or tied to the structure using single or
double steel stays to provide the required stability. This tying back will induce
stresses in the supporting structure, which must therefore be of adequate strength.
Supported tower cranes usually have horizontal jibs, because the rotation of a
lufﬁng jib mast renders it unsuitable for this application (see Fig. 2.4.12 for a
typical example).

 
104
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.11
Typical self-supporting static tower crane (courtesy: Stothert & Pitt)

 
Plant for transportation
105
Figure 2.4.12
Typical supported static tower crane (courtesy: Babcock Weitz)

 
106
Advanced Construction Technology
Travelling tower cranes
To obtain better site coverage with a tower crane a rail-mounted or travelling 
crane could be used. The crane travels on heavy wheeled bogies mounted on a
wide-gauge (4.200 m) rail track with gradients not exceeding 1 in 200 and curves
not less than 11.000 m radius depending on mast height. It is essential that the 
base for the railway track sleepers is accurately prepared, well drained, regularly
inspected and maintained if the stability of the crane is to be ensured. The motive
power is electricity, the supply of which should be attached to a spring-loaded
drum, which will draw in the cable as the crane reverses to reduce the risk of the
cable becoming cut or trapped by the wheeled bogies. Travelling cranes can be
supplied with similar lifting capacities and jib arrangements as given for static
cranes (see Fig. 2.4.13 for a typical example).
Climbing cranes
These are designed for tall buildings, being located within and supported by the
structure under construction. The mast, which extends down through several
storeys, requires only a small (1.500 to 2.000 m square) opening in each ﬂoor.
Support is given at ﬂoor levels by special steel collars, frames and wedges. The
raising of the static mast is carried out using a winch that is an integral part of 
the system. Generally, this form of crane requires a smaller horizontal or lufﬁng 
jib to cover the construction area than a static or similar tower crane. The jib is 
made from small, easy-to-handle sections, which are lowered down the face of 
the building, when the crane is no longer required, by means of a special winch
attached to one section of the crane. The winch is ﬁnally lowered to ground level 
by hand when the crane has been dismantled (see Fig. 2.4.14 for typical crane
details).
CRANE SKIPS AND SLINGS
Cranes are required to lift all kinds of materials, ranging from prefabricated
components to loose and ﬂuid materials. Various skips or containers have been
designed to carry loose or ﬂuid materials (see Fig. 2.4.15). Skips should be of 
sound construction, easy to attach to the crane hook, easily cleaned, easy to load 
and unload and of a suitable capacity. Prefabricated components are usually 
hoisted from predetermined lifting points by using wire or chain slings 
(see Fig. 2.4.15).
WIRE ROPES
Wire ropes consist of individual wires twisted together to form strands, which are
then twisted together around a steel core to form a rope or cable. Ordinary lay
ropes are formed by twisting the wires in the individual strands in the opposite
direction to the group of strands, whereas in Lang’s lay ropes the wires in the
individual strands are twisted in the same direction as the groups of strands. 

 
Plant for transportation
107
Figure 2.4.13
Typical travelling tower crane (courtesy: Richier International)

 
108
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.4.14
Typical climbing tower crane (courtesy: Stothert & Pitt Ltd)

 
Plant for transportation
109
Figure 2.4.15
Typical crane skips and sling

 
110
Advanced Construction Technology
Lang’s lay ropes generally have better wearing properties thanks to the larger 
surface area of the external wires, but they have the tendency to spin if the ends of
the rope are not ﬁxed. For this reason ordinary lay ropes with a working life of up
to two years are usually preferred for cranes. All wire ropes are lubricated during
manufacture, but this does not preclude the need to clean and lubricate wire ropes
when exposed to the elements. Under Regulation No. 9 of the Lifting Operations
and Lifting Equipment Regulations 1998 wire ropes must be inspected before use
and given a thorough examination every six months, the results being recorded on
the appropriate form.
nnn THE LIFTING OPERATIONS AND LIFTING
EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS 1998 – SEE ALSO PAGE 93
These regulations detail the minimum requirements for lifting appliances, chains,
ropes and lifting gear. The main points include the following:
n Examination of all forms of lifting gear to ensure sound construction, materials
appropriate for the conditions of use, adequate strength for the intended task,
retention in good order, and inspection at regular intervals depending on use 
and exposure as determined by a competent person.
n Adequate support, strength, stability, anchoring, ﬁxing and erection of lifting
appliances to include an appropriate factor of safety against failure.
n Travelling and slewing cranes require a 500 mm (preferably 600 mm) wide
minimum clearance wherever practicable between the appliance and ﬁxtures 
such as a building or access scaffold. If such a clearance cannot be provided,
movement between the appliance and ﬁxture should be prevented.
n Safe means of access is required for the crane operator and the signaller. If the
access platform is above ground it must be of adequate size, close boarded or
plated, provided with guard rails at least 950 mm above platform level with toe
boards at least 150 mm high. Any gap between the toe board and intermediate
guard rail or between guard rails must be no more than 470 mm. (See Chapter 1.5
in Construction Technology.)
n A cab or cabin is required for the crane operator; this must provide an
unrestricted view for safe use of the applicance. The cabin must have adequate
protection from the weather and harmful substances, with a facility for
ventilation and heating. The cabin must also allow access to the machinery 
for maintenance work.
n Equipment that can be adapted for various operating radii and other
conﬁgurations must be clearly marked with corresponding safe working loads for
these variables.
n Brakes, controls and safety devices must be clearly marked to prevent accidental
operation or misuse.
n Safe means of access are to be provided for examination, repair and servicing,
particularly where there is a possibility of a person falling from any height.
n Strength and ﬁxing requirements for equipment supporting pulley blocks and
gin wheels must be ascertained.

 
Plant for transportation
111
n Stability of lifting appliances on soft ground, uneven surfaces and slopes must be
considered. Cranes must be either anchored to the ground or to a foundation, or
suitably counterweighted or stabilised to prevent overturning.
n Rail-mounted cranes must have a track laid and secured on a ﬁrm foundation to
prevent risk of derailment. There must be provision for buffers, effective braking
systems and adequate maintenance of both track and equipment.
n Strength requirements are to be assessed for mounting cranes on bogies, trolley
or wheeled carriages.
n Cranes (particularly those used for lifting persons) require hoisting and lowering
limiters in addition to capacity indicators and limiters.
n Measures must be taken to prevent a freely suspended load from moving
uncontrollably. Devices that could be ﬁtted include: multiple ropes, pawl 
and ratchet, check valves for hydraulics and safety nets.
n Cranes must be erected under planned conditions and the supervision of a
competent person.
n There are speciﬁc requirements for persons operating lifting equipment and for
signalling duties. Operators of lifting appliances must be trained, experienced
and over 18 years of age. If the operator cannot see the whole passage of a lift, an
efﬁcient signalling system must be used. A signaller must be over 18 years of age,
and capable of giving clear and distinct communications by hand, mechanical or
electrical means.
n Testing, examination and inspections are required for all equipment. Chains,
slings, ropes, hooks, shackles, eyebolts, pulleys, blocks, gin wheels, sheer legs and
other small components are no less important than grabs and winches. All must
be tested and thoroughly examined before being put into operation. Further
thorough examination is required every 12 months (6 months if for lifting
persons), and inspections are to be conducted weekly and documented.
n All cranes must be clearly marked with their safe maximum working loads
relevant to lifting radius and maximum operating radius, particularly when 
ﬁtted with a derricking jib. Lifting equipment not designed for personnel 
must be clearly marked as such.
n Jib cranes must be ﬁtted with an automatic safe load indicator such as a warning
light for the operator and a warning bell for persons nearby.
n Except for testing purposes, the safe working load must not be exceeded.
n When loads are approaching the safe maximum load, the initial lift should be
short. A check should then be made to establish safety and stability before
proceeding to complete the lift.
Apart from the legal requirements summarised above, commonsense precautions 
on site must be taken, such as the clear marking of high-voltage electric cables and
leaving the crane in an ‘out of service’ position when unattended or if storm or high
wind conditions prevail. Most tower cranes can operate in wind conditions of up to
60 km/h. The usual ‘out of service’ position for tower cranes is as follows:
1. Jibs to be left on free slew and pointed in the direction of the wind on the
leeward side of the tower.
2. Fuel and power supplies switched off.

 
112
Advanced Construction Technology
3. Load removed.
4. Hook raised to highest position.
5. Hook positioned close to tower.
6. Rail-mounted cranes should have their wheels chocked or clamped.
nnn ERECTION OF CRANES
Before commencing to erect a crane, careful consideration must be given to its
actual position on the site. As for all forms of plant, maximum utilisation is the
ultimate aim: therefore a central position within reach of all storage areas, loading
areas and activity areas is required. Generally, output will be in the region of 18 to
20 lifts per hour: therefore the working sequence of the crane needs to be carefully
planned and coordinated if full advantage is to be made of the crane’s capabilities.
The erection of mast and tower cranes varies with the different makes, but there
are several basic methods. Mast cranes are usually transported in a collapsed and
folded position and are quickly unfolded and erected on site, using built-in lifting
and erection gear. Tower cranes, however, have to be assembled on site. In some
cases the superstructure that carries the jib and counterjib is erected on the base
frame. The top section of the tower or pintle is raised by internal climbing gear
housed within the superstructure; further 3.000 m tower lengths can be added as
the pintle is raised until the desired tower height has been reached. The jib and
counterjib are attached at ground level to the superstructure, which is then raised 
to the top of the pintle; this whole arrangement then slews around the static tower.
Another method of assembly and erection adopted by some manufacturers is 
to raise the ﬁrst tower section onto a concrete base, and then assemble the jib and
counterjib and ﬁx these to the ﬁrst tower section with the aid of a mobile crane.
Using the facilities of the jib, further tower sections can be ﬁtted inside the ﬁrst
section and elevated hydraulically on a telescopic principle; this procedure is
repeated until the desired height has been reached. A similar approach to the 
last method is to have the jib and top tower section ﬁxed to a cantilever bracket
arrangement so that it is offset from the main tower. Further sections can be added
to the assembly until the required height is reached when the jib assembly can be
transferred to the top of the tower.
A procedure using hydraulic jacks and climbing mast is shown in Fig. 2.4.16.

 
Plant for transportation
113
Figure 2.4.16
Crane mast assembly

 
The mixing and transporting of concrete and mortar mixes are important activities
on most building sites, from the very small to the very large contract. The choice 
of method for mixing and transporting the concrete or mortar must be made on the
basis of the volume of mixed material required in any given time and also on the
horizontal and vertical transportation distances involved. Consideration must also
be given to the use of ready-mixed concrete, especially where large quantities are
required and/or site space is limited.
nnn CONCRETE MIXERS
Most concrete mixers used on building sites are derived from the minimum
recommendations of BS 1305: Speciﬁcation for batch type concrete mixers. Although
obsolescent, this British Standard provides useful references for two basic forms:
the drum type or free-fall concrete mixer, and the pan type or forced action
concrete mixer. The drum mixers are subdivided into three distinct forms:
n Tilting drum (T) – in which the single-compartment drum has an inclinable
axis with loading and discharge through the front opening. This form of mixer 
is primarily intended for small batch outputs ranging from 100T to 200T litres.
Note that mixer output capacities are given in litres for sizes up to 1,000 litres
and in cubic metres for outputs over 1,000 litres; a letter sufﬁx designating the
type is also included in the title. In common with all drum mixers, tilting mixers
have ﬁxed blades inside the revolving drum that lift the mixture and at a certain
point in each revolution allow the mixture to drop towards the bottom of the
drum to recommence the mixing cycle. The complete cycle time for mixing one
batch from load to reload is usually speciﬁed as 21/2 minutes. Typical examples 
of tilting drum mixers are shown in Fig. 2.5.1.
n Non-tilting drum (NT) – in which the single-compartment drum has two
openings, and rotates on a horizontal axis; output capacities range from 200NT
2.5
CONCRETE MIXERS AND PUMPS

 
Concrete mixers and pumps
115
Figure 2.5.1
Typical tilting drum mixers (courtesy: Liner Concrete Machinery)

 
116
Advanced Construction Technology
to 750NT. Loading is through the front opening and discharge through the rear
opening by means of a discharge chute collecting the mixture from the top of the
drum. The chute should form an angle of not less than 40° with the horizontal
axis of the drum.
n Reversing drum (R) – a more popular version of a mixer with a drum rotating
on a horizontal axis than the non-tilting drum mixer described above. Capacities
of this type of mixer range from 200R to 500R. Loading is through a front
opening and discharge from a rear opening carried out by reversing the rotation
of the drum (see Fig. 2.5.2).
Generally, mixers with an output capacity exceeding 200 litres are ﬁtted with 
an automatic or manually operated water system, which will deliver a measured
volume of water to the drum of the mixer. Table 1 of BS 1305 gives recommended
minimum water tank capacities for the various mixer sizes.
Forced action mixers (P) are generally for larger capacity outputs than the drum
mixers described above, and can be obtained within the range from 200P to 2000P.
The mixing of the concrete is achieved by the relative movements between the mix,
pan and blades or paddles. Usually the pan is stationary while the paddles or blades
rotate, but rotating pan models are also available consisting of a revolving pan and a
revolving mixer blade or star giving a shorter mixing time of 30 seconds with large
outputs. In general, pan mixers are not easily transported, and for this reason are
usually employed only on large sites where it would be an economic proposition to
install this form of mixer.
nnn CEMENT STORAGE
Cement for the mixing of mortars or concrete can be supplied in 25 kg bags 
or in bulk for storage on site prior to use. Bagged cement requires a dry and 
damp-free store to prevent air setting taking place (see Chapters 1.2 and 2.4 of 
Construction Technology). If large quantities of cement are required an alternative
method of storage is the silo, which will hold cement supplied in bulk under ideal
conditions. A typical cement silo consists of an elevated welded steel cylindrical
container supported on four crossed braced legs with a bottom discharge outlet 
to the container. Storage capacities range from 12 to 50 tonnes. Silos can be
incorporated into an on-site static batching plant, or they can have their own
weighing attachments. Some of the advantages of silo storage for large quantities 
of cement are:
n Cost of bulk cement is cheaper per tonne than bagged cement.
n Unloading is by direct pumping from delivery vehicle to silo.
n Less site space is required for any given quantity to be stored on site.
n First cement delivered is the ﬁrst to be used because it is pumped into the top 
of the silo and extracted from the bottom.

 
Concrete mixers and pumps
117
Figure 2.5.2
Typical reversible drum mixer (courtesy: Liner Concrete Machinery)

 
118
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn READY-MIXED MORTAR
Many sites are congested, particularly in town and city centres where land is at 
a premium and density of building is high. Space for cement-mixing plant and
materials is not always available. Furthermore, labour requirements for mixing 
and transporting mortar about the site have reduced the cost viability of site
preparation. By comparison, quality-controlled factory preparation and delivery 
of mortar offers many cost-saving advantages, including a guarantee of consistency
batch after batch. If required, the manufacturer can also declare the following:
n workability and workable life;*
n chloride content;
n air content;
n compressive strength;
n bond strength;
n water absorption;
n density;
n water vapour permeability;
n thermal conductivity;
n prescribed mix proportions (by volume or weight).**
* It is usual to incorporate a cement set retarder in the mix to extend the mortar working life.
This is to allow for any delay in transport and the time taken to work through a large batch
delivery.
** Mix selection is normally to BS 5628: Code of practice for use of masonry and BS EN 1052:
Methods of test for masonry.
nnn READY-MIXED CONCRETE
The popularity of ready-mixed concrete has increased tremendously since 1968,
when the British Ready-Mixed Concrete Association laid down minimum standards
for plant, equipment, personnel and quality control for all BRMCA-approved
depots. The ready-mixed concrete industry consumes a large proportion of the 
total cement output of the United Kingdom in supplying many millions of cubic
metres of concrete per annum to all parts of the country.
Ready-mixed concrete is supplied to sites in specially designed truck mixers,
which are basically a mobile mixing drum mounted on a lorry chassis. Truck mixers
can be employed in one of three ways:
n Loaded at the depot with dry batched materials plus the correct quantity of
water, the truck mixer is used to complete the mixing process at the depot 
before leaving for the site. During transportation to the site the mix is kept
agitated by the revolving drum; on arrival the contents are remixed before 
being discharged.
n Fully or partially mixed concrete is loaded into the truck mixer at the depot.
During transportation to the site the mix is agitated by the drum revolving at 
1 to 2 revolutions per minute. On arrival the mix is ﬁnally mixed by increasing
the drum’s revolutions to between 10 and 15 revolutions per minute for a few
minutes before being discharged.

 
Concrete mixers and pumps
119
n When the time taken to deliver the mix to the site may be unacceptable the
mixing can take place on site by loading the truck mixer at the depot with dry
batched materials and adding the water upon arrival on site before completing
the mixing operation and subsequent discharge.
All forms of truck mixer carry a supply of water that is normally used to wash 
out the drum after discharging the concrete and before returning to the depot. 
See Fig. 2.5.3 for typical truck mixer details.
Truck mixers are heavy vehicles, weighing up to 24 tonnes when fully laden,
with a turning circle of some 15.000 m; they require both a ﬁrm surface and 
turning space on site. The site allowance time for unloading is usually 30 minutes,
allowing for the discharge of a full load in 10 minutes and leaving 20 minutes 
of free time to permit for a reasonable degree of ﬂexibility in planning and
programming to both the supplier and the user. Truck mixer capacities vary 
with the different models but 4, 5 and 6 m3 are common sizes. Consideration 
must be given by the contractor as to the best unloading position because most
truck mixers are limited to a maximum discharge height of 1.500 m and using a
discharging chute to a semicircular coverage around the rear of the vehicle within a
radius of 3.000 m.
To obtain maximum advantage from the facilities offered by ready-mixed
concrete suppliers, building contractors must place a clear order of the exact
requirements, which should follow the recommendations given in BS EN 206-1 
and BS’s 8500-1 and 2. The supply instructions should contain the following:
n type of cement;
n types and maximum sizes of aggregate;
n test and strength requirements;
n testing methods;
n slump or workability requirements;
n volume of each separate mix speciﬁed;
n delivery programme;
n any special requirements such as a pumpable mix.
Note: Much of the above can be rationalised by specifying the concrete 
grade, e.g. C30, and the mix category, e.g. ‘Designed’. For more detail, see 
BS EN 206-1: Concrete. Speciﬁcation, performance, production and conformity and 
the complementary British Standards to BS EN 206-1, i.e. BS 8500-1: Concrete.
Method of specifying and guidance for the speciﬁer, and BS 8500-2: Concrete.
Speciﬁcation for constituent materials and concrete. See also, the summary in 
Chapter 2.4 of Construction Technology.
nnn CONCRETE PUMPS
The advantages of moving large volumes of concrete by using a pump and pipeline
are as follows:
n Concrete is transported from point of supply to placing position in one
continuous operation.

 
120
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.5.3
Typical ready-mixed concrete truck details

 
Concrete mixers and pumps
121
n Faster pours can be achieved with less labour. Typical placing ﬁgures are up to
100 m3 per hour using a two-person crew consisting of the pump operator and 
an operator at the discharge end.
n No segregation of mix is experienced with pumping, and a more consistent
placing and compaction is obtained, requiring less vibration.
n Generally, site plant and space requirements are reduced.
n Only method available for conveying wet concrete both vertically and
horizontally in one operation.
n No shock loading of formwork is experienced.
n Generally the net cost of placing concrete is reduced.
Against the above advantages must be set the following limitations:
n Concrete supply must be consistent and regular, which can usually be achieved
by well-planned and organised deliveries of ready-mixed concrete. Note that
under ideal conditions the discharge rate of each truck mixer can be in the order
of 10 minutes.
n Concrete mix must be properly designed and controlled, because not all concrete
mixes are pumpable. The concrete is pumped under high pressure, which can
cause bleeding and segregation of the mix: therefore the mix must be properly
designed to avoid these problems, as well as having good cohesive, plasticity and
self-lubricating properties to enable it to be pumped through the system without
excessive pressure and without causing blockages.
n More formwork will be required to receive the high output of the pump to make
its use an economic proposition.
Most pumps used today are of the twin-cylinder hydraulically driven design, 
as either a trailer pump or a lorry-mounted pump using a small-bore (100 mm
diameter) pipeline capable of pumping concrete 85.000 m vertically and 200.000 m
horizontally, although these ﬁgures will vary with the actual pump used (see 
Fig. 2.5.4 for a typical example). The delivery pipes are usually of rigid seamless 
steel in 3.000 m lengths except where ﬂexibility is required, as on booms and at the
delivery end. Large-radius bends of up to 1.000 m radius giving 221/2°, 45° and 90°
turning are available to give ﬂexible layout patterns. Generally, small-diameter pipes
of 75 and 100 mm are used for vertical pumping, whereas larger diameters of up to
150 mm are used for horizontal pumping. If a concrete mix with large aggregates 
is to be pumped, the pipe diameter should be at least three or four times the
maximum aggregate size.
The time required on site to set up a pump is approximately 30 to 45 minutes.
The pump operator will require a supply of water and grout for the initial 
coating of the pipeline: this usually requires about two or three bags of cement. 
A hardstanding should be provided for the pump, with adequate access and turning
space for the attendant ready-mixed concrete vehicles. The output of a concrete
pump will be affected by the distance the concrete is to be pumped: therefore 
the pump should be positioned so that it is as close to the discharge point as is
practicable. Pours should be planned so that they progress backwards towards 
the pump, removing the redundant pipe lengths as the work proceeds.

 
122
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.5.4
Typical lorry-mounted concrete pump (courtesy: Schwing)

 
Concrete mixers and pumps
123
Generally, if the volume of concrete to be placed is sufﬁcient to warrant hiring a
pump and operators it will result in an easier, quicker and usually cheaper operation
than placing the concrete by the traditional method of crane and skip with typical
outputs of 15 to 20 m3 per hour as opposed to the 60 to 100 m3 per hour output of
the concrete pump. Concrete pumping and placing demands a certain amount of
skill and experience, and for this reason most pumps in use are hired out and
operated by specialist contractors.
nnn SAFETY NOTE
Mortar and concrete contain cement. Mortar may also contain lime. Both
ingredients can burn, and skin contact with fresh mortar or concrete may result 
in skin ulceration and/or dermatitis. Contact with the skin should be prevented 
by wearing suitable protective clothing – in particular, reinforced plastic gloves,
waterproof overalls and footwear and protection for the eyes. Face protection may
also be appropriate for certain applications. Where skin contact occurs, immediate
washing with soap and water is recommended. Eye contact requires immediate
washing of the affected area with clean water. If cement is swallowed, the mouth
should be washed out, followed by drinking plenty of clean water. Cement products
are packaged with a safety label, similar to that shown in Fig. 2.5.5.
References:
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 1999
Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations 1992
Figure 2.5.5
Safety sign on cement materials

 
A scaffold is a temporary frame, usually constructed from steel or aluminium 
alloy tubes clipped or coupled together to provide a means of access to high-level
working areas as well as providing a safe platform from which to work. The two
basic forms of scaffolding, namely the putlog scaffold with its single row of uprights
or standards set outside the perimeter of the building and partly supported by the
structure, and independent scaffolds which have two rows of standards, have been
covered in Chapter 1.5 of Construction Technology.
It is therefore necessary to consider in this text only the special scaffolds such as
slung, suspended, truss-out and gantry scaffolds, as well as the easy-to-erect system
scaffolds. It cannot be overemphasised that all scaffolds must comply fully with 
the minimum requirements set out in the Work at Height Regulations 2005 and 
BS EN 12811-1: 2003 Temporary works equipment. Scaffolds. Performance
requirements and general design.
nnn SLUNG SCAFFOLDS
These are scaffolds that are suspended by means of wire ropes or chains and 
are not provided with a means of being raised or lowered by a lifting appliance.
Their main use is for gaining access to high ceilings or the underside of high roofs.
A secure anchorage must be provided for the suspension ropes, and this can usually 
be achieved by using the structural members of the roof over the proposed working
area. Any member selected to provide the anchorage point must be inspected to
assess its adequacy. At least six evenly spaced suspension wire ropes or chains
should be used, and these must be adequately secured at both ends. The working
platform is constructed in a similar manner to conventional scaffolds, consisting 
of ledgers, transoms and timber scaffold boards with the necessary guard rails and
toe boards. Working platforms in excess of 2.400 m × 2.400 m plan size should be
checked to ensure that the supporting tubular components are not being overstressed.
2.6
SCAFFOLDING

 
Scaffolding
125
nnn TRUSS-OUT SCAFFOLDS
These are a form of independent tied scaffold that rely entirely on the building for
support, and are used where it is impossible or undesirable to erect a conventional
scaffold from ground level. The supporting scaffolding structure that projects 
from the face of the building is known as the truss-out. Anchorage is provided 
by adjustable struts ﬁxed internally between the ﬂoor and ceiling, from which the
cantilever tubes project. Except for securing rakers, only right-angle couplers
should be used. The general format for the remainder of the scaffold is as used 
for conventional independent scaffolds (see Fig. 2.6.1).
nnn SUSPENDED SCAFFOLDS
These consist of a working platform suspended from supports such as outriggers
that cantilever over the upper edge of a building, and in this form are a temporary
means of access to the face of a building for the purposes of cleaning and light
maintenance work. Many new tall structures have suspension tracks incorporated 
in the fascia or upper edge beam, or a cradle suspension track is ﬁxed to the upper
surface of the ﬂat roof on which is supported a manual or power trolley with
retractable davit arms for supporting the suspended working platform or cradle. 
All forms of suspended cradles must conform with the minimum requirements set
out in the Work at Height Regulations 2005 with regard to platform boards, guard
rails and toe boards. Cradles may be single units or grouped together to form a
continuous working platform; if grouped together they are connected to one 
another at their abutment ends with hinges. Figure 2.6.2 shows typical suspended
scaffold details.
nnn MOBILE TOWER SCAFFOLDS
These are used mainly by painters and maintenance staff to gain access to ceilings
where it is advantageous to have a working platform that can be readily moved to a
new position. The scaffold is basically a square tower constructed from scaffold
tubes mounted on wheels ﬁtted with brakes. Platform access is gained by short
opposing inclined ladders or one inclined ladder within the tower base area. 
See Chapter 1.5 of Construction Technology for more detail.
nnn BIRDCAGE SCAFFOLDS
These are used to provide a complete working platform at high level over a 
large area, and consist basically of a two-directional arrangement of standards,
ledgers and transoms to support a close-boarded working platform at the 
required height. To ensure adequate stability standards should be placed at 
not more than 2.400 m centres in both directions, and the whole arrangement 
must be adequately braced.

 
126
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.6.1
Typical truss-out scaffold details

 
Scaffolding
127
Figure 2.6.2
Typical suspended scaffold details

 
128
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn GANTRIES
These are forms of scaffolding used primarily as elevated loading and unloading
platforms over a public footpath where the structure under construction or repair is
immediately adjacent to the footpath. As for hoardings, local authority permission is
necessary, and their speciﬁc requirements such as pedestrian gangways, lighting and
dimensional restrictions must be fully met. It may also be necessary to comply with
police requirements as to when loading and unloading can take place. The gantry
platform can also serve as a storage and accommodation area as well as providing 
the staging from which a conventional independent scaffold to provide access to 
the face of the building can be erected. Gantry scaffolds can be constructed from
standard structural steel components as shown in Fig. 2.6.3 or from a system
scaffold as shown in Fig. 2.6.4.
nnn SYSTEM SCAFFOLDS
These scaffolds are based upon the traditional independent steel tube scaffold, but
instead of being connected together with a series of loose couplers and clips they
usually have integral interlocking connections. They are easy to erect, adaptable,
and generally can be assembled and dismantled by semi-skilled operatives. The
design of these systems is such that the correct position of handrails, lift heights 
and all other aspects of the Work at Height Regulations 2005 are automatically met.
Another advantage found in most of these system scaffolds is the elimination of
internal cross-bracing, giving a clear walk-through space at all levels; facade-
bracing, however, may still be required. Figure 2.6.5 shows details of a typical
system scaffold and, like the illustrations chosen for items of builders’ mechanical
plant, is intended only to be representative of the many scaffolding systems
available.

 
Scaffolding
129
Figure 2.6.3
Typical gantry scaffold details: 1

 
130
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 2.6.4
Typical gantry scaffold details: 2

 
Scaffolding
131
Figure 2.6.5
Typical system scaffold (courtesy: SGB Anglok Scaffolding)

 

 
SUBSTRUCTURE: 1
PART
3

 

 
Groundwater can be deﬁned as water that is held temporarily in the soil above 
the level of the water table. Below the water table level is the subsoil water, which 
is the result of the natural absorption by subsoils of the groundwater. Both types 
of water can be effectively controlled by a variety of methods, which have been
designed either to exclude the water from a particular area or merely to lower the
water table to give reasonably dry working conditions, especially for excavation
activities.
The extent to which water affects the stability and bearing capacity of a 
subsoil will depend upon the physical characteristics of the soil and in particular
upon the particle size, which ranges from the very ﬁne particles of clay soils to the
larger particles or boulders of some granular soils. The effect of the water on these
particles is that of a lubricant, enabling them to move when subjected to a force
such as a foundation loading or simply causing them to ﬂow by movement of the
groundwater. The number and disposition of the particles together with the amount
of water present will determine the amount of movement that can take place. The
ﬁner particles will be displaced more easily than the larger particles, which could
create voids, thus encouraging settlement of the larger particles.
The voids caused by excavation works encourage water to ﬂow, because the
opposition to the groundwater movement provided by the soil has been removed. 
In cases where the ﬂow of water is likely, an artiﬁcial opposition must be installed 
or the likelihood of water movement must be restricted by geotechnical processes.
These processes can be broadly classiﬁed into one of two groups:
n permanent exclusion of groundwater;
n temporary exclusion of groundwater by lowering the water table.
3.1
GROUNDWATER CONTROL

 
136
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn PERMANENT EXCLUSION OF GROUNDWATER
Sheet piling
This is suitable for all types of soil except boulder beds, and is used to form a
barrier or cut-off wall to the ﬂow of groundwater. The sheet piling can be of 
a permanent nature, being designed to act as a retaining wall, or it can be a
temporary enclosure to excavation works in the form of a cofferdam (for details 
see Chapter 3.3). Vibration and noise due to the driving process may render this
method unacceptable, and the capital costs can be high unless they can be
apportioned over several contracts on a use and re-use basis.
Diaphragm walls
These are suitable for all types of soil, and are usually of in-situ reinforced concrete
installed using the bentonite slurry method (see Chapter 3.2 for details). This form
of diaphragm wall has the advantages of low installation noise and vibration; it 
can be used in restricted spaces and can be installed close to existing foundations.
Generally, unless the diaphragm wall forms part of the permanent structure, this
method is uneconomic.
Slurry trench cut-off
These are non-structural thin cast in-situ unreinforced diaphragm walls suitable 
for subsoils of silts, sands and gravels. They can be used on sites where there is
sufﬁcient space to enclose the excavation area with a cut-off wall of this nature sited
so that there is sufﬁcient earth remaining between the wall and the excavation to
give the screen or diaphragm wall support. Provided adequate support is given,
these walls are rapidly installed and are cheaper than the structural version.
Thin-grouted membrane
This is an alternative method to the slurry trench cut-off wall when used in silt 
and sand subsoils, and is also suitable for installation in very permeable soils and
made-up ground where bentonite methods are unsuitable. Like the previous
example, ample earth support is required for this non-structural cut-off wall. 
The common method of formation is to drive into the ground a series of touching
universal beam or column sections, sheet pile sections or, alternatively, small steel
box sections to the required depth. A grout injection pipe is ﬁxed to the web or face
of the section, and this is connected by means of a ﬂexible pipe to a grout pump at
ground level. As the sections are withdrawn, the void created is ﬁlled with cement
grout to form the thin membrane (see Fig. 3.1.1).
Contiguous piling
This is an alternative method to the reinforced concrete diaphragm wall, consisting
of a series of interlocking reinforced concrete-bored piles. The formation of the

 
Groundwater control
137
Figure 3.1.1
Thin grouted membrane and contiguous piling

 
138
Advanced Construction Technology
bored piles can be carried out as described in Chapter 4.2, ensuring that the piles
interlock for their entire length. This will require special cutting tools to form the
key in the alternate piles for the interlocking intermediate piles. The pile diameter
selected will be determined by the strength required after completion of the
excavations to one side of the wall. The usual range of diameters used is between
300 and 600 mm. Contiguous piling can be faced with a reinforced rendering or
covered with a mesh reinforcement sprayed with concrete to give a smooth ﬁnish.
This latter process is called shotcrete or gunite. An alternative method is to cast in
front of the contiguous piling a reinforced wall terminating in a capping beam to the
piles (see Fig. 3.1.1).
Cement grouts
In common with all grouting methods, cement grouts are used to form a ‘curtain’ 
in soils that have high permeability, making temporary exclusion pumping methods
uneconomic. Cement grouts are used in ﬁssured and jointed rock strata, and are
injected into the ground through a series of grouting holes bored into the ground 
in lines, with secondary intermediate borehole lines if necessary. The grout can be 
a mixture of neat cement and water, cement and sand up to a ratio of 1:4, or PFA
(pulverised fuel ash) and cement in the ratio of 1:1 with 2 parts of water by 
weight. The usual practice is to start with a thin grout and gradually reduce the
water:cement ratio as the process proceeds, to increase the viscosity of the mixture.
To be effective this form of treatment needs to be extensive.
Clay/cement grouting
This is suitable for sands and gravels where the soil particles are too small for
cement grout treatment. The grout is introduced by means of a sleeve grout pipe
that limits its spread, and as for the cement grouting the equipment is simple and
can be used in a conﬁned space. The clay/cement grout is basically bentonite with
additives such as Portland cement or soluble silicates to form the permanent barrier.
One disadvantage of this method is that at least 4.000 m of natural cover is required
to provide support for the non-structural barrier.
Chemical grouting
This is suitable for use in medium-to-coarse sands and gravels to stabilise the soil,
and can also be used for underpinning works below the water-table level. The
chemicals are usually mixed prior to their injection into the ground through injection
pipes inserted at 600 mm centres. The chemicals form a permanent gel or sol in 
the earth, which increases the strength of the soil and also reduces its permeability.
This method, in which a liquid base diluted with water is mixed with a catalyst to
control the gel-setting time before being injected into the ground, is called the 
one-shot method. An alternative two-shot method can be used: it is carried 
out by injecting the ﬁrst chemical (usually sodium silicate) into the ground and
immediately afterwards injecting the second chemical (calcium chloride) to form a

 
Groundwater control
139
silica gel. The reaction of the two chemicals is immediate, whereas in the one-shot
method the reaction of the chemicals can be delayed to allow for full penetration of
the subsoil, which will in turn allow a wider spacing of the boreholes. One main
disadvantage of chemical grouting is the need for at least 2.000 m of natural cover.
Resin grouts
These are suitable for silty ﬁne sands or for use in conjunction with clay/cement
grouts for treating ﬁne strata, but like the chemical grouts described above they can
be costly unless used on large works. Resin grouts are similar in application to the
chemical grouts, but have a low viscosity, which enables them to penetrate the ﬁne
sands that are unsuitable for chemical grouting applications.
Bituminous grouts
These are suitable for injection into ﬁne sands to decrease the permeability of the
soil, but they will not increase the strength of the soil, and are therefore unsuitable
for underpinning work.
Grout injection
Grouts of all kinds are usually injected into the subsoil by pumping in the mixture
at high pressure through tubes placed at the appropriate centres according to the
solution being used and/or the soil type. Soil investigation techniques will reveal
the information required to enable the engineer to decide upon the pattern and
spacing of the grout holes, which can be drilled with pneumatic tools or tipped
drills. The pressure needed to ensure a satisfactory penetration of the subsoil will
depend upon the soil conditions and results required, but is usually within the
range of 1 N/mm2 for ﬁne soils to 7 N/mm2 for cement grouting in ﬁssured and
jointed rock strata.
Freezing
This is a suitable method for all types of subsoil with a moisture content in excess 
of 8% of the voids. The basic principle is to insert freezing tubes into the ground
and circulate a freezing solution around the tubes to form ice in the voids, thus
creating a wall of ice to act as the impermeable barrier. This method will give the
soil temporary extra mechanical strength, but there is a slight risk of ground heave,
particularly when operating in clays and silts. The circulating solution can be a
brine of magnesium chloride or calcium chloride at a temperature of between 
−15 and −25 °C, which would take between 10 to 17 days to produce an ice wall
1.000 m thick according to the type of subsoil. For works of short duration where
quick freezing is required the more expensive liquid nitrogen can be used as the
circulating medium. A typical freezing arrangement is shown in Fig. 3.1.2. Freezing
methods of soil stabilisation are especially suitable for excavating deep shafts and
driving tunnels.

 
140
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.1.2
Exclusion of groundwater by freezing

 
Groundwater control
141
nnn TEMPORARY EXCLUSION OF GROUNDWATER
Sump pumping
This is suitable for most subsoils and, in particular, gravels and coarse sands when
working in open shallow excavations. The sump or water collection pit should be
excavated below the formation level of the excavation and preferably sited in a
corner position to reduce to a minimum the soil movement due to settlement, 
which is a possibility with this method. Open sump pumping is usually limited 
to a maximum depth of 7.500 m because of the limitations of suction lift of most
pumps. An alternative method to the open sump pumping is the jetted sump, which
will achieve the same objective and will also prevent the soil movement. In this
method a metal tube is jetted into the ground and the void created is ﬁlled with a
sand medium, a disposable hose and a strainer as shown in Fig. 3.1.3.
Wellpoint systems
These are popular methods for water lowering in non-cohesive soils up to a depth
of between 5.000 and 6.000 m. To dewater an area beyond this depth requires a
multi-stage installation (see Fig. 3.1.4). The basic principle is to water-jet into 
the ground a number of small diameter wells, which are connected to a header pipe
attached to a vacuum pump (see Fig. 3.1.5). Wellpoint systems can be installed with
the header pipe acting as a ring main enclosing the area to be excavated. The header
pipe should be connected to two pumps, the ﬁrst for actual pumping operations 
and the second as a standby pump, because it is essential to keep the system fully
operational to avoid collapse of the excavation should a pump failure occur. The
alternative system is the progressive line arrangement, where the header pipe is
placed alongside a trench or similar excavation to one side or both sides according 
to the width of the excavation. A pump is connected to a predetermined length of
header pipe, and further well points are jetted in ahead of the excavation works. As
the work including backﬁlling is completed the redundant well points are removed
and the header pipe is moved forwards.
Shallow-bored wells
These are suitable for sandy gravels and water-bearing rocks, and the action is
similar in principle to wellpoint pumping but is more appropriate for installations
that have to be pumped for several months because running costs are generally
lower. This method is subject to the same lift restrictions as wellpoint systems and
can be arranged as a multi-stage system if the depth of lowering exceeds 5.000 m.
Deep-bored wells
These can be used as an alternative to a multi-stage wellpoint installation where 
the groundwater needs to be lowered to a depth greater than 9.000 m. The wells are
formed by sinking a 300 to 600 mm diameter steel lining tube into the ground to the

 
142
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.1.3
Typical jetted sump detail

 
Groundwater control
143
Figure 3.1.4
Typical example of a multi-stage wellpoint dewatering installation

 
144
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.1.5
Typical wellpoint installation details

 
Groundwater control
145
required depth and at spacings to suit the subsoil being dewatered. This borehole
allows a perforated well liner to be installed with an electro-submersible pump to
extract the water. The annular space is ﬁlled with a suitable medium such as sand
and gravel as the outer steel lining tube is removed (see Fig. 3.1.6).
Horizontal groundwater control
The pumping methods described above all work on a completely vertical system.
An alternative is the horizontal system of dewatering, which consists of installing
into the ground a 100 mm diameter PVC perforated suction pipe covered with 
a nylon ﬁlter sleeve to prevent the inﬁltration of ﬁne particles. The pipe is 
installed using a special machine that excavates a narrow trench, lays the pipe, 
and backﬁlls the excavation in one operation at speeds up to 180 m per hour with a
maximum depth of 5.000 m. Under average conditions a single pump can handle
approximately 230.000 m of pipe run; for distances in excess of the pumping length
an overlap of consecutive pipe lengths of up to 4.000 m is required (see Fig. 3.1.7).
Electro-osmosis
This is an uncommon and costly method, which can be used for dewatering
cohesive soils such as silts and clays where other pumping methods would not 
be adequate. It works on the principle that soil particles carry a negative charge,
which attracts the positively charged ends of the water molecules, creating a
balanced state; if this balance is disturbed the water will ﬂow. The disturbance 
of this natural balance is created by inserting into the ground two electrodes and
passing an electric charge between them. The positive electrode can be of steel rods
or sheet piling, which will act as the anode, and a wellpoint is installed to act as the
cathode or negative electrode. When an electric current is passed between the anode
and cathode it causes the positively charged water molecules to ﬂow to the wellpoint
(cathode), where it is collected and pumped away to a discharge point. The power
consumption for this method can vary from 1 kW/m3 for large excavations up to 
12 kW/m3 of soil dewatered for small excavations, which will generally make this
method uneconomic on running costs alone.

 
146
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.1.6
Typical deep-bored well details

 
Groundwater control
147
Figure 3.1.7
Horizontal system of dewatering

 
Any form of excavation on a building site is a potential hazard, and although
statistics show that, of the 46,000 or so reportable accidents occurring each year 
on building sites, excavations do not constitute the major hazard, they can often
prove to be serious; indeed, approximately 1 in 10 accidents occurring in
excavations are fatal.
nnn THE CONSTRUCTION (DESIGN AND
MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS 1994, THE CONSTRUCTION
(HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE) REGULATIONS 1996, THE
CONFINED SPACES REGULATIONS 1997 AND THE WORK
AT HEIGHT REGULATIONS 2005
These statutory instruments are effected by the Factory Acts 1961 and the Health
and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. The Design and Management Regulations were
introduced with particular regard for a minimum degree of safety for operatives
working in the process of construction. The Health, Safety and Welfare Regulations
have speciﬁc references to excavations, shafts, tunnels, demolitions and work on 
or adjacent to water, the Conﬁned Spaces Regulations include, among other
references, chambers, pits and trenches, and the Work at Height Regulations apply
to work in any place, including at or below ground level. All of these regulations
apply to building operations and works of engineering construction, because the
risks encountered in the two industries are similar and therefore a common code 
of practice is desirable.
The Health, Safety and Welfare Regulations 12 and 13 establish the
requirements for the supply and use of adequate support to excavations. These
must be installed by competent, qualiﬁed or trained operatives, or be supervised
and inspected by a competent person. Construction work involving excavation 
3.2
DEEP TRENCH EXCAVATIONS

 
Deep trench excavations
149
must be inspected every shift, with reports ﬁled detailing each inspection and the
approval of safe conditions.
All contractors and subcontractors are responsible for the safety of their own
employees, and every person employed must cooperate in observing the various
requirements of the regulations. If an employee discovers any defect or unsafe
condition in a working area it is that person’s duty to report the facts to the
employer, the foreman, or a person appointed by the employer as safety 
supervisor.
nnn DEEP TRENCH EXCAVATIONS
Deep trenches may be considered as those over 3.000 m deep; they are usually
required for the installation of services, because deep foundations are not very 
often encountered owing to the more economic alternatives such as piling and raft
techniques. Trench excavations should not be opened too far in advance of the
proposed work, and any backﬁlling should be undertaken as soon as practicable 
after the completion of the work. These two precautions will lessen the risk of falls,
ﬂooding and damage to completed work as well as releasing the timbering for reuse
at the earliest possible date. Great care must be taken in areas where underground
services are present: these should be uncovered with care, protected and supported
as necessary. The presence of services in an excavation area may restrict the use of
mechanical plant to the point where its use becomes uneconomic. Hand trimming
should be used for bottoming the trench, side trimming, end trimming and for
forming the gradient just prior to the pipe, cable or drain laying.
In general, all deep excavations should be close boarded or sheeted as a
precautionary measure, the main exception being hard and stable rock subsoils. 
Any excavation in a rock stratum should be carefully examined to ascertain its
stability. Fissures or splits in the rock layers that slope towards the cut face may
lead to crumbling or rock falls, particularly when exposed to the atmosphere for
long periods. In this situation it would be prudent to timber the faces of the
excavation according to the extent and disposition of the ﬁssures.
In ﬁrm subsoils it might be possible to complete the excavation dig before
placing the timbering in position. The general method of support for the excavation
sides follows that used in shallow and medium-depth trench excavations studied 
in Chapter 2.1 of Construction Technology, except that larger sections are used to
resist the increased pressures encountered as the depth of excavation increases 
(see Fig. 3.2.1).
If the subsoil is weak, waterlogged or running sand it will be necessary to 
drive timber runners, trench sheeting or interlocking sheet piles of steel, timber or
precast concrete ahead of the excavation dig. This can be accomplished by driving
to a depth exceeding the ﬁnal excavation depth or by the drive-and-dig system,
ensuring that timbering is always in advance of the excavating operation. Long
runners or sheet piles will require a driving frame to hold and guide the members
while being driven. To avoid the use of large piling frames and heavy driving
equipment the tucking and pile framing techniques may be used. Tucking
framing will give an approximately parallel working space width, but will

 
150
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.2.1
Traditional deep trench timbering

 
Deep trench excavations
151
necessitate driving the short runners at an angle, whereas pile framing will give 
a diminishing working space but is easier to install. Both methods, having the
bottom and top of consecutive members secured with a single strut, will give a
saving on the total number of struts required over the more traditional methods 
(see Fig. 3.2.2).
The sizes of suitable timber walings can be calculated using Rankine’s formula:
p = wh
× 9.81
where
p = approximate pressure at base of excavation (N/m2)
w = mass of soil (typically 1,500−2,000 kg/m3)
h = height of excavation (m)
θ = soil angle of repose or shearing resistance (usually 30°)
The resultant thrust will act through the centre of gravity of the pressure diagram
(h/3): see Fig. 3.2.3. The overturning moment (P) is expressed as a variation on
Rankine’s formula:
P =
× 9.81
Therefore, for a 3.000 m high excavation in soil of 2,000 kg/m3 mass with 
θ = 30°:
P =
×
× 9.81 = 29.43 kN
Bending moment = wl 2/8 = (29.43 × 1 × 1) ÷ 8 = 3.68 kN m
For timber beam design, the moment of resistance (M) or bending moment is
given by
M =
where
f = permissible ﬁbre stress of the timber, according to species, moisture 
content and stress grade
b = breadth of timber section (usually assumed)
d = depth of timber section to be calculated
Assuming breadth of waling (b) to be 75 mm and the ﬁbre stress ( f ) of timber to be
7.4 N/mm2, substituting in the design formula:
d 2 =
=
= 39783, ∴d = 200 mm
Dimensions of waling timbers = 200 × 75 mm
Note: Bending moment of wl 2/10 for runners and wl 2/8 for short poling boards.
Remember that timbering is a general term used to cover all forms of temporary
support to the sides of an excavation to:
6 × 3.68 × 106
7.4 × 75
6 × M × 106
f × b
fbd 2
6
1 −0.5
1 + 0.5
2,000 × 32
2
D
E
F
1 −sin θ
1 + sin θ
A
B
C
D
E
F
wh2
2
A
B
C
D
E
F
1 −sin θ
1 + sin θ
A
B
C

 
152
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.2.2
Timbering: tucking and pile framing

 
Deep trench excavations
153
n prevent collapse of the excavation sides that would endanger the operatives
working in the immediate vicinity;
n keep the excavation open during the required period.
The term is used both when timber is actually used and when a different material 
is employed to fulﬁl the same function.
nnn DEEP BASEMENT EXCAVATIONS
The methods that can be used to support the sides of deep basement excavations
can be considered under four headings:
n perimeter trench;
n raking struts;
n cofferdams;
n diaphragm walls.
Figure 3.2.3
Design principles for earth support members

 
154
Advanced Construction Technology
PERIMETER TRENCH
This method is employed where weak subsoils are encountered, and is carried 
out by excavating a perimeter trench around the proposed basement excavation.
The width and depth of the trench must be sufﬁcient to accommodate the
timbering and basement retaining wall, and provide adequate working space. 
The trench can be timbered by any of the methods described above for deep
trenches in weak subsoils. The bottom of the trench should be graded and covered
with a 50 to 75 mm blinding layer of weak concrete or coarse sand to protect the
base of the excavation from drying and shrinking, and to form a deﬁnite level from
which to set out and construct the basement wall. The base of the wall should be
cast ﬁrst, with a kicker formed for the stem and starter bars left projecting for 
the stem and the base slab. The stem or wall should be cast in suitable lifts, and 
as it cures the struts are transferred to the new wall. When the construction of the
perimeter wall has been completed the mound of soil, or dumpling, in the centre of
the basement area can be excavated and the base slab cast (see Fig. 3.2.4). Although
this method is intended primarily for weak subsoils it can also be used in ﬁrm soils,
where it may be possible to excavate the perimeter trench completely before placing
the timbering in position.
RAKING STRUTS
This method is used where it is possible to excavate the basement area back to 
the perimeter line without the need for timbering: therefore ﬁrm subsoils must 
be present. The perimeter is trimmed and the timbering placed in position and
strutted by using raking struts converging on a common grillage platform similar 
to raking shoring; alternatively each raker is taken down to a separate sole plate 
and the whole arrangement adequately braced. An alternative method is to excavate
back to the perimeter line on the subsoil’s natural angle of repose and then cast the
base slab to protect the excavation bottom from undue drying out and subsequent
shrinkage. The perimeter trimming can now be carried out, timbered and strutted
using the base slab as the abutment (see Fig. 3.2.5). The retaining wall is cast in
stages as with the perimeter trench method, and the strutting is transferred to the
stem as the work proceeds.
COFFERDAMS
The term ‘cofferdam’ comes from the French word coffre meaning a box, which 
is an apt description as a cofferdam consists of a watertight perimeter enclosure,
usually of interlocking steel sheet piles, used in conjunction with waterlogged sites
or actually in water. The enclosing cofferdam is constructed, adequately braced, and
the earth is excavated from within the enclosure. Any seepage of water through the
cofferdam can normally be handled by small pumps. The sheet piles can be braced
and strutted by using a system of raking struts, horizontal struts or tie rods and
ground anchors (see Fig. 3.2.6). Cofferdams are considered in greater detail, along
with caissons, in the next chapter.

 
Deep trench excavations
155
Figure 3.2.4
Basement timbering: perimeter trench method

 
156
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.2.5
Basement timbering: raking struts

 
Deep trench excavations
157
Figure 3.2.6
Cofferdams: basic principles

 
158
Advanced Construction Technology
DIAPHRAGM WALLS
A diaphragm can be deﬁned as a dividing membrane, and in the context of 
building a diaphragm wall can be used as a retaining wall to form the perimeter wall
of a basement structure, to act as a cut-off wall for river or similar embankments,
and to retain large masses of soil such as a side wall of a road underpass.
In-situ concrete diaphragm walls are being used to a large extent in modern
construction work and can give the following advantages:
n The ﬁnal wall can be designed and constructed as the required structural wall.
n Diaphragm walls can be constructed before the bulk excavation takes place, thus
eliminating the need for temporary works such as timbering.
n Methods that can be employed to construct the wall are relatively quiet and have
little or no vibration.
n Work can be carried out immediately adjacent to an existing structure.
n They may be designed to resist vertical and/or horizontal forces.
n Walls are watertight when constructed.
n Virtually any plan shape is possible.
n Overall they are an economic method for the construction of basement or
retaining walls.
There are two methods by which a cast in-situ diaphragm wall may be
constructed:
n touching or interlocking bored piles;
n excavation of a trench using the bentonite slurry method.
The formation of bored piles is fully described later in Chapter 4.2 on piling.
The piles can be bored so that their interfaces are just touching; or by boring for
piles in alternate positions and using a special auger the intermediate pile positions
can be bored so that the interfaces interlock. The main advantage of using this
method is that the wall can be formed within a restricted headroom of not less than
2.000 m. The disadvantages are the general need for a reinforced tie beam over the
heads of the piles and the necessity for a facing to take out the irregularities of the
surface. This facing usually takes the form of a cement rendering lightly reinforced
with a steel-welded fabric mesh.
The general method used to construct diaphragm walls is the bentonite slurry
system. Bentonite is manufactured from a montmorillonite clay that is commonly
called fuller’s earth because of its historical use by fullers in the textile industry to
absorb grease from newly woven cloth. When mixed with the correct amount of
water bentonite shows thixotropic properties, giving a liquid behaviour when
agitated and a gel structure when undisturbed.
The basic procedure is to replace the excavated spoil with the bentonite slurry 
as the work proceeds. The slurry forms a soft gel or ‘ﬁlter cake’ at the interface of
the excavation sides with slight penetration into the subsoil. Hydrostatic pressure
caused by the bentonite slurry thrusting on the ﬁlter cake cushion is sufﬁcient to
hold back the subsoil and any groundwater that may be present. This alleviates 
the need for timbering and/or pumping, and can be successfully employed up to
36.000 m deep.

 
Deep trench excavations
159
Diaphragm walls constructed by this method are executed in alternate panels
from 4.500 m to 7.000 m long with widths ranging from 500 to 900 mm using a
specially designed hydraulic grab attached to a standard crane, or by using a
continuous cutting and recirculating machine. Before the general excavation
commences, a guide trench about 1.000 m deep is excavated and lined with lightly
reinforced walls. These walls act as a guide line for the excavating machinery and
provide a reservoir for the slurry, enabling pavings and underground services to be
broken out ahead of the excavation.
To form an interlocking and watertight joint at each end of the panel, circular
stop end pipes are placed in the bentonite-ﬁlled excavation before the concrete is
placed. The continuous operation of concreting the panel is carried out using a
tremie pipe and a concrete mix designed to have good ﬂow properties without 
the tendency to segregate. This will require a concrete with a high slump of 
about 200 mm but with high-strength properties ranging from 20 to 40 N/mm2.
Generally the rate of pour is in the region of 15 to 20 m3 per hour, and as the
concrete is introduced into the excavated panel it will displace the bentonite slurry,
which is less dense than the concrete, which can be stored for reuse or transferred
to the next panel being excavated. The ideal situation is to have the two operations
acting simultaneously and in complete unison (see Fig. 3.2.7).
Before the concrete is placed, reinforcement cages of high yield or mild steel 
bars are fabricated on site in one or two lengths. Single length cages of up to 
20.000 m are possible; where cages in excess of this are required they are usually
spot-welded together when the ﬁrst cage is projecting about 1.000 m above 
the slurry level. The usual recommended minimum cover is 100 mm, which is
maintained by having spacing blocks or rings attached to the outer bars of the 
cage. Upon completion of the concreting the bentonite slurry must be removed
from the site either by tanker or by diluting so that it can be discharged into the
surface water sewers by agreement with the local authority.

 
160
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.2.7
Diaphragm wall construction: bentonite slurry method

 
A cofferdam may be deﬁned as a temporary box structure constructed in earth or
water to exclude soil and/or water from a construction area. It is usually formed to
enable the formation of foundations to be carried out in safe working conditions. It
is common practice to use interlocking steel trench sheeting or steel sheet piling to
form the cofferdam, but any material that will fulﬁl the same function can be used,
including timber piles, precast concrete piles, earth-ﬁlled crib walls and banks of
soil and rock. It must be clearly understood that, to be safe, economic and effective,
cofferdams must be the subject of structural design. Regulations 12 and 13 of the
Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1996 speciﬁcally require
cofferdams and caissons to be properly designed, constructed and maintained. Of
equal importance are Regulations 5 and 14. Regulation 5 requires a safe place to
work and safe means of access to and egress from that place of work. Regulation 14
includes provision for water transport and rescue equipment for operatives working
where water levels are a perceived danger. These regulations are complemented by
the Conﬁned Spaces Regulations 1997, which include speciﬁc reference to chambers
and pits, i.e. implications for cofferdams and caissons. Under Regulation 5 of this
Statutory Instrument there must be preparation of suitable contingency plans in 
the event of an emergency rescue and availability of resuscitation equipment. Under
Regulation 4 of the Work at Height Regulations 2005, speciﬁc reference is made 
to adequate supervision, planning and safety procedures. This includes planning for
emergencies and rescue.
nnn SHEET PILE COFFERDAMS
Cofferdams constructed from steel sheet piles or steel trench sheeting can be
considered under two headings:
n single-skin cofferdams;
n double-skin cofferdams.
3.3
COFFERDAMS AND CAISSONS

 
162
Advanced Construction Technology
SINGLE-SKIN COFFERDAMS
These consist of a suitably supported single enclosing row of trench sheeting or
sheet piles forming an almost completely watertight box. Trench sheeting could 
be considered for light loadings up to an excavation depth of 3.000 m below the
existing soil or water level, whereas sheet piles are usually suitable for excavation
depths of up to 15.000 m. The small amount of seepage that will occur through 
the interlocking joints must not be in excess of that which can be comfortably
controlled by a pump; alternatively the joints can be sealed by caulking with 
suitable mastics, bitumastic compounds or silicone sealants.
Single-skin cofferdams constructed to act as cantilevers are possible in all soils,
but the maximum amount of excavation height will be low relative to the required
penetration of the toe of the pile, and this is particularly true in cohesive soils. Most
cofferdams are therefore either braced and strutted or anchored using tie rods or
ground anchors. Standard structural steel sections or structural timber members 
can be used to form the support system, but generally timber is economically
suitable only for low loadings. The total amount of timber required to brace a
cofferdam adequately would be in the region of 0.25 to 0.3 m3 per tonne of steel
sheet piling used, whereas the total weight of steel bracing would be in the region 
of 30–60% of the total weight of sheet piling used to form the cofferdam. Typical
cofferdam support arrangements are shown in Figs 3.3.1 and 3.3.2. Single-skin
cofferdams that are circular in plan can also be constructed using ring beams of
concrete or steel to act as bracing without the need for strutting. Diameters up to
36.000 m are economically possible using this method.
Cofferdams constructed in water, particularly those being erected in tidal 
waters, should be ﬁtted with sluice gates to act as a precaution against unanticipated
weaknesses in the arrangement and, in the case of tidal waters, to enable the water
levels on both sides of the dam to be equalised during construction and before ﬁnal
closure. Special piles with an integral sluice gate forming a 200 mm wide × 400 mm
deep opening are available. Alternatively a suitable gate can be formed by cutting a
pair of piles and ﬁtting them with a top-operated screw gear so that they can be
raised to form an opening of any desired depth.
DOUBLE-SKIN COFFERDAMS
These are self-supporting gravity structures constructed by using two parallel rows
of piles with a ﬁlling material placed in the void created. Gravity-type cofferdams
can also be formed by using straight-web sheet pile sections arranged as a cellular
construction (see Figs 3.3.3 and 3.3.4).
The stability of these forms of cofferdam depends upon the design and
arrangement of the sheet piling and upon the nature of the ﬁlling material. 
The inner wall of a double-skin cofferdam is designed as a retaining wall which 
is suitably driven into the substrata whereas the outer wall acts primarily as an
anchor wall. The two parallel rows of piles are tied together with one or two rows 
of tie rods acting against external steel walings. Inner walls should have a series of
low-level weepholes to relieve the ﬁlling material of high water pressures and thus

 
Cofferdams and caissons
163
Figure 3.3.1
Typical cofferdam strutting arrangements

 
164
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.3.2
Typical cofferdam section using timber and steel strutting

 
Cofferdams and caissons
165
Figure 3.3.3
Typical double-skin cofferdam details

 
166
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.3.4
Cellular cofferdam arrangements

 
Cofferdams and caissons
167
increase its shear resistance. For this reason the ﬁlling material selected should be
capable of being well drained. Therefore materials such as sand, hardcore and broken
stone are suitable, whereas cohesive soils such as clay are unsuitable. The width-to-
height ratio shown in Fig. 3.3.3 of 0.7:0.8H can in some cases be reduced by giving
external support to the inner wall by means of an earth embankment or berm.
Cellular cofferdams are entirely self-supporting, and do not require any other
form of support such as that provided by struts, braces and tie rods. The straight
web pile with its high web strength and specially designed interlocking joint is
capable of resisting the high circumferential tensile forces set up by the non-
cohesive ﬁlling materials. The interlocking joint also has sufﬁcient angular deviation
to enable the two common arrangements of circular cell and diaphragm cellular
cofferdams to be formed (see Fig. 3.3.4). Like the double-skin cofferdam, the walls
of cellular cofferdams should have weepholes to provide adequate drainage of the
ﬁlling material. The circular cellular cofferdam has one major advantage over its
diaphragm counterpart in that each cell can be ﬁlled independently, whereas care
must be exercised when ﬁlling adjacent cells in a diaphragm type to prevent an
unbalanced pressure being created on the cross-walls or diaphragms. In general,
cellular cofferdams are used to exclude water from construction areas in rivers and
other waters where large structures such as docks are to be built.
nnn STEEL SHEET PILING
Steel sheet piling is the most common form of sheet piling; it can be used in
temporary works such as timbering to excavations in soft and/or waterlogged 
soils and in the construction of cofferdams. This material can also be used to 
form permanent retaining walls, especially those used for river bank strengthening,
and in the construction of jetties. Three common forms of steel sheet pile are the
Larssen, Frodingham and straight-web piles, all of which have an interlocking 
joint to form a water seal, which may need caulking where high water pressures 
are encountered. Straight-web sheet piles are used to form cellular cofferdams as
described above and illustrated in Fig. 3.3.4. Larssen and Frodingham sheet piles
are suitable for all uses except for the cellular cofferdam, and can be obtained in
lengths up to 18.000 m according to the particular section chosen – typical sections
are shown in Fig. 3.3.5.
To erect and install a series of sheet piles and keep them vertical in all directions
usually requires a guide frame or trestle constructed from large-section timbers.
The piles are pitched or lifted by means of a crane, using the lifting holes sited 
near the top of each length, and positioned between the guide walings of the trestle
(see Figs 3.3.6 and 3.3.7). When sheet piles are being driven there is a tendency for
them to creep or lean in the direction of driving. Correct driving methods will help
to eliminate this tendency, and the generally accepted method is to install the piles
in panels as follows:
1. A pair of piles are pitched and driven until approximately one-third of their
length remains above ground level to act as anchor piles to stop the remainder of
the piles in the panel from leaning or creeping while being driven. It is essential
that this ﬁrst pair of piles are driven accurately and plumb in all directions.

 
168
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.3.5
Typical steel sheet pile and trench sheeting sections

 
Cofferdams and caissons
169
Figure 3.3.6
Typical timber trestle for installing steel sheet piles

 
170
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.3.7
Typical timber trestle for large steel sheet piles

 
Cofferdams and caissons
171
2. Pitch a series of piles in pairs adjacent to the anchor piles to form a panel of 
10 to 12 pairs of piles.
3. Partially drive the last pair of piles to the same depth as the anchor piles.
4. Drive the remaining piles in pairs including the anchor piles to their ﬁnal set.
5. The last pair of piles remain projecting, for about one-third of their length,
above the ground level to act as guide piles to the next panel.
To facilitate accurate and easy driving there should be about a 6 mm clearance
between the pile faces and the guide walings, and timber spacer blocks should be
used in the troughs of the piles (see Fig. 3.3.6).
Steel sheet piles may be driven to the required set using percussion hammers 
or hydraulic drivers. Percussion hammers activated by steam, compressed air or
diesel power can be used, and these are usually equipped with leg grips bolted to 
the hammer and ﬁtted with inserts to grip the face of the pile to ensure that the
hammer is held in line with the axis of the pile. Wide, ﬂat driving caps are also
required to prevent damage to the head of the pile by impact from the hammer.
Hydraulic drivers can be used to push the piles into suitable subsoils such as
clays, silts and ﬁne granular soils. These driving systems are vibrationless and
almost silent, making them ideal for installing sheet piling in close proximity to
other buildings. The driving head usually consists of a power pack crosshead
containing eight hydraulic rams ﬁtted with special pile connectors, each ram having
a short stroke of 750 mm. The driving operation entails lowering and connecting
the hydraulic driver to the heads of a panel of piles, activating two rams to drive a
pair of piles for the full length of the stroke, and repeating this process until all the
rams have been activated. The rams are retracted and the crosshead is lowered onto
the top of the piles to recommence the whole driving cycle. This process is repeated
until the required penetration of the piles has been reached.
The tendency for sheet piles to lean while being driven may occur even under
ideal conditions with careful supervision, and should this occur immediate steps
must be taken to correct the fault, or it may get out of control. The following
correction methods can be considered:
n Attach a winch rope to the pair of piles being driven and exert a corrective
pulling force as driving continues.
n Attach a winch rope to the previously driven adjacent pair of piles and exert a
corrective pulling force as driving continues.
n Reposition the hammer towards the previously driven pair of piles to give an
eccentric blow.
n Combinations of any of the above methods.
If the above correction techniques are not suitable or effective it is possible to 
form tapered piles by making use of the tolerances within the interlocking joint by
welding steel straps across the face of the pair of piles to hold them in tapered form.
This technique is suitable only if the total amount of taper required does not exceed
50 mm in the length of the pile. To insert a special tapered pile within a panel it
will of course be necessary to extract a pair of piles from the panel. Typical
examples of correction techniques are shown in Fig. 3.3.8.

 
172
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.3.8
Creep correction techniques and access cage

 
Cofferdams and caissons
173
WATER JETTING
In soft and silty subsoils the installation of steel sheet piles can be assisted by 
using high-pressure water jetting to the sides and toes of the piles. The jets should
be positioned in the troughs of the piles and to both sides of the section. In very 
soft subsoils this method can sometimes be so effective that the assistance of a
driving hammer is not required. To ensure that the pile ﬁnally penetrates into an
undisturbed layer of subsoil the last few metres or so of driving should be carried
out without jetting.
ACCESS
Access in the form of a working platform to the heads of sheet piles is often
necessary during installation to locate adjacent piles, to position and attach the
driving hammer, and to carry out inspections of the work in progress. Suitable
means of access are:
n independent scaffolding;
n suspended cradle (see Fig. 3.3.7);
n mobile platform mounted on a hydraulic arm;
n working platform in the form of a cage suspended from a mobile crane and
hooked onto the pile heads (see Fig. 3.3.8).
EXTRACTION OF PILES
Piles that are used in temporary works should have well-greased interlocking 
joints to enable them to be extracted with ease. Inverted double-acting hammers 
can be used to extract sheet piles, but these have generally been superseded by
specially designed sheet pile extractors. These usually consist of a compressed- 
air- or steam-activated ram giving between 120 and 200 upward blows per 
minute, which causes the jaws at the lower end to grip the pile and force it 
out of the ground.
nnn CAISSONS
These are box-like structures that can be sunk through ground or water to install
foundations or similar structures below the water line or table. They differ from
cofferdams in that they usually become part of the ﬁnished foundation or structure,
and should be considered as an alternative to the temporary cofferdam if the
working depth below the water level exceeds 18.000 m. The design and installation
of the various types of caisson are usually the tasks of a specialist organisation, but
building contractors should have a fundamental knowledge of the different types
and their uses.

 
174
Advanced Construction Technology
There are four basic types of caisson in general use:
n box caissons;
n open caissons;
n monolithic caissons;
n pneumatic or compressed-air caissons.
BOX CAISSONS
These are prefabricated precast concrete boxes that are open at the top and closed at
the bottom. They are usually constructed on land, and are designed to be launched
and ﬂoated to the desired position, where they are sunk onto a previously prepared
dredged or rock blanket foundation (see Fig. 3.3.9). If the bed stratum is unsuitable
for the above preparations it may be necessary to lay a concrete raft, by using
traditional cofferdam techniques, onto which the caisson can be sunk. During
installation it is essential that precautions are taken to overcome the problems 
of ﬂotation by ﬂooding the void with water or adding kentledge to the caisson 
walls. The sides of the caisson will extend above the water line after it has been
ﬁnally positioned, providing a suitable shell for such structures as bridge piers,
breakwaters and jetties. The void is ﬁlled with in-situ concrete placed by pump,
tremie pipe or crane and skip. Box caissons are suitable for situations where the 
bed conditions are such that it is not necessary to sink the caisson below the
prepared bed level.
OPEN CAISSONS
Sometimes referred to as cylinder caissons because of their usual plan shape,
these are of precast concrete and open at both the top and bottom ends, with a
cutting edge to the bottom rim. They are suitable for installation in soft subsoils
where the excavation can be carried out by conventional grabs, enabling the caisson
to sink under its own weight as the excavation proceeds. These caissons can be
completely or partially pre-formed; in the latter case further sections can be added 
or cast on as the structure sinks to the required depth. When the desired depth has
been reached a concrete plug in the form of a slab is placed in the bottom by tremie
pipe to prevent further ingress of water. The cell void can now be pumped dry and
ﬁlled with crushed rocks or similar material if necessary to overcome ﬂotation
during further construction works.
Open caissons can also be installed in land if the subsoil conditions are suitable.
The shoe or cutting edge is formed so that it is wider than the wall above to create
an annular space some 75 to 100 mm wide into which a bentonite slurry can be
pumped to act as a lubricant and thus reduce the skin friction to a minimum.
Excavation is carried out by traditional means within the caisson void, the caisson
sinking under its own weight. The excavation operation is usually carried out
simultaneously with the construction of the caisson walls above ground level 
(see Fig. 3.3.10).

 
Cofferdams and caissons
175
Figure 3.3.9
Typical box caisson details

 
176
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.3.10
Typical open caisson details

 
Cofferdams and caissons
177
MONOLITHIC CAISSONS
These are usually rectangular in plan and are divided into a number of voids 
or wells through which the excavation is carried out. They are similar to open
caissons but have greater self-weight and wall thickness, making them suitable 
for structures such as quays, which may have to resist considerable impact forces 
in their ﬁnal condition.
PNEUMATIC OR COMPRESSED-AIR CAISSONS
These are similar to open caissons except that there is an airtight working chamber
some 3.000 m high at the cutting edge. They are used where difﬁcult subsoils exist
and where hand excavation in dry working conditions is necessary. The working
chamber must be pressurised sufﬁciently to control the inﬂow of water and/or 
soil and at the same time provide safe working conditions for the operatives. The
maximum safe working pressure is usually speciﬁed as 310 kN/m2, which will limit
the working depth of this type of caisson to about 28.000 m. When the required
depth has been reached the ﬂoor of the working chamber can be sealed over with 
a 600 mm thick layer of well-vibrated concrete. This is followed by further well-
vibrated layers of concrete until only a small space remains, which is pressure-
grouted to ﬁnally seal the working chamber. The access shafts are ﬁnally sealed 
with concrete some three to four days after sealing off the working chamber: for
typical details see Fig. 3.3.11.

 
178
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.3.11
Typical pneumatic or compressed-air caisson details

 
A tunnel may be deﬁned as an artiﬁcial underground passage. Tunnels have 
been used by man as a means of communication or for transportation for several
thousand years. Prehistoric man is known to have connected his natural cave
habitats by tunnels hewn in the rock. A Babylonian king circa 2180–2160 
connected his royal palace to the Temple of Jupiter on the opposite bank of the
Euphrates by a brick-arched tunnel under the river. Other examples of early 
tunnels are those hewn in the rock in the tomb of Mineptah at Thebes in Egypt,
and the early Greek tunnel, constructed about 687 , used for conveying water on
the Island of Sámos.
The majority of these early tunnels were constructed in rock subsoils and
therefore required no permanent or temporary support. Today, tunnelling in 
almost any subsoil is possible. Permanent tunnels for underground railways and
roads can be lined with metal and/or concrete, but such undertakings are the
province of the civil engineer. The general building contractor would normally 
be involved only with temporary tunnelling for the purposes of gaining access to
existing services or installing new services, constructing small permanent tunnels
for pedestrian subways under road or railway embankments, or forming permanent
tunnels for services.
When the depth of a projected excavation is about 6.000 m the alternative of
working in a heading or tunnel should be considered, taking the following factors
into account:
n Nature of subsoils
The amount of timbering that will be required in the
tunnel as opposed to that required in deep trench excavations.
n Depth of excavation
Over 9.000 m deep it is usually cheaper to tunnel or use
one of the alternative methods such as thrust boring. The cover of ground over a
tunnel to avoid disturbance of underground services, roads, pavings and tree
roots is generally recommended to be 3.000 m minimum.
3.4
TUNNELLING AND CULVERTS

 
180
Advanced Construction Technology
n Existing services
In urban areas buried services can be a problem with open
deep-trench excavations; this can generally be avoided by tunnelling techniques.
n Carriageways
It may be deemed necessary to tunnel under busy roads to
avoid disturbance of the ﬂow of trafﬁc.
n Means of access
The proposed tunnel may be entered by means of an open
trench if the tunnel excavation is into an embankment or access may be gained by
way of a shaft.
n Construction Regulations
The Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare)
Regulations 1996 establish the need for a safe place of work for the protection 
of operatives working in excavations, shafts and tunnels, covering such aspects 
as temporary timbering, supervision of works, and means of egress in case of
ﬂooding. Regulations 23 to 27 deal with site-wide issues such as ventilation of
excavations and provision of adequate lighting.
n Conﬁned Spaces Regulations 1997
Regulation 1 includes reference to any
‘chamber, tank, vat, silo, pit, trench, pipe, sewer, ﬂue, well or other similar place’
as enclosed situations with foreseeable risks. Tunnels and culverts can apply to
many of these categories: therefore Regulations 3 (Duties), 4 (Work in conﬁned
spaces) and 5 (Emergency arrangements) are applicable.
n Work at Height Regulations 2005
Work at height means work in any place.
This includes a workplace at or below ground, i.e. tunnels and culverts. Access 
to or egress from that place of work by suitable means is a speciﬁc requirement.
nnn SHAFTS
These are by deﬁnition vertical passages, but in the context of building operations
they can also be used to form the excavation for a deep isolated base foundation. 
In common with all excavations, the extent and nature of the temporary support 
or timbering required will depend upon:
n subsoil conditions encountered;
n anticipated ground and hydrostatic pressures;
n materials used to provide temporary support;
n plan size and depth of excavation.
In loose subsoils a system of sheet piling could be used by driving the piles ahead
of the excavation operation. This form of temporary support is called a cofferdam
and is explained in the preceding chapter.
Alternatives to the cofferdam techniques for shaft timbering are tucking 
framing and pile framing (see Chapter 3.2). These methods consist of driving 
short timber runners, 1.000 to 2.000 m long, ahead of the excavation operation and
then excavating and strutting within the perimeter of the runners. The process is
repeated until the required depth has been reached. It is essential with all drive and
dig methods that the depth to which the runner has been driven is in excess of the
excavation depth at all times. The installation of tucking framing and pile framing
in shafts is as described for deep trench timbering (see Fig. 3.2.2). Both tucking
framing and pile framing have the advantages over sheet piling of not requiring
large guide trestles and heavy driving equipment.

 
Tunnelling and culverts
181
In ﬁrm subsoils the shaft excavation would be carried out in stages of 1.000 to
2.000 m deep according to the ability of the subsoil to remain stable for short periods.
Each excavated stage is timbered before proceeding with the next digging operation.
The sides of the excavated shaft can be supported by a system of adequately braced
and strutted poling boards (see Figs 3.4.1 and 3.4.2). Sometimes a series of crossbeams
are used at the head of the shaft timbering to reduce the risk of the whole
arrangement sliding down the shaft as excavation work proceeds at the lower levels.
Shafts are usually excavated square in plan with side dimensions of 1.200 to
3.000 m, depending on:
n total depth required;
n method of timbering;
n sizes of support lining to save unnecessary cutting to width;
n number of operatives using or working within the shaft;
n size of skip or container to be used for removing spoil;
n type of machinery used for bulk excavation.
If the shaft is for the construction of an isolated base then an access or ladder bay
should be constructed. This bay would be immediately adjacent to the shaft and of
similar dimensions, making in plan a rectangular shaft. The most vulnerable point
in any shaft timbering is the corners, where high pressures are encountered, and
these positions should be specially strengthened by using corner posts or runners 
of larger cross-section (see Fig. 3.4.1).
nnn TUNNELS
The operational sequence of excavating and timbering a tunnel or heading by
traditional methods is as follows:
1. In ﬁrm soils excavate ﬁrst 1.000 m long stage or bay; if weak subsoil is
encountered it may be necessary to drive head boards and lining boards as the
ﬁrst operation.
2. Head boards 1.000 m long are placed against the upper surface.
3. Sole plate and stretcher are positioned; these are partly bedded into the ground
to prevent lateral movement and are levelled through from stretcher to stretcher.
4. Cut and position head tree.
5. Cut side trees or struts to ﬁt tightly between sole plate and head tree and wedge
into position.
6. Secure frames using wrought iron dogs, spikes and cleats as required.
7. Excavate next stage or bay by starting at the top and taking out just enough soil
to allow the next set of head boards to be positioned.
8. If loose subsoils are encountered it will be necessary to line the sides with driven
or placed horizontal poling boards as the work proceeds (see Figs 3.4.2 and 3.4.3).
After the construction work has been carried out within the tunnel it can be backﬁlled 
with hand-compacted material, extracting the timbering as the work proceeds. This
method is time consuming and costly; the general procedure is to backﬁll the tunnel
with pumped concrete and leave the temporary support work in position.

 
182
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.4.1
Shaft timbering: typical plans

 
Tunnelling and culverts
183
Figure 3.4.2
Typical shaft and tunnel timbering

 
184
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.4.3
Typical section through tunnel timbering

 
Tunnelling and culverts
185
nnn ALTERNATIVE METHODS
Where the purpose of the excavation is the installation of pipework, alternative
methods to tunnelling should be considered.
SMALL-DIAMETER PIPES
Two methods are available for the installation of small pipes up to 200 mm diameter:
n Thrust boring
A bullet-shaped solid metal head is ﬁxed to the leading end of the
pipe to be installed and is pushed or jacked into the ground, displacing the earth.
n Auger boring
This is carried out with a horizontal auger boring tool 
operating from a working pit having at least 2.400 m long × 1.500 m wide clear
dimensions between any temporary supporting members. The boring operation
can be carried out without casings, but where the objective is the installation 
of services, concrete or steel casings are usually employed. The auger removes
the spoil by working within the bore of the casing, which is being continuously
rammed or jacked into position. It is possible to use this method for diameters 
of up to 1.000 m.
PIPE JACKING
This method can be used for the installation of pipes from 150 to 3,600 mm
diameter but is mainly employed on the larger diameters of over 1.000 m. Basically
the procedure is to force the pipes into the subsoil by means of a series of hydraulic
jacks, and excavate, as the driving proceeds, from within the pipes by hand or
machine according to site conditions. The leading pipe is usually ﬁtted with a steel
shield or hood to aid the driving process. This is a very safe method, because the
excavation work is carried out from within the casing or liner and the danger of
collapsing excavations is eliminated; there is also no disruption of the surface or
underground services, and it is a practical method for most types of subsoil.
The most common method is to work from a jacking or working pit, which is
formed in a similar manner to traditional shafts except that a framed thrust pad is
needed from which to operate the hydraulic jacks. The working pit must be large
enough for the jacks to be extended and to allow for new pipe sections to be lowered
into the working bay at the bottom (see Fig. 3.4.4).
Pipe jacking can also be carried out from ground level, and is particularly suitable
for driving pipes through an embankment to form a pedestrian subway. A series of
300 mm diameter lined augered boreholes are driven through the embankment to
accommodate tie bars, which are anchored to a bulkhead frame on the opposite side
of the embankment. The reactions from the ramming jacks are thus transferred
through the tie bars to the bulkhead frame, and the driving action becomes one of
pushing and pulling (see Fig. 3.4.5). In ﬁrm soils the rate of bore by this method is
approximately 3.000 m per day.
Pipes can also be jacked, from ground level, into the earth at a gradient of up 
to 1:12 using a jacking block attached to a row of tension piles sited below the
commencing level.

 
186
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.4.4
Pipe jacking from below ground level

 
Tunnelling and culverts
187
nnn PIPES
The pipes used in the above techniques are usually classiﬁed in diameter ranges thus:
n Small pipes
150 to 900 mm diameter: thrust or auger bored.
n Medium pipes
900 to 1,800 mm diameter: pipe-jacking techniques.
n Large pipes
1,800 to 3,600 mm diameter: pipe-jacking techniques.
Two materials are in common use for the pipes: concrete and steel. Spun concrete
pipes are specially designed with thick walls, and have a rubber joint, making them
especially suitable for sewers without the need for extra strengthening. Larger-diameter
pipes for pedestrian subway constructions are usually made of cast concrete and can
have special bolted connections making the joints watertight, which also renders them
suitable for use as sewer pipes. Steel pipes have a wall thickness relative to their
diameter, and usually have welded joints to give high tensile strength, the alternative
being a ﬂanged and bolted joint. They are obtainable with various coatings and
linings to meet special requirements such as corrosive-bearing efﬂuents.
nnn CULVERTS
A culvert is a box, conduit or pipe of large cross-section usually used to convey
pedestrians, water (foul or surface) or services in general under a road, canal or
some other elevated construction. Figure 3.4.5 illustrates the concept, using precast
concrete pipes under a railway embankment. In the true principle of culvert
construction, a void for the pipe would be excavated and covered after the pipes were
placed, thus differentiating the process from tunnelling. In practice this may not always
be convenient or cost-effective: hence the preference for tunnelling in some situations.
The cut and cover technique involves considerable excavation, with sides
usually temporarily restrained by interlocking sheet piles or steel trench sheeting.
Groundwater controls may also be required, particularly if in-situ concrete is
speciﬁed as the culvert material.
CONSTRUCTION
n in-situ concrete;
n in-situ concrete base with precast concrete crown;
n precast concrete.
See Fig. 3.4.6.
PRECAST CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS
These have proved the most popular speciﬁcation for culverts, with manufacturers
producing them in a wide range of sizes from about 1.000 to 4.000 m in width, 0.500
to 2.500 m in depth and in standard lengths of 1.000, 1.500 and 2.000 m to suit a
variety of applications. These include subways, stream crossings, animal (badger)
crossings, sewers and sea outfalls. They are not limited to horizontal use, and may also
be used as vertical access shafts. Concrete is normally from ordinary Portland cement,
but if aggressive soils are encountered, sulphate-resisting cement can be speciﬁed.
Mild steel reinforcement with a minimum concrete cover of 30 mm is standard.

 
188
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 3.4.5
Pipe jacking from above ground level

 
Tunnelling and culverts
189
Figure 3.4.6
Concrete culverts: construction principles

 
190
Advanced Construction Technology
Application
Site delivery and installation should be carefully planned to coordinate hire of suitable
plant and operatives. Following excavation, a bed or foundation must be prepared
from well-compacted selected granules of about 225 mm total thickness. This is
levelled to suit the situation, or placed on a slight incline for drainage purposes.
Projecting reinforcement loops or purpose-made threaded sockets provide crane
lifting gear attachments for the box units. After placing and levelling the ﬁrst unit,
second and subsequent units are lowered and positioned for jointing. Pre-primed
spigot and socket rebated joints are ﬁtted with a mastic jointing strip or gasket-
bonded to the socket as shown in Fig. 3.4.7. If preferred, and site conditions permit,
the joints may be sealed with waterproof cement and sand mortar.
With the ﬁrst unit restrained, second and subsequent units have their weight
partially supported while tensioners draw the spigots into opposing sockets to compress
the jointing material/gasket (see Fig. 3.4.7). Care must be taken to ensure that the
joints remain clean, and that the bedding granules are excluded during this process.
Figure 3.4.7
Precast concrete box unit culvert

 
SUBSTRUCTURE: 2
PART
4

 

 
The main objective of underpinning is to transfer the load carried by an existing
foundation from its present bearing level to a new level at a lower depth. It can also
be used to replace an existing weak foundation.
Underpinning may be necessary for one or more of the following reasons:
n As a remedy for:
n uneven loading;
n unequal resistance of the subsoil;
n action of tree roots;
n action of subsoil water;
n cohesive soil settlement;
n deterioration of foundation concrete.
n To increase the loadbearing capacity of a foundation, which may be required to
enable an extra storey to be added to the existing structure or if a change of use
would increase the imposed loadings.
n As a preliminary operation to lowering the adjacent ground level when
constructing a basement at a lower level than the existing foundations of the
adjoining structure or when laying deep services near to or below the existing
foundations.
nnn SITE SURVEY AND PRELIMINARY WORKS
Before any underpinning is commenced the following surveying and preliminary
work should be carried out:
1. Notice should be served to the adjoining owners, setting out in detail the
intention to proceed with the proposed works and giving full details of any
proposed temporary supports such as shoring.
4.1
UNDERPINNING

 
194
Advanced Construction Technology
2. A detailed survey of the building to be underpinned should be made, recording
any defects or cracks, supplemented by photographs and agreed with the
building owner where possible.
3. Glass slips or ‘telltales’ should be ﬁxed across any vertical or lateral cracks to give
a visual indication of any further movement taking place.
4. A series of check levels should be taken against a reliable datum; alternatively
metal studs can be ﬁxed to the external wall and their levels noted. These levels
should be checked periodically as the work proceeds to enable any movements to
be recorded and the necessary remedial action taken.
5. Permission should be obtained, from the adjoining owner, to stop up all ﬂues 
and ﬁreplaces to prevent the nuisance and damage that can be caused by 
falling soot.
6. If underpinning is required to counteract unacceptable settlement of the existing
foundations an investigation of the subsoil should be carried out to determine the
cause and to forecast any future movement so that the underpinning design will
be adequate.
7. The loading on the structure should be reduced as much as possible by removing
imposed ﬂoor loads and installing any shoring that may be necessary.
nnn WALL UNDERPINNING
Traditional underpinning to walls is carried out by excavating in stages alongside
and underneath the existing foundation, casting a new foundation, building up to
the underside of the existing foundation in brickwork or concrete, and ﬁnally
pinning between the old and new work with a rich dry mortar.
To prevent the dangers of fracture or settlement the underpinning stages or bays
should be kept short and formed to a deﬁnite sequence pattern so that no two bays
are worked consecutively. This will enable the existing foundation and wall to arch
or span the void created underneath prior to underpinning. The number and length
of the bays will depend upon the following factors:
n total length of wall to be underpinned;
n width of existing foundation;
n general condition of existing substructure;
n superimposed loading of existing foundation;
n estimated spanning ability of existing foundation;
n subsoil conditions encountered.
The generally speciﬁed maximum length for bays used in the underpinning of
traditional wall construction is 1.500 m, with the proviso that at no time should the
sum total of unsupported lengths exceed 25% of the total wall length.
Bays are excavated and timbered as necessary, after which the bottom of the
excavation is prepared to receive the new foundation. To give the new foundation
strip continuity, dowel bars are inserted at the end of each bay. Brick and concrete
block underpinning is toothed at each end to enable the bonding to be continuous,
whereas in-situ concrete underpinning usually has splice bars or dowels projecting
to provide the continuity. Brickwork would normally be in a dense clay common

 
Underpinning
195
brick bedded in 1:3 cement mortar laid in English bond for strength. Concrete
blockwork should meet manufacturers’ speciﬁcations for foundations and have a
compressive strength of 7 N/mm2, or preferably 10 N/mm2. Concrete used in
underpinning is usually speciﬁed as a 1:2:4/20 mm aggregate mix (C20) using
rapid-hardening cement. The ﬁnal pinning mix should consist of 1 part rapid-
hardening cement to 3 parts of well graded ﬁne aggregate from 10 mm down to 
ﬁne sand with a water/cement ratio of 0.35. In both methods the projection of 
the existing foundation is cut back to the external wall line so that the loads are
transmitted to the new foundation and not partially dissipated through the 
original foundation strip onto the backﬁll material (see Fig. 4.1.1).
nnn PRETEST METHOD OF UNDERPINNING
This method is designed to prevent further settlement of foundations after
underpinning has been carried out by consolidating the soil under the new
foundation before the load from the underpinning is applied. The perimeter of the
wall to be underpinned is excavated in stages as described for wall underpinning,
the new foundation strip is laid, and a hydraulic jack supporting a short beam is
placed in the centre of the bay under the existing foundation. A dry mortar mix is
laid between the top of the beam and the existing foundation, and before it has
ﬁnally set the jack is extended to give a predetermined load on the new foundation,
thus pretesting the soil beneath.
This process is repeated along the entire underpinning length until the whole
wall is being supported by the hydraulic jacks. Underpinning is carried out using
brickwork or concrete walling between the jacks, which are later removed and
replaced with underpinning to complete the operation.
nnn JACK OF MIGA PILE UNDERPINNING
This is a method that can be used in the following circumstances:
n Depth of suitable bearing capacity subsoil is too deep to make traditional wall
underpinning practical or economic.
n Where a system giving no vibration is required. It is worth noting that this
method is also practically noiseless.
n If a system of variable depth is required.
n The existing foundation is structurally sound.
The system consists of short precast concrete pile lengths jacked into the 
ground until a suitable subsoil is reached (see Fig. 4.1.2). When the jack pile 
has reached the required depth the space between the top of the pile and 
underside of the existing foundation is ﬁlled with a pinned concrete cap. 
The existing foundation must be in a good condition, because in the ﬁnal 
context it will act as a beam spanning over the piles. The condition and hence 
the spanning ability of the existing strip foundation will also determine the 
spacing of the piles.

 
196
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.1.1
Traditional brick underpinning

 
Underpinning
197
Figure 4.1.2
Jack or miga pile underpinning

 
198
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn NEEDLE AND PILES
If the wall to be underpinned has a weak foundation that is considered unsuitable
for spanning over the heads of jack piles an alternative method giving the same
degree of ﬂexibility can be used. This method uses pairs of jacks or usually bored
piles in conjunction with an in-situ reinforced concrete beam or needle placed above
the existing foundation. The system works on the same principle as a dead 
shoring arrangement relying on the arching effect of bonded brickwork. If water is
encountered when using bored piles a pressure pile can be used as an alternative.
The formation of both types of pile is described in Chapter 4.2 on piling. Typical
arrangements to enable the work to be carried out from both sides of the wall or
from the external face only are shown in Fig. 4.1.3.
nnn PYNFORD STOOLING METHOD
The Pynford method of underpinning enables walls to be underpinned in
continuous runs without the use of needles or raking shoring. The procedure is 
to cut away portions of brickwork, above the existing foundation, to enable precast
concrete or steel stools to be inserted and pinned. The intervening brickwork can 
be removed, leaving the structure supported entirely on the stools. Reinforcing 
bars are threaded between and around the stools and caged to form the ring 
beam reinforcement. After the formwork has been placed and the beam cast, 
ﬁnal pinning can be carried out using a well-rammed dry mortar mix (see 
Fig. 4.1.4). This method replaces the existing foundation strip with a reinforced
concrete ring beam, from which other forms of deep underpinning can be carried
out if necessary.
nnn CERFAX HOOPSAFE METHOD
This is most appropriate as remedial treatment where differential settlement 
can be identiﬁed. A limited amount of external excavation is needed to expose 
the substructural wall to a depth just above foundation level. Here, an in-situ
concrete beam with purpose-made longitudinal voids created with plastic 
conduits is cast around the building’s periphery. The small-diameter voids
accommodate steel stressing tendons for post-tensioning to bind the walls into 
a solid unit.
Continuity provided by the post-tensioned beams integrates the substructural
wall and compensates for weaker areas of subsoil. However, where areas or pockets
of weakness in the ground can be identiﬁed, these should be stabilised by granular
consolidation to complement the remedial treatment. This method is relatively 
fast when applied to regular plan shapes such as a square or rectangle. Offsets 
and extensions to buildings are less easy to peripherate. Figure 4.1.5 shows the
principles of application.

 
Underpinning
199
Figure 4.1.3
Needle and pile underpinning

 
200
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.1.4
‘Pynford’ stooling method of underpinning

 
Underpinning
201
Figure 4.1.5
Hoopsafe foundation support
nnn BULLIVANT DOUBLE-ANGLE PILING
This is another low-cost modern alternative to traditional underpinning for
stabilising existing substructural walls and foundations. Figure 4.1.6 shows the
installation of reinforced concrete angle piles by air-ﬂushed rotary percussion drill
from inside and outside the building. The voids are lined with steel casings cut off
at the surface prior to lowering of reinforcement and placing concrete. Spacings 
and depth of borings will depend on site conditions such as the occurrence of 
solid bearing strata and extent of structural damage. Although disruption to the

 
202
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.1.6
Angle piled foundation stabilisation
building’s interior is most likely (unless external application only is considered
adequate), the relatively short timescale and minimal excavation make for an
economic process.
nnn OTHER FORMS OF UNDERPINNING USING BEAMS
Stressed steel
This consists of standard universal beam sections in short lengths of 600 to 1,500 mm
with a steel diaphragm plate welded to each end that is drilled to take high tensile
torque bolts. Short lengths of wall are removed and the steel beam inserted. The
joints between adjacent diaphragm plates are formed so that a small space occurs 

 
Underpinning
203
on the lower or tension side to give a predetermined camber when the bolts are
tightened. Final pinning between the top of the stressed steel beam and the wall
completes the operation.
Prestressed concrete
Short precast concrete blocks are inserted over the existing foundations as the
brickwork is removed. The blocks are formed to allow for post-tensioning stressing
tendons to be inserted, stressed and anchored to form a continuous beam. Final
pinning completes the underpinning.
Note that all forms of beam underpinning can also be used to form a lintel or
beam, in any part of a wall, prior to the formation of a large opening.
nnn FINAL PINNING
Although ﬁnal pinning is usually carried out by ramming a stiff dry cement mortar
mix into the space between the new underpinning work and the existing structure,
alternative methods are available such as:
n Flat jacks
These are circular or rectangular hollow plates of various sizes
made from thin sheet metal, which can be inﬂated with high-pressure water for
temporary pinning or, if work is to be permanent, with a strong cement grout.
The increase in thickness of the ﬂat jacks is approximately 25 mm.
n Wedge bricks
These are special bricks of engineering quality of standard face
length but with a one brick width and a depth equal to two courses. The brick is
made in two parts, the lower section having a wide sloping channel in its top bed
surface to receive the wedge-shaped and narrower top section. Both parts have a
vertical slot through which the bedding grout passes to key the two sections
together.
nnn UNDERPINNING COLUMNS
This is a more difﬁcult task than underpinning a wall. It can be carried out on brick
or stone columns by inserting a series of stools, casting a reinforced concrete base,
and then underpinning by the methods previously described.
Structural steel or reinforced concrete columns must be relieved of their loading
before any underpinning can take place. This can be achieved by variations of one
basic method. A collar of steel or precast concrete members is ﬁxed around the
perimeter of the column. Steel collars are usually welded to the structural member,
whereas concrete columns are usually chased to a depth of 25 to 50 mm to receive
the support collar. The column loading is transferred from the collar to cross-beams
or needles, which in turn transmit the loads to the ground at a safe distance from
the proposed underpinning excavations. Cantilever techniques that transfer the
loadings to one side of the structural member are possible provided sufﬁcient
kentledge and anchorage can be obtained (see Fig. 4.1.7). The underpinning of the
column foundation can now be carried out by the means previously described.

 
204
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.1.7
Typical column underpinning arrangements

 
A pile can be loosely deﬁned as a column inserted in the ground to transmit the
structural loads to a lower level of subsoil. Piled foundations have been used in 
this context for hundreds of years and until the twentieth century were invariably 
of driven timber. Today a wide variety of materials and methods are available to
solve most of the problems encountered when confronted with the need for deep
foundations. It must be remembered that piled foundations are not necessarily 
the answer to all awkward foundation problems, but should be considered as an
alternative to other techniques when suitable bearing-capacity soil is not found 
near the lowest ﬂoor of the structure.
The unsuitability of the upper regions of a subsoil may be caused by:
n low bearing capacity of the subsoil;
n heavy point loads of the structure exceeding the soil bearing capacity;
n presence of highly compressible soils near the surface such as ﬁlled ground and
underlying peat strata;
n subsoils such as clay, which may be capable of moisture movement or plastic
failure;
n high water table.
nnn CLASSIFICATION
Piled foundations may be classiﬁed by the way in which they transmit their loads to
the subsoils or by the way they are formed. Transmittance of loading to a lower
level may be by:
n End bearing
The shafts of the piles act as columns, carrying the loads through
the overlying weak subsoils to ﬁrm strata into which the pile toe has penetrated.
This can be a rock stratum or a layer of ﬁrm sand or gravel that has been
compacted by the displacement and vibration encountered during the driving.
4.2
PILED FOUNDATIONS

 
206
Advanced Construction Technology
The design of end bearing piled foundations can be determined by establishing
the safe bearing capacity of the subsoil by sampling and labatory analysis, and
relating this to the load distribution on each pile. For example, the wall shown 
in Fig. 4.2.1 carries a load of 100 kN/m onto piles bearing on subgrade of safe
bearing capacity of 300 kN/m2. Using piles of say 0.500 m diameter their spacing
will be:
Pile base area = 3.142 × (0.25)2 = 0.20 m2
Each pile carries: 300 × 0.2 = 60 kN
The extent of wall on one pile = 100/60 = 1.670 m
Therefore pile spacing is not more than 1.670 m.
Minimum permissible spacing is 3 × pile diameter (1.500 m) or 1.000 m (take
greater value). Therefore calculated spacing is satisfactory.
n Friction
Any foundation imposes on the ground a pressure that spreads out 
to form a bulb of pressure as shown in Fig. 4.2.2. If a suitable loadbearing
stratum cannot be found at an acceptable level, particularly in stiff clay soils, 
it is possible to use a pile to carry this bulb of pressure to a lower level where a
higher bearing capacity is found. The friction or ﬂoating pile is supported mainly
by the adhesion or friction action of the soil around the perimeter of the pile
shaft. Vertical stress at various points in a pile can be calculated by multiplying
the coefﬁcients shown in Fig. 4.2.2 by the result of the pressure divided by the
pile length squared, i.e. K(P/L2).
Figure 4.2.1
Pile spacing

 
Piled foundations
207
In most situations piles work on a combination of the two principles outlined
above, but the major design consideration identiﬁes the pile class.
Piles may be preformed and driven, thus displacing the soil through which they
pass, and are therefore classiﬁed as displacement piles. Alternatively the soil can
be bored out and subsequently replaced by a pile shaft, and such piles are classiﬁed
as replacement piles.
nnn DOWNDRAG
When piles are driven through weak soils such as alluvial or silty clay, peat 
layers or reclaimed land, the long-term settlement and consolidation of the 
ground can cause downdrag of the piles. This is in simple terms a transference of
the downdrag load of consolidating soil onto a pile shaft. It is called negative skin
friction because the resistance to this transfer of load is the positive skin friction 
of the pile shaft. Downdrag loads have been known to equal the design bearing
capacity of the pile.
Figure 4.2.2
Pressure bulb for a friction pile

 
208
Advanced Construction Technology
Three methods to counteract the effects of downdrag are possible:
n Increase the number of piles being used to carry the structural loads to
accommodate the anticipated downdrag loads. This method may necessitate the
use of twice the number of piles required to carry only the structural loadings.
n Increase the size of the piles designed for structural loads only: this can be
expensive, because the cost of forming piles does not increase pro rata with 
its size.
n Design for the structural loads only and prevent the transference of downdrag
loads by coating the external face of the shaft with a slip layer, thus reducing 
the negative skin friction. A special bituminous compound has been developed 
to fulﬁl this task and is applied in a 10 mm thick coat to that part of the shaft
where negative skin friction can be expected. The toe of the pile is never coated,
so that the end bearing capacity is not reduced. Care must be taken to ensure 
that the coating is not damaged during transportation, storage and driving,
particularly in hot weather, when a reﬂective coating of lime wash may be
necessary.
nnn DISPLACEMENT PILES
This is a general term applied to piles that are driven, thus displacing the soil, 
and includes those piles that are preformed, partially preformed or are driven 
in-situ piles.
TIMBER PILES
These are usually of square sawn hardwood or softwood in lengths up to 12.000 m
with section sizes ranging from 225 mm × 225 mm to 600 mm × 600 mm. They are
easy to handle, and can be driven by percussion with the minimum of experience.
Most timber piles are ﬁtted with an iron or steel driving shoe, and have an iron 
ring around the head to prevent splitting due to impact. Although not particularly
common, they are used in sea defences such as groynes and sometimes as guide
piles for large trestles in conjunction with steel sheet piling. Loadbearing capacities
can be up to 350 kN per pile, depending upon section size and/or species.
PRECAST CONCRETE PILES
These are used on medium to large contracts where soft soils overlying a ﬁrm
stratum are encountered and at least 100 piles will be required. Lengths up to
18.000 m with section sizes ranging from 250 mm × 250 mm to 450 mm × 450 mm
carrying loadings of up to 1,000 kN are generally economical for the conditions
mentioned above. The precast concrete driven pile has little frictional bearing
strength because the driving operation moulds the cohesive soils around the shaft,
which reduces the positive frictional resistance.
Problems can be encountered when using this form of pile in urban areas for the
following reasons:

 
Piled foundations
209
n Transportation of the complete length of pile through narrow and/or congested
streets.
n The driving process, which is generally percussion, and can set up unacceptable
noise and/or vibrations.
n The fact that many urban sites are in themselves restricted or congested, thus
making it difﬁcult to manoeuvre the long pile lengths around the site.
PREFORMED CONCRETE PILES
These are available as reinforced precast concrete or prestressed concrete piles, 
but because of the problems listed above and the site difﬁculties that can be
experienced in splicing or lengthening preformed piles their use has diminished
considerably in recent years in favour of precast piles formed in segments or the
partially preformed types of pile. Typical examples of the segmental type are 
West’s ‘Hardrive’ and ‘Segmental’ piles. The Hardrive pile is composed of
standard interchangeable precast concrete units of 10.000, 5.000 and 2.500 m
lengths designed to carry working loads up to 800 kN. The pile lengths are 
locked together with four H-section pins located at the corners of an aligning 
sleeve (see Fig. 4.2.3). The Segmental pile is designed for lighter loading
conditions of up to 300 kN, and is formed by joining the 1.000 m standard lengths
together with spigot and socket joints up to a maximum length of 15.000 m. Special
half-length head units are available to reduce wastage to a minimum 
(see Fig. 4.2.4).
STEEL PREFORMED PILES
These are used mainly in conjunction with marine structures and where overlying
soils are very weak. Two forms are encountered: the hollow box pile, which is made
from welded rolled steel sections to BS EN 10210-2: Hot ﬁnished structural hollow
sections of non-alloy and ﬁne grain structural steels. Tolerances, dimensions and sectional
properties, and the universal bearing pile of conventional ‘H’ section to BS 4-1:
Structural steel sections. Speciﬁcation for hot-rolled sections. These piles are relatively
light and therefore are easy to handle and drive. Splicing can be carried out by site
welding to form piles up to 15.000 m long with loadbearing capacities up to 
600 kN. Consideration must always be given to the need to apply a protective
coating to the pile to guard against corrosion.
COMPOSITE PILES
These are sometimes referred to as partially preformed piles, and are formed by a
method that combines the use of precast and in-situ concrete or steel and in-situ
concrete. They are used mainly on medium to large contracts where the presence 
of running water or very loose soils would render the use of bored or preformed
piles unsuitable. Composite piles provide a pile of readily variable length made 
from easily transported short lengths. Typical examples are ‘Prestcore’, West’s
‘Shell’ and cased piles.

 
210
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.2.3
West’s Hardrive precast modular piles

 
Piled foundations
211
Figure 4.2.4
West’s Segmental piles

 
212
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.2.5
West’s Shell piles

 
Piled foundations
213
The Prestcore pile is a composite pile formed inside a lined, bored hole and is,
strictly speaking, a replacement pile and is therefore described in more detail in the
following section on replacement piles.
The Shell pile is, however, a driven or displacement pile consisting of a series 
of precast shells threaded onto a mandrel and top-driven to the required set. After
driving and removing the mandrel the hollow core can be inspected, a cage of
reinforcement inserted, and the void ﬁlled with in-situ concrete. Lengths up to
60.000 m with bearing capacities within the range 500 to 1,200 kN are possible with
this method. The precast concrete shells are reinforced by a patent system using
ﬁbrillated polypropylene ﬁlm as a substitute for the traditional welded steel fabric
(see Fig. 4.2.5).
Piles formed in this manner solve many of the problems encountered with
waterlogged and soft substrata by being readily adaptable in length, the shaft can be
inspected internally before the in-situ concrete is introduced, the ﬂow of water or
soil into the pile is eliminated, and the presence of corrosive conditions in the soil
can be overcome by using special cements in the shell construction.
BSP CASED PILES
These are typical composite piles using steel and in-situ concrete. Cased piles 
are bearing piles consisting of a driven tube that is ﬁlled with in-situ concrete. 
The casing is manufactured from steel strip or plate, which is formed into a
continuous helix with the adjoining edges butt-welded. These piles are usually
driven into position by using an internal drop hammer operating within the casing.
Usually a ﬂat circular plate is welded to the base of the casing and a cushion plug 
of concrete with a very low water content is placed to a depth equal to 21/2 times 
the pile diameter directly on top of the plate shoe. Pile lengths are available up to
24.000 m as a single tube, but should extra length be required extension casings 
can be butt-welded on after the ﬁrst length has been driven to a suitable depth.
Apart from situations such as jetties, where a fair amount of the pile is left
projecting, cased piles do not require reinforcement except for splice bars at the 
top to bond the pile to a pile cap. The in-situ concrete is a standard 1:2:4 mix with 
a water/cement ratio of 0.4 to 0.5 (C20). A wide range of diameters from 250 to 
600 mm are available with varying casing thicknesses to give working loads per pile
ranging from 150 to 1,500 kN according to the type of subsoil. Typical cased pile
details are shown in Fig. 4.2.6.
DRIVEN IN-SITU OR CAST-IN-PLACE PILES
These are an alternative to preformed displacement piles and are usually applied 
on medium to large contracts where subsoil conditions or loadings are likely to
create variations in the lengths of pile required. They can be formed economically
in diameters of 300 to 600 mm with lengths up to 18.000 m designed to carry loads
of up to 1,300 kN. They generally require heavy piling rigs, and an open, level site
where noise is unrestricted.
In some systems the tube that is used to form the pile shaft is top driven, and 
in others such as the Franki system driving is carried out by means of an internal

 
214
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.2.6
BSP cased piles

 
Piled foundations
215
Figure 4.2.7
Franki driven in-situ piles

 
216
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.2.8
Vibro cast in-situ pile

 
Piled foundations
217
Figure 4.2.9
Piling frames and equipment

 
218
Advanced Construction Technology
drop hammer working on a plug of dry concrete. In-situ concrete for the core is
introduced into the lined shaft through a hopper or skip, and the concrete can be
consolidated by impact of the internal drop hammer or by vibration of the tube as 
it is withdrawn (see Figs 4.2.7 and 4.2.8).
A problem that can be encountered with this form of pile is necking due to
groundwater movement washing away some of the concrete, thus reducing the
effective diameter of the pile shaft and consequently the cover of concrete over 
the reinforcement. If groundwater is present the other forms of displacement pile
previously described should be considered.
PILEDRIVING
Displacement piles are generally driven into the ground by holding them in the
correct position against the piling frame and applying hammer blows to the head 
of the pile. Exceptions are encountered, such as the cased pile shown in Fig. 4.2.6.
The piling frame can be purpose made or an adaptation of a standard crane power
unit. The basic components of any piling frame are the vertical member that houses
the leaders or guides, which in turn support the pile and guide the hammer onto the
head of the pile (see Fig. 4.2.9). Pile hammers come in a variety of types and sizes
powered by gravity, steam, compressed air or diesel.
Drop hammers
These are blocks of cast iron or steel with a mass range of 1,500 to 8,000 kg and are
raised by a cable attached to a winch. The hammer, which is sometimes called a
monkey or ram, is allowed to fall freely by gravity onto the pile head. The free-fall
distance is controllable, but generally a distance of about 1.200 m is employed. 
Drop hammers are slower than the following power hammers and may inﬂict more
damage to the pile caps.
Single-acting hammers
Activated by steam or compressed air, these have much the same effect as drop
hammers in that the hammer falls freely by gravity through a distance of about
1.500 m. Two types are available: in one case the hammer is lifted by a piston rod;
in the other the piston is static and the cylinder is raised and allowed to fall freely
(see Fig. 4.2.9). Both forms of hammer deliver a very powerful blow.
Double-acting hammers
These are activated by steam or compressed air, and consist of a heavy ﬁxed
cylinder in which there is a light piston or ram that delivers a large number of 
rapid light blows (90 to 225 blows per minute) in a short space of time, as opposed
to the heavier blows over a longer period of the drop and single-acting hammers.
The object is to try to keep the pile constantly on the move rather than being driven
in a series of jerks. This type of hammer has been largely replaced by the diesel
hammer and by vibration techniques.

 
Piled foundations
219
Figure 4.2.10
Typical diesel hammer details

 
220
Advanced Construction Technology
Diesel hammers
These have been designed to give a reliable and economic method of piledriving.
Various sizes giving different energy outputs per blow are available, but most
deliver between 46 and 52 blows per minute. The hammer can be suspended from a
crane or mounted in the leaders of a piling frame. A measured amount of liquid fuel
is fed into a cup formed in the base of the cylinder. The air being compressed by
the falling ram is trapped between the ram and the anvil, which applies a preloading
force to the pile. The displaced fuel, at the precise moment of impact, results in an
explosion that applies a downward force on the pile and an upward force on the
ram, which returns to its starting position to recommence the complete cycle. The
movement of the ram within the cylinder activates the fuel supply, and opens and
closes the exhaust ports (see Fig. 4.2.10). Water- or air-cooled variations exist for
popular application to vertical and inclined driving.
Vibration techniques
These can be used in driving displacement piles where soft clays, sands and gravels
are encountered. They are notably efﬁcient, with preformed steel pipe, ‘H’ and
Figure 4.2.11
Operating principles of a vibrating hammer

 
Piled foundations
221
sheet pile sections. The equipment consists of a vibrating unit mounted on the 
pile head transmitting vibrations of the required frequency and amplitude down 
the length of the pile shaft. It achieves this with two eccentric rotors propelled in
opposite directions to generate vertical vibrations in the pile. These are, in turn,
transmitted to the surrounding soil, reducing its shear strength and enabling the
pile to sink into the subsoil under its own weight and also that of the vibrator unit.
Figure 4.2.11 shows the operating principles of the unit attached to the head of a
sheet steel pile. To aid the driving process and to reduce the risk of damage to the
pile during driving, water-jetting techniques can be used. Water is directed at the
soil around the toe of the pile to loosen it and ease the driving process. The water
pipes are usually attached to the perimeter of the pile shaft, and are therefore 
taken down with the pile as it is being driven. The water-jetting operation is
stopped before the pile reaches its ﬁnal depth so that the toe of the pile is ﬁnally
embedded in undisturbed soil. The main advantage is the relatively silent operation.
Additionally there is no damage to the pile cap, and high-voltage electricity may be
used instead of combustible fuels.
To protect the heads of preformed piles from damage due to impact from
hammers, various types of protective cushioned helmet are used. These can be
either of a general nature, as shown in Fig. 4.2.9, or special purpose for a particular
system, such as those used for West’s piling.
nnn REPLACEMENT PILES
Sometimes referred to as bored piles, these are formed by removing a column of
soil and replacing it with in-situ concrete or, as in the case of composite piles, with
precast and in-situ concrete. Replacement or bored piles are considered for sites
where piling is being carried out in close proximity to existing buildings or where
vibration and/or noise is restricted. The formation of this type of pile can be
considered under three general classiﬁcations:
n percussion bored piles;
n rotary bored piles;
n prestcore piles.
PERCUSSION BORED PILES
These are suitable for small and medium-sized contracts of up to 300 piles in clay 
or gravel subsoils. Pile diameters are usually from 300 to 950 mm, designed to carry
loads up to 1,500 kN. Apart from the common factor with all replacement piles that
the strata penetrated can be fully explored, these piles can be formed by using a
shear leg or tripod rig requiring as little as 1.800 m headroom.
A steel tube made up from lengths (1.000 to 1.400 m) screwed together is sunk
by extracting the soil from within the tube liner using percussion cutters or balers
according to the nature of the subsoil to be penetrated. The steel lining tube will
usually sink under its own weight, but it can be driven in with slight pressure,
normally applied by means of hydraulic jacks. When the correct depth has been
reached, a cage of reinforcement is placed within the liner and the concrete is
introduced. Tamping is carried out as the liner is extracted by using a winch or

 
222
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.2.12
Typical percussion bored pile details

 
Piled foundations
223
Figure 4.2.13
Typical rotary bored pile details

 
224
Advanced Construction Technology
hydraulic jack operating against a clamping collar ﬁxed to the top of the steel tube
lining. An internal drop hammer can be used to tamp and consolidate the concrete,
but usually compressed air is the method employed.
If waterlogged soil is encountered, a pressure pile is usually formed by ﬁxing 
to the head of the steel liner an airlock hopper through which the concrete can be
introduced and consolidated while the borehole remains under pressure in excess 
of the hydrostatic pressure of the groundwater (see Fig. 4.2.12).
ROTARY BORED PILES
These can range from the short bored pile used in domestic dwellings (see
Construction Technology, Chapter 2.2) to the very-large-diameter piles used for
concentrated loads in multi-storey buildings and bridge construction. The rotary
bored pile is suitable for most cohesive soils, such as clay, and is formed using an
auger, which may be operated in conjunction with the steel tube liner according to
the subsoil conditions encountered.
Two common augers are in use. One is the Cheshire auger, which has 11/2 to 
2 helix turns at the cutting end and is usually mounted on a lorry or tractor. The
turning shaft or kelly bar is generally up to 7.500 m long and is either telescopic or
extendable. The soil is cut by the auger, raised to the surface, and spun off the helix
to the side of the borehole, from where it is removed from site (see Fig. 4.2.13).
Alternatively, a continuous or ﬂight auger can be used, where the spiral motion
brings the spoil to the surface for removal from site. Flight augers are usually
mounted on an adapted excavator or crane power unit.
Figure 4.2.14
Grout injection piling

 
Piled foundations
225
Figure 4.2.15
Typical large-diameter bored pile details

 
226
Advanced Construction Technology
A development of continuous or ﬂight auger replacement piling uses a modiﬁed
auger with an open-ended hollow central core. The borehole is excavated as
described for a conventional auger but, on reaching the required depth, concrete 
is pumped into the hollow core as the auger is withdrawn. This practice is time
efﬁcient, as there is no need to case the pile or temporarily support the excavation.
There is also little disturbance to the surrounding subsoil. When the auger is
removed, a reinforcement cage is vibrated into the concrete to the required 
depth. To ease pumping and reinforcement placement, the concrete design 
may specify rounded aggregates and a higher than normal water/cement ratio.
Therefore pile diameter and quantity of piles may be greater than with more
conventional methods. This technique is also known as grout injection piling
(see Fig. 4.2.14).
Large-diameter bored piles are usually considered to be those over 750 mm, 
and can be formed with diameters up to 2.600 m with lengths ranging from 24.000
to 60.000 m to carry loadings from 2,500 to 8,000 kN. They are suitable for use in
stiff clays for structures having highly concentrated loadings, and can be lined or
partially lined with steel tubes as required. The base or toe of the pile can be
enlarged or under-reamed up to three times the shaft diameter to increase the
bearing capacity of the pile. Reinforcement is not always required, and the need for
specialists’ knowledge at the design stage cannot be overemphasised. Compaction of
the concrete, which is usually placed by a tremie pipe, is generally by gravitational
force (see Fig. 4.2.15). Test loading of large-diameter bored piles can be very
expensive, and if the local authority insists on test loading it can render this 
method uneconomic.
PRESTCORE PILES
These are a form of composite pile consisting of precast and in-situ concrete. The
formation of the borehole is as described previously for the percussion bored pile,
using light, easy to handle equipment requiring a low headroom or working height.
The main advantage of this form of pile lies in the fact that the problem of necking
is eliminated, which makes the system suitable for piling in waterlogged soils. The
formation of a prestcore pile can be divided into four distinct stages:
1. Boring
A lined borehole formed by percussion methods using a tripod rig.
2. Assembly
Precast units that form the core of the pile are assembled on a
special mandrel, and reinforcement is inserted before the core unit is lowered
into position.
3. Pressing the core
The pile core is raised and lowered by means of a
pneumatic winch attached to the head of the lining tube to consolidate the
bearing stratum.
4. Grouting
The lining tube is withdrawn and the pile is grouted with the aid of
compressed air to expel any groundwater.
The assembly arrangement and the unit details are shown in Fig. 4.2.16.

 
Piled foundations
227
Figure 4.2.16
BSP Prestcore bored pile

 
228
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn PILE TESTING
The main objective of forming a test pile is to conﬁrm that the design and formation
of the chosen pile type is adequate. It is always advisable to form at least one test
pile on any piling contract and, indeed, many local authorities will insist upon this
being carried out. The test pile must not be used as part of the ﬁnished foundations,
and should be formed and tested in such a position that it will not interfere with the
actual contract but is nevertheless truly representative of site conditions.
Test piles are usually overloaded by at least 50% of the design working load 
to near failure or to actual failure depending upon the test data required. Any
loading less than total failure loading should remain in place for at least 24 hours.
The test pile is bored to the required depth or driven to the required set (which is a
predetermined penetration per blow or series of blows), after which it can be tested
by one of the following methods:
n A grillage or platform of steel or timber is formed over the top of the test pile
and loaded with a quantity of kentledge composed of pig iron or precast concrete
blocks. A hydraulic jack is placed between the kentledge and the head of the pile
and the test load gradually applied.
n Three piles are formed, and the outer two piles are tied across their heads with a
steel or concrete beam. The object is to jack down the centre or test pile against
the uplift of the outer piles. Unless two outer piles are available for the test this
method can be uneconomic if special outer piles have to be bored or driven.
n Anchor-stressing wires are secured into rock or by some other means to provide
the anchorage and uplift the resistance to a cross-beam of steel or concrete 
by passing the wires over the ends of the beam. The test load is applied by a
hydraulic jack placed between the cross-member and the pile head, as described
for the previous method.
n The constant rate of penetration test is a method whereby the pile under test is
made to penetrate the ground at a constant rate, generally in the order of about
0.8 mm per minute. The load needed to produce this rate of penetration is
plotted against a deﬂection or timebase. When no further load is required to
maintain this constant rate of penetration, the ultimate bearing capacity 
has been reached.
Note that the safe load for a single pile cannot necessarily be multiplied by the
number of piles in a cluster to obtain the safe load of a group of piles.
nnn PILE CAPS
Apart from the simple situations such as domestic dwellings, or where large-
diameter piles are employed, piles are not usually used singly but are formed 
into a group or cluster. The load is distributed over the heads of the piles in the
group by means of a reinforced cast in-situ concrete pile cap. To provide structural
continuity the reinforcement in the piles is bonded into the pile cap; this may
necessitate the breaking out of the concrete from the heads of the piles to expose 
the reinforcement. The heads of piles also penetrate the base of the pile cap some
100 to 150 mm to ensure continuity of the members.

 
Piled foundations
229
Figure 4.2.17
Typical pile cap and ground beam details

 
230
Advanced Construction Technology
Piles should be spaced at such a distance that the group is economically formed
and at the same time any interaction between adjacent piles is prevented. Actual
spacings must be selected upon subsoil conditions, but the usual minimum 
spacings are:
n Friction piles: 3 pile diameters or 1.000 m, whichever is greater.
n End bearing piles: 2 pile diameters or 750 mm, whichever is greater.
The plan shape of the pile cap should be as conservative as possible, and this 
is usually achieved by having an overhang of 150 mm. The Federation of Piling
Specialists have issued the following guide table as to suitable pile cap depths,
having regard to both design and cost requirements:
Pile diameter (mm)
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
750
Depth of cap (mm)
700
800
900
1,000
1,100
1,200
1,400
1,800
The main reinforcement is two-directional, formed in bands over the pile heads
to spread the loads, and usually takes the form of a U-shaped bar suitably bound to
give a degree of resistance to surface cracking of the faces of the pile cap (see typical
details shown in Fig. 4.2.17).
In many piling schemes, especially where capped single piles are used, the pile
caps are tied together with reinforced concrete tie beams. The beams can be used to
carry loadings such as walls to the pile foundations (see Fig. 4.2.17).
nnn PILING CONTRACTS
The formation of piled foundations is a specialist’s task, and so a piling contractor
may be engaged to carry out the work by one of three methods:
n Nominated subcontractor.
n Direct subcontractor.
n Main contractor under a separate contract.
Piling companies normally supply the complete service of advising, designing
and carrying out the complete site works, including setting out if required. When
seeking a piling tender the builder should have and supply the following information:
n site investigation report, giving full details of subsoil investigations, adjacent
structures, topography of site and any restrictions regarding headroom, noise or
vibration limitations;
n site layout drawings, indicating levels, proposed pile positions and structural
loadings;
n contract data regarding tender dates, contract period, completion dates, a
detailed speciﬁcation and details of any special or unusual contract clauses.
The appraisal of piling tenders is not an easy task, and the builder should take
into account not only costs but also any special conditions attached to the submitted
tender and the acceptance by the local authority of the proposed scheme and system.
Reference:
BS 8004: Code of practice for foundations.

 
Loadings in buildings consist of the combined dead weight of the structure plus the
imposed loading from people, furnishings and the effect of snow and wind. These
exert a downward pressure upon the soil on which the structure is founded, and this
in turn promotes a reactive force in the form of an upward pressure from the soil.
The structure is in effect sandwiched between these opposite pressures, and the
design of the building must be able to resist the resultant stresses set up within the
structural members and the general building fabric. The supporting subsoil must be
able to develop sufﬁcient reactive force to give stability to the structure to prevent
failure due to unequal settlement and to prevent failure of the subsoil due to shear.
To enable designers to select, design and detail a suitable foundation they must
have adequate data regarding the nature of the soil on which the structure will 
be founded, and this is normally obtained from a planned soil investigation
programme.
nnn SOIL INVESTIGATION
Soil investigation is speciﬁc in its requirements whereas site investigation is all-
embracing, taking into account such factors as topography, location of existing
services, means of access and any local restrictions. Soil investigation is a means of
obtaining data regarding the properties and characteristics of subsoils by providing
samples for testing or providing a means of access for visual inspection. The actual
data required and the amount of capital that can be reasonably expended on any 
soil investigation programme will depend upon the type of structure proposed and
on how much previous knowledge the designer has of a particular region or site.
The main methods of soil investigation can be enumerated as follows:
n Trial pits: small contracts where foundation depths are not likely to exceed 
3.000 m.
n Boreholes: medium to large contracts with foundations up to 30.000 m deep.
4.3
SUBSOIL ANALYSIS AND
FOUNDATIONS

 
232
Advanced Construction Technology
TRIAL PITS
These present a relatively cheap method of obtaining soil data by enabling easy
visual inspection of the soil stratum in its natural condition. The pits can be hand-
or machine-excavated to a plan size of 1.200 m × 1.200 m and spaced at centres to
suit the scope of the investigation. A series of pits set out on a 20.000 m grid would
give a reasonable coverage of most sites. The pits need to be positioned so that the
data obtained are truly representative of the actual conditions, but not in such a
position where their presence could have a detrimental effect on the proposed
foundations. In very loose soils, or soils having a high water table, trial pits can
prove to be uneconomical because of the need for pumps and/or timbering to keep
the pits dry and accessible. The spoil removed will provide disturbed samples for
testing purposes, whereas undisturbed samples can be cut and extracted from the
walls of the pit.
BOREHOLES
These enable disturbed or undisturbed samples to be removed for analysis and
testing, but undisturbed samples are sometimes difﬁcult to obtain from soils other
than rock or cohesive soils. The core diameter of the samples obtained varies 
from 100 to 200 mm according to the method employed in extracting the sample.
Disturbed samples can be obtained by using a rotary ﬂight auger or by percussion
boring in a manner similar to the formation of small-diameter bored piles using a
tripod or shear leg rig. Undisturbed samples can be obtained from cohesive soils
using 450 mm long × 100 mm diameter sampling tubes, which are driven into the
soil to collect the sample; upon removal the tube is capped, labelled and sent off to 
a laboratory for testing. Undisturbed rock samples can be obtained by core drilling
with diamond-tipped drills where necessary.
nnn CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS
Soils may be classiﬁed by any of the following methods:
n physical properties;
n geological origin;
n chemical composition;
n particle size.
It has been established that the physical properties of soils can be closely associated
with their particle size, both of which are of importance to the foundation engineer,
architect or designer. All soils can be deﬁned as being coarse-grained or ﬁne-
grained, each resulting in different properties.
COARSE-GRAINED SOILS
These would include sands and gravels having a low proportion of voids, negligible
cohesion when dry, high permeability and slight compressibility, which takes place
almost immediately upon the application of load.

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
233
FINE-GRAINED SOILS
These include the cohesive silts and clays having a high proportion of voids, high
cohesion, very low permeability and high compressibility, which takes place slowly
over a long period of time.
There are of course soils that can be classiﬁed in between the two extremes
described above. BS 1377: Methods of test for soils for civil engineering purposes
divides particle sizes as follows:
n Clay particles:
less than 0.002 mm.
n Silt particles:
between 0.002 and 0.06 mm.
n Sand particles:
between 0.06 and 2 mm.
n Gravel particles:
between 2 and 60 mm.
n Cobbles:
between 60 and 200 mm.
Soils that are composed mainly of clay, silt and sand can be classiﬁed on the
triangular chart shown in Fig. 4.3.1. Given a soil sample analysis of 60% sand, 
15% silt and 25% clay, it can be identifed as sandy clay loam.
Note: Silt is ﬁne particles of sand, easily suspended in water. Loam is very ﬁne
particles of clay, easily dissolved in water.
The silt, sand and gravel particles are also further subdivided into ﬁne, medium
and coarse with particle sizes lying between the extremes quoted above.
Figure 4.3.1
Triangular chart, soil classiﬁcation

 
234
Advanced Construction Technology
Fine-grained soils such as clays are difﬁcult to classify positively by their particle
size distribution alone, and therefore use is made of the reaction of these soils to a
change in their moisture content. If the moisture content is high, the volume is
consequently large and the soil is basically a suspension of clay particles in water. As
the moisture content decreases, the soil passes the liquid limit and becomes plastic.
The liquid limit of a soil is deﬁned as ‘the moisture content at which a soil passes
from the plastic state to the liquid state’, and this limit can be determined by the
test set out in BS 1377.
Further lowering of the moisture content will enable the soil to pass the plastic
limit and begin to become a solid. The plastic limit of a soil is reached when a 20 g
sample just fails to roll into a 3 mm diameter thread when rolled between the palm
of the hand and a glass plate. When soils of this nature reach the solid state the
volume tends to remain constant, and any further decrease in moisture content will
only alter the appearance and colour of the sample. It must be clearly understood
that the change from one deﬁnable state to another is a gradual process and not a
sudden change.
nnn SHEAR STRENGTH OF SOILS
The resistance that can be offered by a soil to the sliding of one portion over
another or its shear strength is of importance to the designer because it can be used
to calculate the bearing capacity of a soil and the pressure it can exert on such
members as timbering in excavations. Resistance to shear in a soil under load
depends mainly upon its particle composition. If a soil is granular in form, the
frictional resistance between the particles increases with the load applied, and
consequently its shear strength also increases with the magnitude of the applied
load. Conversely, clay particles, being small, develop no frictional resistance, and
therefore clay’s shear strength will remain constant whatever the magnitude of the
applied load. Intermediate soils such as sandy clays normally give only a slight
increase in shear strength as the load is applied.
To ascertain the shear strength of a particular soil sample the triaxial
compression test as described in BS 1377 is usually employed for cohesive soils.
Non-cohesive soils can be tested in a shear box, which consists of a split box into
which the sample is placed and subjected to a standard vertical load while a
horizontal load is applied to the lower half of the box until the sample shears.
COMPRESSIBILITY
Another important property of soils that must be ascertained before a ﬁnal choice of
foundation type and design can be made is compressibility, and two factors must be
taken into account:
n the rate at which compression takes place;
n the total amount of compression when full load is applied.
When dealing with non-cohesive soils such as sands and gravels the rate of
compression will keep pace with the construction of the building, and therefore

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
235
when the structure is complete there should be no further settlement if the soil
remains in the same state. A soil is compressed when loaded by the expulsion of air
and/or water from the voids, and by the natural rearrangement of the particles. In
cohesive soils the voids are very often completely saturated with water, which in
itself is nearly incompressible, and therefore compression of the soil can take place
only by the water moving out of the voids, thus allowing settlement of the particles.
Expulsion of water from the voids within cohesive soils can occur, but only at a very
slow rate, mainly because of the resistance offered by the plate-like particles of the
soil through which it must ﬂow. This gradual compressive movement of a soil is
called consolidation. Uniform settlement will not normally cause undue damage to
a structure, but uneven settlement can cause progressive structural damage.
STRESSES AND PRESSURES
The above comments on shear strength and compressibility clearly indicate that
cohesive soils present the most serious problems when giving consideration to
foundation choice and design. The two major conditions to be considered are:
n shearing stresses;
n vertical pressures.
Shearing stress
The maximum stress under a typical foundation carrying a uniformly distributed
load will occur on a semicircle whose radius is equal to half the width of the
foundation, and the isoshear line value will be equal to about one-third the applied
pressure (see Fig. 4.3.2). The magnitude of this maximum pressure should not
exceed the shearing resistance value of the soil.
Vertical pressure
This acts within the mass of the soil upon which the structure is founded, and
should not be of such a magnitude as to cause unacceptable settlement of the
structure. Vertical pressures can be represented on a drawing by connecting
together points that have the same value, forming what are termed pressure bulbs.
Most pressure bulbs are plotted up to a value of 0.2 of the pressure per unit area,
which is considered to be the limit of pressure that could inﬂuence settlement of the
structure. Typical pressure bulbs are shown in Figs 4.3.2 and 4.3.3. A comparison
of these typical pressure bulbs will show that generally vertical pressure decreases
with depth; the 0.2 value will occur at a lower level under strip foundations than
under rafts, isolated bases and bases in close proximity to one another, which form
combined pressure bulbs. The pressure bulbs illustrated in Figs 4.3.2 and 4.3.3 are
based on the soil being homogeneous throughout the depth under consideration.
As, in reality, this is not always the case, it is important that soil investigation is
carried out at least to the depth of the theoretical pressure bulb. Great care must be
taken where underlying strata of highly compressible soil are encountered to ensure
that these are not overstressed if cut by the anticipated pressure bulb.

 
236
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.3.2
Strip foundations: typical pressure bulbs

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
237
Figure 4.3.3
Raft or similar foundations: typical pressure bulbs

 
238
Advanced Construction Technology
Contact pressure
It is very often incorrectly assumed that a foundation that is uniformly loaded will
result in a uniform contact pressure under the foundation. This would only be true
if the foundation was completely ﬂexible, such as the bases to a pin-jointed frame.
The actual contact pressure under a foundation will be governed by the nature 
of the soil and the rigidity of the foundation, and because in practice most large
structures have a rigid foundation the contact pressure distribution is not uniform.
In cohesive soils there is a tendency for high stresses to occur at the edges: this is
usually reduced slightly by the yielding of the clay soil. Non-cohesive soils give rise
to a parabolic contact pressure distribution with increasing edge pressures as the
depth below ground level of the foundation increases. When selecting the basic
foundation format consideration must be given to the concentration of the major
loads over the position where the theoretical contact pressures are at a minimum 
to obtain a balanced distribution of contact pressure (see Fig. 4.3.4).
Plastic failure
This is a form of failure that can occur in cohesive soils if the ultimate bearing
capacity of the soil is reached or exceeded. As the load on a foundation is increased,
the stresses within the soil also increase until all resistance to settlement has 
been overcome. Plastic failure, which can be related to the shear strength of the 
soil, occurs when the lateral pressure being exerted by the wedge of relatively
undisturbed soil immediately below the foundation causes a plastic shear failure 
to develop, resulting in a heaving of the soil at the sides of the foundation moving
along a slip circle or plane. In practice this movement tends to occur on one side 
of the building, causing it to tilt and settle (see Fig. 4.3.5). Plastic failure is likely to
happen when the pressure applied by the foundation is approximately six times the
shear strength of the soil.
APPROXIMATE BEARING CAPACITIES FOR DIFFERENT SUBSOILS
Clay
Very stiff boulder clays and hard clays
420–650 kN/m2
Stiff and sandy clays
220–420 kN/m2
Firm and sandy clays
110–220 kN/m2
Soft clays
55–110 kN/m2
Very soft clays
<55 kN/m2
Sand
Compact graded sands and gravels
430–650 kN/m2
Loose graded sands and gravel
220–430 kN/m2
Compact sands of consistent grade
220–430 kN/m2
Loose sands of consistent grade
110–220 kN/m2
Silts
55–110 kN/m2
Note: Figures given are for dry sands. If saturated, the bearing capacity is about one
half of that given.

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
239
Figure 4.3.4
Typical contact pressures

 
240
Advanced Construction Technology
Rocks
Sound igneous and gneissic rocks
10,700 kN/m2
Dense lime and sandstones
4,300 kN/m2
Slate and schists
3,200 kN/m2
Dense shale, mudstones and soft sandstone
2,200 kN/m2
Clay shales
1,100 kN/m2
Dense chalk
650 kN/m2
Thin bedded limestone and sandstone
*
Broken or shattered rocks and soft chalk
*
* To be assessed in situ, as may be unstable.
Figure 4.3.5
Plastic failure of foundations

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
241
PLATE BEARING TEST
In addition to subjecting subsoil to the previously mentioned site and laboratory
tests, trial pit investigation provides an opportunity to load the soil physically in
positions where it is anticipated that the foundations will be. The equipment 
shown in Fig. 4.3.6 replicates the design situation at a proportional reduction, 
i.e. a proportionally smaller foundation bearing area is loaded proportionally less.
Data are recorded as measured in settlement (mm) and soil bearing capacity (kN/m2).
The procedure is to jack between the steel test plate and an immovable load 
or kentledge hydraulically until the required pressure or resistance is achieved.
Thereafter, pressure increase and corresponding settlement are measured, usually at
12 and 24 hour intervals. Loading is applied in increments of about one-ﬁfth of the
anticipated ultimate load per 24 hour interval. The results are plotted graphically, 
as shown in Fig. 4.3.7. The safe design load should be the ultimate load divided by
a factor of safety of at least 3.
Example
If the foundation design is to be a pad of base dimensions 1,400 mm × 1,400 mm
loaded to 40 tonnes, a proportionally reduced test plate of 700 mm × 700 mm 
(1/4 area) may be used to carry 10 tonnes (40 × 1/4). Therefore 10 tonnes × safety
factor 3 = 30 tonnes (approx. 300 kN) ultimate load to be applied.
nnn FOUNDATION TYPES
There are many ways in which foundations can be classiﬁed, but one of the most
common methods is by form, resulting in four basic types:
n Strip foundations
Light loadings, particularly in domestic buildings 
(see Chapter 2.2 of Construction Technology). Heavier loadings can sometimes 
be founded on a reinforced concrete strip foundation, as described and illustrated
in Chapter 2.3 of Construction Technology.
Figure 4.3.6
Plate bearing test: principles

 
242
Advanced Construction Technology
n Raft foundations
Light loadings, average loadings on soils with low bearing
capacities and structures having a basement storey (see Chapter 2.3 of
Construction Technology).
n Pad or isolated foundations
A common method of providing the foundation
for columns of framed structures and for the supporting members of portal
frames (see Chapter 2.3 of Construction Technology, Chapter 6.2 of this volume
and the summary below).
n Piled foundations
A method for structures where the loads have to be
transmitted to a point at some distance below the general ground level (see
Chapter 4.2 of this volume).
PAD FOUNDATIONS
Pad foundations are usually square on plan, unless obstructions or limitations 
such as the site boundary impede the spread in one direction. A rectangular base is
generally acceptable in these situations, although the foundation area and amount 
of reinforcement may need to increase to accommodate the irregular transfer of
loads. Pad foundations can be of mass concrete, but are usually reinforced to limit
the amount of excavation and concrete ﬁll, and to increase the load-carrying
potential. Pads are used mainly to support columns and piers or as a base for heavy
manufacturing machinery. Reinforcement in the pad is tied to projecting vertical
starter bars for column reinforcement (see Chapter 2.3 of Construction Technology).
The area of pad required is obtained by dividing the load on the subsoil (column
imposed and dead load + the foundation weight) by the safe bearing capacity of 
the subsoil.
Figure 4.3.7
Load–settlement graph

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
243
Example
A 40 tonne column and foundation load on a subsoil of safe bearing capacity of 
200 kN/m2.
40 tonne is approximately 400 kN (40 × 9.81 = 392.4 kN).
Therefore 400 ÷ 200 = 2 m2 base area.
If square, the foundation base will be √2 = 1.400 m × 1.400 m.
On sites where space is restricted and column loadings are high, pad foundations
can be sufﬁciently large to be economically constructed in combination with an
adjacent pad. In some situations it may be more practical and economic to combine
several pads into a continuous foundation, as described in the next subsection.
As a guide to the thickness of an individual pad foundation, the following
formula for punching shear* may be used as an estimate:
Thickness of pad base =
where W = total dead and imposed load (column + foundation).
Max. shear stress of concrete varies, depending on speciﬁcation: typically 
690 kN/m2.
Perimeter of a square column of say, 0.300 m sides = 1.200 m.
Thickness of pad base =
= 0.193 m, i.e. 200 mm.
* Punching shear is the term used to describe the situation where the side of a column meets
its support pad, i.e. immediately underneath the column as shown in Fig. 4.3.8.
COMBINED FOUNDATIONS
When designing a foundation the area of the base must be large enough to ensure
that the load per unit area does not exceed the bearing capacity of the soil upon
which it rests. The ideal situation when considering column foundations is to 
have a square base of the appropriate area, with the column positioned centrally.
Unfortunately this ideal condition is not always possible. When developing sites 
in urban areas the proposed structure is very often required to abut an existing
perimeter wall, with the proposed perimeter columns in close proximity to the
existing wall. Such a situation would result in an eccentric column loading if
conventional isolated bases were employed. One method of overcoming this
problem is to place the perimeter columns on a reinforced concrete continuous
column foundation in the form of a strip. The strip is designed as a beam 
with the columns acting as point loads, which will result in a negative bending
moment occurring between the columns, requiring top tensile reinforcement in 
the strip.
If sufﬁcient plan area cannot be achieved by using a continuous column
foundation a combined column foundation could be considered. This form 
400
1.2 × 2.5 × 690
W
Perimeter of column × 2.5 × Max. shear stress

 
244
Advanced Construction Technology
of foundation consists of a reinforced concrete slab placed at right angles to the 
line of columns, linking together an outer or perimeter column to an inner column. 
The base slab must have sufﬁcient area to ensure that the load per unit area will 
not cause overstressing of the soil, leading to unacceptable settlement. To alleviate
the possibility of eccentric loading the centres of gravity of the columns and slab
should be designed to coincide (see Fig. 4.3.9). Combined foundations of this type
are suitable for a pair of equally loaded columns or where the outer column carries
the lightest load. The effect of the column loadings on the slab foundation is similar
to that described above for continuous column foundations where a negative
bending moment will occur between the columns.
In situations where the length of the slab foundation is restricted or where 
the outer column carries the heavier load the slab plan shape can be in the form 
of a trapezium with the widest end located nearest to the more heavily loaded
column (see Fig. 4.3.9). As with the rectangular base, the trapezoidal base will have
negative bending moments between the columns, and to eliminate eccentric loading
the centres of gravity of columns and slab should coincide.
Alternative column foundations to the combined and trapezoidal forms described
above are the balanced base foundations, which can be designed in one of two
basic forms:
n Cantilever foundations.
n Balanced base foundations.
These foundations are usually speciﬁed where it is necessary to ensure that no
pressure is imposed on an existing substructure or adjacent service such as a drain
or sewer. A cantilever foundation can take two forms, both of which use a
cantilever beam, which in one case acts about a short fulcrum column positioned
near the existing structure, whereas in the alternative version the beam cantilevers
beyond a slab base (see Fig. 4.3.10).
A balanced base foundation can be considered where it is possible to place the
inner columns directly onto a base foundation. These columns are usually eccentric
on the inner base, causing within the base a tendency to rotate. This movement
must be resisted or balanced by the inner column base and the connecting beam 
(see Fig. 4.3.11).
Figure 4.3.8
Proximity of shear in foundation pads

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
245
Figure 4.3.9
Typical combined foundations

 
246
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.3.10
Typical cantilever bases

 
Subsoil analysis and foundations
247
Figure 4.3.11
Typical balanced base foundation

 
The construction of shallow single-storey basements and methods of waterprooﬁng
are considered in Chapter 2.6 of Construction Technology and Chapter 3.2 of this
volume.
One of the main concerns of the contractor and designer when constructing deep
and/or multi-storey basements is the elimination as far as practicable of the need
for temporary works such as timbering, which in this context would be extensive,
elaborate and costly. The solution is to be found in the use of diaphragm walling 
as the structural perimeter wall by constructing this ahead of the main excavation
activity or alternatively by using a reinforced concrete land sunk open caisson if the
subsoil conditions are favourable (see Fig. 3.3.10).
Diaphragm walls can be designed to act as pure cantilevers in the ﬁrst instance,
but this is an expensive and usually unnecessary method. Therefore the major
decision is one of providing temporary support until the ﬂoors, which offer lateral
restraint, can be constructed or, alternatively, providing permanent support if the
deep basement is to be constructed free of intermediate ﬂoors. Diaphragm walls 
can take the form of in-situ reinforced concrete walling installed using the bentonite
slurry trench system (see Fig. 3.2.7), contiguous piling techniques as described in
Chapter 3.1, or precast concrete units as described below.
nnn PRECAST CONCRETE DIAPHRAGM WALLS
The main concept of precast concrete diaphragm walls is based on the principles of
in-situ reinforced concrete walling installed using a bentonite slurry-ﬁlled trench but
with the advantages obtained by using factory-produced components. The wall is
constructed by forming a bentonite slurry-ﬁlled trench of suitable width and depth,
and inserting into this the precast concrete panel or posts and panels according to
the system being employed. As a normal bentonite slurry mix would not effectively
seal the joints between the precast concrete components, a special mixture of
4.4
DEEP BASEMENTS

 
Deep basements
249
bentonite and cement with a special retarder additive to control setting time is 
used. The precast units are placed into position within this mixture, which will set
sufﬁciently within a few days to enable excavation to take place within the basement
area right up to the face of the diaphragm wall. To ensure that a clean wall face is
exposed upon excavation it is usual practice to coat the proposed exposed wall faces
with a special compound to reduce adhesion between the faces of the precast
concrete units and the slurry mix.
The usual formats for precast concrete diaphragm walls are either simple 
tongue and groove jointed panels or a series of vertical posts with precast concrete
inﬁll panels, as shown in Fig. 4.4.1. If the subsoil is suitable it is possible to use a
combination of precast concrete and in-situ reinforced concrete to form a diaphragm
wall by installing precast concrete vertical posts or beams at suitable centres and
linking these together with an in-situ reinforced concrete wall constructed in 
2.000 m deep stages as shown in Fig. 4.4.2. The main advantage of this composite
walling is the greater ﬂexibility in design.
nnn CONSTRUCTION METHODS
Four basic methods can be used in the construction of deep basements without the
need for timbering or excessive subsoil support, and these can be brieﬂy described
as follows:
n A series of lattice beams are installed so that they span between the tops of
opposite diaphragm walls, enabling the walls to act initially as propped
cantilevers, receiving their ﬁnal lateral restraint when the internal ﬂoors 
have been constructed (see Fig. 4.4.3).
n The diaphragm walls are exposed by carrying out the excavation in stages, 
and ground anchors are used to stabilise the walls as the work proceeds. This 
is a very popular method where no lateral restraint in the form of ﬂoors is to 
be provided (see Fig. 4.4.3). The technique and details of ground anchor
installations are given in conjunction with prestressing systems in Chapter 10.1.
n After the perimeter diaphragm walls have been constructed, the ground ﬂoor slab
and beams are cast, providing top edge lateral restraint to the walls. An opening
is left in this initial ﬂoor slab through which operatives, materials and plant can
pass to excavate the next stage and cast the ﬂoor slab and beams. This method
can be repeated until the required depth has been reached (see Fig. 4.4.4).
n The centre area between the diaphragm walls can be excavated, leaving an 
earth mound or berm around the perimeter to support the walls while the 
lowest basement ﬂoor is constructed. Slots to accommodate raking struts acting
between the wall face and the ﬂoor slab are cut into the berm; ﬁnal excavation
and construction of the remainder of the basement can take place working
around the raking struts (see Fig. 4.4.4).
nnn WATERPROOFING BASEMENTS
Standard methods for waterprooﬁng basements such as the application of
membranes, using dense monolithic concrete structural walls and tanking

 
250
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.4.1
Typical precast concrete panel diaphragm wall details

 
Deep basements
251
Figure 4.4.2
Typical precast and in-situ concrete diaphragm wall details

 
252
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 4.4.3
Deep basement construction methods: 1

 
Deep basements
253
Figure 4.4.4
Deep basement construction methods: 2

 
254
Advanced Construction Technology
techniques using mastic asphalt, are covered in the context of single-storey
basements (see Chapter 2.6 of Construction Technology). Another method that can 
be used for waterprooﬁng basements is the drained or cavity tanking system using
special ﬂoor tiles produced by Atlas Stone Products Ltd.
DRAINED CAVITY SYSTEM
This system of waterprooﬁng is suitable for basements of any depth where there are
no intermediate ﬂoors, or where such ﬂoors are so constructed that they would not
bridge the cavity. The basic concept of this system is very simple, in that it accepts
that it is possible to have a small amount of water seepage or moisture penetration
through a dense concrete structural perimeter wall, and therefore the best method
of dealing with any such penetration is to allow it to be collected and drained away
without it reaching the interior of the building. This is achieved by constructing an
inner non-loadbearing wall to create a cavity and laying a ﬂoor consisting of precast
concrete Dryangle tiles over the structural ﬂoor of the basement. This will allow any
water trickling down the inside face of the outer wall to ﬂow beneath the ﬂoor tiles,
where it can be discharged into the surface water drains or, alternatively, pumped
into the drains if these are at a higher level than the invert of the sump. Typical
details are shown in Fig. 4.4.5.
The concrete used to form the structural basement wall should be designed 
as if it were speciﬁed for waterproof concrete, which, it must be remembered, is 
not necessarily vapourproof. All joints should be carefully designed, detailed and
constructed, including the ﬁxing of suitable water bars (see Fig. 2.6.1, Construction
Technology). It must be emphasised that the drained cavity system is designed to
deal only with seepage that may occur, and therefore the use of a dense concrete
perimeter wall is an essential component in the system. The dense concrete used in
the outer wall needs to be well vibrated to obtain maximum consolidation, and this
can usually be achieved by using poker vibrators.
The in-situ concrete used in any form of basement construction can be placed by
using chutes, pumps or tremie pipes. The placing of in-situ concrete using pumps is
covered in Chapter 2.5, dealing with contractors’ plant, but the placing of concrete
by means of a tremie pipe is considered in the section on placing concrete below
ground.
nnn BUOYANCY OR TANKED BASEMENT
Where site space permits, the building dead and imposed loading may be
distributed over sufﬁcient basement raft foundation base area to prevent undue
settlement. Multi-storey buildings on relatively small sites of restricted foundation
bearing area can still be constructed, even where the subsoil composition is unsuited
to piling techniques, or where for practical reasons piling is not viable. In these
situations it may be possible to design the basement as a huge tank on which the
building effectively ‘ﬂoats’.
In principle, the concept is to counterbalance the mass of subsoil removed for the
basement with the mass of the building in its place. Very careful design calculations

 
Deep basements
255
Figure 4.4.5
Drained cavity system of waterprooﬁng basements

 
256
Advanced Construction Technology
will be required to ensure the balance; to avoid excessive and eccentric loadings and
to allow for extraneous imposed loading including wind and snow. Generally, the
deeper the excavation the more compressed the subsoil will be and the greater its
bearing capacity. The opportunity to excavate at depth will normally enhance the
loading potential considerably, although when exposing clay subsoil there can be a
problem of it swelling as the soil above is removed. A substantial loading of in-situ
concrete will control this, the weight of which must be incorporated into the
balancing calculations.
nnn PLACING CONCRETE BELOW GROUND
A tremie pipe can be used to place in-situ concrete below the ground or water level
where segregation of the mix must be avoided, and can be used in the construction
of piled foundations, basements and diaphragm walls. For work below ground level
a rigid tube of plastic or metal can be used; alternatively a ﬂexible PVC tube can be
employed, this often being referred to as elephant trunking. In all cases the discharge
end of the tremie pipe is kept below the upper level of the concrete being placed and
the upper end of the pipe is ﬁtted with a feed hopper attachment to receive the charges
of concrete. As the level of the placed concrete rises, the tube is shortened by
removing lengths of pipe as required. The tremie pipe and its attached hopper head
must be supported as necessary throughout the entire concrete-placing operation.
Placing concrete below water level by means of a tremie pipe, very often
suspended from a crane, requires more care and skill than placing concrete below
ground level. The pipe should be of adequate diameter for the aggregates being
used, common tube diameters being 150 and 200 mm. It should be watertight and
have a smooth bore. The operational procedure is as follows:
1. The tremie pipe is positioned over the area to be concreted, and lowered until
the discharge end rests on the formation level.
2. A rabbit or travelling plug of plastic or cement bags is inserted into the top of the
pipe to act as a barrier between the water and concrete. The weight of the ﬁrst
charge concrete will force the plug out of the discharge end of the tube.
3. When ﬁlled with concrete the tremie pipe is raised so that the discharge end is
just above the formation level to allow the plug to be completely displaced and
thus enable the concrete to ﬂow.
4. Further concrete charges are introduced into the pipe and allowed to discharge
within the concrete mass already placed, the rate of ﬂow being controlled by
raising and lowering the tremie pipe.
5. As the depth of the placed concrete increases, the pipe is shortened by removing
tube sections as necessary.
When placing concrete below the water level by the tremie pipe method, great care
must be taken to ensure that the discharge end of the pipe is not withdrawn clear 
of the concrete being placed, as this could lead to a weak concrete mix by water
mixing with the concrete. One tremie pipe will cover an area of approximately 
30 m2, and if more than one tremie pipe is being used simultaneous placing is
usually recommended.

 
Deep basements
257
nnn SULPHATE-BEARING SOILS
A problem that can occur when using concrete below ground level is the
deterioration of the set cement due to sulphate attack by naturally occurring
sulphates such as calcium, magnesium and sodium sulphates, which are found
particularly in clay soils. The main factors that inﬂuence the degree of attack are:
n amount and nature of sulphate in the soil;
n level of water table and amount of groundwater movement;
n form of construction;
n type and quality of concrete.
The permanent removal of the groundwater in the vicinity of the concrete
structure is one method of limiting sulphate attack, but this is very often
impracticable and/or uneconomic. The only real alternative is to use a fully
compacted concrete of low permeability. Once the chemical reaction between 
the sulphates and the set cement has taken place, further deterioration can come
about only when fresh sulphates are brought into contact with the concrete by
groundwater movement. Therefore concrete which is situated above the water 
table is not likely to suffer to a great extent.
Generally, precast concrete components suffer less than their in-situ counterparts
because of the better control possible during casting under factory conditions.
Basement walls and similar structural members usually have to resist lateral water
pressure on one side only, which increases the risk of water penetration, and if
evaporation can occur from the inner face, sulphate attack can take place throughout
the wall thickness.
Ordinary Portland cement manufactured to the recommendations of BS EN 
197-1: Cement. Composition, speciﬁcations and conformity criteria for common cements,
usually contains a signiﬁcant amount of tricalcium aluminate, which is reacted upon
by sulphates in the soil, resulting in an expansion of the set cement, causing a
breakdown of the concrete. Sulphate-resisting Portland cement manufactured to 
the recommendations of BS 4027: Speciﬁcation for sulphate-resisting Portland cement,
has the proportion of tricalcium aluminate present limited to a maximum of 3.5%,
which will give the set cement a considerable resistance to sulphate attack. The
minimum cement content and maximum free water/cement ratio of a concrete to be
placed in a sulphate-bearing soil are related to the concentration of sulphate present
in the soil, and readers seeking further information are advised to consult the
following Building Research Establishment publications:
n BRE Report BR 164: Sulphate resistance of buried concrete.
n BRE Report BR 279: Sulphate and acid attack on concrete in the ground:
recommended procedures for soil analysis.
n BRE Information Paper IP 15/92: Assessing the risk of sulphate attack on concrete
in the ground.
n BRE Digest 276: Hardcore.
n BRE Special Digest 1: Concrete in aggressive ground.

 

 
DEMOLITION AND
TEMPORARY WORK
PART
5

 

 
All forms of shoring are temporary supports applied to a building or structure. 
The assembly and dismantling of a shoring system must comply with the
requirements of the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1996,
particularly Regulations 9 and 10. These relate to work on structures where there 
is a perceived risk of accidental collapse and danger to any person on or adjacent 
to the site. Relevant clauses relating to risk assessment also occur in the Work 
at Height Regulations 2005. Although shoring is an interim measure while a
permanent support structure is built, it can remain in place for a considerable time.
Therefore it is no less important than other aspects of construction. Regardless of
the time it is to remain in place, it must be subject to planned safety procedures 
and competent supervision during assembly, dismantling and any associated
demolition.
The following situations may justify application of shoring:
n to give support to walls that are dangerous or are likely to become unstable
because of subsidence, bulging or leaning;
n to avoid failure of sound walls caused by the removal of an underlying support,
such as where a basement is being constructed near a sound wall;
n during demolition works to give support to an adjacent building or structure;
n to support the upper part of a wall during formation of a large opening in the
lower section of the wall;
n to give support to a ﬂoor or roof to enable a support wall to be removed and
replaced by a beam.
Structural softwood is the usual material used for shoring members; its strength
to weight ratio compares favourably with that of structural steel, and its adaptability
is superior to that of steel. Shoring arrangements can also be formed by coupling
together groups of scaffold tubulars.
5.1
SHORING

 
262
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn SHORING SYSTEMS
There are three basic shoring systems:
n dead shoring;
n raking shoring;
n ﬂying shoring.
Each shoring system has its own function to perform and is based upon the
principles of a perfectly symmetrical situation. The simplest example is shown in
Fig. 5.1.1. A single raker and short wall plank or binding combine with a sole plate
and needle and cleat at the top. The sole plate is set in the ground and inclined at a
slightly acute angle to the raker. This allows the raker to be levered and tightened 
in place with a crowbar before securing with cleats and dogs.
Where ﬂying shores are required, the disposition of buildings does not always
lend itself to symmetrical arrangements. Some asymmetrical examples are shown 
in Fig. 5.1.2. See Figs 5.1.6 and 5.1.7 for details of regularly disposed ﬂying shore
components.
DEAD SHORING
This type of shoring is used to support dead loads that act vertically downwards. 
In its simplest form it consists of a vertical prop or shore leg with a head plate, sole
plate and some means of adjustment for tightening and easing the shore. The usual
arrangement is to use two shore legs connected over their heads by a horizontal
beam or needle. The loads are transferred by the needle to the shore legs and hence
down to a solid bearing surface. It may be necessary to remove pavings and cut
holes in suspended timber ﬂoors to reach a suitable bearing surface; if a basement is
encountered, a third horizontal member called a transom will be necessary, because
it is impracticable to manipulate a shore leg through two storeys. A typical example
of this situation is shown in Fig. 5.1.3.
Figure 5.1.1
Single raking shore and base tightening process

 
Shoring
263
Figure 5.1.2
Shoring arrangements

 
264
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 5.1.3
Dead shoring

 
Shoring
265
The sequence of operations necessary for a successful dead shoring arrangement
is as follows:
1. Carry out a thorough site investigation to determine:
n number of shores required, by ascertaining possible loadings and window
positions;
n bearing capacity of soil and ﬂoors;
n location of underground services that may have to be avoided or bridged.
2. Fix ceiling struts between suitable head and sole plates to relieve the wall of ﬂoor
and roof loads. The struts should be positioned as close to the wall as practicable.
3. Strut all window openings within the vicinity of the shores to prevent movement
or distortion of the opening. The usual method is to place timber plates against
the external reveals and strut between them; in some cases it may be necessary 
to remove the window frame to provide sufﬁcient bearing surface for the plates.
4. Cut holes through the wall slightly larger in size than the needles.
5. Cut holes through ceilings and ﬂoors for the shore legs.
6. Position and level sleepers on a ﬁrm base, removing pavings if necessary.
7. Erect, wedge and secure shoring arrangements.
Upon completion of the builder’s work it is advisable to leave the shoring in
position for at least seven days before easing the supports, to ensure the new 
work has gained sufﬁcient strength to be self-supporting.
RAKING SHORING
This shoring arrangement transfers the ﬂoor and wall loads to the ground by 
means of sloping struts or rakers. It is very important that the rakers are positioned
correctly so that they are capable of receiving maximum wall and ﬂoor loads. 
The centreline of the raker should intersect with the centrelines of the wall or 
ﬂoor bearing; common situations are detailed in Fig. 5.1.4. One raker for each 
ﬂoor is required and ideally should be at an angle of between 40° and 70° with the
horizontal; therefore the number of rakers that can be used is generally limited to
three. A four-storey building can be shored by this method if an extra member,
called a rider, is added (see Fig. 5.1.5).
The operational sequence for erecting raking shoring is as follows:
1. Carry out site investigation as described for dead shoring.
2. Mark out and cut mortises and housings in wall plate.
3. Set out and cut holes for needles in external wall.
4. Excavate to a ﬁrm bearing subsoil and lay grillage platform and sole plate.
5. Cut and erect rakers, commencing with the bottom shore. A notch is cut in the
heel so that a crowbar can be used to lever the raker down the sole plate and thus
tighten the shore (see Fig. 5.1.1). The angle between sole plate and shores should
be at its maximum about 89° to ensure that the tangent point is never reached
and not so acute that levering is impracticable.
6. Fix cleats, distance blocks, binding and if necessary cross-bracing over the backs
of the shores.

 
266
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 5.1.4
Raking shore intersections

 
Shoring
267
Figure 5.1.5
Typical multiple raking shore

 
268
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 5.1.6
Typical single ﬂying shore

 
Shoring
269
FLYING SHORING
These shores fulﬁl the same functions as a raking shore but have the advantage 
of providing a clear working space under the shoring. They can be used between
any parallel wall surfaces provided the span is not in excess of 12.000 m, when the
arrangement would become uneconomic. Short spans up to 9.000 m usually have a
single horizontal member, whereas the larger spans require two horizontal shores to
keep the section sizes within the timber range commercially available (see Figs 5.1.6
and 5.1.7).
It is possible with all forms of shoring to build up the principal members from
smaller sections by using bolts and timber connectors, ensuring all butt joints are
well staggered to give adequate rigidity. This is in effect a crude form of laminated
timber construction.
The site operations for the setting out and erection of a ﬂying shoring system are
similar to those listed for raking shoring.

 
270
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 5.1.7
Typical double ﬂying shore

 
This is a skilled and sometimes dangerous operation and unless of a very small
nature should be entrusted to a specialist contractor. Demolition of a building or
structure can be considered under two headings:
n taking down or removals: partial demolition of a structure;
n demolition: complete removal of a structure.
Before any taking down or demolition is commenced it is usual to remove carefully
all saleable items such as copper, lead, steel ﬁttings, domestic ﬁttings, windows,
doors and frames (see subsection on salvaging).
Taking down requires a thorough knowledge of building construction and 
design so that loadbearing members and walls can be correctly identiﬁed and
adequately supported by struts, props and suitable shoring. Most partial demolition
works will need to be carried out manually using hand tools such as picks and
hammers. These operations usually relate to the removal of small parts of a
building, such as brickwork to form a new opening or roofwork alterations to 
create dormer windows.
nnn PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS
SURVEY
Before any works of demolition are started, a detailed survey and examination
should be made of the building or structure and its curtilage. Photographs 
of any existing defects on adjacent properties should be taken, witnessed and 
stored in a safe place. The relationship and condition of adjoining properties 
that may be affected by the demolition should also be considered and noted, 
taking into account the existence of easements, wayleaves, party rights and
boundary walls.
5.2
DEMOLITION

 
272
Advanced Construction Technology
n Roofs and framed structures
Check whether proposed order of demolition
will cause unbalanced thrusts to occur.
n Walls
Check whether these are loadbearing, party or cross-walls. Examine
condition and thickness of walls to be demolished and of those to be retained.
n Basements
Careful examination required to determine whether these extend
under public footpaths or beyond boundary of site.
n Cantilevers
Check nature of support to balconies, heavy cornices and stairs.
n Services
These may have to be sealed off, protected or removed, and could
include any or all of the following:
n drainage runs;
n electricity cables;
n gas mains and service pipes;
n water mains and service pipes;
n telephone cables above and below ground level;
n radio and television relay cables;
n district heating mains.
A careful survey of the whole site is advisable to ensure that any hazardous,
ﬂammable or explosive materials such as oil drums and gas cylinders are removed
before the demolition work commences. If the method of construction of the
existing structure is at all uncertain all available drawings should be carefully
studied and analysed; alternatively a detailed survey of the building should be
conducted under the guidance of an experienced surveyor.
INSURANCE
Insurance companies and their underwriters will regard demolition work as
particularly hazardous. Any aspect of demolition is normally contracted out 
to specialists, as it may not be included under a general contractor’s insurance 
policy. Even minor work such as removals may not be included. Therefore, 
where demolition or removals form part of a work contract, general builders 
should ensure that adequate insurance is in place to cover all risks, including 
claims from operatives and other parties to the work. Insurance will also be 
required for any other third party risk, including cover for any claim for loss 
or damage to property, business, public utilities and local authority maintained
roads and paving.
SALVAGING
This is otherwise known as salving or recycling of materials. Old building materials
can often be sold, as they are sometimes preferred to new materials. For example,
when constructing an extension to an existing building, salvaged roof tiles if
matched well will immediately mellow in and be less contrasting than new. They
will also be less expensive than new, unless they are rare because of discontinued
manufacture. Other examples of building items of value include ﬁreplaces, rooﬁng
slates, stairways, London stock bricks and useful lengths of structural timber.

 
Demolition
273
Architectural salvage is now a signiﬁcant business, responsible for the preservation
and reuse of much of the featurework from our old buildings.
When quoting for demolition work, contractors will consider the salvage
potential. However, there will be a calculated balance between the time and cost
factors for careful reclamation, transporting, cleaning, preparing and marketing old
materials for resale, against simply demolishing without regard. The latter will still
require transportation of surplus materials from site, as well as attracting tipping
costs at licensed receivers.
HOARDINGS
A site survey will determine whether the location justiﬁes special protection 
for adjoining properties, public highways or other places used by the general 
public. Consultation with the local authority will be required to determine their
requirements for temporary works, not least the health and safety aspects. The local
authority usually requires a formal application, licensing fees and possibly ﬁnancial
deposits against damages, particularly if the work abuts a public thoroughfare and
highway. Some examples of standard boarded and fan hoardings are included under
the section on security and protection in Chapter 1.2 of Construction Technology.
ASBESTOS SURVEY
In the UK there are many laws and regulations relating to the use and handling 
of asbestos. This is understandable, because inhaled asbestos ﬁbres may be
carcinogenic, in time manifesting as a form of cancer of the lungs. Much of our
existing building stock contains large quantities of asbestos. It was originally used 
in ignorance of its latent effect on personal health, often sprayed onto steelwork as
ﬁre protection, used as a pipe insulation and in board form as a cladding or lining.
Therefore, before altering or demolishing buildings, it is essential that an asbestos
appraisal is undertaken to assess whether there is a risk to operatives. The Health
and Safety at Work etc. Act is the principal statute, under which there are
numerous supplementary regulations and advisory papers, including:
n The Asbestos (Licensing) Regulations 1983. These require a licence to be 
held by an employer carrying out work on sprayed and other asbestos-ﬁnished
coatings, and where asbestos insulating board is used.
n The Control of Asbestos at Work Regulations 2002. These relate to all work 
with asbestos, and affect anyone liable to exposure. The regulations have a
speciﬁc requirement for identiﬁcation and management of asbestos products 
in non-domestic buildings. This provides for maintenance of records
documenting up-to-date specialist surveys for location, condition and 
assessment of exposure risk.
n See also the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) publications Methods 
for the Determination of Hazardous Substances (MDHS 100); Surveying, 
sampling and assessment of asbestos containing materials – 2001. Contact
www.hsebooks.co.uk.

 
274
Advanced Construction Technology
Depending on the intended course of action, asbestos surveys can be categorised
generally, as:
n A presumptive survey
This involves a visual inspection of the premises to
locate and identify all materials that could contain asbestos materials. This survey
is mainly for the beneﬁt of building owners and facilities managers. They will
have the responsibility for ensuring that asbestos products are maintained in a
manner harmless to the building occupants.
n A sampling survey
This survey is usually provided as a supplement 
to a presumptive survey for positively identifying the nature of asbestos 
in suspected materials. Where possible asbestos-containing materials are 
known to be located in inaccessible areas, they are assumed to be a health risk.
Note: Some established types of asbestos now banned under the Asbestos
(Prohibition) Regulations 1999 are named as chrysotile, amphibole, amosite 
and crocidolite.
n Sampling and identiﬁcation survey
This type of survey is required before
demolition and refurbishment work commences. It can be used as a basis for
specialist contractors to tender for asbestos removal. Accessibility to all parts 
of the building is essential to obtain material samples for laboratory analysis 
and for destruction testing on site.
Note: The Personal Protective Equipment Regulations 1992 and the Control of
Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 require employers to ensure that
their employees are appropriately dressed and protected when working with or in
the presence of materials posing a potential health risk. For asbestos surveys and
removals, dress requirements will necessitate total isolation by means of disposable
outer protective clothing and respiratory equipment.
nnn STATUTORY NOTICES
Under the Public Health Act 1961, the local authority for the area in England or
Wales must be notiﬁed before any demolition work can be started by the building
owner or their agent. In the Inner London area there are by-laws relating to the
demolition of buildings, and they require notiﬁcation to be deposited with the
district surveyor. In Scotland a warrant is required from the building authority of
the burgh or county in which the proposed demolition work is to take place. It is
also necessary in Great Britain to inform the Health and Safety Executive of the
local authority or the appropriate area authority applicable under the Health and
Safety at Work etc. Act 1974.
Prior to the commencement of any demolition work the building owner or their
agent must notify the public utilities companies, i.e. the gas, electricity, water and
drainage authorities, the telecommunications services, and the associated companies
responsible for other installations such as radio and cable television relay lines. 
Note that it is the contractor’s responsibility to ensure that all services and other
installations have been rendered safe or removed by the authority or company
concerned.

 
Demolition
275
nnn SUPERVISION AND SAFETY
Regulations 7 to 11 of the Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) 
Regulations 1996 relate speciﬁcally to safety measures applied to buildings 
subject to dismantling and demolition. This high-risk activity must be undertaken
in a safe manner, requiring thorough planning and organisation. It must be
supervised by a competent person to ensure that no one is exposed to unnecessary
danger. The supervisor must be experienced in the type of demolition concerned,
and where more than one contractor is involved each must appoint a competent
supervisor.
A systematic planned approach is endorsed by Regulation 6 of the Work 
at Height Regulations 2005. Speciﬁc reference is made to an employer’s 
and self-employed person’s responsibility to undertake a risk assessment 
under Regulation 3 of the Management of Health and Safety at Work 
Regulations 1999.
FURTHER PLANNING AND RISK CONSIDERATIONS
n Method of construction of the building and the structural interdependence and
integrity of elements of construction.
n Type of materials used, their strengths and weaknesses, their potential as a health
and safety hazard (see subsection on asbestos survey) and the possibility for
reclamation and reuse (see subsection on salvaging).
n Whether the demolition is full or partial. Occasionally, facades are retained as
part of a preservation order: therefore temporary supports may be required 
(see Chapter 5.1 on shoring).
n Need to isolate the effects of demolition. This may include measures to prevent
dust and debris spilling onto a public thoroughfare and into the curtilage of
adjacent buildings. Means for protection to be considered, e.g. dust sheeting 
and hoardings.
n Exposure of contaminants. In addition to hazardous materials used in the
construction process, there may be contamination of the land from previous
occupancies. Consider extraction of soil samples for laboratory analysis.
n Location and isolation of all existing services to the site and inform relevant
supplier. See listing on page 271.
n Local planning authority and Health and Safety Executive requirements and
restrictions on hours and days of work. Also, determine acceptable noise and 
dust levels.
n Handling and disposal methods for debris. See section on rubble chutes 
and skips.
nnn METHODS OF DEMOLITION
There are several methods of demolition, and the choice is usually determined by:
n Type of structure
For example, two-storey framed structure, reinforced
concrete chimney.

 
276
Advanced Construction Technology
n Type of construction
For example, masonry wall, prestressed concrete,
structural steelwork.
n Location of site
For example, a detached building on an isolated site, which
is deﬁned as a building on a site where the minimum distance to the boundary is
greater than twice the height of the building to be demolished. A conﬁned site is
one where not all the boundaries are at a distance exceeding twice the height of
the building to be demolished.
Every site is unique, and it must be assessed with particular regard to selection of
demolition technique. Methods vary, and the procedures given below are included
for general guidance.
HAND DEMOLITION
This involves the progressive demolition of a structure by operatives using hand-
held tools; lifting appliances may be used to hoist and lower members or materials
once they have been released. Buildings are usually demolished, by this method, 
in the reverse order to that of their construction storey by storey. Debris should 
be allowed to fall freely only where the horizontal distance from the point of fall 
to the public highway or an adjoining property is greater than 6.000 m, or half the
height from which the debris is dropped, whichever is the greater. In all other 
cases a chute or skip should be used.
PUSHER ARM DEMOLITION
This is a method of progressive demolition using a machine ﬁtted with a steel
pusher arm exerting a horizontal thrust on to the building fabric. This method
should be used only when the machine can be operated from a ﬁrm level base 
with a clear operating base of at least 6.000 m. The height of the building should be
reduced by hand demolition if necessary to ensure that the height above the pusher
arm does not exceed 600 mm. The pusher arm should not be overloaded, and
generally should be operated from outside the building. An experienced operator 
is required, who should work from within a robust cab capable of withstanding 
the impact of ﬂying debris and ﬁtted with shatterproof glass cab windows. Where
this method of demolition is adopted in connection with attached buildings, the
structure to be demolished should ﬁrst be detached from the adjoining structure 
by hand demolition techniques.
DELIBERATE COLLAPSE DEMOLITION
This method involves the removal of key structural members, causing complete
collapse of the whole or part of the building. Expert engineering advice should be
obtained before this method is used. It should be used only on detached isolated
buildings on reasonably level sites so that the safety to personnel can be carefully
controlled.

 
Demolition
277
DEMOLITION BALL TECHNIQUES
This method of progressive demolition is carried out by swinging a weight or
demolition ball, suspended from a lifting appliance such as a crane, against the
fabric of the structure. Three techniques can be used:
n vertical drop;
n swinging in line with the jib;
n slewing jib.
Whichever method is used, a skilled operator is essential.
The use of a demolition ball from a normal-duty mobile crane should be 
conﬁned to the vertical drop technique only. A heavy-duty machine such as a
convertible dragline excavator should be used for the other techniques, but in all
cases an anti-spin device should be attached to the hoist rope. It is advisable to
reduce the length of the crane jib as the demolition work proceeds, but at no 
time should the jib head be less than 3.000 m above the part of the building 
being demolished.
Pitched roofs should be removed by hand demolition down to wall plate level
and at least 50–70% of the internal ﬂooring removed to allow for the free fall of
debris within the building enclosure. Demolition should then proceed progressively
storey by storey.
Demolition ball techniques should not be used on buildings over 30.000 m high,
because the fall of debris is uncontrollable. Attached buildings should be separated
from the adjoining structure by hand demolition to leave a space of at least 6.000 m,
or half the height of the building, whichever is the greater; a similar clear space is
required around the perimeter of the building to give the machine operating space.
WIRE ROPE PULLING DEMOLITION
Only steel wire ropes should be used, and the size should be adequate for the
purpose, but in no case less than 38 mm circumference. The rope should be ﬁrmly
attached at both ends and the pulling tension gradually applied. No person should
be forward of the winch or on either side of the rope within a distance of three-
quarters of the length between the winch and the building being demolished.
If, after several pulls, the method does not cause collapse of the structure it may
have been weakened and should not therefore be approached, but demolished by an
alternative means such as a demolition ball or a pusher arm. A well-anchored winch
or heavy vehicle should be used to apply the pulling force, great care being taken to
ensure that the winch or the vehicle does not lift off its mounting, wheels or tracks.
DEMOLITION BY EXPLOSIVES
This is a specialist method where charges of explosives are placed within the fabric
of the structure and detonated to cause partial or complete collapse. It should never
be attempted by a building contractor without the advice and supervision of an
expert.

 
278
Advanced Construction Technology
OTHER METHODS
Where site conditions are not suitable for the use of explosives, the following
specialist methods can be considered:
n Gas expansion burster
A steel cylinder containing a liqueﬁed gas, which
expands with great force when subjected to an electric charge, is inserted into a
prepared cavity in the fabric to be demolished. On being ﬁred, the expansion of
the cylinder causes the fabric mass to be broken into fragments.
n Hydraulic burster
This consists of a steel cylinder with a number of pistons,
which are forced out radially under hydraulic pressure.
n Thermal reaction
A structural steel member that is to be cut out and
removed is surrounded by a mixture of a metal oxide and a reducing agent. This
covering is ignited, usually by an electric current, which results in the liberation
of a large quantity of heat, causing the steel to become plastic. A small force 
such as a wire rope attached to a winch will be sufﬁcient to cause collapse of 
the member.
n Thermic lance
This method involves a steel tube, sometimes packed with
steel rods, through which oxygen is passed. The tip of the lance is preheated by
conventional means to melting point (approximately 1,000 °C) when the supply
of oxygen is introduced. This sets up a thermochemical reaction giving a
temperature of around 3,500 °C at the reaction end, which will melt all the
materials normally encountered, causing very little damage to surrounding
materials.
The dangers and risks encountered with any demolition works cannot be
overemphasised, and all builders should seek the advice of and employ specialist
contractors to carry out all but the simple demolition tasks.
See also BS 6187: Code of practice for demolition.
nnn RUBBLE CHUTES AND SKIPS
RUBBLE CHUTES
In principle and original concept, these are reputed to derive from bottomless refuse
containers strung together with a central core of rope. Purpose-made developments
are produced from reinforced rubber, usually in effective lengths of 1.000 m (actual
unit length is 1.100 m), to suspend collectively from a building or scaffold system
and provide safe conveyance of waste materials to a suitable discharge point or 
skip receptacle.
Proprietary chute units typically taper from 510 mm diameter down to 380 mm
diameter and have internal ribbing to resist wear and abrasion. Each unit is ﬁtted
with two uppermost brackets on opposing sides for chain link retention and ﬁxing
of adjacent sections. Figure 5.2.1 shows a typical standard unit with variations
having a reinforcing ring (use every sixth section), side entry and hopper
attachments. Figure 5.2.2 shows the application to a building, with material
discharge to a skip placed at ground level.

 
Demolition
279
Figure 5.2.1
Typical rubble chute details
SKIPS OR DUMPSTERS
Skips are manufactured from mild steel sheet with welded box sections and 
angles to provide ribbed reinforcement and rigidity. They are produced in a wide
range of sizes as rubbish/demolition material receptacles to suit all applications
from minor domestic work to major demolition contracts. Skip capacities can 
be categorised:

 
280
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 5.2.2
Rubble chute and skip
n mini:
1.5 to 2.5 m3
n midi:
3.0 to 4.0 m3
n builders:
4.5 to 30 m3
Skips are hired out on the basis of a delivery and removal charge, plus a nominal
rent for each day the skip remains on site. The removal charge will reﬂect the fee
levied to the skip contractor for tipping at licensed ﬁll sites. The local authority
highways department and the local police must be consulted if the skip is to occupy
all or part of the road and/or pavement. Permission to encroach onto the highway
may be granted subject to suitable lighting being provided, an alternative temporary
walkway, if required, and payment of a fee and deposit against damage to the
highway. Provision of temporary trafﬁc control lights may also be necessary.

 
PORTAL FRAMES
PART
6

 

 
A portal frame may be deﬁned as a continuous or rigid frame that has the basic
characteristic of a rigid or restrained joint between the supporting member or
column and the spanning member or beam. The object of this continuity of 
the portal frame is to reduce the bending moment in the spanning member by
allowing the frame to act as one structural entity, thus distributing the stresses
throughout the frame.
If a conventional simply supported beam was used (over a large span) an
excessive bending moment would occur at mid-span, which would necessitate 
a deep heavy beam or a beam shaped to give a large cross-section at mid-span.
Alternatively a deep cross-member of lattice struts and ties could be used. The 
main advantage of the simply supported frame lies in the fact that the column
loading is for all practicable purposes axial, and therefore no bending is induced
into the supporting members, which may well ease design problems because it
would be statically determinate, but does not necessarily produce an economic
structure. Furthermore, the use of a portal frame eliminates the need for a lattice 
of struts and ties within the roof space, giving a greater usable volume to the
structure and generally a more pleasing internal appearance.
The transfer of stresses from the beam to the column in rigid frames will 
require special care in the design of the joint between the members; similarly 
the horizontal thrust and/or rotational movement at the foundation connection
needs careful consideration. Methods used to overcome excessive forces at the
foundation are:
n reliance on the passive pressure of the soil surrounding the foundation;
n inclined foundations so that the curve of pressure is normal to the upper surface,
thus tending to induce only compressive forces;
n a tie bar or beam between opposite foundations;
n introducing a hinge or pin joint where the column connects to the foundation.
6.1
PORTAL FRAME THEORY

 
284
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn HINGES
Portal frames of moderate height and span are usually connected directly to their
foundation bases, forming rigid or unrestrained joints. The rotational movement
caused by wind pressures tending to move the frames and horizontal thrusts of 
the frame loadings is generally resisted by the size of the base and the passive earth
pressures. When the frames start to exceed 4.000 m in height and 15.000 m in 
span the introduction of a hinged or pin joint at the base connection should be
considered.
A hinge is a device that will allow free rotation to take place at the point of 
ﬁxity but at the same time will transmit both load and shear from one member 
to another. They are sometimes called pin joints, unrestrained joints or non-rigid
joints. Because no bending moment is transmitted through a hinged joint the 
design is simpliﬁed by the structural connection becoming statically determinate. 
In practice it is not always necessary to provide a true ‘pivot’ where a hinge is
included, but to provide just enough movement to ensure that the rigidity at 
the connection is low enough to overcome the tendency of rotational movement.
Hinges can be introduced into a portal frame design at the base connections 
and at the centre or apex of the spanning member, giving three basic forms of 
portal frame:
n Fixed or rigid portal frame
All connections between frame members 
are rigid. This will give bending moments of lower magnitude more evenly
distributed than other forms. Used for small to medium-size frames where 
the moments transferred to the foundations will not be excessive.
n Two-pin portal frame
In this form of frame, hinges are used at the base
connections to eliminate the tendency of the base to rotate. The bending
moments resisted by the supporting members will be greater than those
encountered in the rigid portal frame. Main use is where high base moments 
and weak ground conditions are encountered.
n Three-pin portal frame
This form of frame has hinged joints at the base
connections and at the centre of the spanning member. The effect of the third
hinge is to reduce the bending moments in the spanning member but to increase
deﬂection. To overcome this latter disadvantage a deeper beam must be used or,
alternatively, the spanning member must be given a moderate pitch to raise the
apex well above the eaves level. Two other advantages of the three-pin portal
frame are that the design is simpliﬁed because the frame is statically determinate
and, on site, they are easier to erect, particularly when preformed in sections.
A comparison of the bending moment diagrams for roof loads of the three forms
of portal frame with a simply supported beam are shown in Fig. 6.1.1.
Another form of rigid frame is the arch rib frame, which is not strictly a 
portal frame as it has no supporting members. The main design objective is to
design the arch to follow the curve of pressure, thus creating a state of no bending
when subjected to a uniformly distributed load. Any moments encountered with
this form of frame are generally those induced by wind pressures. Hinges may 
be used in the same positions for the same reasons as described above for the

 
Portal frame theory
285
Figure 6.1.1
Portal frames: comparison of bending moments

 
286
Advanced Construction Technology
conventional portal frames. The arch rib rigid frame is very often used where
laminated timber is the structural material.
Most portal frames are made under factory-controlled conditions off site, which
gives good dimensional and quality control but can create transportation problems.
To lessen this problem and that of site erection, splices may be used. These can be
positioned at the points of contraﬂexure (see Fig. 6.1.1), at the junction between
spanning and supporting members and at the crown or apex of the beam. Most
hinges or pin joints provide a point at which the continuity of fabrication is broken.
Portal frames constructed of steel, concrete or timber can take the form of the
usual roof proﬁles used for single- or multi-span buildings such as ﬂat, pitched,
northlight, monitor and arch. Examples of northlight and monitor roofs are shown 
in Chapter 11.1. The frames are generally connected over the spanning members
with purlins designed to carry and accept the ﬁxing of lightweight insulated roof
coverings or deckings. The walls can be of similar material ﬁxed to sheeting rails
attached to the supporting members or alternatively clad with brick or inﬁll panels.

 
Concrete portal frames are invariably manufactured from high-quality precast
concrete suitably reinforced. In common with all precast concrete components 
for buildings, rapid advances in design and use were made after the Second World
War, mainly because of the shortage of steel and timber that prevailed at that time.
Now that the use of steel and timber is less restricted, reinforced concrete portal
frames for new work is less common. In the main the use of precast concrete portal
frames is conﬁned to low-pitch (4° to 221/2°) single-span frames, but two-storey 
and multi-span frames are available, giving a wide range of designs from only a few
standard components.
The frames are generally designed to carry a lightweight (35 kg/m2 maximum)
roof sheeting or decking ﬁxed to precast concrete purlins. Most designs have 
an allowance for snow loading of up to 150 kg/m2 in addition to that allowed for 
the dead load of the roof covering. Wall ﬁnishes can be varied and intermixed
because they are non-loadbearing and therefore have to provide only the degree 
of resistance required for ﬁre, thermal and sound insulation, act as a barrier to the
elements, and resist positive and negative wind pressures. Sheet claddings are 
ﬁxed in the traditional manner, using hook bolts and purlins; sheet wall claddings
are ﬁxed in a similar manner to sheeting rails of precast concrete or steel spanning
between or over the supporting members. Brick or block wall panels either of solid
or cavity construction can be built off a ground beam constructed between the
foundation bases; alternatively they can be built off the reinforced concrete ground
ﬂoor slab. Remember that all such claddings must comply with any relevant
building regulations, which will vary depending on whether the end use is for
industrial, commercial, storage or agricultural purposes.
nnn FOUNDATIONS AND FIXINGS
The foundations for a precast concrete portal frame usually consist of a reinforced
concrete isolated base or pad designed to suit loading and ground-bearing
6.2
CONCRETE PORTAL FRAMES

 
288
Advanced Construction Technology
conditions. The frame can be connected to the foundations by a variety of 
methods:
n Pocket connection
The foot of the supporting member is located and housed
in a void or pocket formed in the base so that there is an all-round clearance of
25 mm to allow for plumbing and ﬁnal adjustment before the column is grouted
into the foundation base.
n Baseplate connection
A steel baseplate is welded to the main reinforcement
of the supporting member, or alternatively it could be cast into the column using
ﬁxing lugs welded to the back of the baseplate. Holding-down bolts are cast into
the foundation base; the erection and ﬁxing procedure follows that described for
structural steelwork (see Chapter 10.5 of Construction Technology).
n Pin joint or hinge connection
A special base or bearing plate is bolted to the
foundation, and the mechanical connection is made when the frames are erected
(see Fig. 6.2.4).
The choice of connection method depends largely upon the degree of ﬁxity required
and the method adopted by the manufacturer of the particular system.
nnn ADVANTAGES
The main advantages to using precast concrete portal frames are as follows:
n Factory production will result in accurate and predictable components because
the criteria for design, quality and workmanship recommended in BS 8110:
Structural use of concrete can be more accurately controlled under factory
conditions than casting components in situ.
n Most manufacturers produce a standard range of interchangeable components
that, within the limitations of their systems, gives a well-balanced and ﬂexible
design range covering most roof proﬁles, single-span frames, multi-span frames
and lean-to roof attachments. By adopting this limited range of members the
producers of precast portal frames can offer their products at competitive rates
coupled with reasonable delivery periods.
n Maintenance of precast concrete frames is not usually required unless the
building owner chooses to paint or clad the frames.
n Precast dense concrete products have an inherent resistance to ﬁre, and therefore
it is not usually necessary to provide further ﬁre-resistant treatment. However,
the amount of reinforcement concrete cover will vary depending on the ﬁre
resistance required – see Approved Document B, Building Regulations to
ascertain purpose grouping. For industrial premises the ﬁre resistance is unlikely
to be less than 2 hours, which will justify a minimum of 35 and 50 mm concrete
cover for column and beam components respectively.
n The wind resistance of precast concrete portal frames to both positive and
negative pressures is such that wind bracing is not usually required.
n Where members of the frame are joined or spliced together the connections are
generally mechanical (nut and bolt), and therefore the erection and jointing can
be carried out by semi-skilled operatives.

 
Concrete portal frames
289
n In most cases the foundation design, setting out and construction can be carried
out by the portal frame supplier or their nominated subcontractor.
Typical details of single-span frames, multi-span frames, cladding supports,
splicing and hinges are shown in Figs 6.2.1 to 6.2.4.

 
290
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 6.2.1
Typical single-span PCC frame

 
Concrete portal frames
291
Figure 6.2.2
Typical multi-span precast concrete portal frame

 
292
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 6.2.3
Typical splice details for PCC portal frames

 
Concrete portal frames
293
Figure 6.2.4
Typical hinge details for PCC portal frames

 
Steel portal frames can be fabricated from standard universal beam, column and box
sections. Alternatively a lattice construction of ﬂats, angles or tubulars can be used.
Most forms of roof proﬁles can be designed and constructed, giving a competitive
range when compared with other materials used in portal frame construction. The
majority of systems employ welding techniques for the fabrication of components,
which are joined together on site using bolts or welding. An alternative system uses
special knee joint, apex joint and base joint components, which are joined on site to
square-cut standard beam or column sections supplied by the main contractor or by
the manufacturer producing the jointing pieces.
The frames are designed to carry lightweight roof coverings of the same loading
conditions as those given previously for precast concrete portal frames. Similarly,
wall claddings can be of the same speciﬁcation as for precast concrete portal frames
and ﬁxed in the same manner. Part L2 of the Building Regulations must be
observed if thermal insulation requirements apply (may not be applicable for
unheated storage-only facilities). If the building’s use, irrespective of the framing
material, is for an industrial process, the structure will have to comply with Part B
to the Building Regulations: Fire Safety. The roof may also require purpose-made
vents to relieve smoke logging and to reduce temperatures to ease ﬁreﬁghting access
(see Chapter 11.1).
nnn FOUNDATIONS AND FIXINGS
The foundation is usually a reinforced concrete isolated base or pad foundation
designed to suit loading and ground-bearing conditions. The connection of the
frame to the foundation can be by one of three basic methods:
n Pocket connection
The foot of the supporting member is inserted and
grouted into a pocket formed in the concrete foundation, as described for precast
6.3
STEEL PORTAL FRAMES

 
Steel portal frames
295
concrete portal frames. To facilitate levelling some designs have gussets welded
to the ﬂanges of the columns, as shown in Fig. 6.3.1.
n Baseplate connection
Traditional structural steelwork column to foundation
connection using a slab or a gusset base ﬁxed to a reinforced concrete foundation
with cast-in holding-down bolts (see Chapter 10.5 of Construction Technology).
n Pin or hinge connection
Special bearing plates designed to accommodate
true pin or rocker devices are ﬁxed by holding-down bolts to the concrete
foundation to give the required low degree of rigidity at the connection.
nnn ADVANTAGES
The main advantages of factory-controlled production are a standard range of
manufacturer’s systems, a frame of good wind resistance, and the fact that the ease
of site assembly using semi-skilled operatives attributed to precast concrete portal
frames can be equally applied to steel portal frames. A further advantage of steel 
is that, generally, the overall dead load of a steel portal frame is less than that of 
a comparable precast concrete portal frame. However, steel has the disadvantage 
of being a corrosive material, which will require a long-life protection of a patent
coating or regular protective maintenance, generally by the application of coats 
of paint. Steel has a lower ﬁre resistance than precast concrete, but if the frame is
for a single-storey building structural ﬁre protection may not be required under 
the Building Regulations (see Approved Document B). It depends very much on
the purpose group or function of the building and the amount of space it occupies.
However, the building’s insurers usually require more effective ﬁre protection than
that determined by current building legislation, and may apply the Loss Prevention
Certiﬁcation Board’s Loss Prevention Standards (Fire and Security). Typical details 
of steel portal frames, cladding ﬁxings, splicing and hinges are shown in Figs 6.3.1
to 6.3.3.

 
296
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 6.3.1
Typical steel portal frame details

 
Steel portal frames
297
Figure 6.3.2
Typical steel portal frames

 
298
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 6.3.3
Steel portal frames: splices and hinges

 
Timber portal frames can be manufactured by several methods, which produce a
light, strong frame of pleasing appearance that renders them suitable for buildings
such as churches, halls and gymnasiums where clear space and appearance are
important. The common methods used are glued laminated portal frames, 
plywood-faced portal frames, and timber portal frames using solid members
connected together with plywood gussets.
nnn GLUED LAMINATED PORTAL FRAMES
The main objective of forming a laminated member consisting of glued layers 
of thin-section timber members is to obtain an overall increase in strength of 
the complete component compared with that which could be expected from a
similar-sized solid section of a particular species of timber. This type of portal
frame is usually manufactured by a specialist ﬁrm, because the jigs required 
would be too costly for small outputs. The selection of suitable-quality softwoods 
of the right moisture content is also important for a successful design. In common
with other timber portal frames, these can be fully rigid, two- or three-pin
structures.
Site work is simple, consisting of connecting the foot of the supporting member
to the metal shoe ﬁxing or to a pivot housing bolted to the concrete foundation 
and connecting the joint at the apex or crown with a bolt ﬁxing or a hinge device.
Most glued laminated timber portal frames are fabricated in two halves, which eases
transportation problems and gives maximum usage of the assembly jigs. The frames
can be linked together at roof level with timber purlins and clad with a lightweight
sheeting or decking; alternatively, they may be ﬁnished with traditional roof
coverings. Any form of walling can be used in conjunction with these frames
provided such walling forms comply with any of the applicable Building
Regulations. Typical details are shown in Fig. 6.4.1.
6.4
TIMBER PORTAL FRAMES

 
300
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 6.4.1
Typical glued laminated portal frame

 
Timber portal frames
301
nnn PLYWOOD-FACED PORTAL FRAMES
These frames are suitable for small halls, churches and schools with spans in the
region of 9.000 m. The portal frames are in essence boxed beams, consisting of 
a skeleton core of softwood members faced on both sides with plywood, which 
takes the bending stresses. The hollow form of the construction enables electrical
and other small services to be accommodated within the frame members. Design
concepts, ﬁxing and ﬁnishes are as given above for glued laminated portal frames.
Typical details are shown in Fig. 6.4.2.
nnn SOLID TIMBER AND PLYWOOD GUSSETS
These frames were developed to provide a simple and economic timber portal frame
for clear-span buildings using ordinary tools and basic skills. The general concept 
of this form of frame varies from the two types of timber portal frame previously
described in that no gluing is used, the frames are spaced close together (600, 900
and 1200 mm centres), and they are clad with a plywood sheath so that the ﬁnished
structure acts as a shell, giving a lightweight building that is very rigid and strong.
The frames can be supplied in two halves and assembled by ﬁxing the plywood 
apex gussets on site before erection, or they can be supplied as a complete frame
ready for site erection.
The foundation for this form of timber portal frame consists of a ground beam
or, alternatively, the frames can be ﬁxed to the edge of a raft slab. A timber spreader
or sole plate is used along the entire length of the building to receive and distribute
the thrust loads of the frames. Connection to this spreader plate is made by using
standard galvanised steel joist hangers or by using galvanised steel angle cleats.
Standard timber windows and doors can be inserted into the side walls by trimming
in the conventional way and inﬁlling where necessary with studs, noggins and
rafters. Typical details are shown in Fig. 6.4.3.
The advantages of all timber portal frame types are as follows:
n constructed from readily available materials at an economic cost;
n light in weight;
n easy to transport and erect;
n can be trimmed and easily adjusted on site;
n protection against fungal and/or insect attack can be by impregnation, or surface
application;
n pleasing appearance either as a natural timber ﬁnish or painted.

 
302
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 6.4.2
Typical plywood-faced portal frame

 
Timber portal frames
303
Figure 6.4.3
Typical solid timber and plywood gusset portal frame

 

 
FIRE
PART
7

 

 
Fire has always been an essential element of our technological advancement,
providing heat, energy and light. Today, ﬁre continues to be of great beneﬁt 
to our well-being if it is controlled. If allowed to start and spread without strict
control, it can be one of the greatest hazards with potential for destruction on a 
wide scale. Early civilisations considered ﬁre to be a natural element like air and
water. Later experimenters found that the residue of a burnt fuel (ash) weighed less
than the fuel before it was burnt, and concluded that some substance was removed
during the combustion period: this they called ‘phlogiston’ after the Greek word
phlogistos, meaning ‘inﬂammable’. The doctrine of phlogistics was overthrown by 
a French chemist Antoine Lavoisier (1743–94), who became known as the father 
of modern chemistry.
Lavoisier discovered by his researches and experiments that air consists of 
one-ﬁfth oxygen and that the other main gas, nitrogen, accounted for the bulk 
of the remaining four-ﬁfths. He showed that oxygen played an important part 
in the process of combustion, and that nitrogen does not support combustion. 
This discovery of the true nature of ﬁre led to the conclusion that ﬁre is a 
chemical reaction whereby atoms of oxygen combine with other atoms such as
carbon and hydrogen, releasing water, carbon dioxide and energy in the form 
of heat. The chemical reaction will only start at a suitable temperature, which 
varies according to the substance or fuel involved. During combustion, gases 
will be given off, some of which are more inﬂammable than the fuel itself 
and therefore ignite and appear as ﬂames, giving light, which is due to tiny 
particles being heated to a point at which they glow. Smoke is an indication 
of incomplete combustion and can give rise to deposits of solid carbon commonly
known as soot.
From the discovery of the true nature of ﬁre and processes of combustion it can
be concluded that there are three essentials to all ﬁres:
7.1
THE PROBLEM OF FIRE

 
308
Advanced Construction Technology
n Fuel
Generally any organic material is suitable.
n Heat
Correct temperature to promote combustion of a particular fuel. 
Heat can be generated deliberately, which is termed ignition, or it can be
spontaneous when the fuel itself ignites.
n Oxygen
Air is necessary to sustain and support the combustion process.
The above is often referred to as the triangle of ﬁre: remove any one of the three
essentials and combustion cannot take place. This fact provides the whole basis for
ﬁre prevention, ﬁre protection and ﬁreﬁghting. If non-combustible materials were
used in the construction and furnishing of buildings, ﬁres would not develop. This
method is far too restrictive on the designer and builder: therefore combustible
materials are used and protected with layers or coverings of non-combustible
materials, e.g. plasterboard linings to wooden frames and combustible insulants. 
For guidance on minimum periods of ﬁre resistance to structural elements, see
Tables A1 and A2 in Approved Document B to the Building Regulations. There 
is also provision for materials of limited combustibility, e.g. applications to stair
construction and roof decking, provided the extent of exposure is restricted. See
Table A7 in Approved Document B to the Building Regulations and associated
references to BS 476-11: Method for assessing the heat emission from building products.
Fireﬁghters try to remove one side of the ﬁre triangle; to remove the fuel is not
generally practicable, but by using a cooling agent such as water the heat can be
reduced to a safe level, or alternatively by using a blanketing agent the supply of
oxygen can be cut off and the ﬁre extinguished.
Annual statistics for occurrence of ﬁres and types of building affected are
produced by the Ofﬁce for National Statistics (ONS) and the Ofﬁce of the Deputy
Prime Minister (ODPM). Further data are also produced by the ﬁre service and
insurance companies. The presentation of data varies between the different sources,
some providing ﬁgures for the UK as a whole and others for the constituent
countries. The overall number of annual fatalities from ﬁre (not just in buildings) 
in the UK averages in excess of 500 persons in recent years. Fatalities from ﬁres 
in dwellings exceed 300 on average. The proportion of deaths attributed mainly to
dwellings exceeds 90% of the total for all buildings.
Residential buildings are the most vulnerable, accounting for over 60,000
incidents annually or about 65% of all ﬁres. In excess of 3,000 ﬁres in dwellings are
attributed to children playing with ﬁre, i.e. matches and other easily ignitable home
gadgets. Another high-risk area is commercial distribution, where large quantities of
inﬂammable goods are held in store. One of the main causes of ﬁres in non-domestic
buildings is faulty electrical equipment and wiring. This is not an indication that
the plant or installation is poor, but that regular maintenance, renewal and routine
checks must be carried out and be documented by qualiﬁed and experienced
personnel. In residential buildings the same provision should be made for 
electrical and gas services.
Given the impressive ﬁre suppression record for sprinklers in commercial 
and industrial premises, building insurers and the ﬁre prevention industry and
professions have been considering and promoting the installation of sprinkler
systems in residential accommodation. The government has responded with

 
The problem of ﬁre
309
proposals for these to be included in Part B (Fire safety) of the Building
Regulations. Initially, this is likely to be limited to apartments only.
The annual cost of ﬁres in buildings is difﬁcult to assess. It probably runs into
ﬁgures expressed in billions of pounds. The personal loss is impossible to value.
The cost to manufacturers and employers in terms of loss of goodwill, loss of
production, effect of fatalities and injuries to employees and the delay in returning
to full production or working are almost incalculable. Therefore it can be seen that
the seriousness of ﬁres within buildings cannot be overstated.
Obviously designers and builders alike cannot be held responsible for the actions
or non-actions of the occupants of the buildings they create, but they can ensure
that these structures are designed and constructed in such a manner that they give
the best possible resistance to the action of ﬁre should it occur.
The precautions that can be taken within buildings to prevent a ﬁre occurring –
or, if it should occur, of containing it within the region of the outbreak, providing 
a means of escape for people in the immediate vicinity, and ﬁghting the ﬁre – can 
be studied under three headings:
n structural ﬁre protection;
n means of escape in case of ﬁre;
n ﬁreﬁghting.
Structural ﬁre protection is generally known as a passive measure of ﬁre
protection, and is incorporated within the design speciﬁcation of each element 
of construction. Fireﬁghting and ﬁre control mechanisms such as sprinklers, ﬁre
alarms, fusible link-operated shutters and doors are very much active. These are
mostly integrated with the services of a building, and usually considered in the
context of that subject. Therefore, apart from superﬁcial reference, no depth of
study of this specialism is included in this text. Readers are recommended to refer
to Chapter 9 of Building Services Technology, and Design, published by Pearson
Education/Chartered Institute of Building, for further information on ﬁreﬁghting
and ﬁre control services.

 
The purpose of structural ﬁre protection is to ensure that during a ﬁre the
temperature of structural members or elements does not increase to a ﬁgure at
which their strength would be adversely affected. Additionally, when considering
the features in layout and/or construction that are intended to reduce the effects of
a ﬁre, it can be established that containment of ﬁre spread within buildings by such
measures as compartmentation, as well as providing physical means for preventing
it spreading to other buildings e.g. cavity barriers, is also of paramount importance.
It is not practicable or possible to give an element complete protection in terms of
time: therefore elements are given a ﬁre resistance for a certain period of time that 
it is anticipated will give sufﬁcient delay to the spread of ﬁre, ultimate collapse of
the structure, time for persons in danger to escape and to enable ﬁreﬁghting to be
commenced.
These periods of time vary depending on the function or purpose group and
occupancy of the building, and the size/height of the top ﬂoor above ground and
the depth of basement. See tables in Appendix A to Approved Document B of 
the Building Regulations for speciﬁc requirements.
Before a ﬁre-resistance period can be determined it is necessary to consider
certain factors:
n ﬁre load intensity of the building (amount of combustible material per m2 of 
ﬂoor area);
n behaviour of materials under ﬁre conditions;
n behaviour of combinations of materials under ﬁre conditions;
n Building Regulation requirements as laid down in Part B.
nnn FIRE LOAD
Buildings can be graded as to the amount of overall ﬁre resistance required by
taking into account the following:
7.2
STRUCTURAL FIRE PROTECTION

 
Structural fire protection
311
n size of building (ﬂoor area and height from ground to highest ﬂoor);
n use of building (purpose group);
n ﬁre load.
The ﬁre load is an assessment of potential ﬁre severity based on the
combustibility of materials within a building. Precise calculation of ﬁre severity is
impractical. It is therefore a broad estimate derived from building usage (purpose
grouping) and its contents. This load is expressed as the amount of heat that 
would be generated per unit area by the complete combustion of its contents and
combustible members, and is given a caloriﬁc value of joules per square metre. 
Note that the numerical grade is equivalent to the minimum number of hours’ 
ﬁre resistance that should be given to the elements of the structure.
n Grade 1
Low ﬁre load, not more than 1,150 MJ/m2. Typical buildings within
this grade are ﬂats, ofﬁces, restaurants, hotels, hospitals, schools, museums and
public libraries.
n Grade 2
Moderate ﬁre load, 1,150 to 2,300 MJ/m2. Typical examples are retail
shops, factories and workshops.
n Grade 4
High ﬁre load, 2,300 to 4,600 MJ/m2. Typical examples are certain
types of workshop and warehouses.
When deciding the grade, no account is taken of the effects of any permanent 
ﬁre protection installations such as sprinkler systems. The above principles are
incorporated in the Building Regulations and, in particular, in Part B.
nnn FIRE RESISTANCE
In addition to the previous assessment, ﬁre resistance is the ability of a component
or element of construction in a building to satisfy speciﬁc criteria from the relevant
parts of BS 476: Fire tests on building materials and structures. These are usually
measurements of the effects of temperature, either radiant or naked ﬂame, over 
an exposure time, and may incorporate values for loadbearing capacity, integrity
and insulation. Components can also be studied as separate entities with regard to
their behaviour when subjected to the intense heat encountered during a ﬁre and
their ability to support ﬁre spread over their exposed surfaces.
Structural steel is not considered to behave well under ﬁre conditions, although
its surface ﬁre spread is negligible. As the ﬁre progresses and the temperature of
steel increases there is an actual gain in the ultimate strength of mild steel. This
gain in strength decreases back to normal over the temperature range of 250 to 
400 °C. The decrease in strength continues, and by the time the steel temperature
has reached 550 °C it will have lost most of its useful strength. As the rise in
temperature during the initial stages of a ﬁre is rapid, this ﬁgure of 550 °C can be
reached very quickly. If the decrease in strength results in the collapse of a member,
the stresses it was designed to resist will be redistributed: this could cause other
members to be overstressed, and progressive collapse could occur. Also, the high
degree of thermal movement in steel may cause disturbance to, or loss of, bearing
support, and this, too, will contribute to redistributed loadings and possibly
progressive structural collapse.

 
312
Advanced Construction Technology
Reinforced concrete structural members have good ﬁre-resistance properties, and
being non-combustible do not contribute to the spread of ﬂame over their surfaces.
It is possible, however, under the intense and prolonged heat of a ﬁre, that the bond
between the steel reinforcement and the concrete will be broken. This generally
results in spalling of the concrete, which decreases both the protective cover of the
concrete over the steel and the cross-sectional area. As for structural steel members,
this can result in a redistribution of stresses leading to overloading of certain
members, culminating in progressive collapse.
Timber, strange as it may seem, behaves very well structurally under the 
action of ﬁre. This is due to its slow combustion rate, the strength of its core 
failure remaining fairly constant. The ignition temperature of timber is low
(250–300 °C), but during combustion the timber chars at about 0.5–1.0 mm 
per minute, depending on the species and extent of heat and ﬂame. The layer 
of charcoal so formed slows down the combustion rate of the core. Although its
structural properties during a ﬁre are good, timber, being an organic material and
therefore combustible, will spread ﬁre over its surface, which makes it unsuitable 
in most structural situations. Intumescent paints will provide a limited resistance to
ﬁre, but more successful protection is achieved by nailing and wire-binding
plasterboard to the surface and ﬁnishing with a board ﬁnish plaster.
From the above brief considerations it is obvious that designers and builders
need to have data on the performance, under the conditions of ﬁre, of materials and
especially combinations of materials forming elements. Such information is available
in BS 476: Fire tests on building materials and structures. The BS is divided into parts
that relate to the various ﬁre tests applied to building materials and structures.
nnn FIRE TESTS ON BUILDING MATERIALS AND
STRUCTURES – BS 476
BS 476 consists of 17 parts numbered intermittently between 3 and 33. Omissions
account for withdrawals such as Part 1, which was replaced by Part 8, which, in
turn, was replaced by Parts 20 to 23. The following is a summary:
Part 3
External ﬁre exposure roof test
A series of tests for grading roof structures in terms of time for:
n resistance to external penetration by ﬁre;
n distance of spread of ﬂame over the external surface under certain conditions.
The tests are applied to a specimen of roof structure not less than 1.500 m × 1.200 m,
which represents the actual roof construction including at least one specimen of any
joints used and complete with any lining that is an integral part of the construction.
Three tests are applied:
n Preliminary ignition test.
n Fire penetration test.
n Roof surface spread of ﬂame test.

 
Structural fire protection
313
After testing, the specimen or form of roof construction can be graded by a double
letter designation in the range A–D. An AA designation is the most acceptable and
DD the least. The initial letter relates to the time of ﬁre penetration; the second
letter is a measure of the surface spread of ﬂame:
First letter (penetration)
A. No penetration within 1 hour.
B.
Specimen penetrated in not less than 1/2 hour.
C. Specimen penetrated in less than 1/2 hour.
D. Specimen penetrated in the preliminary ﬂame test.
Second letter (spread of ﬂame)
A. No spread of ﬂame.
B.
Not more than 533 mm spread.
C. More than 533 mm spread.
D. Specimens that continue to burn for 5 minutes after withdrawal of the test
ﬂame or spread more than 381 mm across the region of burning in the
preliminary ﬂame test.
Specimens can be tested from a 45° inclination down to 1° (effectively ﬂat), and
may be preﬁxed EXT.S or EXT.F accordingly. If during the test any dripping from
the underside of the specimen, any mechanical failure and/or development of holes
is observed, a sufﬁx ‘X’ is added to the designation thus:
EXT.S.AB–EXT.S.ABX
The Building Regulations, Approved Document B Fire safety, Section 13: Roof
coverings, has adopted the double letter classiﬁcation. It is shown below compared
with European Standard BS EN 13501: Fire classiﬁcation of construction products 
and building elements.
Building Regulations classiﬁcation
BS EN 13501-5 classiﬁcation
AA, AB, AC
BROOF(t4)
BA, BB, BC
CROOF(t4)
CA, CB, CC
DROOF(t4)
AD, BD, CD
EROOF(t4)
DA, DB, DC, DD
FROOF(t4)
Notes:
The sufﬁx (t4) indicates test number 4 in the Standard.
Classes A1 and A2 also occur in BS EN 13501. Products tested to these classiﬁcations satisfy the
same criteria as Class B, and have no signiﬁcant contribution to the ﬁre load or ﬁre growth.
Part 4
Non-combustibility test for materials
Generally, organic materials are combustible, whereas inorganic materials are 
non-combustible, which can be deﬁned as a material not capable of undergoing
combustion. For the purposes of BS 476, materials used in the construction 
and ﬁnishing of buildings or structures are classiﬁed as ‘non-combustible’ or
‘combustible’ according to their behaviour in the non-combustibility test.

 
314
Advanced Construction Technology
A material is classiﬁed by this test as non-combustible if none of the three
specimens tested:
n causes the temperature reading from either of the two thermocouples used to rise
by 50 °C or more above the initial furnace temperature;
n is observed to ﬂame continuously for 10 seconds or more inside the furnace.
Otherwise the material shall be deemed combustible.
Note that mixtures of organic and inorganic materials have a different behaviour
pattern from that of the individual materials, and therefore such combinations must
be tested and classiﬁed accordingly.
Part 6
Method of test for ﬁre propagation for products
The scope of this test is to provide a means of comparing the contribution of
combustible materials to the growth of ﬁre. It is intended mainly for assessing the
ﬁre performance of linings to internal walls and ceilings. Specimens are given a ﬁre
propagation index (I) ranging from 0 (non-combustible) to 100 in a descending
order according to a curve of rise in temperature plotted against time from ignition.
Part 7
Method of test to determine the classiﬁcation of the surface 
spread of ﬂame of products
This test is used to measure the lateral spread of ﬂame for essentially ﬂat materials,
including composites that may be applied as exposed wall or ceiling ﬁnishes.
The sample for testing must have any surfacings or coatings applied in the usual
manner. The 270 mm × 885 mm sample is ﬁxed in the holder of the apparatus and
subjected to radiant heat from the test furnace. During the ﬁrst minute of the test a
luminous gas ﬂame is applied to the furnace end of the specimen. After 1 minute it
is extinguished and at intervals of 1.5 minutes and 10 minutes the extent of ﬂaming
along the material specimen is recorded. The sample is placed into one of four
classes, set out in Table 7.2.1.
Approved Document B2: Section 6 speciﬁes a higher class than class 1, called
class 0, for wall and ceiling linings. This is deﬁned as a non-combustible material
Table 7.2.1
BS 476-7, Table 1
Classiﬁcation
Flame spread at 11/2 minutes
Final ﬂame spread
Limit for one 
Limit for one 
Limit
specimen in sample
Limit
specimen in sample
(mm)
(mm)
(mm)
(mm)
Class 1
165
+25
165
+25
Class 2
215
+25
455
+45
Class 3
265
+25
710
+75
Class 4
Exceeding class 3 limits

 
Structural fire protection
315
throughout or, if the surface material is tested in accordance with BS 476-6, 
it shall have an index (I) not exceeding 12 and a sub-index (i1) not exceeding 6.
Part 10
Guide to the principles and application of ﬁre testing
This relates to the general principles and methods of applying ﬁre tests to building
products, components and elements of construction for other parts of BS 476. 
It incorporates a general philosophy from BS 6336: Guide to the development of 
ﬁre tests, the presentation of test data and the role of tests in hazard assessment, and
terminology/deﬁnitions from BS 4422: Fire. Vocabulary.
Part 11
Fire tests on building materials and structures
This part of the British Standard is used to assess the heat emission from building
materials when subjected to insertion in a furnace at 750 °C. The test is appropriate
for reasonably homogeneous materials: therefore veneers and superﬁcially treated
products are not normally suited to this test unless the components are tested
individually. Cylindrical specimens 45 mm in diameter × 50 mm high are prepared
with a 2 mm diameter hole for location of a thermocouple. The test provides
comparable results for duration of ﬂaming and determination of whether a material
is ‘non-combustible’ or of ‘limited combustibility’ (see Building Regulations,
Approved Document B, Appendix A (A6 to A8)).
Part 12
Method of test for ignitability of products by direct 
ﬂame impingement
This is used to establish the response of materials when subjected to impingement
of ﬂames having varying size and heat intensity. Several specimen sizes are used,
ranging from 100 mm × 150 mm up to 500 mm × 750 mm, with a range of ﬂame
applications to the sample surfaces and edges. The materal reactions are measured
over exposures of 1 second to 180 seconds. Results are letter designated:
I
= Ignition occurred
T = Transient ignition
N = No ignition
W = Flaming or glowing to material edge or within 10 seconds of ignition source 
removal
Part 13
Method of measuring the ignitability of products subjected to
thermal irradiance
This test is particularly useful for measuring the ignition characteristics of sheet
materials, composites or assemblies less than 70 mm thick when used horizontally
and subject to adjacent levels of thermal irradiance. Specimens 165 mm square are
subjected to irradiance at ﬁve levels from 10 to 50 kW/m2 for 15 minutes or until
the specimen ignites. Test results and observations record time of ignition, glowing

 
316
Advanced Construction Technology
decomposition, melting, surface spalling, foaming, cracking, expansion and/or
contraction. A gas pilot light can also be used to test ignitability of any gases 
leaving the sample.
Part 15
Method for measuring the rate of heat release of products
Specimens of sheet materials of up to 50 mm thickness are prepared in squares 
of 100 mm and subjected to radiant heat from a 5 kW cone-shaped electric heater
(cone calorimeter). Data are recorded up to 2 minutes after ﬂaming commences or
until 60 minutes elapses. Test data in terms of duration and heat energy release 
rate provide for material comparisons.
PARTS 20 TO 24
These include provision for determining the ﬁre resistance of various
parts/elements/components of construction. The term ‘ﬁre resistance’ relates to 
a complete element of building construction and not to the individual materials of
which that element is composed. The tests enable elements of construction to be
assessed according to their ability to retain their composition, to resist the passage 
of ﬂame and hot gases, and to provide the necessary resistance to heat transmission
in a deﬁned pressure environment. This is measured against retention of ﬁre
separating and/or loadbearing facilities over a speciﬁed time.
Part 20
Method for determination of the ﬁre resistance of elements of
construction (general principles)
The general principles outlined in this part of BS 476 include details for preparing
specimens, i.e. the number and size for speciﬁc tests and descriptions of the
apparatus for specimen support and exposure. Procedures for effecting the various
tests are also provided. Details of criteria for performance are shown measured in
terms of integrity (loadbearing capacity and ﬁre containment) and insulation
(thermal transmittance) with reference to test report format and guidance on
application of method. Test results are given in minutes from the start of the 
test until failure occurs. Likewise, the ﬁre resistance is given in minutes for 
each element of construction described in Parts 21 to 24.
Part 21
Method for determination of the ﬁre resistance of loadbearing
elements of construction
This document deﬁnes the application to beams, columns, ﬂoors, ﬂat roofs 
and walls.
Beams
The specimen is to be full size or have a minimum span of 4.000 m and be located
to simulate actual site conditions. If the beam is exposed to ﬁre on three faces,
associated construction as in practice shall be included in the specimen.

 
Structural fire protection
317
Fire resistance
The test specimen is deemed to have failed when it can no longer support its design
loading. This occurs if:
1. The deﬂection exceeds L/20, where L is the clear span of the specimen in mm.
2. The rate of deﬂection (mm/min) calculated at 1 minute intervals commencing 
1 minute from the heat application exceeds the limit set by L2/9,000d, where d
is the distance from the top of the structural section to the bottom of the design
tension zone in mm.
Take (1) or (2), whichever is exceeded ﬁrst.
Columns
The specimen is to be full size or to have a minimum length of 3.000 m and be
loaded to simulate actual site conditions. The specimen is heated on all exposed
faces.
Fire resistance
This is the time taken for the specimen to no longer support the test load, i.e. to
show a noticeable change in the rate of deformation.
Floors and ﬂat roofs
The specimen is to be full size or a minimum of 3.000 m wide × 4.000 m span 
and be loaded to simulate actual site conditions. If a ceiling is intended to add to the
ﬁre resistance, it must be included with the test specimen. This also applies to any
construction or expansion joints, light diffusers or any other components integral
with the actual installation. The specimen is heated from one side by a furnace to
produce a positive pressure at standard heating conditions (see Part 20) until failure
occurs or the test is terminated.
Fire resistance
Loading as for columns, plus criteria to assess integrity and insulation.
n Integrity
A 100 mm × 100 mm × 20 mm thick cotton wool pad of mass 3 
to 4 g is held over the centre of any crack through which ﬂames and gases 
can pass. The pad is held 25 mm from and parallel to the crack for a period 
of 10 seconds to determine whether hot gases can cause ignition. The observation
is repeated at frequent intervals. Alternatively, gap gauges can be used where 
a crack occurs, i.e. a 6 mm gauge penetrating into the furnace for a distance
exceeding 150 mm, or a 25 mm gauge penetrating through the specimen and 
into the furnace.
n Insulation
The unexposed face of elements having a separating function 
is observed at intervals of not more than 5 minutes. Failure is deemed to 
occur if:
n Mean temperature rises more than 140 °C above initial temperature.
n Point temperature rises more than 180 °C above initial temperature.
See also BS 476-20, clauses 10.3 and 10.4.

 
318
Advanced Construction Technology
Walls
The specimens must include provision for any mechanical joints and be tested from
both sides. They must be full size or a minimum of 3.000 m × 3.000 m and loaded
to simulated actual site conditions.
Fire resistance
Time taken to failure by any one of three observations:
n noticeable change in the rate of deformation;
n loss of integrity (as for ﬂoors and ﬂat roofs);
n loss of insulation (as for ﬂoors and ﬂat roofs).
Part 22
Methods for determination of ﬁre resistance of non-loadbearing
elements of construction
This is applicable to partitions, door sets and shutters (fully insulated, partially
insulated and uninsulated), ceiling membranes and glazing.
Partitions
Specimens to be at least 3.000 m × 3.000 m and tested from one or either side. 
They must include any provision for mechanical joints such as built-in facilities 
for expansion and contraction.
Fire resistance
Failure time for integrity and insulation (see Part 21).
Door sets and shutters
Specimens are the same size as for partitions and are tested from both sides.
Fire resistance (fully insulated)
Integrity and insulation as previously described and/or sustained ﬂaming, i.e. a
visible ﬂame occurring for at least 10 seconds.
Fire resistance (part insulated)
As for fully insulated except the cotton wool pad requirement for integrity only
applies to areas other than non-insulating materials such as glazing.
Fire resistance (uninsulated)
Test for integrity only applies, but not the cotton wool pad requirement.
Ceilings
The specimen to be at least 4.000 m × 3.000 m and exposed to test from the
underside only.
Fire resistance
For integrity and insulation as previously described.

 
Structural fire protection
319
Glazed elements
The specimen to be at least 3.000 m × 3.000 m and exposed to test from both sides.
Fire resistance
For integrity and insulation as previously described.
Part 23
Methods for determination of the contribution of components to 
the ﬁre resistance of a structure
This part is in two sections:
1. The contribution made by components such as suspended ceilings when
protecting steel beams.
2. The use of intumescent materials/seals with single-acting latched timber 
ﬁre-resisting door assemblies.
Suspended ceilings protecting steel beams
The specimen to be full size or a minimum of 4.000 m × 3.000 m, with the
underside only exposed to the furnace. The steel beams used to support the
specimen have the top ﬂange covered with a lightweight concrete ﬂoor at least 
130 mm thick. Provision for any light ﬁttings or similar outlets must be made
within the specimen.
Fire resistance
The limit of effective protection is deemed to have been reached when any of the
following are exceeded:
1. With an unloaded specimen, the beam temperature at any point attains 400 °C.
2. For a loaded specimen, see reference to Part 21: Beams, take (1) or (2).
Intumescent seals
This test is suitable for evaluating the effect of intumescent materials/seals between
door to frame assemblies for doors with ﬁre resistance speciﬁed at up to 1 hour 
(see BS 476: Part 22 and Chapter 7.1 of Construction Technology). Full-size
specimens are exposed to the furnace on one side only, as described in Part 22.
Fire resistance
As previously described for integrity, or failure of the seal due to the presence of
continuous ﬂaming on the unexposed door face.
Part 24
Method for determination of the ﬁre resistance of ventilation ducts
This provides information relating to the ability of vertical and horizontal
ventilation or air-conditioning ducting to resist ﬁre spread from one ﬁre
compartment to another, in the absence of ﬁre dampers. Test specimens 
of ducting should be full size with perimeter fully exposed in the furnace.
Thermocouples are strategically located throughout the duct length. Junctions 

 
320
Advanced Construction Technology
with compartment walls and ﬂoors are suitably ﬁre stopped as in standard
installation practice (see Fig. 7.2.3).
Fire resistance
Failure of the specimen by one or more of the following:
n Stability
Duct collapses as retaining devices can no longer hold it.
n Insulation
When the exposed surface of the duct outside the furnace exceeds
an average of 140 °C, or has a point value of 180 °C.
n Integrity
When cracks or holes allowing ﬂames or hot gases to pass appear 
at the duct surface outside the furnace, i.e. sustained ﬂaming occurs for at least
10 seconds. Measurements can also be taken using the cotton wool pad.
PARTS 31 TO 33
Part 31
Methods for measuring smoke penetration through door sets 
and shutter assemblies
Section 31.1: Methods of measurement under ambient temperature conditions provides
guidance on smoke penetration potential through door sets by applying pressurised
air tests and taking measurements of the air leakage rate. Its purpose is for smoke
control only, and it has no reference to ﬁre resistance (see Part 22). Full-size
specimens are subjected to fan-delivered variable air pressures between the two
door faces, in increments up to 100 Pa. Air penetration and leakage is measured in
m3/h. Doors ﬁtted with patent peripheral brush seals can be expected to provide
greater resistance to the simulated air ﬂow. These will have both improved draught
and smoke penetration resistance by comparison with unprotected doors. See also
Building Regulations, Approved Document B: Appendix B, Table B1, where ﬁre
doors for certain situations (sufﬁxed S) are required to have an air leakage rate not
exceeding 3 m3/h at 25 Pa.
Part 32
Guide to full-scale ﬁre tests within buildings
Part 33
Full-scale room test for surface products
As indicated by the titles, these procedures are intended to simulate ﬁres in
buildings from ignition through to full maturity. Tests can represent speciﬁc ﬁre
situations and materials to determine potential for ﬂashover conditions, development
of ﬁre growth, and behaviour of various products in a continuous ﬁre environment.
In addition to visual interpretations of ﬂame spread both vertically and horizontally,
measurements can also include temperature, air ﬂow and gas emissions.
nnn BUILDING REGULATIONS: PART B
One of the major aims of this part of the Building Regulations is to limit the spread
of ﬁre, and this is achieved by considering the use of a building, the ﬁre resistance

 
Structural fire protection
321
of structural elements and surface ﬁnishes, the size of the building or parts of a
building, and the degree of isolation between buildings or parts of buildings.
Part B to the Building Regulations contains three regulations that are concerned
with ﬁre spread under the headings of:
n Internal ﬁre spread (linings) – Regulation B2;
n Internal ﬁre spread (structure) – Regulation B3;
n External ﬁre spread – Regulation B4.
Approved Document B, which supports these regulations, is comprehensive and
gives recommendations for and guidance on meeting the performance requirements
set out in the actual regulations. It is not proposed to analyse each recommendation
fully but rather to use the recommendations as illustrations as to how the objectives
can be achieved.
A full understanding of the terminology used is important to comprehend the
recommendations being made in the Approved Document, and this is given in
Appendix E under the heading of deﬁnitions. Figure 7.2.1 illustrates some of the
general deﬁnitions given in this appendix. Other interpretations that must be clearly
understood are elements of structure, ﬁre stops, relevant and notional boundaries,
and unprotected areas. These are illustrated in Figs 7.2.2, 7.2.3, 7.2.4 and 7.2.5,
respectively.
The use of a building enables it to be classiﬁed into one of the seven purpose
groups given in Approved Document B, Appendix D, Table D1. The purpose
groups can apply to a whole building, or to a separated part or compartment of a
building. All buildings covered by Part B of the Building Regulations should be
included in one of these purpose groups. Each purpose group can be summarised:
1. Residential (dwellings)
Subdivides into three groups:
(a) Apartment.
(b) Dwelling-house with habitable accommodation containing a ﬂoor level over
4.500 m above the ground.
(c) Dwelling-house with habitable accommodation containing ﬂoor levels less
than 4.500 m above ground.
Note: Where a dwelling also functions as a workplace for its occupants and
others, provisions for escape in event of a ﬁre are given in Approved 
Document B1, Means of warning and escape, Section 3.51, Live/work units.
2. (a) Residential (institutional)
Hospital, care home, school or other similar
establishment where persons sleep on the premises.
(b) Other
Hotel, boarding house, hostel and any other residential purpose not
described above.
3. Ofﬁce
Any premises used for ofﬁce and administration work.
4. Shop and commercial
Includes business premises used for any form of retail
trade, such as a restaurant or hairdressers, or where members of the public can
enter to deliver goods for repair or treatment.
5. Assembly and recreation
A public building or place of assembly of people
for functions, which could be social, recreational, entertainment, exhibition,
education, etc.
6. Industrial
Premises used for manufacture, production, processing, repairs, etc.

 
322
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.1
Approved Document B: general deﬁnitions

 
Structural fire protection
323
Figure 7.2.2
Approved Document B: elements of structure

 
324
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.3
Approved Document B: ﬁre-stopping and cavity barriers

 
Structural fire protection
325
Figure 7.2.4
Approved Document B: boundaries and space separation

 
326
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.5
Approved Document B: unprotected areas – ﬁre resistance less than that given in Appendix A, Table A2

 
Structural fire protection
327
7. Storage and other non-residential
Subdivides into two categories:
(a) Place for storage, deposit or placement of goods and materials (vehicles
excluded), and any other non-residential purpose not described in 1–6,
except for detached garages and carports not exceeding 40 m2, which are
included in the dwelling-house purpose group.
(b) Car parks solely for the accommodation of cars, motor cycles, passenger and
light goods vehicles of less than 2,500 kg gross weight.
The use of ﬁre-resistant cells or compartments within a building (Fig. 7.2.1) is a
means of conﬁning an outbreak of ﬁre to the site of origin for a reasonable time to
allow the occupants a chance to escape and the ﬁreﬁghters time to tackle, control
and extinguish the ﬁre. The Approved Document B3, Section 7, provides guidance
on maximum recommended dimensions for buildings or compartments. These are
expressed in terms relating to height of building, ﬂoor area and cubic capacity for
the various purpose groups. Table A2 in Appendix A gives the recommended
minimum periods of ﬁre resistance for all elements of structure (see Fig. 7.2.2).
These minimum periods of ﬁre resistance are stated in minutes according to:
n purpose group;
n ground or upper storey (height of top ﬂoor above ground or of separated part 
of building);
n basement storey including ﬂoor over (depth of lowest basement).
The recommended minimum periods of ﬁre resistance given in the tables are of
prime concern to the designer and contractor. These tables do not state how these
minimum periods are to be achieved, but reference is made to the current edition 
of the BRE Report BR 128: Guidelines for the construction of ﬁre-resisting structural
elements, which gives appropriate and common methods of construction for the
various notional periods of ﬁre resistance for walls, beams, columns and ﬂoors. 
The guidelines are written and presented in a tabulated format, which needs to 
be translated into working details. Figures 7.2.6 to 7.2.13 show typical examples
taken from this document and other sources of reference such as manufacturers’
data. Another useful resource is Loss Prevention Standards produced by the Loss
Prevention Certiﬁcation Board. These provide details of minimum standards to
satisfy building insurers, which are often higher than building regulations. It is
therefore most important for building designers and detailers to ensure that 
their speciﬁcations satisfy all authorities, as post-construction changes are very 
expensive!
The previous examples for ﬁre protection to structural sections assume a 
section factor greater than 140 (section factor = Hp/A (m−1)). Where this number
is speciﬁed as less than 140, a reduced amount of ﬁre insulation can apply and less
ﬁre resistance can be expected. However, this will be adequate for many situations.
Calculation of the section factor is based on:
Hp = Perimeter of section exposed to ﬁre (m) [The heated perimeter].
A = Cross-sectional area of the steel section (m2) – data available in BS 4: 
Structural steel sections and other tables of standard steel sections.

 
328
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.6
Fire resistance: walls of masonry construction

 
Structural fire protection
329
Figure 7.2.7
Fire resistance: framed and composite walls

 
330
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.8
Fire resistance: RC columns and beams

 
Structural fire protection
331
Figure 7.2.9
Fire resistance: steel columns and beams (section factor > 140)

 
332
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.10
Fire resistance: hollow protection to steel columns (section factor > 140)

 
Structural fire protection
333
Figure 7.2.11
Fire resistance: hollow protection to steel beams (section factor > 140)

 
334
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.12
Fire resistance: timber ﬂoors

 
Structural fire protection
335
Figure 7.2.13
Fire resistance: concrete ﬂoors

 
336
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.14
Typical section factor calculations

 
Structural fire protection
337
Note: The section factor is deﬁned as the ratio of heated perimeter to section area.
Heated perimeter is the inside perimeter of ﬁre protection. For protection of box
sections, take the perimeter of the smallest rectangle enclosing the section. Some
sample section factor calculations are shown in Fig. 7.2.14.
Readers are also encouraged to study manufacturers’ literature on the many
patent ready-cut, easy-to-ﬁx ﬁre protection systems for standard structural
members, and other methods such as the use of intumescent paints and materials,
which expand to form a thick insulating coating or strip on being heated by ﬁre.
The degree of space separation needed between buildings to limit the spread 
of ﬁre by radiation is covered in Part B4: Sections 11 to 13 of Approved Document
B. This deals with external walls and roofs and, in particular, unprotected areas
permitted in relationship to the distance of the building or compartment within 
the building from the relevant boundary. It differentiates between buildings 
with external walls occurring within or over 1 metre from the relevant boundary.
External wall surfaces must satisfy the ﬁre-resistance requirements given in 
Tables A1 and A2 of Appendix A, or be constructed with a limited amount of
combustible material (see Diagram 28, Approved Document B4, Section 11).
The Approved Document B4 (External Fire Spread) provides four methods 
to determine the acceptable amount of unprotected external wall area. The ﬁrst is
concerned with small residential buildings not included in the Institutional group,
over 1 metre from the relevant boundary. A simple table and diagram given in the
Approved Document shows the relationship between boundary distance, maximum
length of building side and the maximum total of unprotected area permitted
(Section 12.19, Diagram 34).
The second method can be used for other buildings or compartments that are not
less than 1 metre from the relevant boundary and not over 10 metres high (excludes
open-sided car parks). Data are interpolated from Table 14 of Approved Document
B4, Section 12, to obtain an acceptable percentage of unprotected area relative to
the various purpose grouping. Alternatively, other methods described in the BRE
Report BR 187: External ﬁre spread: building separation and boundary distances may
be used. These are known as the enclosing rectangle method and the aggregate
notional area method. The enclosing rectangle method can be used to ascertain
the maximum unprotected area for a given boundary position or to ﬁnd the nearest
position of the boundary for a given building design. The method consists in
placing an enclosing rectangle around the unprotected areas, noting the width and
height of the enclosing rectangle, and calculating the unprotected percentage in
terms of the enclosing rectangle. This information will enable the distance from 
the boundary to be read direct from the tables given in the BRE report. Note that 
in compartmented buildings the enclosing rectangle is taken for each compartment
and not for the whole facade. Typical examples are shown in Fig. 7.2.15.
The aggregate notional area method is an alternative to the previous method
described above. The principle of separation is still followed, but by a more precise
method, which will involve more investigation than reference to an enclosing
rectangle. Reference is made to an aggregate notional area, which is calculated by
taking the sum of each relevant unprotected area and multiplying by a factor given
in the BRE report. Which unprotected areas are relevant is given in the appendix.

 
338
Advanced Construction Technology
The method entails dividing the relevant boundary into a series of 3.000 m spacings
called vertical data and projecting from each point a datum line to the nearest point
on the building. A baseline is drawn through each vertical datum at right angles to
the datum line and a series of semicircles of various radii drawn from this point
represent the distance and hence the factors for calculating the aggregate notional
area (see Fig. 7.2.16). For buildings or compartments with a residential, assembly 
or ofﬁce use the result should not exceed 210 m2; for other purpose groups the
result should not exceed 90 m2. In practical terms this method would not normally
be used unless the situation was critical or the outline of the building was irregular
in shape.
The speciﬁc recommendations for compartment walls, openings in compartment
walls, compartment ﬂoors, protected shafts, doors, stairways and protecting
structure are set out in Approved Document B. Each purpose group is considered
separately, although many of the recommendations are similar for a number of
purpose groups.
For roof coverings the Building Regulations are concerned mainly with the
performance of roofs when exposed externally to ﬁre, which questions the
application and use of plastics and other combustibles, particularly in roof lights.
Thermoplastic materials divide broadly into two categories: TP(a) (rigid) or TP(b).
TP(a) considers rigid rooflight products having a class 1 rating to BS 476-7, or
satisfying the test requirements of BS 2782-5, Methods of testing plastics. TP(b)
applies to rigid polycarbonates less than 3 mm thick and other products satisfying
tests to BS 2782-5. Diagram 35 and Tables 16 and 17 in Section 13 of Approved
Document B4 indicate minimum acceptable spacings for rooﬂights, distances from
boundaries and maximum areas applicable to these categories of thermoplastics.
Note: There is also a TP(a) ﬂexible category, which is limited to products less
than 1 mm thickness as used for curtains and drapes.

 
Structural fire protection
339
Figure 7.2.15
Unprotected areas: enclosing rectangle method (reference: BRE Report BR 187)

 
340
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.2.16
Unprotected areas: aggregate notional area method
(reference: BRE Report BR 187)

 
Means of escape from within a building is concerned with the safe discharge of
personnel if an outbreak of ﬁre should occur. It is designed to provide the occupants
with the opportunity to reach an area of designated safety. This takes into account
factors such as the risks to human life, unfamiliarity with building layout, problems
of smoke, and the short space of time available to evacuate the premises before the
problems become almost insurmountable.
Fear is a natural human response when confronted with uncontrolled ﬁre and 
in particular fear of smoke, which is justiﬁed by the fact that more deaths are
caused by smoke and heated gases than by burns. Statistics show that on average
approximately 54% of deaths in ﬁres are caused by smoke, 40% by burns and scalds
and 6% by other causes. Smoke may be deﬁned as visible suspension in atmosphere
of solid and/or liquid particles resulting from combustion or pyrolysis. Although
the above statement is true, smoke can also be caused by the release into the air of a
variety of chemical compounds. The main dangers, contained in smoke, to human
life are the carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide gases that are normal products 
of combustion.
The presence of these gases does not always cause the greatest hazard in 
human terms, because the density of smoke is more likely to create fear than the
undetectable gases. Buoyant and mobile dense smoke will spread rapidly within a
building or compartment during a ﬁre, masking or even obliterating exit signs and
directions. Gases, other than those mentioned previously, are generally irritants 
that can affect the eyes, causing watering which further impairs the vision, and 
can also affect the respiratory organs, causing reactions to slow and a loss of
directional sense. It is worth remembering that smoke, being less dense than air,
rises, and that taking up a position as near to the ﬂoor as possible will increase 
the chances of escape.
Carbon dioxide has no smell and is always present in the atmosphere, but
because it is a product of combustion its volume increases at the expense of oxygen
7.3
MEANS OF ESCAPE IN CASE 
OF FIRE

 
342
Advanced Construction Technology
during a ﬁre. The gas is not poisonous but can cause death by asphyxia. The 
normal amount of oxygen present in the air is approximately 21%; if this is reduced
to 12% abnormal fatigue can be experienced; down to about 6% it can cause nausea,
vomiting and loss of consciousness; below 6% respiration is difﬁcult, which can
result in death. Carbon dioxide will not support combustion, and can cause a ﬁre 
to be extinguished if the content by volume exceeds 14%, a fact used by ﬁreﬁghters
in their efforts to deal with an outbreak of ﬁre.
Carbon monoxide, like carbon dioxide, is odourless, but it is very poisonous
and, having approximately the same density as air, will spread rapidly. A very 
small concentration (0.2% by volume) of this colourless gas can cause death in
about 40 minutes. The ﬁrst effects are dizziness and headaches, followed in 5 
to 10 minutes by loss of consciousness leading to death. As the concentration
increases, so the time lapse from the initial dizziness to death decreases, so that 
by the time the concentration has reached about 1.3% by volume death can take
place within a minute or two.
The heat that is associated with ﬁre and smoke can also be injurious and even
fatal. Temperatures in excess of 100 °C can cause damage to the windpipe and
lungs, resulting in death within 30 minutes or sooner as the temperature rises. 
An interesting fact that emerges from statistics is that females generally have longer
survival periods than males, and as would be expected the survival time decreases
with age. Injuries caused by heat are generally in the form of burns, followed very
often by shock, which can be fatal in many cases.
The above has been written not to frighten, but to emphasise the necessity 
for an adequate means of escape to give occupants and visitors in buildings a
reasonable chance to reach an area of safety should a ﬁre occur. To this end a maze
of legislation and advisory documentation exists to guide the designer in planning
escape routes without being too restrictive on the overall design concept. In the UK
this includes regional by-laws, the Building Regulations, the Fire Precautions Act
1971, the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974, the Fire Safety and Safety 
of Places of Sports Act 1987, the Management of Health and Safety at Work
Regulations 1999, the Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations 1997, and
references to BS 5588: Fire precautions in the design, construction and use of buildings.
nnn BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Regulation B1 requires that, in case of ﬁre, a means of escape leading from
the building to a place of safety outside the building must be capable of being safely
and effectively used at all times. The regulation covers all building types with the
exception of prisons. Design sections that satisfy the requirements of Regulation B1
are divided as follows:
n dwelling-houses;
n apartments;
n general provisions for the common parts of apartments;
n design for horizontal escape – buildings other than dwellings;
n design for vertical escape – buildings other than dwellings;
n general provisions common to buildings other than dwelling-houses.

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
343
PLANNING ESCAPE ROUTES
When escape routes are being planned the occupancy must be considered.
Occupants of ﬂats will be familiar with the layout of the premises, whereas
customers in a shop may be completely unfamiliar with their surroundings. In
schools the fundamental principle is the provision of an alternative means of escape,
and in hospitals the main concern is with the adequacy of the means of escape from
all parts of the building.
In the context of means of escape in case of ﬁre the building and its contents 
are of secondary importance. The provision of a safe escape route should, however,
allow at the same time an easy access for the ﬁre service using the same routes, and
because these routes are protected the risk of ﬁre spread is minimised. In practice
the provision of an adequate means of escape and structural ﬁre protection of the
building and its contents are virtually inseparable. Each building has to be
considered as an individual exercise, but certain common factors prevail in 
all cases:
n An outbreak of ﬁre does not necessarily imply the evacuation of the entire
building.
n Rescue facilities of the local ﬁre service should not be considered as part of the
planning of means of escape.
n Persons should be able to reach safety without assistance when using the
protected escape routes.
n All possible sources of an outbreak and the course the ﬁre is likely to take should
be examined and the escape routes planned accordingly.
nnn FIRE PRECAUTIONS ACT 1971
This Act is designed to make further provisions for the protection of persons 
from ﬁre risks. The provisions of this Act do not apply to Northern Ireland, and
Section 11, which deals with means of escape, does not apply to the old Greater
London Council area, which has its own by-laws, or to Scotland, which has its own
regulations. It has since been incorporated with and amended by the provisions of
the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974.
A ﬁre certiﬁcate is required on any premises designated by the Minister of State
at the Home Ofﬁce within the following classes of use:
n sleeping accommodation;
n institutions providing treatment or care;
n entertainment, recreation or instruction;
n teaching, training or research;
n any purpose involving access to the premises by members of the public by
payment or otherwise;
n a place of work.
Certain types of buildings and premises can be exempted from the provisions 
of this Act and different provision made relative to their designated use. 
These are:

 
344
Advanced Construction Technology
n premises with existing ﬁre certiﬁcates covered by the Ofﬁces, Shops and 
Railway Premises Act 1963, as incorporated in the Health and Safety at 
Work etc. Act 1974;
n premises with existing ﬁre certiﬁcates covered by the Factories Act 1961, as
incorporated in the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974;
n a prison, remand centre, detention centre or borstal institution;
n churches, chapels and places of worship;
n houses occupied as a single dwelling;
n special hospitals (Mental Health Act 1983);
n premises occupied solely for purposes of the armed forces.
In dwellings where circumstances indicate a serious ﬁre risk the ﬁre authority
may make it compulsory to have a ﬁre certiﬁcate in particular where the premises
have a room used as living accommodation that is:
n below the ground ﬂoor of a building;
n two or more ﬂoors above the ground;
n a room of which the ﬂoor is 6.000 m or more above the surface of the ground on
any side of the building.
The Secretary of State for the Environment has power, by virtue of Sections 4
and 6 of the Public Health Act 1961, Section 11 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971
and the Building Act 1984, to make building regulations with regard to means of
escape in case of ﬁre.
Applications for a ﬁre certiﬁcate are made to the chief executive of the ﬁre
authority on a form in the Fire Precautions (Application for Certiﬁcate) Regulations
1989. The relevant ﬁre authority can be obtained from the local authority or council
ofﬁces. It is generally the occupier’s responsibility to make the application and
submit any plans, speciﬁcations and details required. Penalties for offences under
this Act incur substantial ﬁnes and/or two years’ imprisonment.
The basic principles in the Act relating to means of escape in case of ﬁre are 
also found in Sections 2, 3 and 4 of Approved Document B1 to the Building
Regulations. These affect:
1. Limitation of travel distances.
2. Escape routes:
n travel distance within rooms;
n travel distance from rooms to a stairway or ﬁnal exit;
n travel within stairways and to ﬁnal exit;
n travel along corridors;
n external means (stairs, routes other than stairs and ﬂat roofs).
3. Provision of protected corridors, lobbies, shafts and stairways. These are a means
for escape separated from the remainder of the building with ﬁre-resisting
construction.
The basic design principles relating to escape routes are shown in Figs 7.3.1, 7.3.2
and 7.3.3. The examples shown apply to hotels of Building Regulations, Purpose
Group 2(b). Approved Document B1, Section 2 should be consulted for other
applications.

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
345
Figure 7.3.1
Means of escape: hotels

 
346
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.3.2
Means of escape: hotels

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
347
Figure 7.3.3
Means of escape: hotels

 
348
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn THE FIRE PRECAUTIONS (WORKPLACE)
REGULATIONS 1997
These regulations made signiﬁcant changes to responsibilities for ﬁre safety in
buildings. The Workplace Regulations, coupled with revisions to Section 12 of 
the Fire Precautions Act 1971, moved responsibility from the local ﬁre authority
(who had previously commented on design proposals, conducted inspections and
issued ﬁre certiﬁcates) to the employer of people in both existing and new buildings.
The role of the ﬁre authority under these regulations is to advise and ‘police’ self-
compliance and assessment of ﬁre risk.
Employers need to ensure adequacy of ﬁreﬁghting measures such as automatic
ﬁre control and detection equipment, e.g. sprinklers, smoke alarms, etc., and ensure
that non-automatic equipment such as hoses and portable extinguishers is accessible
and appropriately indicated. Indication is endorsed by the Health and Safety (Safety
Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996. Employees must be nominated with special
responsibilities and trained in procedures in the event of ﬁre.
Under Part II, Section 5, of the regulations there are speciﬁc requirements for
emergency escape routes and exits. These must remain clear at all times and the
following be complied with:
1. Emergency escape routes must lead directly to a nominated place of safety.
2. Clear access must be maintained for efﬁcient evacuation of employees in an
emergency.
3. Number, location and capacity of escape routes must be adequate, with regard 
to the use of the workplace and number of personnel employed within it (see
Building Regulations AD, B1, Sections 2 to 4 and BS 5588: Fire precautions in 
the design, construction and use of buildings.
4. Emergency escape doors to open with the direction of escape.
5. Emergency escape doors must not have any facility for locking or fastening that
would impede their use.
6. Sliding and revolving doors are not to be deployed in exits speciﬁcally designated
as escape routes.
7. Designated emergency routes and exits must be suitably indicated by signs 
(see Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996).
8. Emergency routes and exits must be illuminated and provided with emergency
lighting facilities if normal lighting fails.
nnn DWELLING-HOUSES
Provision for escape from ﬁre in dwellings can be categorised under three 
headings:
1. Dwelling-houses of one or two storeys, with ﬂoors not more than 4.500 m above
ground level.
2. Dwelling-houses with one ﬂoor more than 4.500 m above ground level.
3. Dwelling-houses of two or more storeys with more than one ﬂoor over 4.500 m
above ground level.

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
349
1. With the exception of kitchens, each habitable room should open directly onto 
a hallway or protected stairway, which in turn connects to the property entrance
door or a window through which escape can be made. Such windows should have
minimum opening dimensions of 0.450 m high × 0.450 m wide and an opening 
area of at least 0.330 m2. The lowest level of opening in the window is 0.800 m 
(see Note) and the maximum, 1.100 m above ﬂoor level. With skylights and 
dormers the minimum opening height above ﬂoor level can reduce to 0.600 m 
(see Note).
Note: Building Regulations, Approved Document K: Protection from falling,
collision and impact.
Inner rooms, i.e. rooms off a room, are discouraged unless they are a kitchen,
laundry or utility room, dressing room or bathroom, or they have their own
openable window that could be used as a means of escape.
Balconies and ﬂat roofs may be considered a means of escape if the roof is part 
of the same building and the route leads to a storey exit or external escape route.
The escape route should be constructed to at least a 30 minute ﬁre-resisting
standard, including any opening within 3.000 m of that escape route.
A basement stairway could be blocked by ﬁre or smoke. Therefore, if a basement
contains habitable accommodation, an alternative means for egress should be
provided. This may be:
n an external door; or
n a window of dimensions speciﬁed above; or
n a protected stairway to a ﬁnal exit.
Loft conversions from a two-storey house currently attract certain provisions 
as deﬁned in Section 2 of Approved Document B to the Building Regulations.
These are generally as described in the next category for houses with one ﬂoor 
more than 4.500 m above ground level. New access stairs should be in an enclosure
continuing from the existing stairs or accessing the existing stairs. Depending on
the age and type of construction of the house, the new ﬂoor joists will probably 
need structurally upgrading from their former function as ceiling ties, and the ﬂoor
construction will need to achieve a 30 minute ﬁre resistance. Escape windows from
within the roof space are as previously described, with a maximum 1.700 m of roof
slope below the opening.
2. Dwelling-houses with a ﬂoor more than 4.500 m above ground level should 
have at least two internal stairways. Each of these stairways is to provide an 
effective means of escape. If it is impractical to install two stairways in a dwelling,
all upper storeys should be served by a protected stairway enclosed by 30 minute
ﬁre-resisting construction. This stairway should extend directly to a ﬁnal exit.
Alternatively, the stairway can give access to at least two escape routes to ﬁnal exits
at ground level, each route separated from the other by 30 minute ﬁre-resisting
construction and ﬁre doors.
A different approach is to separate the upper storey from the lower storeys 
with 30 minute ﬁre-resisting construction, and provide the upper storey with a
designated ﬁre escape route to its own ﬁnal exit.

 
350
Advanced Construction Technology
Note: Fire-resisting construction includes the need for ﬁre doors. Traditionally
these have self-closing devices, but current thinking indicates that, where used in
dwellings, these can pose a hazard to children. Also, many occupants remove door
closers as they regard them as an inconvenience. Therefore, future guidance may be
to promote the beneﬁts of manually closing these doors, particularly at night.
3. Dwelling-houses of two or more storeys with more than one ﬂoor over 4.500 m
above ground level have the same requirements as the previous category. The
following additional provisions apply:
n Each storey over 7.500 m above ground level should have an alternative escape
route with access via the protected stairway to an upper storey, or from a landing
within the protected stairway to an alternative escape route on the same storey.
At or about 7.500 m above ground level the protected stairway should be
separated from the lower storeys by ﬁre-resisting construction.
n Alternatively, the whole house should be ﬁtted with a domestic sprinkler system.
See BS 9251: Sprinkler systems for residential and domestic occupancies. Code of
practice.
COMPARTMENTATION AND SEPARATION
Every wall separating semi-detached and terraced houses should be constructed 
as a ﬁre-resisting compartment wall. The ﬁre resistance period is usually 30 minutes
for dwellings where the top ﬂoor is less than 5.000 m above ground level. At ﬂoor
heights in excess of this the ﬁre resistance may increase to 60 minutes: see Table A2
in the Approved Document to Part B of the Building Regulations.
An attached or integral garage should be separated, where in contact with the
rest of the house, by 30 minute ﬁre-resisting construction. Any opening for access
from the house into the garage should be at least 100 mm above the garage ﬂoor
level (petrol leakage) and be ﬁtted with a self-closing FD30 ﬁre door.
nnn APARTMENTS (FLATS AND MAISONETTES)
At one time only accommodation over 24.000 m above ground level would have
been considered, this being the height over which external rescue by the ﬁre service
was impracticable. It has become apparent that even with dwellings within reach 
of ﬁreﬁghters’ ladders external rescue is not always possible. This is because
present-day trafﬁc conditions and congestion may prevent the appliance from
approaching close to the building or may delay the arrival of the ﬁre service. 
Section 3 of Approved Document B1 to the Building Regulations speciﬁcally 
relates to this class of buildings and has special provision for accommodation 
with ﬂoors over 4.500 m above ground level.
As with other forms of buildings the only sound basis for planning means of
escape from apartments is to identify the positions of all possible sources of any
outbreak of ﬁre and to predict the likely course the ﬁre, smoke and gases would
follow. The planning should be considered in three stages:

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
351
1. Risk to occupants of the dwelling in which the ﬁre originates.
2. Risk to occupants of adjoining dwellings should the ﬁre or smoke penetrate the
horizontal escape route or common corridor.
3. Risk to occupants above the level of the outbreak, particularly on the ﬂoor
immediately above the source of the ﬁre.
n Stage 1
Most of the serious accidents and deaths occur in the room in which
the outbreak originates. Fires in bedrooms have increased in the last decade,
mainly because of the increased use of electrical appliances such as heated
blankets that have been improperly maintained or wired. Social habits, such as
watching television, have enabled ﬁres starting in other rooms to develop to a
greater extent before detection. Fires occurring in the circulation spaces such as
halls and corridors are a serious hazard, and the use of naked ﬂame heaters and
smoking in these areas should be discouraged. Risks to occupants in maisonettes
are higher than those incurred in ﬂats because ﬁre and smoke will spread more
rapidly in the vertical direction than in the horizontal direction.
n Stage 2
This is concerned mainly with the safety of occupants using the
horizontal escape route, where the major aim is to ensure that, should a ﬁre 
start in any one dwelling, it will not adversely affect or obstruct the escape of
occupants of any other dwelling on the same or adjoining ﬂoor.
n Stage 3
This is concerned with occupants using a vertical escape route, which
in fact means a stairway, for in this context lifts are not considered as a means of
escape because of:
n time delay in lift answering call;
n limited capacity of lift;
n possible failure of the electricity supply in the event of a ﬁre.
The main objective is to remove the risk of ﬁre or smoke entering a stairway and
rendering it impassable above that point. This objective can be achieved by
taking the following protective measures:
n Where there is more than one stairway serving a ventilated common corridor
there should be a smoke-stop door across the corridor between the doors in
the enclosing walls of the stairways to ensure that both stairs are not put at
risk in the event of a ﬁre (see Fig. 7.3.4).
n Where there is only one stairway serving a ventilated common corridor there
must be a smoke-stop door between the door in the enclosing walls of the
stairway and any door covering a potential source of ﬁre, and the lobby so
formed should be permanently ventilated through an adjoining external wall
(see Fig. 7.3.4).
n Means for ventilating common corridors are necessary because some 
smoke will inevitably penetrate the corridor as occupants escape through 
the entrance door to an affected apartment. Ventilation may be by natural 
or mechanical means.
The basic means of escape requirements for ﬂats can be listed as follows:
n Every ﬂat should have a protected entrance hall of 30 minute ﬁre resistance.
n Every living room should have an exit into the protected entrance hall.

 
352
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.3.4
Main stairway protection: apartments

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
353
n Bedrooms should be nearer to the entrance door than the living rooms or
kitchen, unless an alternative exit is available from the bedroom areas.
n Doors opening onto a protected entrance hall to be self-closing FD30 ﬁre doors
(see section on ﬁre doors in this chapter and in Chapter 7.1 of Construction
Technology).
n Maximum travel distance from any habitable room exit to the entrance door to
be 9.000 m; if exceeded an alternative route is to be provided.
n Locate cooking facilities remote from entrance doors.
A typical ﬂat example is shown in Fig. 7.3.5.
The basic means of escape requirements for maisonettes can be similarly listed:
n All maisonettes to have a protected entrance hall and stairway.
n All habitable rooms to have direct access to this hall or stairway.
n Doors opening on to hall or stairway to be self-closing (FD30).
n Hall and stairway to have 30 minute ﬁre-resistant walls.
n Alternatively, means of escape from each habitable room must be provided
except that at entrance level, e.g. exit through windows (dimensions as described
for dwelling-houses).
A typical maisonette example is shown in Fig. 7.3.6.
Readers are encouraged to study the many examples of means of escape planning
for apartments given in Section 3 of Approved Document B1 to the Building
Regulations and BS 5588-1: Fire precautions in the design, construction and use 
of buildings. Code of practice for residential buildings.
nnn OFFICE BUILDINGS
BS 5588-11: Fire precautions in the design, construction and use of buildings. Code of
practice for shops, ofﬁces, industrial, storage and other similar buildings covers ofﬁce
buildings of all sizes and heights in the context of means of escape in case of ﬁre,
and complements Building Regulation B1.
The planning procedures for means of escape set out in the code are based on
attempting to identify the positions of all possible sources of outbreak of ﬁre and to
predict the courses that might follow such an outbreak and in particular the passage
of the ﬁre and the passage of the smoke and gases ensuing from the ﬁre. The basic
planning objectives are to provide protected escape routes in the horizontal and
vertical directions that will enable persons within the building confronted by an
outbreak of ﬁre to turn away and make a safe escape without outside assistance. 
To achieve this planning objective there must be sufﬁcient exits to allow the
occupants to reach an area of safety without delay. It is not always necessary to 
plan for the complete evacuation of the building because compartmentation of 
the building will restrict the ﬁre initially to an area within that compartment.
Two important factors to be considered in planning escape routes are width and
travel distance. The width is based upon an evacuation time of 2.5 minutes through
a storey exit on the assumption that a unit exit width of 500 mm will allow the ﬂow
of 40 persons per minute. See Tables 2 and 3 in the code and Table 4 in Section 2

 
354
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.3.5
Means of escape: example of ﬂats/apartments with only one stairway

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
355
Figure 7.3.6
Means of escape: maisonette example

 
356
Advanced Construction Technology
of Approved Document B1 of the Building Regulations for guidance on assessing
the likely population density and clear widths of escape routes related to the
maximum number of persons.
Travel distances are considered under two headings: direct distance and travel
distance. A direct distance is the shortest distance from any point within the ﬂoor
area to the nearest storey exit measured so as to ignore walls, partitions and ﬁttings.
Generally the maximum direct distance is 12.000 m for escape in one direction or
30.000 m for escape in more than one direction. The travel distance is deﬁned as 
the actual distance travelled from any point within the ﬂoor area to the nearest
storey exit having regard to the layout of walls, partitions and ﬁttings. Generally 
the maximum travel distances are 18.000 m for escape in one direction and 
45.000 m for travel in more than one direction. Note that both maximum 
distances must not be exceeded, and that if alternative exits subtend an angle 
of less than 45° with one another and are not separated by ﬁre-resisting construction
they are classiﬁed as exits in one direction only. See also Appendix H in the
Approved Document for small premises.
The horizontal escape routes should be clear gangways with non-slippery even
surfaces, and if ramps are included these should have an easy gradient of a slope 
of not more than 1 in 12. (See also Approved Document M: Access to and use of
buildings.) The minimum clear headroom should be 2.000 m with no projections
from walls except for normal handrails. The minimum ﬁre resistance should be 
not less than 30 minutes unless a higher resistance is required by the Building
Regulations. Limitations on glazing for both escape corridors and doors are given 
in the text and accompanying tables within Approved Document B and the code 
of practice.
The code recommends that there should not be less than two protected stairways
available from any storey unless the premises are small or a basement storey in a
localised ﬁre-risk situation, with direct distance no more than that given in Table 1
of the code. Additional protected stairways should be provided as necessary to meet
the requirements for travel distance. Where more than one stairway is provided it 
is usual to assume that one stairway would be blocked by the ﬁre and therefore the
remaining stairways must have sufﬁcient width to cater for the total persons to be
evacuated. A typical example of means of escape from an ofﬁce building is shown 
in Fig. 7.3.7.
nnn SHOPS AND SIMILAR PREMISES
BS 5588-11 covers all classes of shops and other similar types of premises such 
as cafés, restaurants, public houses and premises where goods are received for
treatment, examples being dry cleaners and shoe repairers. The main objectives of
the code’s requirements are to provide safety from ﬁre by means of planning and
providing protection of both horizontal and vertical escape routes for any area
threatened by ﬁre, thus enabling any person confronted by an outbreak of ﬁre 
to make an unassisted escape. Under the Fire Precautions Act 1971 as amended 
by the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 an adequate means of escape is
required for all shops, and for particular shops a ﬁre certiﬁcate will be required.

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
357
Figure 7.3.7
Means of escape: ofﬁce buildings – upper ﬂoor level < 5.000 m above ground

 
358
Advanced Construction Technology
In planning escape routes there must be sufﬁcient exit facilities, such as
protected routes and stairways, to allow the public and staff to reach areas of safety
without undue delay. It is not always necessary to plan for complete evacuation
immediately an outbreak of ﬁre occurs. Compartmentation of multi-storey shops
will limit the rate of ﬁre spread, and in such cases a reasonable assumption would 
be to design for the immediate evacuation of the ﬂoor on which the outbreak occurs
plus the ﬂoor above, which is the next portion of the building at risk. Escape widths
are based upon an evacuation time of 2.5 minutes and on the assumption that a unit
exit width of 500 mm permits the passage of 40 persons per minute. Guidance as to
possible population densities is given in the code by means of a table that shows the
ﬂoor space per person for types of rooms or storeys. Similarly, another table gives
clear widths for exits related to the total number of persons in a room or storey.
The maximum permitted travel distance is another important factor, and can be
taken as a maximum distance measured around obstructions such as ﬁxed counters
or a direct distance measured over the obstructions. The distances given in a table
take into account the number of exits, the relationship of alternative exits and
whether the ﬂoor under consideration is a ground ﬂoor or an upper ﬂoor. Generally
the maximum travel distances in one direction are 18.000 m and 45.000 m where
exits subtend an angle of more than 45°. The maximum direct travel distances are
12.000 m and 30.000 m for similar conditions.
The vertical escape route via the stairs leading to the ﬁnal exit leading direct 
to the open air must also cater for the anticipated number of persons likely to 
use the stairs for evacuation purposes. A table giving guidance on minimum stair
widths related to population density and height of building is given in the code.
Alternatively, Tables 5, 6 and 7 in Approved Document B1 may be used. It is
recommended that approach lobbies are used for all stairs in buildings over 
18.000 m high because of the higher risks to occupants in high buildings (see 
Fig. 7.3.8). In calculating the number of stairways required it should be assumed
that one stairway would be inaccessible in the event of a ﬁre if two or more
stairways are actually required.
Small shops with ﬂoor areas of not more than 280 m2 in one occupancy and of
not more than two storeys plus a basement are treated separately. The maximum
travel or direct distance is governed by the ﬂoor’s position within the building.
Basement and upper ﬂoor distances are 18.000 m and 12.000 m for single exits, with
ground-ﬂoor distances being 27.000 m and 18.000 m respectively (see Fig. 7.3.8).
Where more than one exit exists the distances are 45.000 m and 30.000 m
respectively.
STAIRS
These should be of non-combustible materials and continuous, leading ultimately 
to the ﬁnal exit door to the place of safety. The recommended dimensions of going,
rise, handrails and maximum number of risers per ﬂight are shown in Fig. 7.3.9.
Fire-resistant glazing is permitted but should be restricted to the portion of the 
wall above the handrails and preferably designed in accordance with the
recommendations of BS 476-22.

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
359
Figure 7.3.8
Means of escape: small and large shops – upper ﬂoor example

 
360
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.3.9
Typical escape stairway details

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
361
Minimum widths of escape stairs depend on the number provided, the type 
of building served, the anticipated number of persons likely to use it, and the
number of storeys served. Tables 4 and 5 in BS 5588-11 can be used for 
design guidance and Table 5 from Section 3 of Approved Document B1 to the
Building Regulations. Also, a formula method can be applied:
P = 200w + 50(w −0.3)(n −1)
where
P = no. of people to be accommodated (except ground ﬂoor)
w = width of stair
n = number of storeys
For example, in a 15-storey building with 1,000 people, P = 1,000 and n = 15.
Therefore, using the formula:
1,000 = 200w + 50(w −0.3)(15 −1)
= 200w + (50w −15)(14)
= 200w + 700w −210
= 900w −210
∴w = 1,210/900 = 1.345 m
nnn DOORS
Factors relating to the integrity, insulation and stability of doors in the presence 
of ﬁre are considered in some detail in Chapter 7.1 of the accompanying volume,
Construction Technology, and in Chapter 7.2 of this volume. Speciﬁc reference 
is also made to BS 476-22: Methods for determination of ﬁre resistance of non-
loadbearing elements of construction. See also Fig. 7.3.10 for a typical example 
of a ﬁre door with variations to achieve FD30 and FD60 ratings.
SMOKE-STOP DOORS
The function of this form of door is obvious from its title, and no special
requirements are recommended as to door thickness or area of glazing when using 
6 mm wired glass. The most vulnerable point for the passage of smoke is around the
edges, and therefore a maximum gap of 3 mm is usually speciﬁed, together with a
brush draught-excluder seal.
AUTOMATIC FIRE DOORS
In compartmented industrial buildings it is not always convenient to keep the ﬁre
doors in the closed position as recommended. A closed door in such a situation 
may impede the ﬂow and circulation of people and materials, thus slowing down 
or interrupting the production process. To seal the openings in the compartment
walls in the event of a ﬁre automatic ﬁre doors or shutters can be used. These can
be held in the open position in normal circumstances by counterbalance weights 
or electromagnetic devices, and should a ﬁre occur they will close automatically,
usually by gravitational forces. The controlling device can be a simple fusible link, 

 
362
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.3.10
Fire doors

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
363
a smoke or heat detector, which could be linked to the ﬁre alarm system. A typical
detail of an automatic sliding ﬁre door is shown in Fig. 7.3.11.
nnn PRESSURISED STAIRWAYS
The traditional methods of keeping escape stairways clear of smoke during a ﬁre 
by having access lobbies and/or natural ventilations are not always acceptable in
modern designs where, for example, the stairways are situated in the core of the
building or where the building has a full air conditioning and ventilation design.
Pressurisation is a method devised to prevent smoke logging in an unfenestrated
stairway by a system of continuous pressurisation, which will keep the stairway 
clear of smoke if the doors remain closed. Only a small fan installation is required 
to maintain a nominal pressure of not less than 50 Pa. In addition to controlling
smoke, pressurisation also increases the ﬁre resistance of doors opening into the
protected area. It is essential with these installations that the doors are well sealed 
to prevent pressure loss.
nnn EXTERNAL ESCAPE STAIRS
If more than one escape route is provided from a storey, some of these may be by
way of an external escape stairway, provided there is at least one internal escape
stair. Therefore these are considered only as an alternative additional escape route.
They can be adversely affected by snow, ice and heat, and are generally difﬁcult to
design in a manner that can be considered aesthetically pleasing. All such stairs
should be constructed throughout in steel, light alloy or concrete and be adequately
protected against corrosion. Typical details of a steel external escape staircase are
shown in Fig. 7.3.12.
Having now completed a brief study of ﬁre and the way it affects the design 
of buildings choice of materials and circulation patterns it must be obvious to the
reader that this is an important topic that, if ignored or treated lightly, can have
disastrous consequences not only for a structure but also for human life.

 
364
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 7.3.11
Automatic sliding ﬁre door details

 
Means of escape in case of ﬁre
365
Figure 7.3.12
Typical external steel escape stairway details

 

 
CLADDINGS 
TO FRAMED
STRUCTURES
PART
8

 

 
Claddings are a form of masking or inﬁlling a structural frame, and can be
considered under the following headings:
n Panel walls with or without attached facings (see Chapter 10.6 of Construction
Technology).
n Concrete and similar cladding panels.
n Light inﬁll panels.
n Curtain walling, which can be deﬁned as a sheath cladding that encloses the
entire structure, such as fully glazed systems.
All forms of cladding should fulﬁl the following functions:
n self-support between the framing members;
n resistance to rain penetration;
n resistance to both positive and negative wind pressures;
n resistance to wind penetration;
n thermal insulation;
n sound insulation;
n ﬁre resistance;
n admittance of natural daylight and ventilation;
n constructed to a suitable size for handling and placing;
n durability – limited maintenance;
n aesthetically acceptable for the situation.
nnn CONCRETE CLADDING PANELS
These are usually made of precast concrete with a textured face in a storey height or
undersill panel format. The storey height panel is designed to span vertically from
beam to beam and if constructed to a narrow module will give the illusion of a tall
8.1
CLADDING PANELS

 
370
Advanced Construction Technology
building. Undersill panels span horizontally from column to column and are used
where a high wall/window ratio is required. Combinations of both formats are 
also possible.
Concrete cladding panels should be constructed of a dense concrete mix 
and suitably reinforced with bar reinforcement or steel-welded fabric. The
reinforcement should provide the necessary tensile resistance to the stresses induced
in the ﬁnal position and to the stresses set up during transportation and hoisting
into position. Lifting lugs, positions or holes should be incorporated into the design
to ensure that the panels are hoisted in the correct manner so that unwanted stresses
are not induced. The usual speciﬁcation for cover of concrete over reinforcement is
25 mm minimum. If thin panels are being used the use of galvanised or stainless
steel reinforcement should be considered to reduce the risk of corrosion.
When designing or selecting a panel the following must be taken into account:
n column or beam spacing;
n lifting capacities of plant available;
n jointing method;
n exposure conditions;
n any special planning requirements as to ﬁnish or texture.
The greatest problem facing the designer and installer of concrete panels is one
of jointing to allow for structural and thermal movements and at the same time
provide an adequate long-term joint (see Chapters 8.3 and 8.4). Typical examples 
of storey height and undersill panels are shown in Figs 8.1.1 and 8.1.2.
Where a stone facing is required to a framed structure, possibly to comply 
with planning requirements, it may be advantageous to use a composite panel.
These panels have the strength and reliability of precast concrete panel design 
and manufacture but the appearance of traditional stonework. This is achieved by
casting a concrete backing to a suitably keyed natural or reconstructed stone facing
and ﬁxing it to the frame by traditional masonry ﬁxing cramps or by conventional
ﬁxings (see Fig. 8.1.3).
Thermal insulation can be achieved when using precast concrete panels by
creating a cavity, as shown in Figs 8.1.1 and 8.1.2. However, continuity of
insulation will require an insulative material lining with supplementary blockwork
extending over the face of the edge beams to coincide with mineral wool (or 
similar) insulation slabs to the roof/ﬂoor slab sofﬁt. These slabs can be faced with
plasterboard containing an integral vapour control layer. It may also be possible to
incorporate insulation in a sandwich cladding panel, as shown in Fig. 8.3.4.
Concrete cladding panels can be large and consequently heavy. To reduce the
weight they are often designed to be relatively thin (50 to 75 mm) across the centre
portion and stiffened around the edges with suitably reinforced ribs, which usually
occur on the back face but can be positioned on the front face as a feature, which
can also limit the amount of water which can enter the joint.
An alternative lightweight cladding material is glass-ﬁbre-reinforced plastic
(GRP). This consists of glass ﬁbre reinforcement impregnated with resin,
incorporating ﬁllers, pigments and a suitable catalyst as a hardener. The resultant
panels are lightweight, durable, non-corrosive, have good weather resistance, can be

 
Cladding panels
371
Note: For buildings where energy conservation and thermal bridging prevention measures
are required (UK – see Bldg Reg. L), a supplementary thickness of insulation and inner
walling can extend over the edge beam. Additional insulation is applied to the sofﬁt of 
the RC roof/ﬂoor slabs. Cavity insulation may also be considered.
Figure 8.1.1
Typical storey height concrete cladding panel

 
372
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.1.2
Typical undersill concrete cladding panel (see note to Fig. 8.1.1)

 
Cladding panels
373
Figure 8.1.3
Typical storey height composite panel

 
374
Advanced Construction Technology
moulded to almost any proﬁle, and have good aesthetic properties. As they age,
their colour can have a tendency to fade.
Further relevant reading includes the Building Research Establishment’s (BRE)
Cladding Pack (2005). This is a collection taken from the Establishment’s BRE
Digests, Information Papers and Good Building Guides. Pack contents:
n Insulated external cladding systems (GG 31).
n Metal cladding: assessing the thermal performance of built-up systems which use
‘Z’ spacers (IP 10/02).
n Reinforced plastics cladding panels (DG 161).
n Wall cladding defects and their diagnosis (DG 217).
n Wall cladding: Designing to minimise defects due to inaccuracies and
movements (DG 223).
The BRE also publishes A cladding bibliography of selected publications: BRE 
Report 194.

 
The functions of an inﬁll panel are as listed previously for cladding panels in
general. Inﬁll panels are lightweight and usually glazed to give good internal 
natural daylighting conditions. The panel layout can be so arranged to expose some
or all of the structural members, creating various optical impressions. For example,
if horizontal panels are used, leaving only the beams exposed, an illusion of extra
length and/or reduced height can be created (see Fig. 8.2.1). These practices are
typical of many existing structures and continue to be appropriate where thermal
insulation and thermal bridging are not a design priority, e.g. car parks. Current
energy conservation requirements provide an opportunity to over-clad exposed
structural members with a superﬁcial cladding when refurbishing and updating
these buildings: see Chapter 8.6 on rainscreen cladding.
A wide variety of materials or combinations of materials can be employed, such
as timber, steel, aluminium or plastic. Double-glazing techniques can be used to
achieve the desired sound or thermal insulation. The glazing module should be 
such that a reasonable thickness of glass can be speciﬁed.
The design of the ‘solid’ panel is of great importance, because this panel must
provide the necessary resistance to ﬁre, heat loss, sound penetration and interstitial
condensation. Most of these panels are of composite or sandwich construction, as
shown in Figs 8.2.2 and 8.2.3. The extent and type of glazing, plus the thickness 
of insulating quilt in the lower panels, will depend on local climatic conditions and
associated legislation (see note to Fig. 8.2.2).
The jointing problem with inﬁll panels occurs mainly at its junction with the
structural frame, and allowance for moisture or thermal movement is usually
achieved by using a suitable mastic or sealant (see Chapter 8.4). Masonry inﬁll
panels of contemporary cavity construction can be used to preserve traditional
features and to attain high standards of sound and thermal insulation and ﬁre
protection. Masonry walls are tied to the structural frame with wall ties cast into 
8.2
INFILL PANELS

 
376
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.2.1
Typical inﬁll panel arrangements

 
Infill panels
377
*Note: Construction shown can be upgraded to improve thermal insulation standards by
applying thermal laminate gypsum plasterboard to interior of exposed RC beams and
underside of the RC ﬂoor, installing double glazing (see Construction Technology) and an
insulated screed, and increasing the thickness of the lower panel to contain more glass 
fibre insulant.
Figure 8.2.2
Typical timber inﬁll panel details

 
378
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.2.3
Typical metal inﬁll panel details

 
Infill panels
379
the concrete columns or with a purpose-made cladding support system. 
Figures 8.2.4 and 8.2.5 show the principles of application.
Most inﬁll panels are supplied as a manufacturer’s modular system, because
purpose-made panels can be uneconomic, but whichever method is chosen 
the design aims remain constant: that is, to provide a panel that fulﬁls all the
required functions and has a low long-term maintenance factor. Note that many 
of the essentially curtain-walling systems are adaptable as inﬁll panels, which 
gives the designer a wide range of systems from which to select the most suitable.
One of the maintenance problems encountered with inﬁll panels, and probably 
to a lesser extent with the concrete claddings, is the cleaning of the facade and 
in particular the glazing. All buildings collect dirt, the effects of which can vary
with the material: concrete and masonry tend to accept dirt and weather naturally,
whereas impervious materials such as metals and glass do not accept dirt and can
corrode or become less efﬁcient.
If glass is allowed to become coated with dirt its visual appearance is less
acceptable, its optical performance lessens because clarity of vision is reduced, 
and the useful penetration of natural daylight diminishes. The number of times 
that cleaning will be necessary depends largely upon the area, ranging from three-
monthly intervals in non-industrial areas to six-weekly intervals in areas with a high
pollution factor.
Access for cleaning glazed areas can be external or internal. Windows at ground
level present no access problems and present only the question of choice of method
such as hand cloths or telescopic poles with squeegee heads. Low- and medium-rise
structures can be reached by ladders or a mobile scaffold tower and usually present
very few problems. High-rise structures need careful consideration. External access
to windows is gained by using a cradle suspended from roof level; this can be in the
form of a temporary system consisting of counterweighted cantilevered beams from
which the cradle is suspended. Permanent systems, which are incorporated as part
of the building design, are more efﬁcient and consist of a track on which a mobile
trolley is mounted and from which davit arms can be projected beyond the roof
edge to support the cradle. A single track ﬁxed in front of the roof edge could also
be considered; these are simple and reasonably efﬁcient but the rail is always visible
and can therefore mar the building’s appearance.
Internal access for cleaning the external glass face can be achieved by using
windows such as reversible sashes, horizontal and vertical sliding sashes, but the
designer is restricted in his choice to the reach possible by the average person. 
It cannot be overemphasised that such windows can be a very dangerous hazard
unless carefully designed so that all parts of the glazed area can be reached by the
person cleaning the windows while standing ﬁrmly on the ﬂoor.

 
380
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.2.4
Non-loadbearing masonry inﬁll panel

 
Infill panels
381
Figure 8.2.5
Non-loadbearing masonry cladding panel

 
When incorporating precast concrete cladding panels in a framed structure the
problem of making the joints waterproof is of paramount importance. Joints 
should be designed so that they fulﬁl the following requirements:
n exclude wind, rain and snow;
n allow for structural, thermal and moisture movement;
n good durability;
n easily maintained;
n maintain the thermal and sound insulation properties of the surrounding
cladding;
n easily made or assembled.
Experience has shown that bad design, poor workmanship or lack of
understanding of the function of a joint has led to water penetration through 
the joints between cladding panels. To overcome this problem it is essential that
both the designer and the site operative fully appreciate the design principles 
and the need for accurate installation. Suitable joints can be classiﬁed under two
headings:
n Filled joints.
n Drained joints.
Filled joints are generally satisfactory if the cladding panel module is small 
because, if incorporated in large module panels, ﬁlled joints can crack and allow
water to penetrate. This failure is due either to the ﬁlling materials being incapable
of accommodating movement or to a breakdown of adhesion between the ﬁlling
material and the panel. Research has shown that if the above failures are possible
the most effective alternative is the drained joint.
8.3
JOINTING

 
Jointing
383
nnn FILLED JOINTS
These joints are not easy to construct and rely mainly upon mortars, sealants,
mastics or preformed gaskets to provide the barrier against the inﬁltration of wind
and rain. They are limited in their performance by the amount to which the sealing
material(s) can accommodate movement and to a certain extent by their weathering
properties, such as their resistance to ultraviolet rays. The disadvantages of ﬁlled
joints can be listed as:
n difﬁculty in making and placing the joints accurately, particularly with
combinations of materials;
n providing for structural, thermal and moisture movement;
n suitable only for small module claddings.
For typical detail see Fig. 8.3.1.
nnn DRAINED JOINTS
These joints have been designed and developed to overcome the disadvantages of
the ﬁlled joint by:
n designing the joint to have a drainage zone;
n providing an air-tight seal at the rear of the joint.
Drained joints have two components that must be considered: the vertical joint
and the horizontal joint.
VERTICAL JOINTS
These consist basically of a deep narrow gap between adjacent panels where the 
rear of the joint is adequately sealed to prevent the passage of air and moisture. The
width of the joint does not signiﬁcantly affect the amount of water reaching the rear
seal, for the following reasons:
n Most of the water entering the joint (approximately 80%) will do so by following
over the face of the panel; the remainder (approximately 20%) will enter the joint
directly, and most of this water entering the joint will drain down within the ﬁrst
50 mm of the joint depth. Usually the deciding factor for determining the joint
width is the type of mastic or sealant being used and its ability to accommodate
movement.
n There are checks on the amount of water entering the drainage zone such as ribs
to joint edges, exposed aggregate external surfaces and the use of bafﬂes.
Bafﬂes are loose strips of material such as neoprene, butyl rubber or plasticised
PVC, which are unaffected by direct sunlight and act as a ﬁrst line of defence to
water penetration. The bafﬂes are inserted, after the panels have been positioned
and ﬁxed, either by pulling them through prepared grooves or by direct insertion
into the locating grooves from the face or back of the panel according to the joint
design. Care must be taken when inserting bafﬂes by the pulling method because

 
384
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.3.1
Typical ﬁlled and drained joints

 
Jointing
385
they invariably stretch during insertion and they must be allowed to return to their
original length before trimming off the surplus to ensure adequate cover at the
intersection of the vertical and horizontal joint.
Adequate sealing at the back of the joint is of utmost importance, because some
water will usually penetrate past the open drainage zone or the bafﬂe, and any air
movement through the joint seal will also assist the passage of water or moisture.
Drained joints that have only a back seal or a bafﬂe and seal can have a cold bridge
effect on the internal face giving rise to local condensation: therefore consideration
must be given to maintaining the continuity of the thermal insulation value of the
cladding (see typical details in Figs 8.3.1 and 8.3.2).
HORIZONTAL JOINTS
These are usually in the form of a rebated lap joint, the upper panel being lapped
over the top edge of the lower panel. As with the vertical joints, the provision of 
an adequate back seal to prevent air movement through the joint is of paramount
importance. The seal must also perform the function of a compression joint:
therefore the sealing strip is of a compressible material such as bituminised 
foamed polyurethane or a preformed cellular rubber strip.
The proﬁle of the joint is such that any water entering the gap by ﬂowing from
the panel face or by being blown in by the wind is encouraged to drain back onto
the face of the lower panel. The depth of joint overlap is usually determined by the
degree of exposure, and ranges from 50 mm for normal exposure to 100 mm for
severe exposure (see Fig. 8.3.3 for typical details). Note that the effective overlap of
a horizontal joint is measured from the bottom edge of the bafﬂe in the vertical joint
to the seal, and not from the rebated edge of the lower panel (see Fig. 8.3.4).
nnn INTERSECTION OF JOINTS
This is an important feature of drained joint design and detail, because it is
necessary to shed any water draining down the vertical joint onto the face of the
lower panels where the vertical and horizontal joints intersect, as the joints are
designed to cater only for the entry of water from any one panel connection at 
a time. The usual method is to use a ﬂashing starting at the back of the panel,
dressed over and stuck to the upper edge of the lower panel, as shown in Fig. 8.3.4.
The choice of material for the ﬂashing must be carefully considered, because it 
must accept the load of the upper panel and any movements made while the panel 
is positioned and secured. Also, it should be a material that is durable but will 
not give rise to staining of the panel surface. Experience has shown that suitable
materials are bitumen-coated woven glasscloth and synthetic rubber sheet.

 
386
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.3.2
Typical drained joints using bafﬂes

 
Jointing
387
Figure 8.3.3
Typical horizontal joints

 
388
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.3.4
Typical drained joint intersection detail

 
Materials that are to be used for sealing joints, whether in the context of claddings
or for sealing the gap between a simple frame and the reveals, have to fulﬁl the
following requirements:
n provide a weathertight seal;
n accommodate movement due to thermal expansion, wind loadings, structural
movement and/or moisture movement;
n accommodate and mask tolerance variations;
n stability: that is, to remain in position without slumping;
n should not give rise to the staining of adjacent materials.
Mastics and sealants have a limited life ranging from 10 to 25 years, which 
in most cases is less than the initial design life of the structure: therefore all joints
must be designed in such a way that the seals can be renewed with reasonable 
ease, efﬁciency and cost. The common form of sealing material, called putty, is
unsuitable for many applications because it hardens soon after application and
cannot therefore accept the movements that can be expected in claddings and
similar situations. It was this inability to accommodate movement that led to the
development of mastics and sealants.
A wide variety of mastics and sealants are available to the designer and builder,
giving a variety of properties and applications. A text of this nature does not lend
itself to a complete analysis of all the types available but only to a comparison of
some of the most frequently used.
Mastics and sealants can be applied in a variety of ways such as gun or knife
applications. The most common method is by hand-held gun using disposable
cartridges ﬁtted into the body of the applicator. Most guns can be ﬁtted with
various nozzles to produce a neat bead of the required shape and size. Mastics are
also available for knife application, the material being supplied in tins or kegs up 
to 25 kg capacity.
8.4
MASTICS, SEALANTS AND GASKETS

 
390
Advanced Construction Technology
The joint should be carefully prepared to receive the mastic or sealant by
ensuring that the contact surfaces are free from all dirt, grease and oil. The contact
surfaces must be perfectly dry, and in some instances they may have to be primed
before applying the jointing compound.
nnn MASTICS
These are materials that are applied in a plastic state and form a surface skin over
the core, which remains pliable for a number of years.
BUTYL MASTIC
These are basic mastics with the addition of butyl rubber or related polymers,
making them suitable for glazing. They have a durability of up to 10 years and can
accommodate both negative and positive movements up to 5% using a maximum
joint width of 20 mm and a minimum joint depth of 6–10 mm.
OIL-BOUND MASTICS
These are the most widely used mastics, made with non-drying oils; they have
similar properties to the butyl mastics but in some cases a better durability of 
up to 15 years. They have a joint width of 25 mm maximum although some 
special grades can be up to 50 mm, but in all cases the minimum joint depth 
is 12 mm.
nnn SEALANTS
These are capable of accommodating greater movement than mastics; they are 
more durable, but dearer in both material and installation costs. They are applied 
in a plastic state and are converted by chemical reactions into an elastomer or
synthetic rubber.
TWO-PART POLYSULPHIDE AND POLYURETHANE SEALANTS
These are well-established elastomer sealants having an excellent durability 
of 25 years or more, with a movement accommodation of approximately 15%. 
They are supplied as two components: a polysulphide or polyurethane base and 
a curing or vulcanising agent. Dense impervious surfaces such as glass may need
priming, particularly before polyurethane is applied. The two parts are mixed
shortly before use, the mixture having a pot life of approximately 4 hours. The 
two parts will chemically react to form a synthetic rubber, and should be used with
a maximum joint width of 25 mm and a minimum joint depth of 6 mm when used
in conjunction with metal or glass or a 10 mm minimum joint depth when used 
in connection with concrete. Two-part polysulphide sealants should conform to 
BS 4254: Speciﬁcation for two-part polysulphide-based sealants.

 
Mastics, sealants and gaskets
391
ONE-PART POLYSULPHIDE, SILICONE OR URETHANE SEALANTS
These do not require premixing on site before application. They convert to a
synthetic rubber or an elastomer by chemical reaction with absorbed moisture 
from the atmosphere. The joint sizing is similar to that described for a two-part
polysulphide but the ﬁnal movement accommodation is less at approximately plus 
or minus 12 %. Silicones and urethanes cure quite quickly whereas polysulphides
can take up to 2 months, and during this period the movement accommodation is
very low. One-part polysulphides are generally speciﬁed for pointing and where
early or excessive movements are unlikely to occur. They should conform to 
BS 5215: Speciﬁcation for one-part gun grade polysulphide-based sealants.
ONE-PART SOLVENT-RELEASE SEALANT
This is a butyl- or acrylic-based material that does not undergo chemical reaction
with the atmosphere. It remains soft and pliable, adhering to most surfaces, but 
may break down in persistently damp exposures.
SILICONE RUBBER SEALANT
This is a one-part sealing compound that converts to an elastomer by absorbing
moisture from the atmosphere, and has similar properties to the one-part
polysulphide. It is available as pure white, translucent or in a wide range of 
colours, which makes it suitable for a variety of internal and external applications,
e.g. sealing tiles to bath ﬁttings and window/door frames to masonry. It should
conform to BS 5889: Speciﬁcation for one-part gun grade silicone-based sealants.
See also: BS EN 26927: Building construction. Jointing products. Sealants.
Vocabulary.
nnn GASKETS
As an alternative to using mastics and sealants for jointing, pre-formed gaskets 
of various designs and shapes are available (see Fig. 8.3.1). They are classiﬁed as
structural or non-structural. Structural gaskets are produced from a compound
of vulcanised polychloroprene rubber and speciﬁed to BS 4255-1: Speciﬁcation for
non-cellular gaskets. Non-structural gaskets can be made from synthetic rubber and
various plastics in solid or tubular proﬁles. They too should conform to BS 4255-1.
These can have better durability than mastics and sealants, but the design and
manufacture of the joint proﬁle requires a high degree of accuracy if a successful
joint is to be obtained.
1
2

 
Curtain walls are a form of external lightweight cladding attached to a framed
structure forming a complete envelope or sheath around the structural frame. 
They are non-loadbearing claddings, which have to support only their own
deadweight and any imposed wind loadings that are transferred to the structural
frame through connectors, which are usually positioned at ﬂoor levels. For
clariﬁcation, BS EN 13830: Curtain walling – product standard deﬁnes curtain
walling as ‘an external vertical building enclosure produced by elements mainly 
of metal, timber or plastic’. The basic conception of most curtain walls is a series 
of vertical mullions spanning from ﬂoor to ﬂoor interconnected by horizontal
transoms forming openings into which can be ﬁxed panels of glass or inﬁll panels 
of opaque materials. Most curtain walls are constructed by using a patent or
proprietary system produced by proﬁle metal fabricators.
The primary objectives of using curtain-walling systems are to:
n provide an enclosure to the structure that will give the necessary protection
against the elements;
n make use of dry construction methods;
n impose onto the structural frame the minimum load in the form of claddings;
n express an architectural feature.
To fulﬁl its primary functions a curtain wall must meet the following
requirements:
n Resistance to the elements
The materials used in curtain walls are usually
impervious and therefore in themselves present no problem, but by virtue of the
way in which they are fabricated a large number of joints occur. These joints
must be made as impervious as the surrounding materials or designed as a
drained joint. The jointing materials must also allow for any local thermal,
structural or moisture movement, and generally consist of mastics, sealants
and/or preformed gaskets of synthetic rubber or PVC.
8.5
CURTAIN WALLING

 
Curtain walling
393
n Assistance in maintaining the designed internal temperatures
As
curtain walls usually include a large percentage of glass the overall resistance 
to the transfer of heat is low, and therefore preventive measures may have to be
incorporated into the design. Another problem with large glazed areas is solar
heat gain, because glass will allow the short-wave radiations from the sun to pass
through and consequently warm up the surfaces of internal walls, equipment and
furniture. These surfaces will in turn radiate this acquired heat in the form of
long-wave radiations that cannot pass back through the glazing, thus creating an
internal heat build-up. Louvres ﬁxed within a curtain-walling system will have
little effect upon this heat build-up but they will reduce solar glare. A system of
non-transparent external louvres will reduce the heat gain slightly by absorbing
heat and radiating it back to the external air. The usual methods employed to
solve the problem of internal heat gain are:
n Deep recessed windows, which could be used in conjunction with external
vertical ﬁns.
n Balanced internal heating and ventilation systems.
n Use of special solar control glass such as reﬂective glasses that are modiﬁed 
during manufacture by depositing a metallic or dielectric reﬂective layer 
on the surface of the glass. The efﬁciency of this form of glazing can be
increased if the glass is tilted by 5° to 15° to increase the angle of incidence.
n Adequate strength
Although curtain walls are classiﬁed as non-loadbearing
they must be able to carry their own weight and resist both positive and negative
wind loadings. The magnitude of this latter loading will depend upon three basic
factors:
n height of building;
n degree of exposure;
n location of building.
The strength of curtain walling relies mainly upon the stiffness of the vertical
component or mullion together with its anchorage or ﬁxing to the structural
frame. Glazing beads and the use of compressible materials also add to the
resistance of possible wind damage of the glazed and inﬁll panel areas by
enabling these units to move independently of the curtain-wall framing.
n Required degree of ﬁre resistance
This is probably one of the greatest
restrictions encountered when using curtain-walling techniques because of the
large proportion of unprotected areas as deﬁned in the Building Regulations,
Approved Document B4: Section 12.7. See also Part 7 of this volume for matters
relating to external ﬁre spread. By using suitable materials or combinations of
materials the opaque inﬁll panels can normally achieve the required ﬁre
resistance to enable them to be classiﬁed as protected areas.
n Ease of assembly and ﬁxing
The principal member of a curtain-walling
system is usually the mullion, which can be a solid or box section that is ﬁxed 
to the structural frame at ﬂoor levels by means of adjustable anchorages or
connectors. The inﬁll framing and panels may be obtained as a series of
individual components or as a single prefabricated unit. The main problems 
are ease of handling, amount of site assembly required and mode of access 
to the ﬁxing position.

 
394
Advanced Construction Technology
n Required degree of sound insulation
Sound originating from within the
structure may be transmitted vertically through the curtain-walling members.
The chief source of this form of structure-borne sound is machinery, and this
may be reduced by isolating the offending machines by mounting them on
resilient pads and/or using resilient connectors in the joints between mullion
lengths. Airborne sound can be troublesome with curtain-walling systems
because the lightweight cladding has little mass to offer in the form of a 
sound barrier, the weakest point being the glazed areas. A reduction in the
amount of sound transmitted can be achieved by:
n reducing the areas of glazing;
n using sealed windows of increased glass thickness;
n double glazing in the form of inner and outer panes of glass with an air space
of 150 to 200 mm between them.
n Provision for thermal and structural movements
As curtain walling is
situated on an external face of the structure it will be more exposed than the
structural frame and will therefore be subject to greater amounts of temperature
change, resulting in high thermal movement. The main frame may also be
subjected to greater settlement than the claddings attached to its outer face.
These differential movements mean that the curtain-walling systems should 
be so designed, fabricated and ﬁxed that the attached cladding can move
independently of the structure. The usual methods of providing for this required
movement are to have slotted bolt connections and, to allow for movement
within the curtain walling itself, to have spigot connections and/or mastic-sealed
joints. Figures 8.5.1 and 8.5.2 show typical established curtain-walling examples
to illustrate these principles. To reduce the risk of condensation on the interior
of support framing and thermal bridging, a thermal break is incorporated as
shown in Fig. 8.5.3.
nnn INFILL PANELS
The panels used to form the opaque areas in a curtain-walling system should have
the following properties:
n lightweight;
n rigidity;
n impermeability;
n suitable ﬁre resistance;
n suitable resistance to heat transfer;
n good durability requiring little or no maintenance.
No one material has all the above-listed properties, and therefore inﬁll panels are
usually manufactured in the form of a sandwich or combination panel. One of the
main problems encountered with any form of external sandwich panel is interstitial
condensation, which is usually overcome by including a vapour control layer of
suitable material situated near the inner face of the panel. A vapour control layer
can be deﬁned as a membrane with a vapour resistance greater than 200 MN/g.
Suitable materials include adequately lapped sheeting such as aluminium foil,

 
Curtain walling
395
Figure 8.5.1
Typical curtain-walling details: 1

 
396
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.5.2
Typical curtain-walling details: 2

 
Curtain walling
397
waterproof building papers, polythene sheet and applied materials such as two coats
of bitumen paint or two coats of chlorinated rubber paint. Care must be taken when
positioning vapour control layers to ensure that an interaction is not set up between
adjacent materials, such as the alkali attack of aluminium if placed next to concrete
or ﬁbre cement.
The choice of external facing for these inﬁll cladding materials is very important
because of their direct exposure to the elements. Plastic and plastic-coated materials
are obvious choices provided they meet the minimum ﬁre regulations as set out in
Approved Document B. One of the most popular materials for the external facing 
of inﬁll panels is vitreous enamelled steel or aluminium sheets of 0.7 and 0.8 mm
thickness respectively. In the preparation process a thin coating of glass is fused
onto the metal surface at a temperature of between 800 and 860 °C, resulting in an
extremely hard, impervious, acid and corrosion-resistant panel that will withstand
severe abrasive action; also, the ﬁnish will not be subject to crazing or cracking,
resulting in an attractive ﬁnish with the strength of the base metal. Aluminium
sheeting can be ﬁnished with a silicone polyester coating. When used in
combination with materials such as expanded polystyrene (EPS), rockﬁbre,
polyurethane, phenolic or polyisocyanurate insulants a lightweight inﬁll panel
giving U-values less than 0.35 W/m2 K can be achieved. Typical inﬁll panel
examples are shown in Figs 8.5.4 and 8.5.5. Fire performance for both internal 
and external surfaces must satisfy the Building Regulations for class 0, tested in
accordance with BS 476-6 and 7. The insulating core should not ignite when tested
to BS 476-12. Panels can be manufactured up to 3.000 m long by 1.000 m wide.
nnn GLAZING
The primary function of any material ﬁxed into an opening in the external facade 
of a building is to provide a weather seal. Glass also provides general daylight
Figure 8.5.3
Extruded aluminium mullion or transom incorporating thermal breaks

 
398
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.5.4
Typical curtain-walling inﬁll panel details

 
Curtain walling
399
Figure 8.5.5
Typical insulated horizontal wall panel cladding

 
400
Advanced Construction Technology
illumination of the interior of the building and daylight for carrying out speciﬁc
tasks; at the same time it can provide a view out or visual contact with the outside
world. It is not really necessary to have the internal space of a building illuminated
by natural daylight because this can be adequately covered by a well-designed and
installed artiﬁcial lighting system, but in psychological and energy conservation
terms it is usually considered desirable to have a reasonable proportion of glazed
areas.
The nature of work to be carried out and the position of the working plane will
largely determine whether daylight from glazed areas alone can provide sufﬁcient
illumination for speciﬁc work tasks. Many of these tasks are carried out on a
horizontal surface, which is best illuminated by vertical light: therefore careful
design of window size, window position and possible daylight factors need to be
assessed if glazed areas are to provide the main source of work task illumination.
The need for visual contact with the outside world, like the need for daylight
illumination of the interior, is largely a case of psychological well-being rather than
dire necessity, but to provide an acceptable view out the areas of glazing need to be
planned bearing in mind the size, orientation and view obtained. The problems 
of solar heat gain, solar glare, thermal and sound insulation have already been
considered at the beginning of this chapter, and therefore no further comment
seems necessary under this heading. The major problem remaining when using
glass in the facades of high-rise structures and in particular for curtain walling is
providing a means of access for cleaning and maintenance.
The cleaning of windows in this context can be a dangerous and costly process,
but such glazed areas do need cleaning, for the following reasons:
n prevention of dirt accumulation resulting in a distortion of the original visual
appearance;
n maintaining the designed daylight transmission;
n maintaining the clarity of vision out;
n prevention of deterioration of the glazing materials due to chemical and/or 
dirt attack.
The usual method of cleaning windows is by washing with water using swabs,
chamois leather, scrims and squeegee cleaners, all of which are hand held, requiring
close access to the glass to be cleaned. Cleaning the internal surfaces does not
normally present a problem, but unless pivot or tilt-and-turn windows are used 
the cleaning of the outside surface will require a means of external access. In 
low- to medium-rise structures access can be by means of trestles, stepladders or
straight ladders, the latter being possible up to 11.000 m, after which they become
dangerous because of ﬂexing and the lack of overall control. Tower scaffolds are
seldom used for window cleaning because of the cost and time involved in assembly,
but lightweight, quickly erected scaffold systems could be considered for heights 
up to 6.000 m.
Access for external cleaning of curtain-wall facades in high-rise structures is
generally by the use of suspended cradles, which can be of a temporary nature as
shown in Fig. 2.6.2, or can be of a permanent system designed and constructed as
an integral part of the structure. The simplest form is to install a universal beam

 
Curtain walling
401
section at roof level positioned about 450 mm in front of the general facade line and
continuous around the perimeter of the roof. A conventional cradle is attached by
means of castors located on the bottom ﬂange of the ring or edge beam. Control 
is by means of ropes from the cradle, which must be lowered to ground level for
access purposes.
A better form is where the transversing track is concealed by placing a pair 
of rails to a 750 mm gauge to which is ﬁxed a trolley having projecting beams or
davits that can be retracted and/or luffed, the latter being particularly useful for
negotiating projections in the general facade. The trolley may be manually operated
from the cradle for transversing, or it may be an electric-powered trolley giving
vertical movement of between 5 and 15 m per minute or horizontal movement of 5
to 12 m per minute. This form of trolley is usually considered essential for heights
over 45.000 m. In all cases the roof must have been structurally designed to accept
the load of the apparatus.
Some form of cable restraint must be incorporated in the design to overcome 
the problem of unacceptable cradle movement due to the action of wind around the
structure. Winds moving up the face of the building will cause the cradle to swing
at right angles to the face, giving rise to possible impact damage to the face of the
structure as well as placing the operatives in a hazardous situation.
Crosswinds can cause the cradle to move horizontally along the face of the
building, with equally disastrous results. Methods of cradle and cable restraint
available are the use of suction grips, eyebolts ﬁxed to the facade through which 
the suspension ropes can be threaded, suspension ropes suitably tensioned at
ground level, electrical cutouts at intervals of 15.000 m, which will prevent further
cradle movement until a special plug through which the hoist line passes has been
inserted, using the mullions as a guide for rollers that are either in contact with 
the mullion face to prevent lateral movement, or using castors located behind a
mullion ﬂange to prevent outward movement.

 
Rainscreen cladding is a facing or facade applied as part of the construction of new
buildings or as a protective or decorative overcladding to existing structures. The
latter application provides an opportunity to modernise the exterior appearance 
of a dated building and improve its sound and thermal insulation.
The ‘loose-ﬁt’ nature of rainscreen cladding with screw, rivet or clip-on ﬁxings
allows for future changes, as variations in corporate image or changing owner
requirements may determine. The key features of this type of exterior treatment 
are the provision of:
n an outer weather-resistant layer;
n an outer decorative layer;
n a vertical support frame secured to the structural wall;
n a drained and ventilated cavity between cladding and wall;
n a facility for integral insulation.
The concept is shown in Fig. 8.6.1.
nnn NEW CONSTRUCTION
The use of rainscreen cladding allows an opportunity for the designer to use 
an inexpensive single skin of lightweight concrete blockwork as inﬁlling between 
the structural frame. This provides the background support for superimposed
water-resistant insulation such as resin-bonded rock ﬁbre batts in thicknesses 
up to 150 mm. Traditional details such as cavity trays and damp-proof
membranes/courses are not required. Also, the continuity of insulation 
considerably reduces any possibility for cold bridging or the occurrence 
of interstitial condensation.
8.6
RAINSCREEN CLADDING

 
Rainscreen cladding
403
Figure 8.6.1
Rainscreen cladding (RSC): the concept

 
404
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn EXISTING CONSTRUCTION
Weather-damaged, dated and generally unattractive building facades can be
considerably improved and protected by supplementary cladding. However, local
planning restrictions with particular regard to conservation areas must be consulted
before proceeding with the obliteration of an existing facade. Signiﬁcant change 
of appearance, modernisation and change of use will necessitate a formal planning
application. Nevertheless, the alternative interior approach to updating to comply
with current sound and thermal regulations and periods of ﬁre resistance may prove
difﬁcult and expensive. The practicalities of application to the interior of walls can
be more difﬁcult to effect and more disruptive for the building occupants, and can
impose on valuable ﬂoor area.
nnn APPLICATION
Vertical battens of timber or metal-proﬁled framing are secured to the background
wall at spacings to suit the cladding. Treated timber battens of 50 mm × 38 mm 
and 100 mm × 38 mm at panel junctions are normally secured at between 400 
and 600 mm vertical spacing to allow continuity of ventilation and drainage. There
should be no horizontal battens, noggins or struts. Figure 8.6.2 shows the principles
of application, which must be supplemented with anti-bird mesh at upper and lower
ventilation openings to prevent entry by birds, vermin or insects. Ventilation
openings must also be provided at interruptions such as windows and projecting
ring beams. The size of ventilation opening can vary with height of building:
n Up to 5 storeys:
10 mm continuous or equivalent.
n 5 to 15 storeys:
15 mm continuous or equivalent.
n Over 15 storeys:
20 mm continuous or equivalent.
Incorporating insulation behind timber-supported cladding is unlikely to be
economical or practical when considering the space required. Several manufacturers
produce purpose-made aluminium sections with extendable brackets that can
suspend the cladding up to 200 mm from the wall, as shown in Fig. 8.6.3.
nnn FIRE SPREAD
As for any other void or cavity, the cavity created behind the cladding is treated 
by the Building Regulations as a potential passage for conveyance of ﬁre. Therefore
ﬁre barriers must be located in accordance with the spacings speciﬁed in Approved
Document B3, Section 8. The vertical support battens or framing are normally
adequate, but these will need to be supplemented horizontally. In order to preserve
the continuity of ventilation and drainage, horizontal barriers are manufactured
from pressed steel, perforated, and coated with an intumescent material (see 
Fig. 8.6.4).

 
Rainscreen cladding
405
Figure 8.6.2
RSC with timber support battens

 
406
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.6.3
RSC with proﬁled aluminium carriers and brackets

 
Rainscreen cladding
407
Figure 8.6.4
Cavity ﬁre barrier

 
408
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn CLADDING MATERIALS
Rainscreen claddings are ﬁre-tested to BS 476-6 and 7 for ﬁre propagation and
surface spread of ﬂame respectively, and are also classiﬁed for ﬁre resistance
depending on purpose grouping. Standards apply to both sides of the cladding, with
criteria for assessment depending on building height, purpose group and distance
from the boundary. These are determined in the Building Regulations, Approved
Document B4, Section 11.6, with reference to class 0 materials of limited
combustibility and an Index (I) < 20 (see reference to BS 476-6 in Chapter 7.2).
Sheet claddings are available in thicknesses ranging from 5 to 10 mm in a wide
variety of colours. Popular sheet material applications include ﬁbre cement, glass-
ﬁbre-reinforced plastics and polyester resins, some with stone ﬁnishing, polyester-
coated aluminium, enamelled or stove ﬂuorocarboned steel, and resin-impregnated
cellulose with melamine facing.

 
Toughened glass sheeting of 10 or 12 mm thickness can be considered under 
two headings:
n structural sealant (silicone) glazing;
n mechanical ﬁxing or suspended glazing.
nnn STRUCTURAL SEALANT (SILICONE) GLAZING
This system relies on the bonding characteristics of silicone or other elastomeric
sealants between the glass and the support frame. Sealants are also selected with
regard to their long-term resilience when exposed to ultraviolet light, heat, rain,
varying temperatures, thermal movement, atmospheric pollutants, etc. Two 
types of glazing are used: two-edge and four-edge. The two-edge system uses
conventional head and sill rebates with glass retention beads, and the sides are
silicone-bonded to mullions or styles. The four-edge system uses a structural
adhesive to bond all four sides of the glass pane to a frame, with the sealant
functioning as an integral structural link between glazing and frame. The lower
edge of each glass pane is supported on resilient setting blocks or spacers of
precured silicone to ensure adequate provision of sealant under the lower edge.
Total control of production quality (particularly for four-edge systems) will require
factory assembly of glazing modules and close supervision of the bonding process.
Standard application is to factory-bond the glass to an aluminium frame with 
in-situ silicone ﬁnishing/pointing provided between the pane and frame, as shown
in Fig. 8.7.1. Some coated glass, and absorbent backgrounds such as timber or
masonry, must be carefully primed before application of sealant.
8.7
STRUCTURAL GLASS CLADDING

 
410
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.7.1
Structural sealant glazing

 
Structural glass cladding
411
nnn MECHANICAL FIXING
This method promotes the use of uninterrupted glazing, limiting the visual 
impact of framing members. A frameless glazing facade is achieved by suspending
toughened glass from the building structure, with supports for each pane at its four
corners. Some support is also provided from the pane below. Intermediate ﬁxing
may also be necessary if panes are sufﬁciently large and if justiﬁed by high wind
loading. Fixings comprise stainless steel nuts and bolts, plastic washers, plastic
bushes, ﬁbre washers and stainless steel support brackets that attach to the building
structural frame. Bolts can be countersunk to ﬁt neatly into preformed holes in the
glass. Edges of glass are butt-jointed and sealed with elastomeric (silicone) sealant.
Some applications use metal patch plates of about 165 mm square to create a
clamping effect at signiﬁcant stress concentrations around the bolt hole and corners
of the glass pane (see Fig. 8.7.2). Heights in excess of 20.000 m are possible based
on modules of 1.200 and 1.500 m, but the system is limited to single glazing.
nnn ‘PLANAR’ GLAZING SYSTEM
This variation of frameless glazing reduces the visual impact of ﬁxing plates. It has
been developed by Pilkington UK Ltd on the principle of direct bearing of the glass
via nylatron polyamide bushes onto the ﬁxing bolts. Each pane is separately ﬁxed
independent of the pane below, with bolts having minimal clamping effect owing to
attachment to a spring plate by predetermined torque settings (see Fig. 8.7.3). The
spider bracket shown is purpose-made to accommodate all four corner ﬁxings in 
one cast aluminium unit. The spring plate system creates ﬂexibility by reducing 
the concentration of stresses around the ‘planar’ ﬁtting, relative to the patch plate
system. A further advantage is application to either single or double glazing, the
latter providing opportunity for variations in the selection of glass. A typical
speciﬁcation could be 10 or 12 mm toughened glass outer layer, tinted to deﬂect
solar gains, with a 6 mm clear toughened glass inner layer and a 16 mm air space, 
as shown in Fig. 8.7.4.

 
412
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.7.2
Mechanical ﬁxing or suspended glazing (courtesy: Pilkington Glass)

 
Structural glass cladding
413
Figure 8.7.3
‘Planar’ glazing system (courtesy: Pilkington Glass)

 
414
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 8.7.4
‘Planar’ double glazing (courtesy: Pilkington Glass)

 
Existing buildings originally designed speciﬁcally for commercial, industrial or
assembly purposes are too often demolished, as it is not ﬁnancially or practically
viable to adapt them for alternative use. Modern premises require vast areas for
cabling and other services, but much of our building heritage was designed solely
for its initial function, without consideration for the high-technology facilities
needed today. The result is a relatively short-term cycle of demolition and new
build. When designing and building framed structures and their cladding, the
economic and environmental beneﬁts of creating sustainable, versatile and 
adaptable construction are now recognised. The concept evolved gradually over 
the latter part of the last century. In 1968 the designer Robert Propst published 
The ofﬁce: A facility based on change. This reference presented the idea of buildings
being adaptable to differing uses, and functions as a strategic life-cycle design plan.
Later, in the early 1970s, the architect Alex Gordon developed a design formula
that became known as ‘Long life, Loose ﬁt, Low energy’.
nnn LONG LIFE
The idea is to ensure that the design of a building is not just based on the 
limited life of its initial function. Planned obsolescence may be appropriate for
inexpensive commodities, which can include temporary buildings, site huts, etc.
However, commercial buildings represent a huge ﬁnancial investment, considerable
construction time, and signiﬁcant use of diminishing material resources. Designers
have a responsibility to society to ensure maximum beneﬁt from a facility, and to
their clients to provide maximum ﬁnancial return. Long life takes into consideration
that a building is not only for tomorrow; it should have an in-built design to adapt
and upgrade to future changes of use and occupation. The structure should be a
shell or skeletal frame with a number of solutions for division of space and provision
for services.
8.8
SUSTAINABLE CONSTRUCTION

 
416
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn LOOSE FIT
Loose ﬁt develops the concept further, with provision for accommodating numerous
uses over the design life of a building.
The accommodation must be ﬂexible in layout, so that successive occupants 
can conﬁgure and reconﬁgure the interior to suit their changing needs, working
layouts and processes. This requires demountable partitioning, generally of modular
format, suspended ceilings, and raised ﬂooring to facilitate state-of-the-art services
installations.
The outward appearance or aesthetic perspective can be considered with regard
to architectural fashion changes and the corporate image of the building occupants.
Loose ﬁt in the form of replacement curtain-walling and over-cladding systems
permits a complete exterior change to an existing frame, thereby considerably
enhancing a structure without the cost of demolition and rebuilding. Such changes
can run parallel with upgrading to current legislative standards, particularly thermal
insulation and airtightness.
nnn LOW ENERGY
Low energy refers to the last consideration under loose ﬁt, which ensures that
refurbishment associated with ongoing changes of use is subject to building control
and in accordance with current energy conservation measures, e.g. high-efﬁciency
fuel-burning appliances, solar controls, double glazing, etc. Low energy also refers
to the time, labour and material cost or wastage that would otherwise be associated
with the repetitive cycle of building and demolition that has been needed to meet
ongoing architectural design trends and client needs for internal spatial
requirements.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, all structural investments have an 
economic life: that is, because of deterioration and limited adaptability they reach 
a point at which the value of the site and the building becomes no more than 
the value of the land on which the building stands. The objective of sustainable
construction is to maximise the investment value in a building by ensuring that 
it has a long and useful life.

 
FORMWORK
SYSTEMS
PART
9

 

 
Before considering different applications of formwork, it is worth deﬁning some
aspects of this work. Formwork is used generally to describe the temporary work
associated with the formation of concrete structures and components. However, 
it can be subdivided into several areas:
n Centering
A type of falsework used as a temporary support to masonry arches.
See Chapter 3.6 in Construction Technology.
n Falsework
The term applied to timber, scaffolding or other temporary
structural framing to support the forms, shutters or moulds for concrete work 
or masonry arches. Falsework can be of either sawn timber or steel sections,
scaffold tube and couplings being an option for the latter. The structure must
have sufﬁcient strength to prevent deformation, deﬂection and collapse under 
the full load of wet concrete, operatives and equipment. Falsework must remain
in position until the permanent structure is sufﬁciently strong to support itself
and ongoing work.
n Moulds
These are generally associated with the factory manufacture 
of precast concrete units such as blocks, lintels and feature work of artiﬁcial 
or reconstructed stonework, e.g. sills. Moulds can be of planed timber, steel or
plastics. Plastic materials are often used as a smooth lining or facing to timber.
n Shuttering
A term generally restricted to the use of planed timber, plywood
sheeting, steel and other materials used for supporting and shaping the ﬁnished
concrete on site. Timber products will require mould oil treatment to the surface
exposed to concrete, to prevent cement adhering to the timber and subsequently
spalling when the shuttering is struck.
Formwork provides the facility for wet concrete and reinforcement to form a
particular desired shape with a predetermined strength. Depending upon the
complexity of the form, the relative cost of formwork to concrete can be as high 
as 75% of the total cost to produce the required member. A typical breakdown 
of percentage costs could be as follows:
9.1
WALL FORMWORK

 
420
Advanced Construction Technology
n Concrete
(materials 28%; labour 12%) = 40%.
n Reinforcement
(materials 18%; labour 7%) = 25%.
n Formwork
(materials 15%; labour 20%) = 35%.
The above breakdown shows that a building contractor will have to use an
economic method of providing the necessary formwork to be competitive in
tendering, because this is the factor over which that company has most control.
The economic essentials of formwork can be listed thus:
n Low cost
Only the amount of money necessary that will produce the required
form to be expended.
n Strength
Careful selection of formwork materials and falsework to obtain the
most economic balance in terms of quantity used and continuing site activity
around the assembled formwork.
n Finish
Selection of method, materials and, if necessary, linings to produce the
desired result direct from the formwork. Applied ﬁnishes are usually speciﬁed,
and therefore method is the only real factor over which the builder would have
any economic control.
n Assembly
Consideration must be given to the use of patent systems and
mechanical handling plant.
n Material
Advantages of using either timber, steel or glass-reinforced plastics
should be considered; generally, timber’s light weight and adaptability make it
the most favoured material, but steel and glass-reinforced plastics will provide
more uses than timber, although they cannot be repaired as easily.
n Design
Within the conﬁnes of the architectural and/or structural design,
formwork should be as repetitive and adaptable as possible. Timber forms have
limited reuse, with exposed surfaces suffering the most damage. Five or six
reuses are usual, whereas steel and plastics can be reused indeﬁnitely if cared for.
These are pressed or moulded into ﬁxed shapes, having speciﬁc application to
repetitive uses such as columns and beams in multi-storey buildings.
n Joints
These should be tight enough to prevent grout leakage. Sealing of joints
can be achieved with compressible plastic tape between components or with
mastic or silicone sealant applied to junctions of adjacent pieces of formwork.
A balance of the above essentials should be achieved, preferably at pre-tender
stage, so that an economic and competitive cost can be calculated.
Before proceeding with this section, background reading of the basic principles
of formwork explained in Chapter 10.3 of Construction Technology is recommended.
In principle the design, fabrication and erection of wall formwork are similar 
to that previously considered in the context of column formwork in Construction
Technology. Several basic methods are available that will enable a wall to be cast 
in large quantities, deﬁned lifts or continuous from start to ﬁnish.
nnn TRADITIONAL WALL FORMWORK
This usually consists of standard framed panels tied together over their backs with
horizontal members called walings. The walings fulﬁl the same function as the

 
Wall formwork
421
yokes or column clamps of providing the resistance to the horizontal force of wet
concrete. A 75 mm high concrete kicker is formed at the base of the proposed wall
to enable the forms to be accurately positioned and to help prevent the loss of grout
by seepage at the base of the form.
The usual assembly is to erect one side of the wall formwork, ensuring that it is
correctly aligned, plumbed and strutted. The steel reinforcement cage is inserted
and positioned before the formwork for the other side is erected and ﬁxed. Keeping
the forms parallel and at the correct distance from one another is most important;
this can be achieved by using precast concrete spacer blocks that are cast in, or steel
spacer tubes that are removed after casting and curing, the voids created being
made good, or alternatively by using one of the many proprietary wall tie spacers
available (see Fig. 9.1.1).
To keep the number of ties required within acceptable limits horizontal members
or walings are used; these also add to the overall rigidity of the formwork panels and
help with alignment. Walings are best if composed of two members, with a space
between that will accommodate the shank of the wall tie bolt: this will give complete
ﬂexibility in positioning the ties and leave the waling timbers undamaged for
eventual reuse. To ensure that the loads are evenly distributed over the pair of
walings, plate washers should be speciﬁed.
Plywood sheet is the common material used for wall formwork, but this material
is vulnerable to edge and corner damage. The usual format is therefore to make up
wall forms as framed panels on a timber studwork principle with a plywood facing
sheet screwed to the studs so that it can be easily removed and reversed to obtain
the maximum number of uses.
Corners and attached piers need special consideration, because the increased
pressure at these points could cause the abutments between panels to open up,
giving rise to unacceptable grout escape and a poor ﬁnish to the cast wall. The
walings can be strengthened by including a loose tongue at the abutment position,
and extra bracing could be added to internal corners (see Fig. 9.1.2). When
considering formwork for attached piers it is usually necessary to have special
panels to form the reveals.
nnn CLIMBING FORMWORK
This is a method of casting a wall in set vertical lift heights using the same forms 
in a repetitive fashion, thus obtaining maximum usage from a minimum number of
forms. The basic formwork is as shown in Fig. 9.1.3: in the ﬁrst lift it is positioned
against the kicker in the inverted position, the concrete is poured and allowed to
cure, after which the forms are removed, reversed and ﬁxed to the newly cast
concrete. After each casting and curing of concrete the forms are removed and
raised to form the next lift until the required height has been reached.
It is possible to use this method for casting walls against an excavated or 
sheet-piled back face using formwork to one side only by replacing the through 
wall tie spacers with loop wall ties (see Fig. 9.1.3).
When using this single-sided method adequate bracing will be required to
maintain the correct wall thickness, and when the formwork is reversed, after the

 
422
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 9.1.1
Traditional wall formwork details: 1

 
Wall formwork
423
Figure 9.1.2
Traditional wall formwork details: 2

 
424
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 9.1.3
Typical climbing formwork arrangement

 
Wall formwork
425
ﬁrst lift, it must be appreciated that the uprights or soldiers are acting as cantilevers
and will therefore need to be stronger than those used in the double-sided version.
nnn SLIDING FORMWORK
This is a system of formwork that slides continuously up the face of the wall 
being cast, by climbing up and being supported by a series of hydraulic jacks
operating on jacking rods. The whole wall is therefore cast as a monolithic and
jointless structure, making the method suitable for structures such as water 
towers, chimneys and the cores of multi-storey buildings that have repetitive 
ﬂoors.
Because the system is a continuous operation, good site planning and
organisation are essential, and will involve the following aspects:
n Round-the-clock working, which will involve shift working and artiﬁcial lighting
to enable work to proceed outside normal daylight hours.
n Careful control of concrete supply to ensure that stoppages of the lifting
operation are not encountered. This may mean having standby plant as an
insurance against mechanical breakdowns.
n Suitably trained staff accustomed to this method of constructing in-situ concrete
walls.
The actual architectural and structural design must be suitable for the
application of a slipform system; generally the main requirements are a wall of
uniform thickness with a minimum number of openings and a height of at least
20.000 m to make the cost of equipment, labour and planning an economic
proposition.
The basic components of slip formwork are:
n Side forms
These need to be strongly braced, and are loadbearing of timber
and/or steel construction. Steel forms are heavier than timber, and more difﬁcult
to assemble and repair, but they have lower frictional loading, are easier to clean
and have better durability. Timber forms are lighter, have better ﬂexibility, are
easier to repair and are generally favoured. A typical timber form would consist
of a series of 100 mm × 25 mm planed straight-grained staves assembled with a 
2 mm wide gap between consecutive boards to allow for swelling, which could
give rise to unacceptable friction as the forms rise. The forms are usually made 
to a height of 1.200 m with an overall sliding clearance of 6 mm by keeping the
external panel plumb and the internal panel tapered so that it is 3 mm in at the
top and 3 mm out at the bottom, giving the true wall thickness in the centre
position of the form. The side forms must be adequately stiffened with
horizontal walings and vertical puncheons to resist the lateral pressure of
concrete and transfer the loads of working platforms to the supporting yokes.
n Yokes
These assist in supporting the suspended working platforms and
transfer the platform and side form loads to the jacking rods. Yokes are usually
made of framed steelwork suitably braced and designed to provide the necessary
bearings for the working platforms.

 
426
Advanced Construction Technology
n Working platforms
Three working levels are usually provided. The ﬁrst is
situated above the yokes at a height of about 2.000 m above the top of the wall
forms for the use of the steel ﬁxers. The second level is a platform over the entire
inner ﬂoor area at a level coinciding with the top of the wall forms, and is used
by the concrete gang for storage of materials and to carry levelling instruments
and jacking control equipment. This decking could ultimately be used as the
sofﬁt formwork to the roof slab if required. The third platform is in the form 
of a hanging or suspended scaffold, usually to both sides of the wall, and is to
give access to the exposed freshly cast concrete below the slip formwork for 
the purpose of ﬁnishing operations.
n Hydraulic jacks
The jacks used are usually speciﬁed by their loadbearing
capacities, such as 3 tonnes or 6 tonnes, and consist of two clamps operated by a
piston. The clamps operate on a jacking rod of 25 to 50 mm diameter according
to the design load, and are installed in banks operated from a central control to
give an all-round consistent rate of climb. The upper clamp grips the jacking
rod, and the lower clamp, being free, rises, pulling the yoke and platforms with it
until the jack extension has been closed. The lower clamp now grips the climbing
rod while the upper clamp is released and raised to a higher position, when the
lifting cycle is recommenced. Factors such as temperature and concrete quality
affect the rate of climb, but typical speeds are between 150 and 450 mm 
per hour.
The upper end of the jacking rod is usually encased in a tube or sleeve to
overcome the problem of adhesion between the rod and the concrete. The
jacking rod therefore remains loose in the cast wall and can be recovered at the
end of the jacking operation. The 2.500 to 4.000 m lengths of rod are usually
joined together with a screw joint arranged so that all such joints do not occur 
at the same level.
A typical arrangement of sliding formwork is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 9.1.4.
The site operations commence with the formation of a substantial kicker 
300 mm high incorporating the wall and jacking rod starter bars. The wall forms are
assembled and ﬁxed together with the yokes, upper working platforms and jacking
arrangement, after which the initial concrete lift is poured. The commencing rate 
of climb must be slow, to allow time for the ﬁrst batch of concrete to reach a
suitable condition before emerging from beneath the sliding formwork. A standard
or planned rate of lift is usually reached within about 16 hours after commencing
the lifting operation.
Openings can be formed in the wall by using framed formwork with splayed
edges, to reduce friction, tied to the reinforcement. Small openings can be formed
using blocks of expanded polystyrene, which should be 75 mm less in width than
the wall thickness so that a layer of concrete is always in contact with the sliding
forms to eliminate friction. The concrete cover is later broken out and the blocks
removed. Chases for ﬂoor slabs can be formed with horizontal boxes drilled to 
allow the continuity reinforcement to be passed through and to be bent back 
within the thickness of the wall so that when the ﬂoor slabs are eventually cast 
the reinforcement can be pulled out into its correct position.

 
Wall formwork
427
Figure 9.1.4
Diagrammatic arrangement of sliding formwork

 
428
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn PERMANENT FORMWORK
In certain circumstances formwork is left permanently in place because of the
difﬁculty and/or cost of removing it once the concrete has been cast. A typical
example of these circumstances would be when a beam and slab raft foundation
with shallow upstand beams and an in-situ slab have been constructed. Apart 
from the cost aspect, consideration must be given to any nuisance that such an
arrangement could cause in the ﬁnished structure, such as the likelihood of fungal
or insect attack and the possible risk of ﬁre.
Permanent formwork can also be a means of utilising the facing material as both
formwork and outer cladding, especially in the construction of in-situ reinforced
concrete walls. The external face or cladding is supported by the conventional
internal face formwork, which can in certain circumstances overcome the external
strutting or support problems often encountered with high-rise structures.
This method is, however, generally limited to thin small modular facing
materials, the size of which is governed by the supporting capacity of the internal
formwork. Figure 9.1.5 shows a typical example of the application of this aspect of
permanent formwork.
The methods described above for the construction of in-situ reinforced concrete
walls can also be carried out by using a patent system of formwork.

 
Wall formwork
429
Figure 9.1.5
Example of permanent formwork

 
Patent formwork is sometimes called system formwork, and is usually identiﬁed 
by the manufacturer’s name. All proprietary systems have the same common aim,
and most are similar in their general approach to solving some of the problems
encountered with formwork for modular designed or repetitive structures. As
shown in the previous chapter, formwork is one area where the contractor has most
control over the method and materials to be used in forming an in-situ reinforced
concrete structure. In trying to design or formulate the ideal system for formwork
the following must be considered:
n Strength
To carry the concrete and working loads.
n Lightness without strength reduction
To enable maximum-size units to 
be employed.
n Durability without prohibitive costs
To gain maximum usage of materials.
n Good and accurate ﬁnish straight from the formwork
To reduce the
costly labour element of making good and patching, which in itself is a difﬁcult
operation to accomplish without it being obvious that this kind of treatment was
found necessary.
n Erection and dismantling times.
n Ability to employ unskilled or semi-skilled labour.
Patent or formwork systems have been devised to satisfy most of the above
requirements by the standardisation of forms and by easy methods of securing and
bracing the positioned formwork.
The major component of any formwork system is the unit panel, which should
fulﬁl the following requirements:
n available in a wide variety of sizes based on a standard module, usually multiples
and submultiples of 300 mm;
n manufactured from durable materials;
9.2
PATENT FORMWORK

 
Patent formwork
431
n covered with a facing material that is durable and capable of producing the
desired ﬁnish;
n interchangeable so that they can be used for beams, columns and slabs;
n formed so that they can be easily connected together to form large unit panels;
n lightweight so that individual unit panels can be handled without mechanical aid;
n designed so that the whole formwork can be assembled and dismantled easily by
unskilled or semi-skilled labour;
n capable of being adapted so that non-standard width inserts of traditional
formwork materials can be included where lengths or widths are not exact
multiples of the unit panels.
Most unit panels consist of a framed tray made from light metal angle or 
channel sections stiffened across the width as necessary. The edge framing is
usually perforated with slots or holes to take the ﬁxing connectors and waling clips
or clamps. The facing is of sheet metal or plywood, some manufacturers offering a
choice. Longitudinal stiffening and support are given by clamping over the backs 
of the assembled panels, special walings of hollow section, or in many systems
standard scaffold tubes. Vertical support where required can be given by raking
standard adjustable steel props, or where heavy loadings are encountered most
systems have special vertical stiffening and support arrangements based on designed
girder principles, which also provide support for an access and working platform.
Spacing between opposite forms is maintained using wall ties or similar devices, 
as previously described for traditional formwork.
Walls that are curved in plan can be formed in a similar manner to the 
straight wall techniques described above using a modiﬁed tray that has no 
transverse stiffening members, thus making it ﬂexible. Climbing formwork can 
also be carried out using system formwork components, but instead of reversing the
forms as described for traditional formwork climbing shoes are bolted to the cast
section of the wall to act as bearing corbels to support the soldiers for each lift.
When forming beams and columns the unit panels are used as side or sofﬁt 
forms held together with steel column clamps, or in the case of beams conventional
strutting or using wall ties through the beam thickness. Some manufacturers
produce special beam box clamping devices that consist of a cross-member
surmounted by attached and adjustable triangulated struts to support the side
forms.
Many patent systems for the construction of ﬂoor slabs that require propping
during casting use basic components of unit panels, narrow width (150 mm) ﬁller
panels, special drop-head adjustable steel props, joists and standard scaffold tubes
for bracing. The steel joists are lightweight, purpose made, and are supported on
the secondary head of the prop in the opposite direction to the ﬁller panels, which
are also supported by the secondary or drop head of the prop. The unit panels are
used to inﬁll between the ﬁller panels and pass over the support joist; the upper
head of the prop is at the same level as the slab formwork and indeed is part of 
the slab sofﬁt formwork.
After casting the slab and allowing it to gain sufﬁcient strength the whole of the
slab formwork can be lowered and removed, leaving the undisturbed prop head to

 
432
Advanced Construction Technology
give the partially cured slab a degree of support. This method enables the formwork
to be removed at a very early stage, releasing the unit panels, ﬁller pieces and joists
for reuse, and at the same time accelerating the drying out of the concrete by
allowing a free air ﬂow on both sides of the slab.
Slabs of moderate spans (up to 7.500 m) that are to be cast between loadbearing
walls or beams without the use of internal props can be formed using unit panels
supported by steel telescopic ﬂoor centres. These centres are made in a simple
lattice form extending in one or two directions according to span, and are light
enough to be handled by one operative. They are precambered to compensate 
any deﬂections when loaded. Typical examples of system formwork are shown 
in Figs 9.2.1 to 9.2.4.
nnn TABLE FORMWORK
This special class of formwork has been devised for use when casting large
repetitive ﬂoor slabs in medium- to high-rise structures. The main objective is 
to reduce the time factor in erecting, striking and re-erecting slab formwork by
creating a system of formwork that can be struck as an entire unit, removed, 
hoisted and repositioned without any dismantling.
The basic requirements for a system of table formwork are:
n a means of adjustment for aligning and levelling the forms;
n adequate means of lowering the forms so that they can be dropped clear of the
newly cast slab; generally the provision for lowering the forms can also be used
for ﬁnal levelling purposes;
n means of manoeuvring the forms clear of the structure to a point where they can
be attached to the crane for ﬁnal extraction, lifting and repositioning ready to
receive the next concrete pour operation;
n a means of providing a working platform at the external edge of the slab to
eliminate the need for an independent scaffold, which would be obstructive to
the system.
The basic support members are usually a modiﬁed version of inverted adjustable
steel props. These props, suitably braced and strutted, carry a framed decking that
acts as the sofﬁt formwork. To manoeuvre the forms into a position for attachment
to the crane a framed wheeled arrangement can be ﬁxed to the rear end of the
tableform so that the whole unit can be moved forward with ease. The tableform 
is picked up by the crane at its centre of gravity by removing a loose centre board 
to expose the framework. The unit is then extracted clear of the structure, hoisted
in the balanced horizontal position, and lowered onto the recently cast slab for
repositioning.
Another method, devised by Kwikform Ltd, uses a special lifting beam that is
suspended from the crane at predetermined sling points, which are lettered so that
the correct balance for any particular assembly can be quickly identiﬁed, each table
having been marked with the letter point required. The lifting beam is connected to
the working platform attachment of the tableform so that when the unit formwork 
is lowered and then extracted by the crane the tableform and the lifting beam are in

 
Patent formwork
433
Figure 9.2.1
System formwork: typical components

 
434
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 9.2.2
System formwork: columns and beams

 
Patent formwork
435
Figure 9.2.3
System formwork: walls

 
436
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 9.2.4
System formwork: slabs using telescopic centres

 
Patent formwork
437
perfect balance. This method of system formwork is illustrated diagrammatically 
in Fig. 9.2.5.
The selection of formwork for multi-storey and complex structures is not a
simple matter; it requires knowledge and experience in design appreciation,
suitability of materials and site operations. Some large building contracting
organisations will have their own specialist staff for designing and detailing
formwork. Alternatively, as main contractors they may prefer to limit their direct
involvement to administration only and seek to subcontract this area of work to a
company that provides a combined design and install service. These subcontractors
will have experienced and specialist site staff for the fabrication of formwork or 
if using a patent system to supervise the semi-skilled or unskilled labour being 
used. Badly designed and/or erected formwork can result in failure of the structure
during the construction period or inaccurate and unacceptable members being 
cast, both of which can be ﬁnancially disastrous for a company and ruinous to the
ﬁrm’s reputation.

 
438
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 9.2.5
Tableforms: ‘Kwikform’ system

 
The appearance of concrete members is governed by their surface ﬁnish, and this is
inﬂuenced by three main factors: colour, texture and surface proﬁle. The method
used to produce the concrete member will have some degree of inﬂuence over the
ﬁnish obtained, because a greater control of quality is usually possible with precast
concrete techniques under factory-controlled conditions. Most precast concrete
products can be cast in the horizontal position, which again promotes better control
over the resultant casting, whereas in-situ casting of concrete walls and columns
must be carried out using vertical-casting techniques, which not only have a lesser
degree of control but also limit the types of surface treatment that can be
successfully obtained direct from the mould or formwork.
nnn COLOUR
The colour of concrete as produced direct from the mould or formwork depends
upon the colour of the cement being used and, to a lesser extent, upon the colour 
of the ﬁne aggregate. The usual methods of obtaining variations in the colour of
ﬁnished concrete are:
n Using a coloured cement
The range of colours available is limited, and most
are pastel shades; if a pigment is used to colour cement the cement content of the
mix will need to be increased by approximately 10% to counteract the loss of
strength due to the colouring additive.
n Using the colour of the coarse aggregate
The outer matrix or cement 
paste is removed to expose the aggregate, which imparts not only colour but 
also texture to the concrete surface.
Concrete can become stained during the construction period, resulting in a
mottled appearance. Some of the causes of this form of staining are as follows:
9.3
CONCRETE SURFACE FINISHES

 
440
Advanced Construction Technology
n Using different-quality timber within the same form
Generally timber
that has a high absorption factor will give a darker concrete than timber with 
a low absorption factor. The same disﬁgurement can result from using old and 
new timber in the same form, because older timber tends to give darker concrete
than new timber with its probable higher moisture content and hence lower
absorption.
n Formwork detaching itself from the concrete
This allows dirt and dust to
enter the space and attach itself to the ‘green’ concrete surface.
n Type of release agent used
Generally the thinner the release agent used the
better will be the result; even coating over the entire contact surface of the
formwork or mould is also of great importance.
Staining occurring on mature concrete, usually after completion and occupation
of the building, is very often due to bad design, poor selection of materials or poor
workmanship. Large overhangs to parapets and sills without adequate throating 
can create damp areas that are vulnerable to algae or similar growths and pollution
attack. Poor detailing of damp-proof courses can create unsightly stains because
they fail to fulﬁl their primary function of providing a barrier to dampness
inﬁltration. Efﬂorescence can occur on concrete surfaces, although it is not as
common as on brick walls. The major causes of efﬂorescence on concrete are
allowing water to be trapped for long periods between the cast concrete and the
formwork, and poorly formed construction or similar joints allowing water to enter
the concrete structure. Removal of efﬂorescence is not easy or always successful,
and therefore the emphasis should always be on good design and workmanship 
in the ﬁrst instance. Methods of efﬂorescence removal range from wire brushing
through various chemical applications to mechanical methods such as grit-blasting.
nnn TEXTURE
When concrete ﬁrst became acceptable as a substitute for natural stone in major
building works the tendency was to try to recreate the smooth surface and uniform
colour possible with natural stones. This kind of ﬁnish is difﬁcult to achieve using
the medium of concrete for the following reasons:
n Natural shrinkage of concrete can cause hairline cracks on the surface.
n Texture and colour can be affected by the colour of the cement, water content,
degree of compaction and the quality of the formwork.
n Pinholes on the surface can be caused by air being trapped between the concrete
and the formwork.
n Rough patches can result from the formwork adhering to the concrete face.
n Grout leakage from the formwork can cause ﬁns or honeycombing on the cast
concrete.
Under site conditions it is not an easy task to keep sufﬁcient control over the
casting of concrete members to guarantee that these faults will not occur. A greater
control is, however, possible with the factory-type conditions prevailing in a well-
organised precast concrete works. Note that attempts to patch, mask or make good
the above defects are nearly always visible.

 
Concrete surface finishes
441
Methods that can be used to improve the appearance of a concrete surface
include:
n ﬁnishes obtained direct from the formwork or mould intended to conceal 
the natural defects by attracting the eye to a more obvious and visual point;
n special linings placed within the formwork to produce a smooth or proﬁled
surface;
n removal of the surface matrix to expose the aggregate;
n applied surface ﬁnishes such as ceramic tiles, renderings and paints.
Formwork can be designed and constructed to highlight certain features, such 
as the joints between form members or between concrete pours or lifts, by adding to
the inside of the form small ﬁllets to form recessed joints, or conversely by recessing
the formwork to form raised joints, the axiom being: if you cannot hide or mask a
joint, make a feature of it. The use of sawn boards to imprint the grain pattern can
give a visually pleasing effect to concrete surfaces, particularly if boards of a narrow
width are used.
A wide variety of textured, patterned and proﬁled surfaces can be obtained 
by using different linings within the formwork. Typical materials used are
thermoplastics, glass ﬁbre mouldings, moulded rubber and PVC sheets; all of these
materials can be obtained to form various patterns, giving many uses, and are easily
removed from the concrete surface. Glass ﬁbre and thermoplastic linings have 
the advantage of being mouldable to any reasonable shape or proﬁle. Ribbed and
similar proﬁles can be produced by ﬁxing materials such as troughed or corrugated
steel into the form as a complete lining or as a partial lining to give a panelled 
effect. Coarse fabrics such as hessian can also be used to produce various textures,
provided the fabric is ﬁrst soaked with a light mineral oil and squeezed to remove
the excess oil before ﬁxing, as a precaution against the fabric becoming permanently
embedded on the concrete surface.
The most common method of imparting colour and texture to a concrete surface
is to expose the coarse aggregate, which can be carried out by a variety of methods
depending generally upon whether the concrete is ‘green’, mature, or yet to be cast.
Brushing and washing is a common method employed on ‘green’ concrete, and is
carried out using stiff wire or bristle brushes to loosen the surface matrix and clean
water to remove the matrix and clean the exposed aggregate. The process should be
carried out as soon as practicable after casting, which is usually within 2 to 6 hours
of the initial pour but certainly not more than 18 hours after casting. When treating
horizontal surfaces brushing should commence at the edges, whereas brushing to
vertical surfaces should start at the base and be ﬁnished by washing from the top
downwards. Skill is required with this method of exposing aggregates to ensure 
that only the correct amount of matrix is removed, the depth being dependent 
on the size of aggregate used. The use of retarding agents can be employed, but 
it is essential that these are used only in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Treatments that can be given to mature concrete to expose the aggregate include
tooling, bush hammering and blasting techniques. These methods are generally
employed when the depth of the matrix to be removed is greater than that usually

 
442
Advanced Construction Technology
associated with the brushing method described above. The most suitable age for
treating the mature concrete surface depends upon such factors as the type of
cement used and the conditions under which the concrete is cured, the usual 
period being from 2 to 8 weeks after casting.
The usual hand-tooling methods that can be applied to natural stone, such as
point tooling and chiselling, can be applied to a mature concrete surface but can be
expensive if used for large areas. Tooling methods should not be used on concrete 
if gravel aggregates have been speciﬁed, because these tend to shatter and leave
unwanted pits on the surface. Hard point tooling near to sharp arrises should also
be avoided because of the tendency to spalling at these edges; to overcome this
problem a small plain margin at least 10 mm wide should be speciﬁed.
Except for small areas, or where special treatment is required, bush hammering
has largely replaced the hand tooling techniques to expose the aggregate. Bush
hammers are power-operated, hand-held tools to which two types of head can 
be used to give a series of light but rapid blows (e.g. 1,750 blows per minute) to
remove about 3 mm of matrix for each passing. Circular heads with 21 cutting
points are easier to control if working on conﬁned or small areas than the more
common and quicker roller head with its 90 cutting points.
Blasting techniques using sand, shot or grit are becoming increasingly popular
because these methods do not cause spalling at the edges and generally result in a
very uniform textured surface. Blasting can be carried out at almost any time after
casting but preferably within 16 hours to 3 days of casting, which gives a certain
degree of ﬂexibility to a programme of work. This method is of a specialist nature,
and is normally carried out by a subcontractor who can usually expose between 
4 and 6 m2 of surface per hour. Sand is usually dispersed in a jet of water, whereas
grit is directed onto the concrete surface from a range of about 300 mm in a jet 
of compressed air, and is the usual method employed. Shot is dispersed from a
special tool with an enclosed head that collects and recirculates the shot.
Any method of removing the surface skin or matrix will reduce the amount 
of concrete cover over the reinforcement, and therefore if this type of surface
treatment is to be used an adequate cover of concrete should be speciﬁed, such 
as 45 mm minimum, before surface treatment.
When exposing aggregates by the above methods the ﬁnished result cannot 
be assured, because the distribution of the aggregates throughout the concrete is
determined by the way in which the ﬁne and coarse aggregates disperse themselves
during the mixing, placing and compacting operations. If a particular colour or type
of exposed aggregate is required it will be necessary to use the chosen aggregate
throughout the mix, which may be both uneconomic and undesirable.
A method that can be used for casting in-situ concrete and will ensure the
required distribution of aggregate over the surface and enable a selected aggregate 
to be used on the surface is the aggregate transfer method. This entails sticking 
the aggregate to the rough side of pegboard sheets with a mixture of water-soluble
cellulose compounds and sand ﬁllers. The resultant mixture has a cream-like
texture and is spread evenly over the pegboard surface to a depth of one-third the
aggregate size. The aggregate may be sprinkled over the surface and lightly tamped;
alternatively it may be placed by hand, after which the prepared board is allowed to

 
Concrete surface finishes
443
set and dry for about 36 hours. This prepared pegboard is used as a liner to the
formwork with a loose bafﬂe of hardboard or plywood immediately in front of 
the aggregate face as protection during the pouring of the cement. The bafﬂe is
removed as work proceeds. This is not an easy method of obtaining a speciﬁc
exposed aggregate ﬁnish to in-situ work, and it is generally recommended that,
where possible, simpler and just as effective precast methods should be considered.
Precast concrete casting can be carried out in horizontal or vertical moulds.
Horizontal casting can have surface treatments carried out on the upper surface or
on the lower surface that is in contact with the mould base. Plain smooth surfaces
can be produced by hand trowelling the upper surface, but this is expensive in
labour costs and requires a high degree of skill if a level surface of uniform texture
and colour is to be obtained, whereas a good plain surface can usually be achieved
direct from the mould using the lower face method. Various surface textures can 
be obtained from upper face casting by using patterned rollers, proﬁled tamping
boards, using a straight-edged tamping board drawn over the surface with a sawing
action or by scoring the surface with brooms or rakes. Proﬁled ﬁnishes from lower
face casting can be obtained by using a proﬁled mould base or a suitable base liner
without any difﬁculty.
Exposed aggregate ﬁnishes can be obtained from either upper or lower face
horizontal casting by spraying and brushing or by the tooling methods previously
described. Alternatives for upper face casting are to trowel selected aggregates into
the freshly cast surface or to trowel in a ﬁne (10 mm) aggregate dry mortar mix and
use a ﬂoat with a felt pad to pick up the ﬁne particles and cement, leaving a clean
exposed aggregate ﬁnish.
The sand bed method of covering the bottom of the mould with a layer of sand
and placing the selected aggregate into the sand bed and immediately casting the
concrete over the layer of aggregate is the usual method employed with lower face
casting. Cast-on ﬁnishes such as bricks, tiles and mosaic can be ﬁxed in a similar
manner to those described above for exposed aggregates. For all practical purposes
vertical casting of precast concrete members needs the same considerations as those
described previously in the context of in-situ casting.
Another surface treatment that could be considered for concrete is grinding 
and polishing, although this treatment is expensive and time consuming, being
usually applied to surfaces such as slate, marble and terrazzo. The ﬁnish can be
obtained by using a carborundum rotary grinder incorporating a piped water supply
to the centre of the stone. The grinding operation should be carried out as soon as
the mould or formwork has been removed, by ﬁrst wetting the surface and then
grinding, allowing the stone dust and water to mix, forming an abrasive paste. 
The operation is completed by washing and brushing to remove the paste residue.
Dry grinding is possible, but this creates a great deal of dust, from which the
operative’s eyes and lungs must be protected by wearing protective masks.
It is very often wrongly assumed that by adding texture or shape to a concrete
surface any deﬁciency in design, formwork fabrication or workmanship can be
masked. This is not so; a textured surface, like the plain surface, will only be as
good as the design and workmanship involved in producing the ﬁnished component,
and any defects will be evident with all ﬁnishes.

 

 
PRESTRESSED
CONCRETE
PART
10

 

 
The basic principle of prestressing concrete is very simple. If a material has little
tensile strength it will fracture immediately its own tensile strength is exceeded, 
but if such a material is given an initial compression then when load-creating
tension is applied the material will be able to withstand the force of this load as 
long as the initial compression is not exceeded. At this stage in the study of
construction technology readers will already be familiar with the properties of
concrete, which result in a material of high compressive strength with low tensile
strength. By combining concrete with steel reinforcing bars of the correct area and
pattern, ordinary concrete can be given an acceptable amount of tensile strength.
Prestressing techniques are applied to concrete in an endeavour to make 
full use of the material’s high compressive strength.
Attempts were made at the end of the nineteenth century to induce a prestress
into concrete, but these were largely unsuccessful because the prestress could not be
maintained. A French civil engineer, Marie Eugene Leon Freyssinet (1879–1962),
showed in the early 1920s how this problem could be overcome, and demonstrated
the type of concrete and prestressing steel that was required. His most signiﬁcant
contributions were the quantitative assessment of creep and shrinkage, and the
realisation that only a high-strength steel at a high stress would achieve a permanent
prestress in concrete.
In normal reinforced concrete the designer is unable to make full use of the 
high tensile strength of steel or of the high compressive strength of the concrete.
When loaded above a certain limit, tension cracks will occur in a reinforced 
concrete member, and these should not generally be greater than 0.3 mm in width,
as recommended in BS 8110: Structural use of concrete. This stage of cracking will
normally be reached before the full strength potential of either steel or concrete has
been obtained. In prestressed concrete the steel is stretched and securely anchored
within its mould box before the concrete is placed. After concreting the steel will
then try to regain its original length, but because it is fully restricted it will be
10.1
PRESTRESSED CONCRETE: 
PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATIONS

 
448
Advanced Construction Technology
subjecting the concrete to a compressive force throughout its life. A comparison of
methods is shown in Fig. 10.1.1.
Concrete while curing will shrink; it will also suffer losses in cross-section 
due to creep when subjected to pressure. Shrinkage and creep in concrete can
normally be reduced to an acceptable level by using a material of high strength 
with a low workability. Mild steel will also suffer from relaxation losses, which 
is the phenomenon of the stresses in steel under load decreasing towards a
minimum value after a period of time. This can be counteracted by increasing 
the initial stress in the steel. If mild steel is used to induce a compressive force into
a concrete member the amount of shrinkage, creep and relaxation that occurs will
cancel out any induced stress. The special alloy steels used in prestressing, however,
have different properties, enabling the designer to induce extra stress into the
concrete member, thus counteracting any losses due to shrinkage and creep and 
at the same time maintaining the induced compressive stress in the concrete
component.
The high-quality strength concrete speciﬁed for prestress work should take 
into account the method of stressing. For pre-tensioned work a minimum 
28-day cube strength of 40 N/mm2 is required, whereas for post-tensioned work a
minimum 28-day cube strength of 30 N/mm2 is required. Steel in the form of wire
or bars used for prestressing should conform to the recommendations of BS 5896:
Speciﬁcation for high tensile steel wire and strand for the prestressing of concrete, which
covers steel wire manufactured from cold-drawn plain carbon steel. The wire can be
plain round, crimped or indented with a diameter range of 2 to 7 mm. Crimped and
indented bars will develop a greater bond strength than plain round bars, and are
available in 4, 5 and 7 mm diameters. Another form of stressing wire or tendon is
strand, which consists of a straight core wire around which are helically wound
further wires to form a 6 over 1 or 7-wire strand, or a 9 over 9 over 1 giving a 
19-wire strand tendon.
Seven-wire strand is the easiest to manufacture and is in general use for tendon
diameters up to 15 mm. The wire used to form the strand is cold-drawn from plain
carbon steel, as recommended in BS 5896. To ensure close contact of the individual
wires in the tendon the straight core wire is usually 2% larger in diameter than the
outer wires, which are helically wound around it at a pitch of 12 to 16 times the
nominal diameter of the strand.
Tendons of strand can be used singly or in groups to form a multi-strand cable.
The two major advantages of using strand are:
n A large prestressing force can be provided in a restricted area.
n It can be produced in long ﬂexible lengths and can therefore be stored on drums,
thus saving site space and reducing site labour requirements by eliminating the
site fabrication activity.
Having now considered the material requirements, the basic principles of
prestressing can be considered. It works in the same way that compressing several
bricks together stops the middle ones falling out. A prestressing force inducing
precompression into a concrete member can be achieved by anchoring a suitable
tendon at one end of the member and applying an extension force at the other end,

 
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
449
Figure 10.1.1
Structural concrete: comparison of methods

 
450
Advanced Construction Technology
which can be anchored when the desired extension has been reached. Upon 
release the anchored tendon, in trying to regain its original length, will induce a
compressive force into the member. Figure 10.1.2 shows a typical arrangement 
in which the tendon inducing the compressive force is acting about the neutral 
axis and is stressed so that it will cancel out the tension induced by the imposed
load W. The stress diagrams show that the combined or ﬁnal stress will result in a
compressive stress in the upper ﬁbres equal to twice the imposed load. The ﬁnal
stress must not exceed the characteristic strength of the concrete as recommended
in BS 8110, and if the arrangement given in Fig. 10.1.2 is adopted the stress
induced by the imposed load will be only half its maximum.
To obtain a better economic balance the arrangement shown in Fig. 10.1.3 is
normally adopted, where the stressing tendon is placed within the lower third of 
the section. The basic aim is to select a stress that, when combined with the dead
load, will result in a compressive stress in the lower ﬁbres equal to the maximum
stresses induced by any live loads, resulting in a ﬁnal stress diagram having in the
upper ﬁbres a compressive stress equal to the characteristic strength of the concrete
and a zero stress in the bottom ﬁbres. This is the pure theoretical case, and is almost
impossible to achieve in practice, but provided any induced tension occurring in the
lower ﬁbres is not in excess of the tensile strength of the concrete used, an
acceptable prestressed condition will exist.
nnn PRESTRESSING METHODS
There are two methods of producing prestressed concrete:
n pre-tensioning;
n post-tensioning.
PRE-TENSIONING
In this method the wires or cables are stressed before the concrete is cast around
them. The stressing wires are anchored at one end of the mould and are stressed by
hydraulic jacks from the other end until the required stress has been obtained. It is
common practice to overstress the wires by some 10% to counteract the anticipated
losses that will occur because of creep, shrinkage and relaxation. After stressing the
wires the side forms of the mould are positioned and the concrete is placed around
the tensioned wires; the casting is then usually steam-cured for 24 hours to obtain
the desired characteristic strength, a common speciﬁcation being 28 N/mm2 in 
24 hours. The wires are cut or released, and the bond between the stressed wires
and the concrete will prevent the tendons from regaining their original length, 
thus inducing the prestress.
At the extreme ends of the members the bond between the stressed wires and
concrete will not be fully developed, because low frictional resistance will result 
in a contraction and swelling at the ends of the wires, forming what is in effect a
cone-shape anchor. The distance over which this contraction takes place is called
the transfer length and is equal to 80 to 120 times the wire diameter. Usually 

 
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
451
Figure 10.1.2
Prestressing principles: 1

 
452
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 10.1.3
Prestressing principles: 2

 
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
453
small-diameter wires (2 to 5 mm) are used so that for any given total area of stressing
wire a greater surface contact area is obtained. The bond between the stressed wires
and concrete can also be improved by using crimped or indented wires.
Pre-tensioning is the prestressing method used mainly by manufacturers of
precast components such as ﬂoor units and slabs, employing the long line method 
of casting, where precision metal moulds up to 120.000 m long can be used with
spacers or dividing plates positioned along the length to create the various lengths
required; a typical arrangement is shown in Fig. 10.1.4.
POST-TENSIONING
In this method the concrete is cast around ducts in which the stressing tendons 
can be housed, and the stressing is carried out after the concrete has hardened. The
tendons are stressed from one or both ends, and when the stress required has been
reached the tendons are anchored at their ends to prevent them from returning to
their original length, thus inducing the compressive force. The anchors used form
part of the ﬁnished component. The ducts for housing the stressing tendons can be
formed by using ﬂexible steel tubing or inﬂatable rubber tubes. The void created 
by the ducting will enable the stressing cables to be threaded prior to placing the
concrete, or they can be positioned after the casting and curing of the concrete 
has been completed. In both cases the remaining space within the duct should be
ﬁlled with grout to stop any moisture present setting up a corrosive action, and to
assist in stress distribution. A typical arrangement is shown in Fig. 10.1.5. For
comparison of anchorages and their performance under test, reference can be 
made to BS EN 13391: Mechanical tests for post-tensioning systems. System types 
and comparisons are shown in the next chapter.
Post-tensioning is the method usually employed where stressing is to be 
carried out on site. Curved tendons can be used where the complete member is to
be formed by joining together a series of precast concrete units, or where negative
bending moments are encountered. Figure 10.1.6 shows diagrammatically various
methods of overcoming negative bending moments at ﬁxed ends and for continuous
spans. Figure 10.1.7 shows a typical example of the use of curved tendons in the
cross-members of a girder bridge. Another application of post-tensioning is in the
installation of ground anchors.
nnn GROUND ANCHORS
A ground anchor is basically a prestressing tendon embedded and anchored into 
the soil to provide resistance to structural movement of a member by acting on 
a ‘tying back’ principle. Common applications include anchoring or tying back
retaining walls and anchoring diaphragm walls, particularly in the context of deep
excavations. This latter application also has the advantage of providing a working
area entirely free of timbering members such as struts and braces. Ground anchors
can also be used in basement and similar constructions for anchoring the foundation
slab to resist uplift pressures and to prevent ﬂotation especially during the early
stages of construction.

 
454
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 10.1.4
Typical pre-tensioning arrangement

 
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
455
Figure 10.1.5
Typical post-tensioning arrangement

 
456
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 10.1.6
Prestressing: overcoming negative bending moments

 
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
457
Figure 10.1.7
Typical example of the structural use of prestressed concrete

 
458
Advanced Construction Technology
Ground anchors are known by their method of installation, such as grouted
anchors, or by the nature of the subsoil into which they are embedded, such as 
rock anchors.
ROCK ANCHORS
These have been used successfully for many years, and can be formed by 
inserting a prestressing bar into a pre-drilled hole. The leading end of the bar has
expanding sleeves that grip the inside of the bored hole when the bar is rotated to a
recommended torque to obtain the desired grip. The anchor bar is usually grouted
over the ﬁxed or anchorage length before being stressed and anchored at the
external face.
Alternatively the anchorage of the leading end can be provided by grout
injection, relying on the bond developed between a ribbed sleeve and the wall 
of the bored hole. A dense high-strength grout is required over the ﬁxed length to
develop sufﬁcient resistance to pull out when the tendon is stressed. The unbonded
or elastic length will need protection against corrosion, and this can be provided 
by protective coatings such as bitumen or rubberised paint, casings of PVC, or
wrappings of greased tape. Alternatively a full-length protection can be given by
ﬁlling the void with grout after completion of the stressing operation (see Fig. 10.1.8).
INJECTION ANCHORS
The knowledge and experience gained in the use of rock anchors has led to the
development of suitable ground anchorage techniques for most subsoil conditions,
except for highly compressible soils such as alluvial clays and silts. Injection-type
ground anchorages have proved to be suitable for most cohesive and non-cohesive
soils. Basically a hole is bored into the soil using a ﬂight auger with or without
water-ﬂushing assistance; casings or linings can be used where the borehole would
not remain open if unlined. The prestressing tendon or bar is placed into the
borehole and pressure-grouted over the anchorage length. For protection purposes
the unbonded or elastic length can be grouted under gravity for permanent ground
anchors, or covered with an expanded polypropylene sheath for temporary anchors.
Anchor boreholes in clay soils are usually multi-under-reamed to increase the bond,
using special expanding cutter or brush tools. Gravel placement ground anchors can
also be used in clay and similar soils for lighter loadings. In this method an irregular
gravel is injected into the borehole over the anchorage length. A small casing with 
a non-recoverable point is driven into the gravel plug to force the aggregate to
penetrate the soil around the borehole. The stressing tendon is inserted into the
casing and pressure-grouted over the anchorage length as the casing is removed.
Typical ground anchor examples are shown in Fig. 10.1.9.
nnn ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
The preceding text clariﬁes that in pre-tensioning it is the bond between the tendon
and the concrete that prevents the prestressing wire from returning to its original

 
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
459
Figure 10.1.8
Typical rock ground anchor

 
460
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 10.1.9
Typical injection ground anchors

 
Prestressed concrete: principles and applications
461
length, and in post-tensioning it is the anchorages that prevent the stressing tendon
returning to its original length.
The advantages and disadvantages of prestressed concrete when compared with
conventional reinforced concrete can be summarised as follows:
Advantages
n Makes full use of the inherent compressive strength of concrete.
n Makes full use of the special alloy steels used to form prestressing tendons.
n Eliminates tension cracks, thus reducing the risk of corrosion of steel
components.
n Reduces shear stresses.
n For any given span and loading condition a member with a smaller cross-section
can be used, giving a reduction in weight and height.
n Individual units can be joined together to act as a single member.
Disadvantages
n High degree of control of materials, design and workmanship is required.
n Special alloy steels are dearer than mild steels.
n Extra cost of special equipment required to carry out stressing activities.
As a general comparison between the two structural media under consideration it is
usually found that:
n For spans of up to 6.000 m traditional reinforced concrete is the most economic
method.
n For spans between 6.000 and 9.000 m the two mediums are compatible.
n For spans of over 9.000 m prestressed concrete is generally more economical
than reinforced concrete.

 
The prestressing of concrete is usually carried out by a specialist contractor or
alternatively by the main contractor using a particular system and equipment. The
basic conception and principles of prestressing are common to all systems; it is only
the type of tendon, type of anchorage and stressing equipment that vary. The
following established systems are typical and representative of the methods
available.
nnn BBRV (SIMON-CARVES LTD)
This is a unique system of prestressing developed by four Swiss engineers, 
namely Birkenmaier, Brandestini, Ros and Vogt, whose initials are used to name 
the system. It differs from other systems in that multi-wire cables capable of
providing prestressing forces from 300 to 7,800 kN are used, and each wire is
anchored at each end by means of enlarged heads formed on the wire. The cables 
or tendons are purpose-made to suit individual requirements, and may comprise up
to 121 wires. The high-tensile steel wire conforming to the recommendations of BS
5896: Speciﬁcation for high tensile steel wire and strand for the prestressing of concrete is
cut to the correct length, and any sheathing required is threaded on together with
the correct anchorage before the button heads are formed using special equipment.
The completed tendons can be coiled or left straight for delivery to site. Four types
of stressing anchor are available, the choice being dependent on the prestressing
force being induced, whereas the ﬁxed anchors come in three forms. The ﬁnished
tendon is ﬁxed in the correct position to the formwork before concreting; when 
the concrete has hardened the tendons are stressed, and grout is injected into the
sheathing. If unsheathed tendons are to be drawn into preformed ducts the anchor
is omitted from one and is ﬁxed after drawing through the tendon, the button heads
being formed with a portable machine.
10.2
PRESTRESSED CONCRETE 
SYSTEMS

 
Prestressed concrete systems
463
Tendons in this system are tensioned by using a special hydraulic jack of the
centre hole type with capacities ranging from 30 to 800 tonnes. A pull rod or pull
sleeve, depending on anchor type, is coupled to the basic element carrying the
wires. A locknut, stressing stool, hydraulic jack and dynamometer are then 
threaded on. The applied stressing force can be read off the dynamometer, 
whereas the actual extension achieved can be seen by the scale engraved on 
the jack.
After stressing, the locknut is tightened up and the jack released before 
grouting takes place. Losses due to friction, shrinkage and creep can be overcome
by restressing at any time after the initial stressing operation so long as the tendons
have not been grouted.
In common with most other prestressing systems, tendons in long continuous
members can be stressed in stages without breaking the continuity of the design.
The ﬁrst tendon length is stressed and grouted before the second tendon length 
is connected to it using a coupling anchor, after which it is stressed and grouted,
before repeating the procedure for any subsequent lengths. Alternatively, lengths of
unstressed tendons can be coupled together and the complete tendon stressed from
one or both ends. Figure 10.2.1 shows a typical BBRV stressing arrangement.
nnn CCL (CCL SYSTEMS LTD – NOW ANCON CCL LTD)
To form the tendon, this post-tensioning system uses a number of strands, ranging
from 4 to 31, according to the system being employed, giving a range of prestressing
forces from 450 to 5,000 kN. CCL established two basic systems, namely Cabco 
and Multiforce. These have since been further developed by the company, but are
retained here to illustrate a principle of post-tensioning. In the Cabco system each
strand or wire is stressed individually, the choice of hydraulic jack being governed
by the size of strand being used. The system is fast and, being manually operated,
eliminates the need for lifting equipment. By applying the total tendon force in
stages, problems such as differential elastic shortening and out-of-balance forces 
are reduced. Curved tendons are possible using this system without the need for
spacers, but spacers are recommended for tendons over 30.000 m long.
The alternative Multiforce system uses the technique of simultaneously stressing
all the strands forming the tendon. In both systems the basic anchorages are similar
in design. The ﬁxed or dead-end anchorage has a tube unit to distribute the load, a
bearing plate and a compressing grip ﬁtted to each strand. If the ﬁxed anchorage is
to be totally embedded in concrete a compressible gasket and a bolted-on retaining
plate are also used, a grout vent pipe being inserted into the grout hole of the tube
unit. The compression grips consist of an outer sleeve with a machined and
hardened insert, which can be ﬁtted while making up the tendon or installed after
positioning the tendon. The stressing anchor is a similar device, consisting of a tube
unit, bearing plate and wedges working on a collet principle to secure the strands.
The wedges are driven home to a ‘set’ by the hydraulic jack used for stressing the
tendon before the jack is released and the stress is transferred. Figure 10.2.2 shows
a typical CCL Cabco stressing arrangement.

 
464
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 10.2.1
Typical BBRV prestressing arrangement

 
Prestressed concrete systems
465
Figure 10.2.2
Typical details of the CCL Cabco system of prestressing

 
466
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn DYWIDAG (DIVIDAG STRESSED CONCRETE LTD)
This post-tensioning system uses single- or multiple-bar tendons with diameters
ranging from 12 to 36 mm for single-bar applications and 16 mm diameter threaded
bars for multiple-bar tendons, giving prestressing forces up to 950 kN for single-bar
tendons and up to 2,000 kN for multiple-bar tendons. Both forms of tendon are
placed inside a thin-wall corrugated sheathing, which is ﬁlled with grout after
completion of the stressing operation. The single-bar tendon can be of a smooth bar
with cold-rolled threads at each end to provide the connection for the anchorages,
or it can be a threadbar that has a coarse thread along its entire length, providing
full mechanical bond. A threadbar is used for all multiple-bar tendons.
Two forms of anchorage are available: the bell anchor and the square or
rectangular plate anchor. During stressing, using a hydraulic jack acting against 
the bell or plate anchor, the tendon is stretched and at the same time the anchor 
nut is being continuously screwed down to provide the transfer of stress when 
the speciﬁed stress has been reached and the jack is released. A counter shows 
the number of revolutions of the anchor nut and the amount of elongation of the
tendon. As in other similar systems the tendons can be restressed at any time before
grouting. Figure 10.2.3 shows typical details of a single-bar tendon arrangement.
nnn MACALLOY (BRITISH STEEL CORPORATION – NOW
CORUS UK LTD)
Like the method previously described, the Macalloy system uses single- or
multiple-bar tendons. The bars used are of a cold-worked high-strength alloy 
steel threaded at each end to provide an anchorage connection, and are available in
lengths up to 18.000 m with nominal diameters ranging from 20 to 40 mm, giving
prestressing forces up to 875 kN for single-bar tendons and up to 3,500 kN using
four 40 mm diameter bars to form the tendon.
The ﬁxed anchorage consists of an end plate drilled and tapped to receive the
tendon, whereas the stressing anchor consists of a similar plate complete with 
a grouting ﬂange and anchor nut. Stressing is carried out using a hydraulic 
jack operating on a drawbar attached to the tendon, the tightened anchor nut
transferring the stress to the member upon completion of the stressing operation.
The prestressing is completed by grouting in the tendon after all the stressing and
any necessary restressing has been completed. Figure 10.2.4 shows typical details 
of a single-bar arrangement.
nnn PSC FREYSSINET LTD
This post-tension system uses strand to form the tendon and is available in three
forms: the Freyssi-monogroup, Freyssinet multistrand and PSC monostrand.
Monogroup tendons are composed of 7, 13, 15 or 19 wire strands stressed in a
single pull by the correct model of hydraulic jack, giving prestressing forces of 
up to 5,000 kN. The anchorages consist of a cast iron guide shaped to permit the
deviation of the strands to their positions in the steel anchor block, where they are

 
Prestressed concrete systems
467
Figure 10.2.3
Typical stressing anchors for Dywidag post-tensioning system

 
468
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 10.2.4
Typical Macalloy prestressing system details

 
Prestressed concrete systems
469
secured by collet-type jaws. During stressing, 12 wires of the tendon are anchored
to the body of the jack, the remaining wires passing through the jack body to an
anchorage at the rear.
The multistrand system is based upon the ﬁrst system of post-tension ever
devised, and consists of a cable tendon made from 12 high-tensile steel wires laid
parallel to one another and taped together, resulting in a tendon that is ﬂexible and
compact. Two standard cable diameters are produced, giving tendon sizes of 29 and
33 mm capable of taking prestressing forces up to 750 kN. The anchorages consist
of two parts: the outer reinforced concrete cylindrical body has a tapered hole to
receive a conical wedge, which is grooved or ﬂuted to receive the wires of the
tendon. The 12 wires of the cable are wedged into tapered slots on the outside 
of the hydraulic jack body during stressing, and when this operation has been
completed the jack drives home the conical wedge to complete the anchorage.
Monostrand uses a four- or seven-strand tendon for general prestressing or a
three-strand tendon developed especially for prestressing ﬂoor and roof slabs. This
system is intended for the small to medium range of prestressing work requiring a
prestressing force not exceeding 2,000 kN, and as its title indicates each strand in
the group is stressed separately, requiring only a light compact hydraulic jack. All
PSC system tendons are encased in a steel sheath and grouted after completion of
the stressing operation. Typical details are shown in Fig. 10.2.5.
nnn SCD (STRESSED CONCRETE DESIGN LTD)
This post-tensioning system offers three variations of tendon and/or stressing:
multigrip circular, monogrip circular and monogrip rectangular. The multigrip
circular system uses a tendon of 7, 12, 13 or 19 strands, forming a cable tendon
capable of accepting prestressing forces up to 5,000 kN. The anchorages consist 
of a cast iron guide plate, enabling the individual strands of the cable to fan out and
pass through a bearing plate, where they are secured with steel collet-type wedges.
The strands pass through the body of the hydraulic jack to a rear anchorage and are
therefore stressed simultaneously.
The monogrip circular tendons are available as a single-, 4-, 7- or 12-strand 
cable in which each strand is stressed individually, and the whole tendon is capable
of taking prestressing forces up to 3,200 kN. Each strand in the tendon is separated
from adjacent strands by means of circular spacers at 2.000 m centres, or less if the
tendon is curved. The anchorages are similar in principle to those already described
for multigrip tendons.
The monogrip rectangular system, by virtue of using a rectangular tendon
composed of 3 to 27 strands capable of taking a prestressing force of up to 
3,900 kN, affords maximum eccentricity with a wide range of tendon sizes. The
anchorage guide plate and bearing plates work on the same principle as described
above for the multigrip method. In all methods the tendon is encased in a sheath
unless preformed ducts have been cast; upon completion of the stressing operation
all tendons are grouted in. See Fig. 10.2.6 for typical details.

 
470
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 10.2.5
Typical PSC prestressing system

 
Prestressed concrete systems
471
Figure 10.2.6
Typical SCD prestressing system details

 

 
BUILDINGS FOR
INDUSTRIAL AND
STORAGE USE
PART
11

 

 
For a review of the general concepts of a roof’s function, construction techniques
and methods of covering, the reader is recommended to review Parts 6 and 10 in 
the associated volume, Construction Technology, before proceeding with this chapter.
This advanced level of study is concerned mainly with particular building types
such as those suitable as small to large industrial or factory buildings.
Buildings of this nature set the designer two main problems:
n production layout at ﬂoor level and the consequent need for large unobstructed
areas by omitting as far as practicable internal roof supports such as loadbearing
walls and columns;
n provision of natural daylight from the roof over the ﬂoor area below.
The amount of useful daylight that can penetrate into a building from openings
in side and end walls is very limited and depends upon such factors as height of
windows above the working plane or surface, sizes of windows and the arrangement
of windows. Buildings with spans in excess of 18.000 m will generally need some
form of overhead supplementary lighting. In single-storey buildings this can take
the form of glazed rooﬂights, but in multi-storey buildings the ﬂoors beneath the
top ﬂoor will have to have the natural daylighting from the side and end walls
supplemented by permanent artiﬁcial lighting.
The factors to be considered when designing or choosing a roof type or proﬁle
for a factory building in terms of rooﬂighting are:
n amount of daylight required;
n spread of daylight required over the working plane;
n elimination of solar heat gain and solar glare.
The amount of daylight required within a building is usually based upon the
daylight factor, which can be deﬁned as ‘the illumination at a speciﬁc point
indoors expressed as a percentage of the simultaneous horizontal illumination
11.1
FACTORY BUILDINGS: ROOFS

 
476
Advanced Construction Technology
outdoors under an unobstructed overcast sky’. The minimum daylight factor for
factories depends on usage and work function within the building. Table 11.1.1
provides some comparison. A ﬁgure of 3 to 6% may be acceptable in most factory
assembly situations, depending on the intensity of work.
More accurate determination of daylight factor can be achieved by plotting 
the particular roof proﬁle and glass area with the use of a daylight protractor.
These are made available in literature pack AP 68 from the Building Research
Establishment, with further information in literature pack AP 220. The BRE Report
BR 288: Designing buildings for daylight is also helpful, with worked examples and
practical exercises relating to daylight design.
An estimation of glazed area can be made using a rule of thumb that gives a ratio
of one-ﬁfth glass to ﬂoor area. For example, assuming a daylight factor of 3% is
required over a ﬂoor area of 500 m2, then the area of glass can be calculated as:
Daylight factor × ﬂoor area × 5 =
× 500 × 5
= 75 m2
It must be emphasised that this one-ﬁfth rule of thumb is a preliminary design aid,
and the result obtained should be checked by a more precise method. It should also
be compared with current thermal insulation requirements for maximum areas of
3
100
Table 11.1.1
Daylight factors
Building type
Daylight factor (%)
Recommendations
Dwellings:
kitchen
2
Over at least 50% of ﬂoor area 
(min. approx. 4.5 m2)
living room
1
Over at least 50% of ﬂoor area 
(min. approx. 7.0 m2)
bedroom
0.5
Over at least 75% of ﬂoor area 
(min. approx. 5.5 m2)
Schools
2
Over all teaching areas and kitchens
Hospitals
1
Over all wards
Ofﬁces:
general
1
With side lighting at approx. 3.75 m2 penetration
general
2
With top light over whole area
drawing
6
On drawing boards
drawing
2
Over remainder of work areas
typing and computing
4
Over whole working area
Laboratories
3–6
Depending on dominance of side or top lighting
Factories
5
General recommendation
Art galleries
6
Max. on walls or screens where no special 
problems of fading
Churches
1
General, over whole area
Churches
1.5–2
In sanctuary areas
Public buildings
1
Depending on function, ﬁgure given can be 
taken as minimum

 
Factory buildings: roofs
477
glazing to industrial and storage buildings. This is considered later in the chapter
and deﬁned in Building Regulations, Approved Document L2.
For an even spread of light over the working plane the ratio between the spacing
and height of the rooﬂights is particularly important unless a monitor roof is used,
which gives a reasonable even spread of light by virtue of its shape. For typical
ratios see Fig. 11.1.1. If the ratios shown in Fig. 11.1.1 are not adopted the result
could give a marked difference in illumination values at the working plane, resulting
in light and darker areas.
Another factor to be considered when planning rooﬂighting is the amount of
obstruction to natural daylighting that could be caused by services and equipment
housed in the roof void. Also, the effectiveness of the glazed areas will gradually
deteriorate as dirt collects on the surfaces.
The elimination of solar heat gain and solar glare can be achieved in various
ways, such as ﬁtting reﬂective louvres to the glazed areas and treating the surface
with a special thin paint wash to act as a diffusion agent. Probably the best solution
is to choose a roof proﬁle such as the northlight roof, which is orientated away from
the southern aspect. However, other factors such as site size, site position and/or
planning requirements may mean that the last solution is not always possible.
nnn NORTHLIGHT ROOFS
This form of roof proﬁle is asymmetric: the north-orientated face is pitched at an
angle of between 50° and 90° and is covered with glass, usually in the form of patent
glazing. The south-orientated face of the roof is pitched at an angle of between 20°
and 30° and is covered with proﬁled ﬁbre cement sheeting or similar lightweight
covering attached to purlins. The structural roof members can be of timber, steel 
or precast concrete formed as a plane frame in single or multi-span format and
spaced at 4.500 to 6.000 m centres according to the spanning properties of the
purlins (see Fig. 11.1.2).
Single-span northlight roofs in excess of 12.000 m span are generally
unacceptable because the void formed by the roof triangulation is very large, and as
it is not divorced from the main building it has to be included in the total volume to
be heated. The solution is to use a series of smaller plane frames to form a multiple
northlight roof, which will reduce the total volume of the roof considerably. Note
that there is almost no difference in the total roof area to be covered, whichever
method is adopted; however, multiple roofs will require more ﬁttings in the form 
of ridge pieces, eaves closures and gutters.
Using a system of multiple northlight frames a valley is formed between each
plane frame, and this must be designed to collect and discharge the surface water
run-off from both sides of the valley (see Fig. 11.1.3). Internal support for the 
ends of adjacent frames can be obtained by using a valley beam spanning over
internal columns, the spacing of these supporting columns being determined by 
the spanning properties of the chosen beam. If the number of internal columns
required becomes unacceptable in terms of ﬂoor layout and circulation, an
alternative arrangement can be used consisting of a lattice girder housed between
the apex and bottom tie of the roof frame (see Fig. 11.1.2). This method will enable

 
478
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.1.1
Roof proﬁles: even spread of light ratios

 
Factory buildings: roofs
479
Figure 11.1.2
Typical northlight roof proﬁles

 
480
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.1.3
Multiple northlight roof: typical details

 
Factory buildings: roofs
481
economic spans of up to 30.000 m to be achieved. The inclusion of a lattice girder
in this position will create a cantilever northlight roof truss, and if the same
principle is adopted for a multi-span symmetrically pitched roof truss it is usually
called an umbrella roof. The only real disadvantages of this alternative method 
are a slight increase in shadow casting caused by the lattice beam member, and a
small increase in long-term maintenance such as painting.
nnn MONITOR ROOFS
This form of roof is basically a ﬂat roof with raised portions glazed on two faces,
which are called monitor lights. The roof covering is usually some form of
lightweight metal decking covered with asphalt or built-up rooﬁng felt. The 
glazed areas, like those in a northlight roof, are usually of patent glazing and 
are generally pitched at an angle of between 70° and 90°.
Monitor lights give a uniform distribution of natural daylight with a daylight
factor of between 5% and 8%. Their near-vertical pitch does not give rise to solar
glare problems, and therefore orientation is not of major importance. The void is
considerably less than either the symmetrically pitched or northlight roof, which
gives a more economic solution to heating design problems. The ﬂat ceiling areas
below the monitor lights will give a better distribution of artiﬁcial lighting than
pitched roofs; also the ﬂat roof areas surrounding the projecting monitors will give
better and easier access to the glazed areas for maintenance and cleaning purposes.
The formation of the projecting monitor lights can be of light steelwork
supported by lattice girders or standard universal beam sections; alternatively 
they can be constructed of cranked and welded universal beam sections supported
on internal columns. To give long clear internal spans, deep lattice beams of
lightweight construction can be incorporated within the depth of the monitor
framing in a similar manner to that used in northlight roofs (see Fig. 11.1.4).
Precast concrete monitor portal frames can also be constructed for both 
single- and multi-span applications (see Fig. 11.1.5).
nnn ENERGY CONSERVATION
The control of fuel energy consumption and measures to reduce the associated
atmospheric contamination by CO2 emissions from industrial buildings are included
in the Approved Document to Building Regulation L2: Conservation of fuel and
power in buildings other than dwellings. The Approved Document contains reference
to other technical publications produced by industry, research organisations and the
professions. Amongst other provisions, the Approved Document and the additional
references contain guidance for:
n limiting heat losses from hot water pipes, hot water storage vessels and warm air
ducting;
n limiting heat gains by chilled water and refrigeration vessels;
n energy-efﬁcient heating and hot water systems;
n limiting exposure to solar over-heating;

 
482
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.1.4
Typical cranked beam monitor roof details

 
Factory buildings: roofs
483
Figure 11.1.5
Typical monitor roof proﬁles

 
484
Advanced Construction Technology
n controlling energy use in air conditioning and ventilation systems;
n energy-efﬁcient artiﬁcial lighting and controls;
n documenting building and plant operating details to enable the enclosure to be
maintained in an energy-efﬁcient manner;
n avoidance of thermal bridges in construction and gaps in insulation layers;
n incorporating reasonably airtight construction with satisfactory sealing methods
at construction interfaces;
n maximum acceptable elemental thermal transmittance coefﬁcients (U-values);
n maximum acceptable window, door and other opening areas;
n calculation methodology for establishing carbon emissions.
Under the European Union’s Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (EPBD),
Member States are required to have in place a methodology for calculating the
energy performance of buildings. This calculation must incorporate every aspect 
of energy efﬁciency, not least heat losses through the fabric, daylight calculations,
airtightness of the external envelope, heating and ventilating system efﬁciency 
and internal lighting efﬁciency. In the UK the methodology can be satisﬁed by 
a standard carbon emission calculation. For dwellings (AD.L1), this is effected
through the government’s recommended system for energy rating, known as
Standard Assessment Procedure or SAP. For non-domestic buildings a 
National Calculation Method (NCM) has been devised by the Building Research
Establishment to show compliance with Approved Document L2 in accordance
with the EPBD. This is known as the Simpliﬁed Building Energy Method
(SBEM). The SBEM incorporates all information relating to a building’s design,
principally its geometry, method of construction, function and energy-consuming
services systems. The ﬁnal documentation is in the form of an asset-rating
certiﬁcate. This may be used as part of the application for local authority building
control approval and as an energy guide for building users and prospective
purchasers.
The Approved Document L2 is not a package of prescriptive measures. It 
sets overall targets or benchmarks with objectives to be satisﬁed under the NCM.
Nevertheless, there are some parameters for construction practice, which can be
gauged. These include:
n poorest acceptable fabric U-values;
n air permeability, particularly at construction interfaces;
n area allowances for windows, doors, roof windows and rooﬂights;
n solar controls – maximum solar energy transmittance or window energy rating.
Poorest acceptable fabric U-values
In addition to limiting heat losses through the building fabric, establishment of
maximum U-values will reduce the possibility of condensation. Table 11.1.2 shows
the worst acceptable area-weighted elemental U-values and the worst acceptable
individual elemental values. Some objective U-values are also included for
guidance. Actual values can vary quite signiﬁcantly, depending on the effectiveness
of other energy conservation measures.

 
Factory buildings: roofs
485
Air permeability
No inﬁltration of air should occur at intersections of elements of construction, 
e.g. wall/roof. Guidance for conformity is provided in Approved Document L2,
with reference to the Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE)
publication TM23: Testing buildings for air leakage.
Currently, conformity can be shown as follows:
n Buildings of less than 1,000 m2 gross ﬂoor area: a report from a competent
inspector to show that the design details, material speciﬁcations and quality 
of construction are to an acceptable standard.
n Buildings of gross ﬂoor area greater than 1,000 m2: also the subject of a report
from a competent inspector, plus documented evidence that the air permeability
does not exceed 10 m3/h/m2 of external surface, at an applied pressure of 50 Pa
(1 Pa = 1 N/m2).
Air permeability can be determined by pressurising a building interior with portable
fans. Smoke capsules are discharged to provide visual indication of air leakage.
Area allowances for windows, doors, roof windows and rooﬂights
The window and door opening area for industrial and storage buildings should 
not exceed 15% of the internal area of exposed wall. Residential buildings (hotels,
institutional, etc.) may have up to 30% window and door opening area; places of
Table 11.1.2
U-values
Element of construction
Limiting 
Limiting 
Objective 
area-weighted 
individual
value 
average (W/m2K)
element (W/m2K)
(W/m2K)
Floor
0.25
0.70
0.22
Wall
0.35
0.70
0.27
Roof
0.25
0.35
0.20a
Windows/rooﬂightsb
2.20
3.30
1.80
Curtain wall
See notec
Personnel doors
2.20
3.00
–
Vehicle access and other large doors
1.50
4.00
–
High-use entrance doors
6.00
6.00
–
Roof and smoke vents
6.00
6.00
–
a Pitched roof with insulation between rafters; between joists 0.16.
b Not including display windows.
c The limiting U-value for windows should be applied to glazed areas; the limiting U-value for
walls should be applied to opaque areas.
Notes:
Area-weighted allows for the thermal properties of various materials in a component of
construction and the area that they occupy, e.g. glass and framing materials in a window.
Individual element refers to facilities that interrupt the main fabric of construction, e.g. a meter
cupboard enclosure.

 
486
Advanced Construction Technology
assembly, ofﬁces and shops up to 40%. Rooﬂight and dormer window area is 
a maximum of 20% of the roof area. Purpose groups of buildings other than
industrial (dwellings excluded) have the same roof openings limitations.
Solar controls
Windows, roof windows and rooﬂights should be ﬁtted with means for controlling
solar gain to prevent overheating of the building interior. Solar control or solar 
heat block can be measured by solar energy transmittance or solar factor expressed
in terms of a g-value. g-values are stated as a number between zero and one. For
purposes of an approximate comparison, 0.48 equates to no curtains, 0.43 curtains
open, and 0.17 curtains closed. Table 11.1.3 shows the required standards for
various building orientations.
Table 11.1.3
Solar energy transmittance factors
Windows/rooﬂight orientation
Maximum g-value
N
0.81
NE, NW and S
0.65
E, SE, SW and W
0.52
Horizontal
0.39
The heat loss from within a building is affected by the temperature difference
between the internal and external environments, and to comply with various Acts
and to create good working conditions it is desirable to maintain a minimum
temperature for various types of activity.
The ideal working temperature for any particular task is a subjective measure,
but as a guide the following internal temperatures recommended by the Chartered
Institution of Building Services Engineers are worth considering.
n Sedentary work:
18.4 °C minimum.
n Light work:
15.6 °C minimum.
n Heavy work:
12.8 °C minimum.
The Factories Act 1961 requires a minimum temperature, after the ﬁrst hour, of
15.6 °C to be maintained except where sedentary work takes place, where a higher
temperature would be required.
The advantages that can be gained by having a well-insulated roof (see 
Fig. 11.1.6) are:
n lower fuel bills;
n reduced capital outlay on heating equipment;
n better working conditions for employees and hence better working relationships.
The initial cost of a building will be higher if a good standard of thermal
insulation is speciﬁed and installed but, in the long term, an overall saving is 
usually experienced, the increased capital outlay being recovered within the ﬁrst 
ﬁve or so years by the savings made in running costs.

 
Factory buildings: roofs
487
Figure 11.1.6
Industrial premises: typical insulation details

 
488
Advanced Construction Technology
The inclusion of certain materials within a factory roof to comply with the
thermal insulation requirements of this Act may introduce into the structure a 
ﬁre hazard. To this end the Act stipulates that the exposed surfaces of insulation
materials used, even if within a cavity, must be at least class 1 spread of ﬂame, 
as deﬁned in BS 476-7. Furthermore, where structural steel sections are used to
make up the roof frame and provide lateral stability to external walls, they will 
also need resistance to ﬁre by encasement in plaster proﬁles, sprayed vermiculite
cement or other acceptable material (see Part B to the Building Regulations and the
Loss Prevention Certiﬁcation Board’s Standards). By using suitable materials or
combinations of materials the risk of ﬁre and ﬁre spread in factories can be reduced
considerably. The main objective, in common with all ﬁres in buildings, is to
conﬁne the ﬁre to the vicinity of the outbreak.
Factories can have compartment-type walls with automatic closing ﬁre-resistant
doors as previously described (see Fig. 7.3.11), but if open planning is required
other precautions will be necessary. The roof volume can be divided into cells by
ﬁtting permanent ﬁre barriers within the triangulated proﬁle of the roof structure
with non-combustible materials such as ﬁbre cement sheet or galvanised wire mesh
reinforced mineral wool suitably ﬁre-stopped within the proﬁle of the roof covering.
Beneath these ﬁre barriers can be rolled curtains of ﬁre ﬁbre cloth controlled by a
fusible link or similar ﬁre-detection device, which will allow the curtain to fall
forming a ﬁre screen from roof to ﬂoor in the advent of a ﬁre. A similar curtain
could also be positioned in the longitudinal direction under a valley beam.
Using the above method a ﬁre can be contained for a reasonable period within
the conﬁned area, but it can also create another problem or hazard, that of smoke
logging. The smoke generated by a ﬁre will rise to the roof level and then start 
to circulate within the screened compartment, completely ﬁlling the volume of the
conﬁned section within a short space of time, which, apart from the hazard to
people trying to escape, can present the ﬁreﬁghters with the following problems:
n difﬁculty in breathing;
n prevention from seeing the source of the ﬁre;
n detecting nature of outbreak;
n assessing extent of outbreak.
A method of overcoming this problem is to have automatic high-level 
ventilators that will allow the smoke to escape rapidly and thus give the 
ﬁreﬁghters a chance to see clearly and enable them to deal with the outbreak. 
The use of ventilators, to overcome the problems of smoke logging, will of course
introduce more air, which aids combustion, but this does not have the same
negative effect as smoke logging, because the volume of air in this type of building
is usually so vast that the introduction of more air will have very little effect on the
intensity of the outbreak.
The design and position of automatic roof ventilators are normally the
prerogative of a specialist designer, but as a guide the total area of opening
ventilators should be between 0.5% and 5% of the ﬂoor area, depending 
on the likely area of ﬁre. The essential requirements for an automatic 
ventilator are:

 
Factory buildings: roofs
489
n It must open in the event of a ﬁre, a common speciﬁcation being when the heat
around the ventilator reaches a temperature of 68 °C.
n It must be weatherproof in normal circumstances.
n It must be easy to ﬁx, and blend with the chosen roof covering material 
and proﬁle.
Many automatic ﬁre ventilators are designed to act as manually controlled
ventilators under normal conditions – typical examples are shown in Fig. 11.1.7.

 
490
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.1.7
Automatic roof ﬁre ventilators

 
The walls of factory buildings have to fulﬁl the same functions as any enclosing wall
to a building:
n protection from the elements;
n provision of the required sound and thermal insulation;
n provision of the required degree of ﬁre resistance;
n provision of access to and exit from the interior;
n provision of natural daylighting to the interior;
n provision of reasonable security protection to the premises;
n resistance to anticipated wind pressures;
n reasonable durability to keep long-term maintenance costs down to an 
acceptable level;
n reasonable appearance, in keeping with the occupant’s business image.
Most contemporary factory buildings are constructed as framed structures 
using a three-dimensional frame or a system of portal frames, which means that 
the enclosing walls can be considered as non loading-bearing claddings supporting
their own dead weight plus any wind loading. The wall can be designed as a
complete envelope masking the structural framework entirely using brick or block
walling, precast concrete panels, curtain-walling techniques or lightweight proﬁled
steel wall claddings. Alternatively, an inﬁll panel technique could be used, making a
feature of the structural members.
The choice will depend on such factors as appearance, local planning
requirements, short- and long-term costs and personal preference. If the factory 
is small and contains both production and ofﬁces within the same building,
presentation of the company’s image to business associates and clients is an
important design consideration.
The topic of brick and block panel walls in the context of framed buildings can
be found in Chapter 10.6 of the associated volume, Construction Technology. The use
11.2
FACTORY BUILDINGS: WALLS

 
492
Advanced Construction Technology
of precast concrete cladding panels and lightweight inﬁll panels is considered in
Chapters 8.1 and 8.2 of the present volume. Many manufacturers of portal frame
buildings provide a service that includes design, fabrication, supply and assembly 
of the complete structure, including the roof and wall coverings. Readers are
recommended to study the publicity and data sheets issued by these companies 
for a comprehensive analysis of current practice. This chapter provides details of
lightweight external wall claddings only, as applied to framed buildings in popular
application to factory buildings.
nnn LIGHTWEIGHT EXTERNAL WALL CLADDINGS
In common with other cladding methods for framed buildings, lightweight 
external wall claddings do not require high compressive strength because they 
only have to support their own dead load and any imposed wind loading, which 
will become more critical as the height and/or exposure increases. The subject of
wind pressures is dealt with in greater detail in the next chapter. Lightweight
claddings are usually manufactured from impervious materials, which means that
the run-off of rainwater can be high, particularly under storm conditions, when the
discharge per minute could reach 2 litres per square metre of wall area exposed to
the rain.
A wide variety of materials can be used as a cladding medium, most being
proﬁled to a corrugated or trough form because the shaping will increase the
strength of the material over its ﬂat sheet form. Flat sheet materials are available 
but are rarely applied to large buildings because of the higher strength obtained
from a proﬁled sheet of similar thickness. Special contoured sheets have been
devised by many manufacturers to give the designer a wide range of choice in 
the context of aesthetic appeal. Claddings in two layers or sandwich construction
are also available to provide reasonable degrees of thermal insulation and sound
insulation, and to combat the condensation hazard that can occur with lightweight
claddings of any nature.
The sheets are ﬁxed in a similar manner to that for sheet roof coverings, except
that support purlins are replaced in walls by similar steel angles called sheeting
rails ﬁxed by angle cleats to the vertical structural frame. Alternatively, sheeting
rails can be of zed or sigma proﬁle for direct ﬁxing to the structural frame. A
signiﬁcant difference occurs with the position of the sheet ﬁxings, which in wall
claddings are usually speciﬁed as being positioned in the trough of the proﬁle 
as opposed to the crest when ﬁxing roof coverings. This change in ﬁxing detail 
is to ensure that the wall cladding is pulled tightly up to the sheeting rail or 
lining tray.
Plastic protective caps for the heads of ﬁxings are available, generally of a colour
and texture that will blend with the wall cladding. A full range of ﬁttings and trims
are usually obtainable for most materials and proﬁles to accommodate openings,
returns, top edge and bottom edge closing. Typical cladding details are shown in
Figs 11.2.1 and 11.2.2.

 
Factory buildings: walls
493
Figure 11.2.1
Lightweight wall cladding: typical details 1

 
494
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.2.2
Lightweight wall cladding: typical details 2

 
Factory buildings: walls
495
Common materials used for lightweight wall claddings are:
n Fibre cement
This is a non-combustible material in corrugated and troughed
sheets, which are generally satisfactory when exposed to the weather but are
susceptible to impact damage. Average life is about 20 years, which can be
increased considerably by paint protection. Unpainted sheets lose their surface
ﬁnish at the exposed surface by carbonation, and become ingrained with dirt. To
achieve adequate thermal insulation standards a lining material of mineral wool
or similar will be required. This is normally sandwiched between the outer sheet
cladding and an inner lining.
n Coated steel sheet
A non-combustible material with a wide range of 
proﬁles produced by various manufacturers. The steel sheet forms the core 
of the cladding, providing its strength, and this is covered with various forms of
coatings to give weather protection, texture and colour. A typical speciﬁcation
would be a galvanised 0.9 mm thick core, covered on both sides with silicone
polyester for improved appearance and durability.
n Aluminium alloy sheet
A non-combustible material in corrugated 
and troughed proﬁles, which are usually made to the recommendations 
of CP 143-1 and BS 4868 respectively. Other proﬁles are also available as
manufacturers’ standards. Durability will depend on the alloy speciﬁcation, 
but this can be increased by specialist paint applications or plastic coatings as 
for steel. If unpainted or otherwise protected, regular cleaning may be necessary
to maintain its natural bright appearance. Aluminium alloys are unsuited to
coastal locations, where the salty atmosphere will react and corrode the metal.
Fixings, ﬁttings and the availability of linings are as indicated for other cladding
materials.
n Polyvinylchloride sheet
This is generally supplied in a corrugated proﬁle
with an embedded wire reinforcement to provide a cladding with a surface
spread of ﬂame classiﬁcation of class 1 in accordance with BS 476-7. The extent
of this type of external cladding may be limited by combustibility and ﬁre spread
regulations deﬁned in the Building Regulations, Approved Document B4,
Section 11. For most applications the critical building height is 18.000 m, with
boundary proximity 1.000 m. As many industrial buildings are single storey of
limited height and in excess of the boundary threshold, materials such as proﬁled
rigid PVC and polycarbonate sheeting may be considered viable. The durability
of this form of cladding is somewhat lower than of those previously considered,
and the colours available are limited. The usual range of ﬁttings and trims is
available.
The importance of adequate design, detail and ﬁxing of all forms of lightweight
cladding cannot be overstressed, because the primary objective of these claddings 

 
496
Advanced Construction Technology
is to provide a lightweight envelope to the building, giving basic weather protection
and internal comfort at a reasonable cost. Claddings that will fulﬁl these objectives
are very susceptible to wind damage unless properly secured to the structural 
frame.
Notes: Figs 11.2.1 and 11.2.2
1. Wall insulation thickness as required by national building regulations and
building purpose. Approximate values using mineral ﬁbre insulants:
Thickness (mm)
U-value (W/m2 K)
None
2.80
60
0.55
80
0.45
100
0.35
150
0.25
2. Roof insulation thickness as required by national building regulations and
building purpose. Approximate values using mineral ﬁbre insulants:
Thickness (mm)
U-value (W/m2 K)
None
2.60
60
0.54
80
0.40
100
0.33
130
0.25
150
0.22

 
Wind can be deﬁned as a movement of air, the full nature of which is not fully
understood, but two major contributory factors that can be given are:
n convection currents caused by air being warmed at the earth’s surface, becoming
less dense, rising and being replaced by colder air;
n transference of air between high- and low-pressure areas.
The speed with which the air moves in replacement or transfer is termed its
velocity, and can be from 0 to 1.5 metres per second, when it is hardly noticeable,
to speeds in excess of 24 metres per second, when considerable damage to property
and discomfort to persons could be the result.
The physical nature of the ground or topography over which the wind passes 
will have an effect on local wind speeds, because obstructions such as trees and
buildings can set up local disturbances by forcing the wind to move around the
sides of the obstruction or funnel between adjacent obstacles. Where funnelling
occurs, the velocity and therefore the pressure can be increased considerably.
Experience and research have shown that the major damage to buildings is caused
not by a wind blowing at a constant velocity but by short-duration bursts or gusts 
of wind of greater intensity than the prevailing mean wind speed. The durations of
these gusts are usually measured in 3, 5 and 15 second periods, and information on
the likely maximum gust speeds for speciﬁc long-term time durations of 50 years 
or more is available from the Meteorological Ofﬁce.
When the wind encounters an object in its path, such as the face of a building, 
it is usually rebuffed and forced to turn back on itself. This has the effect of setting
up a whirling motion or eddy, which eventually ﬁnds its way around or over the
obstruction. The pressure of the wind is normally in the same direction as the path
of the wind, which tends to push the wall of the building inwards, and indeed will
do so if sufﬁcient resistance is not built into the structure. The effect of local eddies,
however, is very often opposite in direction and force to that of the prevailing wind,
producing a negative or suction force (see Fig. 11.3.1).
11.3
WIND PRESSURES

 
498
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.3.1
Typical effect of wind pressures around buildings

 
Wind pressures
499
Many factors must be taken into account before the magnitude and direction 
of wind pressures can be determined: these include the height-to-width ratio 
of the building, the length-to-width ratio of the building, the plan shape of the
building, the approach topography, exposure of the building, and the proximity 
of surrounding structures. Account must also be taken of any likely openings in 
the building, because the entry of wind will exert a positive pressure on any walls 
or ceilings encountered. These internal pressures must be added to or subtracted
from the type of pressure anticipated acting on the external face at the same point.
All buildings are at some time subjected to wind pressures, but some are more
vulnerable than others because of their shape, exposure or method of construction.
One method of providing adequate resistance to wind pressures is to use materials
of high density: it follows, therefore, that buildings that are clad with lightweight
coverings are more susceptible to wind damage than those using the heavier,
traditional materials. Factory buildings using lightweight claddings have therefore
been taken to serve as an illustration of providing suitable means of resistance to
wind pressures.
To overcome the problem of uplift or suction on roofs caused by the negative
wind pressures, adequate ﬁxing or anchorage of the lightweight coverings to the
structural frame is recommended. Generally, sufﬁcient resistance to uplift of the
frame is inherent in the material used for the structural members; the problem is
therefore to stop the covering being pulled away from the supporting member. 
This can be achieved by the quality or holding power of the ﬁxings used, or 
by the number of ﬁxings employed, or by a combination of both. Note that 
the whole roof considered as a single entity is at risk, and not merely individual
sheets.
If the supporting member does not have sufﬁcient self-dead load to overcome 
the suction forces, such as a timber plate bedded onto a brick wall, then it will be
necessary to anchor the plate adequately to the wall. This can be carried out by
means of bolts or straps ﬁxed to the plate and wall in such a manner that part 
of the dead load of the wall can be added to that of the supporting member.
Positive wind pressures tend to move or bend the wall forwards in the same
direction of the wind; this tendency is usually overcome when using light structural
framing by adding stiffeners called wind bracing to the structure. Wind braces 
are usually of steel angle construction ﬁtted between the structural members 
where unacceptable pressures are anticipated. They take the form of cross-bracing,
forming what is in fact a stiffening lattice within the frame (see Fig. 11.3.2).
Although each area of the country has a predominant prevailing wind, buildings
requiring wind bracing are usually treated the same at all likely vulnerable positions
to counteract changes in wind direction and the effect of local eddies.
The immense destructive power of the wind, in the context of building works,
cannot be overemphasised, and careful consideration is required from design stage
to actual construction on site. Readers should also appreciate that temporary works
and site hutments are just as vulnerable to wind damage as the ﬁnished structure.
Great care must be taken, therefore, when planning site layouts, plant positioning,
erection of scaffolds and hoardings if safe working conditions are to be obtained on
building sites.

 
500
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.3.2
Typical wind-bracing arrangements

 
Wind pressures
501
Further details of the effects and assessment of wind loads on buildings can be
obtained from the Building Research Establishment publication Wind, ﬂoods and
climate pack.
An additional reference for the determination of wind load values is BS 6399-2:
Loading for buildings. Code of practice for wind loads. This publication provides two
methods for calculation:
n Standard method
This contains many graphs, tables and simple formulae 
for basic calculations, which produce a general result on the conservative side 
of the directional method. It is most suited to the orthogonal wind direction 
and load examples normal to the building face shown in Fig. 11.3.1. However,
wind directions up to 45° either side of the building face can be considered.
n Directional method
This gives a more complex but detailed assessment 
of wind load analysis, with charts and formulae for a variety of situations. It is
particularly appropriate where wind direction and load are at an angle to the
building face, or where the building has an irregular proﬁle or plan shape of
geometric or curved proportions. Data in this section of the BS are suited more
to computer processing than to simple calculations.
For both applications, calculations are derived from basic wind speeds typical of
those shown for the UK and Ireland in Fig. 11.3.3. However, in accordance with
guidance in the BS, these ﬁgures will need adjustment for:
n the altitude of the building;
n wind direction and building orientation;
n season;
n a risk or probability factor of basic wind speed being exceeded.
Loading must be assessed for external and internal surface pressures, and a balance
obtained for both. Detailed calculation involves numerous computations from
ﬁgures, tables and formulae in BS 6399-2, which is beyond the brief of this text. 
To pursue this subject further, the reader is recommended to refer to Sections 2
and 3 of the British Standard for the standard and directional methods respectively.

 
502
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.3.3
Zones of basic wind speed (m/s)

 
Wind-driven rain can cause material damage by dampness penetration into the
structure, and loss of insulation by penetration of lightweight components. It can
cause the building fabric to become sufﬁciently moist for the growth of fungi,
mildew, mosses, moulds and other plant and insect life.
The quantity of rain falling on the vertical surfaces of domestic, industrial 
and commercial buildings is an important consideration for exposure design
considerations. The source of rain penetration is not necessarily defective or
damaged materials, as many building components such as tiles and window parts
rely on sufﬁcient overlapping to prevent moisture access. Total exclusion of
moisture is optimum, but the nature of some building materials, such as tiles and
porous bricks and stone, will inevitably permit some rain penetration in extreme
conditions: hence the need for undertiling layers and purpose-made cavities in 
wall construction.
The choice of external ﬁnishing may be inﬂuenced by architectural trends, 
but research into exposure conditions should be undertaken before speciﬁcation of
wall-facing products. The Building Research Establishment has published maps
providing guidance on the driving rain index (DRI) for particular locations in 
the UK and Ireland, shown in Fig. 11.4.1. Values of DRI are obtained by taking the
mean annual wind speed (m/s), multiplying by the mean annual rainfall (mm) and
dividing by 1,000 (m2/s). The result is a series of contours linking areas with similar
DRIs throughout the country. Correction factors may be applicable for topography,
exposure, shelter, roughness of terrain, altitude and building height. Figure 11.4.2
shows annual mean driving rain roses for different parts of the country. The length
of each radiating line indicates the mean DRI received from that direction. The
direction of prevailing wind is therefore the longest of the lines. See also BS 5618:
Code of practice for thermal insulation of cavity walls (with masonry or concrete inner
and outer leaves) by ﬁlling with urea-formaldehyde foam systems, and BRE Report 59:
Directional driving rain indices for the UK – computation and mapping.
11.4
DRIVING RAIN

 
504
Advanced Construction Technology
An alternative approach is detailed in BS 8104: Code of practice for assessing
exposure of walls to wind driven rain. This provides formulae, tables and maps to
enable calculation of the quantity of wind-driven rain (l/m2 per spell) at a given
location on a wall. It is known as the wall spell index, where spell is the period for
which wind-driven rain occurs on a vertical surface. The quantity of wind-driven
rain can also be calculated on a yearly basis (l/m2 per year), and this is known as the
wall annual index. From these a local spell index and a local annual index
can be established – the former useful for assessing the resistance of the structure 
to water penetration and the latter appropriate when considering the quantity of
moisture in a wall and its possible base for lichen, mosses and other growths that
can have a deteriorating effect.
The procedure for assessment can be followed using worked examples provided
in BS 8104. Specialist maps for the UK are endorsed with data on subregions, spell
and annual rose values and geographical incremental data. A typical rose is shown 
in Fig. 11.4.3 with numbers corresponding to building orientation: for example, 
if a building faces west, the rose value in Fig. 11.4.3 is 7. Geographical increments
will vary with location, and may add or reduce the value by a nominal amount.
From this information the airﬁeld spell and annual indices can be established
from tables. These are a measure of driving rain (l/m2) occurring 10.000 m above
Figure 11.4.1
Driving rain index (DRI)

 
Driving rain
505
Figure 11.4.2
Driving rain rose diagram
Figure 11.4.3
Rose diagrams

 
506
Advanced Construction Technology
ground in the middle of an airﬁeld for the worst spell in 3 years and for an average
annually, respectively. Factors for terrain roughness, topography, obstructions and
wall characteristics compound the calculation to provide an assessment in litres/m2
for the respective calculations. Further calculations can be used to determine the
run-off in litres per metre width of wall, which is useful for assessing local ﬂooding
potential and the need for adjacent subsoil and surface drainage.
BRE Report No. 59 and BS 8104 are complementary, whereas BS 5618 
applies speciﬁcally to UF foam ﬁlled cavity walls. Therefore, when considering
information, source identiﬁcation is essential to avoid confusion.
The importance of categorising driving rain, whether by indices or by roses, 
is to determine suitable speciﬁcation of construction details. Details appropriate for
sheltered exposure zones are unlikely to be acceptable in areas of severe exposure.
Establishing standards for construction should be by consultation with the local
building control authority, because different areas of the country will have speciﬁc
climatic conditions and possibly microclimates within those areas. For example,
simple masonry cavity wall construction in a zone of severe exposure should
maintain a 50 mm air space beyond any insulation included in the overall cavity
width. This is essential to prevent dampness bridging the cavity.

 
Roof design and construction is an extensive topic. It is therefore usual practice to
develop an understanding by including speciﬁc aspects of rooﬁng techniques at each
element or level of study. In this chapter the roofs considered are those suitable 
for a variety of large, clear-span applications using structural timber, steel and
reinforced concrete. Roof construction techniques for lesser spans are described in
Chapter 11.1 of this volume and Part 6 of the accompanying volume, Construction
Technology.
nnn LARGE-SPAN TIMBER ROOFS
A wide variety of timber roofs are available for both medium and large spans, and
these can be classiﬁed under three headings:
n pitched trusses;
n ﬂat top girders;
n bowstring trusses.
Pitched trusses
These are two-dimensional triangulated designed frames spaced at 4.500 to 
6.000 m centres with spans up to 30.000 m. The pitch should have a depth to 
span ratio of 1:5 or steeper and be chosen to suit roof coverings. The basic
construction follows that of an ordinary domestic small-span roof truss, as 
shown in Fig. 6.1.7 of Construction Technology, except that the arrangement 
and number of struts and ties will vary according to the type of truss being 
used (see Fig. 11.5.1).
11.5
ROOF STRUCTURES

 
508
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.1
Typical large-span truss and girder types

 
Roof structures
509
Flat top girders
Basically these are lattice beams of low pitch spaced at 4.500 to 6.000 m centres 
and can be economically used for spans up to 45.000 m with a depth to span ratio 
of 1:8 to 1:10. Construction details are similar to those of the roof truss in that the
joints and connections are usually made with timber connectors and bolts. The
main advantage of this form of roof structure is the reduction in volume of the
building, which should result in savings in the heating installation required and 
in the running costs. Typical ﬂat top girder outlines are shown in Fig. 11.5.1 and
typical construction details are shown in Fig. 11.5.2.
Bowstring trusses
These trusses are basically a lattice girder with a curved upper chord, and 
are spaced at 4.500 to 6.000 m centres with an economic span range of up to 
75.000 m. The depth-to-span ratio is usually 1:6 to 1:8 with the top chord radius
approximately equal to the span. They can be constructed from solid segmental
timber pieces, but the chords are usually formed from laminated timber with solid
timber struts and ties forming the lattice members (see Fig. 11.5.3 for typical
details). The older form of bowstring truss, known as a belfast truss, which has
interlacing struts and ties, is not very often speciﬁed because it is difﬁcult to analyse
fully the stresses involved, and although relatively small-section timbers can be used
they are very expensive in labour costs.
CHOICE OF TRUSS AND TIMBER
To decide upon the most suitable and economic truss to be speciﬁed for any given
situation the following should be considered:
n availability of suitable timber in the sizes required;
n cost of alternative timber;
n design and fabrication costs;
n transportation problems and costs;
n on-site assembly and erection problems and costs;
n roof covering material availability and costs;
n architectural design considerations.
It may be possible that the consideration given to the last item may well outweigh
some of the economic solutions found for the preceding items.
The timber speciﬁed should comply with the recommendations of BS 5268, 
the Structural use of timber codes of practice, i.e. BS 5268-2: Code of practice for
permissible stress design, materials and workmanship and BS 5268-3: Code of practice
for trussed rafter roofs. The speciﬁed timber must also satisfy the structural 
stability requirements of Building Regulation A1 and the recommendations set 
out in the supportive Approved Document A. This means that unless a designer,
manufacturer or builder makes special arrangements to obtain approval, each piece
of timber used in a strength application in any form of building will have to be

 
510
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.2
Typical timber ﬂat top Pratt truss details

 
Roof structures
511
Figure 11.5.3
Typical bowstring truss details

 
512
Advanced Construction Technology
stress graded to the grades set out in BS 5268-2. Reference should also be made 
to BS 4978: Speciﬁcation for visual strength grading of softwood. This standard was
published after collaboration between engineers, scientists and the timber trades 
of the United Kingdom and the main timber-exporting countries such as Canada,
Finland and Sweden. The stress grading can be carried out either visually or by
machine, and the permissible stresses for the various grades and species are set 
out in BS 5268-2 – see extract in Chapter 3.8 of Construction Technology.
Visual stress grading is carried out by the knot area ratio (KAR) method, in
which the proportion of cross-section occupied by the projected area of knots is
assessed. Any pieces of timber where the KAR is less than one-ﬁfth are graded
special structural (SS), and pieces of timber where the KAR is between one-ﬁfth
and one-half are graded as general structural (GS) or SS depending on whether 
a margin condition exists. Any piece of timber with a KAR exceeding one-half is
automatically rejected for structural work.
Machine stress grading relies on the correlation between the strength of timber
and its stiffness. These grading machines work on one of two principles: those that
apply a ﬁxed load and measure the deﬂection, and those that measure the load
required to cause a ﬁxed deﬂection. The gradings obtained are designated MGS
(machine general structural) or MSS (machine special structural), and these grades
are comparable to the visual grades given above. BS 5268 also describes two further
grades, M50 and M75, which means that these pieces of timber have been graded 
as having 50% or 75% of the strength of a clear specimen of a similar species.
All graded timber must be marked so that it can be immediately identiﬁed by 
the speciﬁer, supplier and user. Visually graded timber is marked at least once
within the length of each piece with GS or SS, together with a mark to indicate 
the company or grader responsible for the grading. Machine stress-graded timber
should be marked MGS, MSS, M50 or M75 at least once within the length of each
piece together with a mark to indicate species, grading machine used, BSI Kitemark
and the relevant BS number, namely BS 4978. Machine stress-graded timber can
also be colour coded with a coloured dye at one end or a series of dashes throughout
the length, the colour coding used being:
Green
MGS
Purple
MSS
Blue
M50
Red
M75
The most readily available species of structural softwoods are imported redwood,
imported whitewood and imported commercial western hemlock. Other suitable
structural softwoods are generally available only in small quantities. Structural
softwoods are supplied in standard lengths, commencing at 1.800 m and increasing
by 300 mm increments to lengths rarely exceeding 6.300 m. When specifying stress-
graded timber the following points should be considered:
n species;
n section size;
n length;

 
Roof structures
513
n preparation requirements;
n stress grade;
n moisture content.
Additional timber grading methods in accordance with European standards are
incorporated into BS EN 518: Structural timber. Grading. Requirements for visual
strength grading standards, and BS EN 519: Structural timber. Grading. Requirements
for machine strength graded timber and grading machines, respectively. This and other
more recent categorisation of timber, including the North American gradings, are
detailed in Chapter 3.8 of the accompanying volume, Construction Technology.
JOINTING
Connections between structural timber members may be made by:
n nails;
n screws;
n glue and nails or screws;
n truss plates;
n bolts;
n bolts and timber connectors.
Nails and screws are usually used in conjunction with plywood gussets and like 
the truss or gangnail plates are usually conﬁned to the small to medium span
trusses.
The usual ﬁxings, such as nails, screws and bolts, have their own limitations. 
Cut nails will generally have a greater holding power than round wire nails 
because of the higher friction set up by their rough sharp edges and also the smaller
disturbance of the timber grain. The joint efﬁciency of nails may be as low as 15%
because of the difﬁculty in driving sufﬁcient numbers of them within a given area to
obtain the required shear value. Screws have a greater holding power than nails but
are dearer in both labour and material costs.
Joints made with a rigid bar such as a bolt usually have low efﬁciency because of
the low shear strength of timber parallel to the grain and the unequal distribution of
bearing stress along the shank of the bolt. The weakest point in these connections is
where the high stresses are set up around the bolt, and various methods have been
devised to overcome this problem. The solution lies in the use of timber connectors
that are designed to increase the bearing area of the bolts, as described below.
Toothed plate timber connector
Sometimes called bulldog connectors, these are used to form an efﬁcient joint
without the need for special equipment, and are suitable for all types of connection,
especially when small sections are being used. To form the connection the timber
members are held in position and drilled for the bolt to provide a bolt hole with 
1.5 mm clearance. If the timber is not too dense the toothed connectors can be
embedded by tightening up the permanent bolts. In dense timbers, or where more

 
514
Advanced Construction Technology
than three connectors are used, the embedding pressure is provided by a high-
tensile steel rod threaded at both ends. Once the connectors have been embedded,
the rod is removed and replaced by the permanent bolt.
Split ring timber connectors
These connectors are suitable for any type of structure, and timbers of all densities;
they are very efﬁcient and develop a high-strength joint. The split ring is a circular
band of steel with a split tongue and groove vertical joint. A special boring and
cutting tool is required to form the bolt hole and the grooves in the face of the
timber into which the connector is inserted, making the ring independent of the
bolt itself. The split in the ring ensures that a tight ﬁt is achieved on the timber 
core but at the same time it is sufﬁciently ﬂexible to give a full bearing on the
timber outside the ring when under heavy load.
Shear plate timber connector
These are counterparts of the split ring connectors. They are housed ﬂush into 
the timber members and are used for demountable structures. See Fig. 11.5.4 for
typical timber connector details.
nnn LARGE-SPAN STEEL ROOFS
The roof types given for large-span timber roofs can also be designed and fabricated
using standard structural steel sections. Span ranges and the spacings of the frames
or lattice girders are similar to those given for timber roofs. Connections can be of
traditional gusset plates to which the struts and ties would be bolted or welded;
alternatively an all-welded construction is possible, especially if steel tubes are used
to form the struts and ties. Large-span steel roofs can also take the form of space
decks and space frames.
SPACE DECKS
A space deck is a structural rooﬁng system designed to give large clear spans 
with wide column spacings. It is based on a simple repetitive unit consisting of an
inverted pyramid frame, which can be joined to similar frames to give spans of up 
to 22.000 m for single spanning designs and up to 33.000 m for two-way spanning
roofs. These basic units are joined together at the upper surface by bolting adjacent
angle framing together and by ﬁxing threaded tie bars between the apex couplers
(see Fig. 11.5.5).
Edge treatments include vertical fascia, mansard and cantilever. Rooﬂights can be
ﬁxed directly over the 1.200 m × 1.200 m modular upper framing (see Fig. 11.5.6).
The roof can be laid or screeded to falls, or alternatively a camber to form the falls
can be induced by tightening up the main tie bars. The space deck roof can be
supported by steel or concrete columns or ﬁxed to padstones or ring beams situated
at the top of loadbearing perimeter walls.

 
Roof structures
515
Figure 11.5.4
Typical timber connectors. See also BS EN 912: Timber fasteners.
Speciﬁcation for connections to timber.

 
516
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.5
Typical space deck standard units

 
Roof structures
517
Figure 11.5.6
Typical space deck edge-ﬁxing details

 
518
Advanced Construction Technology
The most usual and economic roof covering for space decks is a high-density
mineral wool insulated rooﬁng board covered with three layers of built-up rooﬁng
felt with a layer of reﬂective chippings. Alternatively, composite double-skin
decking may be used. This comprises panels of rigid urethane core with proﬁled
coated steel or aluminium sheet facings. In principle, similar to that shown in 
Fig. 11.1.6. The void created by the space deck structure can be used to house 
all forms of services, and the underside can be left exposed or covered in with an
attached or suspended ceiling. The units are usually supplied with a basic protective
paint coating applied by a dipping process after the units have been degreased, 
shot-blasted and phosphate-treated to provide the necessary key.
The simplicity of the space deck unit format eliminates many of the handling 
and transportation problems encountered with other forms of large-span roof. 
A complete roof can usually be transported on one lorry by stacking the pyramid 
units one inside the other. Site assembly and erection are usually carried out by a
specialist subcontractor, who must have access to the whole ﬂoor area. Assembly 
is rapid with a small labour force which assembles the units as beams in the 
inverted position, turns them over and connects the whole structure together 
by adding the secondary tie bars. Two general methods of assembly and erection
can be used:
1. The deck is assembled on the completed ﬂoor immediately below the ﬁnal
position and lifted directly into its ﬁnal position.
2. The deck is assembled outside the perimeter of the building and lifted in small
sections to be connected together in the ﬁnal position. This is generally more
expensive than method 1.
Prior to assembly and erection the main contractor has to provide a clear, level
and hard surface to the perimeter of the proposed building as well as to the whole
ﬂoor area to be covered by the roof. These surfaces must be capable of accepting 
the load from a 25 tonne mobile crane. The main contractor is also responsible for
unloading, checking, storing and protecting the units during and after erection, and
for providing all necessary temporary works and plant such as scaffolds, ladders and
hoists. The site procedures and main contractor responsibilities set out above in the
context of space decks are generally common to all rooﬁng contractors involving
specialist subcontractors and materials.
SPACE FRAMES
Space frames are similar to space decks in their basic concept, but they are generally
more ﬂexible in their design and layout possibilities, because their main component
is the connector joining together the chords and braces. Space frames are usually
designed as a double-layer grid as opposed to the single-layer grid used mainly for
geometrical shapes such as a dome. The depth of a double-layer grid is relatively
shallow when compared with other structural roof systems of similar loadings and
span: the span-to-depth ratio for a space frame supported on all its edges would be
about 1:20, whereas a space frame supported near the corners would require a ratio

 
Roof structures
519
Figure 11.5.7
Typical BSC (now Corus UK Ltd) ‘Nodus’ system joint details

 
520
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.8
Typical BSC (now Corus UK Ltd) ‘Nodus’ space frame details

 
Roof structures
521
of about 1:15. A variety of systems are available to the architect and builder. The
concept is illustrated in Figs 11.5.7 and 11.5.8. These show the ‘Nodus’ system
established by the British Steel Corporation (now Corus UK Ltd).
The claddings used in conjunction with a space frame roof should not be unduly
heavy, and normally any lightweight proﬁled decking would be suitable. As with the
space decks described above, some of the main advantages of these systems are:
n They are constructed from simple standard prefabricated units.
n Units can be mass produced.
n The roof can be rapidly assembled and erected on site using semi-skilled labour.
n Small sizes of components make storage and transportation easy.
Site works consist of assembling the grid at ground level, lifting the completed
space frame, and ﬁxing it to its supports. The grid can be assembled on a series of
blocks to counteract any ground irregularities, and during assembly the space frame
will automatically generate the correct shape and camber. The correct procedure is
to start assembling the space frame at the centre of the grid and work towards the
edges, ensuring that there is sufﬁcient ground clearance to enable the camber to be
formed. Generally the space frame is assembled as a pure roof structure, but it is
possible to install services and ﬁx the cladding prior to lifting and ﬁxing. Mobile
cranes are usually employed to lift the completed roof structure, holding it in
position while the columns are erected and ﬁxed. Alternatively the grid can be
constructed in an offset position around the columns that pass through the spaces 
in the grid; the completed roof structure is then lifted and moved sideways onto 
the support seatings on top of the columns.
nnn SHELL ROOFS
A shell roof may be deﬁned as a structural curved skin covering a given plan shape
and area. The main points are:
n It is primarily a structural element.
n The basic strength of any particular shell is inherent in its shape.
n The quantity of material required to cover a given plan shape and area is
generally less than for other forms of rooﬁng.
The basic materials that can be used in the formation of a shell roof are concrete,
timber and steel. Concrete shell roofs consist of a thin curved reinforced membrane
cast in situ over timber formwork, whereas timber shells are usually formed from
carefully designed laminated timber, and steel shells are generally formed using a
single-layer grid. Concrete shell roofs, although popular, are very often costly to
construct because the formwork required is usually purpose-made from timber and
is, in itself, a shell roof and has little chance of being reused to enable the cost of 
the formwork to be apportioned over several contracts.
A wide variety of shell roof shapes and types can be designed and constructed,
but they can be classiﬁed under three headings:

 
522
Advanced Construction Technology
n Domes.
n Vaults.
n Saddle shapes and conoids.
Domes
In their simplest form these consist of a half sphere, but domes based on the 
ellipse, parabola and hyperbola are also possible. Domes have been constructed by
architects and builders over the centuries using individually shaped wedge blocks 
or traditional timber roof construction techniques. It is therefore the method of
construction together with the materials employed rather than the geometrical
setting out that has changed over the years.
Domes are double-curvature shells, which can be rotational and are formed by 
a curved line rotating around a vertical axis, or they can be translational domes,
which are formed by a curved line moving over another curved line (see Figs 11.5.9
and 11.5.10). Pendentive domes are formed by inscribing within the base circle a
polygon and cutting vertical planes through the true hemispherical dome.
Any dome shell roof will tend to ﬂatten because of the loadings, and this
tendency must be resisted by stiffening beams or similar to all the cut edges. 
As a general guide, domes that rise in excess of one-sixth of their diameter will
require a ring beam. Timber domes, like their steel counterparts, are usually
constructed on a single-layer grid system and covered with a suitable thin skin
membrane.
Vaults
These are shells of single curvature and are commonly called barrel vaults. 
A barrel vault is basically a continuous arch or tunnel, and was ﬁrst used by the
Romans and later by the Norman builders in this country. Geometrically a barrel
vault is a cut half cylinder, which presents no particular setting-out problems.
When two barrel vaults intersect the lines of intersection are called groins. Barrel
vaults, like domes, tend to ﬂatten unless adequately restrained, and in vaults
restraint will be required at the ends in the form of a diaphragm and along the 
edges (see Fig. 11.5.11).
From a design point of view barrel vaults act as a beam with the length being
considered as the span which, if it is longer than its width or chord distance, is
called a long span barrel vault, or conversely if the span is shorter than the 
chord distance is termed a short barrel vault. Short barrel vaults with their
relatively large chord distances – and, consequently, large radii to their inner and
outer curved surfaces – may require stiffening ribs to overcome the tendency to
buckle. The extra stresses caused by the introduction of these stiffeners or ribs will
necessitate the inclusion of extra reinforcement at the rib position; alternatively the
shell could be thickened locally about the rib for a distance of about one-ﬁfth of the
rib spacing (see Fig. 11.5.11).

 
Roof structures
523
Figure 11.5.9
Typical dome roof shapes: 1

 
524
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.10
Typical dome roof shapes: 2

 
Roof structures
525
Figure 11.5.11
Typical barrel vaults

 
526
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.12
Typical barrel vault details

 
Roof structures
527
Figure 11.5.13
Typical conoid shell roof types

 
528
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.14
Hyperbolic paraboloid roof principles

 
Roof structures
529
In large barrel vault shell roofs allowances must be made for thermal expansion,
and this usually takes the form of continuous expansion joints, as shown in 
Fig. 11.5.12, spaced at 30.000 m centres along the length. This will in fact 
create a series of individually supported abutting roofs weather-sealed together.
Conoid shells
These are similar to barrel vaults but are double-curvature shells as opposed to the
single curvature of the barrel vault. Two basic geometrical forms are encountered:
n A straight line is moved along a curved line at one end and a straight line at the
other end, the resultant shape being cut to the required length.
n A straight line is moved along a curved line at one end and a different curved line
at the other end.
Typical shapes are shown in Fig. 11.5.13.
Hyperbolic paraboloids
These are double-curvature saddle-shaped shells formed geometrically by moving 
a vertical parabola over another vertical parabola set at right angles to the moving
parabola (see Fig. 11.5.14). The saddle shape created is termed a hyperbolic
paraboloid because horizontal sections taken through the roof will give a
hyperbolic outline and vertical sections will result in a parabolic outline. To obtain 
a more practical shape than the true saddle the usual shape is that of a warped
parallelogram or straight line limited hyperbolic paraboloid, which is formed by
raising or lowering one or more corners of a square, as shown in Figs 11.5.14 and
11.5.15. By virtue of its shape this form of shell roof has a greater resistance to
buckling than dome shapes.
Hyperbolic paraboloid shells can be used singly or in conjunction with one
another to cover any particular plan shape or size. If the rise – that is, the 
difference between the high and low points of the roof – is small, the result will 
be a hyperbolic paraboloid of low curvature acting structurally like a plate, which
will have to be relatively thick to provide the necessary resistance to deﬂection. To
obtain full advantage of the in-built strength of the shape the rise to diagonal span
ratio should not be less than 1:15; indeed, the higher the rise the greater will be the
strength and the shell can be thinner.
By adopting a suitable rise-to-span ratio it is possible to construct concrete shells
with diagonal spans of up to 35.000 m with a shell thickness of only 50 mm. Timber
hyperbolic paraboloid roofs can also be constructed using laminated edge beams
with three layers of 20 mm thick tongued and grooved boards. The top and bottom
layers of boards are laid parallel to the edges but at right angles to one another, 
and the middle layer is laid diagonally. This is to overcome the problem of having
to twist the boards across their width and at the same time bend them in their
length.

 
530
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 11.5.15
Typical hyperbolic paraboloid roof shapes

 
Roof structures
531
Figure 11.5.16
Typical folded plate roof details

 
532
Advanced Construction Technology
CONSTRUCTION OF SHELL ROOFS
Concrete shell roofs are constructed on traditional formwork adequately supported
to take the loads. When casting barrel vaults it is very often convenient to have a
movable form consisting of birdcage scaffolding supporting curved steel ribs to
carry the curved plywood or steel forms. Top formwork is not usually required
unless the angle of pitch is greater than 45°. Reinforcement usually consists of steel
fabric and bars of small diameter, the bottom layer of reinforcement being welded
steel fabric followed by the small-diameter trajectory bars following the stress
curves set out on the formwork and ﬁnally a top layer of steel fabric. The whole
reinforcement arrangement is wired together, and spacer blocks of precast concrete
or plastic are ﬁxed to maintain the required cover of concrete.
The concrete is usually speciﬁed as a mix with a characteristic strength of 25 or
30 N/mm2. Preferably the concrete should be placed in one operation in 1.000 m
wide strips, commencing at one end and running from edge beam to edge beam
over the crown of the roof. A wet mix should be placed around the reinforcement,
followed by a ﬂoated drier mix. Thermal insulation can be provided by laying high-
density mineral wool insulation boards over the completed shell prior to laying the
roof covering.
nnn FOLDED PLATE ROOFS
This is another form of stressed skin roof, and is sometimes called folded slab
construction. The basic design concept is to bend or fold a ﬂat slab so that the roof
will behave as a beam spanning in the direction of the fold. To create an economic
roof the overall depth of the roof should be related to span and width so that it is
between 1/10 and 1/15 of the span or 1/10 of the width, whichever is the greater.
The fold may take the form of a pitched roof, a monitor roof, or a multi-fold roof 
in single or multiple bays with upstand or downstand diaphragms at the supports 
to collect and distribute the slab loadings (see Fig. 11.5.16). Formwork may be
required to both top and bottom faces of the slabs. To enable concrete to be
introduced and vibrated, openings or ‘windows’ can be left in the upper surface
formwork, and these will be ﬁlled in with slip-in pieces after the concrete has been
placed and vibrated.
nnn TENSION ROOF STRUCTURES
Suspended or tensioned roof structures can be used to form permanent or
temporary roofs and are generally a system or network of cables, or in the
temporary form they could be pneumatic tubes, which are used to support roof
covering materials of the traditional form or continuous sheet membranes. With this
form of roof the only direct stresses that are encountered are tensile stresses, and
this – apart from aesthetic considerations – is their main advantage. Because of their
shape and lightness, tension roof structures can sometimes present design problems
in the context of negative wind pressures, and this is normally overcome by having a

 
Roof structures
533
second system of curved cables at right angles to the main suspension cables. This
will in effect prestress the main suspension cables. Figure 11.5.17 shows an outline
principle in one direction only.
Figure 11.5.17
Tensioned roof structure

 

 
STAIRS
PART
12

 

 
Any form of stairs is primarily a means of providing circulation and communication
between the various levels within a building. Apart from this primary function,
stairs may also be classiﬁed as a means of escape in case of ﬁre; if this is the case 
the designer is severely limited by necessary regulations as to choice of materials,
position and sizing of the complete stairway. Stairs that do not fulﬁl this means of
escape function are usually called accommodation stairs and as such are not
restricted by the limitations given above for escape stairs.
Escape stairs have been covered in a previous section of this volume, and it is
necessary only to reiterate the main points:
1. Constructed from non-combustible materials.
2. Stairway protected by a ﬁre-resisting enclosure.
3. Separated from the main ﬂoor area by a set or sets of self-closing ﬁre-resisting
doors.
4. Limitations as to riser heights, tread lengths and handrail requirement usually
based upon use of building.
5. In common with all forms of stairs, all riser heights must be equal throughout
the rise of the stairs.
It should be appreciated that points 2 and 3 listed above can prove to be
inconvenient to persons using the stairway for general circulation within the
building, such as having to pass through self-closing doors, but in the context of
providing a safe escape route this is unavoidable.
Generally, concrete escape stairs are designed in straight ﬂights with not more
than 16 risers per ﬂight, particularly if the stairs serve a shop or an assembly area. 
A turn of at least 30° is required after any ﬂight that has more than 36 risers. In
special circumstances such as low usage (not more than 50 persons), minimum
overall diameter of 1.600 m, i.e. 0.800 m width, spiral stairs may be acceptable 
as a suitable means of escape in case of ﬁre. To satisfy the Building Regulations,
12.1
CONCRETE STAIRS

 
538
Advanced Construction Technology
Approved Document B1, for escape routes, spiral stairs should adhere to the
requirements of BS 5395-2: Stairs, ladders and walkways. Code of practice for the
design of helical and spiral stairs.
The construction of simple reinforced concrete stairs, together with suitable
formwork is considered in Chapter 7.5 of Construction Technology. Figure 12.1.1
shows another example of formwork, and the following basic requirements will
serve as a reminder of the construction:
n Concrete mix usually speciﬁed as 1:1.5:3/3–10 mm aggregate (25–30 N/mm2).
n Minimum cover of concrete over reinforcement 15 mm or bar diameter,
whichever is the greater to give a 1-hour ﬁre resistance.
n Waist thickness usually between 100 and 250 mm depending on stair type.
n Mild steel or high-yield steel bars can be used as reinforcement.
n Continuous handrails of non-combustible materials at a height of between 
900 mm and 1,000 mm above the pitch line are required to all stairs and to 
both sides if the stair width exceeds 1.000 m.
nnn TYPES OF STAIR
The main area of study at advanced level is consideration of the different stair 
types or arrangements, which can range from a single straight ﬂight to an open
spiral stairway.
SINGLE STRAIGHT FLIGHT STAIRWAY
This form of stairway, although simple in design and construction, can be
unpopular because of the plan space it occupies. In this arrangement the ﬂight
behaves as a simply supported slab spanning from landing to landing. The effective
span or total horizontal going is usually taken as being from landing edge to edge 
by providing a downstand edge beam to each landing. If these edge beams are not
provided, the effective span would be taken as overall of the landings, resulting in 
a considerably increased bending moment and hence more reinforcement. Typical
details are shown in Fig. 12.1.2.
INCLINED SLAB STAIR WITH HALF-SPACE LANDINGS
These stairs have the usual plan format for reinforced concrete stairs, giving a 
more compact plan layout and better circulation than the single straight ﬂight 
stairs. The half-space or 180° turn landing is usually introduced at the mid-point 
of the rise, giving equal ﬂight spans, thus reducing the effective span and hence the
bending moment considerably. In most designs the landings span crosswise onto a
loadbearing wall or beam and the ﬂights span from landing to landing. The point 
of intersection of the sofﬁts to the ﬂights with the landing sofﬁts can be detailed in
one of two ways:
n Sofﬁts can be arranged so that the intersection or change of direction is in a
straight line: this gives a better visual appearance from the underside but will

 
Concrete stairs
539
Figure 12.1.1
Typical formwork to reinforced concrete stair

 
540
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.1.2
Straight ﬂight concrete stairs

 
Concrete stairs
541
mean that the riser lines of the ﬁrst and last steps in consecutive ﬂights are offset
in plan.
n Flights and landing sofﬁt intersections are out of line on the underside by
keeping the ﬁrst and last risers in consecutive ﬂights in line on plan (see 
Fig. 12.1.3).
Note from the reinforcement pattern shown in the detail in Fig. 12.1.3 that a
tension lap is required at the top and bottom of each ﬂight to overcome the tension
induced by the tendency of the external angles of the junctions between stair ﬂights
and landings to open out.
STRING BEAM STAIRS
These stairs are an alternative design for the stairs described above. A string or edge
beam is used to span from landing to landing to resist the bending moment, with
the steps spanning crosswise between them: this usually results in a thinner waist
dimension and an overall saving in the concrete volume required, but this saving 
in material is usually offset by the extra formwork costs. The string beams can 
be either upstand or downstand in format and to both sides if the stairs are free
standing (see Fig. 12.1.4).
CRANKED SLAB STAIRS
These stairs are very often used as a special feature because the half-space 
landing has no visible support, being designed as a cantilever slab. Bending,
buckling and torsion stresses are induced with this form of design, creating the 
need for reinforcement to both faces of the landing and slab or waist of the ﬂights;
indeed, the amount of reinforcement required can sometimes create site problems
with regard to placing and compacting the concrete. The problem of deciding 
upon the detail for the intersection line between ﬂight and landing sofﬁts, as
described above for inclined slab stairs with half-space landings, also occurs 
with this arrangement. Typical details of a cranked slab stairs, which is also 
known as continuous stairs, scissor stairs or jack-knife stairs, are shown in 
Fig. 12.1.5.
CANTILEVER STAIRS
Sometimes called spine wall stairs, these consist of a central vertical wall 
from which the ﬂights and half-space landings are cantilevered. The wall 
provides a degree of ﬁre resistance between the ﬂights, and they are therefore 
used mainly for escape stairs. Because both ﬂights and landings are cantilevers, 
the reinforcement is placed in the top of the ﬂight slab and in the upper surface 
of the landing to counteract the induced negative bending moments. The plan
arrangement can be a single straight ﬂight or, as is usual, two equal ﬂights with 
an intermediate half-space landing between consecutive stair ﬂights (see Fig. 12.1.6
for typical details).

 
542
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.1.3
Inclined slab concrete stairs with half-space landings

 
Concrete stairs
543
Figure 12.1.4
String beam concrete stairs

 
544
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.1.5
Cranked or continuous concrete stairs

 
Concrete stairs
545
Figure 12.1.6
Cantilever concrete stairs

 
546
Advanced Construction Technology
SPIRAL STAIRS
These are used mainly as accommodation stairs in the foyers of prestige buildings
such as theatres and banks. They can be expensive to construct, being normally at
least seven times the cost of conventional stairs. The plan shape is generally based
on a circle, although it is possible to design an open spiral stairway with an elliptical
core. The spiral stairway can be formed around a central large-diameter circular
column in a similar manner to that described for cantilevered stairs or, as is usual,
designed with a circular open stair well. Torsion, tension and compressive stresses
are induced in this form of stairway, which will require reinforcement to both 
faces of the slab in the form of radial main bars bent to the curve of the slab with
distribution bars across the width of the ﬂight (see Fig. 12.1.7). Formwork for spiral
stairs consists of a central vertical core or barrel to form the open stair well, to
which the sofﬁt and riser boards are set out and ﬁxed, the whole arrangement being
propped and strutted as required from the ﬂoor level in a conventional manner.
Notes
1. For stairs in buildings for institutional and assembly purposes, the minimum
going is 280 mm unless the building ﬂoor area is less than 100 m2, when 250 mm
is acceptable. For other stairs the minimum going is 250 mm except for
private/domestic use, where it is 220 mm minimum.
2. Maximum rises are 180 mm in institutional and assembly buildings, 190 mm
elsewhere except in private/domestic use, where it is 220 mm maximum.
nnn PRECAST CONCRETE STAIRS
Most of the concrete stair arrangements previously described can be produced as
precast concrete components, which can have the following advantages:
n Better quality control of the ﬁnished product.
n Saving in site space, because formwork storage and fabrication space are no
longer necessary.
n Stairway enclosing shaft can be utilised as a space for hoisting or lifting materials
during the major construction period.
n Can usually be positioned and ﬁxed by semi-skilled operatives.
In common with the use of all precast concrete components the stairs must be
repetitive and in sufﬁcient quantity to justify their use and be an economic
proposition.
The straight ﬂight stairs spanning between landings can have a simple bearing 
or, by leaving projecting reinforcement to be grouted into preformed slots in the
landings, can be given a degree of structural continuity: this latter form is illustrated
in Chapter 7.5 of Construction Technology. Straight ﬂight precast concrete stairs 
with a simple bearing require only bottom reinforcement to the slab and extra
reinforcement to strengthen the bearing rebate or nib. The bearing location is a
rebate cast in the in-situ ﬂoor slab or landing, leaving a tolerance gap of 8 to 12 mm,
which is ﬁlled with a compressible material to form a ﬂexible joint. The decision as

 
Concrete stairs
547
Figure 12.1.7
Open spiral concrete stairs

 
548
Advanced Construction Technology
to whether the stair and landing sofﬁts will be in line or, alternatively, the ﬁrst and
last risers kept in line on plan remains, and as the bearing rebates are invariably cast
in a straight line to receive both upper and lower stair ﬂights the intersection design
is detailed with the precast units. A typical example is shown in Fig. 12.1.8.
Cranked slab precast concrete stairs are usually formed as an open well stairway.
The bearing for the precast landings to the in-situ ﬂoor or to the structural frame is
usually in the form of a simple bearing, as described above for straight ﬂight precast
concrete stairs. The inﬁll between the two adjacent ﬂights, in an open well plan
arrangement at ﬂoor and intermediate landing levels, can be of in-situ concrete with
structural continuity provided by leaving reinforcement projecting from the inside
edge of the landings (see Fig. 12.1.9). Remember that, when precast concrete stair
ﬂights are hoisted into position, different stresses may be induced from those that
will be encountered in the ﬁxed position. To overcome this problem the designer
can either reinforce the units for both conditions or, as is more usual, provide
deﬁnite lifting points in the form of projecting lugs or by utilising any holes cast 
in to receive the balustrading.
Precast open riser stairs are a form of stairs that can be both economic and
attractive, consisting of a central spine beam in the form of a cut string supporting
double cantilever treads of timber or precast concrete. The foot of the lowest spine
beam is located and grouted into a preformed pocket cast in the ﬂoor, whereas the
support at landing and ﬂoor levels is a simple bearing located in a housing cast into
the slab edge (see Fig. 12.1.10). Anchor bolts or cement in sockets are cast into 
the spine beam to provide the ﬁxing for the cantilever treads. The bolt heads are
recessed below the upper tread surface and grouted over with a matching cement
mortar for precast concrete treads or concealed with matching timber pellets when
hardwood treads are used. The supports for the balustrading and handrail are
located in the holes formed at the ends of the treads and secured with a nut and
washer on the underside of the tread. The balustrade and handrail details have been
omitted from all the stair details so far considered: this has been done for reasons of
clarity and as this aspect of stairwork is considered in Chapter 7.5 of the associated
volume, Construction Technology.
Spiral stairs in precast concrete work are based upon the stone stairs found 
in many historic buildings such as Norman castles and cathedrals, consisting
essentially of steps that have a ‘keyhole’ plan shape rotating round a central core.
Precast concrete spiral stairs are usually open riser stairs with a reinforced concrete
core or alternatively a concrete-ﬁlled steel tube core. Holes are formed at the
extreme ends of the treads, to receive the handrail supports in such a manner 
that the standard passes through a tread and is ﬁxed to the underside of the tread
immediately below. A hollow spacer or distance piece is usually incorporated
between the two consecutive treads (see typical details in Fig. 12.1.11). In common
with all forms of this type of stairs, precast concrete spiral stairs are limited as to
minimum diameter and total rise when being considered as escape stairs, and
therefore they are usually installed as accommodation stairs.
The ﬁnishes that can be applied to a concrete ﬂoor can also be applied in 
the same manner to an in-situ or precast concrete stairway. Care must be taken,
however, with the design and detail, because the thickness of ﬁnish given to stairs 

 
Concrete stairs
549
Figure 12.1.8
Precast concrete straight ﬂight stairs

 
550
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.1.9
Precast concrete cranked slab stairs

 
Concrete stairs
551
Figure 12.1.10
Precast concrete open riser stairs

 
552
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.1.11
Precast concrete spiral stairs

 
Concrete stairs
553
is generally less than the thickness of a similar ﬁnish to ﬂoors. It is necessary, for
reasons of safety, to have equal height risers throughout the stairway rise: therefore
it may be necessary when casting the stairs to have the top and bottom risers of
different heights from the remainder of the stairs. An alternative method is to form
a rebate at the last nosing position to compensate for the variance in ﬂoor and stair
ﬁnishes (see Fig. 12.1.2).
If the stairs are to be left as plain concrete, an anti-slip surface should be
provided by trowelling into the upper surfaces of the treads some carborundum
dust or casting in rubber or similar material grip inserts to the leading edge, or by
ﬁxing a special nosing covering of aluminium alloy or other suitable metal with a
grip patterned surface or containing non-slip inserts. Metal nosing coverings with
an upper grip surface can also be used in conjunction with all types of applied ﬁnish
to stairs.

 
Metal stairs can be constructed to be used as escape stairs or accommodation stairs,
both internally and externally. Most metal stairs are manufactured from mild steel
with treads of cast iron or mild steel and in straight ﬂights with intermediate half-
space landings. Spiral stairs in steel are also produced, but their use as escape stairs
is limited by size and the number of persons likely to use the stairway in the event
of a ﬁre. Aluminium alloy stairs are also made, and are used almost exclusively as
internal accommodation stairs.
As the layout of most buildings is different, stairs are very often purpose made to
suit the particular situation. Concrete, being a ﬂexible material at the casting stage,
generally presents little or no problems in this respect, whereas purpose-made metal
stairs can be more expensive and take longer to fabricate in the workshop. Metal
spiral stairs have the distinct advantage that the need for temporary support and
hoisting equipment is eliminated. All steel stairs have the common disadvantage 
of requiring regular maintenance in the form of painting as a protection against
corrosion.
Most metal stairs are supplied in a form that requires some site fabrication, and
this is usually carried out by the supplier’s site erection staff, the main contractor
having been supplied with the necessary data as to foundation pads, holding-down
bolts, any special cast-in ﬁxings and any pockets to be left in the structural members
or ﬂoor slabs to enable this preparatory work to be completed before the stairs are
ready to be ﬁxed.
nnn STEEL ESCAPE STAIRS
These have already been considered in the context of means of escape in case of 
ﬁre, and a typical general arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 7.3.12, which shows a
structural steel support frame and a stairway composed of steel plate strings with
preformed treads giving an open riser format. The treads for this type of stair are
12.2
METAL STAIRS

 
Metal stairs
555
bolted to the strings and can be of a variety of types, ranging from perforated cast
iron to patterned steel treads with renewable non-slip nosings. Handrail balustrades
or standards can be of steel square or tubular sections bolted to the upper surface of
a channel string or to the side of a channel or steel plate string. Figure 12.2.1 shows
typical steel escape stair components, and should be read in conjunction with the
stair arrangement shown in Fig. 7.3.12.
nnn STEEL SPIRAL STAIRS
These may be allowed as an internal or external means of escape stairs if they are to
accommodate no more than 50 persons. The minimum overall diameter is 1.600 m
and the design must be in accordance with BS 5395-2: Stairs, ladders and walkways.
Code of practice for the design of helical and spiral stairs, to satisfy Building Regulation
classiﬁcation as an escape stair. Spiral stairs give a very compact arrangement, and
can be the solution in situations where plan area is limited. In common with all steel
external escape stairs the tread and landing plates should have a non-slip surface
and be self-draining, with the stairway circulation width completely clear of any
opening doors. Two basic forms are encountered: those with treads that project
from the central pole or tube, and those that have riser legs. The usual plan 
format is to have 12 or 16 treads to complete one turn around the central core 
and terminating at ﬂoor level with a quarter-circle landing or square landing. The
standards, like those used for precast concrete spiral stairs, pass through one tread
and are secured on the underside of the tread immediately below, giving strength
and stability to both handrail and steps. Handrails are continuous and usually
convex in cross-section of polished metal, painted metal or plastic covered. 
Typical details are shown in Fig. 12.2.2.
nnn STRING BEAM STEEL STAIRS
These are used mainly to form accommodation stairs that need to be light and
elegant in appearance: this is achieved by using small sections and an open riser
format. The strings can be of mild steel tube, steel channel, steel box or small
universal beam sections ﬁxed by brackets to the upper ﬂoor surfaces or landing
edges to act as inclined beams. The treads, which can be of hardwood timber,
precast concrete or steel, are supported by plate, angle or tube brackets welded to
the top of the string beam. Balustrading can be ﬁxed through the ends of the treads
or alternatively supported by brackets attached to the outer face of the string beam.
Typical details are shown in Fig. 12.2.3.
nnn PRESSED STEEL STAIRS
These are accommodation stairs, made from light pressed metal such as mild steel.
Each step is usually pressed as one unit with the tread component recessed to
receive a ﬁlling of concrete, granolithic, terrazzo, timber or any other suitable
material. The strings are very often in two pieces, consisting of a back plate to
which the steps are ﬁxed and a cover plate to form a box section string, the cover

 
556
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.2.1
Typical steel stairway components

 
Metal stairs
557
Figure 12.2.2
Typical steel spiral stairs

 
558
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.2.3
Typical steel string beam stairs details

 
Metal stairs
559
plate being site-welded using a continuous MIG (metal inert gas) process. 
The completed strings are secured by brackets or built into the ﬂoors or landings,
and provide the support for the balustrade. Stairs of this nature are generally
purpose made to the required layout, and site assembled and ﬁxed by a specialist
subcontractor, leaving only the tread ﬁnishes and decoration as builder’s work.
Typical details are shown in Fig. 12.2.4.
nnn ALUMINIUM ALLOY STAIRS
These are usually purpose made to suit individual layout requirements, with half-
or quarter-space landings from aluminium alloy extrusions. They are suitable for
accommodation stairs in public buildings, shops, ofﬁces and ﬂats. The treads have 
a non-slip nosing with a general tread covering of any suitable ﬂoor ﬁnish material.
Format can be open or closed riser, the latter having greater strength. The two-part
box strings support the balustrading and are connected to one another by small-
diameter tie rods that, in turn, support the tread units. The ﬂights are secured by
screwing to purpose-made baseplates or brackets ﬁxed to ﬂoors and landings, or
alternatively located in preformed pockets and grouted in. When the stairs are
assembled they are very light and can usually be lifted and positioned by two
operatives without the need for lifting gear. No decoration or maintenance is
required except for routine cleaning. Typical details are shown in Fig. 12.2.5.

 
560
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 12.2.4
‘Prestair’ internal pressed steel stairs

 
Metal stairs
561
Figure 12.2.5
‘Gradus’ aluminium alloy stairs

 

 
INTERNAL
COMPONENTS AND
DECORATIONS
PART
13

 

 
Internal components and ﬁnishes that are normally associated with domestic
dwellings such as brick walls, lightweight concrete block walls, plastering, dry
linings, ﬂoor ﬁnishes and coverings, ﬁxed partitions and the various trims are
detailed in the associated volume, Construction Technology. Advanced studies 
of construction technology more appropriately concentrate on the components 
and ﬁnishes applied to buildings such as ofﬁces, commercial and institutional
establishments. These include the partitions, sliding doors and suspended 
ceilings developed in this chapter.
nnn PARTITIONS
A partition is similar to a wall in that it is a vertical construction dividing the
internal space of a building, but partitions are generally considered to be internal
walls that are lightweight, non-loadbearing, demountable or movable. They are 
used in buildings such as ofﬁces where it is desirable to have a system of internal
division that can be altered to suit changes in usage without excessive costs and the
minimum of interference to services and ceilings. Note that any non-loadbearing
partition could if necessary be taken down and moved, but in most cases moving
partitions such as timber studwork with plasterboard linings will necessitate the
replacement or repair of some of the materials and ﬁnishes involved. A true
demountable partition can usually be taken down, moved and re-erected without
any notable damage to the materials, components, ﬁnishes and surrounding parts 
of the building. Movable partitions usually take the form of a series of doors or 
door leaves hung to slide or slide and fold, and these are described later under a
separate heading. Many demountable partition systems are used in conjunction 
with a suspended ceiling, and it is important that both systems are considered
together in the context of their respective main functions, because one system may
cancel out the beneﬁts achieved by the other.
13.1
PARTITIONS, DOORS AND CEILINGS

 
566
Advanced Construction Technology
There are many patent demountable partition systems from which the architect,
designer or builder can select a suitable system for any particular case, and it is not
possible in a text of this nature to analyse or list them all but merely to consider 
the general requirements of these types of partition. The composition of the types
available range from glazed screens with timber, steel or aluminium alloy frames to
panel construction with concealed or exposed jointing members. Low-level screens
and toilet cubicles can also be considered in this context, and these can be attached
to posts ﬁxed at ﬂoor level or suspended from the structural ﬂoor above.
When selecting or specifying a demountable partition the following points should
be taken into account:
n Fixing and stability
Points to be considered are bottom ﬁxing, top ﬁxing 
and joints between sections. The two common methods of bottom ﬁxing are the
horizontal base unit, which is very often hollow to receive services, and the screw
jack ﬁxing: both methods are intended to be ﬁxed above the ﬁnished ﬂoor level,
which should have a tolerance not exceeding 5 mm. The top ﬁxing can be of a
similar nature with a ceiling tolerance of the same magnitude, but problems 
can arise when used in conjunction with a suspended ceiling because little or no
pressure can be applied to the underside of the ceiling. A brace or panel could be
ﬁxed above the partition in the void over the ceiling to give the required stability;
alternatively, the partition could pass through the ceiling, but this would reduce
the ﬂexibility of the two systems should a rearrangement be required at a later
date. The joints between consecutive panels do not normally present any
problems as they are an integral part of the design, but unless they are adequately
sealed the sound insulation and/or ﬁre-resistance properties of the partition
could be seriously impaired.
n Sound insulation
The degree of insulation required will depend largely 
upon the usage of rooms created by the partitions. The level of sound insulation
that can be obtained will depend upon three factors: the density of the partition
construction, the degree of demountability, and the continuity of the partition
with the ﬂoor and ceiling. Generally, the less demountable a partition, the easier
it will be to achieve an acceptable sound insulation level. Partitions ﬁxed between
the structural ﬂoor and the structural ceiling usually result in good sound
insulation, whereas partitions erected between the ﬂoor and a suspended ceiling
give poor sound insulation properties, mainly because of the ﬂanking sound path
over the head of the partition. In the latter case two remedies are possible: either
the partition could pass through the suspended ceiling, or a sound-insulating
panel could be inserted in the ceiling void directly over the partition below.
n Fire resistance
The main restrictions on the choice of partition lie in the
requirements of the Building Regulations Part B with regard to ﬁre-resistant
properties, spread of ﬂame, ﬁre stopping and providing a suitable means of
escape in case of ﬁre. The weakest points in any system will be the openings and
the seals at the foot and head. Provisions at openings are a matter of detail and
adequate construction together with a suitable ﬁre-resistant door or ﬁre-resistant
glazing. Fire stopping at the head of a partition used in conjunction with a
suspended ceiling usually takes the form of a ﬁre break panel or barrier ﬁxed 
in the ceiling void directly above the partition below. These may be produced

 
Partitions, doors and ceilings
567
from 25 mm galvanised wire mesh stitched to mineral wool insulation in two
layers of at least 50 mm thickness, or from two sheets of 12.5 mm plasterboard,
as indicated in Fig. 13.1.1. Most proprietary demountable systems will give a
half-hour or one-hour ﬁre resistance with a class 1 or class 0 spread of ﬂame
classiﬁcation.
Typical demountable partition details are shown in Figs 13.1.1 and 13.1.2.
nnn SLIDING DOORS
Sliding doors may be used in all forms of building, from the small garage to large
industrial structures. They may be incorporated into a design for any of the
following reasons:
n as an alternative to a swing door to conserve space or where it is not possible to
install a swing door because of space restrictions;
n where heavy doors or doors in more than two leaves are to be used, and where
conventional hinges would be inadequate;
n as a movable partition used in preference to a demountable partition because of
the frequency with which it would be moved.
In most cases there is a choice of bottom or top sliding door gear, which in the
case of very heavy doors may have to be mechanically operated. Top gear can be
used only if there is a suitable sofﬁt, beam or lintel over the proposed opening that
is strong enough to take the load of the gear, track and doors. In the case of bottom
gear all the loads are transmitted to the ﬂoor. Top gear has the disadvantage of
generally being noisier than its bottom gear counterpart, but bottom gear either 
has an upstanding track, which can be a hazard in terms of tripping, or it can have 
a sunk channel, which can become blocked with dirt and dust unless regularly
maintained. In all cases it is essential that the track and guides are perfectly aligned
vertically to one another and in the horizontal direction parallel to each other to
prevent stiff operation or the binding of the doors while being moved. When specifying
sliding door gear it is essential that the correct type is chosen to suit the particular
door combination and weight range if the partition is to be operated efﬁciently.
Many types of patent sliding door gear and track are available to suit all needs,
but these can usually be classiﬁed by the way in which the doors operate:
n Straight sliding
These can be of a single leaf, double leaf or designed to run
on adjacent and parallel tracks to give one parking. Generally this form of sliding
door uses top gear (see Fig. 13.1.3 for a typical example).
n End-folding doors
These are strictly speaking sliding and folding doors that
are used for wider openings than the straight doors given above. They usually
consist of a series of leaves operating off top gear with a bottom guide track so
that the folding leaves can be parked to one or both sides of the opening (see 
Fig. 13.1.4 for typical details).
n Centre-folding doors
Like the previous type, these doors slide and fold to be
parked at one or both ends of the opening, and have a top track with a bottom
ﬂoor guide channel arranged so that the doors will pivot centrally over the
channel. With this arrangement the hinged leaf attached to the frame is only
approximately a half-leaf (see typical details in Fig. 13.1.5).

 
568
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 13.1.1
Typical demountable partition details: 1 (courtesy: Tenon Contracts)

 
Partitions, doors and ceilings
569
Figure 13.1.2
Typical demountable partition details: 2 (courtesy: Venesta International Components)

 
570
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 13.1.3
Typical straight sliding door details (courtesy: Hillaldam Coburn)

 
Partitions, doors and ceilings
571
Figure 13.1.4
Typical end-folding door details (courtesy: Hillaldam Coburn)

 
572
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 13.1.5
Typical centre-folding sliding door details (courtesy: Hillaldam Coburn)

 
Partitions, doors and ceilings
573
Other forms of sliding doors include round-the-corner sliding doors, which 
use a curved track and folding gear arranged so that the leaves hinged together will
slide around the corner and park alongside a side wall, making them suitable for
situations where a clear opening is required. The number of leaves in any one
hinged sliding set should not be less than three nor more than ﬁve. Up-and-over
doors operated by a counterbalance weight or spring are common for domestic
garage applications and are available where they form, when raised, a partial canopy
to the opening or are parked entirely within the building. Another application of the
folding door technique is the folding screen, which is suitable for a limited number
of lightweight leaves that can be folded back onto a side or return wall without the
use of sliding gear, track or guide channels (see Fig. 13.1.6 for typical details).
nnn SUSPENDED CEILINGS
A suspended ceiling can be deﬁned as a ceiling that is attached to a framework
suspended from the main structure, thus forming a void between the ceiling and 
the underside of the main structure. Ceilings that are ﬁxed, for example, to lattice
girders and trusses while forming a void are strictly speaking attached ceilings,
although they may be formed by using the same methods and materials as the
suspended ceilings. The same argument can be applied to ceilings that are ﬁxed 
to a framework of battens attached to the underside of the main structure. Some
suspended ceilings contribute to the ﬁre resistance of the structure above, and 
these are deﬁned as ﬁre-protecting suspended ceilings. Reference should be made to
Building Regulations, Approved Document B, Appendix A, Table A3 for material
limitations of these ﬁre-protecting suspended ceilings in various applications.
Further reasons for including a suspended ceiling system in a building design are
that it can:
n provide a ﬁnish to the underside of a structural ﬂoor or roof, generally for
purposes of concealment;
n create a void space suitable for housing, concealing and protecting services and
light ﬁttings;
n add to the sound and/or thermal insulation properties of the ﬂoor or roof above
and adjacent rooms;
n provide a means of structural ﬁre protection to steel beams supporting a concrete
ﬂoor;
n provide a means of acoustic control in terms of absorption and reverberation;
n create a lower ceiling height to a particular room or space.
A suspended ceiling, for whatever reason it has been speciﬁed and installed,
should fulﬁl the following requirements:
n Be easy to construct, repair, maintain and clean.
n Comply with the requirements of the Building Regulations and, in particular,
Approved Document B2 and associated Appendix A. These are concerned with
ﬂame spread over the surface, classiﬁcation of performance and the limitations
imposed on the use of certain materials with regard to ﬁre, e.g. thermoplastic
light diffusers.

 
574
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 13.1.6
Typical folding screen details

 
Partitions, doors and ceilings
575
n Provide an adequate means of access for the maintenance of the suspension
system and/or the maintenance of concealed services and light ﬁttings.
n Conform to a planning module that preferably should be based on the modular
coordination recommendations set out in BS 6750: Speciﬁcation for modular
coordination in building, which recommends a ﬁrst preference module of 
300 mm.
There are many ways in which to classify suspended ceilings. They can be
classiﬁed by function, e.g. sound absorbing or ﬁre resisting, by speciﬁcation of the
materials involved. Another simple practical method of classiﬁcation is to group 
the ceiling systems by their general method of construction:
n jointless ceilings;
n jointed ceilings;
n open ceilings.
Jointless ceilings
These are ceilings that, although suspended from the main structure, give the
internal appearance of being a conventional ceiling. The ﬁnal ﬁnish is usually 
of plaster applied in one or two coats to plasterboard or expanded metal lathing;
alternatively, a jointless suspended ceiling could be formed by applying sprayed
plaster or sprayed vermiculite-cement to an expanded metal background. Typical
jointless ceiling details are shown in Fig. 13.1.7.
Jointed ceilings
These suspended ceilings are the most popular and common form because of 
their ease of assembly, ease of installation and ease of maintenance. They consist
basically of a suspended metal framework to which the ﬁnish in a board or tile 
form is attached. The boards or tiles can be located on a series of inverted tee 
bar supports with the supporting members exposed forming part of the general
appearance; alternatively, by using various spring clip devices or direct ﬁxing the
supporting members can be concealed. The common ceiling materials encountered
are ﬁbreboards, metal trays, ﬁbre cement materials and plastic tiles or trays (see 
Figs 13.1.8 and 13.1.9 for typical details).
Open ceilings
These suspended ceilings are largely decorative in function but by installing light
ﬁttings in the ceiling void they can act as a luminous ceiling. The format of these
ceilings can be an open work grid of timber, with or without louvres or a series of
closely spaced plates of polished steel or any other suitable material. The colour 
and texture of the sides and sofﬁt of the ceiling void must be carefully designed 
if an effective system is to be achieved. It is possible to line these surfaces with 
an acoustic absorption material to provide another function to the arrangement – 
see typical details in Fig. 13.1.10.

 
576
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 13.1.7
Typical jointless suspended ceiling details (courtesy: Gyproc M/F)

 
Partitions, doors and ceilings
577
Figure 13.1.8
Typical jointed suspended ceiling details (courtesy: Dampa (UK) Ltd)

 
578
Advanced Construction Technology
Note: Dimensions vary between different manufacturers
Figure 13.1.9
Jointed suspended ceiling support proﬁles

 
Partitions, doors and ceilings
579
Figure 13.1.10
Typical open suspended ceiling details

 
The fundamentals of applying decorative ﬁnishes in the form of paint and wallpaper
have been considered in Chapter 7.11 of Construction Technology. Therefore, study
at this advanced level progresses beyond basic principles, particularly in the context
of painting timber and metals.
nnn PAINTING TIMBER
Timber can be painted to prevent decay in the material by forming a barrier to the
penetration of moisture, thus giving rise to the conditions necessary for fungal
attack to begin; alternatively, timber may be painted mainly to impart colour.
Timber that is exposed to the elements is more vulnerable to eventual decay than
internal joinery items, but internal condensation can also give rise to damp
conditions. Timber can also be protected with clear water-repellent preservatives
and varnishes to preserve the natural colour and texture of the timber.
The moisture content of the timber to which paint is to be applied should be as
near as possible to that at which it will stabilise in its ﬁnal condition. For internal
joinery this would be within an 8–12% region depending upon the internal design
temperature, and for external timber within a 15–18% region according to exposure
conditions. If the timber is too dry when the paint is applied, any subsequent
swelling of the base material due to moisture absorption will place unacceptable
stresses on the paint ﬁlm, leading to cracking of the paint barrier. Conversely, wet
timber drying out after the paint application can result in blistering, opening of
joints and the consequential breakdown of the paint ﬁlm.
New work should receive a four-coat application consisting of primer, undercoat
and ﬁnishing coats. The traditional shellac knotting applied to reduce the risk of
resin leaking and staining should be carried out prior to the primer application, but
in external conditions it may prove to be inadequate. Therefore timber selected for
exposed or external conditions should be of a high quality without or with only a
13.2
PAINTING AND DECORATIONS

 
Painting and decorations
581
small amount of knots. Knotting and priming should preferably be carried out
under the ideal conditions prevailing at the place of manufacture. Filling and
stopping should take place after priming but before the application of the undercoat
and ﬁnishing coats. It is a general misconception that a good key is necessary to
achieve a satisfactory paint surface. It is not penetration that is required but a good
molecular attraction of the paint binder to the timber that is needed to obtain a
satisfactory result.
If the protective paint ﬁlm is breached by moisture, decay can take place 
under the paint coverings; indeed, the coats of paint prevent the drying out of any
moisture that has managed to penetrate the timber prior to painting. Any joinery
items that in their ﬁnal situation could be susceptible to moisture penetration
should therefore be treated with a paintable preservative. Preservation treatments
include diffusion treatment using water-soluble borates, water-borne preservatives
and organic solvents. The methods of application and chemical composition of these
timber preservatives can be found in the following references:
n BS 1282: Wood preservatives. Guidance on choice, use and application.
n BS 5268-5: Structural use of timber. Code of practice for the preservative treatment of
structural timber.
n BS 5589: Code of practice for preservation of timber.
n BS 8471: Preservation of timber. Recommendations.
n BRE: Timber durability and treatment pack.
nnn PAINTING METALS
The application of paint to provide a protective coat and for decorative purposes 
is normally conﬁned to iron and steel, because most non-ferrous metals are left to
oxidise and form their own natural protective coating. Corrosion of ferrous metals 
is a natural process that can cause disﬁguration and possible failure of a metal
component. Two aspects of painting these metals must be considered:
n initial preparation and paint application;
n maintenance of protective paint.
PREPARATION
The basic requirement is to prepare the metal surface adequately to receive the
primer and subsequent coats of paint, because the mill scale, rust, oil, grease and
dirt that are frequently found on metals are not suitable as a base for the
applications of paint. Suitable preparation treatments are:
n Shot and grit blasting
This is an effective method, which can be carried out
on site, although it is usually considered to be a factory process.
n Phosphating and pickling
This is a factory process involving immersion of
the metal component in hot acid solutions to remove rust and scale.
n Degreasing
This is a factory process involving washing or immersion using
organic solvents, emulsions or hot alkali solutions followed by washing. It is very
often used as a preliminary treatment to phosphating.

 
582
Advanced Construction Technology
n Mechanical
This is a site or factory process using hand-held or powered tools
such as hammers, chisels, brushes and scrapers. To be effective these forms of
surface preparation must be thorough.
n Flame cleaning
An oxyacetylene ﬂame is used in conjunction with hand-held
tools for removing existing coats of paint or loose scale and rust.
It is essential that in conjunction with the above preparation processes the correct
primer is speciﬁed and used to obtain a satisfactory result. For further reference, see
BS EN ISO 12944-7: Paints and varnishes. Corrosion protection of steel structures by
protective paint systems. Execution and supervision of paintwork.
MAINTENANCE
To protect steel in the long term a rigid schedule of painting maintenance must be
worked out and invoked. This is particularly true of the many areas where access is
difﬁcult, such as pipes ﬁxed close to a wall or adjacent members in a lattice truss.
Access for future maintenance is an aspect of building that should be considered
during the design and construction stages, not only in the context of metal
components but also for any part of a building that will require future maintenance
and/or inspection. To take full advantage of the structural properties of steelwork,
and at the same time avoid the maintenance problems, weathering steels could be
considered for exposed conditions.
nnn WEATHERING STEELS
These do not rust or corrode as normal steels, but interact with the atmosphere 
to produce a layer of sealing oxides. The colour of this protective layer will vary
from a lightish brown to a dark purple grey depending on the degree of exposure,
amount and type of pollution in the atmosphere and orientation. The best-known
weathering steel is called ‘Cor-Ten’, which is derived from the fact that it is
CORrosion resistant with a high TENsile strength. Cor-Ten is not a stainless steel
but a low-alloy steel with a lower proportion of non-ferrous metals than stainless
steel, which makes it a dearer material than mild steel but cheaper than traditional
stainless steels.
Weathering steels can be used as a substitute for other steels except in wet
situations, marine works or in areas of high pollution unless protected with paint 
or similar protective applications, which defeats the main objective of using this
material. Jointing can be by welding or friction grip bolts. Note that the protective
coating will not form on weathering steels in internal situations because the
formation of this coat is a natural process of the wet and dry cycles encountered
with ordinary weather conditions.

 
EXTERNAL WORKS
PART
14

 

 
Building contractors are not normally engaged to construct major roads or
motorways, as this is the province of the civil engineer. However, they can be
involved in the laying of small estate roads, service roads and driveways, and it is
within this context that the student of construction technology would consider 
roadworks.
Before considering road construction techniques and types it is worthwhile
considering some of the problems encountered by the designer when planning 
road layouts. The width of a road can be determined by the anticipated trafﬁc 
ﬂow, volume and speed. Lane width dimension is calculated from an allowance 
of maximum vehicle width of 2.500 m plus 0.500 m minimum clearance between
vehicles, to provide a minimum lane width of 3.000 m. The major layout problems
occur at road junctions and at the termination of cul-de-sac roads. At right-angle
junctions it is important that vehicles approaching the junction from any direction
have a clear view of approaching vehicles intending to join the main trafﬁc ﬂow.
Most planning authorities have layout restrictions at such junctions in the form 
of triangulated sight lines, which give a distance and area in which an observer 
can see an object when both are at speciﬁc heights above the carriageway. Within
this triangulated area street furniture or any other obstruction is not allowed (see
Fig. 14.1.1). Angled junctions, by virtue of their distinctive layout, do not present
the same problems. At any junction a suitable radius should be planned so that
vehicles ﬁltering into the main road should not have to apply a full turning lock.
The actual radius required will be governed by the anticipated vehicle types that
will use the road.
Terminations at the end of cul-de-sacs must be planned to allow vehicles to 
turn round. For service roads this is usually based on the length and turning circle
speciﬁcations of refuse collection vehicles, which are probably the largest vehicles to
use the road. Typical examples are shown in Fig. 14.1.2.
14.1
ROADS, PAVINGS AND SLABS

 
586
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn ROADS
The construction of roads can be considered under two headings:
n preparation or earthworks;
n pavement construction.
Before any roadwork is undertaken a thorough soil investigation should be
carried out to determine the nature of the subgrade, which is the soil immediately
below the topsoil that will ultimately carry the trafﬁc loads from the pavement
above. Soil investigations should preferably be carried out during the winter period
when subgrade conditions will be at their worst. Trial holes should be taken down
to at least 1.000 m below the proposed formation level. The information required
Figure 14.1.1
Typical road junctions

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
587
from these investigations to ensure that a good pavement design can be formulated
is the elasticity, plasticity, cohesion and internal friction properties of the subgrade.
EARTHWORKS
This will include removing topsoil, scraping and grading the exposed surface to 
the required formation level, preparing the subgrade to receive the pavement, and
forming any embankments and/or cuttings. The strength of the subgrade will
generally decrease as the moisture content increases. An excess of water in the
subgrade can also cause damage by freezing, causing frost heave in ﬁne sands, chalk
and silty soils. Conversely, thawing may cause a reduction in subgrade strength,
giving rise to failure of the pavement above. Tree roots, particularly those of 
Figure 14.1.2
Typical road turn-around and terminations

 
588
Advanced Construction Technology
fast-growing deciduous trees such as the poplar and willow, can also cause damage
in heavy clay soils by extracting vast quantities of water from the subgrade down to
a depth of 3.000 m.
The pavement covering will give ﬁnal protection to the subgrade from excess
moisture, but during the construction period the subgrade should be protected by a
waterproof surfacing such as a sprayed bituminous binder with a sand cover applied
at a rate of 1 litre per square metre. If the subgrade is not to be immediately covered
with the sub-base of the pavement it should be protected by an impermeable
membrane such as 500 gauge plastic sheeting with 300 mm side and end laps.
PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION
‘Pavement’ is a general term for any paved surface, and is also the term applied
speciﬁcally to the whole construction of a road. Road pavements can be classiﬁed 
as ﬂexible pavements that, for the purpose of design, are assumed to have no tensile
strength and consist of a series of layers of materials to distribute the wheel loads to
the subgrade. The alternative form is the rigid pavement of which, for the purpose
of design, the tensile strength is taken into account and which consists of a concrete
slab resting on a granular base.
Flexible pavements
The sub-base for a ﬂexible pavement is laid directly onto the formation level and
should consist of a well-compacted granular material such as a quarry overburden
or crushed rocks. The actual thickness of sub-base required is determined by the
cumulative number of standard axles (msa) to be carried (msa = millions of standard
axles, where a standard axle is taken as 8,200 kg) and the CBR (California bearing
ratio) of the subgrade. The CBR is an empirical method in which the thickness of
the sub-base is related to the strength of the subgrade and to the amount of trafﬁc
the road is expected to carry. A fully ﬂexible pavement design life should be at least
20 years. As an alternative to empirical calculations, reference can be made to
Volume 7 of the Design Manual for Roads and Bridges: Part 3, ref. HD 26/94:
Pavement Design and Maintenance, published by the Stationery Ofﬁce. This 
manual provides graphical presentations on the principle shown in Fig. 14.1.3 for
determining road construction speciﬁcation relative to design trafﬁc load (msa) 
and overall bituminous layer thickness.
The subgrade is covered with a sub-base, a base course and a wearing course; 
the last two components are collectively known as the surfacing. The sub-base can
consist of any material that remains stable in water, such as crushed stone, dry lean
concrete or blast furnace slag. Compacted dry-bound macadam in a 75 to 125 mm
thick layer with a 25 mm thick overlay of ﬁrmer material or a compacted wet mix
macadam in 75 to 150 mm thick layers could also be used. The material chosen
should also be unaffected by frost and be well compacted in layers, giving a
compacted thickness of between 100 and 150 mm for each layer.
The base course of the surfacing can consist of rolled asphalt, dense tarmacadam,
dense bitumen macadam or open-textured macadam, and should be applied to a

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
589
minimum thickness of 60 mm. Base courses are laid to the required ﬁnished road
section providing any necessary gradients or crossfalls, ready to receive the thinner
wearing course, which should be laid within three days of completing the base
course. The wearing course is usually laid by machine and provides the water
protection for the base layers. It should also have non-skid properties, reasonable
resistance to glare, good riding properties and a good life expectancy. Materials 
that give these properties include hot-rolled asphalt, bitumen macadam, dense tar
surfacing and cold asphalt (see Fig. 14.1.4 for typical details). Existing ﬂexible 
road surfaces can be renovated quickly and cheaply by the application of a hot 
tar or cut-back bitumen binder with a rolled layer of gravel, crushed stone or slag
chippings applied immediately after the binder and before it sets.
Pavements that contain a nominal amount of cement to bind materials in the 
sub-base and have bituminous materials for surfacing vary sufﬁciently from a truly
ﬂexible speciﬁcation. These are often known appropriately as semi-ﬂexible or
ﬂexible composite.
The above treatments are termed bound surfaces, but ﬂexible roads or 
pavements with unbound surfaces can also be constructed. These are suitable for
light vehicular trafﬁc where violent braking and/or acceleration is not anticipated,
such as driveways to domestic properties. Unbound pavements consist of a 100 
to 200 mm thick base of clinker or hardcore laid directly onto the formation level 
of the subgrade, and this is covered with a well-rolled layer of screeded gravel to 
pass a 40 mm ring with sufﬁcient sand to ﬁll the small voids to form an overall
consolidated thickness of 25 mm. This will give a relatively cheap ﬂexible
Figure 14.1.3
Design thickness for pavements (see publication HD 26/94, Stationery
Ofﬁce)

 
590
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 14.1.4
Typical pavement details

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
591
pavement, but to be really efﬁcient it should have adequate falls to prevent 
the ponding of water, and should be treated each spring with an effective
weedkiller.
Rigid pavements
This is a form of road using a concrete slab laid over a base layer. The subgrade 
is prepared as described above for ﬂexible pavements, and it should be adequately
protected against water. The base layer is laid over the subgrade, and is required 
to form a working surface from which to case the concrete slab and enable work to
proceed during wet and frosty weather without damage to the subgrade. Generally,
granular materials such as crushed concrete, crushed stone, crushed slag and
suitably graded gravels are used to form the base layer. The thickness will depend
upon the nature and type of subgrade: weak subgrades normally require a minimum
thickness of 150 mm whereas normal subgrades require a minimum thickness of
only 80 mm.
The thickness of concrete slabs used in rigid pavement construction will depend
upon the condition of the subgrade and intensity of trafﬁc, and on whether the slab
is to be reinforced. With a normal subgrade using a base layer 80 mm thick the slab
thickness would vary from 125 mm for a reinforced slab carrying light trafﬁc to 
200 mm for an unreinforced slab carrying a medium to heavy trafﬁc intensity. The
usual strength speciﬁcation is 28 MN/m2 at 28 days with not more than 1% test
cube failure rate: therefore the mix design should be based on a mean strength of
between 40 and 50 MN/m2, depending upon the degree of quality control possible
on or off site. To minimise the damage that can be caused by frost and deicing salts,
the water/cement ratio should not exceed 0.5 by weight, and air entrainment to at
least the top 50 mm of the concrete should be speciﬁed. The air-entraining agent
used should produce 3–6% of minute air bubbles in the hardened concrete, thus
preventing saturation of the slab by capillary action.
Before the concrete is laid, the base layer should be covered with a slip
membrane of polythene sheet, which will also prevent grout loss from the concrete
slab. Concrete slabs are usually laid between pressed steel road forms, which are
positioned and ﬁxed to the ground with steel stakes. These side forms are designed
to provide the guide for hand tamping or to provide for a concrete train consisting
of spreaders and compacting units. Curved or ﬂexible road forms have no top or
bottom ﬂange and are secured to the ground with an increased number of steel
stakes (see Fig. 14.1.5 for typical road form examples).
Reinforcement generally in the form of a welded steel fabric complying with 
the recommendations of BS 4483: Steel fabric for the reinforcement of concrete, can 
be included in rigid pavement constructions to prevent the formation of cracks and 
to enable the number of expansion and contraction joints required to be reduced. 
If bar reinforcement is used instead of welded steel fabric it should consist of
deformed bars at spacings not exceeding 150 mm. The cover of concrete over the
reinforcement will depend on the thickness of concrete: for slabs under 150 mm
thick the minimum cover should be 50 mm, and for slabs over 150 mm thick the
minimum cover should be 60 mm.

 
592
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 14.1.5
Typical steel road form details

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
593
Joints used in rigid pavements may be either transverse or longitudinal, and are
included in the design to:
n limit the size of slab;
n limit the stresses due to subgrade restraint;
n make provision for slab movements such as expansion, contraction and warping.
The spacing of joints will be governed by several factors, namely slab thickness,
presence of reinforcement, trafﬁc intensity and the temperature at which the
concrete is placed. Five types of joint are used in rigid road and pavement
construction and are classed as follows:
n Expansion joints
These are transverse joints at 36.000 to 72.000 m centres in
reinforced slabs and at 27.000 to 54.000 m centres in unreinforced slabs.
n Contraction joints
These are transverse joints that are placed between
expansion joints at 12.000 to 24.000 m centres in reinforced slabs and at 4.500 to
7.500 m centres in unreinforced slabs to limit the size of slab bay or panel. Note
that every third joint should be an expansion joint.
n Longitudinal joints
These are similar to contraction joints and are required
where slab width exceeds 4.500 m.
n Construction joints
The day’s work should normally be terminated at an
expansion or contraction joint, but if this is impossible a construction joint 
can be included. These joints are similar to contraction joints but with the two
portions tied together with reinforcement. Construction joints should not be
placed within 3.000 m of another joint, and should be avoided wherever possible.
n Warping joints
These are transverse joints that are sometimes required in
unreinforced slabs to relieve the stresses caused by vertical temperature gradients
within the slab if they are higher than the contractional stresses. The detail is
similar to contraction joints but has a special arrangement of reinforcement.
Typical joint details are shown in Fig. 14.1.6.
Road joints can require ﬁllers and/or sealers: the former need to be compressible
whereas the latter should protect the joint against the entry of water and grit.
Suitable materials for ﬁllers are soft knot-free timber, impregnated ﬁbreboard,
chipboard, cork and cellular rubber. The common sealing compounds used are
resinous compounds, rubber-bituminous compounds and straight-run bitumen
compounds containing ﬁllers. The sealed surface groove used in contraction joints
to predetermine the position of a crack can be formed while casting the slab, or can
be sawn into the hardened concrete using water-cooled circular saws. Although
slightly dearer than the formed joint, sawn joints require less labour and generally
give a better ﬁnish.
The curing of newly laid rigid roads and pavings is important if the concrete
strength is to be maintained and the formation of surface cracks is to be avoided.
Curing precautions should commence as soon as practicable after laying, preferably
within 15 minutes of completion by covering the newly laid surface with a suitable
material to give protection from the rapid drying effects of the sun and wind. This
form of covering will also prevent unsightly pitting of the surface due to rain. Light
covering materials such as waterproof paper and plastic ﬁlm can be laid directly

 
594
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 14.1.6
Typical rigid road joint details

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
595
onto the concrete surface, ensuring that they are adequately secured at the edges.
Plastic ﬁlm can give rise to a smooth surface if the concrete is wet; this can be
avoided by placing raised bearers over the surface to support the covering. Heavier
coverings such as tarpaulin sheets will need to be supported on frames of timber 
or light metalwork so that the covering is completely clear of the concrete surface.
Coverings should remain in place for about 7 days in warm weather and for longer
periods in cold weather.
The design of rigid pavements follows a similar procedure to that described for
ﬂexible pavements. Graphical extracts from Volume 7 of the Design Manual for
Roads and Bridges resemble the illustration in Fig. 14.1.3, but with concrete
thickness in the vertical axis.
Rigid composite or semi-rigid road construction can be speciﬁed to combine
the beneﬁts of a smooth surface with a solid concrete sub-base. The concrete is
reinforced throughout and surfaced with a bituminous wearing course of hot-rolled
or porous asphalt.
DRAINAGE
Road drainage consists of directing the surface water to suitable collection points
and conveying the collected water to a suitable outfall. The surface water is
encouraged to ﬂow off the paved area by crossfalls, which must be designed with
sufﬁcient gradient to cope with the volume of water likely to be encountered during
a heavy storm to prevent vehicles skidding or aquaplaning. A minimum crossfall 
of 1:40 is generally speciﬁed for urban roads and motorways, whereas crossfalls of
between 1:40 and 1:60 are common speciﬁcations for service roads. The run-off
water is directed towards the edges of the road, where it is in turn conveyed by
gutters or drainage channels at a fall of about 1:200 in the longitudinal direction to
discharge into road gullies and thence into the surface water drains.
Road gullies are available in clayware and precast concrete with or without a
trapped outlet; if ﬁnal discharge is to a combined sewer the trapped outlet is
required, and in some areas the local authority will insist upon a trapped outlet
gully for all situations. Spacing of road gullies is dependent upon the anticipated
storm conditions and crossfalls, but common spacings are 25.000 to 30.000 m. The
gratings are usually made from cast iron, slotted and hinged to allow easy ﬂow into
the collection chamber of the gully and to allow for access for suction cleaning 
(see Fig. 14.1.7). Roads that are not bounded by kerbs can be drained by having
subsoil drains beneath the verge or drained directly into a ditch or stream running
alongside the road. The sizing and layout design of a road drainage system is based
on anticipated rainfall. For example, given a rainfall (R) intensity of 40 mm/h, the
quantity (Q) of water in litres/second running off a road, car-park or similar surface
can be shown as:
Q =
where A is the surface area to be drained, and P is the surface permeability 
(asphalt and concrete = 0.85 to 0.95).
APR
3,600

 
596
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 14.1.7
Typical road gully and grating details

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
597
If a road has an area of 1,000 m2 and a permeability of 0.9, then:
Q =
= 10 litres/s
or
0.010 m3/s
Q = V × A
where V is the velocity of water ﬂowing in drain (min = 0.75 m/s for self-cleansing)
and A is the area of water ﬂowing in pipe (m2) – allow half-full bore. That is:
0.010 = 0.75 × A
therefore
A =
= 0.0133 m2
Area (A) for half-bore = 1/2πr2; therefore r (radius) = 0.092 m and diameter of drain
= 0.184 m. The nearest commercial drain is 225 mm or possibly a non-standard
pipe of 200 mm.
For a more detailed perspective of drainage design, the reader is recommended
to resource Chapter 8 of Building Services, Technology and Design, published jointly
by CIOB and Pearson Education.
FOOTPATHS AND PEDESTRIAN AREAS
These can be constructed from a wide variety of materials or, for a large area, they
can consist of a mixture of materials to form attractive layouts. Widths of footpaths
will be determined by local authority planning requirements, but a width of 1.200 m
is usually considered to be the minimum in all cases. Roads are usually separated
from the adjacent footpath by a kerb of precast concrete or natural stone, which by
being set at a higher level than the road not only marks the boundary of both road
and footpath but also acts as a means of controlling the movement of surface water
by directing it along the gutter into the road gullies (see Fig. 14.1.8).
Flexible footpaths, like roads, are those in which for design purposes no tensile
strength is taken into account. They are usually constructed in at least two layers,
consisting of an upper wearing course laid over a base course of tarmacadam.
Wearing courses of tarmacadam and cold asphalt are used, the latter being more
expensive but having better durability properties (see Fig. 14.1.8 for typical details).
Gravel paths similar in construction to unbound road surfaces are an alternative
method to the layered tarmacadam footpaths. Loose cobble areas can make an
attractive edging to a footpath as an alternative to the traditional grass verge. The 
30 to 125 mm diameter cobbles are laid directly onto a hardcore or similar bed and
are handpacked to the required depth.
Unit pavings are a common form of footpath construction, consisting of a 50 to
75 mm thick base of well-compacted hardcore laid to a minimum crossfall of 1:60 
if the subgrade has not already been formed to falls. The unit pavings can be of
precast concrete ﬂags or slabs laid on a 25 mm thick bed of sand, a mortar bed of 
1:5 cement:sand or a weak dry cement:sharp sand mortar, or each unit can be laid
0.010
0.75
1,000 × 0.9 × 40
3,600

 
598
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 14.1.8
Typical footpath details

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
599
on ﬁve mortar dots of 1:5 cement:sand mix, one dot being located in each corner
and one dot in the centre of each ﬂag or slab (see Fig. 14.1.8). Mortar dot ﬁxing is
favoured by many designers because it facilitates easy levelling, and the slabs are
easy to lift and re-lay if the need arises. Paving ﬂags can have a dry butt joint, a 12
to 20 mm wide soil joint to encourage plant growth, or they can be grouted together
with a 1:3 cement:sand grout mix. Component speciﬁcation is to BS 7263-1: Precast
concrete ﬂags, kerbs, channels, edgings and quadrants. Precast, unreinforced concrete
paving ﬂags and complementary ﬁttings. Requirements and test methods. See also, BS
EN 1340: Concrete kerb units. Requirements and test methods.
Brick pavings of hard, well-burnt clay bricks or concrete pavers laid on their bed
face or laid on edge and set in a bed of sharp sand or dry weak mortar with dry or
ﬁlled joints can be used to create attractive patterned and coloured areas. Care must
be taken with the selection of the bricks to ensure that those chosen have adequate
resistance to wear, frost and sulphate attack. Bricks with a rough texture will also
give a reasonably good non-slip surface.
Small granite setts of square or rectangular plan format make a very hard-
wearing unit paving. Setts should be laid in a 25 mm thick sand bed with a 10 mm
wide joint to a broken bond pattern. The laid setts should be well rammed, and the
joints should be ﬁlled with chippings and grouted with a cement:sand grout.
Firepath pots are suitable for forming a surface required for occasional vehicle
trafﬁc such as a ﬁreﬁghting appliance. Firepaths consist of 100 mm deep precast
concrete hexagonal or round pots with a 175 mm diameter hole in the middle,
which may be ﬁlled with topsoil for growing grass or with any suitable loose ﬁlling
material. The pots are laid directly onto a 150 mm thick base of sand-blinded
compacted hardcore.
Cobbled pavings and footpaths can be laid to form a loose cobble surface as
previously described, or the oval cobbles can be hand set into a 50 mm thick bed 
of 1:2:4 concrete having a small maximum aggregate size laid over a 50 mm thick
compacted sand base layer.
Rigid pavements consisting of a 75 mm thick unreinforced slab of in-situ concrete
laid over a 75 mm thick base of compacted hardcore can also be used to form
footpaths. Like their road counterparts these pavings should have expansion and
contraction joints incorporated into the construction. Formation of these joints
would be similar to those shown in Fig. 14.1.6; for expansion joints the maximum
centres would be 27.000 m and for contraction joints the maximum centres would
be 3.000 m.
ACCOMMODATION OF SERVICES
The services that may have to be accommodated under a paved area could include
any or all of the following:
n public or private sewers;
n electrical supply cables;
n gas mains;
n water mains;

 
600
Advanced Construction Technology
n telecommunications cables;
n television relay cables;
n district heating mains.
In planning the layout of these services it is essential that there is adequate
coordination between the various undertakings and bodies concerned if a logical 
and economical plan and installation programme is to be formulated.
Sewers are not generally grouped with other services, and because of their lower
ﬂexibility are given priority of position. They can be laid under the carriageway 
or under the footpath or verge, the latter position creating less disturbance should
repairs be necessary. The speciﬁcation as to the need for ducts, covers and access
positions for any particular service will be determined by the undertaking or board
concerned. Most services are laid under the footpath or verge so that repairs will
cause the minimum of disturbance and to take advantage of the fact that the
reinstatement of a footpath is usually cheaper and easier than that of the
carriageway.
Services that can be grouped together are very often laid in a common trench,
commencing with the laying of the lowest service and backﬁlling until the next
service depth is reached and then repeating the procedure until all the required
services have been laid. The selected granular backﬁlling materials should be 
placed in 200 to 250 mm well-compacted layers. All services should be kept at 
least 1.500 m clear of tree trunks, and any small tree roots should be cut, square-
trimmed and tarred. Typical common service trench details are shown in 
Fig. 14.1.9.
nnn INTERNAL SLABS AND PAVINGS
The design and construction of a large paved area to act as a ground ﬂoor slab is
similar to that already described in the context of rigid pavings. The investigation
and preparation of the subgrade is similar in all aspects to the preparatory works 
for roads. A sub-base of well-compacted graded granular material to a thickness of
150 mm for weak subgrades and 80 mm for normal subgrades should be laid over
the formation level. If the sub-base is to be laid before the roof covering has been
completed, the above thicknesses should be increased by 75 mm to counteract the
effects of any adverse weather conditions. A slip membrane of 500 gauge plastic
sheeting or similar material should be laid over the sub-base as described for rigid
pavings for roads.
The in-situ concrete slab thickness is related to the load intensity, the required
life of the ﬂoor and the classiﬁcation of the subgrade. Floors with light loadings of
up to 5 kN/m2 would require a minimum thickness of 175 mm for weak subgrades
and 150 mm for normal subgrades, whereas heavier slab loadings would require
minimum slab thicknesses of 200 mm for weak subgrades and 175 mm for normal
subgrades. The grade of concrete speciﬁed would range from 20 N/mm2 for ofﬁces
and shops to 40 N/mm2 for heavy industrial usages. The need, design, detail and
spacing of the various types of joints are as described for rigid pavings and detailed
in Fig. 14.1.6.

 
Roads, pavings and slabs
601
Figure 14.1.9
Typical common service trench details

 
602
Advanced Construction Technology
Large internal pavings or slabs are laid in bays to control the tensile stresses due
to the thermal movement and contraction of the slab. Laying large areas of paving
in bays is also a convenient method of dividing the work into practicable sizes. Bay
widths of 4.500 m will enable a two-operative tamping beam to be used, and will
facilitate the easy placing and ﬁnishing of the slab. This is also an ideal width for 
a standard sheet of welded steel fabric reinforcement. Two basic bay layouts are
possible: chequered board and long strip. Chequered board layout is where
alternate bays in all directions are cast with joints formed to their perimeters. 
The intermediate bays are laid some 7 days later to allow for some shrinkage to 
take place. Although this is the traditional method it has two major disadvantages,
in that access to the intermediate or inﬁll bays is poor and control over shrinkage 
is suspect.
The long strip method of internal paving construction provides an excellent
alternative and is based on established rigid road-paving techniques. The 4.500 m
wide strips are cast alternately, which gives good access; expansion joints if required
are formed along the edges; transverse contraction joints can be formed as the work
proceeds, or the surface groove can be sawn in at a later time. With this method 
it may be necessary to cast narrow edge strips some 600 mm to 1.000 m wide at 
the commencement of the operation if perimeter columns or walls would hinder 
the use of a tamping board or beam across the full width of the ﬁrst strip.
The concrete paving must be fully compacted during laying, and this can be
achieved by using a single or double tamping beam ﬁtted with a suitable vibration
unit. The ﬁnish required to the upper surface will depend upon the usage of the
building and/or any applied ﬁnishes that are to be laid. Common methods
employed are hand trowelling using steel trowels, power ﬂoating and power
trowelling. The latter methods will achieve a similar result to hand trowelling 
but in a much shorter space of time. None of the above ﬁnishing methods can 
be commenced until the concrete has cured sufﬁciently to accept the method 
being used.
Vacuum dewatering is a method of reducing the time delay before power ﬂoating
can take place. The object is to remove the excess water from the slab immediately
after the initial compaction and levelling has taken place. The slab is covered 
with a ﬁne ﬁlter sheet and a rigid or ﬂexible suction mat to which is connected a
transparent ﬂexible plastic pipe attached to a vacuum generator. The vacuum
created will compress the concrete slab and force the water to ﬂow out up to a depth
of 300 mm. The dewatering process will cause a reduction of about 2% in the slab
depth, and therefore a surcharge should be provided by means of packing strips 
on the side forms or at the ends of the tamping boards. The ﬁlter sheet will ensure
that very little of the cement ﬁnes of the mix is carried along in suspension by the
water being removed. The vacuum should be applied for about 3 minutes for every
25 mm of concrete depth, which will generally mean that within approximately 
20 minutes of casting the mats can be removed and the initial power ﬂoating
operation commenced, followed by the ﬁnal power trowelling operation. This
method enables the laying of long strips of paving in a continuous operation. It is
possible for a team consisting of six operatives and a supervisor to complete 200 m2
of paving per day using this method.

 
ACCESS AND FACILITIES FOR
DISABLED PEOPLE: BUILDINGS
OTHER THAN DWELLINGS
PART
15

 
604
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn INTRODUCTION
Much of the guidance in the Building Regulations, Approved Document M: Access
to and use of buildings is complementary to the recommendations provided in BS
8300: Design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs of disabled people –
Code of practice. The British Standard contains additional material not considered
appropriate for Building Regulation guidance, such as signposting and other
management procedures. It also contains some variations from the Approved
Document. Therefore, although the two publications have similar objectives, and
compliance with the BS will ensure good practice, it is not necessarily equivalent
with the guidance in the Approved Document.
The Disability Discrimination Act differs from Approved Document M and 
BS 8300 in that it is not directly about the design and construction of buildings. 
It is concerned with the provision of goods, services and premises with non-
discriminatory facilities. Therefore the facilities available in buildings must be
favourable for all users, including the physically less able.
All three documents apply to newly constructed buildings as well as to newly
extended buildings and those undergoing material alteration or change of use. 
The Act has particular reference to all buildings that function as a service provider.
Owners and business operators are required to remove and change features that
prevent access to that service or facility. For example, in retail outlets, displays 
need to be at an accessible height, aisle widths adequate for wheelchairs, lighting
levels increased, accesses ramped, etc.
Chapters 15.1 to 15.5 of this book provide a general guidance for some of the
more common provisions and facilities for the less ambulant using non-domestic
buildings. Although the objectives are to show how the less able can be assisted, 
it is noteworthy that the title of the Building Regulations Approved Document 
does not include speciﬁc reference to disabled people. This emphasises the need 
for buildings to be convenient for all users, including those carrying heavy or large
packages or luggage as well as people with pushchairs. Furthermore, note that
particular purpose groups and building functions, e.g. theatres and sports centres,
will have provisions speciﬁcally detailed for that activity, and appropriate references
should be sought.

 
The objective is to provide a suitable means for accessing entrances to buildings
from the point of site entry and from the car parking areas. It is also important to
provide suitable means for gaining access between buildings on the same site. 
Car parking designated for disabled persons should be planned to have a priority 
for closeness to the building entrance.
nnn CAR PARKING
Parking provisions should be made available for visitors, customers and members of
staff needing to access a building. The main entrance and staff entrances should be
reasonably accessible on foot or by wheelchair from any of the allocated car parking
spaces. Priority parking for the disabled should be suitably designated and given
larger parking bays to allow people with limited mobility to access their vehicles
unimpeded: see Fig. 15.1.1.
n Location of accessible bays clearly signed at the car park entrance.
n Designated parking for disabled drivers or passengers clearly identiﬁed.
n Firm, durable and slip-resistant surface on level ground (no undulations greater
than 5 mm).
n Parking space for the disabled within 50.000 m of the building main entrance or
other facility served.
n Parking bays for use by the disabled to have adequate width to allow car doors to
be fully opened for wheelchair space and passenger transfer.
n Dropped kerbs for wheelchair access.
n Parking ticket machine in close proximity to designated parking with controls
between 750 and 1,200 mm above adjacent ground.
15.1
ACCESS TO BUILDINGS

 
606
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn GENERAL PROVISIONS
n Level or slightly graded foot or wheelchair approach to building entrance.
n Approach surface to be ﬁrm, durable, trip free, slip resistant and unobstructed to
a height of 2.100 m.
n Where the surface comprises paving slabs, differentials between slab levels to be
no more than 5 mm, with joints no deeper than 5 mm. Preferably not exceeding
3 mm under a 1.000 m level.
n Tactile (blistered) paved surfaces to be located to indicate deviation from the
pedestrian access.
n Surface width to be at least 1.500 m, with established passing places.
n Passing places to be at least 1.800 m wide × 2.000 m long, at a maximum distance
of 50.000 m apart.
n Main access route to be adequately signed.
nnn GRADIENTS
n Formed as a gentle continuous slope (max. gradient 1 in 60).
n May include a series of shorter gradients.
n Maximum gradient 1 in 20 in any part, with level landings at each 500 mm rise.
n Crossfalls, maximum gradient 1 in 40.
Figure 15.1.1
Designated parking bays

 
Access to buildings
607
nnn RAMPED ACCESS
Required where site conditions create a gradient greater than 1 in 20. Ramps are
essential for wheelchair users and parents with pushchairs to overcome changes in
ground levels. See Fig. 15.1.2 for outline requirements.
n Must be clearly signed.
n Maximum going of ﬂight, 10.000 m.
n Maximum rise of ﬂight, 0.500 m.
n An alternative access is required where the total rise exceeds 2.000 m, e.g. a
platform lift.
n Slip-resistant surface to ramp and landings.
n Ramp surface colour to contrast with that of the landings.
n Surface width, minimum 1.500 m.
n Landings provided at the top and bottom of ramp, minimum 1.200 m long and
clear of opening doors and other possible obstructions.
n Intermediate landings at least 1.800 m long and 1.800 m wide to function as
passing places.
n Landings level, subject to maximum gradient 1 in 60 along their length, with
maximum cross-gradient of 1 in 40.
n Handrails to both sides; one side only is acceptable if there is another means for
accessing the main entrance to a building.
n Handrail to be accompanied by balustrade or other guarding (see guidance in
Building Regulations Approved Document K). If there is an open side, the
adjacent ground level to be with the ramp surface or a visually contrasting kerb
of at least 100 mm height to be provided.
n Grading of ramps:
n Flight going up to 2.000 m, maximum gradient is 1 in 12.
n Flight going of 10.000 m, maximum gradient is 1 in 20.
Figure 15.1.2
Ramped access

 
608
Advanced Construction Technology
n Maximum ﬂight gradient in between 2.000 and 10.000 m going can be
interpolated directly:
e.g. A going of 6.000 m has a maximum gradient of 1 in 16.
A going of 8.500 m has a maximum gradient of 1 in 18.5.
nnn STEPPED ACCESS
Ramps should be accompanied by a stepped access, because many ambulant
disabled people may ﬁnd them more negotiable.
n Landings
Approach identiﬁed by an 800 mm deep tactile (corduroy) warning
surface. Intermediate landings provided with a tactile warning surface where the
landing is accessed other than from the steps. Top and bottom of ﬂights to have 
a level landing not less than 1.200 m long. Landings to be clear of door swings
and other potential obstructions.
n Steps and ﬂights
n Unobstructed surface width not less than 1.200 m.
n Maximum 12 risers between landings for going less than 350 mm.
n Maximum 18 risers between landings for going 350 mm or more.
n No open risers.
n Nosings integral (not projecting) and colour-contrasted 55 mm on tread and
riser.
n Nosing projection a maximum of 25 mm over tread below.
n Risers between 150 and 170 mm and consistent.
n Going between 280 and 425 mm and consistent.
n Handrail
n Continuous to both sides, including landing.
n Central handrail provided where unobstructed stair width exceeds 1.800 m.
n Height between 900 and 1,000 mm above the pitch line.
n Height between 900 and 1,100 mm above landings.
n Extends at least 300 mm beyond ramps or steps.
n Contrasts visually with the background.
n Suggested proﬁle 40–50 mm diameter and 50–60 mm from wall.
n Projection from wall preferably not more than 100 mm into stair width.
n Terminates in a non-hazardous manner, generally by returning to the wall to
prevent clothing being caught.
Note: Some variations may be more practical and safer in special circumstances, e.g.
the given riser, going and handrail dimensions may not be considered appropriate
for use in schools designed speciﬁcally for young children, e.g. rise 150 mm and
going 280 mm.
Figure 15.1.3 shows the general provisions for stair ﬂights, landings and handrails.

 
Access to buildings
609
Figure 15.1.3
Stepped access

 
The disposition of entrances to buildings should have regard for the routes that
service them. They should be prominent, and easily distinguished from the 
general facade.
Further considerations:
n Entrance to be clearly identiﬁed with adequate signage.
n If an alternative access for the disabled is provided, it should link directly with
the area served by the principal entrance.
n Architectural featurework or structural supports, e.g. columns to a canopy, to be
colour contrasted and of a rounded ﬁnish to minimise any hazard to the visually
impaired.
n Threshold to have a level approach at least 1.500 × 1.500 m clear of swing doors.
n Threshold to be ﬂush and trip free for easy transit with a wheelchair (see 
Fig. 3.5.9 in Construction Technology). A 15 mm maximum upstand is 
acceptable, provided it has a chamfered or rounded ﬁnish.
n Floor ﬁnishes in the immediate threshold area (inside and out), of materials not
likely to impede movement.
n Entrance doors ideally activated automatically by motion sensor, not to swing
outwards (horizontal sliding preferred), and to remain open long enough for a
slow-moving person to progress through.
n If not automatic, entrance doors to have large push button controls at a suitable
height for all users (750–1,000 mm above ground ﬁnish).
n Revolving doors are acceptable for wheelchair access, if they are slow moving 
and enclose a 1.500 m × 1.200 m footprint, and there is an alternative suitably
furnished single-leaf side-hung door available: see Fig. 15.2.1.
n Immediately inside the entrance, the area should be sympathetically lit for
transition and adjustment by the visually impaired, when contrasting with
outside lighting levels.
15.2
ACCESS INTO BUILDINGS:
ENTRANCES

 
Access into buildings: entrances
611
n Inside the entrance, location of facilities, e.g. WC, lift, reception, to be clearly
signed.
n Entrance lobby to be of adequate dimensions to allow a wheelchair user to move
sufﬁciently clear of the ﬁrst door before negotiating the next: see dimensionally
enhanced diagrams provided in Section 2 of Approved Document M to the
Building Regulations.
n Door opening widths as Fig. 15.2.2.
n Glass doors to be deﬁned by manifestation (lettering or patterns) at 0.850 to
1.000 m and 1.400 to 1.600 m above ﬂoor level. Manifestation to contrast with
background: see Fig. 15.2.1.
Figure 15.2.1
Entrance doors

 
612
Advanced Construction Technology
Figure 15.2.2
Door opening widths

 
Circulation within buildings applies to both the horizontal and the vertical
dimension. The facility should provide for unimpeded independent circulation 
by users of wheelchairs and for those with hearing and/or visual impairments.
nnn HORIZONTAL CIRCULATION
Corridors and passageways have the dual function of connecting spaces and
providing a means for emergency escape. With particular regard to escape, they
must be easy and safe to negotiate by the less ambulant. Information about the
building (ﬁre escape routes, location of lavatories, function rooms, etc.) should be
adequately signed to assist circulation.
nnn ENTRANCE AND RECEPTION AREA
n Reception point to be identiﬁed and accessible from the entrance door by a
wheelchair user.
n Reception to be sufﬁciently clear of the building entrance to be unimpaired by
external noise.
n The minimum space for wheelchair manoeuvring in front of reception is 
1,200 mm deep × 1,800 mm wide where there is a 500 mm minimum knee recess
under the counter. With no recess, a 1,400 mm × 2,200 mm space is required.
n Part of the reception counter should be at a lower level. Maximum surface height
760 mm with at least 700 mm clear space above ﬂoor ﬁnish: see Fig. 15.3.1.
nnn DOORS
All doors need to perform well in containing a ﬁre, yet must still be easily operable
by all users, including those of limited strength. The maximum door closer pressure
15.3
ACCESSIBILITY WITHIN BUILDINGS

 
614
Advanced Construction Technology
by powered operation, as speciﬁed in Approved Document M to the Building
Regulations, relates directly to a minimum opening force for manual operation 
of a door. The exact relationship between closing and opening operating pressure
depends on the efﬁciency of the closing device: see BS EN 1154: Building hardware.
Controlled door closing devices. Requirements and test methods.
Doors hinder circulation, particularly for disabled people. Where speciﬁed as
‘ﬁre doors’ (Building Regulations Part B: Fire safety) they are normally closed, 
but may be held open by an electromagnetic device. Such doors must self-close
when activated by a smoke detector, a ﬁre alarm system, a power failure or a hand
operated device, but must still open manually. BS 8300 has guidance on the use of
electromagnetic door retention devices. Powered swing doors must also be capable
of manual operation. Other considerations include:
n Clear opening width 800 mm minimum with a 300 mm minimum access space
for convenience of a wheelchair user. Situations exceeding 800 mm as shown in
Fig. 15.2.2.
n Door latch to be lever operated in preference to a rounded knob.
n Door furniture to colour contrast with door.
n Door surround (frame and/or architrave) to colour contrast with the adjacent
wall.
n Door leading edge to colour contrast with door surface and surrounds.
n Vision panels to be provided at a height between 500 and 1,500 mm above ﬂoor
level. If necessary, interrupted between 800 and 1,150 mm for an intermediate
rail: see Fig. 15.2.1.
n Glass doors to be suitably manifested as Fig. 15.2.1, and differentiated from any
adjacent glazed wall system.
Figure 15.3.1
Counters and checkouts

 
Accessibility within buildings
615
nnn CORRIDORS
See Fig. 15.3.2.
n Unobstructed width of at least 1,200 mm.
n Structural elements, e.g. columns and piers, are not to project into the
passageway.
n Unavoidable wall ﬁxings, e.g. radiators, grills, ﬁre hoses, to be fully recessed.
Note: If projections are unavoidable, a means such as a colour-contrasted guard
rail may be acceptable.
n Other hazard potential projections into a corridor, such as outward-opening
doors, are unacceptable.
n Monochromatic decorative schemes to be avoided. Use of colour contrasts
between elements preferred.
n Lighting design to avoid glare and silhouettes.
n Surface ﬁnishes: patterns to be avoided as they can be confused with components
or facilities by those with impaired vision. Light reﬂecting surfaces can also be
confusing.
n Special facilities:
n Splayed or radiused turns to ease wheelchair transport.
n Occasional 1,800 mm widths to facilitate wheelchairs to pass.
n Floor to be level. If a gradient is unavoidable, it should not exceed 1 in 20 and
rise no more than 500 mm without a horizontal landing or rest area of at least
1,500 mm length.
n Any irregularity in a ﬂoor ﬁnish to be clearly identiﬁed by visual colour contrasts.
Figure 15.3.2
Corridors and passageways, minimum dimensions (mm)

 
616
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn VERTICAL CIRCULATION
Lifts are usually the most convenient means for travelling between and accessing
different levels in a building. Some buildings, particularly those subject to
modernisation, may not have sufﬁcient space to accommodate a lift. In these
situations a platform lift or a stair lift may be considered for use between two 
levels. Platform and stair lifts may be used only if they do not interfere with the
requirements for ﬁre escape on a stairway. A ramp in place of a step may be used
for access limited to a 300 mm rise, and as described in Chapter 15.1. In excess of a
300 mm rise, steps are also to be provided. Steps or internal stairs are as described
in Chapter 15.1 and limited to 12 risers (up to 16 risers may be used in small
premises where space for landings is restricted) with 900 to 1,100 mm handrail
heights at landings. An internal stair must always be provided as an alternative to
vertical access by any form of lift. Stairs are suitably designed for use by the
ambulant disabled and the visually impaired.
PASSENGER LIFT
See Fig. 15.3.3.
n Landing space in front of lift doors should have enough area (min. 1,500 mm ×
1,500 mm) for a wheelchair user to turn and reverse into the lift car.
n Where a building design allows enough space, opposing doors are beneﬁcial so
that a wheelchair user can enter one side and leave via the other side without
turning around.
n Lift doors to remain open a sufﬁcient time for a wheelchair user and assistant to
enter the lift car unimpeded. Door-reactivating device essential.
n Lift doors colour-contrasting and distinguishable from surroundings.
n Landing and in-car call panel to be easily distinguishable from its wall mounting.
Located between 900 and 1,100 mm from the ﬂoor and within 400 mm of the
wall return.
n Lift control buttons to be embossed for tactile identiﬁcation and to contrast
visually with their background.
n Landing and in-car audible announcements and visual/illuminated displays of
lift arrival, travel direction and ﬂoor reached.
n Emergency telephone in lift car to have inductive couplers for use by people with
hearing difﬁculties.
n Alarm buttons to have a visual display acknowledging that an alert has been
sounded.
n Lift car ﬂoor ﬁnish to be resistant to slippage, particularly when wet.
n Support rail in lift car at 900 mm top height above ﬂoor level.
n Floor number displayed clearly on the wall opposite the lift doors.
n Independent power supply for emergency use.
Reference: BS EN 81: Safety rules for the construction and installation of lifts.

 
Accessibility within buildings
617
PLATFORM LIFT
Platform lifts have evolved from industrial applications for movement of goods
between different levels within ﬂoors. For people with mobility impairments,
platform lifts have been adapted to provide safe vertical transport. The main
differences from conventional passenger lifts are a relatively small ﬂoor area,
limitations on speed, and operation by continuous pressure controls by push button
or joystick. Section 3 of Approved Document M contains design and installation
provisions deemed to satisfy the Building Regulations. Other guidance is found in:
n BS 6440: Powered lifting platforms for use by disabled persons. Code of practice.
n BS 8300: Design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs of disabled
people. Code of practice.
n ISO/DIS 9386-1: Power operated lifting platforms for persons with impaired
mobility. Rules for safety, dimensions and functional operations. Part 1. Vertical
lifting platforms.
Figure 15.3.3
Lift provisions

 
618
Advanced Construction Technology
STAIR LIFT
These have evolved from special applications used in hospitals and homes for the
elderly. More recently they have become standardised in terms of components for
use in dwellings and now have a place in Approved Document M to the Building
Regulations. All newly created dwelling-houses are required to be suitably
structured to support and accommodate a retrospective installation. The objective 
is to allow people with limited disabilities to continue the enjoyment of their home
without the need to move. For non-domestic applications, a stair lift should be
considered only where it is impractical to install a conventional lift or platform lift.
Where used, a stair lift must not restrict the use of a stair by other people, and there
must be no intrusion on the required width of stair for emergency escape purposes.
References:
BS 5776: Speciﬁcation for powered stair lifts.
ISO/DIS 9386-2: Power operated lifting platforms for persons with impaired mobility.
Rules for safety, dimensions and functional operations. Part 2. Powered stairlifts moving
in an inclined plane for seated, standing and wheelchair users.

 
Buildings provide a huge range of uses, functions and facilities. All people should
be able to participate and enjoy the proceedings, the entertainment or the service
that a particular building offers. Buildings should be designed to provide disabled
people with a choice of unobstructed seating locations. This is particularly
appropriate when designing a building for spectators and audiences. Refreshment
bars, sanitary conveniences and other public services should be on a level and
accessible path for the less ambulant. Different ﬂoor levels should have provision
for access.
Buildings designed as commercial accommodation, e.g. hotels and hostels, should
have some rooms arranged and serviced speciﬁcally for the convenience of disabled
occupants. These are most likely to be situated at ground level; accommodation
elsewhere should provide for the ambulant disabled.
Determining the requirements and the subsequent design of buildings with
adequate facilities for the disabled depends considerably on a building’s function.
Functions vary: therefore the subject of special accommodation and facilities is
diverse and not within the scope of this text. The reader should seek design
manuals relating to particular purpose groups. Some outline guidance for 
audience seating to lecture theatres, conference centres, theatres, cinemas and sports
stadia is provided in the Building Regulations, Approved Document M, Section 4:
Facilities in buildings other than dwellings. This Section also considers accessibility 
to and the use of refreshment facilities, and the design considerations for sleeping
accommodation, with particular regard for wheelchair accessibility to bedrooms 
and bathrooms.
15.4
USE OF FACILITIES

 
620
Advanced Construction Technology
nnn MANUAL LIGHTING CONTROLS AND SOCKET
OUTLETS
See Fig. 15.4.1.
Provision and disposition of controls and connections is common to most
buildings, and should feature the following:
n Switches and sockets with colour and tonal contrast to distinguish visually from
background.
n Switch location 750 to 1,200 mm above ﬂoor.
n Switches preferably aligning with door handles at 900 to 1,100 mm above ﬂoor.
n Switches of simple design, preferably of push pad type or large rocker style for
operating with one hand.
n Switches and thermostats that require hand movement other than a push/pull
function, 750 to 1,000 mm above ﬂoor.
n Alarm pull chords in sanitary accommodation and other private areas, coloured
red, located close to the wall with two 50 mm diameter red bangles for easy 
grasp at 100 mm and between 800 to 1,000 mm above ﬂoor.
n Printouts or metered indicators at 1,200 to 1,400 mm above ﬂoor.
n Socket location 400 to 1,000 mm above ﬂoor.
n Socket outlets (power or telecommunications) not closer than 350 mm to corners.
n Switched sockets and circuit isolators to clearly indicate ON or OFF.
Figure 15.4.1
Switch and socket location

 
Accessibility to and within sanitary accommodation is essential for the freedom of
people with disabilities. This generally requires the provision of supplementary
sanitary accommodation for wheelchair users. Special facilities should also be
provided for people of either sex with babies and small children, and in certain
buildings such as hotels and airport terminals for people encumbered with luggage.
The design and physical layout of sanitary facilities especially for the disabled 
is a specialised subject, covering provisions for:
n WC compartments for ambulant disabled people within standard separate-sex toilets;
n unisex facilities that are accessible for a wheelchair user with an assistant, and
that allow space for lateral transfer from ‘chair to WC pan’;
n enlarged cubicle space in separate-sex toilets.
In buildings designed for sports participation, accessibility to changing facilities,
showers and bathrooms is also a priority. The Building Regulations, Approved
Document M, Section 5: Sanitary accommodation in buildings other than dwellings 
in conjunction with BS 8300 provides a basis for the design of these requirements.
Both publications include applications to cinemas, theatres, sports stadia, ofﬁce
buildings and recreational facilities. The subject is both extensive and specialised,
with speciﬁc provisions for individual buildings. As a guide, the following general
considerations for accessibility to, and use of facilities within WC compartments,
and those shown in Figs 15.5.1 and 15.5.2, may be applied to most non-domestic
buildings:
n Passageways, minimum 1,200 mm clear width.
n Door openings in passageways preferably 900 mm wide, 1,000 mm in public
buildings.
n Minimum ﬂoor dimensions 1,500 mm × 2,000 mm, to accommodate a wheelchair
in clear turning space and people with impaired leg movement and those with
crutches.
15.5
SANITARY ACCOMMODATION

 
622
Advanced Construction Technology
n Door opening into a compartment, minimum 1,000 mm clear width.
n Compartment door to open outwards and to be provided with an emergency
release device that may be operated from the outside. A horizontal bar for closing
is ﬁtted to the inside.
n Support or hand grab rails of 50 mm diameter located each side of a wash basin.
n Support rail of the hinged drop-down type positioned on the exposed side of the
WC pan. Minimum length of rail 300 mm.
n WC pan located at least 500 mm from the adjacent wall to allow for unimpeded
transfer from a wheelchair.
n WC pan seat set at a 480 mm height above the ﬂoor. Seat to be of a robust and
rigid composition.
n WC cistern ﬂush handle or push button at 1,200 mm maximum above the ﬂoor.
n Toilet paper dispenser to be on the nearest adjacent wall and within easy reach.
n Wash basin rim set between 720 and 740 mm above the ﬂoor and within
reachable distance of a user seated on the WC pan.
n A towel facility is acceptable, but an automatic warm air hand dryer is preferable,
with the air temperature set at 35 °C maximum. Height above ﬂoor, 800 to 
1,200 mm.
Figure 15.5.1
Disposition of facilities in a WC compartment

 
Sanitary accommodation
623
n Basin taps of the quarter-turn lever type or of photoelectric cell automatic
operation. Water temperature controlled through a thermostatic mixing valve 
to 35 °C maximum.
n Emergency alarm chord suspended from the ceiling, close to the wall and
unobstructed. Two distinctive red bangles of 50 mm diameter ﬁtted at 
100 mm and between 800 and 1,000 mm above the ﬂoor.
Figure 15.5.2
Facilities in a typical unisex WC compartment

 
Barry, R. The Construction of Buildings. Blackwell Scientiﬁc.
Boughton, B. Reinforced Concrete Detailers Manual. Blackwell Scientiﬁc.
Fisher Cassie, W. and Napper, J. H. Structure in Buildings. The Architectural 
Press.
Holmes, R. Introduction to Civil Engineering Construction. College of Estate
Management.
Handisyde, Cecil C. Building Materials. The Architectural Press.
Leech, L. V. Structural Steelwork for Students. Butterworth/Heinemann.
Llewelyn Davies, R. and Petty, D. J. Building Elements. The Architectural Press.
McKay, W. B. Building Construction, Vols 1 to 4. Pearson Education.
Smith, G. N. Elements of Soil Mechanics for Civil and Mining Engineers. Blackwell
Scientiﬁc.
West, A. S. Piling Practice. Butterworth/Heinemann.
Whitaker, T. The Design of Piled Foundations. Elsevier Science.
GENERAL
A Guide to Scaffolding Construction and Use. Scaffolding (GB) Ltd.
BSP. Pocket Book. The British Steel Piling Co. Ltd.
Building Regulations, Approved Documents. ODPM.
Construction Safety. Construction Industry Publications Ltd.
Data sheets of the British Precast Concrete Federation.
Design Manual for Roads and Bridges, Vol. 7. The Stationery Ofﬁce Ltd.
DoE Construction Issues: 1 to 17. The Stationery Ofﬁce Ltd.
Drained Joints in Precast Concrete Cladding. The National Buildings Agency.
Glass. Pilkington UK Ltd.
Handbook on Structural Steelwork. The British Constructional Steelwork
Association Ltd.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

 
Bibliography
625
Lifting Operations and Lifting Equipment Regulations 1998. The Stationery Ofﬁce
Ltd.
Lighting for Building Sites. Electricity Association Services Ltd.
Loss Prevention Standards. Loss Prevention Certiﬁcation Board.
Mitchell’s Building Series. Pearson Education.
The Conﬁned Spaces Regulations 1997. The Stationery Ofﬁce Ltd.
The Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) Regulations 1996. The Stationery
Ofﬁce Ltd.
The Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations 1997. The Stationery Ofﬁce Ltd.
The Work at Height Regulations 2005. The Stationery Ofﬁce Ltd.
OTHER READING
Relevant advisory leaﬂets. The Stationery Ofﬁce Ltd.
Relevant AJ Handbooks. The Architectural Press.
Relevant BRE Digests. Construction Research Communications Ltd.
Relevant British Standards, Codes of Practice and EuroNorms. British Standards
Institution.
Relevant manufacturers’ catalogues and technical guides contained in the Barbour
Index and Building Products Index libraries.

 
access inside buildings 613–18
access into buildings 610–12
access to buildings 605–9
access to site 6
accessibility for the disabled 604–23
accommodation 13
stairs 537, 554–5, 559
aggregate
notional area 337, 340
transfer 442–3
air permeability 484–5
air-supported structures 43, 45–6
aluminium alloy
sheets 495
stairs 559, 561
angledozer 70–2
angle of repose 151
area lighting 32–6
artiﬁcial lighting 28–39, 484
asbestos regulations 273
asbestos survey 273–4
auger boring 185, 221, 223–6
automatic
ﬁre doors 361–4, 488
roof/ﬁre ventilators 488–90
backacter 77, 80–1
bafﬂe strips 383–6, 388
balanced base foundation 244, 247
barrel vault roof 522, 525–6
base plate 288
basement
storeys 322
timbering 153–6
basements 153–6, 248–56
beam ﬂoodlighting 35
Belfast truss 511
Belgian truss 508
bending moment 151
bending moment diagrams 284–5
bentonite 158–60
birdcage scaffold 125
bituminous grout 139
boreholes 231–2
boundaries 321, 325
bowstring truss 509, 511, 513
box caisson 173–5
BSP piles
cased 213–14
prescore 209–10, 221, 224, 227
Building Act 344
Building Regulations (Fire) 320–39, 342, 344
bulkhead lamps 37–8
bulldozer 70–4
buoyancy basement 254
bush hammering 442
butyl mastics 390
caissons 10, 173–8
box 173–5
monolithic 173–4
open 173–4, 176
pneumatic 173, 177–8
cantilever
base 244, 246
stairs 541, 545
carbon dioxide 341–2, 481
carbon emissions 481, 484
carbon monoxide 342
car parking 605
cartridge hammer 60–3
cased piles 213–14
cast-in-place piles 213, 216
cast-on ﬁnishes 443
cavity barrier 324, 403–4, 407
cement
grout 138
mortar 116, 118, 123
storage 116
centering 419
INDEX

 
Index
627
centre folding doors 568, 572
chemical grouting 138–9
Cheshire auger 221, 223
circulation in buildings 613–18
cladding panels 369–74
concrete 369–72, 384–8
claddings 369–414
classiﬁcation of soils 232–4
clay/cement grouting 138
climbing formwork 421, 424
coarse grained soils 232
coated steel sheets 495
cofferdams 10, 154, 156–7, 161–7
cellular 166–7
double skin 162, 165
sheet pile 161–71
single skin 161–4
coloured cement 439
column underpinning 203–4
combined foundations 243–5
compartment
ﬂoors 322–3
walls 322–4, 350, 352, 354–6
composite cladding panels 370, 373
composite piles 209–13
compressors 60–1
concrete
cladding panels 369–72, 384–8
ﬂoors 335
mixers 114–19
portal frames 287–93
pump 119, 121–2
stairs 537–53
escape 537
surface ﬁnishes 439–43
colour 439–40
texture 440–3
Conﬁned Spaces Regulations 161, 180
conoid shell roofs 522, 527, 529
Construction Regulations
Design and Management 148
Health, Safety and Welfare 8–10, 23, 43, 57,
59, 148, 161, 180, 261, 275
contact pressure 238–9
diagrams 239
contiguous
piling 136–8
continuous column foundations 243, 245
Control of Pollution Act 57
Control of Vibration at Work Regulations 60
convector heaters 46
conveyor 90
COSHH Regulations 13, 123, 274
cranes 94–113
erection 112–13
gantry 101
guyed derrick 101–2
lorry mounted 94–5, 97–8
mast 94–5, 100
monotower 103
scotch derrick 101–2
self propelled 94–6
skips and slings 106, 109
tower 103–8
track mounted 94–5, 99
cranked slab stairs 541, 544, 548, 550
culvert 189–90
curtain walling 392–401
cleaning 400–1
functions 392–4
glazing 397, 400, 409–14
inﬁll panels 375–81, 394, 397–8
cutting shield 185–6
daylight
factor 475–6
protractor 476
dead shoring 262, 264–5
decorations 580
deep
basements 248–57
bored wells 141, 145–6
deep trench
excavations 148–59
timbering 149–50, 152
dehumidiﬁer 47
demolition 12, 271–80
bursters 278
deliberate collapse 276
demolition ball 277
explosives 277
hand 276
methods 275–8
pusher arm 276
statutory notices 274
survey 271–2
thermal reaction 278
thermic lance 278
wire rope pulling 277
design of buildings for the disabled
604–23
dewatering 141–7
diaphragm walls 136, 154, 157–9, 248–54
diesel hammer 218–19
Disability Discrimination Act 604
dispersive lighting 32, 36
displacement piles 207–20
dome roofs 522–4
doors 361–4
ﬁre 361–4
smoke stop 361
double acting hammer 218
double angle piling 198, 202
double curvature shell roof 522, 528–9
double glazing 409–11, 414, 480, 482
double skin
cofferdams 161–2, 165
roof insulation 486–7
downdrag 207–8
dragline 82–3
drained
cavities 254–5
joints 372, 383–8
driven in situ piles 213, 215–16
driving rain 503–6
index 503–4
rose 504–5
drop hammer 216, 218
dumpers 87–8
dumpster 279–80

 
628
Index
earth monitor unit 26–7
efﬂorescence 440
electric hand tools 58–9
Electricity at Work Regulations 23, 27
electricity on building sites 22–7
Electricity Supply Regulations 23
electro-osmosis 145
elements of structure
321, 323
elevator 90
enclosing rectangle 337, 339
end bearing piles 205–6
end folding doors 567, 571
energy conservation 481, 484–6
erection of cranes 112–13
escape routes 341–61
escape stairs 358–61
excavation plant 70–85
excavations 148–60
basements 153–60
cofferdams 154, 157, 161–7
deep trench 149–50
diaphragm walls 154, 157–60
shafts 180–3
tunnels 181, 183–7
exposed aggregates 441–3
external escape stairs 363, 365
face shovel 77, 79
facilities in buildings 619–23
Factories Act 148, 344, 486
factory buildings 475–96
roofs 475–90
walls 491–6
falsework 419
festoon lighting 37–8
ﬁbre cement sheet cladding 480, 492, 495
roof 480
wall 492, 495
ﬁlled joints 382–4
ﬁnal pinning 203
ﬁne grained soils 232–4
ﬁre 307–65
Building Regulations 310, 320–40, 342
cavity barrier 324
doors 309, 345–7, 349–55, 357, 359, 361–4 
load 310–11
Loss Prevention Certiﬁcation Board 295, 327, 488
means of escape 341–65
problems 307–9
resistance 311–12, 327–35
stopping 321, 324
structural protection 310–40
tests 312–20
Fire Precautions Act 343–4
Fire Precautions Regulations
(Application for Certiﬁcates) 343–4
(Workplace) 342, 348
ﬁre protection
apartments (ﬂats and maisonettes) 350–5
dwelling houses 348–50
ofﬁces 353, 356–7
shops 356–9
Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sports Act 342
ﬂame lamp 37
ﬂat jacks 203
ﬂat top girder 507–10
ﬂats, means of escape 350–5
ﬂexible pavement 588–90
ﬂight auger 221, 223–4
ﬂoodlighting 32, 35, 37
ﬂying shores 262–3, 265, 268–70
folded plate roof 529, 531–2
folding
doors 567, 571–3
screens 573–4
footpaths 597–9
forced air heater 47
fork lift truck 87, 89
formwork 419–38
beam 432, 434
climbing 421, 424
column 434
patent 430–8
permanent 428–9
slab 432, 436
sliding 425–7
table 432, 438
wall 419–29
foundations 193–247, 287–91, 293–6
combined 242–7
soil investigation 231–5
types 242
framed temporary enclosures 43–5
frameworks 283–303
freezing of ground 139–40
French truss 508
Freyssinet, Marie Eugene 447
friction bearing piles 206–7
g values 486
gantry
crane 101
scaffold 128–30
gas expansion burster 278
gaskets 391
glass cladding 409–14
glass-ﬁbre-reinforced
gypsum board 332–3
plastics 370, 374
glazing 376–9, 397, 400, 409–14, 484–6
glued laminated frames 299–300
grader 74
gradients and ramps 606–8
grinding concrete 443
ground
anchors 453, 458–60
beam 228–9
freezing 139–40
water control 135–47
permanent exclusion 135–40
temporary exclusion 141–7
grouting 136–9
gust speeds 497
guyed derrick 101–2
hand demolition 276
hardrive precast pile 209–10
health and safety 9–13, 20, 123, 273, 275
Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals)
Regulations 11, 21, 27

 
Index
629
Health and Safety at Work, etc., Act 9, 13, 21, 23,
57, 148, 274, 342–4
heat loss 481, 484–6
hinges 284–6, 288–9, 293, 298
hoardings 273
hoists 90–2
horizontal
casting 443
joints 385, 387–8
hotels, means of escape 344–7
Howe truss 508
hydraulic burster 278
hyperbolic paraboloid roof 524, 529–31
illuminance 29, 31
inclined slab stair 538, 541–2
incoming site assembly 25–6
incoming site distribution assembly 25
inﬁll panels 375–81
arrangements 375–6
masonry 375, 380
metal 375, 378
timber 375, 377
injection anchors 458, 460
internal pavings 600, 602
intumescent strip 362
jack pile 195, 197, 204
jacking rods 426–7
jetted sumps 141–2
jointing 382–8
drained 382–5
ﬁlled 382–4
kentledge 203–4, 241
kicker 421–2, 424, 426, 435
ladders 12
lattice
frame 297
girder 477, 479, 481, 483
Lavoisier, Antoine 307
Lifting Operations Regulations 93, 110–11
lighting building sites 28–39
beam ﬂoodlighting 32, 35, 37
illumination 29
installations 32–9
lamps 31–9
local lighting 37, 39
walkway 37–8
lightweight
decking 481–3, 487
wall claddings 492–5
long life, loose ﬁt, low energy 415–16
loop tie 421, 424
lorries 86–7
lorry mounted crane 94–5, 97–8
Loss Prevention Certiﬁcation Board 295, 327, 488
Loss Prevention Standards 295, 327
louvred ﬁre ventilator 488–90
main distribution assembly 25–6
maisonettes, means of escape 350–5
Management of Health and Safety at Work
Regulations 21, 275, 342
masonry inﬁll panel 375, 380
mass haul diagram 71, 73
mast crane 95, 100–1
mastics 389–90
materials schedule 6–7
means of escape 341–65
apartments (ﬂats and maisonettes) 350–2
Building Regulations 342
hotels 344–7
ofﬁces and shops 353, 356–9
planning 343
stairs 358, 360, 363, 365
mercury lamps
discharge 31
tungsten 31
metal
cladding 408, 493–5
decking 481–3
inﬁll panel 375, 378
metal stairs 554–61
aluminium alloy 559, 561
escape stairs 363, 365, 554–5
pressed steel 555, 559–60
spiral stairs 555, 557
string beam 555, 558
miga pile 195, 197
mobile crane 94–101
monitor roofs 481–3
monolithic caisson 174
monotower crane 103
moulds 419 
movement on site 8
needle 262, 266–9
needle and pile underpinning 197–9
Noise at Work Regulations 57, 59
northlight roofs 477–81
notional boundaries 321, 325
ofﬁces, means of escape 353, 356–7
Ofﬁces, Shops and Railway Premises Act 344
oil bound mastics 390
open caisson 174, 176
open riser stairs 548, 551, 558
outlet assembly 25–6
over purlin insulation 487
pad foundations 242–4, 287
painting 580–92
maintenance 582
metals 581–2
preparation 580–1
timber 580–1
partitions 565–7
passenger lift 616–17
patent
formwork 430–8
glazing 479, 482
paving 585–602
see also roads
percussion bored piles 221–2
perimeter trench 153–5
permanent formwork 428–9
personal protective clothing and equipment
12–13, 46, 123

 
630
Index
Personal Protective Equipment at Work
Regulations 59, 123, 274
pile caps 228–9
pile framing 149, 151–2
piled foundations 205–30
caps 228–9
classiﬁcation 205–7
contracts 228, 230
displacement 208–20
downdrag 207–8
driving 213–20
end bearing 205–6
friction 206
grout injection 224
replacement 207, 220–6
spacing 206
testing 226, 228
piling
helmets 217
rigs 210–14, 217–18, 222–3, 225, 227
pinning 203
pipe jacking 185–7
pitched trusses 509–10
place of safety 348, 353
planar glazing 411, 413–14
plant 53–123
backacter 77, 80–1
bulldozer 70–2
cartridge hammer 60–3
compressor 58, 60–1
concrete mixer 114–16
concrete pump 119, 121–2
crane skip 106, 109
cranes 94–113
dragline 82–3
dumper 87–8
electric hand tools 58–9
face shovel 76–7, 79
fork lift truck 87, 89
grader 74
hoist 90–2
lorries 86–7
multi-purpose excavator 82, 84
power ﬂoat 64
pneumatic tools 60–1
pumps 65–7, 141–2
roller 66, 68–9
scraper 71, 74–5
skimmer 77–8
tractor shovel 74, 76
trencher 82, 85
vibrator 63–4
wire ropes 106, 110
plant
choice 53–7
cost comparisons 54–5
schedule 6
plastic failure 238, 240
plate bearing test 241–2
platform lift 613
plywood faced frames 301–2
pneumatic
caisson 173, 177–8
tools 58, 60–1
pocket foundation 288, 290, 294–6
polysulphide sealants 390–2
polyurethane sealants 390–1
polyvinyl chloride sheets 495
portal frames 284–304
bending moment diagram 285–6
concrete 287–93
steel 294–8
theory 283–6
timber 299–303
post-tensioning 453, 455
power ﬂoat 64
Pratt truss 508, 510
pre-tender
health and safety plan 6
programme 6
precast concrete piles 208–9
precast concrete stairs 546, 548–52
cranked slab 549, 550
open riser 548, 551
spiral 548, 552
straight ﬂight 546, 549
preformed concrete piles 209–11
preservation orders 7
pressed steel stairs 555, 559–60
pressure bulb 207, 235–7
pressurised stairways 363
Prestcore pile 224–7
prestressed concrete 447–61
ground anchors 453, 458–60
pretensioning 450, 453–4
principles 447–53
post-tensioning 453, 455
systems 462–71
pretensioning 450, 454
pretest method of underpinning 195
protected route 343–59
protected shaft 322–3, 356, 358
protected stairway 322–3, 348–60
protection 7
protective
clothing 46
screens 43–5
Public Health Act 274, 344
pumps 65–7, 141–2
punching shear 243
purpose groups 321, 327
pusher arm demolition 276
Pynford stooling 198, 200
queen tie 479
radiant heater 46
raft foundation 235, 237
rainscreen cladding 402–8
raking
shore 262–3, 265–7
struts 154, 156
Rankine’s formula 151, 153
ready mixed concrete 118–20
ready mixed mortar 116, 118
reduced voltage 24–6
reinforced concrete stairs 537–53
cantilever 541, 545
cranked slab 541, 544, 548
formwork 538–9
inclined slab 538, 541–2
spiral 546–8

 
Index
631
reinforced concrete stairs (continued)
straight ﬂight 538–40
string beam 541, 543
release agents 440
relevant boundaries 321, 325
replacement piles 207, 220–6
resin grout 139
rigid
pavements 591–5
portal frame 284–6, 290–2, 296–7
road 
forms 591–2
gully 595–6
roads and pavings 585–602
drainage 595–7
earthworks 586–8
ﬂexible pavements 588–91
footpaths 597–9
internal paving 600–2
joints 593–4
layout 585–7
rigid pavements 591–5
services 599–601
rock anchors 458–9
rollers 66, 68
roof structures 507–32
folded plate 529, 531–2
jointing 513–15
large span steel 514, 516–18
large span timber 507–14
shell roofs 521–9
space deck 514, 516–18
space frame 518–21
tension roof 532
rooﬂights 475
roofs 475–90
daylight 475–8
ﬁre ventilation 488–90
monitor 481–3
northlight 477–81
thermal insulation 484–5, 496
rotary bored piles 221, 223–4
rubble chute 278–80
salvage 272
sandwich construction 480, 487
sanitary accommodation 621–3
scaffolding 11, 124–31
birdcage 125
gantries 128–30
slung 124
suspended 125, 127
system 128, 131
truss-out 125–6
Scotch derrick 101–2
scraper 71, 74–5
sealants 389–91
section factor 327, 336
security 6
self propelled crane 94–6
shafts 180–3
shallow bored wells 141
shear leg rig 221–2, 227
shearing stresses 235–6
sheet piling 161–71
shell roofs 521–29
shops, means of escape 356, 358–9
shoring 261–9
dead 262, 264–5
ﬂying 262–3, 265, 268–9
raking 262, 263, 265–7
shot blasting 442
shuttering 419
sight lines 585–6
silicone rubber sealant 390–1, 409–10, 
412–14
Simpliﬁed Building Energy Method 484
single acting hammer 217–18
single skin cofferdam 161–4
site
accommodation 13–14
activities 7
control 9
efﬁciency 8
electricity 22–7
distribution 25–7
facilities 9–13
layout 7–20
accommodation 13–14
planning 5–21
lighting 28–39
time 29–30
organization structure 7
works 5–49
skimmer 77–8
skips 106, 109, 278–80
sliding
doors 567, 570, 572–3
formwork 425–7
slurry trench cut-off 136
smoke 341
logging 488–90
stop door 361
socket outlet assembly 25–6, 146
sodium discharge lamp 31
soil
classiﬁcation 232–4
investigation 231–2
solar controls 484, 486
solar energy transmittance 486
space deck 514, 516–18
space frame 518–21
spiral stairs 546–8, 552, 555, 557
splice joints 292, 298
sprayed vermiculite cement 331
sprinklers 308–9
stair lift 618
stairs 537–61
in situ concrete 537–46
metal 554–61
precast concrete 546, 548–52
Standard Assessment Procedure 484
static crane 101–5
staves 425, 427
steel
portal frames 294–8
preformed piles 209–12
roofs 294–8, 514, 516–21
sheet piling 161–73, 218, 220
steel stairs 554–9
escape 363, 365, 554–5
pressed metal 555, 560

 
632
Index
steel stairs (continued)
spiral 555, 557
string beam 555, 558
stepped access 608–9
storey height cladding panels 369–71, 373
straight ﬂight stair 538–40, 546, 548–9
strand 448, 462, 466–71
string beam stair 541, 543, 555, 559
strip foundation 242
structural
glass 409–14
sealant 409–10, 412–14
subsoil analysis 231–42
subsoil bearing capacity 238, 241
subsoil types 232–4, 238, 240–1
sulphate bearing soil 257
sump pumping 141–2
suspended ceiling 573, 575–9
sustainable construction 415–16
system formwork 430–8
table formwork 432, 437–8
tanked basement 254
temporary shelter 43–6
tendon 448, 450–7, 462–9
tension roof 532–3
thermal break 394, 397
thermal bridging 394
thermal insulation 481, 484
thermal reaction demolition 278
thermic lance 278
thin grouted membranes 136–7
three pin portal frame 284–5, 297–8
thrust boring 185
thrust frame 186, 188
timber
connectors 510–11, 513–15
ﬂoor 334
inﬁll panel 377
piles 208
portal frame 299–303
roofs 299–303, 507–14
timber and plywood gusset frames 301–3
timbering 149–53, 180–3
tower crane 103–8
track mounted crane 95, 99
tractor shovel 74, 76
transformer assembly 25–6
transportation plant 86–113
trapezoidal base 244–5
tremie pipe 159–60, 224, 256
trencher 82, 85
trial pit 231–2
triangle of ﬁre 308
triangular chart 233
tripod rig 222, 227
trucks 86–7
truss-out scaffold 125–6
trusses 507–13
tubular ﬂuorescent lamp 31
tucking framing 149, 151–2
tungsten lamp
ﬁlament 31
halogen 31
tunnel timbering 180–4
tunnelling 179–90
tunnels 181–8
two pin portal frame 284–5, 293, 298
U values 484–6, 496
under purlin insulation 487
underpinning 193–204
beams 201–2
columns 203–4
double angle piling 198–9, 202
ﬁnal pinning 203
hoopsafe method 198, 201
jack pile 195, 197
needle and piles 197–9
pretest method 195
Pynford stooling 198, 200
survey 193–4
wall 194–6
underreamed pile 224–5
underreaming tool 225
undersill cladding panel 370, 372
unprotected areas 321, 337, 339–40
urethane sealant 390–1
vacuum dewatering 602
vaulted roofs 522, 525–6
vertical
joints 383–5
pressures 235–7
vibrating
hammer 218, 220
pile driver 213–14, 217–18
vibrators 63–4
vibro pile 213, 216
vortex 498
walkway lighting 37–8
wall formwork 419–29
climbing 421, 424
permanent 428–9
sliding 425–7
traditional 420–3
wall functions 491
warren girder 508
water
bafﬂe 384–8
jetting 173, 220
waterprooﬁng basements 249, 254–5
weather effects 41–2
weathering steels 582
wedge bricks 203
wellpoint systems 141, 143–4
wind bracing 499–500
wind pressures 477–81
wind speed zones 501–2
window and door areas 484–5
window cleaning 400–1
winter building 40–9
wire rope pulling demolition 277
wire ropes 106, 110
Work at Height Regulations 9–13, 124–6, 128,
148, 161, 180, 261, 275
working temperatures 486

