SUSANNE K 
LANGER
▼
 
THIRD 
^
1 
REVISED 
'M H
rniTIHkl
mm 
EDITION 
yg\
V
TTTTlt] m  | 
■Q im Q

AN INTRODUCTION TO 
SYMBOLIC LOGIC
by
SUSANNE K. LANGER
Third Revised Edition
DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
NEW YORK

Copyright ©  1967 by Dover Publications, Inc. 
Copyright ©  1953 by Susanne K. Langer.
All rights reserved under Pan American and 
International Copyright Conventions.
Published in Canada by General Publishing Com­
pany, Ltd., 30 Lesmill Road, Don Mills, Toronto, 
Ontario.
Published in the United Kingdom by Constable 
and Company, Ltd., 10 Orange Street, London 
WC Z
This is the third revised (1967) edition of An 
Introduction to Symbolic Logic. The work was orig­
inally published by George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., in 
1937. The second revised and enlarged edition was 
first published by Dover Publications, Inc., in 1953.
International Standard Book Number: 0-486-60164-1 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 66-29834
Manufactured in the United States of America 
Dover Publications, Inc.
180 Varick Street 
New York, N.Y. 10014

TO MY MOTHER 
ELSE U. KNAUTH


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
T his new edition incorporates a number of corrections which 
were recently brought to the author’s attention and which 
were published together with the second edition as a list of 
errata. The author is grateful to Mr. James Forrester of 
Baltimore, Maryland, for his assiduous efforts in reviewing 
the book and compiling these many errata. Also, in this edi­
tion the bibliographic references have been brought up to 
date in an attempt to provide the reader with more current­
ly available sources.
October 1966. 
S. K. L.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
W hen this book was written, there was no systematic 
textbook of symbolic logic in English except the Symbolic 
Logic of Lewis and Langford. Perhaps Couturat's little 
summary, The Algebra of Logic, could also be regarded as 
a text, in that it set forth a system developed by various 
persons, notably De Morgan, Boole, and Schroeder, making 
no claim for itself to originality; but that was, after all, an 
outline rather than an introduction. For the rest, every 
exposition was still in connection with a contribution: 
Lewis's Survey of Symbolic Logic had been written mainly 
to propose the system of “strict implication," Russell raised 
many questions he did not claim to settle, Quine was almost 
completely original; and even the most “ digested" work 
(Lewis and Langford) entered into no elementary discussion 
of the basic logical notions— generalization, abstraction, 
relation, form, system. Such fundamental concepts were 
taken for granted.
They have always been taken for granted in that paragon 
of pure sciences, mathematics. It is the exceptional student 
of mathematics who knows why “ + ” is classed as an 
operation and “ = "  as a relation, or, indeed, why his exercises 
are called “examples"; or who understands, even at a fairly 
advanced stage of technical proficiency, just how algebra is 
related to arithmetic. His training is entirely in techniques 
and their application to problems; arithmetic, geometry and 
algebra are related for him only by the fact that their several 
techniques may converge on one and the same problem; 
that is to say, they are related practically but not intellec­
tually. The mathematics books used in schools dwell almost 
exclusively on rules of operation.
The prestige of mathematics is so great that logic, in 
emulating its method, tended to follow its pedagogy as well. 
The excellent textbooks of logic that have appeared during

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
7
the last fifteen years (see the supplementary new list appended 
to “ Suggestions for further reading") tend similarly to 
emphasize techniques— transformation, inference, consis­
tency-tests, decision-procedures— without detailed explana­
tions of the concepts involved. Now, mathematics has such 
obvious practical uses that to learn its tricks without 
understanding their significance is not entirely silly; but 
may the same be said of symbolic logic? Is the manipulation 
of its symbols of such practical importance that students 
should learn to perform logical operations even without 
knowing or questioning their conceptual foundations? It 
seems to me that despite its practical uses, which are still 
coming to light in unexpected quarters, its chief value is con­
ceptual. Through the influence of the various positivistic 
schools of philosophy, which are certainly the most promi­
nent and perhaps the most promising schools to-day, our 
scholars and educators are so imbued with methodology that 
they value the new logic primarily for its codification of the 
rules of inference. But that is only one of its contributions to 
human thought, and even to science; method can be over­
emphasized, and tends to be so in our intellectual life.
Symbolic logic is an instrument of exact thought, both 
analytic and constructive; its mission, accordingly, is not 
only to validate scientific methods, but also to clarify the 
semantic confusions that beset the popular mind as well as 
the professional philosopher at the present time. “ Semantics" 
(blessed word!) is in dire need of responsible analysis and 
skilful handling, and symbolic logic is the most effective 
preparation I can think of for a frontal attack on the pathetic 
muddles of modern philosophical thought. It blasts natural 
misconceptions with every move, not by a process of “ de­
bunking," but by purposeful and lucid construction of ideas.
Because this book seeks to present in clear, stepwise 
fashion the elementary concepts of logic, it cannot encompass 
as much technical material as other textbooks do. But to-day 
that is not a serious embarrassment, because it may be

8
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
supplemented by a standard text. One of the most useful 
devices now generally taught— the construction of “ truth- 
tables” to test the legitimacy of constructs in a truth-value 
system— is included in this edition as Appendix C. The 
reading list for further study has been brought up to date. 
For the rest, no revisions have been made except to correct 
errors, especially a major error in Chapter IV, which 
mysteriously escaped the several readers of the script, and 
has necessitated a little actual rewriting. Apart from these 
details, the book is unchanged— a book for the student who 
has no teacher, or for the teacher who has to meet too many 
naïve questions for his comfort. As such it is still alone in its 
class, at least for English readers; and in the belief that there 
is always a real need for at least one such book, I send my 
Introduction out anew.
July 1952. 
S. K. L.

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
Sym bolic L ogic is a relatively new subject, and the easiest 
methods of approach have not yet been determined. In 
point of arrangement, therefore, this Introduction has no 
predecessor. That is just why it was written: the need of 
some systematic guide, from the state of perfect innocence 
to a possible understanding of the classical literature, has 
become acute and commanding.
But, although my text has no predecessor, it has had at 
least one inspirer: my debt to Professor Sheffer of Harvard 
is too great to be expressed in any detailed acknowledgments. 
The underlying ideas of the book— its emphasis upon system, 
its progress from the specific to the general, from the general 
to the abstract, its whole treatment of logic as a science of 
forms— all this is due to his influence. How many lesser ideas 
also derive from him I am unable to say; it is the mark of a 
great teacher that one cannot render to him the things 
that are his. They become part of one’s own mentality, and 
ultimately of the intellectual commonwealth.
To my friend Professor Paul Henle I wish to express my 
heartiest thanks for his kindness and patience in reading the 
entire manuscript, uncovering various errors, and checking 
all the algebraic formulae. He has suggested many improve­
ments, and sometimes found simpler or briefer explanations 
or formal demonstrations. I would also thank Dr. Henry S. 
Leonard for some excellent suggestions, and for reading a 
part of the proof.
S. K. L.


CONTENTS
PAGE
INTRODUCTION 
17
CHAPTER I
THE STUDY OF FORMS 
21
1. The Importance of Form
2. Logical Form
3. Structure
4. Form and Content
5. The Value of Analogy
6. Abstraction
7. Concepts
8. Interpretation
9. The Field of Logic
10. Logic and Philosophy
CHAPTER 11
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
45
1. Relations and Elements
2. Terms and Degree
3. Propositions
4. Natural Language and Logical Symbolism
5. Some Principles Governing Symbolic Expression
6. The Power of Symbols
CHAPTER III
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE {continued) 
64
1. Context
2. Concepts and Conceptions
3. Formal Context
The Universe of Discourse 
Constituent Relations

12
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
4. Truth-Values
5. Related Propositions in a Formal Context
6. Constituent Relations and Logical Relations
7. Systems
Deductive
Inductive
Mixed
CHAPTER IV
GENERALIZATION
1. Regularities of a System
2. Variables
3. Values
4. Propositional Forms
5. The Quantifiers (a) and (3a)
6. General Propositions
7. The Economy of General Propositions
8. The Formality of General Propositions
9. Quantified Terms in Natural Discourse
c h a p t e r  v
CLASSES
1. Individuals and Classes
2. Membership in a Class
3. Concepts and Classes
4. “ Defining Forms“ of Classes
5. Classes and Sub-Classes
6. The Notion of a “ Unit Class“
7. The Notion of a “Null Class“
8. The Notion of a “ Universe Class“
9. Identity of Classes
10. The Uniqueness of “ 1“ and “ 0“
CHAPTER v i
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES
1. The Relation of Class-Inclusion
2. Consequences of the Definition of “ < “
3. Partial Inclusion or Conjunction of Classes

CONTENTS
*3
PAGE
4. Joint Inclusion, or Disjunction of Classes
5. The Principle of Dichotomy: A and -A
6. The Importance of Dichotomy: Negation
7. The Ubiquity of the Null Class
8. Complements of Sums and Products
9. Equivalent Expressions
CHAPTER VII
THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES 
157
1. Relations and Predicates
2. Classes as Indispensable Constructs in a System
3. Classes as “ Primitive Concepts“ in a System
4. The Generalized System of Classes
5. A Convenience of Symbolism: Logical Punctuation
CHAPTER VIII
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
182
1. The Class-System as a Deductive System
2. Postulates and Theorems
3. Truth and Validity
4. Postulates for the System of Classes, K  (a, b . . .)< 2
5. Relations and Operations
6. Operations as “Primitive Notions"
7. Postulates for the System, K{a, b . . .) -f, X , =
8. The “Calculus" of Classes
CHAPTER IX
THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC 
206
1. The Meaning of “Algebra," and its Relevance to the
Class-Calculus
2. Further Discussion of the Postulates
3. Principles of Proof: Substitution, Application, and
Inference
4. Elementary Theorems
Tautology, Absorption, Double Negation, Associa­
tion
5. The Duality of +  and x

x4
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
PAGE
6. The Definition of < , and Inclusion-Theorems
7. Comparison with Postulates for K(a, b . . .)< 2
8. Fundamental Traits of Boolean Algebra
c h a p t e r  x
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION 
240
1. Different Degrees of Formalization
2. Properties of Relations
3. Postulates as Formal Definitions of Relations
4. Boolean Algebra: the Calculus of Classes as a Formula
5. Other Interpretations of the Boolean Formula
6. The Two-Valued Algebra
CHAPTER XI
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS 
266
1. Properties of Logical Relations and Operations
2. Propositional Interpretation of Boolean Algebra
3. The Propositional Calculus as an Algebra of Truth-
Values
4. The Notion of “Material Implication'*
5. The “ Reflexiveness” of a Propositional Calculus
6. The Significance of a Propositional Calculus
CHAPTER XII
THE ASSUMPTIONS OF PRINCIPIA MATHEMATICA 
287
1. Limitations and Defects of the “Propositional” Algebra
2. Assertion and Negation
3. The Calculus of Elementary Propositions of Principia
Mathematica
4. The Most Important Theorems Involving V, 
and O
5. The Definition of Conjunction, and Some Important
Theorems
6. The Definition of Equivalence, and Some Important
Theorems*

CONTENTS
IS
PAGE
CHAPTER XIII
LOGISTICS
3 I 2
1. The Purpose of Logistics
2. The Primitive Ideas of Mathematics
3. Functions
4. Assumptions for a Calculus of General Propositions
5. The Definitions of “Class” and “Membership”
6. The Definition of “Relation”
7. The Structure of Principia Mathematica
8. The Value of Logic for Science and Philosophy
APPENDIX A
SYMBOLIC LOGIC AND THE LOGIC OF THE SYLLOGISM 340
APPENDIX B
PROOFS OF THEOREMS n a  AND n b  
350
APPENDIX C
THE CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF TRUTH-TABLES 
352 
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY 
356
INDEX
36i


I N T R O D U C T I O N
T he first thing that strikes the student of symbolic logic 
is that it has developed along several apparently unrelated 
lines: (i) the symbolic expression of traditional logic; (2) the 
invention of various algebras such as the algebra of logic, 
and with this the study of postulational technique; (3) the 
derivation of mathematics from a set of partially or wholly 
“logical” postulates; (4) the investigation of the “laws of 
thought,” and formal deduction of logical principles them­
selves. Every worker in the field drifts into one or another 
of these specialized endeavours. To a novice, it is hard to 
see what are the aims, principles, and procedures of logic 
per se, and what relations the several branches bear to it 
and to each other.
Underlying them all is the principle of generality which 
culminates in the attainment of abstractions. The several 
branches of logic are so many studies in generalization. The 
aims of logical research may vary with the interests of 
different investigators— one may be interested in the validity 
of Aristotelian logic, another in that of mathematics, a third 
in the canons of science, a fourth in the relation between 
mathematics and science or mathematics and classical logic, 
etc., etc.— but the procedure is everywhere the same: it is 
progressive systematization and generalization. Likewise, the 
criterion of success is the same: it is the discovery of abstract 
forms. The latter interest distinguishes logic from natural 
science, which is in search of general but not abstract 
formulae, i.e. formulae for concrete facts.
In order to prepare the reader for further study in any 
branch of symbolic logic, I have undertaken to discuss the 
characteristics of logical science as such, and show precisely 
how the branches spring from a parent trunk; to laydown 
the principles governing all symbolic usage, and to introduce 
him specifically to the most important systems of symboliza-

tion. To this end it is necessary for the student to have 
plenty of exercise in the actual manipulation of symbols. 
Nothing else can overcome their initial mystery. Symbolic 
logic, like mathematics, is a technique as well as a theory, 
and cannot be learned entirely by contemplation.
The book is built around the two great classic feats of 
symbolic logic: the Boole-Schroeder algebra, and the logistic 
masterpiece of Messrs. Whitehead and Russell, Principia 
Mathematica. Its chief aim is to prepare the student to 
understand the thought and procedure of these two very 
distinct developments of logic, and to see the connection 
between them. Most introductions to symbolic logic treat 
them without relation to each other; the student, who has 
mastered the algebraic symbolism and “postulational” 
method of Boole and Schroeder and feels reasonably familiar 
with the algebra as a system, suddenly finds himself at a 
new beginning, confronted with an entirely new realm of 
ideation, new symbols, new aims. Pedagogically, the transi­
tion is hard to effect. Therefore, this whole book has been 
planned to show very precisely that “algebra of logic” and 
“logistic” are all of a piece, and just how, why, and where 
they have diverged both in appearance and in sense.
The present work endeavours to be both a textbook of 
symbolic logic and an essay on that logic. It is essential that 
the student should learn both to “do” logic, and to know 
precisely what he is doing. Therefore the exposition of 
method is interspersed throughout with discussion of the 
principles and general import of the procedure. The actual 
material presented should enable him, at the end of a 
systematic course of study, to tackle the monographic 
literature of symbolic logic, and pursue it either in the 
direction of mathematics, or of postulational theory, or of 
logistic. Furthermore, it should in some measure prepare 
students of philosophy to understand the epistemological 
problems which arise in contemporary philosophy of nature, 
as presented by Poincare, Mach, Reichenbach, Carnap,
18 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

INTRODUCTION
19
Russell, Whitehead, and others. To this end it emphasizes 
the principles of logical construction; the possibilities and 
limits of formalization; equivalent conceptions, fundamental 
types of formulae, criteria of clarity, simplicity, generality, 
and above all, the difference between fecund and sterile notions. 
In this connection it seeks to show the bearing of logic on 
natural science and philosophy of nature.
Although it is intended as a text for a course in symbolic 
logic (usually a second course, though it presupposes no 
previous training) it should also serve as introductory 
reading for a course in philosophy of nature, or a course of 
general philosophy for upper classmen, or for graduate 
students seeking a key to the important monographic 
literature of symbolic logic and logistic. It aims to take no 
technical knowledge of logic, science, or mathematics for 
granted, but to develop every idea from the level of common 
sense, so that it may be comprehensible and useful also to 
the interested layman who desires a general discussion of the 
purpose, approach, technique, and results of symbolic logic.


C H A P T E R  I
THE STUDY OF FORMS
i. T he Importance of F orm
All knowledge, all sciences and arts have their beginning 
in the recognition that ordinary, familiar things may take 
on different forms. Our earliest experience of nature brings 
this fact to our notice; we see water freezing into a trans­
lucent block, or the snow which fell from heaven changing 
to water before our very eyes. A little reflection makes us 
aware of further changes. Where do snow and rain come 
from? From the vaporous masses we call clouds, the white 
mists that float in the air, and as the snow or rain descends 
those clouds dissolve. They have turned to water, or to 
white flakes. Where did the clouds come from? They are 
made by some process of transformation from the waters 
of the earth. Different forms of the same thing may be so 
widely diverse in appearance that it is hard to think of 
them as essentially the same substance.
All science tries to reduce the diversity of things in the 
world to mere differences of appearance, and treats as 
many things as possible as variants of the same stuff. 
When Benjamin Franklin found out that lightning is one 
form of electricity, he made a scientific discovery, which 
proved to be but a step in a very great science, for an 
amazing number of things can be reduced to this same 
fundamental “something,” this protean substance called 
“ electricity” : the force that holds the firmament together, 
the crackle of a cat’s fur, the heat in a flat-iron, the 
flickering Northern Aurora. Electricity is one of the 
essential things in the world that can take on a vast variety

22
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
of forms. Its wide mutability makes nature interesting, and 
its ultimate oneness makes science possible. But if we could 
not appreciate its different forms as different forms of one 
thing, then we would have no way of relating them to each 
other at all; we would not know why sliding our feet over a 
rug makes the brass door-knob give off a spark at our 
touch, or why the lightning has a preference for metal 
crosses on church-steeples, nor see any connection what­
ever between these two causal facts.
We have two kinds of knowledge, which may be called 
respectively knowledge of things, and knowledge about 
them. The former is that direct intimacy which our senses 
give us, the look and smell and feel of a thing— the sort 
of knowledge a baby has of its own bed, its mother’s breast, 
its usual view of ceiling and window and wall. It knows 
these objects just as it knows hunger or toothache; it has 
what Bertrand Russell has called “knowledge by acquaint­
ance” of certain things, a most direct and sensuous know­
ledge. Yet the baby cannot be said to know anything about 
beds, food, houses, or toothaches. To know anything about 
an object is to know how it is related to its surroundings, 
how it is made up, how it functions, etc., in short, to know 
what sort of thing it is. To have knowledge about it we must 
know more than the direct sensuous quality of “ this stuff” ; 
we must know what particular shape the stuff is taking in 
the case of this thing. A child may know the taste and 
feeling of a scrambled egg, without knowing that it is an 
egg which has been scrambled; in that case, he will not 
associate it with a boiled egg or an omelette. He does not 
know that these are different forms of the same thing. 
Neither does he know that in its raw, fresh, natural state 
the egg is a pristine form of chicken, and by more distant 
relationship an incipient chicken-dinner.
The only way we can do business at all with a rapidly 
changing, shifting, surprising world is to discover the most 
general laws of its transformations. The very word “trans­

THE STUDY OF FORMS
23
formation” tells us what we are dealing with: changes of 
form. The growth of science is the most striking demon­
stration of the importance of forms as distinguished from 
matter, substance, stuff, or whatever we call that which 
remains “ the same” when the form of a thing changes. 
Whenever we may truly claim to have a science, we have 
found some principle by which different things are related 
to each other as just so many forms of one substrate, or 
material, and everything that can be treated as a new 
variation belongs to that science.
2. L o g ic a l F orm
Not all the sciences deal with material things. Philology, 
for instance, deals with the relations among words, and 
although the production of a word in speech or writing 
always has a material aspect— involving paper and ink, or 
movement of speech organs— this aspect is not what 
interests the philologist. When the word undergoes changes 
of form, as for instance the word “pater” to “père” and 
“ father” and “padre,” this cannot be taken to mean that 
it changes its shape, as an egg changes shape when it is 
scrambled. The meaning of “form” is stretched beyond its 
common connotation of shape. Likewise, in the science or 
art of musical composition we speak of a rondo form, sonata 
form, hymn form, and no one thinks of a material shape. 
Musical form is not material; it is orderliness, but not shape. 
So we must recognize a wider sense of the word than the 
geometric sense of physical shape. And indeed, we admit 
this wider sense in ordinary parlance; we speak of “ for­
mality” in social intercourse, of “good form” in athletics, 
of “ formalism” in literature, music, or dancing. Certainly 
we cannot refer to the shape of a dinner or a poem or a dance. 
In this wider sense, anything may be said to have form that 
follows a pattern of any sort, exhibits order, internal con­
nection; our many synonyms for “ form” indicate how 
wide the range of this notion really is. We speak of physical,

grammatical, social forms; of psychological types; norms of 
conduct, of beauty, of intelligence; fashions in clothing, 
speech, behaviour; new designs of automobiles or motor 
boats; architectural plans, or the plans for a festival; 
pattern, standard, mode, and many other words signify 
essentially the same thing in specialized usage or subtle 
variations of meaning. But all these words refer to “form" 
in that most general sense in which we are going to use it 
here.
It is this most general sense which we always give to 
the word in logic. Therefore I shall call it “logical form," 
to distinguish it from “ form” in any more restricted sense, 
particularly its usual connotation of physical shape.
3. S t r u c t u r e
“ Logical form” is a highly general notion, and like all 
generalizations, it covers a large number of particular 
ideas. But if these various particular ideas may all be called 
by one general name, they must have something— some 
general feature— in common. But what is common to, say, 
the form of declensions and conjugations in a language, 
and the topography of a continent? Both are “ forms” in 
the logical sense. What bridge can be thrown across the gap 
between such widely diverse notions as the shape of the 
continent, and the orderly sequence of word-endings in the 
language? Is there any justification for applying the same 
name to such different matters ?
The bridge that connects all the various meanings 
of form— from geometric form to the form of ritual or 
etiquette— is the notion of structure. The logical form of 
a thing is the way that thing is constructed, the way it is 
put together. Any thing that has a definite form is con­
structed in a definite way. This does not mean, of course, 
that it has been deliberately put together by somebody; 
forms may be preconceived, or they may be natural, or 
accidental. The famous “ Old Man of the Mountain” in
24 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE STUDY OF FORMS
25
New Hampshire is an accidental rock-formation, put 
together like a human profile; a piece juts out just a little, 
as eyebrows do, then there is a gap like the hollow of the 
eyes, a large projection, exactly as a nose projects, a straight 
piece, a fissure beneath it, as the mouth is beneath the lip, 
another straight piece ending in a projection with a great 
overhang that resembles the projection of a strong chin 
and jaw. The outline of the rock is made up like a human 
profile; the powers of nature— glacier, water, and frost—  
have accidentally constructed the "Old Man of the Mountain” 
out of granite; the cliff, which has nothing else in common 
with human flesh, yet resembles a man by its form. Nature 
is full of most elaborate constructs, from the crude structure 
of strata in a geological fault to the infinitesimal dynamic 
pattern of protons and electrons in an atom. One must not 
make the mistake of associating "structure” always with 
something put together out of parts that were previously 
separate. A snowflake is a detailed construct of very recog­
nizable individual parts, but these have not been "put 
together” ; they crystallized out of one homogeneous drop of 
water. They were never separate, and there has been no 
process of combination. Yet the flake has a structure (in 
fact, an interesting structure) and is therefore called a natural 
construct.
Now let us consider a form which is not geometric, i.e., 
which is not a shape: the form, for instance, of the ordinary 
musical scale, in the so-called "major mode,” do, re, mi, 
fa, sol, la, si, high do. There are eight notes in this 
scale, counting the customary repetition of do. But to 
have a major scale we must have more than the eight 
notes; we must have them put together in just this parti­
cular way. The major scale is constructed by letting these 
notes follow each other in just this order. Supposing we 
put them together differently, as for instance; do, mi, re, 
fa, si-la sol, do (high). We have then constructed a per­
fectly singable melody, but it is not a major scale. It has

the notes but not the form of the scale. We may group 
them yet differently, and construct another tune; sol-mi-do 
(high), si, la-fa, re-do. Here we have the same notes again, 
but the musical form is not the same; this is a “ skippy” 
tune in waltz-time. The two melodies have every note in 
common; that is to say, exactly the same ingredients have 
gone into both. Were these ingredients material things, we 
should say the two constructs were made of exactly the 
same substance, and differed only in form. Logically we 
may say this even though the “ substance” is immaterial, 
being a collection of individual sounds, for order and 
arrangement among sounds is just as much “ logical form” 
as the arrangement of parts in a physical thing. If we 
compare these tunes with each other and with the con­
ventional “major scale,” we see even in this rudimentary 
and trivial case how very diverse may be the appearance, 
the character, the value, of things which are merely different 
forms of the same given material. This fact should always 
be borne in mind; often it is hard to believe that a philo­
sopher or a scientist has any chance whatever of reducing 
widely different things to the same category, because they 
look and “ feel” so incommensurable, but he has found a 
principle by which he can describe them as two forms of one 
substance, and we are amazed to see how precisely and 
usefully he then relates them. Logic is full of such surprises; 
that is why it sharpens and broadens one's outlook, 
scientific or metaphysical, upon the whole world,
4. F o rm a n d  C on ten t
So far, we have dealt entirely with the different forms 
that may be exhibited by the same material, and which 
may make it look like an essentially different thing in each 
case. The “material” may not be physical at all; the words 
“matter” and “substance” are not very fortunate, because 
they only reinforce our natural prejudice in favour of 
imagining form as shape, and whatever has form, as stuff.
26 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE STUDY OF FORMS
27
Logicians usually avoid this connotation by calling that 
medium wherein a form is expressed, its content. We may 
say, then, that we have so far considered how one and the 
same content may appear in several forms.
But equally important is the fact that one and the same 
form may be exemplified by different contents. Different 
things may take the same form. Consider the example given 
above (page 25) of structure determining form— the great 
stone face called the “ Old Man of the Mountain.” There it 
was pointed out that the cliff had nothing in common with 
a human face, except the arrangement of its parts, but this 
arrangement gave it the form of a man's profile. A form 
which is usually expressed in flesh and blood is here arti­
culated in stone; the extraordinary content arouses our wonder 
and perhaps our superstitious imagination.
A very much homelier example of different contents for 
the same form, one which confronts us repeatedly in 
practical life, derives from the fact that two suits of the 
same pattern may be cut of different cloths. In this day of 
standardization, any number of suits, in any number of 
materials, exhibit exactly the same form, and if we chose 
to sew up the paper pattern from which they were cut, 
instead of leaving it spread out flat, we would have yet 
another suit made of paper. Likewise, one may think of a 
bread-pudding, a fruit-jelly, a blanc-mange, etc., all cooled 
in the same mould; they will, then, all have the same form, 
but differ in material, or content. There is nothing un­
familiar about the notion that diverse things may follow the 
same pattern. Everybody takes it for granted, just as every­
body grants the fact that one substance may assume various 
forms.
The form of a suit or a pudding is, of course, a geometric 
form, a shape; so is the form of a face, whether it is 
moulded of flesh or of stone. But non-material structures 
may also have various contents. Suppose we return to our 
former example of a non-material construct, the C-major

28
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
scale, and imagine it transposed one half-tone higher, so 
that it reads: C*, D#, E#, F#, G#, A#, B#, high C#. Not a 
single note in the C#-major scale figures in the scale of 
C-natural. * 
Yet the two have exactly the same form, 
which is commonly called “ the major scale/' It is a peculiar 
fact that in music forms are easier to recognize than con­
tents; most people can tell whether a given succession of 
tones is a major scale or not— they will mark any deviation 
from the form— but very few can tell whether the given 
major scale is C, C#, or any other particular key. A normal 
ear will apprehend the form, but only persons blessed with 
so-called “ absolute pitch" can identify the content.
Furthermore, two different contents for the same form 
may vary so widely that they belong to entirely different 
departments of human experience. Suits of cloth or paper 
are, after all, equally tangible, physical contents for a geo­
metric form. Tones in a major scale are all equally auditory 
contents. However we vary our material, as from C to C#, 
D to D#, etc., our scale is still a musical form, and its content 
is some sort of sound. But why is the standard arrangement 
of these tones called a “scale"? “ Scale" means “ladder." 
The fact is that ordinary, common sense sees a similarity 
of form between the order of successive tones, each new tone 
being a little higher than its predecessor, and the successive 
rungs of a ladder, each a little higher than the one before 
it. The word “scale" or “ladder" is transferred from one to 
the other. In this way, what was once the name of a certain 
kind of object has become the name of a certain form. Any 
series whose separate parts are arranged so that each is 
either higher or lower than any other part, is a “scale." 
Thus we speak of “going up in the social scale," or call a 
certain series of successively “higher" spiritual experiences
* On the piano the two scales appear to have certain tones in 
common, because E# and F, B# and C, respectively, fall on the 
same key; but that is due to the inaccuracy of a “tempered” 
instrument. On a violin they are distinguishable.

THE STUDY OF FORMS
29
“the ladder of faith,” without any danger of being mis­
understood, and being thought to refer to a series of tones, 
or a wooden contraption with steps or rungs. Everybody 
admits the propriety of our usage, by analogy; and analogy 
is nothing but the recognition of a common form m different 
things.
5. T h e V a l u e  o f A n a l o g y
Whenever we draw a diagram, say the ground-plan of 
a house, or a street-plan to show the location of its site, or 
a map, or an isographic chart, or a “curve” representing 
the fluctuations of the stock-market, we are drawing a 
“logical picture” of something. A “logical picture” differs 
from an ordinary picture in that it need not look the least 
bit like its object. Its relation to the object is not that of a 
copy, but of analogy. We do not try to make an architect’s 
drawing look as much as possible like the house; that is, 
even if the floor is to be brown, the floor-plan is not con­
sidered any better for being drawn in brown; and if the 
house is to be large, the plan need not convey an impression 
of vastness. All that the plan must do is to copy exactly the 
proportions of length and width, the arrangement of rooms, 
halls and stairs, doors and windows. The narrow dash that 
represents a window is not intended to look like one; it 
resembles the object for which it stands only by its location 
in the plan, which must be analogous to the location of the 
window in the room.
The dissimilarity in appearance between a “logical 
picture” and what it represents is even more marked in the 
case of a graph. Supposing a graph in the newspaper conveys 
to you the growth, acceleration, climax and decline of an 
epidemic. The graph is spatial, its form is a shape, but the 
series of events does not have shape in a literal sense. The 
graph is a picture of events only in a logical sense; its con­
stituents, which are little squares on paper, are arranged 
in the same proportions to each other as the constituents of

3<>
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
the epidemic, which are cases of illness. *If the epidemic 
has lasted twenty days, the graph will show twenty vertical 
columns, and if the third day of the epidemic brought sixty 
cases of illness, the third column of the graph will show 
black squares up to sixty. Most of us have no difficulty in 
seeing an order and configuration of events graphically; 
yet the only form which the graph and the events have in 
common is a logical form. They have an analogous structure, 
though their contents are more incongruous than cabbages 
and kings.
It is only by analogy that one thing can represent another 
which does not resemble it. By analogy, a map can 4'mean” 
a certain place; and obviously it cannot “mean” any place 
which it does not fit, i.e. which has not a contour analogous 
to the map. If two things have the same logical form, one 
of them may represent the other, and not otherwise. Six 
mice may represent six horses, but even a fairy godmother 
would have had a hard time making six horses out of five, 
or seven, mice. Likewise, seven lean cows may mean seven 
poor years, and seven fat cows, seven years of plenty; but 
had the cows been all alike they would have lost their 
significance, for the analogy would have been broken. A 
rosary of beads may represent the number and order of 
prayers to be repeated, for the beads can be moved one 
after another, as the successive prayers are accomplished; 
if the beads were strung so they could not move, the band 
might be a necklace or a bracelet, but it could not be a 
rosary, for it would not represent what the shifting of the 
prayer-beads is supposed to stand for.
Perhaps the most elaborate structure ever invented for 
purely representative purposes is the syntactical structure 
of language. Its content, in itself, is trivial; it is a system 
of various little sounds, not beautiful and arresting sounds, 
like the content of musical structures, but rather ridiculous 
little squeaks and hums and groans. Yet in their arrange­
ment and organization, these noises have such a developed

THE STUDY OF FORMS
3i
pattern that they constitute a great system, any fragment 
of which has its logical form, its so-called *''grammatical 
structure.” What this structure can represent, is the order 
and connection of ideas in our minds. Our ideas are not mere 
fleeting images without definite relations to each other; 
whenever we are really thinking, not merely dozing in a 
haze of passive impressionism, our ideas exhibit sequence, 
arrangement, connection, a definite pattern. Some ideas 
belong together more intimately than others; some lead to 
others; sonje arise out of others, etc. It is this pattern which 
the elaborate pattern of language reflects. Separate words 
usually (though not always) stand for separate impressions 
or ideas, and such words are put together to make sentences, 
which express completed, organic thoughts, or propositions. 
Because the ideas we want to represent are of this complex 
sort, language cannot be a mere collection of words, such as 
a spelling-book might offer. Language must have a more 
articulated logical form. As soon as we are old enough to 
apprehend this form (not to comprehend it, for that is 
another matter), we learn to speak; our concerted ideas are 
reflected in the concerted patterns of sound that we utter. 
There are many ways of combining the elementary notions 
in our minds, and the commonest, most general of these 
ways are reflected in the laws of language, which we call 
syntax. Syntax is simply the logical form of our language, 
which copies as closely as possible the logical form of our 
thought. To understand language is to appreciate the 
analogy between the syntactical construct and the complex 
of ideas, letting the former function as a representative, or 
“logical picture,” of the latter.
Bertrand Russell has given an excellent account of the 
sort of “form” that belongs to language, and by virtue of 
which we understand it to mean what it does. I quote the 
passage chiefly because it shows clearly the distinction of 
form and content in a sentence, and the relation of that 
form to structure, or arrangement of parts.

"In every proposition and every inference there is, 
besides the particular subject-matter concerned, a certain 
form, a way in which the constituents of the proposition or 
inference are put together. If I say, ‘Socrates is mortal/ 
‘Jones is angry/ ‘The sun is hot/ there is something in 
common in these three cases, something indicated by the 
word ‘is/ What is in common is the form of the proposition, 
not an actual constituent. If I say a number of things about 
Socrates—that he was an Athenian, that he married 
Xantippe, that he drank the hemlock— there is a common 
constituent, namely Socrates, in all the propositions I 
enunciate, but they have diverse forms. If, on the other 
hand, I take any one of these propositions and replace its 
constituents, one at a time, by other constituents, the 
form remains constant, but no constituent remains. Take 
(say) the series of propositions, ‘Socrates drank the hem­
lock/ ‘Coleridge drank the hemlock/ ‘Coleridge drank 
opium/ ‘Coleridge ate opium/ The form remains unchanged 
throughout this series, but all the constituents are altered. 
Thus form is not another constituent, but is the way the 
constituents are put together. . . . We might understand 
all the separate words of a sentence without understanding 
the sentence: if a sentence is long and complicated, this is 
apt to happen. In such a case we have knowledge of the 
constituents, but not of the form. We may also have 
knowledge of the form without having knowledge of the 
constituents. If I say, ‘Rorarius drank the hemlock/ 
those among you who have never heard of Rorarius 
(supposing there are any) will understand the form, without 
having knowledge of all the constituents. In order to 
understand a sentence, it is necessary to have know­
ledge both of the constituents and of the particular in­
stance of the form. . . .  Thus some kind of knowledge 
of logical forms, though with most people it is not ex­
plicit, is involved in all understanding of discourse. It is 
the business of philosophical logic to extract this know­
32 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE STUDY OF FORMS
33
ledge from its concrete integuments, and to render it ex­
plicit and pure.” *
The great value of analogy is that by it, and it alone, we 
are led to seeing a single ‘ 'logical form” in things which 
may be entirely discrepant as to content. The power of 
recognizing similar forms in widely various exemplifications, 
i.e. the power of discovering analogies, is logical intuition. 
Some people have it by nature; others must develop it (and 
I believe all normal minds can develop it), and certainly 
all may sharpen the precision of their understanding, by a 
systematic study of the principles of structure.
6. 
A b s t r a c t i o n
The consideration of a form, which several analogous 
things may have in common, apart from any contents, or 
“concrete integuments,” is called abstraction. If we speak 
of the major scale apart from any particular key, we are 
treating it as an abstracted form. If we note what is common 
to a couple of days, a pair of gloves, a brace of partridges, 
and a set of twins, we are abstracting a form which each of 
these items exhibits, namely its numerosity, two. If we 
speak simply of a couple, without reference to any content, 
or simply of “ two-ness” or “two,” we are treating of this 
form in abstracto. Or again, if we consider the order in 
which hours of a day follow each other— always one after 
another, never two at once following the same predecessor 
— and then regard the order of inches on a ruler, or rungs 
on a ladder, or the succession of volumes of the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, or the sequence of Presidents of the United 
States, we see at once that there is a common form in all 
these progressions. They are all analogous, all different 
contents for a pattern which is a section of the ordinal 
number series: first, second, third, etc. It is easy to see that 
it is but a short step from the recognition of analogies, or
* “ L ogic as the Essence of P hilosophy“ in Our Knowledge of the 
External World, London, 1914.

different contents for the same form, to abstraction, or the 
apprehension of that form regardless of any particular 
content.
Most people shy at the very word “ abstraction.” It 
suggests to them the incomprehensible, misleading, difficult, 
the great intellectual void of empty words. But as a matter 
of fact, abstract thinking is the quickest and most powerful 
kind of thinking, as even an elementary study of symbolic 
logic tends to show. The reason people are afraid of 
abstraction is simply that they do not know how to handle 
it. They have not learned to make correct abstractions, and 
therefore become lost among the empty forms, or worse 
yet, among the mere words for such forms, which they 
call “ empty words” with an air of disgust. It is not the 
fault of abstraction that few people can really think 
abstractly, any more than it is the fault of mathematics 
that not many people are good mathematicians. There is 
nothing in our educational curriculum that would teach 
anyone to deal in abstracted forms. The only notable 
abstraction we ever meet is that empty form of arithmetic 
which is called algebra; and this is taught to us in such a 
way that most of us can pass a fairly hard examination in 
algebraic technique without even knowing that algebra is, 
indeed, the abstracted form of arithmetical calculations. 
No wonder, then, that we feel unfamiliar with pure forms! 
No wonder that some philosophers and almost all laymen 
believe abstraction to be vicious and intrinsically false. 
Without logical insight and training, they cannot go very 
far before falling into confusion, and then they blame the 
abstract nature of the ideas they are trying to handle for 
their own inability to handle them. Yet these same people 
are not afraid that a problem in, say, distances and horse­
powers will become “purely verbal” if they apply algebra 
to its solution; that is because they know the manipulation 
of their algebra, and have learned to choose such forms as 
actually can be applied.
34 
AN introduction to sym b o lic logic

THE STUDY OF FORMS
35
There is nothing abstruse, esoteric or “unreal" about 
abstract thinking. As Lord Russell remarks, everybody has 
“some kind of knowledge of logical forms"; it only needs to 
be made explicit, conscious, and familiar. And this is what 
the study of logic is supposed to do. We all deal with pure 
forms in a practical, intuitive way. Whenever we draw the 
ground-plan of a house, we not only see the analogy between 
the plan and the prospective edifice, but we intend to convey 
the mere form of the house without any indication or thought 
of the material to be used in building it. When we buy a 
paper pattern for a dress, we intend to use the form, with­
out mentally committing ourselves to follow the suggestion 
on the envelope that it be made in blue chiffon or flowered 
voile. When we compose a tune, we recognize it whether it 
be sung, played, or whistled, and even if it is transposed into 
a higher or lower key. It is the form that interests us, not 
the medium wherein this form is expressed.
7. C o n c e pt s
This process of attending only to the form of a thing or 
a situation, and conveying this “ abstracted" form, which 
we carry out unconsciously as part of our common sense, 
becomes increasingly important when we pass from mere 
common sense to scientific thinking. Such abstracted forms 
are our scientific concepts. And because there are an astound­
ing number of analogies in nature, we can form concepts 
which apply to a very great range of events. In fact, a few 
powerful concepts can systematize, or perhaps revolutionize, 
a whole field of observation, experiment, and hypothesis, 
called “ a science."
Consider, for instance, how many motions follow the 
general pattern called “oscillation." The swing of a pendulum, 
the swaying of a skyscraper, the vibration of a violin-string 
over which the bow is passing, the chatter of our teeth on a 
cold day— all these are examples of the type-form called 
“ oscillation." Now, if we were to define this type-form, we

36
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
would omit all reference to skyscrapers and fiddle-strings 
and teeth, and describe it, probably, as “rhythmic motion 
to and fro,,, or in some such terms that would connote only 
the sort of motion we are talking about and not the sort 
of thing that moves. Probably, each of us has learned the 
meaning of oscillation through a different medium; but 
whether we gathered our first idea of it from the shaking of 
Grandpa’s palsied hands— or from the quiver of a tuning- 
fork— or from the vibration of a parked automobile with the 
motor running— however our mental pictures may differ 
from each other, they have one thing in common: they are 
all derived from some rhythmic motion to and fro. The 
things exemplifying this type of motion are not necessarily 
alike in other respects; the swaying skyscraper and the 
vibrating violin-string are certainly not alike in appearance, 
origin, or purpose. But their motions have the common 
property of going rhythmically to and fro. This property is 
the logical form of their motions, and so we may call all 
these motions diverse instances of the same form.
When we consider the common form of various things, 
or various events, and call it by a name that does not 
suggest any particular thing or event, or commit us to any 
mental picture— for instance, when we consider this common 
form of various movements, and call it by a name such as 
“ oscillation”— we are consciously, deliberately abstracting 
the form from all things which have it. Such an abstracted 
form is called a concept. From our concrete experiences we 
form the concept of oscillation.
The fact that so many things in nature exemplify the 
same forms makes it possible for us to collect our enormously 
variegated experiences of nature under relatively few 
concepts. If this were not the case, we could have no science. 
If there were not fundamental concepts such as oscillation, 
gravitation, radiation, etc., exemplified in nature over and 
over again, we could have no formulae of physics and dis­
cover no laws of nature. Scientists proceed by abstracting

THE STUDY OF FORMS
37
more and more fundamental forms (often seeing similarities 
among the abstracted forms, or concepts, themselves, and 
thus gathering several, concepts into one); and by finding 
more and more things that fall under certain concepts, 
i.e. that exhibit certain general forms.
8. 
I n t e r p r e t a t i o n
The latter of these two procedures, finding applications 
for concepts, is called interpretation of an abstract form. It 
is a process of looking about for kinds of things to which a 
certain form belongs. If, for instance, we would interpret 
the abstract concept of “rotation," we would think of the 
rolling of a wheel, the motion of a heavenly body, the 
spinning of a top, the whirl of a propeller. Wheel-rolling, 
globe-turning, top-spinning, propeller-whirling, are all inter­
pretations of the form, all different contents for the abstract 
concept “rotation." In one sense, two exactly similar spinning 
tops might be taken as two contents for one form, but in 
order to avoid confusion I shall call them two instances of 
one content for the same form. By two contents for a form 
I shall always mean two sorts of thing having the same 
form, i.e. falling under the same concept. That two instances 
do so goes without saying. There will be further discussion 
of this usage when we come to the distinction between 
“concrete" and “specific" elements.
Scientific concepts are forms which are exemplified in 
some general and important part of reality. The natural 
sciences all deal with abstract forms, but only with a selected 
set of them, namely those which will take a special sort of 
thing for their contents. Physics deals with any forms which 
may have physical things for their contents. Biology deals 
with just those forms that apply to living matter. That is 
to say, the special sciences take cognizance of all those and 
only those conceptual patterns, or formulae, to which they 
can give some interpretation relevant to their chosen subject-

matter. Interpretation is the reverse of abstraction; the 
process of abstraction begins with a real thing and derives 
from it the bare form, or concept, whereas the process of 
interpretation begins with an empty concept and seeks 
some real thing which embodies it. In the sciences as in 
ordinary life, we are interested in forms only in so far as 
they are the patterns of certain things that concern us. 
Most of the abstract concepts we employ are handed down to 
us— in language, like all our simple adjectival and adverbial 
concepts; or by deliberate training, like our common know­
ledge of mathematics, mechanics, and so forth. We learn 
them as they apply to certain things; we learn number by 
counting things, shapes by fitting objects together, qualities 
by comparing various articles, rules of conduct by gradually 
collecting and judging instances of good and evil. The 
easiest way to teach a formula is to present several instances 
and point out their common formal properties. But this is 
not the easiest way to discover new patterns, which no one 
points out to us. There are, essentially, two ways in which 
new forms of things are discovered: (i) by abstraction 
from instances which nature happens to collect for us 
(the power to recognize a common form in such a chance 
collection is scientific genius); (2) by interpretation of 
empty forms we have quite abstractly constructed. The 
latter way is usually the easier, because if we know a great 
variety of possible forms, we have at least an idea of what 
we are looking for. Technical inventions are discoveries of 
this sort; the inventor rarely, if ever, propounds a new 
principle, i.e. a new fundamental concept of physics, but 
cleverly combines the principles he has learned into a new 
interesting pattern; he may then construct a physical thing, 
or actual model, of that pattern. His abstract form— the 
calculation he makes on paper— is a mathematical theorem 
from purely conceptual principles; his application of it to 
the realm of physics is an interpretation; and his model is 
an instance of this interpreted special form (and of the
38 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE STUDY OF FORMS
39
principles it combines). He is concerned essentially about 
interpretations, and his abstract work is all performed for 
the sake of finding physically interpretable forms.
9. T h e F ie l d  o f L o g ic
But if we would hold aloof awhile from any special science 
and really gain insight into the great storehouse of forms 
which may be interpretable physically, or psychically, or 
for any realm of experience whatever, we must consider 
abstracted patterns as such— the orders in which ?ny things 
whatever may be arranged, the modes under which any­
thing whatever may present itself to our understanding. 
This sounds like an utterly impossible and elusive task; to 
a casual observer it certainly seems as though there must 
be as many incommensurable forms in the world as there 
are different kinds and departments of experience. But, 
happily for our restricted intellects, this is not the case. 
Many things which look utterly unlike in experience— far 
more unlike than the motions of skyscrapers and of violin- 
strings, or tops and planets— are really made up in very 
similar ways, only it requires a good deal of practice to see 
this. “ Orderliness and system,” said Josiah Royce,* “ are 
much the same in their most general characters, whether 
they appear in a Platonic dialogue, or in a modem text­
book of botany, or in the commercial conduct of a business 
firm, or in the arrangement and discipline of an army, or 
in a legal code, or in a work of art, or even in a dance or in 
the planning of a dinner. Order is order. System is system. 
Amidst all the variations of systems and of orders, certain 
general types and characteristic relations can be traced.” 
The tracing of such types and relations among abstracted 
forms, or concepts, is the business of logic.
* “ The Principles of L o gic“ in W indelband and R u ge’s Encyclo­
paedia of the Philosophical Sciences, vol. i, p. 81 (further volum es 
did not appear).

4o
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
io . L o g ic a n d  P h il o so p h y
What is the use of a science of pure forms? The use of 
it becomes apparent when we consider what just one branch 
of this science, pursued for its own sake, has added to 
human knowledge— I mean the branch of logic which we 
call mathematics. It has made all the quantitative sciences 
possible by showing us what relations may hold among 
quantities, i.e. by telling us what to look for. Some mathe­
matical truths probably were discovered in the course of 
practical application, but by far the greater number, and 
among them all the more subtle and elusive (and, ultimately, 
most useful) mathematical relations, were found by people 
who gave their undivided attention to the study of abstract 
mathematical forms. Now, what mathematics is to the 
natural sciences, logic, the more general study of forms, is 
to philosophy, the more general understanding of the 
world. The aim of philosophy is to see all things in the world 
in proportion to each other, in some order, i.e. to see reality 
as a system, or at least any part of it as belonging to some 
system. But before we can find order and system, we must 
know something about them, so as to know what we are 
looking for, or we shall not recognize them when we find 
them. Systematic patterns, however, are so much easier 
to study in absiracto, without the confusing irrelevancies 
of any particular case, that although every science may 
be said to deal with this topic, logic is the science of order 
par excellence. Philosophy and science deal with interpreted 
patterns; it is not hard to see that this work is greatly 
facilitated by a thorough command of the abstract science 
of forms. In the case of philosophy especially, logic is a well- 
nigh indispensable tool. It illuminates problems that have 
been obscure for hundreds and even thousands of years, 
by showing us a possible new formulation of some thoroughly 
muddled question; it does away with innumerable notions 
that are merely different names for one and the same con­

THE STUDY OF FORMS
41
cept; it reveals inconsistencies in our most cherished 
thoughts, and suggests remarkable generalizations of ideas 
that seemed quite local in their application.
Logic is to the philosopher what the telescope is to the 
astronomer: an instrument of vision. If we would become 
astronomers, we must learn the use of the telescope— not 
impatiently, chafing to get at more important work, but 
systematically, finding a certain intrinsic interest in +^e 
mysteries of the instrument itself. Great scientific dis­
coveries have often rewarded men who laboured over slight 
improvements of their instruments. The same is true for 
logic"; if we try to learn it in a cursory fashion, grudging the 
time and thought we would rather put on metaphysical 
problems, constantly wondering whether we have not 
acquired enough logic for our purposes, we shall never see 
the world in its clear light. We must work with a genuine 
interest in our restricted, abstract subject if we want it to 
lead us naturally to philosophical topics, as indeed it will—  
to problems of epistemology, metaphysics and even ethics. 
Logic applies to everything in the world; but we must 
understand its powers and difficulties thoroughly before 
we can use it. A telescope does not of itself find the object 
we wish to see, nor does it show us any thing at which we 
direct it, unless we know precisely how to adjust the focus 
— that is to say, unless we are truly familiar with the instru­
ment. Logic, likewise, becomes useful and important to the 
philosopher only after he has really grasped its technique. 
Any technique seems hard to the novice because at first he 
is clumsy in his ways; just as a learner at the typewriter 
feels that his work is made needlessly hard by the exactions 
of the touch-system, so the beginner in symbolic logic is 
apt to think the use of symbols is a silly device to make 
thinking more difficult. But as the typist soon learns to 
appreciate the tremendous advantage of a method that 
dispenses with sight, so to the logician the use of symbols 
soon becomes an inestimable aid in reasoning. Therefore

we should try from the very beginning to operate with 
symbols, not to write long sentences first and then translate 
them into the required symbolism. Clear expression is a 
reflexion of clear concepts; and clear concepts are the 
goal of logic.
Summary
The first step in scientific thinking is the realization that 
one substance may take many forms. Many unlike things 
may be “understood” as dissimilar forms of the same 
material. To understand a thing is not merely to know, 
have sensory knowledge of it, but to have knowledge about 
it, to know how it is made up and what other forms it 
might take.
“Form” does not necessarily mean “shape.” “Logical 
form” means “structure,” or the way a thing is puttogether. 
The many synonyms for “ form” show that we use it in a 
highly general sense. “ Structure,” again, does not mean a 
deliberate putting together, or even any actual consecutive 
combination of parts that first are given separately. It 
means an orderly arrangement of parts, that may be found 
in nature as well as in artefacts.
A construct is not necessarily made out of physical sub­
stance. Therefore “form” should be distinguished not from 
“matter” but from “ content” The content of a logical 
form may be psychical, musical, temporal, or in some other 
way non-physical, just as well as physical.
Two things which have the same logical form are 
analogous. The value of analogy is that a thing which has 
a certain logical form may be represented by another which 
has the same structure, i.e. which is analogous to it. The 
most important analogy is that between thought and 
language. Language copies the pattern of thought, and 
thereby is able to represent thought. To understand language 
requires some apprehension of logical form.
Abstraction is the consideration of logical form apart
42 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE STUDY OF FORMS
43
from content. The reason why people distrust abstractions 
is simply that they do not know how to make and use them 
correctly, so that abstract thought leads them into error 
and bewilderment. Abstraction is perhaps the most power­
ful instrument of human understanding.
Abstracted forms are called concepts. Because nature is 
full of analogies, we can understand certain parts of it in 
the light of a few very general concepts. All things to which 
the same concept applies are analogous. Scientists attempt 
(i) to find many forms for a given content; (2) to abstract 
a common form from diverse contents, and so form concepts; 
(3) to apply their concepts to more and more kinds of thing, 
i.e. find new contents for their abstracted forms.
Finding possible contents for an empty form is called 
interpretation. The sciences deal only with forms which 
may be interpreted for their special subject-matter.
Logic deals with any forms whatever without reference 
to content. A knowledge of forms and their relations greatly 
facilitates any study of their possible applications. Logic 
is a tool of philosophical thought as mathematics is a tool 
of physics.
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What is meant by “transformation” ? Why is this notion 
important for science?
2. What is the difference between knowledge of a thing and 
knowledge about it? Do you think a dog has both kinds of 
knowledge?
3. What is a “logical picture” ? How does it differ from an 
ordinary picture?
4. What is a “construct” ? Is it always something that has been 
put together? Is a cloud a “construct” ?
5. What is meant by “content” ? What is its relation to form, 
to “stuff” ? May two forms have the same content? May one 
form have different contents ?
6. What is meant by calling two things “analogous” ? What is 
the importance of analogy?

44
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
7. Why is the grammatical structure of language important? 
What, if anything, have the Lord's Prayer and the “Pater 
Noster" in common? What are their respective constituents? 
Have they any common constituent(s) ?
8. What is abstraction ?
9. What is the opposite of “abstraction"?
10. What rôle does abstraction play in science? Do we ever use 
abstract notions in “common-sense" thinking? Have abstrac­
tions practical value ?
11. Are scientists interested primarily in abstractions? If so, 
why?
12. What is the relation of logic to science? Do you think it 
has any value for everyday life ?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK 
(avo id e x am ple s given in the text)
1. Name three things that may appear in different forms.
2. Give two examples of “logical form" other than “shape."
3. Give an example of a “construct" not deliberately made.
4. Name two things, one material and one immaterial, which 
are analogous in form.
5. What name would you give to the structure exemplified by 
(1) a string-quartet, (2) a group of bridge-players, (3) a 
“good-luck" clover?
6. Give two different interpretations of the abstract concept 
“progression." To what respective fields of experience (e.g. 
different sciences) do they belong?
7. Make up a proposition with a different content, but the same 
form as: “Plato was the teacher of Aristotle."

C H A P T E R  II
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
i .  R e l a t io n s a n d  E le m e n t s
In the previous chapter, it was said that the logical 
form of a thing depends upon its structure, or the way it is 
put together; that is to say, upon the way its several parts 
are related to each other.
Without adding or subtracting any of the factors in the 
composition of a thing, we may utterly change the character 
of that thing by changing the relations of the various factors 
to each other. For instance, consider the three names, 
“ r o n a l d ,” “ r o l a n d ,” and “ a r n o l d ” ; they contain exactly 
the same letters, but the relative positions of these letters 
— that is to say, their mutual relations of “before” and 
“after,” or “right” and “left”— are different in each case, 
and utterly different words result. We may relate these 
six letters differently yet, and spell the name of an English 
poet, “ l a n d o r.” What has been changed is not any of the 
letters, but the relations of “before” and “ after” among 
these letters.
Not only in artificial devices like the letters that spell a 
word, but in physical things as well, the importance of 
relations may be seen in the very constitution of objects 
themselves. Consider, for instance, the character of a coral 
rock. Its factors are the shells of millions of lilliputian indi­
viduals, all in definite relations to each other. Each tiny 
shell coheres with some other, and that with another, and 
so forth. Ultimately they all cohere together in an immense 
lump. So long as their relations to each other— i.e. the fact 
that one is to the right of another, or on another, or near it, 
far from it, etc.,— can undergo no change, they form a 
solid island. But let some monstrous grinding force change 
their relations, so that shells which were to the right of

46
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
others are now to the lefty shells which were near each other 
now are distant, and so forth— and what has happened? 
The rock is no more! Perhaps not a single one of its factors 
has been destroyed, but if they no longer cohere, and thus 
keep their spatial relations to each other rigidly unaltered, 
the rock is destroyed. A mere shifting pile of corals is 
obviously not a rock. The very nature of the object depended 
on the cohesion of its parts. And cohesion is not itself a 
factor of the rock, but is a relation among the factors.
If you watch a young child playing with blocks, you will 
see him experimenting with the various relations into which 
the blocks may enter with one another, and learning to 
identify the forms which result. He piles one upon another, 
and a third upon this, and a fourth upon that; by using 
only the single relation we call “upon,” he constructs a 
column. He sets one block to the right of another and puts a 
third one across the two; the result is the simplest sort of 
lintel. And so he proceeds, to a wall, a house, a pyramid. 
He does not change the blocks in any way, he merely changes 
that all-important thing called structure, by changing the 
relations among his blocks.
Two things of very diverse material may, as I have 
already pointed out, have the same form. This is because 
many different things may enter into the same relations. Not 
only blocks may be set one above another, but also boxes, 
stones, books, or a thousand other things. A column of lines 
of print is just as much a column as one of bricks, because 
the same relations hold among the respective parts of both 
structures. When we speak of “a column” as such, we are 
quite indifferent to the nature of its material, being con­
cerned only with things ranged above or below each other. 
“Above” and “below” are the essential relations which all 
columnar structures have in common, and by virtue of which 
they possess a common form.
Suppose, however, a column to be perfectly homogeneous, 
made of a single stone or tree-trunk or cement casting.

How can we say, then, that it is made of parts ranged 
one above the other? It has no parts, in the sense in which 
a column of blocks or books has parts. There are no dividing 
lines. What is supposed to be above what? Well, for one 
thing, the top is above the base. Also, if we draw parallel 
rings round the column, any such ring will be above or below 
any other. The rings divide the column into imaginary parts 
which are ranged in order. We may draw an infinite number 
of rings, but this relation will always obtain among them. 
In the previous chapter I pointed out that the elements in 
a structure need not be physically separate, first existing 
alone and then brought into combination. They must only 
be conceptually distinguishable; and ideal parts are geo­
metrically distinguishable, though they be set off from 
each other by artificial, or even purely imaginary, lines. 
Therefore, even though a column be not composed of pieces 
set one upon another, it does allow us to conceive of its 
possible sections as ranged in this fashion; and it is simply 
on the basis of such a conception that we call an upright 
beam, or an obelisk, or even the air in a chimney or the 
mercury in a thermometer tube, a column. We can dis­
tinguish parts among which the governing relation of the 
column-form holds.
Since the related “ parts” of a structure may not be 
parts at all, but may be physically inseparable qualities, 
aspects, locations, or what not, just as well as actual ingre­
dients, I shall not refer to them as related parts, but as 
elements of the structure. Thus, in a column, whatever is 
ranged “ above” or “below” something else, is an element. 
Every structure is at least ideally composed of elements. 
In a musical scale, the elements are tones; in orthography, 
letters; in penmanship, they would be the height, curvature 
and slant of lines which compose letters. Note that in this 
last case the elements are not parts, but merely abstractable 
factors; properties, not portions, of writing. But since these 
properties may be related to each other, since we may
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
47

speak of the relative height and width, the spacing, the 
rounding, etc., of letters, these characteristics may be taken 
as elements in the structure called “ a handwriting." Like­
wise, in judging a musical instrument, say a violin, one 
considers the proportions among certain attributes of its 
sound— the timbre, clarity, volume, and so forth— rather 
than the relations of individual tones to each other. Here 
the various tone-qualities are the elements of a structure 
which we call "the tone" of the violin. They are not 
separable parts of anything, but only distinguishable in 
conception.
Now, the elements alone do not constitute a structure; 
we must know these elements and also the way they are 
combined, that is, we must know the relations that hold 
among them. In forming a conceptual picture of a construct, 
as we do when we "describe" it in language, we must have 
items in the language-picture to stand for the elements, 
and also items of language to represent the relations. There 
are so many ways of relating elements that relations must 
have names. In fact, one might say that the conveyance of 
relationships among elements is the real function of language. 
If our interest centred entirely upon things, we would not 
need the whole system of nouns and adjectives, verbs and 
prepositions, which we call a "language"; grunts and 
demonstrative gestures would serve almost all purposes of 
communication. But relations are not things we can point 
to; they cannot be known by pure acquaintance; a know­
ledge of how the elements of a thing belong together is 
always a knowledge about this thing, and requires a logical 
picture, such as a grammatical word-picture, for its ex­
pression. We must have signs for elements and signs for 
their relationships. And that is just what we have in language. 
Such words as: "upon," "to the right of," "near," "greater 
than," are names for relations. They do not denote elements 
in a construct, but the way these elements are arranged. 
The same is true of such words as "loves," "hates," "knows,"
48 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
49
"writes to,” "escapes from” ; they are expressive of rela­
tionships into which certain elements may enter with each 
other.
2. 
T e r m s  a n d  D e g r e e
The elements which are connected by a relation are 
called its terms.
Every relation must have terms in order to become visible 
to the understanding at all. A relation may be likened 
to the keystone of an arch, and its terms to the walls, which 
are combined by the keystone, and at the same time are 
its sole supports. Thus in a structure involving a relation 
there must always be elements, too, which serve as terms 
of the relation; such words as "upon,” "loves,” "gives,” 
etc., cannot stand alone, but must function in a complex of 
other words denoting elements.
Different relations require different numbers of terms to 
support them. The relation "being North of,” for instance, 
requires two terms; we say "Montreal (is North of) New 
York.” On the other hand, the relation "between” requires 
three terms; we could not say that one term is between 
another, but should have to introduce another element, 
and say that the first is between the second and the third. 
Thus we might say "Cologne is between Paris and Berlin,” 
but we could not say, simply, "Cologne is between Paris” 
or "Cologne is between Berlin,” because "between” is a 
three-termed relation. "Being North of” is two-termed; for, 
although we may say "Montreal is North of Albany and 
New York,” what we mean is "Montreal is North of Albany” 
and "Montreal is North of New York.” That is, "between” 
requires three terms to complete its sense, whereas "North 
of” makes sense with two.
The most elementary characteristic of any relation is 
the number of terms it requires. If it connects two elements 
at a time it is said to be dyadic, if three, triadic, if it has four 
terms, tetradic, and so forth. This numerosity is called the

degree of the relation.* Some relations, as for instance 
"among," have no definite degree, but are merely more 
than dyadic, so we may call them polyadic relations. "Greatest 
of," "least of," and all other relations expressed by super­
latives, are polyadic. (Some writers call any relation of more 
than dyadic degree "polyadic," even when it is definitely 
tetradic, pentadic, etc.; if one deals with relations of very 
high degree, this usage is obviously justified. But, since 
we shall deal only with fairly simple structures, I prefer to 
reserve the expression "polyadic relation" 
for relations 
whose terms are of indefinite number.)
3. P r o po sit io n s
The commonest means of expressing a relation among 
several terms is the proposition. Whenever we assert that 
something is the case, we mention a relation among certain 
elements. Whether we say "Brutus killed Caesar," or 
"Abraham was the father of Isaac," or "The winters in 
Siberia are cold," each proposition asserts that a certain 
relation holds among certain terms. Any linguistic state­
ment of a proposition must contain words for terms and for 
at least one relation; for the statement is a word-picture 
or "logical picture" of a state of affairs (real or imaginary), 
and a state of affairs is a complex of related elements. If 
we assert a proposition containing only one relation, such 
as "Brutus killed Caesar," the number of names for ele­
ments that figure in the assertion tells us of what degree 
the relation must be. By certain conventions of syntax, 
i.e. by the fact that "killed" is an "active" verb-form, 
and that "Brutus" stands before and "Caesar" after the 
relation-sign (here, the verb), we know how the complex 
of "Caesar and Brutus in the relation killing" is put 
together.
Any symbolic structure, such as a sentence, expresses a
* This appellation is due to  Professor H . M . Sheffer. C. S. Peirce 
called the property “ ad in ity”— a peculiarly Peircean word.
50 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

proposition, if some symbol in it is understood to represent 
a relation, and the whole construct is understood to assert 
that the elements (denoted by the other symbols) are thus 
related. In ordinary language, the verb usually performs 
both functions; it names the relation and asserts that it 
holds among the elements. But if, as is often the case, the 
relation is named by a preposition or other kind of word, 
then an extra verb is required to assert the relation. This 
is the “auxiliary” use of the verb. For example, in “Brutus 
killed Caesar,” the verbfumishesboththe name of therelation, 
and the assertion that it holds; but in “the book upon the 
table,” the preposition “ upon” merely names a relation, 
without making any assertion; to make the structure a pro­
position we need an auxiliary word, e.g., the verb “is,” to 
assert that the relation holds between “ the book” and “ the 
table.” “The book is upon the table” is a proposition. The 
relation is named, and is said to hold between the elements.
4. N a t u r a l  L a n g u a g e  a n d  L o g ic a l S y m b o l is m  
Unfortunately, in the matter of picturing the exact 
logical structure of a state of affairs, i.e. in expressing 
propositions, language is very elusive. In the first place, it 
does not by any means employ certain kinds of symbols 
for terms and reserve others for relations. Very broadly 
speaking, nouns represent elements, and verbs, relations. 
In a logically perfect language this would always be the 
case; but in the traditional idioms of the human race, it is 
not. We use all sorts of word-complexes, all sorts of syn­
tactical devices, to convey now elements, now relations, 
so that natural language, if we were to take it as a guide, 
would often lead us into wrong logical analyses. For instance, 
“wife” is a noun, and in the proposition: “Jones killed his 
wife,” it denotes a term; but if we say: “Xanthippe is the 
wife of Socrates,” the relation is “being the wife of.” In this 
case, the noun “wife” names the relation, and the verb “is” 
asserts that it holds between its terms.
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
51

To avoid such ambiguity, as well as a great many other 
difficulties, we replace words by arbitrary symbols— numbers, 
letters, or other signs— which are not subject to the vagaries 
of literary grammar and syntax, but present a simplified 
grammar of logical structure. In such a symbolism, one 
character stands for one term, another for another term, 
etc., and a symbol of different type entirely represents the 
relation. Let us suppose that A and B stand for Jones and 
for his wife, respectively; Then we would not denote the 
relation of killing by “ K,“ which is another Roman capital 
letter, but by some radically different symbol. We might 
use an arbitrary sign, an arrow or a curl, or some different 
type of letter, or combination of letters. Let us take a 
combination of lower case Roman letters, “kd.“ Then the 
proposition symbolically presented reads:
A kd B
On the other hand, let C stand for Xanthippe and D for 
Socrates, and the relation “is the wife of“ be represented by 
“wf“ ; the second proposition is, then:
C wf D
There is no danger of confusing “wife“ as a term with 
“wife“ as a relation, if one is called “ B“ and the other “wf.“ 
Our eye shows us the structural difference.
In this symbolism we do not distinguish between verbs, 
prepositions, adjectives, and nouns which denote relations; 
for the present, we shall always merely name relations, and 
take the function of the auxiliary verb for granted. A 
relation symbol placed among symbols for elements shall 
always have the force of the verb in a sentence, unless 
otherwise specified; e.g., “between“ is a preposition, but if 
we let “bt“ stand for the relation this preposition names, 
and take A, B, and C for its terms, then
A bt B, C
is to be read: “A is between B and C.“
52 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
53
Now, ordinary speech is rich in meanings, is full of 
implicit ideas which we grasp, by suggestion, by association, 
by knowing the import of certain words, word-orders, or 
inflections. That is what gives natural language its colour, 
vitality, speed, its whole emotional value and literary 
adequacy. A few words can convey very much. But this 
same wealth of significance makes it unfit for logical analysis. 
Many apparently simple statements express, in telescoped 
form, more than one proposition. Thus in “Jones killed his 
wife“ the word which a grammarian would call the direct 
object does more than a direct object should, namely to 
denote the element to which Jones stood in the relation of 
killing; it also conveys that this element stood in the rela­
tion “wife“ to Jones. In other words, “Jones killed his wife“ 
means more than “A kd B,“ though that is its grammatical 
form; it signifies
A kd B and B w f A
Here we see how a noun comes to have the same name as a 
relation; by the grammatical aid of the possessive pronoun 
“his,“ it manages to represent a whole proposition. Where 
propositions are thus telescoped into compact linguistic 
expressions it is, of course, the easiest thing in the world 
to miss their logical form completely.
But confusion of elements and relations, and the con­
traction of several propositions into one, are not even the 
only charges to be brought against natural language as a 
revealer of logical forms. The very nature of the relation 
may be obscured. A dyadic relation may look like a triadic 
one, as in the example adduced above: “Montreal is North 
of Albany and New York.“ Also, two relations of different 
degree may be expressed in perfectly homologous ways. 
For example, consider these two statements:
(1) I played bridge with my three cousins.
(2) I played chess with my three cousins.

They seem to present relations of exactly similar structure. 
But in fact, the relation called “bridge-playing” requires 
four terms, i.e. it is tetradic, whereas chess-playing is 
dyadic. Linguistic grammar gives no indication whatever 
of this distinction. But if we operate with symbols the 
difference of structure becomes immediately apparent; 
indeed, the second proposition proves to be ambiguous, for 
it embodies two different meanings. Let A stand for the 
speaker, B, C, D, for the three cousins respectively, “br” 
for the relation “bridge-playing,” “ch” for “playing chess.” 
Then the first statement may be expressed:
A br B, C, D
The second, however, means either that the speaker played 
with each of the three cousins in turn, or that the three 
banded together as one opponent for a very superior player. 
Upon the first alternative, three propositions have been 
collected linguistically into one statement; on the second, 
one of the terms of the relation “chess-playing” is a com­
posite term. But the relation is dyadic, none the less. If we 
chose the former meaning, the symbolic rendering would be:
AchB
AchC
AchD
For the latter, we should write:
A ch (B-C-D)*
But upon either assumption, it is evident that “br” and 
“ch” are relations of different degree, so that the two pro­
positions which in language seem to differ only by the
* T h e hyphen, which m igh t also be replaced b y  + ,  expresses an 
operation, w hereby tw o term s are com bined into one; bu t this 
subject belongs to a later chapter, so the possibility of uniting 
B -C -D  m ust here be taken  on faith.
54 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
55
denotation of one word actually represent situations of 
different logical structure. In ordinary conversation, though 
errors occur through ambiguity, they are not usually of a 
serious nature; they are righted by explanations and common 
sense. But when our whole purpose in quoting propositions 
is the study of their logical forms, then a medium which 
obscures such essential differences as that between a dyadic 
construct and a tetradic one is simply inadequate. We 
must resort to a symbolism which copies the structure of 
facts more faithfully.
When a relation-symbol stands in a construct, the number 
of terms grouped with it reveals the degree of the relation. 
But when it is not actually used, but merely spoken of, it 
is sometimes convenient to have some way of denoting its 
degree. This may be done by adding a numerical subscript; 
for example, “ kd2” means that “killing” is dyadic, “bt3” 
th at“between” is triadic. The upshot of treating the above 
propositions, (i) and (2), symbolically, is that we find 
we have relations of different degree, namely “ ch2” and “br4.”
Furthermore, natural language has a strong tendency 
to let one word embody many meanings. This fallacy, 
which we exploit in making puns and twisting arguments, 
seems, at first sight, to be another of those weaknesses of 
language against which we ought to be guarded by common 
sense and the vigilance of English teachers. We are supposed 
to know that
“The morning breaks, and with it breaks my heart,”
involves an amphibolous use of the word “breaks”— a 
change from one meaning to another, neither of which, in 
this case, happens to be the “real” (or literal, or primary) 
meaning. But ambiguity (and with it amphiboly), especially 
in words denoting relations, is much more general than 
ordinary, casual reflexion would reveal to us, and in logic 
at least it may have unsuspected disastrous effects. Few 
people are aware that they use so common and important

a word as “is” in half a dozen different senses. Consider, 
for instance, the following propositions:
(1) The rose is red.
(2) Rome is greater than Athens.
(3) Barbarossa is Frederick I.
(4) Barbarossa is a legendary hero.
(5) To sleep is to dream.
(6) God is.
In each of these sentences we find the verb “is.” But each 
sentence expresses a differently constructed proposition;
(1) 
ascribes a property to a term; 
in (2) “is” has logically only an auxiliary value of 
asserting the dyadic relation, “greater than” ; 
in (3) “is” expresses identity]
in (4) it indicates membership in a class (the class of 
legendary heroes);
in (5) entailment (sleeping entails dreaming); 
in (6) existence.
So we see that in (1) and (2) it is only part of the logical 
verb— it serves only to assert the relation, which is other­
wise expressed— and in the remaining four cases, where “is” 
does function as the whole logical verb, it expresses a 
different relation in every case. It has at least four different 
meanings besides its use as auxiliary. Our linguistic means 
of conveying relations are highly ambiguous. But the 
expression of relations is the chief purpose of language. 
If we were interested only in things and not in their arrange­
ment and connection, we could express ourselves with our 
forefingers. Things are easy to identify; two beings named 
“John,” when actually present, are not likely to be treated 
erroneously as one person (like the two heroes called “ the 
King” in Gilbert and Sullivan's Gondoliers), because it is 
apparent to every one that there is this John and that John; 
but two relations named “is” are very likely to meet with
56 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

such a fate, because relations become explicitly known—  
become visible, so to speak— only in discourse. Symbolic 
expression, through words, diagrams, or other such means, 
is their only incarnation. So the study of relations is neces­
sarily bound up with a study of discourse. But if the latter 
obscures and disguises relations, as it often does, there is 
no escape from error, except by adopting another sort of 
discourse altogether. Such a new medium of expression is 
the symbolism of logic. In this ideography, the four pro­
positions wherein “is” really names a relation would not 
appear to have a common form, but would wear the badge 
of their distinctions plainly in view:
(3) Barbarossa =  Frederick I
(4) Barbarossa c legendary hero
(5) To sleep c  to dream
(6) E! God
Only by a refined and ever more precise symbolism can we 
hope to bring logic out of language.
5. S o m e  P r i n c i p l e s  G o v e r n i n g  S y m b o l i c  E x p r e s s i o n  
Since the simplest structures— complexes of one relation 
and its terms— yield propositions, we may regard pro­
positions as our first material for analysis; and the task 
to which we immediately address ourselves is the adequate 
expression of the forms which those propositions really have, 
i.e. the forms involved in their meanings, and not their 
customary idiomatic renderings. Now, this art of expression 
cannot be learned by thumb-rule. Symbolic logic is a new 
science, wherein every student may be something of an 
innovator, and with exception of a few usages which have 
become fixed through the classical literature (such as the 
four signs for different meanings of “is,” quoted above), 
everyone is free to introduce any symbols that serve his 
purpose. But of course one must have some way of knowing 
explicitly what each sign stands for, that is, one must know
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
57

the interpretation which is to be attached to it. Therefore it 
is advisable to state that a given symbol equals by inter­
pretation a certain term or relation. This phrase is con­
veniently abbreviated “ =  int.” Thus, in explaining the 
symbolism in the four propositions above, I should head 
my discourse with the glossary:
“ = ” =int “identical with”
“ € ” =int “membership in the class”
“ c  ” =int “ entailment”
“E!” =int “ there exists”
And in the example of the cousins playing bridge and chess, 
a complete notation of the propositions (accepting the first 
alternative for the meaning of “ I played chess with my 
three cousins”) would be:
“A ” =int “the speaker”
“ B,” “C,” “D” =int “cousins” (respectively)
“br4” =int “bridge-playing”
“ ch2” =int “chess-playing”
(1) A br B, C, D*
(2) A ch B 
AchC 
A ch D
The symbols here adopted are arbitrary. We might as well 
have written i, 2, 3, 4 for our elements, or a, j8, y, 8; and the 
relation “br” might have been expressed by a picture of a 
playing card, and “ ch” by a chess-pawn, or any other sign 
that suggested itself. But certain general principles of 
symbolization should be borne in mind in the selection of 
logical characters:
(1) Signs for elements and signs for relations should be 
different in kind.
* W hen a relation is used, the subscript is om itted, because the 
construct itself reveals the degree of the relation.
58 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
59
That is, it would not do to use C and B for the rela­
tions, nor be advisable to use even CH and BR, as 
long as the elements are represented by Roman 
capitals.
(2) Signs for relations should not strongly suggest rela­
tions which are not meant. This principle will be 
elucidated later, when we classify relations by other 
properties than mere degree. In effect, it means that 
one should not represent “ above” by a symbol such 
as O, suggesting “within,” or “to right of” by an 
arrow pointing left, or “br” by a chess-pawn. It is 
advantageous to choose symbols so that they suggest 
their meanings; but
(3) Suggestiveness should never be allowed to interfere 
with logical clarity or elegance.
For instance, if we wanted to state that Chicago lies 
between New York and Denver, we might well use 
C for Chicago, and D for Denver, but to use NY for 
New York would be confusing, because, if we use 
Roman capitals for elements, the use of two letters 
would suggest some combination of two elements. 
If we wanted a more suggestive symbolism than A, 
B and C, we might use C, D and N, or C, D and Y ; 
but not, C, D and NY.
(4) The assignment of arbitrary meanings to signs with 
traditionally established uses should be avoided. 
That is to say, one should not use =  to mean chess­
playing, or € for “ to the right of,” because these 
signs are pre-empted for certain important relations 
and generally used with those connotations.
(5) Signs should be easy to write and to recognize, and 
be as compact as possible. A chess-man, unless it 
were highly conventionalized, would be a poor symbol 
for “ ch” because it would be too elaborate. Also, if 
we did conventionalize it, we should be careful not 
to let the resultant figure look like a 2, an i, or any

other symbol, if such a symbol is to occur in our 
constructs. If a symbol is to appear in print, there 
are further problems of typographical convenience, 
but these need not be considered here.
6. T h e P o w e r  o f S y m b o l s
An intelligent use of symbolism is of utmost importance 
in the study of structure; one should try from the beginning 
to develop definite, consistent, and easy habits of ex­
pression. There is something uncanny about the power of a 
happily chosen ideographic language; for it often allows 
one to express relations which have no names in natural 
language and have therefore never been noticed by anyone. 
Symbolism, then, becomes an organ of discovery rather 
than mere notation. Consider what a development resulted 
in the science of mathematics from the introduction of a 
symbol for “nothing” ! It has given us the better part of 
our arithmetic, columnar addition and subtraction, long 
division, long multiplication, and the whole decimal system. 
A child in grammar-school can write, offhand, computations 
for which a Roman sage would have needed the abacus. 
This is due simply to our superior symbolism, our nine 
digits, and o. The revolutionizing of mathematics by the 
Arabic number system is the most striking example of the 
aid which a good medium of expression lends to the mind.
S u m m a r y
The structure of a thing is the way it is put together. 
Anything that has structure, then, must have parts, pro­
perties, or aspects which are somehow related to each other. 
In every structure we may distinguish the relation or rela­
tions, and the items which are related.
Since these items are not necessarily “parts,” but may 
be qualities, values, or any conceptually distinguishable 
features, they are called not parts of the structure but 
elements. They may be only ideally distinguishable.
60 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

The elements which stand in a relation to each other are 
called the terms of that relation.
Different relations may combine different numbers of 
terms at a time. Some relations hold always among two terms, 
some among three, etc. The number of terms which a relation 
demands is called the degree of that relation. Two-termed 
relations are called dyadic, three-termed triadic, etc. Some 
relations have a minimum of more than two, but no maxi­
mum, number of terms; they are called polyadic.
A symbolic construct, e.g. a combination of words denoting 
terms and relations, which is understood to assert that the 
denoted terms stand in the denoted relation, is a proposition.
Relations are intangible unless they are formulated in 
language. Symbolic expression is their only incarnation. 
Therefore logic is necessarily bound up with language. The 
simplest logical structures are those expressed by proposi­
tions that mention just one relation and its terms. Therefore 
we shall take such propositions as the most elementary 
material for logical study.
In a logically perfect language, elements would always 
be denoted by one kind of word and relations by another; 
there would be just one word for each element and one for 
each relation; and the grammatical form would reflect 
exactly the form of the complex it expresses. In ‘ 'natural 
language/' however, this is not the case. Its idiom often 
disguises relations, by (i) using the same word for relations 
and for elements, (2) telescoping several propositions into 
one, (3) disguising the degree of a relation, and (4) using 
one word in several senses.
Because of these shortcomings of natural language, 
logicians adopt the simpler and more consistent medium of 
ideographic symbols. 
In a symbolically expressed pro­
position the relation is merely named, and the fact that it is 
asserted to hold is (for the present) always understood. Since 
symbols may have meanings arbitrarily assigned, it is 
necessary to state what each sign equals by interpretation.
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
61

Ideographic signs may be freely invented or adopted within 
the limits of the following principles of symbolic expression:
(1) Radical distinction between term signs and relation 
signs.
(2) Avoidance of false suggestion.
(3) Precedence of logical exactness over any psychological 
advantages.
(4) Avoidance of traditionally pre-empted signs.
(5) Due attention to distinctness, compactness, and 
typographical simplicity.
A good symbolism leads not only to a clear understanding 
of old ideas, but often to the discovery of new ones.
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What relations are involved in the constitution of
(a) a nest of tables, (6) a cluster of swarming bees, (c) a 
row of fence pickets, respectively?
2. What constituents must a structure have beside relations?
3. What is the chief use of a “logical picture” ?
4. What is the most important kind of “logical picture” ?
5. What is meant by the terms of a relation?
6. What is meant by the degree of a relation?
7. What is dyadic relation? Polyadic?
8. What is a proposition? What two functions are performed 
by the main verb in a proposition?
9. Why do logicians use symbols ?
10. What dangers can you see in the use of “nktural language” 
to present propositions for logical study?
11. What principles must be observed in the choice of symbols?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK 
I. Name a construct whose elements are not physical parts.
II. In the following propositions, underline the words denoting 
relations:
(1) “The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold.”
(2) “The pen is mightier than the sword.”
(3) “Never trouble trouble till trouble troubles you.”
62 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

III. In the following propositions, underline the relation and
state its degree :
(1) Mary, Margaret, and Jane are sisters.
(2) James, John, and Jerry are triplets.
(3) Paris and Berlin are smaller than London.
(4) The tones C, E, and G form a triad.
(5) "She dwelled among the untrodden ways.”
(6) "The greatest of these is charity.”
IV. Using Roman capitals for terms and symbols of your own
choice for relations, state the following propositions :
(1) Jesse was the father of David.
(2) Keats was younger than Wordsworth and Coleridge.
(3) New England is Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, 
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut.
(4) Sam gave his dog to Rhoda.
(5) Sam gave his dog a bone.
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
63

C H A P T E R  I I I
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
(iContinued)
i. Context
If you read in the paper a headline: "Lived together 
ten years without speaking/' your imagination promptly 
supplies suitable terms to the relation which alone is men­
tioned. A man and his wife, or a mother and her daughter, 
in short: someone and someone else must have lived together 
ten years without speaking. Again, if you open a cook-book 
at random and read at the head of a page: "these should 
be rubbed together to a smooth paste," you know at once 
that "these" must refer to things like flour, shortening, 
sugar, yolks of eggs, or the like. You may say that you 
have not the faintest idea what is to be rubbed together to a 
smooth paste, or who lived together ten years without 
speaking; but the mere fact that you say what and who, 
respectively, shows that you know something about the 
missing terms of such propositions. You would feel greatly 
disconcerted to read that butter and sugar lived together 
ten years without speaking or that mother and daughter 
should be rubbed together to a smooth paste. The reason 
for this is that you have understood the relation and you 
know, in a general way, what is the range of its possible 
applications. The same is true, of course, if a certain set of 
terms is given and the relation left undetermined. If you 
read, on either side of a blot on the back of a post-card: 
"We (blot) Niagara," you may not know whether the relation 
between your friends and Niagara is that they saw the 
waterfall or that they missed it, liked or scorned, feared or 
photographed it, but you do know that the lost verb cannot 
be "married" or "ate" or "strangled." Such relations among 
such terms would fail to make sense. Our thoughts always

move within a certain range, a great, vaguely apprehended 
class of things which we feel could be related to each other, 
and we look only for relations which might conceivably 
hold among these things. Such a range of general subject- 
matter— of terms and relation that may enter together 
into our thoughts— is called a context. Whatever lies out­
side a given context is felt to be irrelevant, incapable of 
adding anything but sheer nonsense.
In ordinary thinking, the context is indefinite, mutable, 
and tacitly assumed. It grows and shrinks with every turn 
of the conversation. You hear a bang, and ask: “Who has 
just come into the house?” And all your thoughts are in 
terms of people, front door, and the relations of closing, 
entering, etc.; but let the answer be: “No one; that was the 
cover of the wood-box you heard,” and your whole con­
stellation of ideas, your context, has shifted to wood-box, 
covery the relations of dropping, making noise. The person 
who gave the answer was thinking in your terms and also 
in those which his reply presupposes, else he would not 
have found any sense in your question, and his answer 
would have been an irrelevant statement, not an answer 
at all. So the context in everyday conversation is always 
varying, adjusting itself to the interests of many people 
and many domains of thought.
2. Concepts and Conceptions
But in the sciences, which study the interrelations of 
elements within certain limited, definite realms of reality, 
or in logic, which deals with any given realm, and studies 
the possible means of making sense out of its constituents, 
we cannot do with a vague, indefinite, tacitly accepted 
context. If we want to build up an elaborate conceptual 
structure, we must have recognizable concepts, not sub­
jective and incommunicable mental pictures. It does not 
make any difference what sort of mental picture embodies 
a concept; all that counts in science is the concept itself.
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
65

66
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
For instance, it is immaterial whether you imagine "absolute 
zero" (the temperature of interstellar space in complete 
absence of heat) as a sensation experienced by someone 
fantastically floating in a dark void, or whether you imagine 
it as the lowest mark on a very long thermometer. Two 
persons, one of whom imagines the void, while the other 
envisages the mercury-column, may talk perfectly compre­
hensibly together about the properties of "absolute zero." 
That is because their mental pictures are merely personal 
symbols of a concept with which they are both operating. 
The sensation in the void only represents the concept, 
which is "the first element of the ordered series of all 
possible temperatures ranged in the relation 'warmer than.' " 
The lowest mark on the imaginary mercury-column repre­
sents the same thing. That is why these two men can talk 
sensibly with one another.
One might say that, due to psychological factors, the 
two people have divergent conceptions of absolute zero, but 
are operating with the same concept. This difference of 
meaning between "concept" and "conception" is not 
rigorously observed in ordinary usage, but neither is it a 
purely arbitrary technicality; purists in English will agree, 
I think, that it is better to speak of “my conception of 
honour" than of “ my concept of honour," and to refer to 
"the concept 'honour'" rather than to “ the conception 
'honour.' " The distinction between these two terms—  
"conception" for the mental image or symbol, "concept" 
for the abstractable, public, essential form— seems to me 
so convenient that we are justified in adopting it "tech­
nically," i.e. as an accepted rule of vocabulary.
3. F ormal Context
If we would rule out of our thinking all associated ideas 
which spring from conceptions rather than concepts, and 
consequently are the subjective, personal context of our 
propositions, we must enumerate explicitly the elements

and relations to be admitted for consideration. In a scientific 
discussion of temperatures, the loneliness and silence of the 
realms where absolute zero obtains are irrelevant; these 
factors are associated with "absolute zero" only through a 
picturesque personal conception of that temperature, and 
are meaningless to the man who imagines a long thermo­
meter with the mercury out of sight. Likewise the astounding 
length of the imaginary thermometer is irrelevant. "Loneli­
ness," "silence," and "length" are not logically connected 
with the meaning of "absolute zero." If we make our formal 
statement: "Absolute zero is the first element in a series 
of all possible temperatures ranged in the relation 'warmer 
than/ " the only elements are "temperatures," and the 
only relation is "warmer than." If the man who thinks 
of the cold void utters this proposition, its psychological 
context probably contains such elements as space, awe, 
death, or what-not; but the thermometer-man who under­
stands and accepts the proposition knows nothing about 
these. His psychological context contains visual elements 
The concept, however, which the two have in common, and 
by virtue of which one understands the other, has a different 
context entirely, which contains as elements only states of 
temperature, and as relations only the comparative concept 
"warmer than" and its derivatives ("cooler than," "not 
warmer than," "of like temperature," are concepts which 
may be derived by definition from "warmer than." See 
below, chapter vi §1). Everything that can enter into a 
scientific discussion of "absolute zero" must be constructed 
within this conceptual frame, which I call the formal context 
of the discourse.
The formal context of any discourse may be agreed upon 
and expressed; the psychological context cannot. One person 
may have a fair idea of another’s psychological framework—  
for instance, we know that "death" figures in a different 
context for a kidnapper’s victim who feels a pistol at his 
back, and for an undertaker whose telephone is ringing—
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
67

but we cannot exhaustively state such a context and know 
all ideas that are relevant to it.
(A) The Universe of Discourse
The total collection of all those and only those elements 
which belong to a formal context is called a Universe of 
Discourse. In ordinary conversation, we assume the limita­
tions of such a universe, as when we say: “Everybody knows 
that another war is coming,“ and assume that “ everybody“ 
will be properly understood to refer only to adults of normal 
intelligence and European culture, not to babies in their 
cribs, idiots, or the inhabitants of remote wildernesses. 
For conversational purposes the tacit understanding will 
do; but if the statement is to be challenged, i.e. if someone 
volunteers to produce a person to whom it may be applied, 
but of whom it is not true, then it becomes important to 
know just what the limits of its applicability really are. 
Arguments of this sort have their own technique, by which 
the opposition marshals contradictory cases— in this example, 
persons who have no such knowledge— and the asseverator 
rules them out as “not meant“ by his statement. The 
universe of ordinary discourse is vague enough so that this 
process can go on as long as the bellicosity of the two 
adversaries lasts.
Logicians and scientists, however, take no pleasure in 
casuistry. Their universe of discourse must be definite 
enough to allow no dispute whatever about what does or 
does not belong to it. For instance, if an anthropologist 
makes the statement that everybody is bom into some 
social group, we understand him to mean the baby in its 
crib and the head-hunter of Patagonia as well as the 
American ambassador to the Court of St. James, because 
the universe of discourse of his science is known to include 
all human beings. Did it not, he would be called upon to 
state its limits.
We may limit a universe of discourse as much as we like;
68 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
69
so elaborate a structure as a natural science has a very 
great universe, whereas a lesser construct, say the formal 
set of rules for playing chess, is limited to 64 elements called 
“ squares,” and 32 elements called “ men.” The chess game 
does not take in all elements called “chess-men” ; its universe 
is limited to 32. In teaching chess to a novice, the first thing 
one does is to enumerate the elements involved, call his 
attention to the squares and the men, before one mentions 
the relations which hold, or fail to hold, among them. Now, 
this is exactly the way to begin the rigorous analysis of any 
structure. The universe of discourse must be recognized and 
expressed. Logicians usually denote it by the letter K, 
derived from the German Klasse, a class, and put in 
parentheses the notation chosen for its elements. But since 
we have adopted the practice of using Roman capital 
letters for elements, I shall use an italic K  for the total class 
of such elements, because this is not itself an element and 
should have a different kind of symbol.
Suppose we select a very simple universe of discourse, a 
group of four houses, whose relations to each other we are 
going to state. We should then introduce our universe as 
follows:
K{A, B, C, D) 
K  =int “houses”
Here we have an enumeration of just four elements, the 
symbolic indication that they form a universe of discourse, 
and the interpretation by virtue of which the elements are 
known to be houses.
(B) Constituent Relations
A formal context involves not only elements, but the 
relations which connect such elements. Obviously one cannot 
introduce any relation, at random, into any universe what­
ever; for instance, one cannot say that 2 is older than 3, 
or that one house is wiser than another. Such statements 
would be neither true nor false; they would be simply

70
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
meaningless. We must choose our relations with reference 
to the sort of elements contained in K.
Now, if we let K  =int “houses,” there are many rela­
tions which “make sense” when taken to function among 
its elements; we may say of two houses, A and B, that A 
is greater than B, A is as old as B, A is costlier than B, A is 
to the right of B, and so forth and so on indefinitely. Or of 
three houses, A, B, and C, it might be said that A is 
between B and C, that A connects B and C, that A, B, and C 
form a triangle, etc. Likewise the four houses A, B, C, and D 
may form a quadrangle, or we might say that A is in the 
midst of B, C, and D. All these are possible relations with 
the given universe of discourse, K. But there is no reason 
why our formal context should include them all. If we want 
to describe the spatial arrangement of four houses, the 
relation costlier than has obviously no place in the dis­
cussion; neither has as old as. Such concepts do not suit our 
purpose, so we rule them out. In fact, in establishing a 
formal context, it is a general practical rule to choose the 
simplest concepts, and the smallest number of them, that will 
serve the purpose of the discourse. Suppose we begin with 
just one dyadic relation, “to the North of,” and symbolize 
it by “nt2.” This is, then, the only relation admitted to thé 
formal context; all propositions must be made solely out of 
elements A, B, C, and D and the relation “nt.”
A relation which belongs to the formal context I call a 
constituent relation of the discourse. It is one of the concepts 
explicitly assumed as a legitimate constituent of pro­
positions in that discourse. The formal context consists of 
the universe and all of the constituent relations (in this 
case, just one), and may be symbolized as follows:
K(A, B, C, D) nt2 
K  =int “houses”
nt2 =int “to the North of”
Every possible pair of terms from this universe, combined by 
the relation “nt,” yields a proposition; the sixteen proposi­

tions which can be made in this wise are called the elemen­
tary propositions in the formal context If (A, B, C, D) nt2.
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
71
4. Truth-Values
Every combination of elements in a formal context yields 
a proposition which is either true or false. But we may not 
know which it is. If I assert “A nt B," you may understand 
the proposition, and know, of course, that either it is true or 
it isn't, but you may never know whether it is true or false. 
That is meant by saying you do not know its truth-value.
The word ‘Value" has, in common parlance, the con­
notation of “good," “precious," or (more materialistically) 
of “having a price." But there is another meaning of the 
word with which most people are familiar from their school­
days, namely the “value" for an “unknown." Most of us 
vaguely remember that if a farmer has x sheep, which meet 
with all sorts of accidents as sheep do in algebra books, so
x
that in the end there are only -, or ten sheep left, then the
value of x is 20. It is this sense of “value" that is involved 
in the term “truth-value," which has nothing whatever to 
do with the eternal or divine or moral qualities of “ truth," 
but merely with the fact that we have here the property of 
“ true-or-false" and do not necessarily know which. If we 
decide a proposition is true, we say it has the truth-value 
“ truth” and if it is false, then its truth-value is “falsity." 
“ Truth-value" is a very convenient term and is widely used 
in the literature of logic, but the word “value" must not 
be taken in any moral or economic sense.
5. Related Propositions in a Formal Context
Consider the formal context given above:
If (A, B, C, D) nt2
K  =int “houses" 
nt« =int “ to the North of"

72
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Since nt is dyadic, i.e. combines its terms two at a time, 
there are sixteen possible ways of combining A, B, C, and 
D (counting the cases where the same letter stands before 
and after the relation, as: "A nt A,” “B nt B,” etc.). Each 
possible combination by means of "nt” yields a proposition 
which is either true or false. Without any special informa­
tion about the four houses in question, can we know the 
truth-values of any of these propositions?
Well, if "nt2” is to mean "North of,” then certainly no 
element can have this relation to itself; so we know off­
hand that:
A nt A fails*
B nt B fails 
C nt C fails 
D nt D fails
Here are four truth-values fixed in advance; none of the 
houses is to the North of itself. To express the fact that a 
relation fails, i.e. that the proposition in which it functions 
is not true, it is customary to enclose the proposition in 
parentheses and prefix to this whole expression the sign 
Thus, ~  (A nt A) means "A nt A fails,” and may be read 
"A is not North of A,” or “ It is false that A nt A.” In formal 
symbolism, then, the four established propositions should 
be written :
~  (A nt A)
~  (B nt B)
~  (C nt C)
^  (D nt D)
So the nature of the constituent relation determines the 
truth-value of four propositions; any other proposition in 
the formal context, however, may be either true or false. 
It seems that, to know all the truth-values of the sixteen
* A relation is said to “fail” whenever it is significant, but does 
not hold among the stated terms.

possible propositions, we would require twelve items of 
special information.
Now, let us assume just one such item; namely, that 
“ A nt B ” is true. Immediately we know the truth-value of 
not one, but two propositions: we know that
A nt B
and 
(B nt A)
The falsity of the latter follows from the truth of the former, 
as we recognize from our common sense understanding of 
“nt2.” We know that this particular relation cannot connect 
two terms in both possible orders. The truth of one proposi­
tion precludes the trutht or implies the falsity, of the other. 
(Note that to be told “ A nt B is false” would not give us 
any knowledge of “ B nt A ” since both might be false, 
though not both can be true.)
Suppose, now, we know “A nt B,” and are given the 
further information, “ B nt C.” At once we realize these two 
propositions together imply that A is also to the North of C. 
So the truth of two propositions determines the truth-values 
of six:
A nt B 
B nt C
jointly asserted, assure us of the following facts:
A nt C 
~  (B nt A)
^  (C nt A)
~  (C nt B)
So it appears that even in the case of the twelve undeter­
mined propositions, the truth-values that might be assigned 
to them are not entirely arbitrary and unrestricted. The 
truth of one proposition precludes that of another, or the 
joint assertion of two propositions implies a third. The 
possible truth-values that could be attached to these twelve 
constructs are relative to one another.
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
73

74
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
6. Constituent Relations and Logical Relations
In describing the formal context for this discourse about 
houses, the only elements to be used were given as A, B, C, 
D, and the only relation as “nt2.“ In merely formulating 
all the possible elementary propositions in this context, 
certainly no other constituents were employed. But as soon 
as the propositions were formulated, it was apparent that 
some could not reasonably be asserted at all, and even the 
others could not all be asserted together indiscriminately. 
Certain ones were dependent upon certain others, by impli­
cation, preclusion, and the like. But implication, or even the 
mere joining-up of two propositions in one assertion, are 
relations; so there appear to be relations operative in our 
discourse besides the relation “nt“ which is mentioned as 
a constituent of the formal context.
Such relations, however, hold among propositions of the 
discourse, not among elements. The relations which hold 
among elements form elementary propositions, and are 
constituents of those propositions, and items in the formal 
context; the relations which hold among propositions are 
not constituents of elementary propositions, and are there­
fore not enumerated as materials of the formal context. I 
shall call the latter kind logical relations, to distinguish them 
from the constituent relations of the discourse.*
The constituent relations vary with the formal context; 
in every discourse there must be constituent relations, but 
what these are to be is arbitrary, within the limits of what 
“makes sense“ in the given universe. Logical relations, too, 
occur in any discourse of more than one proposition; but 
they are always the same few relations. They are some­
times referred to as the “logical constants“ of discourse. 
They hold among elementary propositions, whatever the 
constituents of those propositions may be.
* The importance of this distinction was first pointed out to me 
by Professor Sheffer. The terminology, however, is not his.

The principal logical relations are: (1) conjunction of 
propositions, or joint assertion; this is expressed by the 
word “ and,” or the traditional symbol 
Thus, “A is to 
the North of B, and B is to the North of C,” is expressed 
symbolically,
(A nt B) . (B nt C)
(2) Disjunction of propositions, the assertion of one pro­
position or the other. This relation is taken, in logic, to mean 
“one, or the other, or both” ; that is, it means at least one 
of the two propositions. For instance, it is always the case 
that either A is not to the North of B or B is not to the 
North of A. Either “A nt B” or “ B nt A” must be false; 
they may, in fact, both be false. So, using the accepted 
symbol, “V,” for “ either-or,” we may say:
~  (A nt B) V ~  (B nt A)
(3) Implication of one proposition by another. This covers 
the notion of preclusion, which is the implication by one 
proposition that another is false. “A nt B” precludes 
“B nt A,” i.e. “A nt B” implies “ ~  (B nt A).” The symbol 
for “implies” is “ O.” Sometimes a proposition is implied 
by the joint assertion of two or more others. Then you first 
express the conjunction, bracket the whole expression, 
and use it as one proposition:
[(A nt B) . (B nt C)] O (A nt C)
(There are various ways of circumscribing, and recasting 
the appearance, of the logical relations. Instead of “ O,” 
we might have a symbol for preclusion, since an implied 
proposition is one whose falsity is precluded, just as a 
precluded proposition is one whose falsity is implied (as in 
“ (A nt B) O ^  (B nt A)”). Or we might use and symbolize 
the notion “neither . . . nor” instead of “ either . . . or.” 
But all these relations which may be used in place of 
“ V” , and “O” really come to the same thing; they express
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
75

76
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
the same form, the same state of affairs; so we may as well 
abide by the ones which are in most general use.)
7. Systems
Two propositions which cannot both be true are said to be 
inconsistent. Thus “A nt B” and “ B nt A” are inconsistent 
with each other; one may be true and the other false, and 
logically it is a matter of indifference which is true and which 
is false; or they may both be false (as they would be if the 
houses stood in the same latitude); but they cannot both 
be true. Likewise,
(A nt B) . (B nt C) . ~  (A nt C)
cannot 
be jointly asserted; 
if 
[(A nt B) . (B nt C)] O 
(A nt C), then to assert the truth of the first two and the 
falsity of the third is inconsistent. To assign inconsistent 
truth-values to the elementary propositions within a formal 
context results in a chaotic and absurd discourse.
If, however, we assign a truth-value to every possible 
proposition, so that each is consistent with all the others 
jointly asserted, anyone will readily see that this is a 
systematic description of a certain state of affairs (real or 
imaginary). It is systematic because the propositions are 
interrelated, linked to each other by logical relations. Such 
an ordered discourse within a formal context is called a system.
There are innumerable ways of constructing systems. 
Different constituent relations allow of entirely different 
combinations of elementary propositions by means of the 
logical relations ; different universes of discourse offer 
different possibilities of arrangement. In some systems, the 
several propositions are so closely connected by implication 
that if we know the truth-value of a very few constructs we 
can assign all the rest unequivocally. The process of reasoning 
from one truth-value to another among propositions is 
known as deduction; for instance, from “ (A nt B) . (B nt C)” 
one may deduce “A nt C.” A system wherein this is possible,

so that a small number of known propositions determines 
all the rest, is a deductive system.
A fair example of such a system may be constructed 
within the context K(A ,B, C, D) nt2. Suppose you are told 
that
A nt B 
B nt C 
C nt D
From the first two in conjunction we deduce “A nt C,” since
[(A nt B ) . (B nt C)] O A nt C 
Likewise, 
[(B nt C) . (C nt D)] O B nt D
And if we take this last proposition together with the first, 
we have:
[(A nt B ) . (B nt D)] O A nt D
Here are three propositions whose truth is deducible from 
that of the three given ones. Moreover, each of these true 
propositions implies that its converse is false:
(A nt B) O ~  (B nt A)
(A nt C) O ~  (C nt A)
(A nt D) O ~  (D nt A)
(B nt C) O ~  (C nt B)
(B nt D) O ~  (D nt B)
(C nt D) O ~  (D nt C)
So, by assuming the truth of just three of the twelve 
“undetermined” propositions that could be constructed in 
our context, we have been enabled to deduce all the rest. 
The three original assumptions were made to establish a 
deductive system.
Its virtues are obvious. Instead of twelve constructs 
whose truth-values must be arbitrarily assigned, we have 
only three; a little knowledge of order, relatedness, in short, 
of logical structure, serves us instead of a cumbersome, 
itemized knowledge of many facts.
THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE 
77

78
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Suppose, however, that we assume a different formal 
context, say a collection of five persons, whom I shall 
denote as S, T, U, V, and W. The constituent relation is, 
“likes.” I shall express it by the symbol “lk.” We have 
then,
K(S, T, U, V, W) lk2 
K  =int “persons”
lk2 =int “likes”
Let us assume,
S lk T 
T lk U 
U lk V 
V lk W
What may be inferred from these statements? Nothing at 
all. “Likes” may or not hold both ways between the same 
elements; (S lk T) . (T lk U) does not tell us whether S lk U 
is true or false; we cannot even guess whether any one of 
these persons likes himself, or not. The fact is, that any 
elementary construct, in this context is plausible in itself 
and is perfectly consistent with every other, or any con­
junction of others. If we want to assign truth-values to 
all the propositions we must make twenty-five separate 
assignments. Such a system I call inductive, in contra­
distinction from deductive. Any system in the given con­
text K(S, T, U, V, W) lk2 must be completely inductive; 
this is due to the character of its constituent relation.
Most systems exhibit a mixture of both types; i.e. some 
propositions imply others, but there are also some which 
remain untouched. Such a system may be classed as mixed. 
Most scientific systems are of this hybrid sort; they are 
partly capable of deductive arrangement, but still contain 
a large number of facts that could never have been inferred, 
but are simply known to us as data, arbitrary truths “given” 
to us by experience. The dream of every scientist is to 
find some formulation of all his facts whereby they may

THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
79
be arranged in a completely deductive system; and of this 
desirable type we shall have a great deal more to say in 
subsequent chapters.
We have now introduced all of the essentials of logical 
structure: elements, and relations among elements; ele­
mentary propositions composed of these simple constituents; 
relations among elementary propositions, or logical relations ; 
systems, constructed out of elementary propositions by means 
of these logical relations. All higher logical structures may 
be treated as systems or parts of systems.
Summary
Every discourse, no matter how fragmentary or casual, 
moves in a certain context of inter-related ideas. In ordinary 
thinking this context is indefinite and shifting.
The psychological context of our thoughts is largely 
private and personal. Two people talking about the same 
thing may picture it to themselves in widely divergent ways. 
They have, then, different conceptions. But if they under­
stand each other at all, then their respective conceptions 
embody the same concept.
Logic is concerned entirely with concepts, not concep­
tions. A logical discourse rules out all private and accidental 
aspects. Its context must be fixed and public. The elements 
and relations that may enter into its propositions may, 
therefore, be enumerated in advance. These constitute the 
formal context of the discourse.
The total collection of elements in a formal context is 
called the universe of discourse.
The relations which obtain among such elements are 
called the constituent relations of the formal context.
The combinations which may be made out of the ele­
ments in a formal context by letting a constituent relation 
combine them according to its degree, are the elementary 
propositions of the discourse.
Every elementary proposition has a truth-value, which is

either truth or falsity. “Value” here has nothing to do with 
the quality of being “valuable.”
The propositions constructible in a formal context may 
be such that they cannot all be true, or cannot all be false; 
that is, it may be that to fix the truth-values of some of 
them automatically assigns truth-values to others. The 
propositions of such a context are interrelated.
The relations which hold among elementary propositions 
are not the constituent relations mentioned in the formal 
context, but are logical relations.
The logical relations generally used in symbolic logic are 
conjunction (.), disjunction (V), and implication (O). Con­
stituent relations may be freely chosen within the limits 
of what the universe of discourse admits as “making sense” ; 
logical relations are “constants,” the same for every discourse.
A total set of elementary propositions in a formal context, 
connected by logical relations and jointly assertable without 
inconsistency, is a system.
A system wherein a small number of propositions, known 
from outside information to be true, implies the truth or 
falsity of all other elementary propositions, is called a 
deductive system.
A system wherein all truth-values must be separately 
assigned by pure assumption or outside information is an 
inductive system.
A system wherein some truth-values may be deduced, 
but others neither imply anything nor are implied, is a 
mixed system.
The essentials of structure are: elements, and relations 
among elements, or constituent relations; elementary pro­
positions ; relations among elementary propositions, or 
logical relations; and finally, systems, the higher forms of 
structure, composed of related elementary propositions 
within a logical context.
8o 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ESSENTIALS OF LOGICAL STRUCTURE
81
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What is meant by the context of an ordinary conversation?
2. What is the difference between a concept and a conception?
3. What is the difference between “psychological context'' and 
“formal context"? Which is more important in conversation? 
Which is used in logic?
4. What are the essentials of a formal context ?
5. What is a universe of discourse?
6. How may the elementary propositions in a formal context be 
related to each other?
7. What is the difference between constituent relations and logical 
relations?
8. What is a system?
9. What are the essential factors of logical structure?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Give an example of “formal context," expressed symbolically, 
and state the interpretation in proper form.
2. In the following discourse, underline the constituent relations 
once and the logical relations twice:
If we have any desire, then either our desire leads to 
want or it leads to fulfilment; and fulfilment leads to surfeit; 
and want leads to pain, and surfeit leads to pain; therefore 
any desire leads to pain. (Schopenhauer's argument for 
pessimism.)
3. Express the following statements symbolically, using Roman 
capitals for elements, symbols of your own choice for the 
constituent relation or relations, and the customary symbols 
for logical relations:
(а) John is older than Tim, and Tim is older than George; 
therefore John is older than George.
(б) If New York is colder than Paris, then Paris cannot be 
colder than New York.
(c) She loves me— [or] She loves me not
(d) I am your brother and you are mine.
(e) Neither the Washington nor the Mauretania is faster than 
the Bremen.

C H A P T E R  I V
GENERALIZATION
i. Regularities of a System
In the foregoing chapter we dealt with a system of just 
four elements; in such a system there are sixteen elementary 
propositions. When each one of these is either asserted or 
denied, the system is completely and explicitly stated. In 
a formal context with a very small universe of discourse 
this is perfectly practicable, because sixteen propositions 
are easily perused. Suppose, however, we choose a larger 
universe, say one of ten elements; for convenience, let us 
again take a dyadic relation; and let the new formal con­
text be:
K{A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J) fm2
K  =int “persons” 
fm2 =int “ fellowman of”
Let the following truth-values be assigned to propositions 
of the system:
A fm B 
B f m C  
C fm D 
D fm E 
E fm F 
F fm G 
G fm H 
H fm I 
I fm J
Now, no one can fairly be called his own fellowman: 
so we may add, at once, ten further propositions of estab­
lished truth-value:

GENERALIZATION
83
~  (A fm A) 
~  (B fm B)
-  (J fm J)
Furthermore, in the nature of the constituent relation 
certain implications follow from the nine originally granted 
facts. Thus, (A fm B) O (B fm A) ; (B fm C) O (C fm B) ; and 
so forth, so that we may assert the implication of the nine 
converses of the given propositions:
(A fm B) O (B fm A)
(B fm C) O (C fm B)
(C fm D) O (D fm C)
(IfmJ)O(Jfml)
Also, if “A fm B” and “ B fm C” are true, then “A fm C” 
must be true; if A is a fellowman of B, and B of C, then A 
must be a fellowman of C. This gives us the proposition 
“A fin C” ; so by the same principle, we further relate A to 
D, to E, to F, etc. Obviously, in a universe of ten elements, 
this gives us a swarming multitude of statements :
[(A fm B) . (B fm C)] O (A fm C)
[(A fm C) . (C fm D)] 0 (A fm D )
[(Aim I). (I fm J)]0 (A fm  J)
[(B fm C ). (C fm D)] O (B fm D) 
[(B fm D ). (D fm E)] O (B fm E)
[(C fm D ). (D fm E)] O (C fm E)

Each proposition to the right of the implication sign is a 
newly established elementary construct; and each, of course, 
implies its converse, so we augment the list beginning:
(A fm B) O (B fm A) 
etc., etc.,
by: 
(A fm C) O (C fm A)
84 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
(Hfm J )0 (J  fmH)
Altogether, the explicit statement of this system requires 
ioo assertions.
Many of these assertions, however, look strikingly alike. 
I have arranged them above in three lists. One contains 
simple elementary propositions involving just one element 
apiece; the next contains statements to the effect that an 
elementary proposition with two distinct terms implies its 
converse, i.e. the proposition which relates the same two 
terms in reversed order; the third list consists of pairs of 
propositions conjoined to imply a third. In each list the 
several assertions are analogous ; and by reason of this un­
mistakable analogy I have not troubled myself to write out 
each item, but have merely started each column, and let 
the reader supply what is denoted by dashes or by “etc.” 
We do not have to look very far down any list to appreciate 
the repetitiousness of the logical relations expressed in it; 
to recognize that, no matter which elements we combine 
into an elementary proposition, the logical relation of this 
proposition to its converse is always “ O” ; and no matter 
which three elements we select, if we make two propositions 
out of them, such that the second term of one is identical 
with the first term of the second, and relate these two 
propositions by 
then this conjunct has the relation “ O” 
to a third proposition combining the first term of the first 
with the second term of the second. What the assertions in

GENERALIZATION
each list have in common, is (1) the number of elementary 
propositions involved in them, (2) the number of distinct 
elements involved in these propositions, (3) the location 
of identical and of distinct elements, (4) the nature and 
location of logical relations contained in each total assertion. 
These regularities stamp all the assertions in any one list 
with the same logical form, no matter which element, or 
which two or three elements figure in any such assertion.
85
2. Variables
If we wish to express symbolically the logical form of a 
whole list of propositions, we may do this by using what 
is called a variable symbol. Such a symbol is not a name 
assigned to a certain one of the elements, but means: “A, 
or B, or C, . . . or J, whichever is chosen for this place." 
It is called a variable because it can mean all the elements 
in turn; its meaning may vary from A to J.
To distinguish such symbols from specific names, like 
A, B, C, etc., I shall use lower case italics for variables. 
Thus,
^  (A fm A)
means: "It is false that the element called A has the relation 
fm to itself" ; but
(a fm a)
means, by turns,
~  (A fm A),
~  (B fm B), 
etc., etc.
It may denote any one of the ten propositions involving only 
one element. Likewise, we might use a construct of two 
variables to mean, in turn, all propositions involving just 
two elements. Thus, “a fm b” may mean, in turn,

86
A fm B 
A fm C
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
B fm C 
B fm D
But it may just as well mean “B fm A" as “A fm B.” The 
a and b, respectively, do not mean “A” and “B,” but: “ the 
first-mentioned term” and “the second-mentioned term.” 
If “ B” is the first-mentioned term, then a means “ B.” If 
“J” is the second-mentioned term, then b means “J.”
If, however, two elementary structures are logically 
related, the whole construct is one assertion; and if a variable 
is given a meaning in one part of that assertion it must keep 
it throughout. For instance,
[a fm b) O [b fm a)
may mean: 
(C fm D) O (D fm C)
or: 
(B fm A) O (A fm B);
in the first instance, a means C and b means D; in the 
second, a means B and b means A; but in both cases, the 
fact that a certain [first-mentioned) term has the relation fm to 
a certain other [second) term, implies that the other term has 
that relation to the first. Therefore, no matter how “a certain 
term” and “ a certain other term” are chosen— whether 
we choose B first and A second, or C first and D second, or 
what you will—wherever “that first term” and “that second 
term” recur, we must put in the one we chose first, and the 
one we chose next, respectively. So we may say that a 
variable may mean any element, but whichever it does mean, 
it must mean that same one throughout the whole assertion. 
The variable a in [a fm b) O [b fm a) could not mean A in 
the first case and E in the second. (A fm D) O (D fm A) 
is a possible meaning for [a fm b) O [b fm a), and so is

GENERALIZATION
(E fm D) O (D fm E); but [a fm b) O (b fm a) 
could 
not 
mean (A fm D) O (D fm E), because if a means A it cannot 
in the same total assertion mean E; it must mean just one 
and the same thing in all the logically related elementary 
propositions of one total assertion.
This point is very important; once a variable is given a 
meaning, it keeps it throughout the whole assertion; but 
it must be remembered that in another assertion it may have 
another meaning. That is, if in
aim a
87
we let a mean "J,” so we have the meaning:
and then say:
J fm J,
[a fm b) O (b fm a),
the meaning "J" need not therefore be assigned to a in this 
second assertion; we may give a and b here the meanings 
E and F, if we choose, or any other pair of elements. But of 
course, if our choice falls upon E and F, then a means E 
and b means F in both the elementary propositions connected 
by “ O.”
3. Values
The elements which may be meant by a variable symbol 
are called its values. Here again we encounter the use of 
"value" in a mathematical sense, not to be confounded 
with any sort of "worth." A value for a variable is any 
element which the variable may denote. The entire class of 
possible values for a variable, i.e. of individual elements 
it may signify, is called the range of significance of the 
variable.
In the expression "a fm a" within our formal context, 
the range of the variable a is the entire universe of discourse.

Any element whatever may be substituted for a, and the 
result will be a proposition which is either true or false. If 
an expression involves two variables, as for instance:
a fm h
then the range of this pair of variables is all the dyads 
which can be made in the formal context. Remember that 
the two terms of a dyadic relation may be the same ele­
ment; that is, Aim  A is dyadic, although the terms are 
not distinct. In the expression <la fm 6” there is nothing to 
tell us that a and b are necessarily distinct; “ the first- 
mentioned element” and “ the second-mentioned element” 
may very well be the same element. If the same variable 
occurs in both places, then we know that the terms denoted 
are identical; if different variables occur, we do not know, 
without further reason, whether their values are identical 
or distinct.
The proposition “J fm J” is, then, a possible meaning 
for the variable expression “aim  6.” So is “A fm B ,” 
“J fm H,” or any other elementary proposition. The entire 
hundred dyadic combinations which may be made in the 
formal context fall within the range of “ a, b” ; ten of these 
compose the range of “a, a” in the expression:
aim a
The process of assigning a specific value to a variable 
may be called specification. This is not the same thing as 
interpretation; for, when we interpret a symbol, we com­
mission it to mean a certain kind of thing, as: “K  =int 
houses” determines that A, B, C, D, shall represent houses, 
and not trees, or people, or days. Interpretation fixes the 
sort of term involved in the discourse. But if we say: “ a 
equals, by specification, the element C” (which may be 
abbreviated: “a = s p C ”), this does not tell us that a 
means the sort of thing called a house, but which house it
88 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
89
denotes: the house named C. The range of significance of a 
variable, then, is the class of all those and only those ele­
ments which may be substituted for it by specification.
The notion of variables is not peculiar to logic. It is 
constantly employed in ordinary speech. Every pronoun is 
a variable, and the rules of specification here expounded are 
the same rules that were taught to us in school in regard to 
"antecedents" of pronouns. Take, for instance, the sentence:
I knew you would not do it.
The meaning of such a statement is indefinite until 
we know the meanings of "I,” "you," and "it." If these 
words are said by one person to another, the two personal 
pronouns have different values, i.e. different "antecedents"; 
that is usually the case. But a man who has failed in a high 
resolve, or resisted a great temptation, might also address 
himself in this fashion. In that case, the two variables “ I" 
and "you" would denote the same element. Two different 
pronouns usually but not necessarily have different ante­
cedents. If, however, one says:
You knew you would not do it,
then "you" must mean the same person in both cases; for 
if a variable is once specified, it must keep the same speci­
fication throughout the entire statement wherein it occurs; 
or, in more familiar language, a pronoun must have the same 
antecedent throughout the entire statement. And this again 
is simply common sense. Moreover, "you" may mean any 
person; its range is the class of persons. The same thing holds 
for "I.” On the other hand, "it" refers to something else 
than a person, i.e. it has a different range from the other 
two variables. In a context where "doing" makes any sense, 
the universe must contain, by interpretation, agents and acts; 
"it" may become, by specification, any one of the acts, 
whereas "I" and "you" may denote specifically any two of

the agents respectively (which may be identical). But the 
distinction between “personal" variables and “impersonal" 
variables is a convention of language; in logic, we have no 
literary way of indicating such restrictions of range.
4. Propositional Forms
Every proposition in a formal context is either true or 
false. We may not know which it is; but we may rest assured 
that it is one or the other. An expression like:
a fm b
on the other hand, may be true with one set of values and 
false with another; in our system, it is true whenever the 
two values are distinct and false when they are identical. 
In another system a construct made with variables might 
not even follow such simple rules; for instance, in the 
context K{A, B, C, D) nt2, “a nt b” might mean a true or a 
false proposition even when the values of a and b were 
distinct.
The expression “ a fm 6" (to return to our latest formal 
context) is, in itself, neither true nor false. And that means 
that it is not a proposition at all. It is only the empty form 
of a proposition, which has to be filled in with specific 
elements in order to yield a proposition. It is, in fact, a 
propositional form, a variable whose values are propositions.
In most books of symbolic logic, notably the classic 
Principia Mathematica of Messrs. Whitehead and Russell, 
such an expression which has the form of a proposition, but 
contains at least one variable term, is called a propositional 
function. The name is not very fortunate; it has no clear 
connotation for logicians who do not happen to be con­
versant with mathematics. Its origin is obvious enough, if 
we remember that the great founders of symbolic logic—  
Boole, Frege, Schroeder, Peano, Whitehead, Russell, to 
mention only some of the most important— were primarily
90 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
9i
mathematicians, to whom the empty logical form and its 
specific propositional values naturally suggested the mathe­
matical “ function" and its numerical “values." So the 
variable whose values are propositions came by the name 
of “propositional function," and is generally so denoted in 
the literature. But the term “ function" has so many 
meanings (see chap, xiii, p. 319, note) that I shall use the 
clearer, if less popular, name “propositional form," which 
avoids a great many confusions.*
The sentence: “ I knew you would not do it," is a genuine 
propositional form; as long as no values are assigned to the 
pronouns, it is neither true nor false. Even if we assign a 
value to one or two of the three pronouns, the expression as 
a whole keeps its variable character; only when all its terms 
are fixed it acquires truth-value, i.e. becomes a proposition. 
Thus, we may say:
(1) I knew you would not do it.
(2) I, George, knew you would not do it.
(3) I, George, knew you, John, would not do it.
(4) I, George, knew you, John, would not cheat at 
cards.
Only (4) is a proposition; all the others are propositional 
forms with different numbers of variables, i.e., in different 
stages of formalization.
Let us carry this over from the pronouns of natural 
language to the a, b, c, etc., which are the pronouns of 
symbolic language.
In describing the system
K(A,B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I,J)fm2
* In a dissertation, “The Logical Structure of Meaning“ (unpub­
lished paper in the Radcliffe College Library), I first adopted this 
terminology ten years ago. Since then Professor Sheffer has indepen­
dently arrived at the same practice, and some of his disciples have 
recently used it in print; so I do not feel unjustified in employing it 
throughout this book.

92
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
we have ten propositions about elements in relation to A:
A fm A 
A fm B 
A fm C
A fm J
In these propositions the second term varies from A to J. 
Suppose, then, we use a variable in its place, and write:
A fm a
This is a propositional form of one variable. It is neither 
true nor false; one of its values is a false proposition, whereas 
all the others are true ones.
Now, there is also a list of propositions of the form 
“B fm atyi and one of “C fm a," and “D fm a,” etc. So long 
as only one element is formalized we need ten propositional 
forms to enumerate all the possible elementary propositions 
of the discourse. But when we align these in a list:
A fm a 
B fm a 
C fm a 
D fm a
J fm a
it is clear that the first element, too, could be formalized, 
that we could write:
b fm a
and let the two terms vary over the entire range of both, 
i.e. over all possible dyadic combinations within K . There 
are one hundred values for this propositional form of two 
variables. Ten of these values are false propositions and 
ninety are true.
The propositional form “A fm a” is in one sense a value 
for “ b fm ay but not in the genuine sense in which

GENERALIZATION
93
“A f m E ” would be. “A i m a” is related to “ bim a" by 
partial specification; it still remains a propositional form; 
and I shall call it a restricted propositional form, because the 
specification of one element restricts its range to pro­
positions of the given first term. A restricted propositional 
form might be called an ambiguous value for the unrestricted 
form. But all these names are mere conveniences; the thing 
to remember is that as soon as we replace a single term in a 
proposition by a variable, we have a propositional form 
which has as many values as there are values for that 
variable; and the more elements we ‘formalize ” the greater 
becomes the range of the entire propositional form.
5. The Quantifiers (a) and (3 a)
A propositional form is neither true nor false; but if 
we know that all the values for a certain form are true pro­
positions, then why may we not save ourselves the trouble 
of writing out all those propositions, when we wish to 
describe our system, and merely write the form and let it 
“mean” all its values in turn?
Well, the mere statement of the form does not tell any­
body that its values are all assertable in the system. The 
form alone is not a proposition, and does not assert anything. 
But we may adopt a device to express that a propositional 
form holds for any value of its variables, i.e. that no matter 
how the terms are specified, the resultant proposition is 
true. Let us take the form:
~  (a fm a)
This is the form of the assertion that a certain element does 
not have the relation “ fm” to itself. It is not itself an 
assertion, but its values are. And however we choose a, 
the resultant assertion is true; that is, the form
~  {a fm a)
holds for every value of a.

To express this fact, we use the symbol “ (a),” which 
may be read: “for any value of a,” or more briefly if less 
precisely: “for any a ” Whenever this symbol is prefixed 
to a propositional form, it means that no matter what 
element we substitute for a, the proposition which results 
is true. Thus,
(a) : ~  (a fm a)
is read: “For any a, it is false that ‘a fm a.' ” This is as 
much as to say:
~ ( A fm A )
~  (B fm B)
~  (C fm C) 
etc., etc.
In this way the form may indeed be used to express all its 
values collectively.
Now, let us take a propositional form of one variable, 
which does not hold for all values of that term. The only 
way we can construct such a complex of a single variable in 
our system is to use a restricted propositional form, i.e. to 
use one specific term and formalize the other. Let us take 
the form:
A fm a
This holds for every value of a except A; “A fm A” is false. 
But one case wherein it fails destroys the right to say it 
always holds. All we may say for it is that it sometimes holds. 
The accepted symbol for “sometimes,” or better: “ for some 
value or values of a,” is (3a). Hence,
(3a) : Aim  a
means: “For some value or values of a, ‘Afina' holds." 
Or, briefly: “ For some a, ‘A fm a.' ”
It is a good practical rule, in logic, not to say more than 
is essential. In this respect logicians are very prudent. If 
we always let a symbol mean the least it can possibly claim
94 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
95
to mean, there is little danger of letting irrelevant meanings 
creep in. Now, the most modest way to say “ sometimes” 
is, “ at least once.” So the best reading of (3a) is: “for at 
least one value of a,” or: “There is at least one a, such 
that . . . ” The last version seems to me the best; when 
we come to more complicated structures its advantages will 
become clear. So,
(3a) : A im  a
had best be read: “There is at least one a, such that 
'A fm a.9 ”
If a propositional form has two variables, we are in­
terested, of course, to state that it holds for some or for all 
pairs of elements. Consider, for instance, the propositional 
form:
a fm b
This is not true for all values of the couple a, b, because it 
fails whenever the two elements are identical. We may only 
say, then,
(3a, b) : a fm b
“There is at least one a, and at least one 6, such that 
‘a fm b: ”
No elementary propositional form of two variables, in our 
system, holds for all possible pairs of values. If we resort 
to logical propositional forms, however— i.e., to such as 
contain a logical relation among elementary constructs—  
we shall find some that always hold. For instance, it is 
always true that if aim b holds, then b fm a also holds; in 
other words, the complex proposition
(a fm b) O (b fm a)
holds, no matter how we choose a and b. So we may say:
{a, b) : (a fm b) O (b fm a)
“For any a and any b, la fm V implies ‘b fm a.* ”

96
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
The symbols (a) and (3a) are called the quantifiers of the 
term a. They indicate what part of the total range of a 
yields true propositions of the given form, (a), which means 
“ for any a," is called the universal quantifier, because it lets 
the form hold for every element in the universe, i.e. makes 
it universally true. (3a), “ there is at least one a, such 
th a t. . 
is the particular quantifier, for it refers the form 
only to particular choices within the universe.
Sometimes the two quantifiers are combined in quantifying 
a single form. For instance, we might encounter:
(a) (3 b): a lk 6 
(3 a) (b):alkb
Now, since a is no specific element and b is no specific element, 
does it matter which quantifier— the universal or the par­
ticular— is mentioned first ? If you read the two statements 
aloud, there will at once appear a very obvious difference. 
The first says:
“For any a, there is at least one b such that *a lk b.' ” 
In other words, for every person a there is at least one b whom 
a likes (it may be himself). The second, however, asserts: 
“ There is at least one person, a, such that for any person b, 
*a lk V 
that is, there is at least one a who likes everybody.
With the relation lk2 both statements are possible (though 
the second is highly improbable), but suppose we took the 
relation fm.
(a) (36): aim  b
is true if there is more than one man in the world; but 
(3 a) (b): aim  b
cannot be true, because (6) makes 6 refer to any man what­
ever, including the first term of the relation, so we would have 
by implication:
(3 a). a fm a,
which is false.

GENERALIZATION
97
The proper use of quantifiers requires close attention to 
the sense we wish to make. For instance, if we wished to 
say: “ Everybody has some secret which he will not tell 
to anyone,“ the form of the proposition (using 
►“ for 
“ telling“), is:
(a) (36) (c): r*(a—>b,c)
“ For any a, there is at least one 6 such that, for any c, a 
does not tell 6 to c.“ Try to read the quantifiers in some 
other order, and the change of meaning will immediately be 
apparent; there will be some secret that no one will tell 
anyone, or some person who won't tell anybody anything, 
or someone whom nobody will tell a secret, etc. But the 
sense of the original statement will not be reproduced.
6. G e n e r a l P r o po sit io n s
If a propositional form of one variable is said to hold 
or to fail for all values in the range of significance of that 
variable, this is a statement about the form. Such a state­
ment is either true or false; that is, either it is true that
(a) : 
(a fm a)
or it is false. But anything that has truth-value is a pro­
position; so we have here not an empty form to be filled in 
with values, but a proposition about an empty form and its 
possible values. We do not assign values to a by specifica­
tion, and thus make a true or a false proposition; we say 
that if certain values are assigned to a (in this case, any 
whatever in its range), then: “a fm a ” will be false. And 
this is supposed to express a fact of our system. Yet 
“ (a) : ^  (a fm a)“ is not the same sort of proposition as the 
elementary constructs made with “ fm“ in our universe of dis­
course; “a“ is not the name of an element. In dealing with 
propositional forms, we regarded it as a symbol of variable 
meaning, standing for all the elements in turn; but when we

prefix the quantifier (a) to ~  (a fm a), we no longer mean 
just ~ ( A f m A )  or just ^  (B fm B), or any specific pro­
position. The expression (a) means all of these at the same 
time, yet not as one class, but severally. It means simul­
taneously ^  (A fm A) and ~  (B fm B) and ~  (C fm C)
. . . and ~  (J fm J). It is, then, a general term ; it means 
not first this element and then that, but any one, no 
matter which.
The expression “ (a) : ~  (a fm a)” is, therefore, a general 
proposition, because it makes an assertion about the ele­
ments of K, in general. It does not have to be 4'filled in” 
with certain values in order to be true or false; "For any a, 
a is not his own fellowman” is true, and expresses a general 
condition.
The same thing may be said of forms preceded by the 
particular quantifier. Such a statement as: "(3a) : Aim  a” 
states a general fact about elements in relation to a given 
element, A. At first it may seem as though (3a) must be 
less general than (a); but this is not so; the difference is 
merely that, whereas (a) makes reference to any element 
in the entire range of a, no matter which, (3a) refers us to 
some element in that range, but— again— no matter which.
An example from ordinary thinking may make this 
clearer. Suppose we let four elements, A, B, C, D, represent 
four people, on a desert island, a mountain-top, or other 
isolated place where they constitute the whole population. 
Let A mean a person named Smith. Now, Smith has been 
robbed. Let "rb” stand for "robbing.” The officious radio 
promptly reports to the world:
"(3a): arbA!”
"Somebody in the party robbed Smith!”
This is a perfectly general statement. The "a” is not a 
variable, for the statement is supposedly true. Without the 
quantifier, "a rb A” would be merely a propositional form, 
because "a” would have no meaning. To broadcast "a rb A”
98 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
99
would be like saying “ He robbed A” without naming anyone. 
But “ (3a) : a rb A“ declares a general condition of the party, 
namely that somebody in it robbed Smith. It does not 
name any specific person as the robber; there may have 
been more than one; but this we know, that there is at 
least one person such that this person robbed Smith. And a 
means “ this person, or these persons, whoever that may be.“ 
So long as any real variable remains in a structure, that 
structure is a propositional form; but if every variable has 
a quantifier, the completely quantified propositional form is a 
general proposition. Now, a proposition may be not entirely 
general; it may contain some general and some specific 
terms, like the example above:
(3 a) : a rb A
We must generalize both terms:
(3 a, b) : a rb b
“There are at least two terms, a and b, such that ‘a rb V 
holds.“ Both of these statements are general propositions; 
but one is only partly generalized, and the other com­
pletely so.
7. T h e E co n o m y o f G e n e r a l P r o p o sit io n s
Now let us return to the system of ten persons and the 
constituent relation “ fm2.“ We were given, originally, nine 
specific propositions; all others followed from our know­
ledge of the general ways in which the relation “ fm“ operates. 
The nine specific propositions are all instances of the general 
fact that (3 a, b) : aim b. But they cannot be replaced by 
this general proposition, because the instances, successively 
surveyed, show that in fact every element of the system is 
sooner or later given a different mate, and this is a circum­
stance which no general statement can tell us; for, if only 
five of the specific instances were given, the general pro­
position (3 a, b): a fm b would still be true and in no wise

IOO
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
affected, but our knowledge of the system would be seriously 
impaired. So, if we do not want to alter or curtail our given 
data, we must keep the original nine propositions. We start 
then, as before, with the context
K(A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J) fm2 
K  =int “persons” 
fm2 =int “fellowman of”
And the nine “given” propositions:
A fm B 
Bfm  C 
C fm D 
D fm E 
E fm F 
F fm G 
G fm H 
Him I 
I fm J
But how about the implications of these facts? Here we had 
lists of logical propositions, such as:
(AfmB)O(BfmA)
(B fm C) O (C fm B) 
etc., etc.
Here, clearly, what holds for one pair of terms holds for all: 
(a, b): (a fm b) O (b fm a)
This one general assertion takes the place of nine specific 
ones. Similarly,
[(A fm B ). (B fm C)] O (A fm C)
is an instance of a universal proposition:*
(a, b, c) : [(a #= c). (a fm b). (b fm c)] O (a fm c)
* Note that the general proposition must state a fact which the 
special instance shows— namely, that the first term 4s the third term.

GENERALIZATION
IOI
This saves the whole list of derivations of A fm C, A fm D, 
A f m E  . . . B fm D . . . to H fm J. The converses of these 
derived propositions, by the way, are already provided for 
by the first logical statement. Finally, the fact that “ fm” 
cannot relate a term to itself may be stated universally:
(a) : ~  (aim a)
So it may be shown that, whereas a statement of the 
system in entirely specific terms requires one hundred 
separate assertions, a general account involves just twelve 
— nine specific and three general propositions. And that is 
certainly a considerable saving in paper, ink, and human 
patience !
8. 
T h e  F o r m a l i t y  o f  G e n e r a l  P r o p o s i t i o n s  
Suppose we adopt a new universe of discourse, which I 
will denote by K'(L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S) fm2
K ' =int “ creatures” 
fm =int “ fellowman of”
Now, of every two creatures it is true or false that one is the 
other's fellowman; it is true if the two elements are dis­
tinct, and both are human; and otherwise it is false. That 
is to say, “ a fm b” is significant with any two elements of 
K', but not necessarily true for them. If we had enough 
specific propositions, we could, of course, exhaustively 
describe the system. But even if we have no specific pro­
positions at all, we know something about the conditions 
which obtain in it; for instance:
(a) : ~  (aim a)
(a, b) : (a fm b) O (b fm a)
(a, b, c) : [(a =*= c) . (a fm b) . (b fm c)] O (a fm c)
That is to say, we know how the relation “fm” operates in this 
universe if it operates at all. In other words, we know nothing 
about the universe of discourse except that its elements are

“creatures,” not worlds, propositions, or historical events. 
We do not know whether any two elements are identical 
or distinct; they may be all one and the same creature. 
Also, if they are distinct, there may be only one human 
creature among them, or none at all, in which cases the 
propositional form a fm b would be false with all its values,
i.e. it would be true that
(a,b): 
(a f m b)
But, on the other hand, there may be two or more men. 
These might be L and M, or L and O and S, or any two, 
three, four . . .  up to the entire eight elements. Suppose 
there are “some.” Do we need a specific proposition to assure 
us of this, i.e. do we need to select any specific elements, 
say S and R, or L and P, and assert “ S fm R” or “ L fm P” ? 
No; which ones they are makes no difference whatsoever; 
it is enough to know:
(3 a, b) : aim b.
“There are at least two elements of which it is true that 
one is the other’s fellowman.”
This is enough to assure us that the relation obtains some­
where in the system. But we need not commit ourselves 
even to this assertion.
So it appears that, a good deal may be known about the 
system without the introduction of any specific propositions. 
And what we know about the elements in K f without any 
specific information, we know also about K\ and we would 
know it of any system in a formal context where “ fm” was 
significant. Why, then, must we enumerate specific elements 
at all? Are we bound to any certain elements, or even any 
certain number of them? So long as we assert only general 
propositions, we have no occasion to call elements by 
their names. Why, then, introduce these individual names, 
when they are immaterial to the discourse— when all we
102 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
103
need to know is that there is a collection of elements among 
which the relation functions in certain ways?
Clearly, all we require is a if of “some elements,,, such 
as “a first, a second, a third . . .  an nth element.” But 
these are not named. Therefore we no longer have elements 
A, B, C, etc., but quite generally “some element, a” “some 
other element, &,” etc., and write our generalized universe of 
discourse:
K  (a, b,c . . .)
In a formal context with such a universe, specific pro­
positions are no longer possible. If we assert:
(a): 
(a fm a)
this proposition does not deal specifically with an element 
called a in the universe, “ (e) : ~  (e fm e)” means exactly 
the same thing as “ (a) : ~  (a fm a)/9 It is merely a matter 
of mathematical elegance to use a where only one general 
term is needed, a and b for two, and so forth.
Consider the following three systems, expressed entirely 
in general terms, and note the different conditions which 
may be stated in general propositions:
I. K(a, b,c . . .) fm2 
K  =int “creatures”
fm =int “ fellowman of”
1. (a) : ~  (aim a)
2. (a, b) : (a fm b) O (b fm a)
3. (a, b, c) : [(a 4= c) . (a fm b) . (6 fm c)J O (a fm c)
4. (a) (3 b) : aim b
II. K'(a, b , c . . . )  fm2 
K f =int “creatures”
fm =int “ fellowman of”
1'. (a) : ~  (aim a)
2'. (a, b) : (a fm b) O (b fm a)
3'. (a, b, c) : [(a =*= c) . (a fm b) . (b fm c)] O (a fm c)
4'. (3 a) (b) : ~  (aim b)
5'. (3a, b) : aimb

III. K"(at b, c . . .) fm2 
K " =int “creatures”
fm =int “ fellowman of”
i". (a) : ~  (a fm a)
2". (a, b) : (a fm 6) O (b fm a)
3". (a, by c) : [(0 #= c) . (a fm b) . (b fm c)] O (a fm c)
4". (a, b) : ~ {a  fm 6)*
In the first system, proposition 4 asserts that every 
creature has a fellowman; every creature in this universe, 
then, must be human. In the second, 4' asserts that there is 
at least one creature which is not any other's fellowman; this 
means that either it is not a man, or else no other creature 
is. The latter alternative, however, is denied by 5', which says 
that there are at least two men. Hence there are some men in 
this universe, and at least one creature which is not a man. In 
III we learn from proposition 4” that no two creatures are 
fellowmen, i.e. that there cannot be more than one man in K ".
Among these three systems there is an obvious similarity; 
the first three propositions are identical in all three cases. 
These propositions describe the general nature of fm2, and 
since fm2 is assumed in each system, its description occurs 
in each. To this extent a system is always affected by the 
character of its constituent relation (or relations). The 
other propositions— 4, 4' and 5', and 4”— describe the 
nature of the three respective universes. Such statements, 
regarding the arrangement of elements in a universe, are 
the only items that may vary, and thus produce different 
systems, when the same interpretations are given to the 
formal context. (The information here given about the 
universes K, K ' and K " is meagre, because more detailed 
descriptions in general terms would require a technique 
which belongs to subsequent chapters of this book. But 
much more definite and specialized statements are possible, 
without any mention of specific elements.)
* Note that the assertion of 4" makes 1" unnecessary; for 1" is 
simply a case of 4", namely the case where a and b are identical, 
and is therefore implicit in 4".
io4 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
105
If, now, we take the first system, wherein every creature 
has some fellowman, i.e. every creature is a man, and specify 
the elements of K  (a, b, etc.) to be the ten persons of our 
original discussion, then these ten persons in the relation 
“fm” furnish an instance of a certain kind of system. The 
United States Senate is another instance, having a different 
number of specific terms, but exactly the same conditions 
The people inhabiting Paris are another (we are taking 
“ fellowman,, to mean, as it naturally does, fellow-human, 
not necessarily adult male), and the two authors of 
Principia Mathematica, though they represent the mini­
mum number of if-elements, are yet another instance. 
All the actual groups of people here named are consti­
tuted in the same, way, i.e. any one of them answers to 
the description given in terms of K(a, b ,. . .) fm2. Each 
group is a very simple specific system, and each one of these 
systems exemplifies the same form. It is this form which may 
be expressed in general, without mention of any specific ele­
ments. So it may be said that, as long as we have a specific 
K, our general propositions are merely an economy, i.e. 
they serve to say in small compass what could also be said 
in a great array of specific statements; but as soon as we 
generalize the elements of K, our general propositions express 
the formal properties of any such system. Here, the general 
propositions are more than an economy; they are a means 
of formulating universes of a certain sort. They convey 
principles of arrangement, rather than specific facts. In system 
I we have a formulation of any group whose elements are 
creatures, in the relation “fellowman,” where all the 
creatures are human; in II, the arrangement of any group 
containing at least two men, and at least one non-human 
creature; in III, that of any group containing not more 
than one man (which applies to such as contain no man). 
These generalized systems are the respective descriptions 
not of three groups, but of three kinds of group.
A general account of a system describes its form. Since

it is the form, not the specific instance of it, that concerns 
logicians, we shall henceforth deal entirely with generalized 
universes of discourse, and therefore with general pro­
positions as descriptions of systems of certain kinds, not as 
shorthand renderings of whole lists of specific facts, describ­
ing specific systems. Therefore, we are through with Roman 
capitals for elements; all elements from now on will be 
denoted by lower-case italics, and all elements in pro­
positions hereafter must be quantified. There are no more 
“variables,” i.e. words (or letters) of unassigned meanings, 
and no more “values,” or specific meanings assigned to 
“variables.” Logic deals only with general terms.
9. Q u a n t if ie d  T e r m s in N a t u r a l  D isc o u r se  
Just as pronouns are the “variables” of natural language, 
so there are words which serve the purpose of quantified 
terms. They are commonly called by the rather misleading 
name of “ indefinite pronouns,” and are: something, any­
thing, somebody, anybody, nobody, nothing, none. A 
sentence about “somebody” or “ something” expresses a 
general proposition which would be preceded by (3a); 
“ anything” or “ anyone” is quantified by (a). “Nothing” is 
symbolically rendered by the universal quantifier before a 
negative proposition, but for a negation with the particular 
quantifier there is no special word. We use “ something” 
together with “not.” This little irregularity in the expression 
of logical forms is quite characteristic of natural language; 
it is one of the things that make language a poor medium 
for logical analysis. Yet it has been incorporated, in the 
traditional logic which derives from Aristotle, in the four 
types of proposition:
A 
AU S is P
E 
No S is P
I 
Some S is P
O 
Some S is not P
io6 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
107
Anyone conversant with symbolic expression must be 
struck immediately by the fact that in “E ” the “ ~ ” is 
incorporated in the quantifier, whereas in “ O” it is not, so 
that “A” and “ E” seem to have different quantifiers, which 
is not the case, and “ E” and “ O” seem to be different pro­
positions, which is not true either. When we replace the 
verbal quantifiers by symbolic ones and express “not” by 
the true pattern of these propositions about “ S” 
(which alone is generalized, “ P” being either specific or 
variable) becomes visible:
A 
(s) : s is P 
E 
(s) : ~  (s is P)
I 
(3 s) : s is P 
O 
(3s): ~  (s is P).
Wherever, in ordinary language, we meet an “indefinite 
pronoun,” we have a general proposition (unless some per­
sonal pronoun without antecedent makes the sentence a 
propositional form). To find the logical structure of such a 
proposition, replace the “indefinite pronoun” by a general 
term, i.e. a properly quantified “variable,” and express 
negation, if there be any, by “ ^ ” (note that the negation 
sign never precedes the quantifier). This will show that, 
although there are many “indefinite pronouns,” there are 
really only two kinds of quantification; all general terms 
of language may be rendered by the use of (a) and (3a). 
So it appears that language, which (as we saw in a previous 
chapter) often gives complicated relations a false appearance 
of simplicity, may also sin in the opposite direction, and 
needlessly complicate structures which, when expressed 
with greatest rigour and economy, are found to be genuinely 
simple and clear.
S u m m a r y
When a system is completely stated, its propositions may 
be listed in such a way that each list shows a marked internal

regularity. That is to say, the propositions may be listed so 
that each list assembles all the propositions of a certain form.
Here we may introduce a new type of symbol, which is 
not employed to name an element, but to denote in turn all 
the elements in a collection. Such a symbol is called a 
variable. It has no fixed meaning, but may mean any of a 
given number of things. The totality of terms from which 
it may select its meaning is called the range of significance 
of the variable.
An element which is “meant” by a variable is called 
the value of that variable. The range of significance, then, is 
the class of possible values for a variable. Once a certain value 
is assigned to a variable term, this value must be kept 
throughout the total assertion wherein the term occurs, and 
must be substituted wherever the same variable appears 
(several elementary propositions connected by a logical 
relation constitute one total assertion). But the same 
variable occurring in independent constructs need not have 
the same value every time.
A proposition is either true or false. But a construct 
containing a variable whose value is not fixed is neither true 
nor false. It may yield a true proposition with one value 
and a false one with another. It is only an empty form of 
several propositions, and is therefore called a propositional 
form.
If a propositional form is known to yield true propositions 
with any values that may be assigned to it, then the form 
plus this information may be used to represent the whole 
list of propositions which are its possible values. The symbol 
denoting “ true for all values of a” is (a). This is called the 
universal quantifier. A propositional form preceded by the 
universal quantifier signifies that all values for this form 
are true propositions; i.e. that the relation expressed in 
the form holds among any terms. Where more than one 
variable occurs, there must be more than one quantifier.
If only some values of a variable in a form yield true pro­
108 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

GENERALIZATION
109
positions, this fact is expressed by the particular quantifier, 
(3a). This is read: “There is at least one a, such that. . . ”
Where different quantifiers precede the same form, 
quantifying different variables within that form, great care 
must be taken to give them their proper order, as differences 
of order often make differences of sense.
A completely quantified propositional form is a general 
proposition.
In describing the properties of a specific system, general 
propositions serve as an economical substitute for long lists 
of specific ones. But their usefulness goes beyond mere eco­
nomy; for they describe what is, in fact, true of all systems 
which are like the given, specific, one. General propositions 
may describe the properties of a certain kind of system.
When they are used in this way there is, of course, no 
mention of specific terms, because no specific collection 
“i f ” is under discussion. The universe of such a discourse 
is a collection of elements in general', any elements so inter­
preted and so related are under consideration. We pass, 
then, from specific universes to “K(a, b . . .).” The general 
universe has merely “a certain number” of terms; the 
general propositions describe (1) how the relation functions 
among such terms if it functions at all, and (2) whether it 
holds for all, or merely some, or no terms of the universe. 
Such a generalized discourse conveys a principle of arrange­
ment, and presents a logical pattern of which many different 
specific systems are instances.
We have discussed two procedures in the use of symbolism, 
which must not be confused, namely: (1) interpretation, the 
assignment of meanings (connotations) to symbols. The 
opposite of interpretation is abstraction, of which more will 
be said in later chapters. (2) Specification, the assignment of 
values (specific denotations) to variables. The opposite of 
specification is generalization, with which we have dealt in 
the present chapter.
Natural language also has its symbols for quantified

n o
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
terms; these are the so-called “indefinite pronouns/' But 
there are more linguistic forms than necessary, and their 
grammatical use is somewhat arbitrary ; the symbolic 
expression of general propositions is simpler than their 
rendering in ordinary speech.
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What is meant by saying a completely stated system shows 
“regularities” ?
2. What is a “variable” ? How does it “mean” any term, or 
terms, in a specific universe of discourse?
3. What is the “range of significance” of a variable?
4. What is meant by a “value” ?
5. When a term in a proposition is replaced by a variable, what 
sort of construct results?
6. What is a “quantifier” ? How many quantifiers are there? 
How are they expressed?
7. What is the meaning of the “universal quantifier” ? Of the 
“particular quantifier” ? How would you express the fact that 
a certain dyadic relation never holds in a given group of terms ?
8. What is a general proposition?
9. Does a general proposition have truth-value? Does a pro- 
positional form have truth-value?
10. How may a general proposition be used in a formal context 
with a universe of specific terms?
11. Have general propositions any use besides that of abbreviat­
ing descriptions in a specific system? If so, what other use 
or uses have they?
12. In a discourse where no specific propositions occur, how is 
the universe to be expressed?
13. What is the subject of such a discourse, i.e. what does the 
discourse describe ?
14. Do we ever assert general propositions in ordinary conversa­
tion? If so, how do we express the quantified terms involved 
in such propositions?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Classify the following expressions as (1) specific propositions, 
(2) general propositions, (3) propositional forms.
A. “Nobody knows the trouble I've seen.”
B. Yesterday was a warm day.

GENERALIZATION
in
C. “All Gaul is divided into three parts.”
D. Nelson won the battle of Trafalgar.
E. “Every lassie has her laddie.”
F. “Charlie is my darling.”
2. Express symbolically the propositional forms exemplified by:
A. I +  2 =  2 +  I 
3 4 * 5 =  5 +  3
7 +2 =2 +7
B. New York is greater than Boston.
London is greater than Paris.
Paris is greater than London.
C. If Paris is greater than London, then London is not 
greater than Paris.
If London is greater than Paris, then Paris is not greater 
than London.
(Suggestion: “ > ” is the usual symbol for “greater than.”)
3. Find two sets of values for which the following propositional 
form holds, and two for which it fails:
a is West of b and b is West of c.
Express in general propositions that it sometimes holds and 
that it sometimes fails.
4. Try to express the following general propositions symbolically:
A. Nobody is everybody's friend.
B. Nothing can come out of nothing.
C. Some people are twins.
D. Everybody has relatives.
5. Express, symbolically a system consisting of six streets of a 
certain town, as follows: Oak Street, Ash Street, Cedar Street, 
High Street, Front Street, Exeter Street. The constituent 
relation in the context is “parallel to.” Using your own 
symbol for this relation and the traditional symbols for 
logical relations, state the following propositions:
Oak is parallel to Ash.
Cedar is parallel to Oak.
High is parallel to Oak.
Front is parallel to Ash.
Exeter is not parallel to Oak.
Draw all possible consequences. Keeping within this specific 
system, state as many propositions as possible in general 
terms.

C H A P T E R  V
CLASSES
i .  I n d i v i d u a l s  a n d  C l a s s e s
A specific proposition always concerns a certain subject, 
which could be pointed out and given a proper name. It is 
about this or that subject; this boy James, this house called 
A, that place, that poem. Such a subject, whether it be a 
person, place, thing, or what-not, is termed an individual. 
Anything is an individual if it may be indicated, without 
any description, by pointing and saying “ this” ; and indi­
viduals are the terms of specific propositions.
Completely general propositions, on the other hand, 
never mention individuals. They may apply to specific 
subjects, but that is a very different matter. If the famous 
proposition “ all men are mortal” is applied to Socrates, 
then Socrates figures in a specific proposition, which 
describes an instance of the general fact asserted by the 
general proposition. “All men are mortal” entails “Socrates 
is mortal” by specification; that is what we mean by saying 
it “ applies to Socrates.”
Sometimes an application is so obvious or so important 
that the general proposition from which it is made is uncon­
sciously taken for a specific one. This is especially apt to 
be the case where there is only one instance of the expressed 
condition. For example, in the fable of Reynard the Fox, a 
complaint is brought that “some animal has killed a lamb.” 
This is a general proposition. But the guilty fox, feeling that 
it applies to him, cries out: “Your honour, it was not I!” 
and realizes too late that no accusation was made— no 
proposition about him was ever asserted— and he has need­
lessly given himself away by applying the statement to 
himself.

CLASSES
113
2. M e m b e r sh ip in a  C l a s s
What a general proposition does mention is a member, or 
members, of a certain class. “Any man is mortal” means that 
any member of a certain class, namely the class of men, is 
mortal. “ Some animal has killed a lamb” asserts that at 
least one member of the class of animals has killed a lamb. 
Logic does not deal with specific men or animals; it can 
apply to individuals if they are members of a class, but it 
can actually mention them only as members, not as indi­
viduals. We cannot say in logic, “ Reynard killed a lamb,” 
meaning by “ Reynard” an individual known by personal 
acquaintance; we can only say,
(Bx) : x is named Reynard and x killed a lamb.
But this tells us only that at least one member of a class is 
named Reynard, and has killed a lamb. It still leaves us with 
“ at least one,” not with “ this one.” The fact that this fox 
killed a lamb, that this is Reynard, goes beyond the sphere 
of logic; it requires sense-experience, to furnish a specific 
individual to which one may point
But the fact that such individuals may be members of 
classes makes it possible for logic, which deals only with 
“some, or all, members of a class,” to apply to individuals. 
Otherwise there would be no traffic whatever between logic 
and life. The relation of class-membership, therefore, is one 
of prime importance. For hundreds of years it has been 
confused with the relation of part to whole, and this circum­
stance has led to some of the most intricate metaphysical 
problems known to philosophy. The confusion we owe in large 
measure to the officious ubiquity of the little word “is” ; 
and its removal, to the fact that an Italian mathematician 
and logician, P e a n o , recognizing the difference between 
“is” and “is a,” honoured the latter relation with a special 
symbol, “ e,” the Greek letter epsilon (from “ cart” ). By 
means of a distinct notation, the relation of class-member­

ship may at last be clearly distingished from identity, 
inclusion, entailment, or any number of other relations 
named “is,” with which it has traditionally been con­
founded. Thus, to express briefly and concisely that Reynard 
is a member of the class “ fox,” we shall write:
Reynard € fox,
which may be read “ Reynard is a fox,” if we bear in mind 
that “ c” really means “is a member of the class,” and do 
not confuse it with other sundry meanings of “is.” Likewise, 
we may write
2 e number
A e house 
(3 a) : a e house
The relation of membership in a class must be distin­
guished from that of a part to the whole which it helps to 
compose. A class is not a composite whole, as a little reflec­
tion upon examples will show. Suppose, for instance, that 
the class of 1938 in a college enters with one hundred 
members, and this class pledges a graduation gift of $500 
to the college. Now, let 20 members of the class drop out 
in the course of its four academic years, and fifteen new 
members join during that time; is the pledge still valid? 
The membership of the class has changed; is the class which 
gave the pledge in 1934 still there to redeem it in 1938 ? If 
we were to treat a class as a whole composed of its members, 
then in 1934 there was no class of 1938. Then a class of 
persons would mean no more than “those people”— depend­
ing for its import on our actual acquaintance with certain 
individuals. But, obviously, we mean more than that. We 
know what we mean by the class “ fox” without knowing 
how many foxes there are, and it remains the same class, 
whether Reynard gets shot, or no. We know what we mean 
by “mankind,” which is a class, although obviously we do 
not know all its members. But if its members were the
114 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

CLASSES
parts of which the class were composed, then we could not 
know the class without knowing how many members it 
had, and recognizing them individually, as we must know 
individually who is meant by the demonstrative phrase 
"those people over there.” There is nothing permanent about 
such a collection; the phrase is meaningless as soon as the 
people disperse. If this were indeed the nature of classes, 
then the meaning of a class-name such as "mankind” 
would change with every birth and every death.
But if a class is not the sum of its members, what else is 
it? If the relation € is not that of a part to the whole, what 
else is it? Before we can answer these questions we must 
consider how classes are characterized and distinguished 
from each other.
3. C o n c e pt s a n d  C l a s s e s
A class is usually referred to as "the class of so-and-so's,” 
i.e. the class whose members have a certain character. 
Having this character, being a so-and-so, is what marks a 
thing as belonging to a class. A man, for instance, belongs 
to the class of politicians if and only if he is a politician. 
"Being a politician” is the character which determines his 
membership in the class of politicians.
But different people have different ideas of what it means 
to be a "politician.” So long as we let these vague ideas, or 
personal conceptions, determine what "politician” means, 
few people will always agree with each other as to whether 
Mr. So-and-so is a politician or not. Here it becomes a 
matter of importance to define the concept represented by 
various conceptions of "politician,” and to abide by the 
bare concept, in deciding the membership of a class. We 
cannot enumerate the class of "college students” if we are 
not agreed as to what characterizes a "college,” and what 
are the conditions of being a "student” in such an institu­
tion. We must fix the concept before we can decide on the 
propriety of applying it to this or that individual; and it is
«  5

the application of a concept that marks an individual as a 
member of a certain class.
A “‘class'' may be described, then, as a collection of all 
those and only those terms to which a certain concept applies. 
If we collect all the individuals to which the concept "being 
a fox” applies, we form the class of foxes. If we would form 
the class of prime numbers, we must indicate all the items 
to which the concept "prime number” applies. We may 
say, then, that a class is the field of applicability of a concept; 
in traditional logic, this field is called the extension of the 
concept.* We may not know just what this field includes, 
but we can refer to the field in general, i.e. to the field what­
ever it includes. We may talk about the extension of the 
concept "politician,” without knowing how great or small 
that extension is. That is why the notion of a class is not a 
collective specific notion, but a general one; for we may speak 
of "the extension of the concept ‘politician/ whatever this 
includes,” and that is the same as "the class of politicians.”
4. "D e f in in g F o r m s” o f C l a s s e s
What does it mean to say that Socrates is mortal? It 
means that at some time, Socrates must die. If "Socrates 
must die” is true, then Socrates belongs to the class of 
mortals. Also, if "Plato must die” is true, Plato is a member 
of this class; and "Apollo must die,” if it were true, would 
relegate Apollo, too, to the class of mortals. But "Apollo 
must die” is false; therefore Apollo is not a mortal.
Now, all these propositions exemplify the same form:
x must die
All their subjects are values for “x ” With some the resulting 
proposition is true, with others false. All those with which 
it is true are mortals, all those with which it is false are not
* The extension, or field of applicability, is traditionally opposed 
to the intension, or complete definition, of a concept. Further 
elaboration of these notions may be found in any standard Logic,
n 6  
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

CLASSES
mortals. Therefore the criterion for being a member of 
“mortals” is, to be a true value for x in the propositional 
form “x must die.” The class of mortals is the whole collec­
tion of true values of “ x” in this form. The form, then, may 
be said to define the class, since it furnishes the criterion for 
membership; therefore it is called a defining form of the class 
“ mortals”
The defining form of the class “mortals” is “x must die” ; 
of “mankind,” “ x is human” ; of “carnivora,” “x eats flesh” ; 
o f' 'politicians, ” “x engages in politics.'' In every case, the class 
in question is the range of applicability of the concept expressed 
by its defining form. This concept is called the class-concept, 
or sometimes the class in intension (see footnote above).
We may now answer the questions: What is a class, if 
not the sum of its members? and: What is €, if not the 
relation of a part to a composite whole? A class is the 
extension of a concept, whatever that extension may com­
prise. The relation €, of membership in a class, is the 
relation of falling under a concept. The class is not a fixed 
collection; it is defined by a propositional form, not by its 
specific members. If we understand the class-concept, we 
are acquainted with the class, even if we have never seen a 
single individual that belongs to it. Since concepts are 
abstractions, and classes are based on concepts, we may 
regard a class as a logical construction, a purely conceptual 
entity. Therefore a member of a class, being a concrete 
individual, cannot be a part of it in any literal sense; the 
relation “ <=,” or “membership,” is a peculiar and subtle one.
5. Cl a s s e s a n d  S u b -c l a s s e s
Despite their abstract character, however, classes may 
have parts— logical, not physical parts. For instance, the 
class of sheep may be divided into black sheep and white 
sheep. But “black sheep” is a class, and so is “white sheep” ; 
the class “sheep,” then, is divisible into at least two other 
classes. These are called sub-classes of the original class.
117

Since we are no longer talking about individuals, A, B, C, 
etc., we may put the Roman capital alphabet to a new use; 
and I shall henceforth let these letters denote certain classes. 
Individuals are only mentioned in general now, but classes 
are specified, in that we speak of the class of men, the class 
of sheep, and so forth. Therefore, capitals shall now represent 
classes, and lower-case italics, as before, stand for variables 
whose values are individuals, or (if quantified) 
for individuals in general.
If a certain class, A, is a sub-class of B, 
then every individual which is a member of 
A is also a member of B. If A is the class of 
white sheep, and B, sheep of all sorts, then A 
is a sub-class of B; every member of A is also a member of 
B, i.e.: every white sheep is a sheep. This may be expressed 
in a general proposition:
(x) : {x e A) O (x € B)
The class A is entirely included in the class B. A diagram 
(Fig. i) may show this more clearly. The large circle repre­
sents B, and all the asterisks that fall within it are “sheep,” 
members of B; the smaller circle is A, and all the asterisks 
within it are “white sheep,” members of A. Obviously they are 
all members of B as well. A lies wholly within B ; it is there­
fore called a sub-class of B. If it had a single member that 
did not belong to B, i.e., were it not entirely 
included, it would not be a sub-class of B.
By way of another example, let the class C, 
in Fig. 2, be the class of “royal children” in 
the old fairy-tale, The White Swans. There 
were seven royal children, six boys and one 
girl; all the boys were turned into swans by enchantment, 
to be redeemed by their faithful sister. Now, let P represent 
the class of princes. Every prince is a royal child, a member 
of C. In other words, (x) : (x e P) O {x e C).
But there is one member of C that is not a member of P;
n 8  
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
F ig . 2

CLASSES
119
that is the sister. C, then, is greater than P, and includes P 
as a proper part. P is a sub-class of C.
6. 
T h e  N o t i o n  o f  a  “ U n i t  C L A s s ,,
Suppose there were six princes in the story, and also 
six princesses; then we could form not only the sub-class 
“princes," but another sub-class, “princesses/' Let us call 
this latter class S, and describe it as a sub-class of C by the 
general proposition:
(x) : (x e S) O (x € C)
Obviously there would be such a class not only if there 
were six princesses, but also if there were four, or three, or 
if there were only two. The number of members in the class 
is immaterial, so long as every such member of S is also a 
member of C.
But in the fairy-tale there was only one princess. May 
we, then, claim to have a sub-class “princesses"? Yes, 
indeed; for the class of princesses is the extension of the 
concept “princess," and if this extension happens to include 
only one element, then that element is the sole member of 
the class. A class which has only one member is known as a 
unit class.
At first the notion of a unit class may seem a little difficult, 
because most of us operate with a conception of “class" 
based on the fancy of collecting individuals into a group. 
We cannot very well imagine ourselves collecting one princess 
into a group. But this is merely one of those extraneous 
personal conceptions, pictorial helps for the intellect, against 
which we must guard in logic. The concept of “class" involves 
no process of collecting individuals. It involves only the 
notion of a propositional form and the field of its applica­
bility; and of course some form might have only a single 
application, its variable might have only a single value that 
would yield a true proposition.
As a matter of fact, the idea of a unit class is not peculiar

to logic, nor unfamiliar to men of affairs. A committee of 
one is a unit class; it is a “committee” despite the fact that 
it has only one member, and its rights and duties are those 
of an appointed body of persons, not simply of an individual. 
A so-called “ corporation sole” is another case of a unit 
class. It functions exactly like a corporation of several 
members, except that all its offices devolve upon one and the 
same member. Again, if we count the number of families in 
a population, each family is a class of persons; in the case 
of a completely unattached individual, perhaps a stranger 
in the land, we have a family of only one member— a unit 
class. All these examples are homely and popular, and 
illustrate how often we use a logical construction in practical 
life which looks new and odd on paper.
How may we express in formal terms that a certain 
class, A, has only one member? We cannot enumerate its 
membership, because specific individuals are not named in 
logical discourse. So it is necessary to state in general pro­
positions that there is just one member (whatever individual 
that may be). Now, “just one” means “no less than one,” 
or: “at least one,” and also “no more than one,” or: “ at 
most one.” The first condition is easy to express:
(3 x) : x € A
That there is at most one, however, can be expressed only 
by asserting that any other one is identical with the one 
already mentioned. But another general proposition cannot 
refer to the same element mentioned above, because x in 
one general proposition need not mean the same thing as in 
another; so it is necessary to conjoin two propositions, one 
stating that there is a member of A, the other that any 
member of A is identical with that one: thus we have the 
conjunctive statement,
120 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
(3*) (y) : (x e A) . [(y e A) O {y =  *)]

CLASSES
121
“There is at least one x> such that, for any y, x is an A, 
and if y is an A, then y is identical with x ”
This limits the membership of A to some one element, x.
The conventions of language are very well adapted for 
expressing the condition of sole membership. When we wish 
to denote an individual as such, we use a name, without any 
article; but when an element is to be mentioned as member 
of a unit class, we employ the definite article, “ the,“ and use 
a word (or words) for the class-concept in the singular. 
“ The“ indicates that all members of the class are meant. 
“The sons of Charlemagne“ denotes all three members of 
that class, and if, unknown to history, there were more 
than three, the unknown ones are logically included in the 
denotation. “The city-states of Greece“ refers to all members 
of the class “city-states of Greece“ ; i.e. it means collectively 
all true values for the form:
x e city-state of Greece
If, then, we combine “the,“ which indicates that all members 
of a class are meant, with the grammatical “ singular 
number,“ which signifies that not more than one element is 
denoted, this combination expresses exactly the logical 
condition for sole membership: the whole membership of 
the class, yet only one element. So, to entitle a book: “ The 
Laws of Thought,“ implies that it contains all laws of 
thought; that any value for x with which “ x € law of thought“ 
becomes true, is treated in the book. The plural form of 
“laws“ means that there is more than one such law. But if 
we speak of “ the author of 'the Laws of Thought/ “ this 
refers to just one person, though not to a specific one; for 
“the“ means that “author“ refers to all values, collectively, 
for jy, in the propositional form:
y wrote “ The Laws of Thought“
and the singular form of “ author“ signifies that there is 
only one such value. Everybody understands the indications

122
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
of syntax in his own language; everyone knows that “ the 
author” refers to one person who is the sole writer of a certain 
book; but it takes a little reflection to realize that the com­
bined use of “ the” and a singular noun conveys: “ all 
members, and at most one, of the class in question.”
7. T h e N otion o f a  “ N u l l Cl a s s ”
The word “ the” means more than “ all” ; it also expresses 
the fact that there is at least one element in a certain class. 
If we speak of “The wife of King Arthur,” we mean (1) that 
we refer to the whole extension of the concept “wife of King 
Arthur,” and (2) that at least one element falls under this 
concept. So “the” really means “ all, and at least one.” 
The singular noun “wife” then adds, “ at most one.” The 
total combination conveys: “there is just one x, such that x 
is a wife of King Arthur.” But suppose that King Arthur 
had remained celibate; would the form: “ x e wife of King 
Arthur” define no class? Would the concept “wife of King 
Arthur” have no extension?
If we know what sort of thing we mean by a noun or a 
descriptive phrase, then there is a class of things defined 
thereby, for a “class” is exactly the same thing as a “sort.” 
Now, there may be no wife of King Arthur; then there is 
simply nothing of that sort. That is the same as to say there 
is no element which is a member of that class. The class, 
therefore, is said to be empty, or to be a null class.
If a class is empty, or “null,” then “all its members” 
means none at all. If King Arthur were unmarried, then 
“All wives of King Arthur are named Mary” would simply 
mean the same thing as “No wives of King Arthur are 
named Mary.” “All wives of King Arthur” makes sense, 
even if the King is a bachelor, for “ all” refers to the total 
extension of a concept, and may so refer even when this 
extension covers no elements.
Of course we are not likely to make remarks about “ all 
the wives” of someone who is not known to be married;

CLASSES
123
but sometimes we come across important propositions, 
expressed universally, that may refer to an empty class. In 
city parks one often sees signs that read: "All persons 
picking flowers, etc., will be prosecuted." This statement is 
true even when there happens to be no such person, i.e. 
when the class of flower-pickers, etc., is empty.
But obviously, we could not say: " The persons picking 
flowers will be prosecuted/' if we do not know that there 
are any. We cannot refer to “ the wife of King Arthur" if 
he is unmarried. "The" connotes existence as well as uni­
versality. It combines the senses of (x) and (Bx) into: 
"all, where there is at least one." And in doing this it offers 
another example of the way several logical conditions may 
be telescoped into one modest little word (sometimes even 
into a mere word-ending) by the genius of natural language.
8. 
T h e  N o t i o n  o f  a  " U n i v e r s e  C l a s s "
Suppose, in a given universe of discourse, we form a 
class A such that “x e A" holds for all values of x, i.e. 
such that
(x) : x e A
This is not difficult to do. If we resort to the simple system 
expounded in the previous chapter, of houses in the relation 
"nt," we may form the class of "houses which are not to the 
North of themselves." Obviously this class comprises all 
elements in the universe of discourse, since
(x) : ~  (x nt x)
It is therefore called a universe class.
In ordinary language, any statement about "everything" 
concerns a universe class. "Everything is mutable" asserts 
that the class of mutable things contains all elements in the 
universe, i.e. that
(x) : x may change

124
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Also, every statement about "nothing” may be expressed 
as a statement about a universe class, because what is true 
for nothing is false for anything. Thus, "Nothing is created 
from empty space” means that anything you like is not so 
created:
(y) : ~ (y  is created from empty space)
Note that the opposite of this characterization, i.e. the form: 
“x is created from empty space” 
defines a null class. Likewise in the system of houses, where
(x nt x)
defines a universe class, the positive form: “ (x nt x)” defines 
a null class. These two forms are always correlative; and 
because this is the case, we do not need a quantifier for 
"no x,” but can get along with "all x” and the denial of the 
form that characterizes an empty class. To say that every- 
thing lacks a certain property, is the same as to say nothing 
has it. Formally, then, assertions about a null class are 
always expressed as denials about a universe class; and we 
define a universe class whenever we make a universal state­
ment about the elements in a universe. For instance, if our 
universe contains "creatures,” and we say:
(x) (3y) : xi my
then the class of "creatures having a fellowman” is a 
universe class. But even when the statement is particular, 
but involves a universal condition, a universe class is defined; 
for instance, in a system discussed in Chapter III the con­
stituent relation was "liking,” and “ a likes 6” was expressed 
as "a lk £>.” We might very well assume that there is one 
person who likes everybody (including himself), i.e.
(3a) (ib) : a lk b
This is a particular proposition, because its first quantifier

CLASSES
125
is particular; but it expresses as universal the condition of 
“being liked by a ," and the class of “ elements liked by a** 
is a universe class.
9. I d e n t it y o f C l a s s e s
One class is said to include another if every member of 
the latter is also a member of the former. “ Royal children" 
includes “princes," because every member of “princes" is a 
member of “royal children." It is natural to assume that 
the included class is smaller than the including one.
Suppose, however, that we form a class, “ Passengers on 
the first trip of the Mayflower** (call this class A), and 
another class, B, “ Founders of Plymouth." We have here 
two very different defining concepts. But it so happens that 
every passenger on that famous trip was one of the Founders 
of Plymouth, so A is included in B; and also, every founder 
of Plymouth was a passenger on the Mayflower*s first trip, 
so is not B included in A? By the definition of “inclusion," 
which we have adopted and by which we must abide, this is 
exactly the case. The two classes are mutually inclusive, for 
they have the same membership. They differ only in their 
definitions, or, as logicians say, they differ in intension. 
Their extensions, however, are exactly alike.
If we relate classes to each other by their intensions, 
then “ Passengers on the first trip of the May flower* * and 
“ Founders of Plymouth" have nothing to do with each other. 
But if we relate them by their extensions, then these two 
have the closest of all possible relations— they are identical. 
The extension of A is the extension of B; so we say, the two 
class-concepts define the same class.
It is much more practical to take classes in extension, 
i.e. as exemplifications of a concept, than in intension, or 
as pure meanings. The first and strongest reason is that a 
completely extensional treatment gives us a simple principle 
of relating classes to each other, namely the principle of 
common membership. If we depend upon intensional relations,

then most concepts have nothing to do with each other at 
all; and a systematic ordering of concepts becomes an im­
possibility, except in very small compass. For instance, in 
the example given above, “ Passengers on the first trip of the 
Mayflower” and “ Founders of Plymouth"’ have nothing 
whatever in common if we take them intensionally; to a 
person knowing the respective meanings of these phrases,
i.e. understanding the concepts expressed, but not knowing 
anything of their applicability, they would reveal no rela­
tionship whatever. It is only because their extensions coincide 
that we can say: “The passengers on the first American trip 
of the Mayflower are the founders of Plymouth.” The con­
cepts as such offer no clue to each other; their only related­
ness lies in the fact that they determine the same class. 
This fact is too valuable to be neglected or despised by 
logicians; so, when they are faced with a choice, whether 
to treat classes as extensions or as intensions (pure concepts), 
they usually decide in favour of the former.
Another reason for dealing with classes in extension is, 
that a class in extension is described by a general proposition. 
A systematization of pure concepts might be aesthetically 
gratifying, but would have absolutely no relation to the 
systematization of mundane facts, which we call “science.” 
General propositions, however, occur in science; and the 
systematization of general propositions is the great contri­
bution of logic to the concrete sciences. But general pro­
positions, which are quantified propositional forms, always 
refer to members of a class, for it is only of such that we can 
say “ all” or “some.” Obviously only propositions about 
extensions can be quantified; there is no sense in prefixing 
“all” or “some” to the meaning of “house” or of “ founder 
of Plymouth.”
Two defining forms, then, may define one and the same 
class. That is what is meant by saying, two classes which 
have the same membership are identical, or two mutually 
inclusive classes are identical. Formally, “A includes B”
126 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

CLASSES
127
means “ (a) : (a e B) O (ac A);” and “A includes B and B 
includes A,” i.e.:
(a) : (a e B) O (a € A) . (a e A) O (a e B) 
may be expressed by the simple equation,
A =  B
10. T h e U n iq u e n e ss o f “ i ”  a n d  “ o”
Now let us return once more to a simple and familiar 
system, to study a further condition of its logical structure. 
I assume once more the system K (a, b . . .) fm, of creatures 
in the relation of “ fellowman.” Suppose our universe to be 
composed of human beings; then
(a) (3 b) : a fm b
The class of “creatures having a fellowman,” then, is a uni­
verse class. Let us call it by a special name, the number “ 1,” 
to connote “wholeness” or “totality.” It includes everyone 
of the K-elements. Furthermore, it is a general proposition 
of the system that
(a) : ~  (aim a)
No creature is its own fellowman; therefore the class of 
“creatures which are not their own fellowmen” is another 
universe-class, which I will call “ 1',” for it also includes all 
the if-elements. These two classes, then, are identical, for 
they have exactly the same membership. It is not hard to 
see that all universe-classes within a formal context are 
identical. So, instead of speaking of “ a universe class” in 
the context K(a,b...) fm, we may speak of “ the universe 
class” in this context. This class, the class including every­
thing, may be defined by various propositional forms; but 
whatever concept we may use to form it, it is still the one 
unique class, which is commonly called “ 1.”
That all universe classes in a context are identical is easy 
to grasp, because we can review their membership in imagina-

128
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
tion. But suppose that in the same context we form the 
class of those creatures which are fellowmen to themselves; 
since there are no such creatures, this class, which I call 
“ o ” is empty, is a null class. Its extension is zero (hence 
the appropriate symbol o). Now, consider the class of all 
those creatures which have no fellowmen at all; in a universe 
where “ (a) (36) : a fm b” holds, that class must also be null. 
Call it o'. Its extension also is zero. The extensions of o 
and o' are, therefore, the same; and all null classes are 
identical. This is not so easy to visualize in one's mind as 
the identity of all universe classes, yet a little reflection 
makes it acceptable; there is only one class “nothing." The 
difficulty lies in thinking of any null class in extension, since 
it has no elements.
One genuinely logical problem presents itself, however, 
in this connection: if o =  o', then it is, of course, defined by 
the defining form of o', which is:
(6) : ~  (aim b)
(Note that this expression remains a form, although b is a
general term; the fact that a is not quantified leaves it a
variable, so the expression reads “ a has no fellowman,”
which is a propositional form.) But it is also defined by the
form: 
-
aim a
To have no fellowman and to be one's own fellowman are 
incompatible conditions; how, then, can they define the 
same class?
The answer is, that the null class is the one and only 
class which may have incompatible properties, and more 
than that, it is the class which has all incompatible properties, 
which all absurd combinations of concepts define. It is the class 
of round squares, secular churches, solid liquids, and fellow­
men without fellowmen. For to any of these we must say 
there is no such thing. The class of round squares is null, 
the class of secular churches is null, etc., etc. It is, indeed,

CLASSES
129
rather hard on the imagination to suppose that all round 
squares are all secular churches, and also all round squares 
are all married bachelors; but imagination is no measure 
of logical possibility or fact, and besides, no one is called 
upon to imagine that there is a round square which is a 
married bachelor or a secular church. It is comforting to 
know that there is none. There is, however, the Null Class; 
and since it is defined by all forms that have no true values, 
it most conveniently saves us from having to deal with all 
sorts of structures that might look just like defining forms 
but define no class. Such forms define the null class.
Common sense considers a class as a finite selection of 
elements, including more than one and less than all the 
elements of the universe from which the selection is made. 
Ideas such as that of a class with only one member, or with 
all possible members, or no member at all, are unfamiliar. 
Yet we use them constantly, and in just the way logicians 
recommend. Even the commonest of common-sense philo­
sophers would agree that all statements about “every­
thing” are about the same “ everything” ; that there may be 
committees of one, and that in country schools the graduating 
class may have one member; and that “nothing” =  
“nothing” no matter by what concept we describe it. All 
that logic demands of us is the explicit admission that 
“everything,” “ nothing,” and the committee of one or the 
modest graduating class are classes. If only this is conceded, 
we demand no more stretches of imagination and con­
ception, for the whole system of classes and of relations 
among them, which is the topic of the next chapters.
Summary
Specific propositions deal with individuals. An individual 
is anything that might be pointed out, indicated by “ this,” 
or given a proper name. General propositions deal with 
some or any member of a class, and refer to individuals only 
indirectly, i.e. by applying to them. A general proposition

13°
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
expresses a general condition in a class; a specific proposition 
quotes an instance of such a general condition.
The relation of a member of a class which contains it is 
not that of a part to a whole. “ Is part of” and “is a” are 
distinct relations. The latter is symbolized by “ e.”
A class is determined by a concept, known as the class- 
concept for that class. The concept may be expressed through 
a propositional form, which is called the defining form of the 
class in question. A propositional form always contains a 
variable (for the present we have restricted our study to 
defining forms of one variable). Every value for this variable 
with which the form yields a true proposition is a member 
of the class defined; so, the membership of the class consists of 
all true values for the variable in the defining form.
The meaning of a concept is called its intension, the range 
of applicability its extension. A class, then, may be defined 
as the extension of a concept. If we speak of a class by 
merely naming its class-concept, we are considering the 
class “ in intension” ; if we speak of it as a group of things 
exemplifying the concept, we treat it “in extension.” Thus, 
“ the class ‘fox’ ” is named in intension, “ the class of foxes” 
in extension.
If all the members of one class are also members of 
another, then the first class “in extension” is included in 
the second. This does not mean that their intensions have 
anything in common. The class which is included is called a 
sub-class of the other.
Since we are never to name certain individuals any more, 
the capital Roman alphabet is released from its original 
service and may be put to the new use of naming certain 
classes.
To say a class A is included in a class B, one may use a 
general proposition about members of A and B respectively, 
and say:
(x) : (x e A) O (x e B)

CLASSES
Since a concept may be such that it applies to only one 
thing in the world, there may be classes of only one member. 
In natural language, “the so-and-so," where a singular noun 
is used, denotes a sole member of a class. The member must 
not be confused with the class; for the member is an indi­
vidual, but the class is the extension of a concept. A class 
of just one member is called a unit class. The formal state­
ment that a class, A, is a unit class, requires the joint 
assertions that there is a member of A, and that every 
member of A is this member.
If a concept has no application, i.e. if the variable in the 
propositional form expressing the concept has no true 
value, then the form defines a null class.
If a concept applies to every element in a formal context, 
then its extension is a universe class.
Two classes, A and B, which have the same membership 
are mutually inclusive; for, in this case,
(*) : [(*eA )0(*€B )].[(*€B )0(*«=A )]
So by the definition of “inclusion/' A is included in B, and 
B is included in A. Their two class concepts have the same 
extension, i.e. their two defining functions define the same 
class. Two mutually included classes are identical.
This shows that a class may have more than one defining 
function.
Since all universe classes in a formal context have the 
same extension, namely “ everything," all such classes are 
identical; so we may speak of the universe class in a formal 
context.
The same holds for all null classes; their extensions are 
all alike, namely “ nothing," so all null classes are identical, 
and we may speak of “ the null class."
The null class is defined by any form that has no true 
values. It is the extension of any concept that has no appli­
cation. Hence, all pairs of incompatible concepts, combined 
in one defining form, define the null class.
131

AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. How do specific propositions differ from general ones?
2. In what way can general propositions have any bearing on 
individuals at all?
3. Is a class identical with the things in it ?
4. How are classes related to (1) concepts, (2) propositional 
forms? What is (1) a “class-concept,” (2) a “defining 
form” ?
5. What is a “class in extension” ? A “class in intension” ? Give 
examples.
6. What is a unit class? How does one express in logical sym­
bolism that a class, A, is a unit class ?
7. What is a universe class ? A null class ? How does one express 
formally that A is a universe class ? That B is a null class ?
8. What is a sub-class?
9. What is meant by “inclusion” among classes? By “mutual 
inclusion” ? How is mutual inclusion expressed in logic? 
What is meant by saying two classes are identical ?
10. How many universe classes may be formed in a given formal 
context ? How many null classes ? How many unit classes ?
11. How many defining forms may belong to one class? How 
many classes may one form define ?
12. What class is defined bv “x e living mammoth” ? By “x nt x” ? 
By “x =  x” ?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Express in logical symbolism:
Fido is a dog.
Fido is a dog and not a cat.
No dog is a cat.
Every dog is an animal.
Collies are a kind of dog.
2. Form three sub-classes of humankind. Name each one in 
extension and in intension, and cite (1) the class-concept, and 
(2) the defining form. Express symbolically, for each class, 
that it is a sub-class of the given class.

CLASSES
133
3. Express symbolically:
There is just one Pope.
George VI is the King of England.
Everything must perish.
The king can do no wrong.
4. (a) Give two examples of unit classes.
(ft) Express two propositional forms defining the same class 
(not the null class).
(c) Express two propositional forms defining the null class.

C H A P T E R  VI
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES
i .  T h e R e lat io n  o f Cl a s s-I n c lu sio n 
In the previous chapter, I pointed out that it is advan­
tageous to regard classes in extension, because from this 
point of view they exhibit relations to one another which 
their mere intensions, i.e. the meanings of their class- 
concepts, do not allow us to infer. The only relation intro­
duced in that chapter was that of class-inclusion. Since 
classes are logical constructs, not physical things, 4'class- 
inclusion,^ of course, does not mean just the same thing as 
“inclusion” of (say) one box in another; it is used in a 
special sense. Just what this sense is, we know from the 
definition: “A is included in B” means
(x) : (x e A) O (x e B)
The relation between A and B, which we express directly 
by the word “ inclusion,” is here described indirectly, in 
terms of class-membership; inclusion figures as a logical 
relation between two cases of class-membership. That is a 
perfectly adequate but very complicated rendering of the 
close and simple connection between A and B. If the words: 
“A is included in B” may be taken to mean the state of 
affairs described in the formula, then certainly we may as 
well employ a symbol to express the relation directly between 
A and B, and stipulate that this expression is to be equi­
valent to the longer description in terms of c. The traditional 
symbol used for this purpose is < . It is the mathematical 
sign for “is less than,” originally adopted with the idea 
that the included class must be “less than” the including 
one. We have seen that this need not be the case, since two 
identical classes include each other; but, barring this one 
case, the suggestion of the sign is not bad, so we may follow

common usage in letting <  stand for “is included in.” 
Thus,
A <  B
is read: “class A is included in class B,” or: “A is included 
in B,” and is known to mean:
(x) : (x € A) O (x € B)
“Every member, x, of A is also a member of B.”
These two expressions are equivalent to each other by defi­
nition; we have defined <  in terms of x, e, and O. Wherever 
we find one expression we may substitute the other if we 
like, for they mean the same thing. Now, “ equivalence 
by definition” is a relation between propositions, and a 
relation between propositions is called a logical relation; 
so we have here a new logical relation, which I shall denote 
by “ =df,” “is equivalent by definition to.” * Whenever 
the use of a new symbol is defined in terms of an older 
convention, it should be formally introduced as equivalent 
by definition to the old; so we shall now define the expression 
“A <  B” as follows:
“A <  B” =df “ (*) : (x e A) O (x e B)”
The introduction of new symbols by definition is a very 
important device in logic, for it often saves us from typo­
graphical complications that threaten to become perfectly 
unreadable, and allows the eye to glance with ease over 
very complex structures. But it must always be borne in 
mind that a defined symbol does not carry a new idea; it 
is a concentrated rendering of an old idea, and its meaning 
could be expressed with equal accuracy, only not with the
* In Principia Mathematica 
this 
relation 
is 
expressed 
b y  
“ . . . =  . . . . def,” as in: “pDq . =  . 
pVq def.” B u t the use of a 
split sym bol for a simple d yad ic relation seems to  me unfortunate, 
as also the use of “ = / ’ m eaning equality of terms, for equivalence of 
propositions. So I use th e sign of logical equivalence, 
and
combine it d irectly w ith the modifier “ d f."
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES 
135

i 36 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
same dispatch, by the exclusive use of old symbols. It is a 
mere shorthand. Nevertheless, in dealing with anything as 
intangible as logical structures, our whole ability to recognize 
these structures at all may hang upon the possibility of 
symbolizing them in a way which eye and mind can readily 
follow. Where symbols are our only tools, the importance 
of a “mere” symbol, even of a “mere shorthand,” may be 
momentous. Also, a defined symbol may have psycho­
logical advantages that were lacking to the terms in which 
it was defined. This is certainly true of the symbol < ; it 
is easier to think of “sub-classes of a given class” than of 
“members of classes which (members) are also members 
of a given class.” Sub-classes may be visualized, as in the 
diagrams used with § 5 of the foregoing chapter. A complex 
structure of e-propositions is hard to envisage by any 
diagram.
2. C o n se q u e n c e s o f th e D e fin it io n  o f “ < ”
In using a defined symbol such as < , and giving it a 
familiar name, like “inclusion,” one always runs a little 
risk of dragging into the discourse some personal concep­
tions and other irrelevant suggestions attached to the 
symbol or the word. But in logic, the symbol stands fora 
strict concept, namely its definition, and nothing else; this 
fact may place some peculiar restrictions upon the use of 
the word by which we render it. For instance, if “one class 
is included in another” means “every member of one class 
is a member of the other,” then it follows that every 
class is included in itself; for certainly, every member of 
a class is a member of that class. The proposition
A <  A
looks strange to common sense, but is perfectly acceptable 
by the definition of < ; and shows us at once that the tech­
nical use of a word may be broader than its ordinary use.

Another and more obvious result of the definition is 
that every class which can be formed within a formal 
context is a sub-class of 1. Since 1 contains all the elements 
in the universe, every other class must be included in it; 
and we have seen that it includes itself, because every 
class is self-inclusive. So, if we wish to characterize the 
universe-class in terms of <  instead of c, we may say that 
it is the class which includes all classes. Clearly, no other 
class can have this property; for if there were another class 
having this property, say 1', then 1 would include 1', by 
its characterization; and by virtue of the same charac­
terization 1' would include 1, so we would have
(i' <  1). (1 <  1')
a case of mutual inclusion; and that means identical 
membership; so 1 =  i'.
Mutual inclusion, like self-inclusion, is an idea unfamiliar 
to common sense, but sanctioned by the logical definition 
of < . The more sanctions our definitions will grant, the 
more powerful is the defined relation, and the broader will 
be the uses to which we can put it in sorting out, com­
paring, and ordering the classes that may be formed within 
a universe.
In fact, the notion symbolized by <  is so far-reaching 
that all relations of classes in extension may be expressed 
by it. The fundamental principle by which classes are 
related is that of common membership; of their having 
all, or some, or no members in common. This gives us five 
possible types of inclusion: (1) Mutual inclusion or identity 
of classes. (2) Complete inclusion of a lesser in a greater 
class. (3) Partial inclusion of one class in another, or “ over­
lapping” of two classes. (4) Complete inclusion of two or 
more classes in one greater class, or “composition” of a 
class out of lesser ones; and (5) Complete mutual exclusion 
of classes. All these cases may be visualized in diagrams, 
where the classes are depicted as circles, whose areas signify
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES 
137

the extensions of class-concepts. Suppose two classes, A 
and B, to have the same extension; the circles representing 
them will exactly coincide, so the diagram for type i is a
138 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
( * ©
©
@
Type /. 
Type 2 
Type 3
A <  B, B <  A, or A = B 
B < A  
A x B < A , A x B < B
F ig. 3. 
F ig. 4. 
F ig. 5.
single circle. The second type, complete inclusion of a lesser 
in a greater class, we have already discussed, and pictured 
(chap, v, § 5), but its diagram is given here for the sake of 
completeness. Type 3, however, is new, and merits special 
attention.
3. P a r t ia l  I n c lu sio n  o r C o n ju n c t io n  o f Cl a s s e s 
Two classes, A and B, neither of which includes the 
other, may yet have some members in common. In this 
case the circles representing them would overlap, though 
neither falls completely within the other. It is not true that 
(x) : (x € A) O (x e B), nor that (x) : (x € B) O (x e A); but 
it is true that (3*) : (x € A) . (x e B). There is at least one 
individual which is a member of A and is a member of B.
The class of those elements which are members of A 
and also members of B is called the product of A and B, and 
is symbolized by A x B. Two classes which have members 
in common are said to be conjoined; so the operation ex­
pressed by x is called conjunction.
The defining function of the class which is the product of 
A and B, i.e. the defining form of the class A x  B, is
(x e A) . (x € B)
Clearly, then, every member of A x  B is a member of A, so 
A x  B is a sub-class of A; and by the same principle, 
A x  B is a sub-class of B. Moreover, since the class A x B

is defined by the form just mentioned, everything that is 
both an A and a B must belong to A x B ; so we may assert 
the general proposition:
{x) : [(x € A) . {% e B)] 0 (x*A X B)
In terms of < , we may say that (A x  B <  A ). (A x  B <  B). 
Its members are all those elements which have the pro­
perties both of A and of B.
Like most logical concepts, the product of two classes is 
simply an explication of a very common practical notion. 
Whenever we characterize an individual by more than one 
trait, we class it under two or more class concepts, i.e. we 
put it into a class which combines the defining functions 
of two other classes. A red apple belongs to the class of red 
things and the class of apples, i.e. the class defined by
(x e red thing) . (x e apple)
a female dog is of the class “ females x  dogs,” it is both a 
female creature and a dog. Or, to deal with more interesting 
classes, let A stand for the class of “Englishmen” and B 
stand for “ Socialists.” Not all Englishmen are Socialists—  
we cannot assert that B includes A— nor are all Socialists 
Englishmen, so we cannot say A includes B; but we can 
form the class of “ English Socialists,” and this is the “over­
lapping” of the circles in the diagram of type 3, A x  B. 
Obviously, “English Socialists” is a sub-class of “English­
men,” and also of “ Socialists.” It is the product of the two 
classes, “ Socialists” and “ Englishmen.”
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES 
139
4. J o in t I n c l u sio n , o r D isju n c t io n  o f Cl a s s e s 
Two classes may be related to one another by a third 
class. If we take two classes, A and B, together as one class, 
this new class contains everything that either belongs to 
A or belongs to B ; so it is called the sum of A and B, and is

expressed, just like a mathematical sum, as A - f  B. Its 
defining form is
(x e A) V (x € B)
So we may assert the general proposition,
(*): [(* € A) V (x e B)] O (x e A +  B)
“ It is true for any individual that if either it is an A, 
or it is a B, then it is a member of A +  B.”
In the accompanying diagram for type 4, the whole area 
enclosed in the dotted line represents the extension of 
A +  B. Obviously, if anything is an A, then it is an “A 
or B,” so A is a sub-class of A +  B; and likewise, B is a 
sub-class of the sum of A and B. Moreover, if A and B 
happen to overlap, so that there are elements belonging to 
A x  B, these belong to A, and there­
fore to A +  B; and also to B, and 
A+B therefore to 
A +  B. What is both A
Type4 
and B is doubly sure to belong to at
(a<a+b) (b<a+b) 
least one of 
them. So the existence of
F ig . 6. 
A x  B need 
not trouble us; A x  B
goes in with A and B to compose the sum of them, 
A +  B. Two classes which compose a third are said to be 
disjoined; and the sign +  is known as the sign of dis­
junction.
If you tell the cook to throw out all the apples which 
are either over-ripe or wormy, you are talking about the 
class “Wormy apples +  over-ripe apples.” This is a disjunc­
tion, or sum, of two classes. The cook presumably under­
stands that if any of the apples are both over-ripe and 
wormy, she is to throw them out, too; she takes for granted 
that “Wormy x over-ripe” <  “wormy +  over-ripe.” There 
may be no apples that have both defects, or a few that 
have, or they may all be wormy and over-ripe; your 
order has covered all three cases.
Disjunction of classes may enter into very important
I40 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

definitions. Consider, for instance, what is meant by a 
native citizen of the United States. There is a class of persons 
bom of American parents. They may be born in China, or 
Holland, or the Congo, or in the United States, but they 
must be born of American parents. Let us take A in the 
diagram of type 4 to stand for this class. There is also a 
class of persons born on American soil. These may be born 
of Russian, or Chinese, or English or any other parents, 
perhaps of American parents; but they must be bom on 
American soil. We will let B represent the class of such 
persons. Now, there is a third class, that of native Americans, 
to which belong all people who are either bom of American 
parents or bom on American soil. Native Americans are all 
persons belonging either to A, or to B, or to both. Obviously, 
very many of them belong to both— are bom on American 
soil, of American parents. The class of native Americans is 
the class A +  B. It is the disjunction, or sum, of A and B, 
persons bom of American parents and persons bom on 
American soil. The area within the dotted line represents 
this class.
Logically, nothing is changed if we assume two such 
classes to be entirely distinct, i.e. to have no members in 
common. For instance, Parliament— the class of Parlia­
mentarians— is the sum of two mutually exclusive classes, 
the House of Commons and the House of Lords; every 
member of Parliament is a member either of the House 
of Commons or of the House of Lords, and no one belongs 
to both. If we let A stand for the 
class of Commons and B for that of 
Lords, then “ Parliament” is the class 
A +  B. Whenever we write an ex­
pression 
like A +  B, 
it must be 
understood to mean, “Either A, or B, 
or both, in case anything is both.”
Two classes are mutually exclusive if their product 
is the null-class, i.e., in the case of A and B above, if
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES 
141
Type 5
A X B =  0
F ig. 7.

A X  B =  o. There are no individuals who are both Lords 
and Commons; the class of such persons is zero. Also, there 
are no carnivorous cows; if A means “carnivora” and B 
means “cows,” then A x  B =  o. This is the fifth type of 
inclusion-relation, shown in the figure on p. 141 : complete 
mutual exclusion.
i42 
a n  introduction to sym b o lic logic
5. T h e P r in c ip l e  o f D ic h o t o m y: A a n d  -A
Whenever we form a class within any universe of dis­
course, then every individual in that universe must either 
belong to the class, or not belong to it. If our universe is 
“houses” and we form the class of “ two-storeyed houses,” 
then every house falls either within or without this class; 
for, every house either has two storeys, or it has not. If it 
has not two storeys, it may have one, or one and a half, or 
three, four, . . . n storeys, but it is a “not-two-storeyed” 
house. If our universe is “creatures,” and the sub-class 
“cats,” then every creature is a cat or a non-cat, whether 
the latter be dogs, men, or microbes.
This is simply the ancient and honourable method of 
classification introduced by Aristotle, the division of a 
universe, known as the fundamentum divisionis, into what 
is A and what is not A. Suppose we let the universe =int 
“creatures” ; the universe class 1, in this universe is the class 
of “ all creatures.” Now, let A stand for “cats.” Then
(x) : (x € A) V ^  (x e A)
“For every x, either x is an A or x is not an A.” So there is 
a class for the defining form ctx e A,” and another for the 
defining form “ ~  (x e A).” The latter depends for its ex­
tension entirely on A, for it takes in, by definition, any­
thing that A leaves out, since obviously nothing can both be 
and also not-be a cat. This class is called the class not-A, 
and is usually written -A. Since everything in the universe 
belongs either to A or to -A, the universe class must be the

PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES
M 3
sum of A and -A; i.e.,
1 =  A +  - A
It does not matter what class we form, if this class takes 
in less than the whole universe, there is a remainder in 1; 
and if we call the class (say) C, this remainder constitutes 
the 
class of not-C, or -C. 
If 
D =int “ dogs,” then
1 =  D +  -D
“ Creatures” =  “ dogs +  
not- 
dogs” ; 
also, 
we 
know 
that 
“creatures” =  “horses +  not- 
horses,” 
“mosquitoes 
+  
not- 
mosquitoes,” “ men +  not-men.”
The divisions may cut across 
each other, as “male” and “not- 
male” (in a universe limited to 
bi-sexual creatures, not-males are 
females) cuts across the division 
between men and not-men, dogs 
and not-dogs. (Seethe accompany­
ing diagram.)
Every class creates a dichotomy, or “ division-in-two” ; 
for every class, say N, defined by a form “x € N” auto­
matically determines a class with the following form,
“ (*e-N)”
Two classes which have no members in common, but 
divide the universe between them (A and -A, N and -N, 
etc.) are called complementary classes, for each needs the 
other to complete the universe. Each is the complement of 
the other.
So far we have dealt with classes having some members, 
but less than the entire universe. The complement of a
1 >V>V I = men 
lo0o0o0o0J = not men
w m  -
^
 = notdogs
|3C"C-£-E| = males
||!» |!ililil = females (not males)

144
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
class, however, was said to be determined by negating the 
defining form\ and this definition does not tell us anything 
about the membership of the class. If a defining form of a 
class can be negated, then the class has a complement. 
Now, this may always be done. Suppose we take the defining 
form,
# e creature
This, in our formal context, defines the universe class. What 
class, then, is defined by
(x € creature)
in this same context ?
The null class, o, is defined by negating any defining 
form of the class i. So it follows from our definition of 
complementary classes that the universe class and the null 
class are each other’s complements. Every element that is 
not included in “everything" is “nothing/'
In dividing the universe of creatures into cats and not- 
cats, I used the defining form
x € cat
which defines the class of cats; and this in turn was seen to 
determine the class of not-cats. But suppose I had started 
with the form:
x is unfeline
this would have defined first the class of not-cats. Let us 
call that class A. Now, the only class defined by
(x is unfeline)
is the class of feline creatures, i.e. cats. Therefore, if “not- 
cats" is A, “cats" is -A. Which class is A and which is -A 
depends on which we choose to express by a defining form. 
Positive and negative concepts have nothing to do with 
this. Male and female are equally “positive" notions, but

in a universe of bi-sexual organisms they are complements; 
if “ females” is (say) B, then “males” is -B, and vice-versa. 
The complement of any named sort of thing is “something 
else,” and this need not be a “ negative” or “privitive” or 
otherwise less-favoured sort. If we name the latter first, 
the original class becomes the “negated” element.
6. The Importance of Dichotomy: Negation
Two complementary classes not only divide the universe 
between them, but are also mutually exclusive. This follows 
immediately from the nature of their defining forms: one 
form is the denial of the other. Consequently, no element in 
the universe can be a true value for both forms, i.e. no indi­
vidual can belong to both classes. No creature can be a 
cat and not be a cat; if A =int “cats,” then A x -A =  o. 
Whatever is a cat and not a cat, is nothing.
The significance of dichotomies in the universe is that 
it makes a negative statement, such as:
(3#) : ~  (x e A)
equivalent in meaning to another, which is positive in form :
(3#) : x € -A
That is, the denial of an -individual's membership in a given 
class may be replaced by an assertion of its membership in 
another class; since it must belong to one class or the other, 
a denial of the form “x € A” is equivalent to an assertion 
of the form “ x e - A ” ; and as it cannot belong to both 
classes, the assertion of one proposition is as good as a 
denial of the other. In this way, all negative propositions 
about class-membership may be replaced by positive proposi­
tions, namely by assertion of membership in the comple­
mentary classes.
If we wish to combine classes either by conjunction or 
disjunction, we need positive statements about their member­
ships. We cannot relate, say, cats (C) and dogs (D) through 
the concept <  at all, if all we know is
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES 
145

(x) : (x e C) O ^  (x e D)
(x) : ( ^ e D ) 0 ^ ( ^ c C )
Since there is nowhere a common element, <  cannot be 
introduced between C and D. But if ~  (x e D) is equivalent 
to (x 6 -D), and ~  (x e C) is equivalent to (x e -C), then
(x) : x € C 3 (x e -D) 
which is equivalent by definition to:
C <  -D
and likewise, of course,
D <  -C
Here the relation of type 5 is also expressed in terms of < , 
or class-inclusion. The principle of dichotomy gives us two 
great liberties in logical expression: (1) it allows us to turn 
negative statements into positive, or positive into negative 
ones, to suit our purposes of arrangement and calculation; 
and (2) it lets us express the case of complete exclusion as 
an inclusion. In the following chapter, the advantage of 
such alternatives in expression will become more and more 
apparent. At present I can point out only how the reduction 
of all inter-class relations to <  makes 
for neatness, and that the replace­
ment of a negative defining form by 
the positive form that defines the 
complementary class makes this re­
duction possible. Diagrammatically, 
we have now two classes, A and B, 
each of which lies entirely in the 
complement of the other; for if everything horizontally 
striped is -A, and everything vertically striped is -B, A is 
vertically striped and only vertically; B is horizontally 
striped but only horizontally; and everything else is striped 
both ways. Everything that is neither A nor B is both -A 
and -B, i.e. it is -A x  -B. Note that there is no area re­
presenting A x B; one of the weaknesses of diagrammatic 
expression is that it cannot represent 0.
i46 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES
147
7. T h e U b iq u it y  o f th e N u l l C l a s s 
One reason why o cannot be represented by any diagram 
is the very odd but perfectly logical fact that the null class 
is included in every class. Every extension includes “nothing.” 
This is frankly not a common-sense notion, yet with the 
common-sense ideas we have so far employed to establish 
relations among classes, this somewhat surprising pro­
position may be demonstrated in several ways. It follows 
from what has so far been granted; and, being thus within 
the law, it must be accepted.
The easiest way of demonstrating it takes us back to 
the discussion of the null class in the previous chapter 
(§10), where it was said that the null class is the class 
which has all incompatible properties. It is the class of 
things which, for instance, are cats and not-cats:
x € A . x € -A
defines the null class.
So we may say that
{x) : (x e o) O (x e A) . (x e -A)
But if o is thus included in A and in -A, it must at least 
be included in A, and at least in -A. So o is included in 
every class which is a member of a complementary pair; 
and since every class has a complement, every class includes
o. So we may add, somewhat belatedly, to our list of conse­
quences from the definition of <  : whatever class we call A,
o <  A
The null class is ubiquitous; it is included in every class.
8. C o m pl e m e n t s o f S u m s a n d  P r o d u c t s 
Every class which may be formed in a given universe 
has a complement; this must apply, then, to sub-classes of 
any given class, or to composite classes, as well as to those

which we name by a simple letter. I have already shown 
that it applies to o and i.
If two classes have elements in common, or, to speak 
graphically, if they “overlap,” then the common part, or 
the product of the two, is another class. If our classes A 
and B are “ soldiers” and “brave men” respectively, then 
there is a Class C, “brave soldiers,” a sub-class of soldiers 
and of brave men. This class C is the product of A and B, 
that is,
C =  A x B
But if we have a class C, we must also have -C; therefore 
there must be a class
-(A x B)
This class -(A x  B) includes everything that is not both brave 
and a soldier. A diagram (Fig. io) will show this clearly.
148 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
A X B 
-(A X B)
Fig. io.
-(A x B) includes all the A which is not B, since this is 
not both A and B; all the B which is not A, for the same 
reason; and everything that is neither A nor B.
The sum of two classes, say the same A and B, is likewise 
a class within the universe. There is a class D which includes 
all soldiers, brave or not, and all brave men, soldiers or not. 
This is the sum of A and B :
D =  A +  B
But if D is a class, then there is a -D which is its comple­
ment; that is, there is also a class
-(A +  B)

PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES
14 9
The class of men who are not “either brave or soldiers.”
A +  B 
-(A +  B)
F ig . 11.
This class is the complement of the sum A +  B.
Since the complement of any class is a class, we may 
combine not only our original classes, A and B, to form 
sums and products, but also A and -B, B and -A, and 
every such combination will yield another class. There is 
a class A x -B, and an A +  -B; -A x B and -A +  B; and 
of course these have complements: - ( A x  -B), -(A +  -B), 
-(-A x B), -(-A +  B). The easiest way to grasp all the 
possible combinations and the dichotomies they create is 
by the use of diagrams (Fig. 12).
c ®
|A 
GrV
(*(j| j|LJB 0 0 )
A X -B
-(A X -B)) A +  -B
-(a  +  -b;
-A H— B
-(-A +  -B)
Fig. 12.
It is excellent practice to draw the circles A and B, 
choose some arbitrary combination of A, B, -A, -B, and 
shade the proper portions; then in another diagram shade 
the remainder, or complement. The shaded portion always 
represents a single class.
9. Equivalent Expressions 
Suppose we turn back to a simple deductive system,
K(a, b . . .) nt2 
K =int “houses”
nt =int “to the North of”
Granted propositions:
1. (a) : ~  
(ant a)
2. (a, b) : — [(a nt b) . (b nt a)]
3. (a, b, c) : [(a nt b) . (6 nt c)] O ( nt c)

The conditions here laid down are (i) that no house is to 
the North of itself, (2) no two houses are to the North of 
each other (which is the same as to say that if one is to the 
North of the other, then that other is not to the North of 
the first), and (3) if one house is to the North of another, 
and that other to the North of a third, then the first is to 
the North of that third. These three conditions are obvious 
facts to anyone who knows the meaning of “nt.”
Now, suppose we single out some element, call it x, and 
say there is at least one (perhaps more than one) house to 
the North of 
we have then the general proposition,
(Bx) ( By) : y nt x
150 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
The condition of being North of x may apply to any
number of individuals in K. But a condition which may or
may not apply to one, or to several, individuals, is a class-
concept. 
,
r 
y nt X
where x is a certain element, is a defining form, and defines 
a class, call it Ax, of “houses North of x.” Consequently,
(y) : "y nt 
=df “y e Ax”
We have defined Ax so that henceforth “y n t*” shall be 
equivalent to “y e Ax.”
Now, suppose there is such a term y, i.e. Ax is not o, and 
that we take a certain y in A* ; then certainly,
(z) : (z nty) O (z nt x)
By the third of our granted general propositions, any house 
North of y must also be North of x\ that is, the above con­
dition implies that z e AXi because it is North of y. But 
“any term North of y 99 refers us to a class of “houses North 
of y 99 Let us call this class By. Therefore
(z) : (znty) O (zntx)
may also be written:
(*) : (z € B y) 3  (* e A *)

“Any house, z, that is 'a house North of y’ is also a ‘house 
North of x.’ ”
These two statements are equivalent. Wherever we may 
use one, we may also use the other, and the choice rests 
only upon our personal preference or practical convenience. 
But the statement:
(*) : (* 6 By) ° ( z e  A x)
asserts that any member of By is also a member of Ax; and 
this is known to be equivalent, by definition, to a yet 
simpler expression:
By <  Ax
The class of “houses to the North of y” is included in the 
class of “houses to North of x ”
So we have three expressions for the same fact, in the 
context K  (a, b . . .) nt2; one of these is formed entirely of 
the original terms and relations, the other two are worded 
by means of defined terms (A*, Bv), and defined relations (in 
one case €, in the other <). The meaning, however— the 
actual state of affairs referred to— is the same in all three of 
these propositions:
1. (3 x, y) (2) : (z nt y) O (z nt x)
2. (z) : (z € By) O (z € Ax)
3. By <  A,
For the first one reads:
(1) “There are two houses, x and y, such that any house z 
which is North of y is also North of x.” Obviously, then, y 
is either identical with or North of x.
The second reads:
(2) There are two classes, “houses North of x” and “houses 
North of y ” such that any house in the latter class is also 
in the former. Hence any house North of y must be North 
of x ; which is statement (1), just given above.
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES 
151

AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
152
The third one reads:
(3) There are two classes, “houses North of x” and “houses 
North of y ” the latter of which is included in the former. 
This, again, means simply that every house in the latter 
is also in the former class; and that is statement (2), which 
has been found equivalent to (1).
To have so many different ways of saying the same 
thing may seem like looking for trouble, like confusing the 
issue with more symbols than necessary, and overloading 
one's mind with vocabulary at the expense of clear concepts. 
But the power of recognizing equivalent expressions is the 
test of clear apprehension. All ingenuity, all skill in logical 
thinking requires this ability to re-express the same pattern 
in simpler and more manageable ways. The real import of 
such a concept as “class-inclusion" is understood only if 
we can connect this concept with other concepts, as here 
we connect it with “nt" and “O" or with “ e" and “ O," so 
that we may use the concept where the particular terminology 
is lacking; just as we were taught in school to turn fractions 
into decimals and vice-versa, so as to have always the most 
convenient method of reckoning at our disposal. It does us 
no good to draw circles and express inclusions if our material 
is given in terms of individuals and a constituent relation 
unless we can pass from the elementary propositions of that 
context to classes and <  by means of €. The intelligent 
use of equivalent forms is the touchstone of logical insight.
An example of this general fact is the way the notion of 
“ exclusion" may be turned into one of “inclusion" by the 
well-aimed definition of “complements." Without the defined 
notion of “-A," we would always be left with the one 
case of class-relationship that could not be expressed in 
terms of < . But by this device, the relation <  has at once 
become universally useful, has been empowered to express 
every pattern of classes, every combination that the graphs 
can show (and even more, e.g. o <  A). Anyone who is

ambitious to use the principles of symbolic logic should 
acquire the habit of translating "defined" symbols into 
their defining terms, of passing freely from one type of 
expression to another, without losing sight of the funda­
mental meaning that inspires all our logical formulations, 
and holds them in check with the reins of common sense.
Summary
The main reason for taking classes in extension rather than 
in intension is that the former allows us to use the relation 
of 
class-inclusion. "A <  B" =df “ (x) : (x e A) O (x e B).” 
Where the meaning of 
is defined in other terms,
for instance in terms of x, e and O, the expression 
"A  <  B " is merely shorthand for the longer expression on 
the other side of the sign "==df."
If the definition thus given is really taken seriously, it 
follows that (1) A <  A, (2) A <  1, (3) o <  A, for any class 
called A. Wherever a symbol is defined, all consequences of 
the definition must be accepted even though they violate 
the ordinary sense of the word by which we have named the 
symbol.
The relation <  as here defined serves to express all 
relations of classes in extension. There are five types, or 
degrees, of inclusion: (1) Mutual inclusion, or identity; 
A =  B. (2) Complete inclusion of a lesser in a greater 
class, A <  B. (3) Partial inclusion of one class in another, 
or overlapping; the overlapping part, or product of A and B, 
is called, A x  B. (4) Joint inclusion of two classes in a 
greater class, or composition; the two classes A and B, 
disjoined to form a greater one, are called the sum of A and 
B, or A +  B. (5) Complete mutual exclusion of A from B, 
or A x B =  o.
Whenever we form a class in a universe of discourse, the 
universe thereby is divided into two (perhaps very unequal) 
parts; namely, what is in the class and what is not in the class. 
The latter part, or remainder, forms another class correlative
PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES 
153

154
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
to the given one, known as its complement If the class is 
called A, its complement is -A, called “ not-A.” Its defining 
form is: ^  (x e A).
This division of a universe into A and -A, B and -B, etc., 
is called dichotomy.
The advantage of the principle of dichotomy is that by 
forming a class such as -A, we may turn negative state­
ments about the membership of A into positive ones about 
the membership of -A. For instance, in type 5, the fact 
that A is entirely excluded from B could not be expressed 
with <  because there was no inclusion. But if everything 
excluded from B thereby belongs to -B, then “ A is excluded 
from B ” may be written with < , as: A <  -B. The notion 
of complementary classes, i.e. the use of -A, -B, etc., 
makes it possible to express all relations among classes (in 
extension) in terms of < .
The diagrams cannot picture the class o. This class is 
included in every possible class. There are several ways of 
demonstrating this fact; the simplest proof is, that o is the 
common part of every class and its complement, and the 
“common part” is contained in both classes.
Since the sum of two classes is another class, and every 
class has a complement, such a sum, e.g. A +  B, has a 
complement, -(A +  B); likewise every product has a com­
plement; and the complement of any class may enter 
into further sums and products, so that any combination 
of areas in a diagram represents a class, and whatever is 
left of the diagram is the complement of that class.
Relations among classes may be expressed either with 
<  or with e. If we know how membership in a certain class 
is defined, we may further reduce e-propositions to pro­
positions in the terms of the definition. This gives us several 
alternative ways of expressing the same fact. It is very 
important to cultivate skill in recognizing equivalence in 
different propositions, because a statement fits into a 
certain context only if it is formulated in terms of that

PRINCIPAL RELATIONS AMONG CLASSES
155
context, but our information may come to us in a very 
different form. If we operate with the notion of "inclusion,” 
then information about the "exclusion” of one class from 
another does us no good unless we can turn it into a case of 
"inclusion.” The translation of an idea from one formulation,
i.e. one kind of expression, into another requires practice; 
but it is a test of our real comprehension of the idea.
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. How is "A <  B” defined in terms of membership ?
2. What is meant by saying two expressions are equivalent ?
3. What are the principal relations among classes?
4. If A =int “honest men” and B =int “musicians,” what is 
meant by: A X B, A +  B, B <  A?
5. What is a dichotomy?
6. What is meant by calling two classes, A and B, “comple­
mentary” ? If A is “horses” and B its complement, what 
class is B? How is the complement of A usually expressed?
7. Has o a complement? Has 1 a complement?
8. What are the logical advantages of forming a class -A?
9. How may exclusion of A from B be expressed in terms of <  ?
10. Has the sum of two classes a complement? If so, how is this 
written ?
11. How is o expressed in a diagram? How is 1 represented?
12. What is meant by “equivalent expressions” ? Can you give 
an equivalent expression for: C =  A x  B?
13. What is the purpose of introducing equivalent expressions?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Express in terms of e:
A < B 
A x B  + 0 
A =  B 
A +  B =  C
2. Express the defining forms of the following classes:
White swans.
Non-combatant men.
Musicians or actors.
Musicians who are actors.

3. Express in two ways (i.e. with e and with <  or =):
There are no unicorns.
“Children” are boys and girls.
No men are gods.
All men are animals.
4. Express with c, with <, and by a diagram (i.e. with circles) 
the relations of “married men” and “white men” in a universe 
of “all men.”
5. In the following diagrams, shade the portions representing 
the class named under each one:
156 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
( 3
0
A +  B
( 3
0
A +  -B
( 3
0
1
( 3
0
A X B
( 3
0
( 3
0
( 3
0
( 3
0
A x -B 
-A +  -B 
-(A +  B) 
-A
F ig. 13.
6. In the system cited in § 9, try to define the following classes:
(1) Houses on the same latitude as x.
(2) Houses to the South of x.
7. Express in two alternative ways:
There are some houses North of x.
All houses North of a certain house x are on the 
same latitude with a certain house y.

C H A P T E R  V I I
THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
i. Relations and Predicates
The system of houses, which served as an example in the 
previous chapter, was based upon a general K  of individuals 
(houses) and a dyadic relation. All elementary propositions 
in such a system have to be expressible in terms of two 
elements. In order to construct a class, such as A, we must 
select some fixed element, m> which shall serve as one end, 
or one pole so to speak, of the relation, while "being the 
other end” is the class-concept for the class we want to 
form. Every class, then, is relative to some given element, 
since the defining form of the class must be a dyad. Had we 
started with a triadic relation, such as "between,” we should 
have had to fix two elements to generate a class; e.g. "the 
class of terms between a and 
or "the class of terms not 
between a and £>.”
Ordinarily, however, we do not invoke relationship to a 
given term in order to form a class; we form such classes 
as "white houses,” "two-storeyed houses,” etc., without 
reference to any given term. What sort of formal context 
does this require? What relation functions among the 
elements of our universe to generate a class of "white 
houses” ? If there is no relation among the elements 
of the universe, such as "nt2” or "bt3,” how can we 
have any elementary structures of terms, i.e. elementary 
propositional forms in the given context, to define classes 
of elements?
The answer rests upon a concept which is usually the 
first thing we meet in approaching logic: the concept of 
predicates. Traditional logic begins with terms and their 
predicates, rather than with terms in relation; but I shall 
now try to show why "symbolic” logic, or the study of

structures, is better begun with relations, and how the 
notion of predicates fits into it.
Every relation, as was shown in a much earlier chapter, 
combines its terms two, three, four, 
^ at a time; this 
numerosity of its terms, called its “ degree,” is its most 
fundamental characteristic.
The lowest degree we are acquainted with is 2. A relation, 
it appears, must be at least dyadic, must affect at least two 
terms at a time. But suppose, just by way of using all 
possibilities, there were a relation which affected only one 
term at a time, so that every term in the universe either had 
it or failed to have it; it would always give rise to a pro­
position, but to a proposition of only one term. “ Being 
white” has the properties of such a relation; any term, a, 
has it or does not have it, but since there is no second term 
we cannot say that a has this relation to any other. Such a 
relation of “monadic” degree is called a predicate.
There is considerable disagreement among philosophers 
and logicians as to whether it is “ fair” to call a predicate 
a monadic relation, or whether it is something utterly 
different from relations. I cannot see that our judgment 
one way or the other in this matter makes any difference. 
Let us agree that “relation” is one thing, and “predicate,” 
“quality,” or whatever we choose to call it, is another; all 
that I wish to call attention to is that predicates figure in 
logical systems exactly like relations of a single term—  
they have all properties that a monadic relation would have. 
They characterize one term at a time, hold or fail for every 
element in a single universe, give rise to propositions of one 
term when used with a specific or generalized element, and 
to propositional forms when used as a variable. Such pro- 
positional forms serve as defining forms of classes. What 
more or what less could a monadic relation do? Our treat­
ment of predicates, then, follows the pattern adopted for 
relations; and we may say, according to our philosophical 
inclinations, either that predicates are relations of a single
158 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
i59
term, or that all relations have two or more terms, but 
predicates function instead of monadic relations in a system.
The use of predicates, however, is characteristic and 
limited; for predicates do not connect terms directly with 
each other. If we use “wt“ for the predicate “is white,“ 
and say “ (3a): wt a,“ this does not connect a with any­
thing else, as does the proposition: “ (3a, b): a nt 6.“ A 
system K  (a,b. . .) wt, would have to be entirely in­
ductive; we would have to be told for every element, a, 
whether “wt a” holds, or 
(wt a),“ for the ascription of a 
property to one element does not so much as mention any 
other. Such properties as “holding only one way,“ “holding 
only for distinct elements,“ “connecting an element with 
itself,“ etc., which come in question for genuine relations, 
are meaningless where there is but a single term.
The only important use of predicates in a logical structure 
is classification. Their great significance lies in the fact 
that they generate the simplest type of defining form, namely 
a form requiring no “fixed“ element (specific or general), 
but containing only one element, the variable whose values 
constitute the defined class. Thus the propositional form
wt x
“ x is white,“ defines the class of white things, without any 
mention of a term to which such “white things“ are related. 
Predicates are the most economical, most natural, and most 
usual means of classification. When we think of, say, a 
sub-class in the universe of “houses,“ we may indeed think 
of “houses North of x,“ but we are more likely, in ordinary 
discourse, to think of “brick houses,“ “white houses,“ 
“colonial houses,“ etc., without reference to any relation 
among houses. That is to say, where our main purpose is 
classification, we are more likely to start with a formal 
context containing elements and predicates than with a 
relation-pattern in the strict sense.
Because the sole business of predicates in logic is to

define classes, I have not introduced them into this dis­
cussion until, in due course, the argument had proceeded 
from 
elements-in-relation, via propositions, forms, and 
general propositions, to classes. In a study of structures, 
genuine relations are more essential than predicates, which 
present merely a special case. But now we have come to 
that case : the case of the simplest kind of defining form for 
a class.
For the same reason, namely the intimate connection of 
predicates with classes, so-called "Aristotelian" or "tradi­
tional" logic begins its discourse with a consideration of 
subjects (terms) and predicates; for the older logic is a logic 
of classes. Its fundamental concepts are "individuals," 
"classes" in common-sense conception, and a relation "is," 
which is sometimes taken to be e, sometimes < , and some­
times = . Since this logic takes the existence and precise 
conceivability of classes for granted, it naturally deals with 
predicates, the instruments par excellence for distinguishing 
classes, before it considers true relations; and because I 
have here presented classes as constructions in a formal 
context, I have begun with true relations, the instruments 
of elementary construction, and considered predicates as a 
special case with a special function.* The chief advantage 
of this latter treatment is that it does not sustain the dis­
tinction of kind between so-called "subject-predicate" pro­
positions and "relational" ones, but assigns to the former 
their exact place in a wider field of logic.
2. C l a s s e s a s  I n d isp e n s a b l e  C o n st r u c t s in a  S y st e m
Since predicates may be treated as "monadic relations," 
there is no particular difficulty in assuming a formal context 
wherein such predicates take the place of constituent rela-
* An analogous contrast may be traced throughout the two views 
of logic; the older one tends to reduce relations to predicates, until 
it ends in such doctrines as the “intemality of relations"; the present 
view tends to treat predicates as relations, and ends by making the 
predicate a pragmatic fiction called the “monadic relation."
i6o 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
161
t'ions. Suppose we use the familiar universe of “houses,” 
but, instead of “nt2,” use “wtlB” We may say of every house 
that it is white, or that it is not; that is, the two propositional 
forms we can make with “wt” and one element are:
and
wt x 
~  (wt x)
We may quantify these as we like; since there is only one 
element to quantify, we have just four possible general 
propositions 
(a ):w ta
(a) : ~  (wt a)
(3 a) : wt a 
(3a) : ~  (wt a)
Furthermore, we may combine such forms by logical 
relations, and manipulate the quantifiers, to say that there 
is just one element which is white, or just two, just three, 
etc.* But beyond this we can make no structural dis­
tinctions by predicative general propositions. For all a 
predicative proposition can do is to classify an element, and 
all that its generalization does is to delimit the class.
This fact would reduce predicates to a very trivial position, 
were we always limited to just one in every system. So far 
we have dealt entirely with systems of only one constituent 
relation, because a relation of dyadic or higher degree 
furnishes enough complication all by itself. But of course 
it is possible to have several relations in a system; we might 
assume a context:
K(a, h,c . . .) lk2, br2, md3 
K =int “persons”
lk =int “likes” 
br =int “is a brother of” 
md =int “mediates between”
* The method of expressing in general terms “there is just one 
such-and-such“ was given in chapter v. “There are just 2” may 
be expressed similarly, as follows:
&*. y) (z)\x + y .  [(* =  x) V (z =  y)]
Higher numerosities may, of course, be similarly expressed.

The possible combinations of propositions in such a context 
would reach a staggering figure, yet their relations, though 
complex, would be perfectly definite; a system so con­
structed should be logically irreproachable.
Where the constituent relations are represented by 
predicates, it is not at all impracticable, even for a novice 
in the art, to manipulate more than one. Let us assume two 
predicates instead of one with our given K\ we have, say,
K(a,b ...) wt, bk 
K =int *'‘houses” 
wt =int “is white” 
bk =int “is of brick”
The elementary propositional forms in such a context are:
wt a 
~  (wt a) 
bk a 
~  (bk a)
Since there is but one element in such a form, it is com­
pletely generalized by a single quantifier; and as each form 
may take either one of the quantifiers, there are eight 
elementary general propositions:
1. (a) : wt a
2. (a) : ~  (wt a)
3. (a):bka
4. (a) : ~  (bk a)
5. (3a) : wt a
6. (3a) : ~  (wt a)
7. (3a) : bk a
8. (3a) : ^  (bk a)
Certain ones of these general propositions cannot be 
asserted together: 
thus 1 and 6, 2 and 5, 4 and 7, 3 and 8,
are contradictory pairs; 1 and 2, or 3 and 4, may be jointly
asserted only in the trivial case that K  is empty, i.e. that 
there are no houses. But, barring contradictions and jokes, 
we may have any selection of these elementary propositions ;
i62 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
163
and what is more, any individual must be determined in 
two ways, namely, in respect of both predicates. A system 
with two predicates requires compound propositions for each 
generalized term; that is, it is not enough to know that some 
houses are white and some are brick, but we must know 
whether any of the white houses are also brick, etc. So we 
have the further possibilities:
9. (a) : (wt a) . (bk a)
10. (a) : (wt a) . ~  (bk a)
11. (a) : ~  (wt a) . (bk a)
12. (a) : ~  (wt a) . ~  (bk a)
13. (3a) : (wt a) . (bk a)
14. (3 a) :( a) w t. ^  (bk a)
15. (3 a) : ~  (wt a) . (bk a)
16. (3 a) : ~  (wt a) 
(bk a)
Here again there are, of course, certain contradictories; 
in fact, the increase of determinations has greatly heightened 
the chances of contradiction. Of the four universal pro­
positions, only one can be true; and if one is true, then the 
only particular proposition that can be true is the one that 
exhibits the same form. If, however, none of the universal 
propositions is true, then all the particular ones may be 
true together. These facts may be easily apprehended by 
common sense, by considering some imaginary house under 
the various possible rubrics.
There are other characterizations to be made for a single 
element, by asserting certain logical relations between the 
two predications. Thus, any house may be “ either white or 
brick,” “either white or not brick,” etc. This gives us a 
third list of eight possible general propositions:
17. (a) : (wt a) V (bk a)
18. (a) : ^  (wt a) V (bk a)
24. (3a) : 
(wt a) V ~  (bk a)

i64 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
But if we have made our choices among 9-16, all the truth- 
values in 17-24, as well as in all possible propositions related 
by O, will be found already determined.
At present I shall leave this very important logical fact 
to the slip-shod corroboration of common sense, and merely 
adduce it to explain why we need not carry out the enumera­
tion of general propositions about a single term beyond 
proposition 16.
Suppose we make a choice of consistent general statements 
in our universe
K  (a, b . . .) wt, bk
Let us assume:
13. (3a) : (wt a) . (bk a)
14. (3a) : (wt a) . ~  (bk a)
15. (3a) : ~  (wt a) . (bk a)
16. (3a) : ^  (wt a) . ~  (bk a)
These are very powerful propositions; the four of them 
together determine the truth-value of all other possible 
propositions of one term, as anyone may prove to him­
self who cares to juggle combinations and contemplate the 
sense of any resultant assertion. But what sort of pattern 
do our ‘‘accepted facts” present? Not a single element has 
been related to another. What connection among houses has 
been established by introducing two predicates into our 
universe of discourse?
The only pattern which emerges is one of classifications. 
The two predicates have given rise to four propositional 
forms,
wt a 
~  (wt a) 
bk a 
~  (bk a)
each of which defines a class; and the general propositions 
of our system declare that each of these classes has members

(note that propositions 5-8 are implicitly given in 13-16), 
and that certain of them have members in common. So, 
instead of thinking in terms of “some element” and its 
predicates or lack of predicates, we may shift our conceptual 
outlook to the contemplation of four specific classes and 
their relations to one another. The only connection among 
dements which can be established by predicative propositions 
is common membership in a class.
In a context where predicates figure in place of con­
stituent relations, the formal arrangement of elements 
always falls into a pattern of class-distinctions and cross- 
classifications, and it may fairly be said that the construction 
of classes is the first step in dealing with such a context. 
The first thing we do is to pass from general elementary 
propositions in logical relations to classes in class-relations. 
The transition is effected by definition:
(x) : “w t*” =df “ x e W”
(*) : “bk x” =df “ x € B ”
This changes our “ assumed” propositions to:
(3a):(fl€W).(acB)
(3a ):( ac W). ~  {a € B)
(3 a): ~ ( a e  W) . (a e B)
(3 a) : 
W) . ^  (a € B)
By a further definition, familiar from the previous chapter, 
namely: 
(a e B)” =df “a € -B,” we may simplify the
statements to:
(3 a): (a cW ).(a cB )
(3 a): (a c W) . (a e -B)
(3 a): (ae-W ).(aeB) 
(3a):(ac-W).(ac-B)
What is the point of changing “wt a ” into “ a € W” ? It 
is a transitional step to the much easier, briefer, and more
THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES 
165

natural statement of the whole system in terms of classes, 
and classes alone. For, by all the expositions of a former 
chapter, we know that
f‘(3«) : (a € W) . (a € B)” ^df "W  x  B * o"
Consequently the four propositions assumed for our system 
may be written as statements about the specific classes W, 
'"white houses," and B, "brick houses," as follows:
W X  B * o 
W x  -B #= o 
-W x  B * o 
-W x -B 4= o
The economy of symbolic expression here is obvious; 
but another advantage presents itself in the fact that we 
may now resort to diagrammatic expression, which is a tre­
mendous aid to logical insight. Graphically, 
our propositions assert that W and B over­
lap (W x  B 4= o), yet neither is entirely 
included in the other (W X -B 4= o and 
-W x B 4s o), and they do not, between 
them, exhaust the universe-class (-W X -B 
4= o). Here is the whole system in a form so simple, so 
visible, that all its relations may be intuitively grasped—  
the height and ideal of logical explication.
3. C l a s s e s a s  " P r im it iv e  C o n c e pt s" in a  S y st e m  
The admirable simplicity of statement which has thus 
been reached is bought, however, at the price of elaborate 
definitions. The clear and economical propositions, that 
express the whole system in a handful of symbols, rest upon 
a tedious process of translation and re-translation. Before 
we ever assert the fundamental facts that certain classes 
are not empty, i.e. not equal to o, we have to construct the 
notion of "class" and of "equal to o." Our whole formal
i66 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
F ig . 14

context has to be reformulated before we can begin to say 
the simplest thing.
But a formal context in which the simplest thing cannot 
be said is not a well-chosen context. What is the use of 
introducing individuals and predicates if we are not going 
to talk about them? Why start with a general universe of 
houses, if our real concern is the interrelationship of specific 
classes of houses! Our propositions prove to be, in the end, 
all specific; they are about parts of W and B, and the fact 
that those parts are unequal to the class o. We started out 
bravely with a general K , only to drop it completely out of 
sight; and with wtx and bk1, never to mention them again. 
The only relation we finally assert is = , which is short­
hand for mutual inclusion, for a double use of <  between 
two classes. Now, could not all this preliminary labour of 
restatement be avoided? Is it necessary to drag in the 
forms “wt a” and “bk a" at all, to reveal the structure we 
want to see?
Every system rests upon a certain number of primitive 
concepts, terms and relations which are not defined, but 
simply taken for granted; their meaning is given by inter­
pretation only. In the context with which we started, these 
primitive concepts were “houses"— undefined elements, 
whose meaning was assigned by interpretation— ana two 
predicates, wtx and bk1? also supposed to be understood in 
advance. We may just as well start, however, with primitive 
elements of another sort, say with a certain number of 
specific elements which are to mean, by interpretation, “ the 
class of white houses," and “the class of brick houses," and 
their complements and sub-classes. The relation < , which 
in the old context was defined in terms of e, which in turn 
was defined by the predicates wt and bk, may now be taken 
as a constituent relation, to mean, by interpretation, “is 
included in." So we solve our problem by assuming an 
entirely new formal context, one whose elements are certain 
classes:
THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES 
167

K(B, W, -B, -W, B xW , B x  -W, -B xW , -B x  -W, o, i)<
K  =int “ classes of houses”
B =int “els* of brick houses”
W =int “els of white houses”
-B =int “els of not-brick houses” 
-W =int “els of not-white houses” 
B x W  =int “ els of white brick houses”
168 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
0 =int “els of no houses”
1 =int “els of all houses”
Ten elements and a dyadic relation will give us ioo specific 
propositions. Most of these we may assert or deny from our 
general knowledge of classes: thus, we know
B <  B 
W <  W
i  <  i;
Also, 
B <  i
W <  i 
-B <  i
Also, 
o <  B
o <  -B 
o <  W
O <  I
We know that a class which, by interpretation, means the 
* “els" (pi. “clss”) is the usual symbol for “class."

overlapping part of two classes, must be included in both of 
them:
B x  W <  W 
B x  W <  B 
B x  -W <  -W 
B x  -W <  B
THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES 
169
But one thing we cannot know is, whether any of the given 
classes is included in o. Since o is included in every class, 
any class included in o must equal o, since it provides a 
case of mutual inclusion; so, to express for any class— let 
us say, B— that it equals o, it is sufficient to say
B <  o
This guarantees that B is empty. Then any sub-class of B 
must, of course, equal 0, too; any part of the empty class 
is empty.
Here we must look to our “granted propositions." We 
are told that B x W =#0, i.e.
-  (B x  W <  o)
Neither B nor W, then, can be empty. Also,
~  (-B x W <  o)
~  ( B x  -W <  o)
~  (-B x -W <  o)
That is to say, there are some white houses of brick, and 
some not of brick; some brick houses not white; and some 
houses neither white nor made of brick. Now, these are all 
the possible conjunctions of predicates, so the description 
of our universe is completely settled by four arbitrary con­
ditions and the nature of “ < .” If we wish to form such 
further classes as B +  -W, -B +  -W, etc., their places 
in the system, i.e. their inclusion-relations with other

classes, may all be learned by deduction; but that is a fact 
which had better be taken on faith in this chapter and 
explained in the next. The ten classes in K  do not comprise 
all sub-classes of i that could be made by juggling B and W ; 
but they are all we need to describe any others.
Here is a much simpler system than that of individuals 
and predicates: a system of classes and inclusion, which 
refers by interpretation to those very individuals with those 
very predicates. There has been a shift in our conceptual 
material; the same classes which in one system were ela­
borate constructs, are “primitive elements“ in the other. 
The relation < , which was defined, in the first system, by 
logically related elementary propositions, has become in 
the second system a constituent relation giving rise to 
elementary propositions. The whole structure is analysed, 
so to speak, on a different level. No individual can figure in 
this “higher“ pattern, since the undefined, ultimate ele­
ments of K  are classes, and are above the level of individuals.
This brings us to an important point which is sometimes 
overlooked in the literature of logic: namely, the radical 
distinction between K , the universe of discourse, and i, 
the universe class. De Morgan, who originated the term 
“universe of discourse,“ namely the total collection of 
terms (or “names,“ as he calls them), warned against the 
fallacy of identifying this “universe“ with the greatest 
class that may be formed in it. “Nothing is more easy,“ he 
says, “ than to treat the supposition of a name being the 
universe as an extreme case.“ * John Venn, whose Symbolic 
Logic appeared in 1881, adopts the notion from De Morgan, 
describes the “universe of discourse“ unmistakably as the 
sort of collection I call “if,“ and then identifies it with 
the universe-class, which he calls i.f So he introduces 
precisely that confusion against which De Morgan cautions
♦ A. De Morgan, Formal Logic (1847), edited and republished by 
A. E. Taylor, London, 1926.
f J. Venn, Symbolic Logic, London, 1881, ch. viii passim.
iyo 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
171
him; and any number of writers, especially in elementary 
treatises, have followed him in this practice.
The ground of their error is that they are concerned 
sometimes with classifying individuals and sometimes with 
relating classes to each other. In a if  of individuals, the 
greatest class we can form out of these individuals happens 
to coincide with K . But when we are relating classes to each 
other, the greatest class, 1, is not K, but is an element in K, 
just like any other class. If we take any element in the 
context 2£(B, W, B x  W . . .  1) < , say B, the relation of 
B to 1 is, B <  1; but its relation to K  is B e K. Likewise, 
1 e K y but 1 < K \ K  <  K, or 1 € 1, would be nonsensical. 
So the identification of 1 with K, the "universe class” with 
the "universe of discourse,” rests upon a fallacy which is 
not apparent in a system of individual elements, but is 
immediately visible when we deal with a K  whose elements 
are classes.
4. T h e G e n e r a l iz e d  S y s t e m  o f Cl a s s e s 
We have passed from a system of individuals and 
predicates, a general K(a, b .. .) wtx, bkx, to a system 
of 
certain classes and 
their 
< -relations, a 
specific 
if(B, W. . . o, 1) < . This takes us back to an earlier stage 
of logical study, back to a system expressed in lists of 
analogous, specific propositions (cf. ch. iv); only there 
our terms were such-and-such persons, and now they are 
such-and-such classes. But the same canons of generalization, 
which led us from
- ( A f m A )  
~  (B fm B)
to the general proposition :

172 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
I 
(a) : ~  (a fm a)
allows us to pass from
(B x  W <  B ). (B x  W <  W)
(-B x  W <  -B ). (-B x  W <  W)
to the general fact that, if x and y are any two classes, then
II 
(x, y) : (x x  y <  x ). {x x  y <  y)
Likewise, the whole list of propositions about the specific 
class o,
o <  B 
o <  W 
o <  -B 
o <  -W
o <  -B x  -W 
o <  o
O <  I
might be dispensed with by generalizing the second term of 
any such proposition, and substituting the partly generalized 
proposition,
(a) : o <  a
Analogously, of course, we may eliminate another long list 
by introducing a general assertion about the specific term i,
(a) : a <  i
But in any universe whose elements are classes there is 
one class having the logical properties of “the class of no 
houses,” i.e. an empty class; and this class is included 
in every class in the universe. Also, in any such universe 
there is one “greatest class,” analogous to “the class of

THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
173
all houses," and this includes every class in the universe. 
So we may say that any K  whose elements are classes 
contains a o and a 1. We could therefore employ two 
completely general propositions:
III 
(30) (a) : 0  <  a
"There is at least one class, 0, such that, for any class a, 
0 is included in a,”
and: IV 
(3j) (a) : a <  1
"There-is at least one class, 1, such that, for any class a, a 
is included in i,"
then 
(a) 0 <  a
and 
(a) a <  1
would exemplify these general propositions for the specific 
system here described.
All the propositions so far stated are true for any system 
whose elements are classes. The only statements about 
iC(B, W . . . o, 1) < 2 that have not been taken care of are 
the four "granted propositions/' which were characterized, 
above, as four arbitrary conditions. They do not follow from 
the nature of classes as such, nor from the meaning of <  ; 
therefore not every K  whose elements are classes must needs 
exhibit them. Yet even these conditions are not peculiar to 
the specific system of "the class of white houses," "the class 
of brick houses," etc., with which we are dealing; there 
may be other universes of classes wherein they obtain, i.e. 
wherein two classes and their two complements are such that 
none of the resulting products are memberless. The condition 
in itself may be expressed quite generally, as:
(3a, b): ~  (a x  b) < 0
~  (-Æ X b) <  0
~  (a x  -b) <  0
~  \-a X -b) < 0

174
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
This is a special condition, but not a specific one; it is 
exemplified in some systems, but not in others; classes being 
what they are, and <  meaning what it does, these proposi­
tions are possible in any context of classes and class- 
inclusions, but not necessary.
It appears, then, that any relation of classes in extension 
may be expressed quite generally, no matter whether the 
classes were formed by the use of a dyadic or triadic relation, 
as: "the class of houses North of John Smith's house," "the 
class of cities between Paris and London," or by a predicate, 
as: "the class of white houses," "the class of bad boys." 
Taking together all those propositions which are true for 
any classes whatever, we may generalize from "the class of 
white houses" and "the class of brick houses" to "any class" 
and "any other, or same, class," that is to say, from 
K(B, W . . .  o, i), <  , with its specific interpretations to
K  (a, b .. . )  <
with the general interpretation:
K  =int "classes of individuals"
<  =int "is included in"
Such a system starts on a different level of logical analysis 
from any generalized system of individuals. The elements, 
now symbolized in the lower case, are classes by inter­
pretation; and the inclusion-relation is therefore the con­
stituent relation of a general system of classes. This system, 
which was developed, at least in its main outline, by George 
Boole, has become a centre and kernel of mathematical 
logic. It serves us as an almost perfect example of systema­
tization, being very simple, yet genuinely mathematical; 
and it has lent itself to such mutations and adaptations 
that most far-reaching and unexpected ventures in logical 
theory have taken their start from its few but fertile concepts. 
Consequently I shall give it extensive consideration, even 
presenting it in several forms, so that the essential structure

THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
175
of it, the relation of those forms to each other, and the 
significance of its basic ideas for the whole realm of logic 
may become visible to a thoughtful student.
5. A C o n v e n ie n ce o f S y m b o l is m : L o g ic a l P u n c t u at io n
Before we pass from the simple systems we have so far 
used as illustrations of structure to the more interesting 
"Boolean” system, it were well to adopt a convention of 
symbolism which has proved a great convenience to logicians; 
that is, to substitute a system of dots, single, double, triple, 
etc., for parentheses and brackets. When the latter are 
multiplied they become unwieldy; their shapes have to be 
varied to help the eye; they always occur in pairs, which 
means that at the end of a complex expression we are apt 
to have a series of four or five perfectly useless symbols,
such as: ) ] | J. But if we use dots, these occur only between
the expressions that are to be set apart. Their number is 
easy to apprehend without any variation of type, they take 
little effort to write, and may be made to serve every 
requirement of logical punctuation.
The single dot has already been introduced as a sign of 
logical conjunction. In this capacity it serves to set two 
propositions apart, and also to express the weakest sort of 
relation— mere co-existence in a system, or joint assertion. 
Wherever no other symbol than the dot appears between 
two propositions, the dot may be read: "and,” as in the 
statement:
(a, b) : a fm b . b fm a
If we regard any expression that is not broken up as a 
simple proposition, then the two elementary propositions 
here separated by the dot are the natural factors of this 
statement.
Whenever single dots occur together with a sign of logical 
relation, however, they repiesent parentheses, and signify

that the expressions they separate are to be treated each as 
a separate whole. Thus, in the proposition:
(a, b, c) : a nt b . b nt c . O . a nt c
the dots around the implication-sign set apart “ a nt b . b nt c” 
from “ a nt c ” The implication holds between a compound 
proposition and a simple one.
Note that the quantifier is set off from the rest of this 
expression by a double dot. That means that the quantifier 
is related to the expression as a whole. Double dots are to 
single dots as brackets are to parentheses; everything in 
one pair of parentheses is a unit in a structure enclosed by 
brackets, i.e. (a, b, c) quantifies “ a nt b . b nt c . O . a nt c ” 
But instead of enclosing the quantified form we dispense 
with the end symbol ] by dividing the entire form from its 
quantifier by double dots, which ‘'extend over,” or subsume, 
any single dots in the form.
If we wish to relate two propositions which already 
contain logical relations other than “ and,” then the relation 
between these propositions must be surrounded by double­
dots. For instance, to say that if a is North of b or of c, then 
it is North of d, would read:
(3 a, b, c,d): . a nt b . V . a nt c : O: a nt d
Note how the quantifier, which quantifies this whole ex­
pression, is set off from it by triple dots. The implication 
"extends over” the disjunction; the double dots are like 
brackets, the single dots like parentheses. The triple dots 
serve as braces, { } . But the entire structure is visually 
and typographically much simpler than:
(3 a, b, c, 
nt b) V (a nt c)J O (a nt ¿)|
Wherever a negation-sign occurs, dots indicate how great a 
proposition is affected by the sign. For instance,
(a, b) : ~  . a nt b . O . b nt a 
is quite different from
(a, b) : . ~  : a nt b . O . b nt a
176 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

The first proposition asserts that if a is not North of b, 
then b is North of a ; the other states merely that no impli­
cation holds between the two elementary propositions. In 
the latter case, the 
extends over the whole structure, 
making it negative; and the quantifier extends over the 
negative form. The maximum number of dots always indi­
cates the degree of complexity of the total proposition.
With a little practice, dots become much easier to use than 
any other sort of punctuation. The subordinate parts of 
subordinate parts, and so forth, become obvious to inspec­
tion. Therefore it is highly desirable to practise this 
symbolic usage as freely as possible, and to use parentheses 
only to indicate quantifiers, for which purpose they may 
well be maintained, or to enclose terms like 11 a +  b” or 
fta x b” when these are to be negated, i.e. to distinguish 
-(¿z +  b) from -a +  b. But propositions are no longer to be 
enclosed in parentheses, brackets, or braces ; dots or groups 
of dots can serve all purposes of logical punctuation. This 
principle should be mastered in theory and in practice 
before we proceed to the actual study of the calculus of 
classes.
Summary
A class may be formed by varying one term of a relation 
over its entire range of applicability (not its range of signi­
ficance). Usually, however, no relation in the strict sense 
(i.e. of dyadic or higher degree) enters into the class-concept. 
Classes are usually defined by predicates.
A predicate has exactly the logical properties that would 
belong to a relation of one term, if there could be such a 
thing. Some people, therefore, regard predicates as “monadic 
relations/' whereas others maintain that predicates exist 
in place of monadic relations because the latter are not 
thinkable. In practice the distinction is immaterial.
Predicates have just one important use in logic: they are 
the simplest means of generating classes. Since they do not
THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES 
177

connect terms with one another, they can lend structure 
to a universe only by making the elements co-members in 
classes. For this reason they have not previously figured in 
this book; but they are naturally the first topic of a logic 
that takes classes for granted, as does the “traditional” or 
“Aristotelian” logic.
In a system where predicates take the place of con­
stituent relations, the formulation of classes by means of 
these predicates is naturally the first step. A predicative 
proposition about an element classifies that element, and can 
do nothing more with it. If the element is generalized, its 
quantifier delimits the class of which it is a representative 
member.
A single predicate cannot give rise to more than four 
classes: A,-A, A x - A  or o, A +  - Ao ri. Such a system 
is complete, but trivial. To gain any interest we must 
have more than one predicate. In dealing with relations 
of dyadic or higher degree, a beginner cannot hope to use 
more than one without confusion; but predicates may be 
multiplied without too much complexity. A great number of 
simple or compound propositions result from manipulating 
even two predicates; but many of these are mutually 
exclusive, so that finally our choice of a very few determines 
which others can coexist with these.
Whatever our choice among predicative propositions 
may be, every such proposition defines a class, and its 
quantifier determines (i) that the class is equal to i, in which 
case its complement is equal to o, or (2) that the class is 
not equal to o, i.e. its complement is not equal to 1. The 
first alternative holds for the universal, the second for the 
particular quantifier.
Since the only pattern obtained by predication is one of 
classifications, the notion of membership in a class may be 
substituted by definition for that of possession of a predicate. 
Because every class has a complement, membership in the 
complementary class takes the place of non-possession of a
178 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
179
given predicate. Predicative propositions, then, may be 
replaced by < -propositions. This in itself would be no 
gain in economy or psychological ease of expression; but 
€-propositions about general elements may be turned into 
< -propositions about specific classes. The latter, in the 
case of only two classes and their complements, sums, and 
products, are very simple; they may be diagrammatically 
represented. Psychologically, it is easier to let predicates 
define classes, and then to deal with the relations among 
these classes, than to deal with complex predicative pro­
positions.
But if we are to deal entirely with classes, it is not 
necessary to start with individuals and predicates and go 
through elaborate definitions. Every system starts with 
primitive elements, i.e. undefined elements of the universe, 
and undefined relations (treating predicates as the “monadic 
case” of relation). What these are is given by interpretation. 
So it is perfectly legitimate to start with a K  whose primitive 
elements, by interpretation, shall be classes, and a primitive 
(instead of defined) relation < .
Such a system of specific classes has two kinds of pro­
position: (1) propositions expressing certain “granted” 
facts, that merely happen to be so and therefore must be 
inductively known, and (2) propositions stating necessary 
conditions, that belong to the system simply because its 
elements are classes and its relation is < . The latter do 
not depend on any K  of specific classes; they may be ex­
pressed for classes in general. The former, too, may be true 
for other universes of classes than just the one in hand; they 
are particular conditions, arbitrarily asserted, but they may 
none the less be asserted quite generally. Instead of referring 
to the product of these two classes we may refer to the 
product of some two classes. Just as a system of four houses, 
ten men, or what-not, could be generalized in a previous 
chapter, so the system of specific classes here given may be 
generalized, for it is simply an instance of what is true of

classes in general. Therefore a universe whose elements are 
classes by interpretation may be written with lower-case 
letters, just as well as a system of individuals; and we may 
assume a universe K(a, b . . .) <  containing any classes of 
individuals.
For the sake of typographical ease and visual clarity, 
dots are used to replace brackets. The greatest group of dots 
always makes the chief division. In the propositions here 
symbolized the greatest group divides the form from its 
quantifiers, because those quantifiers are related to the 
form as a whole. A dot or group of dots without other relation 
symbol is a sign of joint assertion or logical conjunction. 
Logical relations are separated by dots from the propositions 
they relate, the number of dots depending on the complexity 
of the propositions involved.
Practice in logical punctuation should be acquired before 
attempting any complicated manipulation of propositions, 
as the use of brackets is difficult and confusing in the long 
run.
180 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. How may a class be generated by use of a dyadic relation?
2. How may a class be generated without the assumption of a 
fixed term ?
3. In what ways are predicates comparable to relations?
4. How many classes may be defined by one predicate?
5. What connections between terms may be established by 
predicates in place of constituent relations ?
6. What is the importance of predicates?
7. What is the advantage of substituting e-propositions for 
predicative propositions in a context of individuals and 
predicates?
8. How may the analysis of a predicative system be radically 
simplified ?
9. What are “primitive concepts” ? What determines our choice 
of “ primitive concepts” ?
10. If you wanted to express symbolically: “There is at least one 
class which has just one member,” what symbols would you 
employ for classes and members respectively?

THÉ UNIVERSE OF CLASSES
181
11. What are the advantages of “logical punctuation” by dots?
12. What determines the number of dots to be used in any given 
position?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Express symbolically the formal context assumed in the 
following propositions, the statement of the propositions 
themselves, and four negative propositions implied by them :
Some men have blue eyes.
Some men have black hair.
Some men have neither.
Some men have both.
2. Express the above propositions (i) in terms of €, (2) in 
terms of < .
3. Draw a diagram showing all the classes which may be formed 
by the twro predicates given above. Mark with a cross each 
class mentioned by the “granted” propositions. Outline 
heavily the following classes :
Men with black hair or blue eyes.
Men having either not black hair or not blue eyes. 
Blue-eyed men without black hair.
Black-haired men without blue eyes.
Express those classes as sums or products of classes.
4. State with proper symbolism and logical punctuation three 
propositions that are true for classes in general.
5. Read the following statements:
A. (a) (36) (c) : c <  a . c <  b . o  . c =  0
B. (3 o) (a): a < 0 . 0  .a =  0
C. (a, b) (3p) (c):.p <  a .p <b: c <  a . c < b  . O . c < p
D. (a, b, c): a < b  . b <  c . O . a <  c
E. (a, 6, c) : c < -(a + b) . O . c <  (-a x -6)
F. (a, 6, c) : : a <  -(6 +  c) . O :. ~  : a <  b . V . a <  c
G. (3 a) ( b ) : .b < a .O : b  =  a.V .b =  0
6. Punctuate with dots instead of brackets:
A. (a, b) (3 s) (c) : [{a <s).(b < s )]. {[(a< c). (6<c)] D (s<  o )}
B. (a, b, c, d) : [(a <  -b). (c <  b)] O {[(d <a) .(d <  c)] O
id =  0)}

C H A P T E R  V I I I
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES
i. The Class-System as a Deductive System 
Any system whose elements are classes of individuals, 
taken in extension, may be ordered by the relation < . 
Even though no special facts, such as:
(3a, b): ~ . a x  b <  0
be arbitrarily granted, certain general conditions are known 
about it; we may assume that there is the class a x  b, if 
there is a and there is b; that at all events, there is a 0, and 
at all events there is a i; and if there is an a there is a -a; 
and if there is a and b, then there is the class a +  b. These 
propositions describe the nature of classes. Moreover, without 
being told that
(3 a, b). a <  b
we know that if any class a is included in another class b, 
then-b <  
and that if a is included in b and b in c, 
then a <  c; for such propositions describe the nature of the 
relation < .
The number of facts about classes and inclusion that 
may be asserted merely on the basis of their general nature 
is astounding. But when these facts are all arranged so as 
to be easily surveyed, ‘a good many of them are seen to be 
closely interconnected, so that, if only a small selection of 
them is explicitly stated, the rest must follow implicitly. 
Indeed, there are no true general statements 
about 
K(a,b. . . )  < 2 that do not either follow if certain others 
are asserted, or themselves have further implications; all 
possible conditions are related to others, i.e. if any condition 
is “granted" certain others follow or become impossible.
A system of this sort was characterized, in chapter iii,

as completely deductive. It has no “mere” facts, that could 
not be known from anything else and do not entail any­
thing else. The structure of the concepts “class” and “class- 
inclusion” is architectonic; however we begin to describe 
them, whatever characteristics we mention, we cannot 
assert many propositions together without generating, by 
implication, a whole system of further classes and their 
relations. In this respect it has the virtues of a mathematical 
system; its possibilities lend themselves to calculation, like 
those of the number-system. We can work to and fro, from 
given facts to implied facts, always relating new hypothetical 
cases to those already known to discover whether the new 
ones are possible, impossible, or absolutely necessary.
2. P o st u l a t e s a n d  T h e o r e m s 
Some facts, of course, must be known to begin with; 
one cannot deduce propositions where there is nothing to 
deduce them from. Also— and this should be remembered—  
a proposition cannot be deduced from anything but another 
proposition. Implication is a relation which holds only 
among propositions. We may say that certain facts “ follow 
from” the nature of classes; but only propositions about that 
nature can imply propositions asserting those facts. So our 
first knowledge of the system— our knowledge of the nature 
of classes and the nature of < — must be expressed in 
propositions before we can make deductions from it. These 
first propositions are not themselves deducible, because 
there are no propositions before them, from which they 
could be deduced. They have to be frankly assumed, or 
postulated. If the system is completely deductive, then 
every such “postulate,” or assumed proposition, must have 
consequences, i.e. must imply some further proposition or 
propositions, either quite by itself, or in conjunction with 
others. An economical selection of such first assumptions, 
from which all other propositions of the system in question 
may be deduced, is called a set of postulates for that system.
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
183

The classic example of a set of postulates for a system is 
Euclid's formulation of geometry, which begins with a 
statement of the assumptions that must be granted, such 
as: that a line may be extended indefinitely in both direc­
tions, that three points in a plane shall determine a triangle, 
etc. Besides these postulates, we are asked to note a number 
of facts which he calls “ axioms,” facts so simple that we 
recognize rather than assume them— such as, that equals 
added to equals yield equals. These facts are supposed to 
bear the stamp of self-evidence. The truth of an axiom is 
vouched for by the fact that we admit it intuitively, that it 
could not be doubted by any sane person; thus, the fact that 
a whole is greater than any of its proper parts is considered 
by Euclid to be self-evident, to recommend itself to the 
untutored mind without argument, and consequently to be 
known by intuition. It may, therefore, be accepted without 
further proof, i.e. as an axiom whereon his system comes to 
rest.
But the self-evidence of any proposition turns out, on 
closer scrutiny, to be a very questionable affair. The power 
to doubt familiar propositions is relative to one's logical 
imagination and to the force of verbal and mental habits; a 
carpenter cannot doubt that a whole is always greater than 
any of its proper parts, but a mathematician can; a little 
girl would find it self-evident that 365 — 1 =  364, whereas 
Humpty Dumpty preferred to see it done on paper. What is 
intuitively known by one person is a subject for demon­
stration to another, and what is intuitively accepted by all 
people may turn out to be false. The history of science is 
full of examples; for instance, that people at the antipode 
would be suspended from the earth head-down and would 
fall into space, was undoubtedly self-evident to an age that 
had not learned to associate “falling” with “motion toward 
a greater body” ; and our own children still find the inverted 
position of China axiomatic. Also it seems self-evident to 
every right-minded child that he cannot subtract 13 from
184 
a n  INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

10; yet he will presently learn that this proposition is 
false.
Euclid himself does not draw the distinction between 
axioms and postulates very sharply; for instance, the 
assumption that parallel lines are the only lines which can 
lie in the same plane and never meet, is sometimes classed 
as a postulate, sometimes as an axiom; undoubtedly the 
great geometer applied the standard of self-evidence to 
postulates, too, though perhaps within the vague and wide 
boundaries of a “ safe” assumption rather than the strict 
limits of immediate truth.
For our part, we know how deceptive intuition may be, 
and how insecure its guarantees; so, whether or not we 
consider a proposition self-evident, we shall regard it as 
an assumption, a postulate, if it is accepted without proof. 
All our “granted” propositions are to be regarded as postulates, 
with no claim to psychological necessity. This not only 
obviates the danger that our system may suffer in a very 
vague and doubtful virtue, but also gives us far more leeway 
in the choice of postulates, for we are no longer limited to 
propositions that are simple, obvious, and generally enter­
tained. If we chance upon a fairly complex and even sur­
prising proposition, from which very many simple ones 
would follow, we are perfectly justified in taking the former 
as a postulate and deriving the others from it.
All we ask of a postulate is, (1) that it shall belong to 
the system, i.e. be expressible entirely in the language of the 
system; (2) that it shall imply further propositions of the 
system; (3) that it shall not contradict any other accepted 
postulate, or any proposition implied by such another 
postulate; and (4) that it shall not itself be implied by other 
accepted postulates, jointly or singly taken.
The first of these characteristics is known as coherence. 
Every proposition in the system must cohere, in conceptual 
structure, with the rest. The second is contributiveness. If a 
postulate has no implications, it contributes nothing beyond
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
185

the explicit fact which it states. This is, of course, perfectly 
permissible, but a system which contains such assumptions 
is not entirely deductive, and where no deduction is intended 
we do not class propositions as “postulates," to be distin­
guished from “theorems." The word “postulate" is ordinarily 
applied to premises for deduction. Contributiveness, there­
fore, is an important criterion of a good postulate; in fact, 
if we have two propositions one of which is to be taken for 
granted, the greater contributiveness of one as against the 
other may be the deciding factor in a choice between them.
The third requirement is the most important; that is 
consistency. Two propositions which contradict each other,
i.e. which cannot both be true, can never be admitted to the 
same system. Anything that is inconsistent is logically 
impossible. Incoherence is a grave fault, but often we can 
ignore the elements which are meaningless and still trace 
systematic connections under a mass of irrelevant concepts; 
non-contributiveness, or barrenness, is a serious blemish 
and spoils the deductive character of a system, but does not 
ruin its validity; but inconsistency is a fatal condition. 
Where this fault is tolerated there is simply no logic at all.
The fourth criterion is termed independence. If a pro­
position is deducible from one of the postulates already 
given, then it is a theorem, a necessary fact, not another 
assumption. The fact that we “assume" rather than “prove" 
it to ourselves is a purely psychological circumstance which 
has no bearing on the logical status of a proposition; if it 
might be proved it is a theorem, and to regard it as a postulate 
is simply an error. Fortunately this error is not serious, 
since deductions made from a theorem are exactly as good 
as those made from a postulate; if we regard a theorem as a 
postulate, and think ourselves to have one more arbitrary 
assumption than in fact we have, then we merely do not 
know how nice our system is.
What a theorem is needs little elucidation; any proposi­
tion, that is implied by another proposition or conjunction
186 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

of propositions “granted” or previously proved within the 
system, is a theorem. Theorems may be positive or negative; 
that is, we may prove something to be necessarily so, or 
not possibly so, i.e. necessarily not so. The same theorem 
may follow from more than one possible selection of 
premises, as a more detailed study of the class-system will 
presently show. But contradictory theorems can never follow 
from consistent postulates. No matter how widely developed 
the system, how far removed a theorem may be from the 
original assumptions, they and they only are its ultimate 
premises; if two theorems in a system are incompatible, 
and there has been no error in the process of deduction, 
then the postulates, no matter how obvious and simple they 
may appear, are inconsistent; for two propositions which 
are consistent can never have contradictory implications. 
Theorems, or deducible propositions, therefore, are the 
touchstone of any set of postulates; if the postulates are 
not contributive, no theorems will result; if the postulates 
are not independent, then some theorem will be identical 
with a postulate that was not used to prove it; and if the 
postulates, though they do not appear to be incompatible 
yet contain some hidden inconsistency, then at some point 
we shall have flatly contradictory implications.
A postulate must contain something that cannot be 
proved in the system. At its best it contains nothing that can 
be proved, but that is not necessary in order to make the 
proposition a postulate. A theorem, on the other hand, must 
contain nothing that cannot be proved. It is not enough that 
it should contain something implied; it must be entirely 
implied by some proposition or propositions other than itself,* 
and contain no assumption not made in the postulates.
* Every proposition implies itself; a postulate, therefore, is 
properly defined as a proposition which is not implied by any 
proposition (or conjunction of propositions) except itself. This 
technicality is not important at the present point, but will recur 
later.
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
187

188
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
3. T r u t h  a n d  V a l id it y
In discussing the requirements for logical postulates and 
theorems, nothing whatever has been said about the truth 
of the propositions assumed or demonstrated. An implied 
proposition is true if the premises are true; if the premises 
are false, the implied proposition may or may not be true. 
For instance, “ Brutus killed Caesar” O “Caesar is dead.” 
Since the premise is true, the implied proposition (sometimes 
called the “consequent”) must also be true. But “Cassius 
killed Caesar” O “Caesar is dead,” too; the fact that 
“Cassius killed Caesar” is false does not alter the impli­
cation. Yet, if we know the premise in this case to be false, 
this does not tell us that the consequent is false; the conse­
quence is simply unaffected. It happens in this case to be 
true. So we cannot say that the theorems have just the same 
truth-value as the postulates; we may say only that they 
are true if the postulates are true, i.e. that they are genuinely 
implied.
For the truth of postulates there is no logical guarantee. 
There is no formal, i.e. structural, difference between a 
proposition that expresses an actual state of affairs in the 
world and one that expresses merely a conceivable state; no 
formal distinction between factual and fictional premises. 
So, if we are concerned about the truth of a whole system, 
of the postulates and all that follows from them, we must 
look to something else than logic for this knowledge. That is 
probably why Euclid justified his choice of premises by their 
“self-evidence.” His avowed principles of deduction made 
no allowance for arbitrary propositions; the deductive 
process was supposed to assure the truth of theorems; yet 
this truth seemed poorly attested if there was no surety 
behind the postulates from which the theorems were 
descended.
If self-evidence is no guarantee, what criterion have we 
for the truth of any logical system?

None whatever. Logic does not go bond for any original 
fact. All it stands for is the conceptual possibility of a 
system, the actual deducibility of its theorems from its 
premises, the consistency of all its propositions. All it 
guarantees is that, if the premises be granted— whether on 
sense-evidence, self-evidence, or divine authority— then the 
system follows thus and so. This is not factual certainty, or 
truth; it is logical certainty, or validity. We may start with 
premises that have no foundation in fact at all, and elaborate 
a perfectly coherent, consistent, deductive system. Logically, 
that system is exactly as good as one whose premises are 
true; for in logic we require only that our assertions shall 
be valid, not that they convey truths about the world. 
For instance, the two propositions:
Napoleon discovered America 
Napoleon died before a.d. 1500
jointly imply “America was discovered before a.d. 1500,” 
and the deduction of the third proposition from the two pre­
mises is perfectly valid, as there is nothing inconsistent 
about them, and if they are true then the consequent cannot 
be false. The fact that they are both false does not affect 
their relation to each other or to the consequent, which 
happens, quite by chance, to be true. Had the second 
premise been: “ Napoleon died before 
a.d. 1492” 
the 
consequent would also have been false; but its logical 
relations would have been exactly the same as above. On 
the other hand, suppose I had postulated:
Columbus discovered America 
Columbus died after 1490
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
189
and concluded:
therefore 
America was discovered after 1490, 
my premises would both be true, the proposition I sought to

deduce would also be true, yet the logical argument would 
not be sound. The word “ therefore” expresses the only 
untrue assertion I have made; the conclusion is logically 
false, or invalid.
So it is evident that a system built upon false propositions 
may be exactly as valid as one based on facts; that true 
propositions may fail to imply anything new at all; that 
false propositions may imply true conclusions, as in our 
first instance. The only case that is impossible is, that 
true premises should genuinely imply a false proposition. 
If we have true premises and valid logical relations, then 
we have true conclusions. But the truth of premises 
cannot be established by logic; 
whereas validity is its 
whole concern.
190 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
4. Postulates for the System of Classes,
K(a, b . . . ) < 2
After all these preambles about the nature of a deductive 
system, the best means for its description, the limits of 
demonstrability, and the character of “granted” pro­
positions, let us turn to an actual example, to witness the 
systematic construction of a logical edifice. The system of 
classes in the relation < , which by this time is generally 
familiar, is an ideal instance for our purposes. Not only is 
it completely deductive, but it may be derived by easy 
reasoning from a fairly small number of postulates; most 
of its propositions are capable of graphic representation, 
which brings them home to common sense by that con­
vincing agent, the eye; and there are alternative ways of 
proof for almost every proposition, so that even a beginner's 
logical inventiveness is frequently rewarded. Moreover, the 
relations that obtain among classes may be initially ex­
pressed in many ways, so we are not bound to just one 
possible set of primitive concepts or just one list of primitive 
propositions (postulates). The readiest formulation from the

point of view I have so far developed is in terms of general 
elements and a dyadic relation, as follows:*
K(a, b, c . . .) <  2 
K  =int “classes of individuals"
<  =int “is included in"
Postulates:
1. (a) . a <  a
“ Every element is included in itself."
2. (a, b, c): a <  b . b <  c . O . a <  c
“ If any element is included in another and that other in a 
third, then the first is included in the third."
3. (3i) (a) . a <  1
“There is at least one element 1 such that any element, a, 
is included in i."
4. (30) (a) . 0 <  a
“There is at least one element 0 such that, whatever element 
we call a, 0 is included in it." (0 is an “empty class," zero.)
5. (a) (3 -a) (6, c): . b <  a . b <  -a . O . b <  0 :
a <  c . -a <  c . O . 1 <  c
“For any a, there is at least one -a and such that any b 
which is included both in a and -a must be included in 0, 
and any c which includes both a and -a also includes i." 
(This means that a and -a have no common part, and 
between them constitute the universe-class; -a is, then, 
the complement of a.)
6. (a,b)(3 pab) : . p < a . p < b  :{c):c<a.c < b . O  c < p
* The following set of postulates is taken, with slight modifications, 
from E. V. H u n t in g t o n 's “Sets of Independent Postulates for the 
Algebra of Logic,“ Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. v (1904), pp. 288- 
309. Huntington gives as a postulate what I have treated as 
definition (i) and does not use strictly symbolic expressions. The set 
here given is his second set.
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
191

‘T or any a and any bt there is at least one element p (the 
subscript indicates that p has reference to the given a and b), 
such that p is included both in a and in b, and any other 
common part of a and b (i.e. any c included in a and in b) 
must be included in p.” The element p, therefore, is the 
greatest common part of a and b.
7. {a, b) (3stf>6) : . a < s  . b <  s : (c): a <  c . b < c . O . s< c
‘T or any a and b there is at least one element s such that 
a and b are both included in s, and any element c which 
includes both a and b also includes s.” The element s for the 
given a and b is, then, the smallest element which includes 
them both.
8. (a, b} c): . c <  a . c <  b . O . c <  0: O . a <  -b
“For any a, b, and c> if c’s being included both in a and b 
implies that c is zero (i.e. if a and b can have no element in 
common but zero), then a is included in not-6.”
To these postulates m ay be added, for convenience, three 
important definitions:
(i) (a,b): a =  b . =df . a <  b . b <  a
“ a =  b” shall mean the same thing as “ a and b are mutually 
inclusive.”
(ii) (a,b): a X b =  df . p^ b 
cf. postulate 6
“a x  6” shall represent the element p defined for a and b 
in postulate 6.
(iii) (a, b): a +  b .= d i . sa b 
cf. postulate 7
“ a +  6” shall represent the element s defined for a and b 
in postulate 7 .
Here we have a systematic codification of the general 
features of classes noted in chapter vi, and the conse­
quences of assuming a relation <  with the characteristics
192 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES
193
there described. Every class includes itself; every class 
includes the sub-classes of its sub-classes; every class is 
included in the universe class, and includes the empty class. 
Every class has a complement; the class and its comple­
ment are mutually exclusive, and exhaust the universe 
class between them. Any two classes have a sum and a 
product (if they are mutually exclusive, the product is 0). 
Any two mutually exclusive classes are included in each 
other's complements. By definition, mutual inclusion is 
called “equality” ; the sum of two elements, a and b, is 
written “ a +  6,”  and the product “ a X  6.”  W ith these 
notions and these fundamental facts we can construct the 
whole system of classes by a process of logical deduction.
5. R e l a t io n s a n d  O p e r a t io n s
The system of classes presented in this form looks very 
much like the simple deductive systems cited in earlier 
chapters, except for one characteristic: namely, that every 
element here given may generate just one further element, 
its complement, and any two elements generate a third, 
their sum, and a fourth, their product. Postulates which 
describe ways of finding further elements are an innovation, 
and merit some discussion.
Whenever a relation, such as < , is used among certain 
“given” elements to define a certain further element, this 
use is called an operation upon the given elements. Thus, if 
we introduce a general proposition with the quantifiers: 
(a) (3 -a), “for every a there is at least one -a, such that 
. . . ” this proposition, which defines the nature of -a, is said 
to describe the operation, 
upon the element a> whereby
the complement, -a, is generated. The new element might, 
of course, bear any name we like; we might perfectly 
well say,
{a) (3 x) (b, c) : b <  a . b <  x . O . b <  0 
a < c . x < c . o . l < c

and hereafter operate with a and x as complementary terms; 
but in practice it would be extremely difficult to bear in 
mind that a and x were complementary, and perhaps d and 
g, m and y, etc., etc. The symbolism would be correct but 
in nowise helpful. But one of the chief purposes of symbols 
is to help one think, to make known relations evident, and 
by visual reminders save one the trouble of sheer remembered 
distinctions. Therefore a term which is established by an 
operation involving other terms is properly expressed by a 
symbol of operation on those given terms. W e are told that 
any given term a has a complement; this is most naturally 
expressed as -a, the little sign 
standing for the rather 
complicated use of <  by which the new term is related to 
the old. Similarly, the term pUt b established for any a and 
b is better expressed not by an arbitrary new letter, but 
by a sign of operation on a and bt such as a x b. Note 
that this is a single term; the sign x expresses the 
whole complicated use of <  whereby a and b determine 
the new element called their product. Being a single term, 
this new element, a X b, has a complement, -(<a x b); and 
takes part in the establishment of further terms, such as 
(a x b) x c, (a x b) +  c, (a x b) +  -0, etc. And these new 
expressions again are single elements, “the class of what 
is both a and b and also ct” “the class of what is either 
both a and b, or is c ” “the class of what is either both a 
and b, or is not-a” Each of them represents one class, and 
each of them can enter into further operations. So the 
process of generating new terms from a given minimum 
ought to be endless.
The only thing that curtails the power of those postulates 
which define operations is the fact that a good many of the 
elements which may be generated from a given set of original 
terms turn out to be identical. For instance, we know that
(^) i a -j- -a =  1 
a x  -a =  0
194 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES
195
This means that all sums of complementary terms are 
identical (since they all =  1) and all such products are 
identical (since they all =  0). Furthermore we shall find 
equations such as:
(a, b) : (a x b) +  b =  b 
(a, b, c) : (a +  b) X c =  [a x c) +  (b x  c)
(a, b) : -a +  -6 =  -(<% x  b)
and many others, showing that although a set of given 
terms can be compounded with each other and with their 
sums and products and complements ad infinitum, we soon 
reach the* point where no new classes are established, but 
only more and more elaborate expressions for the same 
classes. For example,
(a, b) : (a x b) +  {a x -&) =  a
This is not a new class, but merely a complex (and sometimes 
very important) description of the class a.
It is not hard to guess that most of the theorems in the 
deductive system K(a, b . . .) < 2 will be concerned with 
the determination of sums and products, and their identity 
or non-identity with each other and with the original 
elements. This is, indeed, the case; it requires only four or 
five steps to show that a +  b =  b means the same thing 
as a <  by so that hereafter this sort of equation may always 
be written in place of an inclusion, and we deal entirely 
with our defined notions, equations of sums and products, 
instead of the original constituent relation < . In practice, 
equations are much easier to handle than inclusions; this 
justifies our shifting, as soon as possible, from one usage to 
the other.
6. O p e r a t io n s a s  “ P r im it iv e  N o t io n s"
Here is another instance of a formal context which is 
not really suitable for description of the m atter in hand, but 
requires, first of all, a long preamble of definitions; a formal 
context which makes it possible to define the notions that

are required, but which does not yield a convenient voca­
bulary directly and naturally. The same moral that was 
drawn in the previous case (chap, vii, § 3) is pertinent here: 
if we are going to deal entirely, or even very largely, with 
operations, why begin with inclusions? W hy not choose 
our formal context so as to obviate the need of all those 
elaborate definitions that lead from <  to +  and X and =  ?
An operation is a relation to a given term, or to given 
terms, whereby a further term is defined. Such a relation 
is, of course, more difficult to grasp than (say) " < ,” "fin,” 
or "bt.” But the psychological difficulty of imagining it has 
nothing whatever to do with its status in logic. "Primitive 
notions” need not be obvious notions, any more than 
"primitive propositions” need to be axiomatic, or self- 
evident, propositions. Whether they are psychologically 
simple or complex, familiar or remote, easy or difficult, 
makes no difference to their "primitive” or "derived” 
character in a logical context; a relation expressed by =  
and a sign of operation—that is, the establishment of a new 
element from old—is just as respectable a notion as < , and 
may just as legitimately be taken as "primitive,” or unde­
fined. If we regard it as one of the original constituents of 
elementary propositions, then it is logically simple, though 
it may be psychologically complex. So, finding that to start 
with K(a, b . . .) < 2 leads us at once into a need of com­
plicated definitions whereby we pass from <  to the 
operations +  and x , we may as well assume these, rather 
than < , at the outset, and so adopt a more suitable formal 
context, a universe of discourse, K, whose elements are 
classes in general, and two constituent operations, or "rules 
of combination,” +  and X , and the relation = , which 
serves here as a constituent relation (i.e. figures in ele­
mentary propositions), though usually in an auxiliary way, 
in conjunction with +  or x  ; so that we may write
K(a, b . . .) + , X, = 2
or 
K(a, & . . . ) ( +  = ) 3, (X =)3
196 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

or, as is most commonly done, regard =  as understood * 
and write merely: K(a, b . . .) + , x .
Note that when we combine the two-termed, or binary, 
operations +  and x  with = 2, the resultant relations, 
(+  = ) and ( X = ), are triadic. That is because the deter­
mination of a third element, say s, or p, by two given ele­
ments is, of course, a relationship among three terms, a, b, 
and s, or a, 6, and p. Likewise, the definition of the comple­
ment of a term a, i.e. the definition of -a by a, is a relation 
between a and -a, and is therefore dyadic. So it is a general 
rule, where just one new term is defined, that a unary 
operation expresses a dyadic relation, a binary operation 
expresses a triadic relation, etc. But it is far easier to think 
of simple operations and the auxiliary “ = "  than of high- 
degreed relations, so the former practice, first borrowed 
from mathematics, has become indispensable in logic.
7. P o st u l a t e s f o r th e S y s t e m  K(a, & . . . ) + ,  x ,  = t
W ith the new notions of constituent operations we have an 
entirely new set of postulates, or “granted" propositions, 
from which the system of classes may be deduced. W e now 
start from the following assumptions:
K(a, b . .) 
x , =
K  = in t “classes"
+ =int “class-disjunction"
X =int “class-conjunction"
=  = in t “is identical with"
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
197
* There is a good argument for this practice, namely that identity 
and its opposite, distinctness, are “prelogical” notions, like *‘element'* 
and “ relation” ; that = is a “logical constant” and not an arbitrarily 
assumed “constituent relation.” The problem of “logical constants” 
belongs to a later chapter. My position is that = figures here as 
the relating constituent in elementary propositions, and is therefore 
to be mentioned in the formal context, to avoid confusion and 
doubt.
t  See H u n t in g t o n , op. cit. This is Huntington's first set.

198 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC 
Postulates:
I. (at b) (3c) . c =  a +  b
"For any two terms, a and b, there is a third term, c, which 
is the sum a +  b ”
II. (a, b} (3c). c =  a X b
‘T or any a and b there is a third term, c, which is the 
product a x  V9 (Note that c has different meanings in these 
two propositions. In either case, “there is a third term/' 
but the two cases have no relation to each other.)
III. (30) (a) . a +  0 =  a
“There is at least one element 0 such that, for any a, a +  0 
is the same as a."
IV. (31) (a) . a x  1 =  cl
“There is at least one element 1 such that, for any a , a x l  
(i.e. the common part of a and 1) is the same as a ”
V. (ciyb) . a -j- b =  b -j~ d
“For any a and bt a +  b is the same as b +  a.
VI. (af b ) . a x b  =  b x a
“For any a and b, a x  b is the same as b x  a 99
VII. (a, bf c) . a +  (b x  c) =  (a +  b) x  (a +  c)
“For any a, b, and c, the sum of a with the product of b and c 
is the same as the product of the sums (a +  b) and (a +  c).
VIII. (af by c) . a x  (b +  c) =  (a x b) +  (a X c)
“For any a, b, and cf the product of a with the sum of 
b and c is the same as the sum of the two products a x  b 
and a x  c 99
These two propositions are much easier to grasp sym-

THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES
199
bolically than verbally; we have come to the point where 
symbols are easier to manipulate than words.
IX. (a) (3 -a): a +  
=  1 • a X -a =  0
'T or every a there is at least one element -0 such that 
the sum of a and -0 is the universe class, and their product 
is the null class.”
To these may be added a postulate which is not strictly 
necessary to make the system workable, but serves the 
purpose of excluding the trivial case of a K  with only one 
member, so that 1 = 0  and (a) . a =  1, a =  -a, etc. Such 
a system is perfectly legitimate with the nine postulates; 
but it is silly, so that we should always make the reservation: 
"provided there is more than one element.” To save our­
selves this tedious proviso, we add one more assumption:
X. (3a, b): a * 6
"There are at least two elements which are not identical.” 
From these ten postulates we may deduce all the relations 
among classes of individuals, taken in extension, without the 
need of the elaborate definitions required in the context 
K(a, b . . .) < 2. These are, therefore, the postulates we 
shall henceforth use; with the rules of combination +  and 
X ,  and the laws of their manipulation laid down in the 
postulates, a complete technique has been developed for 
finding the relations of any given class to any other given 
class or classes. The system of classes thus lends itself to 
computation, i.e. to the finding of new terms from old ones 
and the exact calculation of their relations to 1, the whole, 
and 0, the limit.
8. T h e "C a l c u l u s” o f C l a s s e s
Such a system, having definite rules of computation 
whereby its elements may be uniquely defined, i.e. known to 
exist and unambiguously described, is a calculus, in the

200
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
most general sense of that word. Most people have heard 
only of “the calculus/' a slip-shod expression applied to the 
infinitesimal calculus of mathematics, invented by Leibniz 
and Newton. That calculus is undoubtedly the most im­
pressive and important ever constructed, and we may for­
give its admirers for trying to pre-empt the word “calculus" 
as its proper name; yet this word is too useful to be lost 
from the more general science of logic. A  calculus is, in 
fact, any system wherein we may calculate. Ordinary 
arithmetic, the system of natural numbers with its con­
stituent operations + , X , - r ,  and —, is a calculus; the 
famous “hedonistic calculus" of Jerem y Bentham was so 
named in the fond and sanguine belief that this philosophy 
furnished a system wherein the relative magnitudes of 
pleasures could be exactly calculated. But as it involved no 
operations upon the elements called “pleasures," it failed 
to be a calculus.
The “Calculus of Classes" is a calculus in the strict sense, 
and has the pleasant distinction of being the simplest known 
example, and the easiest to manipulate. It is the lowest 
sort of mathematical system, somewhat resembling ordinary 
algebra, but unencumbered by coefficients or exponents—a 
veritable dream of an algebra, a calculus that is a “lower" 
mathematics than arithmetic! Yet, for all its simplicity, it 
is of vast importance and interest to all branches of logical 
thinking, as later chapters will show; and like every very 
precise discipline, it requires systematic exposition and 
practice for its correct manipulation. The next chapter, 
therefore, will deal entirely with the consequences of the 
second set of postulates here given, the postulates for 
K(a,b,c . . .) + , x , = , as they exhibit the general character, 
the possibilities and limits, of the Calculus of Classes.
S u m m a r y
Certain facts about the universe of classes ordered by the 
relation <  may be known from the very nature of classes

THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES
201
and of < . W ithout knowing any arbitrary facts, i.e. any 
conditions that might just as conceivably be otherwise, we 
can assert certain propositions that are necessarily true for 
classes. They simply describe classes and describe < .
There are many such propositions, but the greater number 
of them may be deduced when a certain small selection is 
given. Every proposition about classes in general either 
serves to imply some other or others, or itself follows from 
others. There are no matters of “mere” fact. The system is 
wholly deductive.
Propositions can be deduced only from other propositions. 
So a deductive system must start with a number of pro­
positions that are not deduced, but are taken for granted. 
If we choose these wisely for the number and impor­
tance of their implications, we may do with very few such 
initial assumptions. Such “original” propositions are called 
postulates.
The classic example of a deductive system resting ulti­
mately on a group of postulates is Euclid's geometry. 
Some of these assumptions are treated as beyond reasonable 
doubt, others as intuitively known or self-evident. The 
latter are classed as “axioms.” The line between these two 
sorts is not sharp, for Euclid believed even his postulates, 
those propositions which were granted by everybody though 
perhaps not quite intuitive, to be guaranteed by common 
sense.
But common sense is variable and sometimes false. W hat 
is self-evident to one person m ay not be so to another. 
Therefore it is best to treat all postulates as arbitrarily 
granted, without claiming their psychological necessity or 
immediacy. This allows us to assume postulates which are 
far too complicated to be self-evident.
A  postulate must belong to the system, have consequences 
in the system, must not contradict any other postulate or 
consequence of postulates, either in itself or by its impli­
cations, and must not itself follow from any other postulate

202
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
or postulates in the system. These requirements are known, 
respectively, as (i) coherence, (2) contributiveness, (3) con­
sistency, and (4) independence.
A theorem is anything that follows from the original 
assumptions by implication. Contradictory theorems cannot 
follow from consistent postulates. A theorem must contain 
absolutely nothing that is not implied by the postulates, 
either directly or by means of intervening theorems.
There is no guarantee within logic for the truth of 
“primitive propositions,” or postulates. If we have reason 
to believe them as f^ets of nature or conscience or common 
sense, this reason must be sought outside the logical system 
which they generate. For that system they are simply 
arbitrary, and always to be regarded as if true. Conse­
quently we are not really interested in the truth of theorems 
which follow from them, but in the validity thereof. The 
logical connection between postulates and theorems, not 
the condition that one or the other or both happen to be 
factual, is the concern of the logician.
The importance of valid deduction, and its connection 
with truth, lies in the fact that if the premises are true then 
the conclusion is true. A  true theorem invalidly deduced 
has no guarantee. A false premise does not affect the truth- 
value of its consequences at all. But a true premise and a 
valid deduction always yield a true theorem. The truth of 
the premise, however, does not figure in logic, which is 
concerned wholly with the validity of its implications.
Since the system K(a, b . . .) < 2 is a deductive system, 
we m ay state its arbitrary “original” propositions as a 
set of postulates. In its general characteristics the system 
differs from any we have so far encountered chiefly by the 
fact that certain of its relationships serve to define further 
elements whenever an element or a pair of elements is given. 
A relationship which unambiguously defines a new term is 
called an operation on the old term or terms. The new 
term is expressed by naming the elements from which

it is derived and symbolizing the operation upon them, as: 
-a, (<% +  b), (a x  b).
By means of well-chosen postulates for the system 
K(a, b . . .) <  2, we may define the important operations of 
negation (determining a complement), class-disjunction, and 
class-conjunction; also the relation = , which turns out to 
be far more useful than the original constituent relation < . 
Practically all our theorems deal with sums and products 
and are most readily expressed as equations. Before we 
come, then, to any interesting deductions, we must go 
through a process of definition in order to gain the voca­
bulary wherein such deductions may conveniently be 
expressed.
This is another case of starting with a primitive notion 
that is psychologically simple but logically rather ill-adapted 
to the purpose in hand. Operations express complex relations 
which are psychologically hard to treat as “primitive,” 
but which are logically very economical and may be taken 
as perfectly respectable undefined concepts, or primitive 
notions. It is easier, and therefore commendable, to start 
with classes in general, two constituent binary operations +  
and x , and an (auxiliary) relation = , than to define all 
these notions by means of < . The new formal context 
requires a new set of postulates. This set, which is the 
most convenient to work with, howbeit not in all other 
respects the best, will henceforth be taken as the basis for 
the development of the calculus of classes.
The “calculus of classes” is a genuine calculus, being a 
deductive system which allows of computation, i.e. of 
unambiguous definition of certain elements by means of 
others and by rules of manipulation. It is the simplest 
mathematical system of any importance; and its importance 
makes it worth the detailed study which follows.
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
203

204 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC 
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What is a postulate? What requirements must it fulfil? 
What is a theorem?
2. What criterion is there in logic for the truth of a postulate?
3. What is the logical value of self-evidence?
4. What is meant by “validity” ? Do valid deductions always 
yield true statements? Can valid deductions be made from a 
false premise ?
5. What connection, if any, exists between validity and truth- 
value?
6. What characteristic distinguishes the [system K(at b . . .) < 2 
from other deductive systems so far discussed?
7. Turning back to § 4, which postulates seem to you to give the 
system this characteristic ?
8. What is meant by an “operation” in logic? What sort of 
thing results from an operation ?
9. Can operations ever be “primitive notions” in a system? 
Can they wholly replace constituent relations ?
10. What is the advantage of using K(a, b . . .) +, X , =?
11. What is a calculus? Is the “calculus of classes” a good 
designation or a misnomer?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Express symbolically, using < :
Every class includes itself.
The null class is included in every class.
The universe class includes every class.
2. Give the formal definition of =  in terms of <.
3. Express in two ways:
All fools are wise, all wise men fools.
4. Express with +, X, =  (remember that specific classes are 
expressed by Roman capitals, general classes by l.c. letters):
Any class and its complement together make up 
the universe class.
A class and its complement have no members in 
common.
Mules are the descendants of horses and donkeys.
Everything is either natural or artificial.
Nothing that is artificial is natural.

5. Using the formula mentioned in the text,
“ (a, b): a <  b .== . a +  b =  b ” express with +: 
a < b . b < c . o . a < c
0 < a . 0 <  -a 
a < 1 . -a < 1
1 < a . O . a =  1
6. Draw a diagram to show that a < b .  =  .a-{-b =  b.
THE DEDUCTIVE SYSTEM OF CLASSES 
205

C H A P T E R  I X
THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
i .  T h e M e a n in g o f " A l g e b r a ,” a n d  it s R e l e v a n c e  
to th e C l a s s-C a l c u l u s
If we assumed a Universe of Discourse whose elements 
were certain specific classes, A, B, C, etc., including a universe 
class i, a null class o, and for each given class a negative
----A, -B, -C, etc.— and for every two classes a sum
and a product, we should have a perfectly good calculus, 
the operations and relations of which were expressed as 
facts about specific elements. Yet we might know that if the 
sum of A and B were not equal to B, then the product of 
A and -B could not be 0; and we might calculate the 
sum of A X -B and B to be the element A +  B. That is, 
instead of a general theory of classes we might simply have 
learned the existence and properties of each class; and 
might be capable of calculating certain relations of one 
class to another.
This is, in fact, the way people learn arithmetic. They 
learn counting by rote, addition of single digits by rote, 
multiplication by "tables” which they say by rote in the 
most unpleasant hours of childhood. Yet the number 
system, which is ultimately almost memorized by constant 
trafficking with innumerable "examples,” is a calculus, and 
arithmetic is calculation. Its general laws are never expressed, 
though of course they are at the back of everyone's mind; 
we know that any two numbers have a sum, a product, a 
difference, a quotient; that any number subtracted from 
itself equals o; and so forth. Yet these general facts cannot 
be stated in numbers, because numbers are, as it were, 
specific elements of the universe of arithmetic.
As soon as the mathematicians contrived a way of stating 
the fact that for any two numbers there is some third

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
207
number which is their sum, another which is their product, 
another which is their difference, and finally a number 
which is their quotient, they were enabled to give the 
whole calculus of arithmetic algebraic expression. A symbolic 
language for the generalized expression of operations on a 
set of elements is an algebra. The form
a +  b =  c
puzzling to anyone who tries to read it as a statement 
(since an expression with real variables, which have no 
definite meanings, is neither true nor false), becomes a 
general rule of arithmetic as soon as its elements are 
properly quantified:
(a, b) (3c)*. a +  h =  c 
Similarly, 
{a, b) (3c) . a X b =  c
(at b) (3c) . a — b =  c 
(a, b) (3c) . a -f- b =  c
From such beginnings the algebra of numbers is derived; 
it is a generalization of arithmetic, a systematic statement 
of what is true for any numbers or for some numbers. It 
states in general terms the laws of operation, the structure 
of the number series, the existence of the peculiar elements 
1 and 0 (1 being “the element whereby any number, a, may 
be multiplied without being altered/' and 0 “the element 
which may be added to any a without altering that a” ), 
and allows us to calculate, from these conditions, the 
relations of various constructs to each other [such as: 
"(a, b) : (a +  b) x  (a +  b) =  (a x  a) +  (2 x  a X b) +  (b X &)”].f
* Note that the a, b, and c of any one proposition have nothing 
to do with the a, b, and c of any other.
t Any one who is interested in the logical derivation of mathe­
matics will probably be able to read, at this point, the excellent 
rendering of Pêano’s system (from his Formulaire de Mathématiques 
(Turin, 1895-1908) in Young’s Lectures on the Fundamental Concepts 
of Algebra and Geometry (New York, 1911), or Bertrand Russell’s 
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (London, 1919) (a little more 
advanced logic).

208
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
The generalized deductive system of classes does exactly 
the same thing. Its operations are a little different, its 
peculiar elements 1 and 0 are differently defined, wherefore 
it has very different propositions; so that its K  cannot be 
a universe of numbers, just as the universe of arithmetic 
cannot mean, by interpretation, “classes.” But the general­
ized class-calculus is none the less an algebra, howbeit not 
a numerical algebra; it is known as the Algebra of Logic, 
and sometimes, in honour of George Boole its founder, as 
Boolean Algebra. According to its laws, we are able to work 
with “ examples,” to establish equations and solve problems 
of logic by the methods of genuine mathematics. The laws 
which govern these procedures are the “primitive pro­
positions” which constitute our initial set of postulates.
2. F u r t h e r D isc u ssio n  o f th e P o st u l a t e s 
The ten postulates for K(a, b . . .) + ,  X , = , given in 
the previous chapter, had best be reiterated here, so that 
in deducing theorems we may have the premises compactly 
and conveniently before us. We start, then, with the following 
concepts and general propositions:
i,b,c. • •) +> X, =
K  =int “classes of individuals’
+  =int “class-disjunction”
X =int ‘ ‘class-conj unction’ ’
=  =int “is identical with”
IA
(a, b) (Be) . a + b =  c
IB
{a, b) (3c) . a X b — c
IlA
(30) («) . c\ -f- 0 =  a
IlB
(31) (a) . a: X 1 =  a
IIlA
{a, b) . a -}- b = b 
ci
IIlB
(a, b) .a X: 6 = b x  a
IVa
(a, b,c) . a +  (b X c) = {a -f b) X {a +  c)
IVb
(a, b,c) . a X (b +  c) = (a X b) +  {a X c)
V
{a) (3 -a) : a +  ■-a — 1 . a X -a =  0
VI
(3a, b) . a * b

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
209
Altogether, we have here ten postulates, or primitive 
propositions, unproved and unchallengeable assumptions 
about the system. Now, if these postulates are grouped 
according to their general characteristics, they will be 
found to fall into three general categories, according to the 
types of their respective contributions to the system. They 
m av be characterized as:
(1) Those which allow us to derive new terms from 
old, i.e. which permit the use of the operators; (2) those 
which assert categorically the existence of certain elements; 
(3) those which permit certain ways of manipulating terms, 
i.e. which state the general conditions on which the relation =  
depends. The first group comprises I a , I b , and V ; the second 
I I a , I I b , and V I ; the third, I I I a , I I I b , I V a , and I V b . N ow 
it will immediately be noticed that the different kinds of 
postulate are distinguished by the type and order of their 
quantifiers. A  universal quantifier followed by the parti­
cular, e.g. (a) (3 b), expresses the determination of a certain 
element by whatever elements have been given, that is to 
say, it expresses the universal fact that from any given 
term or terms at least one other may be derived in a way 
which the following formula conveys. A particular quantifier, 
which m ay or may not be followed by a universal one, 
(3a) (b), makes a categorical assertion that “there is at 
least one such-and-such/' or “there are at least two such- 
and such/' having certain relations to “any element" in the 
system, or to each other if there be more than one, which 
relations are given by the formula that follows. A  com­
pletely universal proposition, i.e. one introduced by (a) or 
(a, b), or any number of universals without any (3 —), 
expresses a condition which governs the whole system; such 
a condition is an algebraic rule of the system. So it may be 
said that the postulates grant the existence of certain elements, 
rules for deriving new elements, and rules for manipulating 
whatever elements there are. In a system based on operators, 
like +  and x , the second kind of postulate will naturally

210
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
be the first to engage our attention. I a  and I b must be 
granted before we can proceed to the definitions of 0 and 1, 
of two elements such that a 4= b, the rules for relating 
derived elements, or the establishment of the defined operation 
“not.”
3. P r in c ip l e s o f P r o o f : S u b st it u t io n , A p p l ic a t io n , 
a n d  I n fe r e n c e
Before we undertake the systematic deduction of theorems, 
a few words might be said about the principles of logical 
reasoning. The method whereby all other propositions of 
the system are derived from its postulates rests on a few 
very general canons of logical procedure, which are uni­
versally known, though seldom explicitly stated.
The first of these is the principle of substitution. It is 
assumed that, whenever two terms are identical, i.e. are 
names for the same element, either one may be used in place 
of the other. That is, if a =  6, then a x e  may be written 
b x cy or c +  b may be written c +  a Similarly, if two 
propositions are equivalent, one may be asserted in place of 
the other; thus, if a < b . = . a - \ - b  =  b} then wherever 
a <  b occurs we may write a +  b =  b instead, and vice 
versa.
The second canon might be called the principle of appli­
cation. This is the assumption that a statement about any 
element applies to each element ; that is to say, if it is granted 
that
(a, b) . a —|— b =  b —|— a
and if we know there is a certain x and there is a certain y, 
then it is true of this x and this y that x +  y =  y +  x.
The third rule of reasoning is the principle of inference, 
the only one which is not usually taken unconsciously for 
granted, but has received extensive recognition in the 
literature. On this principle, if a proposition may be asserted 
(i.e. is “granted” or otherwise “known as true”), and this

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
211
proposition implies another proposition, then the latter 
may also be asserted. Thus, if we know that (3 a,b) .a =  -b 
and also that (a, b) : a =  -6 . O . b == -a, then we may 
assert b =  -a henceforth as an independent proposition, 
not merely as a part of “ (a, 
b) : a =  -6 . O . b == -a.” 
This is the process of passing from premises to their con­
clusion, which may be called deductive reasoning proper, 
as against the principles of substitution and application, 
which are in a sense auxiliary devices, however important 
they may be to the very possibility of deduction.
These. general rules of argument, together with the 
postulated rules of manipulation for the calculus in question, 
and the conventions governing the use of symbolism (such 
as letting a repeated symbol in one total assertion mean 
the same thing whenever it occurs, or letting the greater 
number of dots always extend over the lesser number, etc.) 
which have been expounded in earlier chapters, must 
suffice for all further developments of the algebra of logic, 
which are now to be exhibited in the form of deduced pro­
positions or theorems.
4. E l e m e n t a r y T h e o r e m s
In developing the calculus of classes, one might begin 
with the proof of almost any proposition that happens to 
follow directly from the postulates. But in logic, as in 
mathematics, there are certain unwritten laws—one might 
fairly say logical "ideals”—which limit our caprices in this 
matter, though they do not prescribe any hard and fast 
order wherein the derived propositions must be marshalled: 
these tacit principles are logical economy, and what the 
mathematicians call "elegance," plan and symmetry in 
exposition. We want to exhibit as soon as possible all the 
general laws of the algebra, the fundamental facts which are 
most frequently used in processes of proof, and leave for 
later derivation the details of the system, to which one 
rarely appeals for further deductions. That is to say, we

212
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
want to explicate first of all the rules of manipulation which 
are characteristic of this system.
Two of these rules are given as postulates; each one is 
expressed by two primitive propositions. IIIa and IIIb state 
what is called the commutative law, one for the operator + , 
the other for x . This law grants one the right to commute 
the elements in a sum or in a product whenever it is con­
venient to do so, i.e. to write either a +  b or b +  a, either 
b x  a or a x  b. Postulates IVa and IV b together express 
the so-called distributive law, one for an element added to 
a product, the other for an element multiplied with a sum. 
IVa states that an element a which is added to a product, 
(b x c), may be “distributed” to each member of the 
product, but not in the usual sense of “distributed,” which 
is to be broken up and divided among the members; the 
whole of a is added to each member of the product. It is 
“distributed” rather in the way a cold may be distributed, 
by one sufferer, to a whole roomful of people, each person 
receiving the whole cold in all its glory. IV b asserts this 
law for the multiplication of an element with a sum; each 
member of the sum may be separately multiplied by that 
element, so that it is “distributed” over the members of 
the sum without being itself split up. Thus a x (b +  c) 
may be written (a x b) +  (a x  c).
Such laws supply us with forms that may be substituted 
for one another. The possibility of making deductions from 
given facts depends so often on the form in which these 
facts are given, that a large supply of interchangeable forms 
is the first requirement for an interesting deductive system. 
The establishment of more such forms is therefore our first 
ambition in developing the algebra, and the theorems we 
are most anxious to prove are such as yield more laws of 
manipulation.
Most of our proofs, however, involve the elements 1 and 0, 
and require that there should be just one element such as 
1 and just one such as 0. The postulates tell us there is at

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
213
least one class 1 and at least one class 0; but not that there is 
at most one of each. Before we can treat 1 and 0 as unique 
it behooves us, then, to demonstrate their uniqueness. Let 
us begin with a proof of the proposition:
Theorem ia
The element 0 in IIa is unique.
This proposition arrests attention because, unlike all 
previous propositions of the system, it is stated in words, 
not symbols. Huntington, who made this and the corre­
sponding 1-proposition his first two theorems, stated them 
verbally, and all subsequent writers, to m y knowledge, 
have followed the practice. The symbolic statement is a bit 
complicated, and without quantifiers (most writers dispense 
with them, regarding generalization as “understood”), it is 
impossible.* To avoid the use of a rather complex formula 
in the very first theorem, I follow the fashion of rendering 
this proposition in words.
Proof:
Assume an element 02 having the properties of 0, so that 
we have 0X and 02.
Then 
(a) . a +  02 == a
B y the principle of application, what is true of a is true 
of 0V
so 
0X -f- 02 =  0X
Likewise, what holds for a in IIa holds for 02, so 
02 + 
=  ^2
But 
02 -¡- 0X =  0X -f- 02 
by IIIa
But 
02 -f- 0X =  02 
and 0X -f- 02 =  0X
* Symbolically the statement that there is at least one 0 which 
if added to any other term, a, leaves it unaffected, and that any b 
having the same property is identical with 0, is:
(30):: (a), a + 0 =  a: . (b)(c) : c + b =  c . 3 . b =  0

214
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
So, by the principle of substitution, 02 may be written for 
02 +  01 and 0X for 0X +  02 and we have
02 =  0X 
Q.E.D.
A ny element, therefore, which has the property ascribed 
to 0 in IIa is identical with 0; which is to say, 0 is unique.
Theorem ib
The element 1 in IIb is unique.
The proof of this theorem is exactly analogous to that of 
Theorem ia, applying IIb in place of IIa and IIIb in place 
of IIIa.
The uniqueness of 0 and 1 being thus guaranteed, we are 
able to demonstrate another important equation, a charac­
teristic of the system known as the Law of Tautology:
Theorem 2b* 
Proof: 
a =  a x
(a) . a X a =  a 
1
1 — a —|— ~a
by IIb 
by V
hence 
a =  a x (a +  -«)
a x {a +  -a) =  (a X a) +  (a X -a)
by IVb, the “distributive law” for products 
a x -a — 0 
V
hence 
a =  a x {a +  -a) =  {a x a) +  [a x -a)
= (tfX fl)+ 0  = a: Xa
or: 
a =  a x a
Q.E.D.
Theorem 2a 
t .
(a) . a +  # =  #
The proof of this theorem is analogous to that of 2b, and
♦Theorems dealing with sums will bear the suffix "a,” those 
dealing with products, “b” ; sometimes “a" will be proved and the 
analogous “b” left to the reader, and sometimes vice versa, so as 
to give equal insight into the treatment of sums and products 
respectively.

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
2 1 5
may easily be carried out, using IIa in place of IIb and IVa 
in place of IVb.
These propositions are called laws of “tautology” because 
they show that it makes no difference how many times a 
term is mentioned in a sum or a product; a product is not 
changed by being multiplied by something that is already 
a factor of it, nor a sum by having one of its summands 
added to it any number of times. Naturally, the common 
part of a and a is the whole of a and nothing more; the 
class of dogs that are also dogs is simply the class of dogs; 
and what is either a or is a must likewise be just exactly 
the class a; what is either a cat or a cat is a cat. The 
tautology is obvious.
It is owing to these two propositions that the algebra of 
logic has no exponents and no coefficients. If a x  a =  a, 
we need not bother about an a2, since a2 =  a; if a +  a =  a, 
we can never arrive at 2a; hence the peculiar simplicity of 
the class-calculus.
Before we proceed to the next “laws” of the algebra, it 
is necessary to prove that if 1 is added to anything, the sum 
is 1, and if anything is multiplied by 0 the product is 0. 
The next two theorems, therefore, describe the behaviour 
of these two unique elements more fully than the minimum 
description that defines them in the postulates.
Theorem 3a
((Z ) . CL -{- í  =  Í
Proof: 
0 +  1 = (a +  I) x 1
by IIb, since (a +  1) is a simple term, and 
may take the place of a in the formula 
(a +  1) X  1 =  1 X (a + 1) 
IIIb
2 =  a +  -a 
V
hence 
1 X (a 
1) =  (a 
-a) x  (a 
1) Substitution 
( cl -|—
cl)  X ( cl 
1 )  =
 U  
(-C L X 1 )
by IV a (the second form in the equation 
here stands first)

2l6
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
hence
1 X (a -j- 1) =  a -f- (-a X 1)
Substituting back, 1 for {a +  -0)
but
1 .X (a 
1) =  a 
1
IIb
and
-a x  1 =  -a
IIb
hence
a -f-1 — a -j—
Substitution
or
a +  l =  l
V
Q.E.D.
Theorem 3b
(a) . a X 0 =  0
The proof is analogous to that of 3a, using IIa instead 
of IIb, IIIa instead of IIIb, IVb instead of IVa.
There are certain points of procedure to be noted in the 
proof of theorem 3a. In the first place, the sum a +  1, which 
is to be proved equal to 1, is treated as a single term, so that 
a truth about "any term, a” m ay be applied to it. It is easy 
to forget that a sum or a product has the same characteristics 
as a single letter. In the second place, it was sometimes wise 
to write 1, sometimes its equivalent a +  -a. The guiding 
principle here is to use, whenever possible, a form which 
makes the resultant expression exemplify some familiar 
formula. Thus, to write a +  -a instead of 1 makes the 
expression 1 x  (a +  1) a product of two sums, (a +  -a) 
X (a +  1), and in this we recognize the right-hand member 
of the equation in postulate IVa . Since 
holds between 
its terms in either order, we m ay assert: (<a +  -a) x  (a +  1) 
=  & “t- 
X 1).
A ll the steps in this proof are very simple; yet to survey 
the possibilities and make a practical choice of forms requires 
a certain ingenuity. There is no thumb-rale to indicate the 
next move in a calculation. The rales of logic merely permit 
some moves and forbid others, but never dictate a line of

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
217
argument. One might say that to understand logic is a 
science, resting purely on reason; but to use logic, to select 
postulates or demonstrate theorems, is an art, and requires 
imagination.
The next proposition is again a “law” of the system, 
applying to all its elements:
Theorem 4b
Proof :
(a, b) . a x  (a +  b) =  a
a x (a -f” b) =  (a 
0) x (a 
b)
IIa
(a +  0) X (a +  i) =  a -f (0 X b)
IVa
=  a -f- (6 X 0)
IIIb
=  a + 0
3b
=  a
IIa
Q.E.D.
Theorem 4a
(a, b) . a +  (a X b) =  a
The proof is analogous to that of theorem 4b, using the 
postulates or theorems which express for the other operator 
the laws used above.
These two propositions state the so-called laws of absorp­
tion, whereby a term, a, “absorbs” any sum of itself and 
another term when multiplied with this sum, and any product 
of itself and another term when it is added to this product. 
For, by interpretation, “a x  (a -f- 6)” means “the common 
part of a and (a +  6),” and thi6 is, of course, just a. The 
class of books that are also either books or chairs is the 
class of books. Also, “a +  (a X 6)” means “the class of 
either a or a x 
and that again is just a; the class of

2X8
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
people who are either soldiers or German soldiers is the class 
of soldiers.
Theorem 5a
(a, b) . (a +  b) x (a +  -b) =  a
Proof: 
(a +  b) x  {a +  -b) =  a +  (b x  -b)
a +  (b x  -b) — a +  0 =  a
IVa
V, IIa
Q.E.D.
Theorem 5b
(a, b) . (a x  b) +  (a x -b) =  a
The proof is similar to that of 5a, using IVb for IVa.
The law expressed in these theorems is called the law 
of expansion, because it allows us to “expand” a term, a, 
to any length by introducing complementary pairs of 
other terms into its description. Thus, a =  [{a x *) +  
[a x -&)] +  [(a X c) +  (a X -c)] +  [(<a X d) +  (a X -¿)] . . . 
since each bracketed expression equals a, and the total, 
a +  a +  a +  . . . , by the law of tautology, is also identical 
with a.
The value of this formula is that it allows us to use a 
single term as a sum of products or a product of sums, in 
making calculations. A term may be “expanded” until it 
matches some other expression with which it is to be 
compared in manipulation, so that we can often produce 
a convenient symmetry of forms, which allows all sorts of 
mathematical tricks and transformations.
A t this point, the operation -, or “negation,” requires some 
further elucidation. The postulates state that for every given 
element, a, there is at least one element -a which has no 
part in common with a, but together with a makes up the 
universe class. Is there, however, only one such element? 
Theorem 6 proves this point, showing that any element b 
having the postulated relations of -a to a is identical with 
a, i.e. that there is just one complement for every a.

Theorem 6
(a, b, c) :a  =  -c .b  =  - c . 0 . a  =  b
Proof: 
a =  a x 1 
IIb
=  a X (c +  b) 
V
=  (a x  c) +  (a x  
b) 
IVb
=  (c x  a) +  (b x  
a) 
IIIb
=  0 +  (b x a) 
V
=  ( c x b )  +  ( b x  
a) 
V
=  ( J x c )  +  ( 4 x a )  
IIIb
=  b x (c +  a) 
IVb
=  b x 1 
V
=  b 
IIb
THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC 
219
Q.E.D.
This proves that for every a, -a is uniquely determined, 
by the operation -on a. E very term has just one comple­
ment. From this it is easy to prove
Theorem 7
(a, b) : b =  -a . 0 . a =  -b
Proof: 
b = - a . O . a - \ - b  =  l . a x b  — 0 
V
then 
b +  a =  l . b x a = 0
IIIa, b, commutative law
therefore a fulfils the condition for -b, and by theorem 6 
this makes it identical with -b
hence 
a =  -b 
q.e.d.
This is known as the law of contraposition, from which 
follows, as a corollary, the law of double negation,
Theorem 8
(a) . a =  -(-a)
The proof is obvious; a term and its complement are each 
other’s complements, i.e. every element is the complement 
of its complement.
One further pair of theorems m ay here be adduced, before

220
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
we discuss the ‘Taw of duality/' although that law is em­
ployed in proving these two propositions, so that the proofs 
cannot be given here. These theorems are properly numbered 
n a  and n b . As they are long and complicated they may 
as well be relegated to a later section.* The theorems in 
question assert the laws of association.
Theorem n a
(a> b, c) . (a -f- b) +  c =  a +  (6 +  c)
Theorem n b
(a, b, c) . (a x  b) x c =  a x {b x c)
Here it is stated that it makes no difference in what 
order summands are added to each other, or in what order 
factors are combined into a product. In practice, it allows 
us to dispense with parentheses where all the operators are 
alike; that is to say, if
a -j- (b -f- c) =  (a -{- b) -J- c 
and 
a x {b x c) =  (a x b) x c
the parentheses lose their significance, and the expressions 
may as well be written
a +  b +  c and a x b X c
Only where we wish to treat part of such an expression as 
a single term we employ parentheses to set it off.
At this point, a simple notational device, borrowed from 
ordinary algebra, may be introduced: the product of two 
elements, a x b, is often written without a x , simply as 
ab. This is a familiar usage which allows us to dispense 
with a good many parentheses where sums and products are 
mixed. Thus, to abbreviate
(a X b) -f- (-a X b} 
c 
[a, x (T) 
by simply omitting parentheses would be confusing, since
* They may be found in Appendix B.

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
221
a x b  + -a  x b  +  c +  a x d  might as well be construed 
to mean a x {b +  -a) x {b +  c) +  (a X d); but ab +  -ab 
+  c +  ad is unmistakable.
5. T h e D u a l it y  o f +  a n d  
x  
Anyone who has followed the exposition to this point 
has undoubtedly noticed a peculiar symmetry in the postu­
lates and theorems, namely that for every proposition about 
sums there is an analogous one about products. If there is 
an entity which, when multiplied with any term, leaves that 
term unaffected, then there is also one which may be added 
to any term without altering it; if there is a term which is 
unchanged by anything that is added to it, then there is 
one that does not change by being multiplied with anything 
else. Moreover, any law of the algebra that holds for addition 
holds for multiplication; if products are “ associative/' so 
are sums, if sums are “commutative," so are products, etc. 
The reason for this duality is that any class which may be 
formed with the operator +  may also be expressed in terms of 
X and negation, and any class that may be formed with X 
could also be expressed with +  and negation. The exact 
relation between sums and products appears in the following 
theorems:
Theorem 10a
-(a +  b) =  -a X -6
The theorem asserts that -a x -b is -(a +  6), i.e. is the 
complement of a +  b; if we can show that (a -f b) +  
-a-b =  1 and (a +  b) x -a -b =  0, then the theorem is 
proved. But there are several steps, or lemmas, in this 
demonstration. First of all we must prove that, with any 
term b, whatever:
-a -(- (a -|- 6) =  1
and 
-a X ab =  0
Call this lemma 1.

Proof: 
-<i -|- (<i -J- 6) = i  X [*® ■)■(<? 4" ^)] 
Hb
1 =  -a +  a 
V
hence 
1 X [-a + (a +  ¿>)] =  (-a +  a) x [-a +  (a +  fy]
=  -a +  [a x  {a + &)] 
IVa
but 
a X (a -j- b) = «  
4b
then 
-a +  [0 X (« +  6)] =  -a +  a
=  i  
V
222 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Similarly -a x  ab may be shown to equal 0 ; the proof 
need not be explicitly rehearsed here, but may be designated 
as lemma 2.
Now we can prove
Lemma 3, 
(a +  b) +  -a -b =  1
Proof: 
(a +  b) +  -a -b =  [(a +  b) +  -a]
[(a +  b) +  -b] 
IVa
but 
(a +  b) +  -a =  -a +  (a +  b) 
IIIa
and 
-a +  (a +  b) =  1 
lemma 1
(a +  b) +  -b =  -b +  (b +  a) — 1
IIIa and lemma 1
then 
(a +  b) +  -a -b =  1 x  1 =  1
Finally we have
Lemma 4, 
(a +  b) X -a -b =  0
Proof: 
(a +  b) x -a-b =  -a -b X (a -\-b)
-a -b X (a +  b) =  {-a -b) a +  (-a -b) b
=  a (-a -b) +  b (-a -b) 
a X (-a -b) =  0 
b X (-a -b) =  0 
0 +  0 =  0
2b
IIlB
IVb 
IIIb 
j- lemma 2
2a

and 
(a +  b) X -a -b =  0
-a-b =  -(a +  b) 
q.e.d
The rather elaborate proof of theorem 10a is given 
because of the great importance of the proposition in 
question. Analogously, we might demonstrate
Theorem 10b
THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC 
223
Since 
[a -f- b) -f- -л -b =  1
(a, b) . -(a x b ) =  -a +  -b
But this is left to the brave and ambitious reader.
The significance of theorems 10a and 10b is that by 
their means we may write any product in the form of a 
sum, and any sum as a product. For, if -a -f- -b is the 
complement of ab, then ab may be written as the com­
plement of -a +  -£>, i.e. ab =  -(-a +  -b). Now, if every 
sum may be turned into a product and vice versa, it is 
not hard to see why the laws for sums should be exactly 
like the laws for products; since a +  b is a term, -(<2 +  6) 
is also a term, and what holds for a +  b holds also for 
-((a +  6); but -(a +  b) =  -a X -b; for every a +  6 there is 
a c x d which is its complement, namely the product of the 
terms -a and -6.
This characteristic of the algebra of logic is called the 
duality of +  and X, and the two theorems which express 
the relation between sums and products state the so-called 
law of duality. Throughout the entire system, whatever rule 
applies to one operator, applies also to the other (where 0 
occurs with one operator, 1 will occur with the other, and 
vice versa). That is why the postulates involving +  and X 
come in pairs, numbered Ia, Ib, IIa, IIb, etc., or— like V—  
make a compound statement whose clauses constitute just 
such a pair; and why the theorems dealing with operations 
follow two by two, like Noah's animals.
The duality of +  and x has some astonishing con-

sequences. If every sum is expressible as a product, then 
certainly everything we have said about sums could have 
been said about those same entities expressed as products; 
and if we said everything there is to say about products, 
this must include all there is about sums expressed as 
products; so it must contain by implication anything that 
could be said about sums. Why, then, assume both sums and 
products as “primitive notions“ ? Sums are just another 
way of writing products. If we assume as “primitive“ the 
meaning of X , and admit
(a, b) (3c) . a X b =  c
then we may regard a +  b as merely another way of say­
ing -(-a -6); everything that is true of a +  b is true of 
-(-a -6), and vice versa. So, if we take x and - as “primitive,“ 
+  may be defined as follows:
{a, b): a +  b . =di . -(-0 -b)
This has, indeed, been done; postulates for the algebra 
of logic have been given entirely in terms of x . Of course 
they are a little different from the x  -postulates here given. 
The characterization of 1 and of -a in our set, for instance, 
would be impossible without + , so a different description 
is necessary if we use x  alone. The distributive law cannot 
be expressed to any purpose, i.e. as a recognizable “law,“ 
at all, in terms of one operator, so it is useless as a postulate, 
but must wait upon the introduction of the defined notion + , 
and follow as a theorem; the postulates, consequently, must 
be chosen in such a way that this important law can be 
deduced from them. But all these are perfectly straight­
forward, soluble problems. Professor Lewis, in A Survey of 
Symbolic Logic, has given a perfectly adequate, simple, and 
workable set of postulates for Boolean algebra, with a formal 
context K{a, b ...) x  (the relation “ = “ is tacitly assumed, 
as usual), nine primitive propositions, and three definitions.
Exactly the same thing may be done for the other operator.
224 
AN in t r o d u c t io n  t o sy m b o l ic l o g ic

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
225
+ . We may take logical disjunction as a primitive notion, 
and, with the help of the postulated (i.e. described, not 
defined) operation -, define the notion of logical conjunction, 
thus:
(a, b) : a  X b . ==df. -(-a +  -6)
The whole algebra may be determined by a handful of 
"primitive propositions” in terms of +  alone; the definition 
of "a X b” figures in such a system as a mere convenience, 
since it could always be replaced by -(-<z +  -&), 
but 
the convenience of this abbreviation is so great that the 
essential form, the simplicity and symmetry of the whole 
system would be practically undiscoverable without it. 
Imagine the "distributive law” in terms of x alone:
(a, b,c) . a X -(-& X -c) = -[-(a  X  b) X  -{a X c)]
This sort of proposition is too clumsy to be useful. There­
fore, if we begin with + , the notion of X is introduced as 
soon as possible by definition. Professor Huntington has 
given a set of postulates for the algebra of logic in terms of 
+  alone ("= ” being understood).*
I have used the formal context K(a, b . . . ) + ,  x ,  = , 
because (1) it does not give preference to either operator, 
and therefore does not create the false impression that either 
one is, in its own right, more "essential” than the other;
(2) it shows in the clearest form the duality of +  and x ; 
and (3) it furnishes the greatest variety of forms to be used 
in the process of deducing theorems, so that it is the easiest 
version of the calculus for a novice to handle. But now that 
we see how either operator may actually be defined in 
terms of the other, we must admit that the primitive notions 
here adopted do not constitute the smallest selection that 
may be made to serve, and the algebra thereby falls short 
of the ideal of conceptual economy.
* H u n t in g t o n , op. c i t the third set.

226
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
6. The Definition of < , and Inclusion-Theorems
So far, we have operated entirely with primitive notions, 
since our formal context is a very generous one. There has 
been no need, as yet, of concepts established by definition. 
But now it is convenient to introduce a new relation, which 
must, of course, be duly defined in terms of previous notions: 
this relation may be called inclusion, symbolized by < , and 
determined thus:
(a, b) : a <  b . =df . a +  b =  b
“ ‘a is included in V is always to mean the same thing 
as: the sum of a and b is b itself/'
The duality of +  and X is so thoroughgoing that even 
where a mere definition is given in terms of + , its equivalent 
for X may be found. We might as well have defined <  
through an equation containing a product:
{a, b) : a < b  . =df . ab =  a
“ ‘a is included in V is always to mean the same thing as: 
the product of a and b is a itself/'
The new symbol, < , is to be officially defined as a +  b =  b. 
But often it is very convenient that a proposition about 
products may be substituted for a +  b =  b, i.e. that this 
expression is equivalent to ab =  a; so it is advisable to 
establish this equivalence.
Logical equivalence is mutual implication. So the theorem 
must be demonstrated in two lemmas, one to prove that 
a +  b =  b . O , a b  =  a, the other that ab =  a. O . a +  b =  b.
Theorem 12
(a,b) : a +  b =  b . =  . ab =  a
Proof:
Lemma 1 
a +  b =  b . O , a b  =  a
Dem. 
a +  b =  b . 0 .ab =  a (a +  6)
=  a 
4b

Dem. 
ab =  a . 0 .a-\-b =  ab-\-b
=  b +  ba 
=  b
Therefore, 
a +  b =  b . =  . ab — a
THE ALGEBRA. OF LOGIC
Lem m a 2 
(a,b) : ab =  a . O , a  +  b =  b
227
I V a , I V b 
4a
Q.E.D.
This gives us the right to substitute ab =  a for a <  b or 
a +  b =  b whenever it suits our purposes to do so.
Although definitions are, in a sense, quite arbitrary, and are 
to be taken as mere shorthand for complicated terms or pro­
positions, they are of course employed to describe some state 
of affairs which is important wherever we use our algebra. 
Just as 2 2 is shorthand for 2 X 2, we none the less call it 
the “square” of 2 because it expresses the formula for a 
geometrical square whose side- 
measure is 2. Similarly, the 
proposition a <  b is shorthand 
for a +  b — b; but <  is read 
“inclusion” because a +  b =  b 
holds, always and only, for cases 
where a is totally included 
in b. The diagram makes this 
doubly clear.
Whenever what is either a or b is b, a is included in b; 
whenever this is the case, what is both a and b, is a, or, 
a < b ; or, ab — a.
With the defined notion of < , we can prove several 
interesting theorems for cases of total inclusion of one class 
in another. Remember that, since a <  bin this system means 
a +  b =  b, and this has been proved equivalent to ab — a, 
a proposition about <  always permits a correlative pair of 
propositions, one in terms of + , one of x  ; so even where 
the explicit pairing of theorems is abandoned, it remains 
implicitly understood.
a + b = b ;a < b  
F ig. 15.

228
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Theorem 13
(a) . a <  a
Proof: 
a <  a . =df . a +  a =  a
CL —|— CL =  CL
Therefore, 
a <  a
2a
q.e.d.
Theorem 14a
b) . a <  a +  b 
Proof: 
cl <C cl -|~ b . =  df
This is equivalent to a (a +  b) =  a 
12
but 
a (a +  b) =  a 
4b
hence 
a <  a +  b 
Q.e.d.
Theorem 14b
{a, b) . ah <  a
The proof is analogous to that of theorem 14a, and follows 
directly from the definition of < .
Theorem 15a
(a, b, c) : a <  c . b <  c . O . a +  b <  c
Proof: 
a +  c =  c .b  +  c =  c . 0 .c  +  c = ( a  +  c)
+  (b +  c)
C +  c =  C 
2b
(cl 
c) 
(Jo 
c) =  CL 
b 
c 
C 
CL 
b 
c 
a +  b +  c =  c . = d f. a +  b <  c 
q.e.d.
Theorem 15b
(a, b, c): c <  a . c <  b . O . c <  ab
The proof is analogous to that of 15a, using the equivalent 
of the definition of < .

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
229
Theorem 16
hence
but
hence
(a, b, c) : a <  b . b <  c
a =  ab 
b — be
a — a (be)
a(be) =  (ab) c 
(ab)c <  c
a <  c
O . a <  c
hyp. and def. 
hyp. and def.
11b
14b
Q.E.D.
Theorem 17a
(a). a <  1 
Proof: 
a =  a x  1
Therefore, 
a <  1
Theorem 17b
(a) . 0 <  a
The proof is analogous to theorem 17a.
IIb
Q.E.D.
Theorem 18b
(a, b) : a < b . a < . - b . O . a  =  0
Proof: 
a =  ab. a =  a-b 
df. and hyp.
a-b =  (ab) -b =  0 
11b, V, 3b
Therefore, 
a =
 0 
q.e.d.
Theorem 18a
(a, b) : a <  b . -a <  b . O . b =  1
The proof is analogous, using the equivalent of the 
definition of < .

230
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Theorem 19
(a, b) :. (c): c <  a . c < b . O . c <  0 : O . a < -b
Proof a 
c ^  cl » c ^  ô * O . c ^  æô 
15b
(c) . c <  ab . O . c =  0  : O : ab <  ab . O . ab =  0
application
ab < ab
13
ab =  0  . O . -{ab) = 1
-a -f- -b = 1
10b
a <C ~a -j— —b
= d f. a = a  {-a + -b)
=  a  X -a  -{- a X -b
IVb
= a X -b
a =  a  x -b . =df . a < -b
Q.E.D.
Theorem 20
(a, b) : a  <  b . =  . a  -b — 0
It must be remembered that the sign of equivalence, = , 
denotes mutual implication between the two expressions 
it connects; so the proofs of 20 and 21 require two steps 
apiece, or— short and simple though they be— two lemmas 
each, for their demonstration.
Proof of 20:
Lemma 1
a <  b .O  . a-b — 0
Dem.
a <  b . =  . ab =  a
def. and 12
then
a-b =  {ab) -b 
=  0
Lemma 2
a-b =  0 . O . a < b
Dem.
a =  ab +  a -b
then
a-b =  0 . O . a  =  ab +  0 =  ab 
a =  ab . =  . ab =  a . =  . a +  è =  
a +  6 =  6 . =  . a <  b
6 
12 
def.
hence
a <  b . =  . a -b =  0
Q.E.D.

THE ALG E BR A OF LOGIC
231
Theorem
Proof:
2 1
(a , b) 
: a  <
 b . =  . -a  +  b =  1
Lemma 1
a  <C. b . O . -d  -f- b =  1
Dem.
CL <C b . =  . CL -f- b =  b
def.
then
-a  +  b =  -a  +  (a +  b) 
—  {-cl -f-  a ) 
b
=  1 +
 b 
=  1
Lemma 2
-a  +
 b =
 l  . O
. a < b
Dem.
- a
+
 b =
 1
. 0
. a
<
- a
+
 b
1 7 a
.O  . a  =
 a  {-a  
b)
I lB
=
 a - a  +
 ab
I V b
=  0  -J- ab
V
=
 ab
I lA
a  =  ab . =
 . a  +
 b =
 b
1 2
. =
 . a  < b
def.
Therefore,
a <  b . =
.
 -a  
b =
 1
Q.E.D.
Many of these theorems are so simple that their proof
is almost a matter of stating definitions. But they have a 
significance, none the less, for the general understanding of 
Boolean algebra, as the next section will show.
7. Comparison with Postulates for K{a, b .. .) < 2 
If now one turns back to chapter viii, § 4, one is struck 
immediately by the close resemblance of the postulates 
there given, in the context K(a, b . . .) < 2, to some of the 
theorems just proved in the present system. The first 
postulate with <  is theorem 13 above. Theorem 14a ex­
presses the first half of the condition laid down for s in 
postulate 7, 15a adds the second part, so that all of (K, <)- 
postulate 7 that remains unproved in our system is the 
existence of the element s— and that, of course, was taken 
care of in our postulate Ia. Likewise, theorems 14b and 15b

correspond to the conditions assumed in (K, <  )-postulate 
6, and the existence of p is given in our postulate Ib. 
Theorem 16 in the present system corresponds to postulate 2 
of the other; theorem 17a to postulate 3, 17b to postulate 4 
(the existence of 1 and 0 being previously established for us), 
18a and b express the two conditions for -a in postulate 5, 
where again the force of the particular quantifier is lost 
because -a is already accepted, and finally 19 derives, 
from the premises with +  and X , the (K, <)-postulate 8 
(20 and 21 need not concern us here; their significance will 
be shown in chapter xi). Everything that is assumed in the 
context K(at b . . .) < 2 may be proved in the context K(a, b .. .) 
+, X, =.
It may be remembered, moreover, that in the first for­
mulation of the class system, i.e. the (K, <)-system, + , 
X, and =  were defined concepts. In that system, every 
postulate of the present system would follow as a theorem from 
the postulates 1-8. Anyone who doubts this statement may 
be referred to Professor Huntington's paper* from which 
the two postulate-sets here adduced have been taken 
(howbeit with some modifications), where the proofs are 
indicated and can easily be completed.
The moral of this long tale is, that it is possible to make 
more than one selection among all the propositions of Boolean 
algebra, such that the chosen set of propositions shall imply 
all the rest. The two different sets of “primitive" propositions 
are two implicit descriptions of the whole system; they are 
two different descriptions of one and the same thing. Just 
as a man who has the blue prints of a house and a scale 
of proportions can construe for himself its measurements, 
and the man who has only the measurements can select a 
scale and make a blueprint from them, so a person with 
either postulate-set can deduce the other. We can translate 
from one system to the other. The only dictionary we need 
for this translation is a definition of the symbols we have not 
* H u n t in g t o n , op. cit.
232 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
233
assumed, in terms of those which we have. But however we 
start— with < , with + , with X, or with +  and X —  
we can select a set of postulates from which all the “laws” 
of the algebra can be deduced; in any of these terms we can 
define all the others; and consequently, from any set of 
propositions that implicitly holds all the “laws” given 
above, we can deduce any other set of propositions that 
does the same thing.
8. 
Fundamental Traits of Boolean Algebra
At this point it might be well to sum up the characteristic 
laws of the class-calculus, which must be accounted for in 
any system that claims to be Boolean algebra. No matter 
what set of propositions we take as “primitive,” they must 
suffice to describe these typical relations among classes of 
individuals taken in extension:
1. The existence of a complement for every term.
2. The existence of a sum for any two terms.
3. The existence of a product for any two terms.
These are the operational assumptions of the algebra.
4. The existence of a universe class.
5. The existence of a null class.
6. The existence of more than one term (not essential, but
usually assumed).
These are the purely existential assumptions of the algebra.
7. The laws of tautology:
a 
a =  a 
a X a =  a
8. The laws of commutation:
a -j- h =  h -f- a 
a x  b =  h x  a
9. The laws of association:
{a +  b) +  c =  a +(b +c) 
(axb) x c  =  a x  (bxc)

AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
234
10. The laws of distribution:
a +  (b X c) =  (a +  b) X (a +  c) 
a X {b +  c) =  (a X b) +  {a X c)
(Note that the first of these differs from ordinary algebra, 
whereas the second does not.)
11. The laws of absorption:
a +  ab =  a 
a x  {a +  b) =  a 
These are the laws of combination.
12. The laws of the universe class:
a x  1 =  a 
a +  1 =  1
13. The laws of the null class:
a —|— 0 =  a 
a X 0 == 0 
These are the laws of the unique elements.
14. The laws of complementation:
a 
-a =  1 
a x  -a =  0
15. The law of contraposition:
a =  -b . O . b =  -a
16. The law of double negation:
a =  -(-a)
17. The laws of expansion:
ab +  a -6 =  a
(a -f" b) x {a -|— 6) =  a
18. The laws of duality:
“•(a -J- 6) =  -a X ~b 
-(a x b) =  -a +  -6 
These are the laws of negation.
This algebra, which in its fundamental traits is extremely 
simple (owing chiefly to the laws of tautology and of double­
negation), lends itself to considerable further development,

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
235
to algebraic devices for eliminating “unknowns,” to a 
peculiar theory of “logical functions,” a treatment resembling 
integration; but all these technicalities rest entirely on the 
laws of the system which have just been enumerated. In the 
calculus of classes we have an ideal instance of systematiza­
tion of far-reaching deductions from relatively few and 
simple assumptions. Boolean algebra combines the lucid 
consecutiveness of geometry with the obviousness of ordinary 
logic, and gives the rigour of mathematics to materials of 
common sense. Its significance for symbolic logic, however, 
lies not so much in its systematization of classes, as in its 
exhibition of relatedness per se, in its character as a structure 
rather than in the material of which it has been constructed. 
The facts to bear in mind, the traits that have made it a 
nucleus for logical theory are, that this system is describable 
in several ways; that what is “assumed,” “unproved,” 
“axiomatic,” and what is “ definable” or “ describable,” is 
a purely relative matter, so that no operation, relation or 
proposition is more “essential” than any other in any 
absolute way; and finally, that it tells us nothing whatever 
about classes except their formal relations to each other. We 
may have divergent ideas as to what particular classes of 
things we are talking about, what individuals are their 
members, or even just what a “class” is, in a full, philo­
sophical sense. All the algebra describes is, what sort of 
relations hold among classes. This purely formal character 
of the calculus is the real source of its importance for logic; 
but that is the burden of the following chapter.
Summary
A calculus is any system wherein we may calculate from 
some given properties of our elements to others not explicitly 
stated. Such a calculus may deal with specific elements, as 
arithmetic, the calculus of numbers, deals always with 
specific numbers. As soon as a calculus is expressed in sym­
bols meaning general terms and their relations in general,

it is an algebra. Therefore the calculus of classes, which is 
given through general (quantified) propositions, is a genuine 
algebra.
There are different ways of expressing the algebra; 
the propositions here selected as ‘‘primitive” are ten 
postulates in the formal context K{a, b .. .) + , x , = . 
These postulates fall into three groups: (i) those asserting 
the existence of certain elements, (2) those permitting the 
derivation of further elements from existing ones, and
(3) those expressing the rules of combination of elements. 
Any set of postulates adequate to the description of the 
class-calculus must contain these three kinds of proposition. 
The first kind is quantified (3 —), or (3 —) (x), the second 
(x) (3 — ), or (x, y) (3 —), the third has only universal 
quantifiers.
The principles of proof employed in deducing theorems 
are (1) substitution— replacing an element by another 
which is known to equal it, or a proposition by another 
which is known to be its equivalent. (2) Application— the 
assertion that a condition which holds for any element or 
elements holds for a certain case. (3) Inference— the inde­
pendent assertion of a new proposition which is implied 
by previously asserted ones. This is ‘'deduction” in its 
narrowest sense.
The rules of symbolic usage expounded in former chapters, 
the postulates, and these three principles of proof should 
be sufficient to develop a deductive system of class-relations.
The theorems express the laws of the calculus which are 
not already stated as postulates. These laws are already 
summarized in § 8. By means of them, one and the same 
element may be transformed so as to exhibit new aspects,
i.e. it may be expressed now by a single letter, now as a 
sum, a product, a sum of products, etc., etc. The more 
forms it may take the easier it is to establish its relations 
to all the rest of the system. For instance, if it is to be 
related to a certain sum we may express it as a sum itself,
236 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
237
and then calculate from a general relation among sums. 
Sometimes it is advantageous to write a, sometimes a x  1, 
a +  0, a(b +  -b), a +  b -b, a +  ab, a(a +  b), aa, a +  a, or 
-(-a). To know which one of all these equivalent forms 
is most suited to our demonstration requires a certain 
imagination and a good deal of practice.
The duality of +  and x is a peculiarity of Boolean algebra. 
The so-called laws of duality,
(a, b) . -(a 
b) =  -a -b
(a, b) . -(ab) == -a +  -b
allow us to express any product as a sum, any sum as a 
product; 
for if -(a +  b) =  -a -b, then a +  b =  -(-a -b). 
Consequently a +  b and -(-a -b) mean the same thing; 
and if the notions of conjunction and negation are 
given, the operation +  may be defined in terms of them. 
Likewise, if we start with disjunction and negation, we 
may define conjunction. Hence a set of postulates could 
have been expressed with only one binary operator. The 
set we have chosen is not the most economical, but has the 
great advantage of being easy to handle, exhibiting the 
important features of duality, and giving the equal and 
correlative operations +  and x  equal emphasis.
In the context 
K(a, b . . . ) + ,  x ,  = , the 
notion of 
inclusion, < , may be defined as a special case of conjunction 
or a special case of disjunction— the two cases being, of 
course, always equivalent. Thus,
(a, b) : a <  b . = d f . a +  b =  b 
or 
(a, b) : a <  b . =df . a x  b =  a
Since it may be shown that a +  b =  b and a x b =  a are 
equivalent (mutually implied), either definition may be 
used at any time. With the defined relation <  we may state 
a long list of inclusion-theorems which follow easily from 
the rest of the (K + , x,=)-system ; and these theorems 
correspond to the postulates given in chapter viii in terms of

K(a, b . . .) < 2. The propositions which are “primitive” in 
one formulation are “derived,” i.e. figure as theorems, in 
another. And this is only an example of a far more general 
fact, that any set of propositions adequate to convey im­
plicitly all the “laws” of Boolean algebra, i.e. any selection 
of such propositions which may be taken as “primitive,” is 
deducible from any other such set, so that there is no one 
selection of “primitive” propositions which must always 
be assumed, which is “prior” to the rest of the system in 
any absolute sense, either philosophically or psychologically. 
What is a postulate and what a theorem is always a relative 
matter. But any selection which shall constitute a set of 
“primitive propositions” must contain by implication the 
eighteen laws listed in § 8.
All that the calculus can tell us about classes is, what 
relations in extension they bear to each other. It does not 
convey the metaphysical nature, the reality or ideality, of 
classes, nor tell us how to construct a class out of concrete 
objects, but merely shows the pattern of class-relationships 
which we may call disjunction and conjunction, or total 
and partial inclusions, or overlapping, or anything that fits 
the formal conditions. In this formalism lies its value for the 
greater science of logic.
238 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What is meant by an “algebra” ?
2. What are the three general types of proposition that are 
required in a postulate-set ? What indicates the type to which 
a given proposition belongs ?
3. What are the principles of logical proof?
4. What is the use of having several equivalent expressions for 
the same term or the same proposition?
5. What is the importance of the “duality” in Boolean algebra?
6. Which “laws” of the algebra are stated in the postulates used 
in this chapter?
7. What do you think is the source of greatest difference 
between numerical algebra and Boolean?

THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
8. Which law of duality holds for both algebras, and which for 
Boolean alone?
9. Is <  a relation or an operation?
10. Which do you think is the most fundamental notion: <, + , 
or x  ?
239
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Express the analogous proposition for the other operator:
(A) a +  0 =  a
(B) a +  1 =  1
(C) a x -a =  0
2. Write in as many forms as you can: a <b.
3. Give as many equivalents as possible for 1.
4. By shading the required portions in the following diagrams, 
illustrate the equations asserted beneath:
(
g
)
a x (b+c) == (a x b) +  (0 x c
( 2 2 )
( 2 2 )
-(0 +  b)
=
-a x -b
(
g
)
a +  be =  (a +  b) (a +  c)
( 2 2 )
( 2 2 )
-(a x b) =  -a +  -b
Fig. 16.
5. Express in terms of +  and then in terms of X  :
(a , b, c, d) : a <  b . c <  d . O  . a c <  bd
Illustrate by a diagram.
6. Find an example for the following forms:
d  -}- b - c
-CL -f" b
a b c -J- d
7. Illustrate by an example the following equation:
-{CL “j~ 
== “ CL x ~b
8. Using the indications in the text, prove theorems ib, 2a, 3b, 
4a, and 5b.

C H A P T E R  X
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
i .  D if f e r e n t D e g r e e s o f F o r m alizat io n
Logic— so this book announces in its very beginning—  
is the study of forms; and forms are derived from common 
experience, reality, life, or whatever we choose to call it, by 
abstraction. The science of logic is a steady progression from 
the concrete to the abstract, from contents with certain 
forms to those forms without their contents, from instances 
to kinds, from examples to concepts.
The first step in the process is the replacement of concrete 
individual elements by formalized elements of variable 
meaning, dealt with at length in chapter iv. The meaning 
of such elements is presently fixed, not by the old method 
of interpretation— which would give us back our original 
specific terms— but in an entirely new way, by the use of 
the quantifiers, which give us the old elements by new 
terms, namely general terms. So it may be said that the 
first degree of formalization is a step from specific elements 
to quantified variables, or general terms.
We can now no longer speak of specific things, but only 
of any or some things of a certain kind. That is to say, 
meanings are no longer given by direct interpretation of 
A, B, C, etc., but only by interpretation of K  and the 
constituent relation. The interpretation of K  determines 
the kind of thing we are talking about in the general terms 
a, b, c, etc. The separate elements are formalized, and 
interpretation given only to the system. If none of the K  
elements are named specifically, then we have a general 
system.
But a general term, a general statement, or a whole 
system treated in general, is not necessarily abstract. For 
instance, “Someone must have lost something” is a per-

ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
241
fectly general proposition, but there is nothing abstract 
about it. “There is one house that is North of any other 
house" is also general, but entirely concrete. The elements in 
these statements are formalized, i.e. they are not individually 
interpreted, or specified. But the total collection of elements, 
K, and the constituent relation are interpreted; conse­
quently the elements, though mentionable only in general, 
have content, or concrete meaning. “A certain house" is 
not an abstraction. It is just as concrete as “Mt. Vernon," 
“ Sunnyside," or “The Elms." The first degree of formaliza­
tion, i.e. formalization of the individual elements in a 
system, leads to generalization.
A familiar example is the context K(a,b...) nt2, where 
K  =int “houses" and “nt" =int “to the North of." 
Without being acquainted with the houses themselves, or 
even knowing just how many there are, we may make such 
general statements as:
{a) . ^  (a nt a)
(a, b) : a nt b . O . 
(b nt a)
(a, by c) : a nt b . b nt c . O . a nt c
Yet nothing we have stated is abstract; a house, no matter 
how little we say about it or how generally we say it, is 
still something perfectly concrete.
Suppose, however, that we now omit the interpretation 
of K . What becomes of (say) the statement 
(a) . ~  (ant a)?
Does it still refer to the universe of certain houses, or even 
of all houses in the world?— No. Does it make any sense at 
all? Well, certainly it may be read: “ For any element of 
any sort, it is always false that this element is to North of 
itself." And this, undoubtedly, is true. So long as the con­
stituent relation has an interpretation, the expression has 
meaning; (a) and (3 a) may be read “anything" and “ some­
thing," and the quantified formula with an interpreted 
relation (or predicate, or operation) is a proposition.

242
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
This proposition, of course, belongs to a wider universe 
of discourse than the K  interpreted to mean 4'houses/' 
The scope of an uninterpreted K  is what might be called 
the “realm of significance" for the relation which is involved. 
Obviously, “Nothing is to North of itself" applies only to 
physical things on the earth's surface; we cannot even ask, 
except in very modern poetry, whether 3 is to the North of 
wisdom, or perfection to North of purple, or whether science 
is to North of itself. Such terms*do not belong to the uni­
verse of discourse which is “understood" in the use of the 
relation “nt," i.e. to the greatest possible universe for this 
relation.*
A system which covers the greatest possible universe 
for its relation, i.e. which has an uninterpreted K , is cer­
tainly more general than one whose reference is restricted to 
houses. But even so, it has no dealing with abstractions. 
“ Houses and hills" is no more abstract than “houses"; 
“houses, hills, boxes, bridges, and horses" is still a collection 
of perfectly concrete objects. The universe is widened, 
immensely widened, when we pass from an arbitrarily inter­
preted K  to the greatest possible universe for “nt," from 
“any house" to “anything" and from “there is at least
one house, such that----- " to “There is something, such
that----- "; but the character of the system is not changed.
So it may be said that by formalizing the individual elements 
of K , we obtain general statements about specified concrete 
things. By formalizing (i.e. leaving uninterpreted) K, we 
obtain general statements about unspecified concrete things.
The two different degrees of formalization have given 
us corresponding degrees of generalization.
Now, suppose we introduce a new system, a K t un­
interpreted, of elements a, b, etc., and a constituent
* The fact that every relation is significant only within a certain 
greatest possible universe was noted by De Morgan, and is the 
origin of his “universe of discourse/' Whether a “universe" may be 
arbitrarily chosen or is always delimited by the relation was a bone 
of contention among logicians for many years.

relation #, which means “higher in pitch.” The elements 
of K  are, of course, automatically limited to things which 
might be said to be “higher in pitch” or “not higher in 
pitch” than others, i.e. to sounds of one sort or another. In 
this context, certain common-sense assertions are possible 
without any arbitrary assumptions, and we may begin with:
K{a, b, . . .) #2
# =int “higher in pitch”
(a) . ~  (a # a)
(a, b) : a # b . O . ^  (b # a)
'(a, b, c ) : a # b . b 9 c . O , a # c
These three propositions look astoundingly like the 
three of our previous system :
(a) . ^  (a nt a)
(a, b) : a nt b . O . ~  (b nt a)
(a, b, c) : a nt b . b nt a . O . a nt c
In fact, the only visible difference is in the symbol that 
represents the constituent relation. If we took the second 
group of propositions and substituted # for every occurrence 
of “nt,” the result would be three true assertions, namely 
the very three that constitute the first group. The two 
relations operate among different sorts of elements, but 
operate in exactly the same way; they hold and fail under 
exactly similar formal conditions.
There is nothing sacred about a symbol; “nt” does not 
mean, intrinsically, eternally, and by some deep law, “ to 
the North of” ; it means this only by interpretation. Neither 
does “#” necessarily mean “higher in pitch than” ; this 
meaning has to be arbitrarily given to it. Suppose, now, 
that I adopt a new notation, and write the following three 
expressions:
(a) . ~  (a R a)
(a, b) : a R b . O . 
(bRa)
(a, b, c) : a R b . b R c . O . a R c
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION 
243

The symbol R (for “relation”) may be taken to mean either 
“nt” or “#.” Whichever relation is substituted for R, the 
three expressions become true propositions. Moreover, any 
expression with an ambiguous R, which becomes a true pro­
position when # is substituted, will become true for “nt” as 
well, and vice versa. A system of true propositions with # 
has the same form as one with “nt.”
This is true of a number of other relations as well. For 
instance, if R in the above expressions be interpreted as 
“older than,” “ancestor of,” or “under,” exactly the same 
constructs will hold that hold for “nt” or for “#.” So it 
appears that to leave the constituent relation uninterpreted 
is not to reduce the whole system to chaos and nonsense, 
but to make the entire context ambiguous. The expressions 
have no fixed meaning, but are capable of various meanings; 
R may represent any relation that fits the arrangement of 
elements in which it appears, i.e. any relation for which 
propositions of the prescribed forms would be true.
These prescribed forms, however, automatically set limits to 
the variety of relations which R may mean. For instance, R 
could not mean “next to,” because (atb) : a Rb . O . ~  (p R a) 
would then be false, and (a, b, c) : a R b . b R c . O . a R c 
would hold only if a =  c, or if a, b, and c always formed 
a triangle. “Next to” is not the type of relation that univer­
sally fits the given arrangement of elements; “before,” 
“greater than,” and many other common relations are of 
the required type, and all such relations are values for the 
variable R.
It appears, then, that R is a real variable, and conse­
quently the expressions in which it figures are propositional 
forms. When R is interpreted, they become concrete general 
propositions, for the interpretation of R determines what 
sort of element at bf cy etc., may be. But suppose that, 
instead of giving R some arbitrary meaning, we say simply 
that there are certain relations— or, according to the best 
logical usage, there is at least one relation, R— having the
244 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

postulated properties. This turns our propositional forms 
into one completely generalized proposition about the 
relation R :
(37?) : : (a) . ^  (a R a) : . (6, c) : b R c . O . ^  (c R b) :.
(d, e,f) : d R e . e R f . O . d R f
"There is at least one 7?, such that for any term a, a R a 
is false; and for any two terms, b and c, b R c  implies that 
c R b is false; and for any three terms, d, e,fy if d R e and 
eRf, then d R f  is true.”
Now, since R is named only as a certain relation, or 
maybe various and sundry relations, there is no inter­
pretation of any constituent in the proposition that could 
give us a clue to the nature of a, 6, etc. These are given 
merely as "elements,” not things of any specified sort, 
physical, mental, sensory, conceptual, or what-not. They 
are left entirely empty of meaning, apart from their logical 
function of being "terms” to the relation. The resultant 
elementary propositions, which enter into the description 
of jR, are not general concrete propositions, for there is no 
concrete K\ they are purely and genuinely formal, that is 
to say, abstract.
By formalizing the elements of a system we obtain general 
concrete propositions; by formalizing the constituent relations 
(or predicates, or operations), we obtain abstract propositions. 
An abstract statement is a completely generalized proposi­
tional form. No constituent in it is interpreted; everything 
is quantified, and all that the proposition is about is the 
functioning of the relation or relations among the elements. 
That is to say, all it conveys is the rule of combination 
for its constituents. Such a proposition presents an empty 
form, and asserts merely that there is a relation which 
yields this form. So, when we generalize the constituent 
relation(s) as well as the elements of any system, we pro­
perly abstract the form from the content; and this is the essential 
business of logic.
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION 
245

246 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
2. P r o p e r t ie s o f R e l a t io n s
The completely general, or abstract, proposition given 
above was said to assert that there is at least one relation, 
R, having certain properties) and the form of the proposition 
to be expressive of those properties. Relations which have 
all their logical properties in common are of the same type, 
and are possible values for the same variable R.
The logical properties of a relation are simply the con­
ditions of its functioning, i.e. the arrangements of elements 
that may or may not be made by means of it. These may, 
of course, be very simple, or they may be elaborate; and 
they may be familiar by dint of many known instances, or 
quite rare and novel. The more complicated ones, as well 
as those which are rarely exemplified, are more readily 
exhibited by symbolic structures than named or described 
by words; but the commonest and most important modes 
of functioning, or properties of relations, have been given 
convenient names, and are worth noting.
The most fundamental characteristic of a relation is its 
degree. This is the property of always forming dyads, triads, 
tetrads, etc., which has been sufficiently discussed, in 
previous chapters, to serve our purposes. All other pro­
perties of relations presuppose that of degree; and, for 
reasons which cannot be shown here, all those traits which 
have received distinctive names belong to relations of dyadic 
degree.
Let us assume, then, that we are dealing with an un­
specified (i.e. uninterpreted) relation, R2, so that any ele­
mentary proposition we might assert must be of the form 
a R b. Some relations can yield true propositions of this 
form when the two terms, a and 6, are identical, that is, 
for the special case of a R a. In fact, for some relations—  
for instance, =  -or <  -propositions of the form a R a are 
always true; for it is true that {a) . a =  a, and {a) . a <  a. 
Such relations are called reflexive. Those for which a R a is

always false are irreflexive; thus "brother of," "higher in 
pitch," "North of," are all irreflexive, since
(a) . ^  (a br a)
(a) . ~  (a t a)
(a) 
(a nt a)
If, however, a relation possibly but not necessarily combines 
a term with itself, it is called non-reflexive. Such relations 
are: "likes," "hurts," "defends," etc., for we may have 
either
(3 a) . a likes a
or 
(3 a) . ~  (a likes a)
and likewise a creature may hurt itself, though not every 
creature necessarily does so; and it may or may not defend 
itself. A non-reflexive relation allows of the case a R a but 
does not require it.
Another important property is known as symmetry. A 
relation which combines its terms regardless of their 
order, i.e. for which a R b always implies b R a, is said to be 
symmetrical. The relation =  is symmetrical; for if a =  b, 
then b =  a in any case. "Married to," "resembles," "parallel 
with" are symmetrical. If, on the other hand, a R b precludes 
b R a, then R is called asymmetrical; examples are: "greater 
than," "descendant of," and the familiar # and nt of 
previous sections. For it is true that
(a, b) . a nt b . O . 
(b nt a) 
and 
(a, b) . a # b . O . 
(bit a)
The only remaining alternative, that of a relation which 
may, but need not combine two terms in both orders, is 
called non-symmetrical. Examples are: "likes," "fears," 
"implies."
Finally, there is a somewhat complicated, but very 
common characteristic which deserves a name, and has 
been called transitivity. As the word implies, transitivity is
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION 
247

the property of being transferable from one pair of terms to 
another; a transitive relation is one which, if it holds 
between two terms a and b, and between b and a third 
term c, holds also between a and c. Symbolically, it fufils 
the condition:
(a, by c) : a R b . b R c . O . a R c
A transitive relation is such that if it relates two terms 
to a mean, it relates the extremes to each other. The signi­
ficance of this trait lies in the fact that it allows us to pass, 
by the agency of a mean term, to more and more terms 
each of which is thus related to every one of the foregoing 
elements. This creates a chain of related terms; in ordering 
a whole universe of elements, such a relation, which transfers 
itself from couple to couple when new terms are added one 
at a time, is of inestimable value. This is the type of relation 
by virtue of which we reason from two premises, united by 
a mean or "middle term,” to a conclusion:
All Chinamen are men
All men are mortals
248 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Therefore, all Chinamen are mortals
The conclusion is justified by the fact that the verb "to be,” 
which here has the force of <  (since "Chinamen,” "men,” 
and "mortals” are taken as classes), is transitive:
(a, bf c) : a <  b . b <  c . O . a <  c
A relation which never holds between a and c when 
a R b  and b R c are granted is intransitive; thus, "son of” 
is intransitive, for if a is the son of b and b is the son of c, 
a cannot be the son of c. Where the relation of a to c is 
possible but not implied, R is non-transitive.
There are, of course, many other properties of relations; 
for instance, the property of holding between one term and

just two others, if holding between that one and any other. 
‘'Child of” exhibits such a condition, where (a, b) . a ch b 
implies there is at least one and at most one c, unequal to 
a or 6, such that a ch c. But this property is not important 
enough to rank a name of its own. It is more readily 
described by a formal proposition, such as:
(3i?) {a, b):: a R b . O  . (3c) :.c 4=a.c * b . aR c . (d): 
a R d . O , d  =  bVd =  c
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION 
249
To honour every peculiar condition, every possible type of 
relation, with an English adjective would be too cumber­
some, but it should always be remembered that the named 
characteristics are by no means the only ones which a 
relation may possess.
3. P o st u l a t e s a s  F o r m a l D e f in it io n s o f R e l a t io n s
If we assume a universe, K, of unspecified elements, and 
an unspecified R— for convenience, let us say R2— and 
then, without interpretation, set up a number of abstract 
propositions to be taken as “primitive,” these primitive 
propositions, or postulates, will be absolutely all we know 
about either K  or R. What they tell us, is how R operates 
among the elements of K, i.e. under what conditions it 
combines any or some such elements with some or any others. 
Now, what K  may represent depends upon the meaning of 
R* ; and the possible meanings of R are restricted to such 
relations as behave like R ; and the behaviour of R is laid 
down in the postulates. These postulates, then, constitute 
a formal definition of R. They tell us what are the properties 
of a certain type of relation; the symbol R, uninterpreted, 
stands for this type rather than for any nameable relation,
* The converse is also true, i.e. any inteipretation of K  sets limits 
to the possible meanings of R. But the progressive generalization 
from K  to R is so much easier, psychologically, than vice versa 
that I have chosen this approach. Only when both K  and R are 
generalized we have an abstract form.

250
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
but may be interpreted to mean any concrete relation of 
the given type. So long as we abide by purely logical, i.e. 
purely general, concepts such as “element,” “relation,” 
“proposition,” and the so-called “logical relations” among 
propositions, we shall find ourselves dealing always with 
types of constituent relations, and hence with types, or 
forms, of systems, rather than with systems themselves; 
with patterns rather than with concrete things. The descrip­
tion of such a pattern, the set of abstract postulates, is a 
formula for systems of a certain sort.
All we know about the constituent relation is what the 
postulates say. These formulae or abstract primitive pro­
positions, then, must describe its properties; whether the 
properties of a relation happen to have names, or not, they 
are all expressible in symbolic form, and for our purposes 
this is by far the most powerful, convenient, and accurate 
means of expression.
There are certain relations whose properties all together 
constitute patterns which lend themselves to particularly 
many and important interpretations. Take, for instance, 
the nature of R in the following formalized system, or 
abstract description:
K{a, b . . .) R2
1. (a, b) . ~  (a R a)
2. (a, bt c) : a R b . b R c . O . a R c
These formulae express two of the three conditions which 
could be asserted by common sense for the systems dealt 
with above. The third, namely
(a, b) . a R b . O . ~  (b R a)
may be deduced from them. Since these propositions about 
an uninterpreted K  R are supposedly postulates, it is no 
longer fitting to assume conditions which may be deduced, 
and the statement that R is asymmetrical must here be treated 
as a theorem, proved as follows:

ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
251
Assume
then
but
therefore,
(3 a, b). a R b . b R a  
a R b . b R a . O . a R a
~  (a R a)
~  (a R a) . O . ~  (aRb .b R a) 
a R b . O . ~  (bRa)
A third postulate is to be added, however:
2
1
Q.E.D.
3. (at b) : a ^ b . O . a R b V b R a  
This asserts that the relation R, which never combines two 
terms in both orders, always combines them in at least one 
order. Such a relation, holding among any two terms of 
the universe in one order or the other, is said to be connected*
Relations having the properties here stipulated, i.e. 
irreflexiveness, transitivity, connexity, and (by implication) 
asymmetry, are so important to mathematics, science, and 
even common reasoning, that they bear a name: they are 
called serial relations. There are a great many serial rela­
tions; that is to say, there are many possible interpretations 
for the K  R above. Whenever R is interpreted, K  assumes a 
definite character. Let R, for instance, mean “ to left of” ; 
then K  must represent elements ranged in a straight line 
from right to left— places, things, points, or what-not, but 
they must be spatial elements and they must lie in a straight 
line. Or, let R mean “greater than” ; K  will then represent 
magnitudes, or things ranged in order of magnitude.
Any system ordered by a serial relation, that is, any 
interpretation of the abstract system K  R above, is a series. 
The system of natural numbers, the succession of days, of 
months, of years, the points on a line, the progeny of a 
person in one unbroken line of descent, all constitute series. 
Every one of these systems is ordered by a relation having 
the properties of the abstract K  R cited above. R may
* I find it difficult to regard connexity as a property of relations, 
since a relation may be connected in one universe and not in another. 
Despite the fact that the postulate of connexity has only universal 
quantifiers, it seems to me to express a property of K , not R. But 
here I follow common usage in ascribing the property to R.

252
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
mean “greater than/' and K  mean “numbers“ ; then K R  
is a number-series. Or R =int “ follows“ and K  =int 
“days“ ; then K R  is a span of time. Or R =int “ to left 
of“ and K  =int “points“ ; then K  R is a straight line; or 
R may mean “descendant of,“ and K, “persons“ ; then K  R 
is a lineage, or line of progeny. Note that in the systems 
K  nt and K  #, the former is not a series, because two 
places or things may lie in the same latitude; but K  # is a 
series, since two tones (apart from their tone-quality, merely 
as notes) of the same pitch are identical.
There are many kinds of series— finite and infinite, 
series with a beginning but no end (e.g. “ future time“), 
or with an end but no beginning (e.g. “ the past“). In 
some there is always a next neighbour to each term (as, 
the next natural number), in others there is no definite 
“next“ (as in the continuous flow of a river). All these 
different types of series are determined by special postu­
lates, such as:
(3 a) (b) : ~  (a R b) . O . a =  b
which asserts that any b which is different from a certain a 
must follow a, i.e. a is the first term of the series. But what­
ever further conditions we may impose, every series requires 
a serial relation, and this requirement is fulfilled by any R 
that is irreflexive, transitive, and connected.
Of course there are many other types of relation, and 
consequently many other abstract patterns, that might 
be named; I have adduced the serial type, and the form 
called a “series“ in the most general sense, because of the 
great importance and relative simplicity of this sort of 
structure. The import of this whole discussion is, that a 
whole system may be taken as an abstract form, a relational 
pattern rather than a complex of concrete things, an empty 
design described by postulates and their consequences 
(theorems) which are entirely abstract, i.e. uninterpreted 
general propositions.

ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
253
4. B o o le an A l g e b r a : th e Ca l c u l u s o f C l a s s e s 
a s a  F o r m u l a
Every actual relation may be viewed as just one instance 
of a certain type. If it is highly complicated, then perhaps 
there is no other nameable relation of exactly the same 
form; if it is simple, like “nt,” then we are likely to find 
various other concepts, such as “greater than” or “ after,” 
to follow the same lines. But whether common or rare, 
obvious or abstruse, every relation allows us to abstract its 
pure form, i.e. to restrict our interest to that formal definition 
which is’ symbolically expressed by the postulates, and ignore 
the particular interpretation; to write R instead of “nt,” 
or “is the nearest male relative of,” or “is equidistant from,” 
or what-not.
What has here been said of relations holds equally, of 
course, for operations, since the latter are really abbreviated 
expressions for such relations as define a new element 
from old. Operations are modes of combination; and “to be 
combined to form an element” is a relationship among 
elements. Just as simpler relations have their general pro­
perties, so do operations; and two different operations 
having the same properties are both instances of one and the 
same form, which may be called a “formalized” operation, 
written “o/>” (“ 0” would cause confusion with zero). Thus,
instead of 
, 
,. 
, , 
, .
(a, 0) . a +  0 =  0 +  a
we might have the completely general uninterpreted pro­
position,
(3op) (a, b) : a op b =  b op a
This being the case, it should be possible to view even 
so elaborate a system as the class-calculus in the light of an 
exemplification for some general pattern. And this may, 
indeed, be done. We may start with
K(af b .. .)R2 
K(a, b . . .) < 2
instead of

and let the postulates describe the conditions under which 
R is to hold or not to hold among the elements of K, exactly 
as the behaviour of <  was described; or we may adopt 
symbols for “a certain operation” which will function like 
+  and “ a certain other operation” which acts like x , and 
these new symbols will represent, not class-disjunction and 
class-conjunction respectively, but any operation having 
the same formal properties as + , and any operation 
having the formal properties of. x . Suppose we adopt 
the notations © and 0  to represent these two generalized 
operations.*
The elements combined by © and 0  (or related by an 
R which acts like <  and may therefore be designated by 
©), are not necessarily classes; they are entirely unspecified. 
They are merely terms, without interpretation, without 
any character, except such formal traits as the postulates 
bestow on them. Instead of a calculus of classes, we have 
now an empty relational form with certain rules of mani­
pulation by which one element may be substituted for 
another or one formula derived from another.
The system presented in the foregoing chapter was 
there described as an "algebra,” sometimes called the 
"Boole-Schroeder Algebra of Classes.” The form is, essentially, 
due to Boole, though it was perfected by Schroeder; there­
fore it is fitting as well as convenient to call all systems 
that have the same form as the class calculus "Boolean 
systems,” ! and the abstracted pattern itself, "abstract 
Boolean algebra.” 
It is the latter that is expressed
* These symbols were used by Huntington, who adopted them 
from Leibniz. Cf. H u n t in g t o n , op. cit., p. 292.
f Some writers speak in the plural of “Boolean algebras,“ since 
(1) each concrete system expressed in general terms is an “algebra“ 
(cf. chap, ix, § 1), and (2) even among abstract systems, different 
numbers of if-elements, if specifically given, really generate different 
algebras (as the “two-valued algebra,“ § 6, below). See S h e f f e r , 
H. M., “Five Postulates for Boolean Algebras,“ Trans. Amer. Math. 
Soc.t vol. 14 (1913).
254 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

in our new symbolism, by the following abstract pro­
positions :
K(a, b . . .) ®, ® , = *
Ia 
(a, b) (3 c) . a ® b =  c 
Ib 
(a, b) (3 c) . a ® b =  c 
IlA (30) (a) . a ® 0 =  a 
IIb 
(31) (a) . a 0  1 =  a 
IIIa 
(a, b) . a © b 
b © a 
IIIb 
(a, 
b) . a ® b =  b 0  a
IVa 
(a, 
bt c) . a © (b ® c) =  
(a ® b) ® (a © c)
IVb 
(a, 
b, c) . a <g> (b © c) =  
(a ® b) ® (a 0  c)
V 
(a) 
(3 -a) : a © -a =  i . 
a ® -a =  0
VI 
(3a, 6) . a * b
Obviously, the theorems deducible in this system will be 
exactly analogous to those of the class-calculus, being 
actually the form, abstractly considered, of those pro­
positions themselves. The system K  ®, 0 , =  is Boolean 
algebra in abstracto, the formula of which the class-calculus 
is an interpretation.
5. O th er I n t e r p r e t a t io n s o f th e B o o le an F o r m u l a
Once we regard the algebra as an empty form, a shell of 
a system, it may be possible to find meanings other than 
“class,” 
“ disjunction 
of classes,” and “conjunction of 
classes” for the symbols a, bt etc., ®, and ®. Of course, 
any new meanings the symbolism is made to convey must 
be such that the entire form will bear interpretation; the 
defined symbol © must automatically assume a meaning, 
0 and 1 must be identifiable, there must be sense in the 
dichotomy between a and -a. 
It may be that another 
system having all the formal traits of the class-calculus
* Note that = has not been modified because its meaning is 
“constant,” i.e. is the same whether it refers to the extension of 
classes or to anything else; it is not dependent on interpretation. 
That is why most writers take = for granted and do not list it 
among constituent or “ variable” relations.
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION 
255

will not be interesting in itself, so that no one would have 
noticed its existence were it not for the exemplification of 
a notable form; but the triviality of an interpretation need 
not trouble us. It is satisfaction enough to find any alter­
native meaning for abstract propositions of such com­
plexity as a Boolean algebra.
We might regard the elements of the algebra as areas 
in a plane space. Their shape does not matter. Let a, b, etc., 
be any areas in one plane. Let ® between two terms mean 
their sum, so that a ® b is the area composed of a and b 
added together; let ® mean “overlapping,” so that a ® b 
is the superimposed portion of a and b. Regard 1 as the 
greatest area, i.e. the whole extent of the plane, and 0 as 
“nowhere.” With this new formal context, every pro­
position of the abstract algebra becomes, by interpretation, 
a true, general, concrete proposition. Since our signs are no 
longer purely formal, they should no longer be ® and ®; 
by rights we should employ new symbols for spatial addition 
and overlapping, but for typographical reasons I shall employ 
+  and X , with the explicit understanding that these have 
new, though equally concrete meanings as in the class-calculus.
The ten propositions of the algebra now take the following 
meaning:
Ia. “For any two areas, a and b, there is an area c which 
is their joint extent, a +  6.”
In the diagram (Fig. 17), the whole 
plane is represented as a square; any 
two areas illustrate I A. Note that in 
the example given, a and b do not 
-\c overlap. But the postulate provides 
that they are to be regarded, none 
the less, as one area, c.
Ib. “For any two areas, a and b, 
there is a third area, d, which is the 
overlapping part of a and bf a x  b."
I have called this area d because in using the same
256 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
F i g . 17.

ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
257
diagram, the a and b of I a  become identified with the a 
and b of I b , so that a +  b and a x  b must go by different 
letters. The product of a and b is, in this illustration, ‘'no­
where/' but is none the less existent in the system. The 
next postulate explains its status:
H a . “There is at least one area, 0, 'nowhere/ such that, 
for any a, the joint extent of a and 'nowhere' is the extent 
of a.”
“Nowhere" cannot be drawn; like the “empty-class," it 
is a purely intellectual construction, but of such pragmatic 
value that common sense as well as logic assumes it.
I I b . “There is at least one area j , 'everywhere/ such 
that for any a, the overlapping part of a and 'everywhere' is 
the extent of a ”
“Everywhere" is, of course, the entire square.
llla. “For any two areas, a and b, the extent of a and 6 
together is the extent of b and a together."
lllb. “For any two areas a and b, the overlapping part of 
a and b is the overlapping part of b and a."
IVa. “For any three areas, a, b, and c, the joint extent of 
a and b x  c is the overlapping part of a +  b and a +  c.
F i g . 18.
a+(bxc)=(a+b) x(a+c) 
F i g . 19.
For convenience, the areas in Figs. 18 and 19 have been 
drawn so that no sum or product mentioned in IVa and 
IVb shall be 0.
IVb. “For any a, b, and c, the overlapping of a with 
b +  c is the total extent of a X b and a x c."

258 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
The disconnected portion a x e  in Fig. 19 is a reminder 
that b 
c may enter into a at different points, i.e. that 
even a product need not be a continuous area.
V. “For any a, there is an area -a, e verywhere-but - a, 
such that the joint extent of a and everywhere-but-<z is the 
whole space, 1, and the overlap of a and -a is nowhere, 0.”
VI. “The plane is divided into at least two distinguishable 
areas, a and b.”
What becomes of the defined relation © ? A very natural 
concept, that of spatial inclusion, < . For, a < b  means
by definition a +  b =  b, or ab =  a; in the accompanying 
diagram, these two conditions are fulfilled, and the area a 
must obviously lie within b; furthermore, -b <  -Æ, and 
all other abstract propositions of the algebra involving 
become true concrete propositions when <  is read as space- 
inclusion, or “lying within."
All formal conditions, then, are satisfied by the new inter­
pretation ; the relational system of areas within a plane is a 
Boolean algebra.
We could, of course, have drawn all our areas as circles, 
since their shapes are irrelevant. Had this been done, the 
result would have been the very diagrams, known as 
“Euler's circles," which were used to illustrate the relations 
of classes in the class-calculus. This peculiar fact points to 
a highly important connection between any two systems of 
the same logical form; they may always be each other’s dia­
grams. To a person who cannot see a plane space before 
his mind's eye— a blind person, perhaps— the collection of 
objects filling a space, i.e. a class of objects, might serve as
F i g . 20.
o + - o = /  a x -a =  0
F i g . 21.

ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
259
an illustration of a given area in a plane. To most people of 
normal visual imagination, the area is easier to conceive 
than the extension of a class, so the second interpretation 
of Boolean algebra is the more “visible,” “conceivable,” or 
as the Germans aptly express it, the more “anschaulich.” 
Therefore it is used as a diagram for the first. The relation 
of a map or diagram to the object (or state of affairs) it 
illustrates is always that the former is easier to visualize, 
literally to imagine, than the latter, and that it has the 
same logical form. No matter how different its content, its 
appearance, may be— no matter in what “projection” a 
map is drawn, or. how elaborate is the “key” to a graph or 
a diagram— the physical symbol exemplifies the same logical 
form that is exemplified by its object. The relation between 
them is analogy. That is why not only Euler's circles, but 
any interpretation of abstract Boolean algebra into visible, 
tangible, or otherwise easy and familiar terms could serve 
as a symbolic picture of class-relationships.
The interpretation for areas in a plane has one dis­
advantage, namely that “nowhere” is taken as an element 
included in all other elements. A far more plausible spatial 
interpretation has been given by Chapman and Henle,* 
who restrict their spatial areas to a circle, its possible sectors, 
and its centre. But just to vary interpretations as much as 
may be, I prefer to view it as a pie and its possible cuts: 
1 is the whole pie; 0 is the centre; a, b, c, 
etc., if they are distinct from 1 or 0, are 
cuts of the pie. The cuts, of course, are 
hypothetical, that is to say they are 
merely planned, not made, so they may 
be re-planned as often as we like. One 
possible cutting may overlap another, as 
b in the diagram (Fig. 22) overlaps a; 
the disputed part is a x  b. Also, someone may by favourit­
ism receive two cuts, say a +  c. What is left of the pie 
* Fundamentals of Logic, New York, 1933, p. 215.

after one cutting, say a, is -a. Every element includes the 
centre, 0, and is included in the whole, 2; every cut plus the rest 
of the pie, i.e. every a +  -a, makes up 2; any two completely 
disjoined cuts have only 0 in common, and are completely 
contained in each other’s negatives; thus, ac =  0 . O . a <  
- c . c <  -a. No matter how complicated we make our 
equations, they still fit this household example, and we are 
faced with the astonishing fact that the mathematics of 
pie-cutting is a Boolean algebra.
6. The Two-Valued Algebra
In all the interpretations here given, we have assumed 
that there are several elements distinct both from 0 and 
from 2. But as a matter of fact, the postulates provide 
for a minimum of only two distinct elements (post. VI), 
and if there were just two, these would have to be 0 and 2, 
since the further conditions of the system would otherwise 
not be satisfied. Suppose that we assume that there are 
really only two elements in K. Then “any a” could have 
reference to nothing but 2 or 0; “any a and any (same or 
other) b” would refer to 2 and 0, 1  and 2, 0 and 2, or 0 and0 ; 
and so forth. Postulate IIa would mean:
(30): 1 + 0  =  1 . 0  +  0 =  0
and IIb, 
(32): 2 x 0 =  0 . 2 x 2 =  2
Likewise, 
(a) (3 -a): a +  -a =  1 . a x  -a =  0 
becomes, by application (see chap, ix, § 3):
(3 -2): 2 +  -2 =  2.2 x  -2 =  0 
(3 -0): 0 +  -0 =  2.0 x  -0 =  0
Since 0 fulfils the conditions of -2 and 2 the conditions of 
-0, this form is valid in the system.
If there are only two elements in K, then “any a” or 
“some a” has only two possible values. Note that “value” 
here refers to terms in the system, which may be substituted 
for a, by the principle of application; not to possible inter­
260 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
261
pretations of a (or any other if-elements). A general term 
has “value” in two senses: (1) being general, it may be 
exemplified by, or applied to, an arbitrary term in the 
system, as {a, b) . “a +  b =  b +  a” is exemplified by the 
special case where b =  a, so that from it we may derive 
a +  a — a +  a; or by the unique terms 1 and 0, i.e.
1 + 0  =  0 +  1 ) which represents another exemplification. 
These special instances are “values” for the formula 
(a,b) . a +  b =  b +  a. (2) if the system is abstract, then 
the terms have interpretational values, so (a, b). a +  b =  b +  a 
may mean: “For any two classes, a and b . . .,” or “ For 
any two regions, a and b . . . ,  etc.” Now, the former kind 
— let me call them “ exemplary values”— are determined 
by the formal character of the system. If K  is infinite, then 
(a) has an infinite number of values; if K  has a finite but 
unrestricted number of elements, {a) has a finite but unre­
stricted number of values; if K  has a definite number of 
elements, say 6, then (a) : a =  a±. V . a =  a2 . V . a =  az . 
V . a =  
.V  . a =  a5 . V . a =  a6. This is a formal con 
dition which holds whatever the interpretational values of “ a” 
may be. Interpretation is always something that is given to 
the symbolic structure after that structure is complete, and 
can therefore never be rendered as part of the structure 
itself. But the exemplary values of a general term may be 
indicated symbolically, as in the disjunctive proposition 
above.
Now, if we are to have only two A-elements-, 0 and 1, 
this fact is easily expressed by the formula:
(a) : a =  1 .V  . a =  0
Such a statement, is, of course, a new and special condition 
to be added to the given conditions of the algebra, since the 
existing postulates provide for a minimum of two elements, 
but this proposition asserts that two is the maximum 
number. So, if we accept it, we must regard it as a further 
postulate; let us call it postulate VII.

The structure which results from the addition of pos­
tulate VII, being a Boolean algebra wherein every general 
term has just two exemplary values, is known as the two­
valued algebra. Its propositions are, of course, extremely 
boresome and redundant; since every term is 0 or 1, such 
complicated terms as, for instance, a +  b +  c — b +  cd
^----aby must all mean either 1 or 0, since a =  1 . V . a =  0,
b =  1 . V . b =  0, etc. Such a system seems, in itself, just 
silly and trivial. But strangely enough, it lends itself to a 
highly interesting interpretation, of which the algebra without 
postulate VII is incapable. The two-valued character of this 
form expresses what is known as “the principle of all-or- 
none,“ or “the law of excluded middle,“ which students 
of Aristotelean logic have met among the famous “laws of 
thought“ ; and to these laws, by virtue of postulate VII, we 
may now apply the familiar mould of Boolean algebra.
Summary
Logic, the science of forms, proceeds by steps from 
totally concrete notions to such as are totally formal. These 
successive steps give rise to as many degrees of formalization. 
The first step is the formalization of the separate elements 
of a concrete (i.e. interpreted) universe of discourse. This 
produces general propositions about a concrete and arbi­
trarily limited K. It is a partial generalization of a system, 
K  R. The next step is to leave K  uninterpreted, regarding 
it merely as the range of significance of the relation R ; its 
meaning is then completely determined by R, and its 
quantified elements stand for “anything“ and “something“ 
that is said to enter into the relation R. This step, the 
formalization of K, represents the greatest generalization of 
the system K  R.
The third step is the formalization of R. As soon as R 
is no longer interpreted to mean some specific relation, 
the system becomes an empty form, a pattern, a system in 
abstracto, and all its quantified propositions become abstract
262 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

propositions. Instead of: (a, b) . a <  b . b <  a . == . a =  6, 
we should now write:
(3 R) (a, b) : a Rb . b R a . =  . a =  b
If the quantification (3i?) is omitted, but R is not inter­
preted, the proposition becomes a propositional form. An 
abstract system is usually presented in this way, as a system 
of propositional forms wherein the only unquantified con­
stituent is the uninterpreted relation.
Relations have certain properties by which they may 
be described. All relations having exactly the same properties 
are of the same kind, and are interpretations! values for the 
same R. Some of these properties are so important and 
common that they bear names, notably: reflexiveness, and 
its correlatives irreflexiveness and nonr-reflexiveness; symmetry, 
and the derived notions of asymmetry and non-symmetry; 
transitivity, and its derivatives intransitivity and non­
transitivity. The third case is always present when neither 
of the others is definitely established.
The logical properties of a relation, i.e. its ways of func­
tioning among its terms, determine what type of relation 
it is; and some types are so important that they have 
received names. Thus a relation which is irreflexive, con­
nected, and transitive is said to be serial.
Any two systems ordered by relations of exactly the 
same type follow the same pattern, and are interpretational 
values for the same abstract system. Some such patterns 
have been named, because of their importance; any system 
made by a serial relation is a series, and varieties in the 
functioning of serial relations have given us various types 
of series.
Postulates are formal definitions of relations, for they 
describe how the relations function among the terms of a 
universe. In an abstract system, this is absolutely all that 
the postulates tell us. The result is an empty form, or 
pattern of relationships.
ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION 
263

Such a pattern may be very complicated. If we replace 
the relations or operations (abbreviated complex relations) 
of the Boolean class-calculus by uninterpreted, unfamiliar 
symbols, the resulting structure is an abstract system 
expressing the form of the calculus, but noi referring to 
classes or their relations.
An empty formula is capable of various interpretations. 
Any relation having the stipulated properties may be 
denoted by its relation-variables (or operation-variables); 
in this case, by the formalized concepts ®, 0 , and the 
defined ©. The meaning of K  follows automatically from 
that of the relational constituents. Thus, ® may mean 
“ addition,” 0  “overlapping/' © “being completely sur­
rounded by” or “contained in” ; then a, b, etc., stand for 
areas in a plane, 1 for the total area, 0 for “nowhere” ; or 
a, b stand for things occupying areas, and (by special 
limitation) 1 is the sum of these things and 0 some point 
of convergence of all the elements; as in the case of the 
properly cut, indefinitely divisible pie, its total area, and its 
centre.
Usually a system having the form of a Boolean algebra is 
supposed to have an indefinite number of elements; but all 
that the postulates really call for is a minimum of two 
elements. If we limit the system arbitrarily to two elements 
then they must be 1 and 0, since these are provided for. 
Then every general term in the system has only two possible 
exemplary values, 0 and 1.
In the existing postulates there is no proposition by 
means of which such a limitation to just two elements 
could be deduced. If we want this limitation, it must be 
added as a new postulate:
VII 
(a) :a =  l .V  . a =  0
A Boolean algebra incorporating this postulate is called a 
two-valued algebra.
On the face of it, the great redundancy and simplicity
264 
AN in t r o d u c t io n  to sy m b o l ic lo g ic

ABSTRACTION AND INTERPRETATION
265
of a two-valued Boolean algebra makes it appear silly; but, 
though it cannot be interpreted for so trivial a matter as 
cuts of pie, it has a most important possible content, namely 
the laws of deductive reasoning, the structure of logic itself. 
To this end it is worth considering in detail.
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What are the successive degrees of formalization of a system?
2. What is the difference between generalization and abstraction ?
3. What is meant by the “realm of significance** of a relation?
4. What is meant by the properties of a relation? What pro­
perties can you name? How can one express properties that 
have no English names?
5. If a system is given in abstracto, with uninterpreted signs of 
relations or operations, how do we know what those signs 
may mean ?
6. What determines a type, or sort, of relation?
7. What are the characteristics of a serial relation?
8. Why do we speak of "Boolean algebras** in the plural case? 
What have several such algebras in common? What dis­
tinguishes them from each other? What is abstract Boolean 
algebra ?
9. Why can Euler*s circles serve to symbolize the class-calculus?
10. What is the two-valued algebra? How does it differ from 
other Boolean algebras ?
11. Do you think classes and their relations would be a good 
interpretation of the two-valued algebra?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS-WORK
1. Express symbolically that R2 is symmetrical, reflexive, and 
transitive. Find an interpretation for this R.
2. Express symbolically that a certain relation, ->2, is serial; 
that the series it produces has a first term; that it has a 
last term.
3. Find an interpretation for ->2.
4. Name a reflexive, an irreflexive, and a non-reflexive relation; 
a symmetrical, an asymmetrical, and a non-symmetrical one; 
a transitive, an intransitive, and a non-transitive relation; 
a connected relation.
5. Express symbolically the characteristic postulate of the 
two-valued algebra.

C H A P T E R  X I
i. Properties of Logical Relations and Operations 
So far, we have considered the formal properties of 
constituent relations and operations, such as nt, #, < , + , 
X, etc., and taken the existence and the behaviour of 
logical relations, V, ., and O, for granted. Such relations hold, 
not among individuals, like nt, nor among classes, like + , 
X and < , but always among propositions; that is to say, 
the terms of these relations are propositions, and consequently 
any propositions to which these relations and their terms give 
rise, are propositions about propositions.
Of course, logical relations have formal properties, as 
all relations do. Consider, for instance, how the relation of 
implication functions. This relation, symbolized by O, holds 
between two propositions whenever, if the first is true, 
then the second is true also. For instance, if Napoleon was 
born in February, then his birthday is in Winter, or:
“Napoleon was born in February” . O . “Napoleon's birth­
day is in Winter.”
Now, if a proposition is true, then of course it is true; if 
Napoleon was bom in Winter, then it is true that he was 
bom in Winter; every proposition, therefore, implies itself, 
so that O is reflexive. Also, an implication, like the above, 
may be irreversible; “Napoleon's birthday is in Winter” 
does not imply “Napoleon was born in February” ; or it 
may be reversible, as in
(a, b) . a +  b =  b . O . a <  b 
and 
(a, b) . a <  b . O . a +  b =  b
Therefore O is neither symmetrical nor asymmetrical, but 
non-symmetrical. Moreover, if a-\-b =  b . O , a < b ,  and 
a <  b . O . ab =  a, 
then we are ready to grant that
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS

a +  b =  b .O  . ab =  a; so O is found to be transitive. 
All these are familiar properties of relations. The only re­
maining difference between O and various other reflexive, 
non-symmetrical, transitive relations is that O is not a con­
stituent in elementary propositions, but a link between such 
propositions. It is hard to see its form because of the com­
plexity of its terms. But suppose we call a given proposition 
P, and another, which is implied by P, Q; then we may 
write:
P . O . Q
and either 
Q . O . P
or 
~  (Q • O . P)
which shows symbolically that O is non-symmetrical.
Also, 
P . O . P
and 
Q - O . Q
and if R is any third proposition
R . O . R
for O is reflexive. Finally, if
P . O . Q  and Q . O . R, then P . O . R
which is the principle of transitivity.
Often enough, when there are three propositions, P, Q, 
and R, it takes two of them together to imply the third; 
as for instance, if A, B, and C are three classes, it is true that
A < B . B < C . O . A < C
Here, 
if 
P =int 
“A <  B,” 
Q =int 
“B <  C,” 
and 
R =int “A <  C,” we have
P . Q . O . R
But O is a dyadic relation, and can have only two terms; 
P . Q, therefore, must be a single term, just as a +  b or 
a x  b is a single term in the proposition: a X b <  a +  b.
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS 
267

The dot between P and Q combines these two propositions 
into one proposition, which implies R. Such a relationship, 
by which a new compound term is established, is an opera­
tion. So the “and” between two propositions, which combines 
them into one compound proposition, P . Q, is a logical 
operation.
Sometimes a proposition implies that either one or the 
other of a certain pair of propositions must be true: for 
instance, if P =int “A B =  i,” Q =int “A =  T,” and 
R =int “B =  i,” then it is true that
P . O : Q . V . R
for 
A B  =  i . O : A  =  I . V . B  =  i
Here the implied proposition is that either A =  i or B =  i ; 
this is, again, a compound proposition, i.e. a compound term 
for the logical relation O, made by means of the logical 
operation V.
The properties of operations within a system are laid 
down in those postulates which express equations (or 
inequations) among compound expressions, for any terms 
of the system; the properties of ® and 0  in Boolean algebras 
are described by such postulates as:
(a, b) . a © b =  b © a
which asserts that © is commutative, and is called the 
commutative law; or by the associative law,
(a, b, c) . a © (b © c) =  {a © b) © c
or the distributive law,
(a, b, c) . a © (b 0  c) =  (a © b) 0  {a © c)
and others. If we were to express symbolically the obvious 
fact that “P and Q” is the same thing as “ Q and P,” i.e.:
268 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
p .Q = Q.p

THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS
269
and then assert this equation for any two propositions, we 
should be laying down the commutative law for the logical 
operation “ •” • This operation is, in fact, commutative, 
associative, distributive, and absorptive; and so is the other 
logical operation “ V” . A few examples, which the reader 
can surely find for himself, will demonstrate these attributes 
convincingly.
2. Propositional Interpretation of Boolean Algebra
It is* a striking fact that the properties just enumerated 
for . and V, “logical conjunction” and “logical disjunction,” 
are exactly those which the Boolean algebra of classes 
postulates for X and + , “class-conjunction” and “ class- 
disjunction.” If x  and . , +  and V have the same logical 
properties, then they must be alternative meanings for 0  
and ® respectively; that is, it must be just as legitimate 
to say:
0  =int “logical conjunction”
® =int “logical disjunction”
as it would be to say:
0  =int “class-conjunction”
© =int “class-disjunction”
But what, in the former case, becomes of K? The elements 
of K  must be propositions, if 0  and © become logical opera­
tions, Let us assume that they are simple propositions, such 
as “A nt B,” “Napoleon was born in February,” etc. But 
since we do not care what propositions they are, let us 
generalize P, Q, and R, and write this newly interpreted 
system,
K(p, q, r 
V

270 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC 
with the following postulates:
IA
iP, q){^r) . p V  q =  r
Ib
(j>, q) (3r) . p .q =  r
IIa *
(3 0 ) (p ). pW0 =  p
IlBf
(3 1) l p ) . p . l = p
IIlA
(p,q).pVq =  qV p
IIlB
(p,q) . p . q  =  q . p
IVa
(p,q,r) . p V  {q .r) =  (pV q) .(pVr)
IVb
(P.q.r) .p.{q^r) =  (p.q)W{p.r)
Vi
(P) (3 -p) : . pW -p =  1 : p . -p =  0
VI
(3p, q) -P * q
VII§
(p) .p =  l . v  .p =  o
Note that this Boolean system of propositions
valued algebra, including the limiting postulate VII. The 
reason for this will be immediately apparent when 0 and 1 
are given their interpretation for the propositional calculus.
Let 1 =int “ truth,” and 0 =int “falsity” ; so that 
“p =  i ” is to be read “p is true,” and “p =  0,” “p is false.” 
Then the seventh postulate becomes, “ for any proposition 
p, either p is true, or p is false.” This is certainly true for 
any proposition. But how about the other postulates wherein 
1 and 0 figure? Take IIa ,
(30) ( p ) . p v o  =  p
Here the 0 means “some proposition which is false” (i.e. 
known to equal 0), for example: “England is larger than 
Asia.” The other element, p, is “any proposition,” true or 
false. Suppose it is true; then p =  1. Let it be: “The ocean 
is salty.” p V 0, then, becomes: “Either the ocean is salty, 
or England is larger than Asia” ; one or the other is to be 
taken as a fact. And since the ocean really is salty, “p V 0” 
is true, that is, p V 0 =  1. But p =  l\ therefore p V  0 =  p.
* The “unique elements” are interpreted below. 
X The unary operation is interpreted below.
§ Same as i and 2 above.
f  Idem

Now assume that p =  0; for instance, let p =int “Berlin 
is in France.” The pWO becomes: “Either Berlin is in 
France, or England is larger than Asia.” But since neither 
is the case, we cannot say one or the other is a fact; the 
whole disjunction is false, i.e. p V  0 — 0. 
Since p =  0, 
p y  0 =  p. What the postulate asserts is that the truth or 
falsity of a disjunction, where one member is known to be 
false, depends entirely on the other member. And this holds 
for any disjunction of two propositions.
IIb, (3)1 (p) . p . 1 =  p, is analogous. A logical con­
junction is a joint assertion of two propositions. If one is 
known to be true, so that it may be denoted by 1, then the 
truth or falsity of the conjunction depends entirely on the 
other. Let the true member, 1, =int “The ocean is salty.” 
Now take p so that p =  0, e.g. “England is larger than 
Asia.” Then p . 1, “The ocean is salty and England is larger 
than Asia,” is false; so p . 1 =  0 if p =  0, and consequently 
p . 1 =  p. But take p to be true, as: “Asia is larger than 
England.” The conjunction p . 1 will be “The sea is salty, 
and Asia is larger than England,” which is true; so if p =  1, 
then p . 1 =  1, or p . 1 =  p.
The only remaining postulate into which the unique 
elements enter is V; and this involves also the unary 
operation -, which has not yet been interpreted. If p is 
a proposition, then it is not satisfactory to let -p mean 
“everything else that is assertible,” for this is a vague term. 
But one proposition that is entirely determined by p, and 
conforms to all the requirements in V, is the denial of p. For 
instance, if p means “The ocean is salty,” than -p means 
“The ocean is not salty.” But this is the same as “ It is false 
that the ocean is salty,” ~  “The ocean is salty.” The proper 
interpretation of “-” is “ rw” ; so, if we write V for +  and . 
for x , we must write ~ p  for -a. Obviously, either p or 
~ p  must be true, if p makes any sense, i.e. if p is a real 
proposition; so we have, by common sense, p V ~ p  =  
And equally clearly, not both can be true; p . ~ p  =  0.
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS 
271

Here are all the primitive ideas of abstract Boolean 
algebra interpreted so as to yield a calculus of true or false 
propositions and their relationships. It is by virtue of their 
truth or falsity that all propositions may be related to 
each other; and, since there are only two alternatives—  
either truth or falsity, either 0 or 1— for any proposition, 
the r‘propositional interpretation” is feasible only if we 
grant the limiting postulate for a “two-valued algebra,” 
postulate VII, which restricts us to the narrowest con­
ditions for a Boolean system.
Before we may safely assume that this abstract system 
may be interpreted, in totof as a calculus of propositions 
and their relations, one more requirement must be fulfilled; 
there must be a significant interpretation for the relation 
©, whether this be defined (as when we begin with K  ©, 
=) or whether it be assumed (as when we start with 
K, ©). The interpretation must give sense to all formal 
expressions in which © may figure in the abstract algebra; 
for instance, (a, b) : a ® b =  b . =  . a © b or (a, b) : a ® b 
=  a . =  . a © b. What logical relation answers to these 
demands?
Suppose we let © mean, by interpretation, “O” . To say 
that a proposition p implies another, q, is to say that if p 
is true, then q is true; or, in the form of a disjunction, 
either p is not true, or q must be true, i.e. either p is false 
or q is true. Notice that “p is false” may be expressed 
either by p =  0 or by -—>p =  1, since p =  1 and -—>p =  1 
would imply p . r^p =  1, which is impossible by V; so p =  1 
is equivalent to ^  p =  0, and p =  0 to ^->p =  1. To say 
p Oq, then, means that if p is true, q is true; that is, if q is 
false, p is false; or, either p is false or q is true. Let us take 
the last condition as its equivalent, since it can be expressed 
in terms of V :
'—' pV q • =  . i
“Either not -p or q” is true.
272 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS
273
Now, consider the equivalence laid down by definition 
in the algebra:
a +  b =  b . =df . a <  b
and translate it into the language of the propositional 
calculus:
pW q =  q . s=df . p O q
If p O q means “p is false or q is true,” i.e. ~ p V  q — 1, 
then ~ p V  q =  f must be equivalent to the formal definition 
of O in the algebra, pW q =  q; otherwise the “meaning” of 
O, that is, the concept we denote by it, is not an acceptable 
value for ©, which is defined by the latter propositional 
form. Fortunately, however, we know that
(j>,q) :pV  q =  q . =  . ~ p  V q =  1
for this is an exact translation of the proposition
(#, b^j' a -}- b — b . =  . »d —j— b —— i 
or 
(a, b) : a <  b . =  . -a +  b =  1
proved as theorem 21 of the class-algebra in chapter ix.
All further properties of O which are set forth in theorems,
such as: 
,, 
, 
, _ 
_ 
_ 
,
(/*>?) ' . p o q . O  . ~ q  o  ~ p
(p,q,r): . p O q  . q 0 r : 0 : p 0 r
are all obviously fitting; any examples from ordinary dis­
course will show them to be entirely respectable.
The interpretation of the calculus for propositions and 
logical relations is, then, completely possible; it remains, 
now, to consider the effects of this circumstance upon logic 
itself, i.e. upon our knowledge of relations, systems, deduc­
tions, and the whole structure of reason.
3. T h e P r o p o sit io n a l C a l c u l u s a s  a n  A l g e b r a  
o f T r u th -V a l u e s
In an earlier chapter, it was said that every proposition 
must possess one of two truth-values: truth, or falsity.

These two concepts are here denoted by 1 and 0, respec­
tively; and, by postulate VII, every proposition is to be 
equated either to 1 or to 0. If p and q are two true pro­
positions, then p =  1 and q =  1 \ from which it follows that, 
in our calculus, p =  q. If every element is equal either to 
1 or to 0, then there can be only two elements, and all the 
letters p , q , ~ p 9 ~ q, etc., are just so many different 
names for 1 and 0.*
Now, if p means, say, “ Russia is big,” and q means 
“Mark Twain wrote Tom Sawyer,” then p =  1 and q =  1. 
But it certainly sounds strange to say that p =  q. These 
two propositions seem as different as they can be; the only 
point in which they agree is their truth-value. This, however, 
is just the point at issue. If they have the same truth-value, 
then their negatives have the same truth-value, i.e. if p is 
true and q is true, then ~ p  is false and ~ q  is false; then, 
if r be any third proposition, pr =  r (i.e., pr =  1 if r =  1 
and pr =  0 if r =  0) and qr =  r, and ~ p y  r =  r and 
~  qV r =  r; in short, in any expression involving p, we 
could substitute q without changing the result. If we know 
that p and q are both true, then it does not matter which 
one we use to represent “truth” ; their conceptual content—  
that is, what they assert, what they are about— plays no 
rôle whatever in this system. Two elements in a system 
which may always take each other's places, such as the 
elements “2 +  2” and “2 X 2” in arithmetic, are said to 
be equal, though conceptually they are not identical (“2 +  2” 
is a sum and “2 x  2” a product, quite different concepts); 
and in the propositional calculus, all true propositions are 
equal, and all false propositions are equal.
The fact is that this calculus does not deal with the 
meanings, and relations among meanings, of propositions;
* This notion, that all true propositions were names for “the 
truth” and all false propositions names for “the false,” was intro­
duced, and maintained for many years, by G o t t l o b F r e g e , a German 
mathematician who was one of the founders of symbolic logic, and 
especially of “logistics” (see next chapter).
274 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

it is a calculus of truth-values and their relations, a system 
of truths and falsehoods. *
Now, if the elements of the system are truthr-values, of 
which there are just two, and these are represented by 
1 and 0, how is it that we have also an indefinite number of 
symbols such as fi, q, ~ p , ~ q , which are supposed to 
represent divers& propositions!
This usage rests upon the fact that only propositions can 
he true or false. A proposition always represents a truth- 
value, but we may not know which; therefore, if we write p, 
we know that this means either 1 or 0, but are not committed 
to one or the other. Whatever, then, is true for both ele­
ments, 0 and 1, may be asserted of p. For instance, each of 
the two elements has a negative; the disjunct of the two 
negatives is 1 and their conjunct is 0 ; or,
(p) (3 ~ p ) :p V ~ p  =  1 .p ~ p  =  0 
Also 
0 V 1 =  1, 1 V 1 =  1 ;0 . 0  =  0, 1 ; 0  =  0 ; 
or 
(p). p V 1 =  1 
( P):p. 0  =  0
Propositions about p and ~  p, then, are propositions about 
truth-values in general, even though there are only two 
such values; and the quantification (p, q) may be read either: 
“for any two propositions, p and q,”  or: “for any truth- 
value p, and any same or other truth-value q.” The latter 
reading keeps one reminded of the fact that truths and false­
hoods as such, and not what is true or false, are the subject- 
matter of the calculus; but the former reading also has its 
virtues; for it emphasizes the fact that the application of a 
truth-value system is always to the realm of propositions, 
so that it incorporates a criterion of proper reasoning. Any 
conclusion of an argument, if it runs counter to a theorem of 
the calculus, is wrong. A true conclusion must be consistent 
with its premises by all the laws that govern the relations 
of truths to each other, i.e. the logical relations, which are 
subject-matter, or constituent relations, of the system.
* See Appendix C.
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS 
275

276 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
4. T h e N otion o f “ M a t e r ia l  I m p l ic a t io n "
The fact that truth-values, not meanings, are the elements 
of the system is reflected in the definition, given above, of 
the implication-relation:
(p, ?): P 0 ? • =df - r^pW q z= 1
“ For any p and q, *p implies q’ means 'either not-p or q* is 
true"; i.e., “p implies q” means “either p is false or q is 
true.” This is entirely a relation among truth-values, for 
we have no idea what propositions p and q may be. It is, 
indeed, a relation which always holds when one proposition, 
p, implies another, q. Let p, for instance, mean “The fourth 
of May is a Monday/' and q “The fifth of May is a Tuesday." 
This is a case of “p implies q” ) and q must certainly be true 
unless p is false. That is to say, either p is false, or q is true. 
If p is true, then q cannot be false.
Now, although this relation of truth-values, rs; p\f q =  
always holds if p o  q, our ordinary view of implication 
demands a further relation between the two propositions, 
namely a relation of meaning. For instance, if p retains its 
assigned meaning, but q means “Napoleon was Emperor 
of France," then the relationship “p is false or q is true" 
may hold for p and q, but it would not ordinarily be thought 
that p implies q. The two propositions have no relation of 
intension, i.e. of meaning, so that we could infer the truth 
of q from the truth of p. Ordinary reasoning deals with 
meanings as well as truth-values. But the propositional 
calculus does not. The import, or intension, of its pro­
positions is entirely irrelevant. The relation O, therefore, 
in the calculus mirrors only the relation of truth-values which 
obtains whenever p O q; and that is, {p =  0) V (q =  i), or 
~ p \ f  q =  1.
This treatment of “implication" makes it a broader 
concept than the ordinary one, and has certain consequences 
that startle and estrange one until the new notation is

entirely familiar. If p O q means “p is false or q is true/' 
then it holds whenever p and q are both true, since “ q is 
true” is then fulfilled; whenever both are false, since “p is 
false” is then fulfilled; and whenever p is false and q is true. 
In fact, the only case in which p O q does not hold is, that p is 
true and q is false. If q is true it holds, whether p be true or 
false; if p is false it holds whether q be true or not. So, if 
we really mean by p O q no more and no less than ~ p  V q =  l 
“p is false or q is true,” we are forced to admit two famous, 
or perhaps infamous, propositions, known as the"paradoxes” 
of symbolic logic:
tf.?) :p . O . q O p
“A true proposition is implied by any proposition”
(p,q) : ~ p . O , p O q
"A false proposition implies any proposition.”
Obviously these peculiarities do not belong to the 
"ordinary” concept of implication. So, in order to dis­
tinguish the relation O from the “ intensions!” relation 
whereby p entails q, O as it figures in the calculus has been 
called material implication. As long as this distinction is 
recognized, there is really nothing paradoxical in the 
theorems,
(P>9) - p . O . q O p
and 
(p, q) : ~ p  . o  . p O q
Only, they should be read: "A true proposition is materially 
implied by any proposition,” and "A false proposition 
materially implies any proposition.” Thus, "Coal is black” 
materially implies "Grass is green,” because the latter is 
true; and "Coal is white” materially implies "Christmas is 
in July/' because the former is false. But "Coal is black” 
does not materially imply "Grass is pink,” for the former is 
true and the latter false, so we have not ~ p  V q\ we have 
p V rw q— the only case for which p O q does not hold.
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS 
277

(Note, however, that in this case qO p\ ioip V ~ q  =  ~qVp 
by IIIa, and ~ q V p  . =df .qOp).
Is there any sense in calling this relation “implication” 
at all? What has it to do with “real” implication? What is 
its use for purposes of argument, or inference?
The character it shares with “real” implication, by 
virtue of which it merits that noble name, and enters into 
deductive processes, is this: that if p is known to be true, 
and p O q, then we may accept q. This is exactly the con­
dition for real inference. The “paradoxical” cases arise 
(i) when p is known to be false, in which case its intensional 
implications are as useless for inference as the “material” 
ones, and (2) when q is already known to be true, so that 
inference is unnecessary, and^ O q, even if true, is gratuitous. 
In both cases the implication is irrelevant for purposes of 
deduction. The only case where inference is in question, is 
that of a true proposition in the relation O to some other 
proposition; and here, material implication guarantees that 
this other will be true. The ground upon which we admit 
that the relation O holds between the two propositions, is 
usually an intensional connection between them; this, 
generally regarded as the essence of “real” implication, has 
nothing to do with the system of truth-values. But wherever 
“ real” implication exists, we have p O  q; and wherever p O q 
holds and “ real implication” does not, inference is irrelevant 
anyway. The important proposition for inference is:
(M ) ' . p . p O q . O . q
“ If p is true, and p materially implies q, then q is true.” 
And this is the sense of “real” implication.
5. T h e “ R e f l e x iv e n e s s” o f a  P r o p o sit io n a l Ca l c u l u s
In all previous systems we have reasoned about constituent 
relations, by means of the logical relations. We cannot 
reason by any other means; for reasoning is nothing else 
than the employment of logical relations and operations to
278 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

determine the truth-values of new propositions from old- 
established ones. As soon as we doubt the validity of, say, 
the relation O, we can no longer pass from premises to 
conclusions. We cannot even offer a reason for doubting 
this validity, for if implication is invalid, then the best 
reason in the world can no longer imply anything, so nothing 
can imply that O is valid or that it is invalid. The laws of 
logic must be taken for granted before any calculus can be 
used; so the question naturally arises, whether a calculus 
that lays down these very laws does not commit us to 
reasoning in a circle, and to lifting ourselves up by our 
boot-straps.
The answer is, that a calculus of logical relations serves 
only to exhibit, but not to sanction, the formal properties 
of logical relations. As Professor Sheffer has put it, “ Since 
we are assuming the validity of logic, our aim should be, 
not to validate logic, but only to make explicit, at least in 
part, that which we have assumed to be valid.” * And when 
the formal properties of those logical relations are thus 
made explicit, they are seen to follow the general pattern 
of a Boolean algebra. For this reason, the algebra, inter­
preted for propositions, is frankly “reflexive” ; it makes 
logically related statements, about statements in logical 
relations. It makes assertions about what may or may not 
be asserted, and exhibits deductively the conditions for 
valid deduction.
This means, of course, that we have some symbols denoting 
the relations which we assert to hold among propositions, 
and others of exactly the same sort expressing the structure 
of complex propositions that we happen to be talking about. 
Our terms are propositions, and so are the assertions we 
make about them. Thus, for any given term p, ilp =  1” is 
a proposition about p ; but p itself is already a proposition. 
Now, if p is true, then of course p =  1 is true, since p =  1
* Review of Principia Mathematica, vol. i (2nd ed.), in Isis, 
vol. viii (1926), pp. 226-31
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS 
279

means “p is true” ; and if p is false, then p =  1 is false. In 
fact, p and “p =  1” always have the same truth-value, which 
means in this system that (p) : p . == . (p =  1). Likewise, 
if p =  0, 
then 
~ p  =  l; 
and 
(by the principle of 
application) what is true for any p, is true for the 
special case ~ p , so {p) : p . =  . (p =  1) means the same as 
{~p) : ~ p  =  { ~ p  =  1), and ~ p  =  1 is equivalent to 
p =  0; so we have the odd-looking equation
p = (p = i)
This form is not valid for any system whose elements are 
not propositions; for p =  i is a proposition of the system, so 
if p =  {p =  2), then p must be a proposition. Thus, if we 
accept the above equation as a further postulate (since it 
cannot be deductively derived from the two-valued algebra 
as an abstract system, but is merely true with its “pro- 
positional” interpretation), then we have, in what I shall call 
postulate VIII, a purely formal condition committing the 
abstract system to just one interpretation.
It is not hard to prove, with the help of VI, VII and VIII, 
that if p =  (p =  2), then ~ p  =  (p =  0). If p means 
“p is true,” then — p means "p is false.” Moreover, since 
every proposition is either true or false (VII), 
(P =  l) 
is the same as p =  0, ~ p  =  1, or simply ~ p . So we have, 
in this algebra, a tremendous variety of equivalent forms:
P =  {p =  1) =  ( ^ p  =  0) =  ^  (-—'p =  1) =  ~  i^P)* etc 
r*~jp =  (p =  0) =  [r^p =  i ) =  r^t[p =  1) =  
(^ p  =  0),etc.
Now, by postulate I, if p and q are any two elements of 
the algebra, then p V q is an element; so that p V  q =  0 
or p V  q =  1. But if p =  {p =  1) and q =  (q =  1), then 
p V q =  (p =  1) V (q =  1): meaning “either p is true or q is 
true.” This proposition, which might well be a postulate or 
a theorem of the algebra, here figures as an element in the 
system. Furthermore, if p is an element, ~ p  is an element, 
and therefore, for any q, ~ p  V q must be an element. But
280 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS
281
~ p  V q . =  . (p =  0) V (q =  1), meaning “p is false or q is 
true’' ; and that is the same thing as p O q. So it follows that 
p O q, “p implies q,” is not only a statement about the ele­
ments p and q in the system, but is itself an element of the 
system.
Here the “reflexiveness” of the two-valued “proposi­
tional” algebra (i.e. Boolean algebra with postulates VII 
and VIII) is in its full glory. Every proposition of the system 
is at once an element in the system, about which further 
algebraic statements might be made, only to become terms, 
themselves, in further statements. The algebra of truths 
and falsehoods is like Cronos devouring his offspring. 
Everything we can say about truths and falsehoods is itself 
a truth or falsehood, to be used in producing new true or 
false propositions of the algebra.
6. T he Significance of a P ropositional Calculus
This very “reflexiveness,” which certainly makes one 
suspect the validity of the Boolean calculus of propositions, 
has made it a touchstone of logical theory. Certainly logical 
relations can be talked about; but does a calculus of pro­
positions and their relations really make sense? Can they 
be talked about systematically, or is any effort to systematize 
the principles of systematic procedure necessarily self- 
defeating? It has already been said, above, that to deduce 
laws of logic from anything by laws of logic is impossible 
and absurd. One may question further, whether a universal 
proposition about propositions is possible; since such a 
proposition must, of course, be about itself as well as about 
all other propositions. That is, if we say:
(j>).p = (p = i)
this universal p applies to any proposition— "Nelson was an 
admiral” =  (“Nelson was an admiral” =  1), and
№- P  =  (£ =  m  =  { №- P  =  
=  
=  1}

282
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
The proposition in this case should itself be an instance of 
the general truth it asserts. Since this gives every term in the 
system an infinity of equivalent forms, and every statement 
is really a term, it may well be asked whether any universal 
facts about propositions can be categorically stated at all.
These and other difficulties, which lie unsuspected until 
we begin to express the science of logic itself in abstracto, 
make the propositional calculus the most intriguing of all 
systems. Do the baffling limitations, which keep running 
us into absurdities, lie in the particular formulation which 
the system of propositions inherits from its original model, 
the calculus of classes? Would a different form of expression 
do better? Or is logic in itself something beyond symbolic 
expression, something that cannot be systematically pre­
sented?
Here we stand on the threshold of contemporary logical 
theory. Its centre is the problem of expressing logical relations 
in general. Its historical root is the Boolean calculus, the 
two-valued algebra of truth and falsehood. By careful 
analysis of the notions there involved, by gradual modifica­
tions in their notation, one paradox after another has been 
eliminated, and unsuspected powers of the simple calculus 
discovered.
As a great result of all this labour we have the master­
piece of symbolic logic, the Principia Mathematica of A lfred 
N. W hitehead and B ertrand R ussell. It begins wdth a 
calculus of propositions in logical relations, exhibiting the 
orthodox Boolean characteristics; it ends with the laws of 
arithmetic, algebra, and geometry.* Where its logical theories 
and technical exposition begin, is practically the point for 
an introductory text-book to end; my closing chapters, 
therefore, will be concerned with the transition from Boolean 
algebra to the language and outlook of Principia Mathe­
matica, and make no attempt to present the system itself 
which is there developed. My intention is only to usher the 
* The volume dealing with geometry has not yet appeared.

reader into the ante-rooms of logistic, mathematical philo­
sophy, and science.
Summary
Logical relations hold always among propositions, so the 
propositions they produce contain propositions as terms. 
Like all relations and operations, V, ., and O have formal 
properties. Logical conjunction and disjunction are com­
mutative, absorptive, associative, and distributive with 
respect to each other, just like the class-operations x  and 
+  ; implication is reflexive, non-symmetrical and transitive, 
like class-inclusion, < . Consequently the logical relations, 
like class-relations, are possible meanings, or values, for the 
abstract 0 , ®, and © of Boolean algebra.
If 0 , ©, and © become by interpretation . , V and O, 
then the if-elements must become propositions. So we have 
K(p, q ,r . . .) V, ., and a set of postulates in these terms 
corresponding exactly to the two-valued algebra, i.e. Boolean 
algebra inclusive of postulate VII. The “unique elements/' 
0 and 1 are interpretable as “ truth” and “falsehood” ; and 
the complement of a term p, ~ p , becomes the denial of the 
proposition^. The seventh postulate, (p) : p =  1 .V  . p =  0, 
now reads “Any proposition is either true or false." Also, 
p V r^p =  1 and p . ~ p  =  0 hold upon this interpretation, 
for “p is true or p is false" is true for any p, and “p is true 
and p is false" is false for any p.
The calculus is given in terms of V and . , corresponding 
to ® and 0  ; O, which corresponds to © of the Boolean 
algebra, is defined by the formula: p O q . = d f. ~ p V  q =  1. 
This corresponds to ordinary usage in that, if p implies q, 
then it is always true that if p is true, then q is true; or, 
either p is true, or q must be false.
If the calculus is truly two-valued, so that every true 
proposition =  1 and every false proposition =  0, then all 
true propositions are equal to each other, and all false 
propositions are equal to each other, regardless of their
THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS 
283

import. Meanings, or “intensions," are irrelevant; only 
their truth-value counts. Therefore the “propositional" 
calculus is a calculus of truth-values.
Since p O q . =df . ~ p  V q . =  1, and ~ p V q = l  is 
merely a relation among truth-values, which holds when­
ever p is false or q is true, p O q may occur when p and q 
have no intensional relation whatever; p O q, in fact, holds 
whenever p is false, and whenever q is true; therefore a 
true proposition is implied by any proposition, aiid a false 
proposition implies any proposition.
The concept symbolized by O is, then, somewhat broader 
than the ordinary notion, though p O q  always holds when 
p “really" or “intensionally" implies q. Bertrand Russell 
has given the algebraic concept the name of “material 
implication."
What saves “material implication" from being utterly 
useless is, that the cases in which it differs from “real" 
implication are all cases where p is known to be false, so its 
“real" implications are irrelevant, or q is already known to 
be true, so it does not need to be inferred. In all cases where 
p is known to be true, and q is not known, “material impli­
cation" serves the purposes of inference.
A calculus of propositions uses the principles of logical 
relationship to reason about logical relations. It states the 
laws of reasoning, so its systematic laws are sometimes 
taken as criteria of valid reasoning. This is an error, for the 
laws of logic must be accepted before any calculus can be 
used. It can only exhibit the formal properties of those laws 
which we do, in fact, accept as valid in reasoning.
But since the calculus makes true or false statements 
about true or false statements, it is necessarily and frankly 
“reflexive." If p is a true proposition, then p =  i ; and 
p =  1 is a true proposition. Therefore, (p =  1) =  1 ; and, 
since p =  1, p =  (p =  1). This peculiar proposition results 
from the propositional interpretation, and is not tenable 
with any other; therefore, p =  {p =  1) is a formal proposi­
284 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE CALCULUS OF PROPOSITIONS
285
tion which, if taken as a postulate, guarantees the pro- 
positional interpretation. Of course, if p =  {p =  1), ~  p 
=  (p =  0). This makes for a tremendous variety of equivalent 
forms and gives the system a redundant character. Every 
statement made in the system is again equal to 0 or 1. All 
its facts, such as: p V q . O . q V p, are also elements, for they 
always equal 1. So it becomes impossible to distinguish 
elementary from logical propositions; p =  (p =  1), ~ p  
=  ~  (p =  l)t and ~ [p  =  (p =  i)]. If p =  (p =  l)t then 
the denial of p, ~ p , may be written ~ p ; and ~ p V  q =  1 
may be written ~ p  V q, or p O q.
The very difficulties of this calculus are the source of its 
importance in logical theory; for in order to obviate them, 
the calculus has been modified until it reached the form 
now presented in the first part of Principia Mathematica, 
which is the starting-point of the greatest logical work that 
has yet been done, a foundation of mathematics and science.
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What formal properties of ''implication'1 can you name?
2. Why may ® and ® be interpreted as logical operations?
3. In the "propositional" version of Boolean algebra, what 
meanings are given to 1 and 0 ?
4. Could postulate VII be omitted from an algebra of 
propositions ?
5. What formula of the abstract algebra (K ®, <g>, =) corre­
sponds to the definition : p O q . = d f. ^  p V q =  2?
6. What is meant by calling the propositional calculus an 
algebra of truth-values ?
7. What is "material implication"? How does it differ from 
"real" implication? Does it, in your opinion, merit the name 
of "implication" at all?
8. What is the importance of the proposition, (p) . p =  (p = 1) ?
9. What objections could be made to this proposition? Do you 
think the objections are valid?
10. Is the "propositional calculus" a guarantee for the validity 
of deductive reasoning? Does it express the laws of such 
reasoning?

ii. What is meant by calling the calculus of propositions 
“reflexive” ? 
What problems arise from the “reflexive” 
character?
286 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. In the two-valued algebra, find five equivalent expressions 
ioip.
2. Let p =  “Dickens wrote Oliver Twist** Let q =  “Nelson was 
a French general.” Express all the material implications that 
hold among p, q, ~p,and ~  q.
3. Give an example of p O q where q may be inferred from p; 
one where q may not be inferred from p.
4. Express p O q as a disjunction and as a conjunction. (Hint: 
use the “law of transposition.”)
5. Express in the terms of the “propositional” calculus:
(a, b, c): (a ® b) ® (a © c) =  a ® (b ® c)
{a, b) : (a ® -b) ® (-a ®b) =  1 . o  . a ® 6 =  0

C H A P T E R  X I I
THE ASSUMPTIONS OF PRINCIPIA MATHEMATICA
i. L imitations and D efects of the “ Propositional” 
A lgebra
There is a type of logical theory, commonly called 
“logistic,” which applies to the whole body of mathematical 
reasoning, reveals the precise relations between arithmetic 
and algebra, algebra and geometry, between cardinal and 
ordinal notions, and many other basic problems. Obviously 
such a powerful logic could never have sprung from the 
syllogistic science of Aristotle; neither could it derive from 
any system as rigid, simple, and limited as a two-valued 
algebra, of the form that yields the propositional calculus. 
This calculus is complete and closed; it has, in its peculiar 
Boolean form, no possibilities of further expansion and 
complication of its laws. We may find new interpretations 
for it, and so discover that many things in the world, which 
look as unlike as propositions and (say) circles intersecting 
one another, have an essential trait in common, namely the 
logical form of their respective inter-relations. But in using 
Boolean algebra we must talk either about propositions, or 
about circles; we cannot make a reasonable statement about 
a proposition and a circle. Likewise we may talk in Boolean 
terms either about propositions or about classes, but a class 
and a proposition cannot be talked about in the same 
terms. The only way to pass from class-concepts to truth-value 
concepts is by a change of interpretation for the whole calculus.
Such limitations, however, are not defects, any more 
than the walls of a small chamber are defects because 
they make it small. The algebra as an abstract system is 
quite perfect. Yet the propositional calculus is in many 
ways unsatisfactory; it is a possible formulation of the 
systematic relations among propositions, but by no means

288
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
the happiest one. This is due to two circumstances, namely: 
(i) that the system was originally constructed to present 
important facts about classes, and the formulae which are 
interesting in this connection may convey facts of no parti­
cular interest when they concern propositions; (2) that this 
system, designed as a class-calculus, really fits the structure 
of propositions in logical relations, with exception of the 
presence of two unique elements. There are not two “unique” 
propositions. Consequently these elements require a slightly 
warped interpretation. They are taken to represent specific 
truth-values, where the other terms, p, q, etc., represent 
ambiguous truth-values, and at the same time are said to 
represent propositions which “have” truth-values. For, if 
p were only a truth-value, like 1 and 0, then it could not be 
identified with “p =  Í,” which is not only a truth-value, 
but a proposition possessing truth-value. To make the 
Boolean algebra fit the universe of propositions, therefore, 
involves a certain vagueness of interpretation, which is a 
real defect, and gives rise to spurious algebraic forms.
The history of the propositional calculus is a story of 
emendations and alterations designed to correct the weak­
nesses it inherits from its origin in a class-calculus. The 
great result of this process is the system which two eminent 
logicians and mathematicians, A l f r e d  N. W h it e h e a d  and 
B e r t r a n d  R u s s e l l , have given us in a book which will 
probably remain the highest classic of symbolic logic, their 
Principia Mathematica. When one first encounters this 
system, it looks utterly different from the familiar Boolean 
algebra; the very language is different, some of the primitive 
ideas are new, the general propositions (at least in the 
first chapters) have no quantifiers, and it looks very much as 
though the authors had simply scrapped the old logic and 
made a new one. This, however, is not the case; their system 
is essentially a Boolean algebra; and the best way to note 
the changes they have made, and yet maintain the con­
nection between the new and the old symbolic logic, is to

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
289
follow the reasoning which led to these changes, which is a 
careful, progressive critique of the ineptitudes and fallacies 
of the two-valued propositional calculus.
First of all, consider the postulate which restricts the 
interpretation of the algebra to propositions in logical 
relations: (p) . p =  (p =  1). Clearly, we may state as a 
fact that p =  1\ this is a possible combination of elements, 
and is true or false in the system; 1 is an element, p is an 
element, and p =  1 is an elementary proposition. Further­
more, we may state that p =  1 . O . ^  
p =  1)\ this is 
a logical proposition, an assertion that the logical relation 
O holds between two elementary propositions of the system. 
So far, so good. But now we encounter the eighth postulate,
(p).p = u> = i)
Here it is said that an element, p, is identical with an ele­
mentary proposition relating that element to another. The 
entire structure of logical systems, the combination of 
elements into elementary propositions and of the latter 
into logical propositions, breaks down upon this equation, 
for hereafter there is no telling what is an element, and 
what an elementary proposition; if (p) . p =  (p =  1), then 
of course {~ p  =  1) =  ~ p ; so we may write, instead of 
P =  1 . O . ^  ('—> p =  l)y
p . o . ^  ^  p
and as this is the same thing as p =  1 . O . ^  
p =  i), 
and O is by interpretation a constituent relation of the system 
(© =int O), p =  1 . O . ~  (~ p  =  1) must be regarded 
as an elementary proposition of the system. The distinction 
between elementary and logical propositions fails us when 
the constituent relations are identical with logical relations 
(as they are, by interpretation), and the elements with 
elementary propositions. Moreover, if p =  (p =  1), then 
IP =  (P =  1)] =  (P =  1), 
so 
p =  [p =  (p =  l)]f 
and 
[p =  (p =  l)] =  {p =  [p =  (p =  i)]}> etc., etc. There is

no end to the increasing complication of forms that are 
all identical withp, and with 1. Likewise, ~ q  =  [ ~ q  =  1), 
and (q =  1) =  0, and [{q =  1) =  0] =  1 and so on ad 
infinitum. There results a tremendous redundancy of forms 
and endless number of “names" for the element 1 and the 
element 0; for note that pO  q means ~  p\f q =  1, which 
is the same as ~ p  V q, and the same as 1 ; that ~ ( ~ p  V q =  l) 
means ~ p  V q . =  . 0, or^  ( ~ p  V q) =  1, or (p . ~q), etc. 
Here the denial of a condition, expressed by ~  ( ~ p V  q =  1), 
“ It is false that ~  p V  q is equal to 1,” is identified with 
an element, p . ~ q. It becomes impossible to distinguish 
what we are saying from what we are talking about.
Such a confusion is not logically tenable. Even if we are 
talking about propositions, there must be a distinction 
between the subject-matter and the proposition which is 
“about" it. In a system where the constituent relationships 
are, by interpretation, V, ., and O, there must simply be two 
classes of logical relationships— those which function as 
constituents and those which function as logical mortar for 
the system. As Professor Lewis has remarked: “The frame­
work of logical relations in terms of which theorems are 
stated must be distinguished from the content of the system, 
even when that content is logic."*
This distinction is abrogated by postulate VIII, (p) . p 
=  [p =  i); and this postulate is the very one which is 
supposed to guarantee that the system which fits a universe 
of propositions and their logical relations fits nothing else 
in the world, that its form has just this unique interpretation. 
The reason for that uniqueness is, that the form is a spurious 
one; for an element can never be identified with a proposition 
involving that same element, without throwing the formal 
assertions of the system into confusion. Where the form is 
obscure, it is not surprising that there is no other inter­
pretation. Every other set of meanings makes the absurdity
* C. I. Lewis, Survey of Symbolic Logic, Berkeley, Cal., 1918, 
p. 225.
290 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
291
of p =  (p =  1) apparent; only if p is a proposition, and 1, 
instead of being also a (same or other) proposition, is an 
attribute of propositions, namely “truth/' can we say that 
“p =  1” means “p is the truth.” The meaning of “is” in 
this case is not supposed to be identity, but equivalence of 
truth-value. But to say that Í, which is not any single 
proposition, has a truth-value— as we must, to make p =  1 
mean that p and 1 are equivalent in truth-value— rests upon 
a slipshod interpretation; and only by some such slip can 
p == (p =  1) ever be made to look like a possible proposition. 
The Boolean algebra of classes fits the system of propositions, 
provided that we make 1 and 0 at once elements and pro­
perties of elements, at once propositions and characteristics 
of propositions. But to do this leads us into grave difficulties 
of distinguishing our assertions from the things they are 
about, and the truth of our statements from the truths and 
falsehoods with which those statements are concerned.
To correct this serious weakness, Whitehead and Russell 
abandon the special form known as “Boolean algebra,” the 
form of the class-calculus, and adopt a set of basic assump­
tions suited primarily to the treatment of propositions and 
their relations. Whether the universe of classes may be 
described in similar terms need not concern us just now, 
though it is clear enough that the authors of Principia 
Mathematica saw far ahead, when they made their new 
systematization of Boolean materials. The new formulation 
involves some changes in language; each one of these changes 
is aimed directly to make explicit the ideas about propositions 
which are tacitly accepted in the “propositional” calculus of 
0 and 1. Moreover, they found that by selecting a different 
set of “primitive” statements they could deduce much more 
promptly and simply those formulae which express important 
facts about logical relations, than by sticking to the pos­
tulates which were designed to yield important facts about 
class-relations. Most of their postulates, therefore, correspond 
to theorems of Boolean algebra.

2. A sse r t io n  a n d  N e g at io n
If p is, by interpretation, a proposition, then p is some­
thing that may be asserted, just as the postulates and 
theorems of a system are asserted. This has led to the belief 
that when we assert a fact such as : p =  2, we have therein 
another case of p. The notion of assertion is involved in the 
propositional interpretation given to the if-elements in this 
calculus, so that, if I write “p,” then this is ipso facto an 
assertion of the proposition p. Now, if p == 2 means “p is 
true,” and p means that p is asserted, there is indeed no 
difference between the two. The concept of assertion is fur­
nished twice, once by the interpretation of p, and once by the 
explicit symbolic statement, p — 1. The meaning of “ =  2” 
is already contained in p. Hence the redundancy of 
expressions in the propositional calculus.
The same difficulty arises with the interpretation of the 
negative, ~ p t as the denial of p, and the use of “ =  0” 
to express “is false.” Negation is at once an operation 
upon p, which yields an element ~ p , and a fact about p, 
namely, that ^  (p =  2). Also, ifp =  {p =  2), then ~ (p  =  2) 
may be written ^  (p); and is exactly the same thing as ~ p .  
The operation of negation is, by interpretation, denial, the 
logical operation
In this embarrassment of symbolic language, the authors 
of Principia Mathematica have decided to abandon the use 
of “ =  2” and “ =  0,” and accept the concept of assertion 
as a primitive idea, necessitated by the fact that they want 
to talk about propositions. Denial is, then, the assertion of 
a proposition with the operation of negation upon it, and is 
expressed in only one way: if the assertion is py the denial 
is ~ p\ and this is called the negation of p. There is no other 
negation-sign than the logical one of denial.
Now it is not strictly true that every proposition, by 
merely being mentioned, is asserted or denied, i.e. that p 
always means p =  2. If I say: “ Some people believe that 
four-leaved clovers bring luck,” I am not asserting or denying
292 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

that “ four-leaved clovers bring luck,” but that this pro­
position is believed by some people. Let us call p “ four- 
leaved clovers bring luck.” What I assert is, “ Some people 
believe p.” When p is used in another proposition, it is not 
asserted or denied. It is merely talked about. This is a fact 
which the interpreters of the Boolean calculus overlooked. 
If I say:
p o q
I am asserting the implication between two propositions, 
but not the propositions themselves. I may hold that 
“ ‘Gold is cheap' implies ‘Wheat is dear/ ” even at a time 
when gold does not happen to be cheap, and I know it is 
not. Here p and q in themselves are not asserted.
What is asserted is always that relation which func­
tions as the main verb in a proposition about propositions. 
Thus, in 
it is the implication
between the two parentheses that is asserted. The pro­
positions p and q are not asserted in p O q, nor denied in 
~ q O  ~ p ; nor are even these implications asserted; only 
the fact that one of them, p O q, implies the other, is 
asserted.
To distinguish between asserted and unasserted pro­
positions, Whitehead and Russell have used a special sign, 
K  called the assertion-sign;* wherever this sign appears, 
the whole expression which follows it is an asserted proposi­
tion. The separate parts of the expression are not asserted 
Thus, if I write:
v .p
then p is asserted; but in
\- : p O q  . O . ~ q  o  ~ p
p is not asserted; the sign refers to the expression governed 
by the two dots, for the two dots follow the sign. All the
* This sign was first used, for the purpose in hand, b y  G o t t l o b 
F r e g e , in his Grundgesetze dev Arithmetik, Jena, 1893.
TH E A SSU M P T IO N S O F P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
293

elements or constructs separated from each other by less 
than two dots are unasserted here.
If a proposition, say p, is to be denied, then it is sufficient 
to assert the negative, i.e.
b . ~ p
The assertion-sign always stands at the beginning of a total, 
independent proposition, and governs its main verb. If the 
dots following the sign are immediately followed by 
then the total proposition is a denial.
But we can never make, symbolically, assertions about 
assertions. The assertion-sign is the strongest symbol in the 
system. Nothing further can be said about it in the language 
of the system. So the assumptions we make about its meaning 
and behaviour have to be expressed as informal postulates, 
as also the assumptions which rest upon the interpretation 
of the universe K(p, q , r . . .). If this interpretation, or the 
import of the sign \~, play any part in the calculus, then 
this is a non-formal part, and the symbolism, which conveys 
only forms, cannot render it.
In this new and more precise symbolism, we can dis­
tinguish between the element p and the assertion that p , or 
“p =  1.” Consequently a © b, which is an assertion in the 
algebra, and is defined by the propositional form a © b =  b, 
equivalent to -a ® b =  1, must be translated into the 
language of Principia Mathematica z s [ - . p O q ,  or (by 
definition) b • ~ p V q ,  since the sign f- means 
“ =  1.” 
In the two-valued algebra, where -a ® b =  1 meant the 
same as -a © b, p O  q could always be written for a © b; 
but in the more careful ideography of Whitehead and 
Russell, p O q, or 
~ p y  q corresponds to -a © b, and 
b p O  q, or b • ~ P  V q, corresponds to -a © b =  1 or 
a © b. So the proper translation of a proposition with © 
is an asserted implication. Any unasserted implication 
translates the formula -a © b.
The “key” by which the system if(©, ®, ©) is to be
294 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
295
translated into the language of a “propositional” system is, 
then, not quite so simple for Principia Mathematica as for 
the “ two-valued algebra” of propositions. It may be stated 
as follows:
Boolean algebra
a, b, c, etc. 
=  1
0
Principia Mathematica
P> q, r, etc.
V
V
hence,
-a © b
—a (+) b =
or
a ©b
~ p V q ,  or (by definition, 
see below) p O q  
K ~ p  V q, or h . p O q
3 . T h e Ca l c u l u s o f E l e m e n t a r y  P r o p o sit io n s 
o f P r in c ip ia  M a t h e m a t ic a
One further difficulty to be avoided is the representation 
of a proposition about p by the very same symbol, p. Some­
how, p must be restricted so that it cannot be a proposition 
about itself, else we run into all the confusion of elementary 
with logical propositions which beset the Boolean calculus. 
But in a system where the elements are propositions, and 
relations among elements are logical relations by inter­
pretation, how can we ever maintain “elementary pro­
positions" at all?
Well, a slight shift of meanings is indeed necessary, to 
draw a line between p and propositions about p, and yet 
allow the elements of the system to be themselves pro­
positions. Whitehead and Russell have given the following 
meaning to "elementary proposition": An elementary pro­
position is one which takes only individuals {things, persons, 
etc.) for its terms'' It may be composed of further pro­
positions, but it is not about propositions.
An elementary proposition in this sense is not always 
(as in the sense formerly used) made entirely with con­

296
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
stituent relations among elements. It is quite possible to 
make a conjunctive or disjunctive statement about indi­
viduals, as:
“ Smith took Jones's hat and wore it,” 
or:
“Smith took Jones's or Evans's hat.”
Both are statements about Smith, Jones's hat, Evans's hat, 
etc. Yet the first is a conjunct, “ Smith took Jones's hat and 
Smith wore Jones's hat,” which is of the form p . q; the 
second is a disjunct, “ Smith took Jones's hat or Smith took 
Evans's hat” ; symbolically, p V q. Yet both are “ elementary” 
by the above definition. On the other hand, “Jones believes 
that Smith took his hat” is not elementary, for it relates 
an individual, Jones, to a proposition, namely what Jones 
believes. Such propositions are not acceptable meanings 
of p.
With this understanding, let us turn to the calculus of 
elementary propositions given in the first chapters of 
Principia Mathematica. It rests upon four primitive concepts, 
namely: elementary proposition, assertion, negation, and one 
binary operation, disjunction. These may be enumerated 
symbolically:
K(p, q,r • • •) b  
V
Furthermore, there is one important definition: 
p O q  . ==df. <**p V q
The sign O is read “implies” ; and the very first postulate 
is an informal one, for it involves the notion of truth (which 
has no symbolic expression but belongs to the interpretation 
of p, q, etc.), and its relevance to O:
*1.1 
Anything implied by a true elementary proposition 
is true. 
Pp.*
There follow five formal principles:
* Pp. denotes, in Principia Mathematica, “ Primitive proposition/*

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF PRINCIPIA MATHEMATICA 
297
* 1 .2  
\ - : p W p . O , p  
P p .
" 'Either p is true, or p is true’ implies *p is true/ is 
asserted/'
*1.3 
f- : q . O . p V q 
Pp.
“ ‘q is true' implies 'either p or q is true/ is asserted/'
*1.4 
h : pV q .O  . q V p  
Pp.
" 'Either p or q is true' implies 'either q or p is true/ is 
asserted."
*1.5 
b : p V (q V r) . O . q V 
V r) 
, 
Pp.
" 'Either 
is true, or q or r is true' implies 'either q is 
true, or p or r is true,' is asserted."
*1.6 
\ - : . q O r . O \ p V q . O , p V r  
Pp.
" ‘q implies ry implies lp or q implies p or r,’ is asserted."
Note that in every case what is asserted is the whole 
proposition, in which the relation is the "implies" which 
connects the two clauses that have inverted commas. These 
clauses themselves are not asserted. All that the postulates 
maintain is that wherever the first clause is true, the second 
is true also; but no postulate asserts that its first proposition 
is true.
The remaining two assumptions are again concerned 
with limiting the interpretation of K , and must therefore 
be given informally:
*1.7 
If p is an elementary proposition, ~ p  is an elementary 
proposition. 
Pp.
*1.71 
If p and q are elementary propositions, p Vq is an 
elementary proposition. 
Pp.
Now let us consider the correspondence of the formal 
postulates here given to certain propositions of Boolean 
algebra, by turning them back into the abstract terms, 
a, b, etc., ©, and ©:

298 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
*1.2 
|- : p V p . O . p becomes a @ a © a
(Note that the implication in *1.2 is asserted, and is 
therefore rendered by ©.)
This proposition of the algebra is, of course, easily proved 
from a ® a =  a and a © a. Postulate *1.2 
therefore 
corresponds to a theorem of the algebra, and expresses in 
a somewhat modified form the so-called law of tautology.
*1.3 
1- : q . O . p V q becomes b © a ® b
In the postulate-set for classes where <  is primitive, this 
proposition is employed in the definition of a sum (postulate 
3). It may be termed the “principle of addition.” From the 
postulates with +  and X it is deduced as theorem 18a 
(chap, ix, p. 229)
*1.4 
[- :pW q . O q V  p becomes a ® b © b ® a
This is a weakened form of a ® b =  b ® a (since =  is 
mutual inclusion) and is an expression of the commutative 
lawy which Whitehead and Russell choose to call the law of 
permutation.
*1.5 
: p V  {qW r) .O  . qV (pV r) becomes
& ® (& © c) • © • b © (a © c)
This is a weakened and somewhat modified case of the 
associative law, a ® (b © c) — {a © b) ® c, and is easily 
derived from it.
*1.6 
f- :. qO r .O  : p V  q .O  . p V  r becomes 
(-6 ® c) © [-(a ® b) @ (a ® c)]
In this postulate of Principia Mathematica, only the second 
O is asserted, and may be translated by ©; the other O's 
are unasserted and must be rendered by the proper com­
bination of - and ®. The result is a rather complicated 
inclusion-formula, but one that belongs to the algebra and

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
299
is easily deduced.* It is known as the principle of sum­
mation.
As I have said in chapter ix, there are several com­
binations of true propositions in Boolean algebra which 
may be taken as “primitive,” to yield deductively all the 
rest of the system. If we compare the postulates of Principia 
Mathematica with the Boolean postulates given in terms of 
® and ®, it will appear that the former express all the 
operational laws of disjunction (tautology, commutation, 
association) besides two principles (addition and summation) 
not assumed in the algebra as we know it.
This means that Whitehead and Russell’s formal postulates 
take care of all those Boolean postulates for © which are 
preceded by universal quantifiers. The two added postulates 
are also of a universal character; all the formal postulates in 
the calculus of elementary propositions are universal. Those 
postulates which derive new elements from given elements, 
sochas:
are taken care of by the informal primitive propositions; 
and those which assert categorically the existence of certain 
elements, 
(3J) ^  .
(30) (/>):...
are taken care of by the interpretation of p as a proposition, 
which has the property of being either true or false. (An
* The proof may be carried out as follows:
-{a ® b) © ifl 
© c) — -a -b © (a © c) 
10a
=  (a@ -a-b)@ c 
n a
a © -a -b 
=  (a © 
-a) (a © -b) =  1 (a © -b) =  a © -b
IVa, V, IIb
then 
{a © -a -b) © c =  (a © -b) © c
=  « ©( - &©* )  
n a
= ("^ 
^ 
HIa
-b © c ©[( -b © c) © a] 
14a
hence 
(-6 © c) © [-(a © b) © (a © c)] 
q.b.d.

attempt is made to express this fact as a theorem, 
f- : p • O . p V ~ p ) the theorem is valid enough, but does 
not express the so-called “layr of thought,” “Every pro­
position is either true or false” ; that is an assumption 
contained in the meaning of “proposition.”) Now, since all 
formal postulates (and all formal theorems) are universal, 
there is no need of quantifiers; where there is but one 
quantifier, no confusion can arise, so the universality of 
P> ~p> 
etc., may be taken for granted. We always mean 
“any p,” “any p and q,” “ any p, q, and r.”
4. T h e M o st I m po r t an t T h e o r e m s I n v o l v in g V, 
a n d  o *
In order to see how the old laws of Boolean algebra 
emerge from this new set of assumptions, it is necessary to 
know at least a few essential propositions among the 
hundreds of theorems which the authors of Principia 
Mathematica proceed to deduce. Some of these, expressing 
familiar characteristics, follow immediately from the pre­
mises, by the principle of exemplification. I shall give them 
their original numbers, so that the reader may be reminded 
that they are not strictly consecutive, but selected. Verbal 
translations of the symbolism may now be omitted, except 
where it emphasizes the import and systematic necessity 
of the proposition.
*2.02 
(- : p . O . q O p
This expresses a peculiarity of material implication, that 
a true proposition is implied by any proposition. Note that 
p means “p is true.” “ If p is true, then, whatever q is, if q 
is true, p is true” ; or, “ If p is true, then lq is false or p is 
true' holds.” This is one of the cases where implication is 
worthless for inference because it is gratuitous; the conse­
quent is true, anyway. The formal proof of *2.02 derives 
from postulate *1.3, b : q . O . p V q, by the principle of 
* Cf. Principia Mathematica, vol. i, *2.
3oo 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

application alone; for, since p means "any element/' and 
q "any other element/' let us interchange the two letters; 
then the postulate becomes
*1.3 
h :p .O  . q V p
Also, instead of "any element q” we mignt have used: "any 
element, ~ q ,” and written:
h :P . O . ~ q y p
By the definition of O,
~ q V p  =df. q O p
and so we have
:p . O . qOp,
which is the desired proposition, *2.02.
*2.03 
\ - : p O ~ q . O , q O ~ p
The proof may be effected by merely re-writing the expression 
f- : •—• p V r*/ q . 3  . 
q V >—> p
which is a case covered by postulate *14, with ~ p  in 
place of p and ~ q  in place of q.
Several other forms of this principle may be given, but 
this is the only form which can be demonstrated without 
a further theorem proving that q . O . ^  ~  q) (*2.12). 
These other forms, however, all follow the same pattern:
*2.15 
f- : ~ p O q  . O . ~ q O p  
*2.16 
(- : pO q .O  . ~ q O  ~ p
*2.17 
f- : ~  q O ~ p  . o . p O q
Obviously, they differ only in the choice of positive and 
negative terms in the first unasserted proposition. But the 
consequent, the second unasserted proposition, always 
presents the terms in reverse order, with reversed signs. To 
quote from Principia Mathematical "These four analogous
THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
301

302
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
propositions constitute the 'principle of transposition/ . . . 
They lead to the rule that in an implication the two sides 
may be interchanged by turning negative into positive and 
positive into negative. They are thus analogous to the 
algebraical rule that the two sides of an equation may be 
interchanged by changing the signs/'
*2.04 
\ - : . p . 0 . q 0 r : 0 : q . 0 . p 0 r
For demonstration, use *1.5 using ~ p  for p, and ^  q for q: 
(- : 
V 
j  Vf) . O . ~ q V  (~ p  V r)
In terms of O,
: p O  (q Or) . O . qO (pOr)
Punctuating with dots,
[ - : . p . 0 . q 0 r : 0 : q . 0 . p 0 r  
q.e.d.
"This is called the 'commutative principle/ . . .  
It 
states that, if r follows from q provided p is true, r follows 
from p provided q is true/'
Further propositions of *2 will be given without proof, 
since the proofs may be found in Principia Mathematica, 
and students should now be able to read them there.
*2.05 
\ - : . q O r . O : p O q . O , p O r
The proof is very simply effected from *1.6, by using ~ p
in place of p ( in Principia Mathematica such a substitution
' 
~ p \
is indicated by writing —
*2.06
\ - : . p O q . O : q O r . O mp O r
q O r p O q p O r
(Use*2.04,with----- , ----- , ------. Since q O r  = d f. ~q V r,
p 
q 
r
and since, if ~  q is an element and r is an element, ^  q V r

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
303
is an element, by *1.71, the principle of application allows 
q O r
the substitution----- ; and similarly in the two other cases).
p
The two theorems *2.05 and *2.06 represent the principle 
of the syllogism, the most famous principle of actual reasoning, 
namely mediate reasoning, the employment of a “middle 
term,” q. Naturally, these two formulae and their derivatives 
are of utmost importance for any deductive process; in 
classical (i.e. Aristotelian) logic they are exalted to the 
rank of the deductive principle, and such logic is often 
referred to as “the logic of the syllogism” (see App. B).
*2.08 
\- . p o p
“Every proposition implies itself.” The proof of this simple 
fact requires several steps; the reader is referred to Principia 
Mathematica.
*2.21 
f- : ~ p  . o  . p O q
This is the counterpart of *2.02, for it expresses that a 
false proposition implies any proposition. The proof is easy; 
p q
use *1.3, with -, -; then use *1.4, and write p O q  for 
q p
r^p V q when the latter form appears.
5. 
T h e  
D e f i n i t i o n  
o f  C o n j u n c t i o n , 
a n d  S o m e  
I m p o r t a n t  T h e o r e m s *
So far we have encountered only one binary operation, V, 
which corresponds to © of the algebra. In the postulate set 
with © and ®, both operations are required to define 
negation, which is said to yield a term -a such that 
-a © a =  1 and -a a =  0. But in the calculus of White- 
head and Russell, negation, 
is taken as primitive; 
consequently we may define conjunction in terms of dis­
junction and negation, as follows:
* Cf. Principia Mathematica, vol. i, *3.

304
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
p . q .  =df. <—» 
p V ^  ÿ)
“ *p and q are both true’ means 'it is false that p is false or 
q is false/ ” In Boolean algebra, this form, here given as 
a definition of p . qt finds its analogue in a theorem :
(a,b).a<g>b = -(-a © -6)
which follows as a corollary from De Morgan's theorem,
(a, b ). -(a 0  b) =  -a © -6
All the fundamental facts about p . q may now be ex­
pressed, for they all hold for the longer and more difficult 
construction, ~  (~ p  V ^  q). If p V q . O . q V p (by the 
principle of application, letting p mean ~ q  and q mean 
^  P), ^  ÿ V 
p . O . ~ p v  ^  q\ hence
p V ^  q) . O 
qW 
p)
which is, by definition,
1- i p . q . O . q . p
the commutative law for logical conjunction.* The associative 
law, the law of absorption, and ultimately the distributive 
law for V and ., may all be derived by operating, wherever 
possible, with previously derived laws for disjunction and 
the disjunctive form of p . q} ~  (~ fi V ^  q).
The propositions which follow, as well as the comments 
which accompany them, are quoted verbatim from White- 
head and Russell.
“ * 3.2 
\ - : . p . O : q . O , p . q
“ Le. ‘p implies that q implies p . q,’ i.e. if each of two 
propositions is true, so is their logical product.
“ *3.26 
b :p • ? • 0 • P
“ *3.27 
h : p . q . O . q
“ I.e. if the logical product of two propositions is true, 
then each of the two propositions severally is true.
* Theorem *3.22 of Principia Mathematica.

“ *3-3 
:.p  . q . O  . r : 0 : p  . O . q O r
“ Le. if p and q jointly imply r, then p implies that q 
implies v. This principle (following Peano) will be called 
‘exportation,’ because q is ‘exported’ from the hypothesis.. . .
“ *3.31 
: . p . O . q 0 r : 0 : p  . q , o r
“This is the correlative of the above, and will be called 
(following Peano) ‘importation.’ . . .
“ *3-35 
b - P - p O q . O . q
“ Le. ‘if p is true, and q follows from it, then q is true.’ 
This will be called the ‘principle of assertion.’ . . .  It differs 
from *1.1 by the fact that it does not apply only when p is 
really true, but requires merely the hypothesis that p is true.
“ *343 
\ - : . p 0 q . p 0 r . 0 : p . 0 . q . r
"Le. if a proposition implies each of two propositions, 
then it implies their logical product. This is called by 
Peano the ‘principle of composition.’ . . .
“* 3 4 5  
\-: . p O q . O - . p . r . O . q . r
“ Le. both sides of an implication may be multiplied by a 
common factor. This is called by Peano the ‘principle of 
the factor.’ . . .
“ *347 
. p O r . q O s . O :  p . q . O . r . s
“ Le. if p implies r and q implies s, then p and q jointly 
imply r and s jointly. The law of contradiction,
1- . 
. ~ p ),
is proved in this number (*3.24) ; but in spite of its fame 
we have found few occasions for its use.”
6 . 
T h e  D e f i n i t i o n  
o f  E q u i v a l e n c e , 
a n d  S o m e  
I m p o r t a n t  T h e o r e m s
The abstract system of Boolean algebra, when stated in 
terms of ® and <g>, appears as a collection of propositions 
most of which are equations. The formulae we have so far
THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
305

encountered in the calculus of elementary propositions have 
been implications, analogous to ©-propositions in the 
abstract algebra. There is, however, a logical relation, 
equivalence, which holds between two propositions if either 
one may always be substituted for the other; it is denoted 
by the symbol ==. This is strictly analogous to the relation 
= , which holds between two elements when one may freely 
replace the other. Two propositions are equivalent if and 
only if each implies the other. Just as, in the algebra, we have
[a, b) . a =  b . =df : a © b .b © a
(Def. in the formal context K©\ obvious from def. of © 
and III а, Ъ in the formal context K®, ®, =) so we have 
in the present calculus, the definition of == :
*4.01 
p =  q : =df : p О q . q О p*
Wherever we can assert a mutual implication between two 
propositions, we may assert their equivalence. Either may 
then be substituted for the other. In a calculus of truth- 
values, such as the present one, any two propositions are 
equivalent if they have the same truth-value.
It now remains to express the principles of this system 
(e.g. commutivity, absorption, exportation, importation, 
etc.), as equivalences, instead of mere implications, and the 
“ Boolean” form of the calculus of elementary propositions 
will be clearly visible. This is done by Whitehead and 
Russell in their fourth chapter (or “number,” as they call 
it), which exhibits, by way of introduction, a summary of 
its most important contents, so that I cannot do better than 
to quote their account:
"The principal propositions of this number are the 
following:
"*4.1 
\- : p O  q . =  . ~ q o  ~ p
"*4.11 
b : p = q . =  . ~ p  == ~ q
* It should be noted that, just as only an asserted implication is 
a proper translation of ©, so only an asserted equivalence functions 
in place of =.
З о б  
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

THE ASSUMPTIONS OF PRINCIPIA MATHEMATICA 
307 
“These are both forms of the ‘principle of transposition.’
“ *4.13 
I- , p = s ~ ( ~ p )
“ This is the principle of double negation, i.e. a proposi­
tion is equivalent to the falsehood of its negation.
“ *4.2 
- P = P
“ *4.21 
\ - : p = q . = . q = p
“ *4.22 
\ - : p = q . q = r . O , p = r
“These propositions assert that equivalence is reflexive, 
symmetrical, and transitive.
“ *4.24 
b : P . =  -p -P
“ *4.25 
\ - : p . = . p V p
“ I.e. p is equivalent to ‘p and p’ and to ‘p or p,’ which 
are two forms of the law of tautology, and are the source of 
the principal differences between the algebra of symbolic 
logic and ordinary algebra.
“ *4.3 
h - p . q . = . q . p
“This is the commutative law for the product of pro­
positions.
“ *4.31 
h ' P V q -  ==.qVp
“This is the commutative law for the sum of propositions. 
“The associative laws for multiplication and addition of 
propositions, namely:
“ *4.32 
\-:(p. q). r.  =  . p. ( q. r)
“ *4-33 
\ - : ( p V q ) V r . = . p V { q V r )
"The distributive law in the two forms
"*4.4 
\ - : . p . q V r . = : p . q . V . p . r
‘‘*4.41 
H : . p . V .q .r: =  . p V  q . p V  r

'The second of these forms has no analogue in ordinary 
algebra.
"*4.71 
\ - : . p o q . = : p . = . p . q
T.e. p implies q when, and only when, p is equivalent to 
p . q. This proposition is used constantly; it enables us to 
replace any implication by an equivalence.
"*473 
b : . q . O : p . = . p . q
‘T.e. a true factor may be dropped from or added to a 
proposition without altering the truth-value of the pro­
position/'
Here, in outline, is the calculus of elementary pro­
positions. Its development in Principia Mathematica is long 
and exhaustive; the summaries here cited show that it 
derives, step by step, all the propositions of the two-valued 
algebra. Its superior formulation, avoiding confusions of 
symbolic usage and shifts of interpretation, is, I think, clear 
from the foregoing sections; its superior power, both for 
manipulation and elaboration, which makes it applicable 
to really important fields of thought, will appear in the 
next chapter.
Summary
The two-valued algebra of propositions may be based 
on several alternative sets of “primitive" assumptions. One's 
aim in formulating an algebra is always to reach as soon as 
possible the greatest possible number of important propo­
sitions. Which propositions are “important" depends upon 
the use one makes of the algebra, i.e. the interpretation 
given to it. The postulates so far employed were originally 
chosen for a calculus of classes, and are important for 
relating classes. They do not necessarily lead most quickly 
to important formulae when the calculus applies to pro­
positions. The Boolean propositional calculus has, there­
3o8 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

fore, certain formal limitations and inelegancies due to its 
original reference to classes.
It has also more vital weaknesses; for, the unique ele­
ments, 1 and 0, can be interpreted only as “ truth” and 
“ falsity,” an interpretation to which there are two objec­
tions: (1) “truth” and “falsity” are not propositions which 
have truth-value, but are themselves the truth-values which 
propositions have, and are not therefore “ elements” in the 
same sense as propositions; and (2) the notion of “p is true,” 
expressed by p =  1, is already contained in the interpretation 
of p as a proposition, for to utter a proposition as a whole is 
to assert that it is true. Consequently one concept is sym­
bolized twice, which leads to redundancy and confusion of 
forms.
The distinction between elementary and logical pro­
positions is here completely lost. Every proposition of the 
algebra becomes itself a term of the algebra.
In any system where the constituent relations are, by 
interpretation, logical relations, this loss is inevitable. 
But even in a propositional calculus some logical relations 
function as constituent ones, and some as logical ones. The 
latter are asserted, the former only considered. Whitehead 
and Russell have avoided confusion by using Frege's asser­
tion-sign, }-, to indicate the total proposition which is 
asserted. Any proposition contained in an assertion is merely 
considered.
They have also given a modified meaning to “ elementary 
proposition,” namely, one whose elements are individuals. 
A negative, disjunctive, or conjunctive proposition may 
still be elementary, i.e. about individuals. The calculus these 
authors present is a calculus of elementary propositions.
A formal postulate resting on an informal notion, such as 
an interpretation, is necessarily fallacious. Hence p =  (p =  1) 
is an inadmissible form, “p =  Í ” is already symbolized by p. 
Principia Mathematica dispenses with any formal expression 
of truth, and substitutes a frankly informal postulate,
THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
309

"Anything implied by a true proposition is true.” Two other 
informal postulates provide for the existence of elementary 
propositions, such as p, the primitive notion of ~ p , and of 
P V q, all elementary propositions.
The primitive notions of the calculus are: elementary 
proposition, f-, 
V, and the informal notion of "truth.” 
The existence of these is expressed by informal assumptions. 
There are three formal definitions, of p O q, p . q, and p =  q 
respectively. The first of these precedes the symbolic pos­
tulates, which assume it. All the formal postulates concern 
operational rules for V and the defined O, so they are all 
universal. Where all quantifiers are universal, they may be 
dispensed with, as they are in the calculus of elementary 
propositions.
From the given postulates, all the characteristics of 
V, ., O, and = , which correspond to those of @, <g), @, 
and =  in Boolean algebra, may be deduced. This calculus 
avoids the faulty interpretation, redundancy, and confusion 
that attend a "propositional” use of Boolean algebra, and, 
being formulated so as to fit the aims of a propositional 
system, lends itself to more important uses than the cal­
culus designed essentially for a description of class-relations.
3io 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What are the formal limitations of the two-valued algebra?
2. What are its most serious weaknesses? What is the source of 
these weaknesses?
3. Who wrote Principia Mathematica? How are the weaknesses 
of the algebra obviated in that work?
4. What is the difference between an asserted and an unasserted 
proposition? How is the concept of assertion expressed?
5. What is meant, in Principia Mathematica, by an elementary 
proposition? How does this meaning compare with the one 
given in chapter iii of this book? In the sense of Principia 
Mathematica mayp .q be an elementary proposition? p\/q? 
p o q l

6. What are the primitive notions of the calculus of elementary 
propositions? What defined notions does it employ?
7. What are its informal postulates?
8. What are the formal postulates?
9. Why are the formal propositions of this calculus expressed 
without quantifiers?
10. What is the definition of O? Of . ? Of =?
11. What theorem allows us to turn every implication into an 
equivalence?
12. Why is the calculus of elementary propositions based on 
other primitive propositions than the Boolean calculus of
classes ?
THE ASSUMPTIONS OF P R I N C I P I A  M A T H E M A T I C A  
311
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Among the following propositions, check those which are 
“elementary” in the sense of Principia Mathematical 
Monday is Washday, and France is a Republic.
Russell and Whitehead wrote Principia Mathemaiica.
Russell and Whitehead say that Frege first used the 
“assertion sign.”
If the earth were flat, Columbus would have sailed to its 
edge.
If the earth were flat, he would not have sailed, lest he 
might fall off its edge.
2. In the following asserted propositions, underline the asserted 
relationships :
. q Op . r Op : O : q\f r . O . p 
\ - : . p . q . 0 . r : 0 : p . 0 . q 0 r  
\ - : . p O r . q O s . O : p . q . O , r . s
p . O .q o r  : O 
p . O .r O s : O :p . O . qO s
3. Give three equivalents for p O q 
Express as a conjunct, ~ p V  ~  q
Express the same as an implication and as an equivalence.
4. Express the law of transposition with O and with =.
5. In § 4 of this chapter, prove *2*05 by the indicated method. 
If you succeed, try *2*21.
6. Translate into terms of Boolean class-algebra the entire list of 
equivalence theorems in §6; then, comparing them with 
the propositions in chapter ix, indicate after each one its 
number (as postulate or theorem) in the class-calculus.

C H A P T E R  X I I I
LOGISTICS
i. T he P urpose of L ogistics
The field of thought to which we now want to apply 
symbolic logic is none less than mathematics. Through the 
ages this science has been recognized as the apotheosis of 
reason. It is the most developed and elaborate system of 
knowledge, and in the course of its wonderful evolution it 
has left all concrete material, all physical facts behind, and 
grown to be a system of purely formal relations among mere 
logical properties of things— among their shapes, magnitudes, 
positions, velocities, etc. All these properties might be 
exemplified by a thousand different things, and are there­
fore abstractable) it makes no difference whether (say) a 
certain magnitude is represented by one instance, or by the 
whole class of its possible instances. Mathematics treats of 
it only in abstracto.
For this reason, the science of number has long been 
regarded as the prototype and ideal of logical thought. 
Leibniz, in the seventeenth century, conceived the great 
project of making not only logic, but all philosophy a 
mathematical system. Greek geometry has ever been the 
model of all systematic demonstration, all deductive argu­
ment; Descartes and Spinoza, the outstanding protagonists 
of purely rational philosophy, professed to deduce their 
knowledge of the world more geométrico, from axioms and 
postulates, by the method of Euclid, in the hope of thus 
constructing a completely general, completely logical system.
The abstractness of mathematics has frequently enough 
been challenged, by thinkers (usually not mathematicians) 
who maintained that, since numbers express magnitudes 
and arrangements of things, they must ultimately represent 
concrete and specific things, or at least our ideas of them.

LOGISTICS
313
Since mathematics is first approached by the art of counting, 
the very concept of number must rest upon counting. To 
the more thoughtful and philosophical among the mathe­
maticians, this challenge offered a real problem. They felt, 
for the most part, that their critics were confusing the con­
cept of number with the normal and perhaps universal 
conception by which it is first conveyed to people; but when 
they tried to define the concept itself, they found them­
selves at a loss. In what terms could it be defined? The 
psychological notions of counting proved unsatisfactory, in 
describing anything beyond the simple manipulation of 
finite real numbers. All irrational, imaginary, or transfinite 
numbers had to be regarded as "fictions," as impossible 
assumptions contrary to sense and reason, which mathe­
maticians, in some inexplicable way, found useful in their 
business. To the mathematicians themselves, this hypothesis 
did not seem very plausible. They felt, rather than knew, 
that the simpler and simpler terms wherein mathematical 
concepts might ultimately be defined were more likely to be 
logical than psychological; so following this instinct, they 
sought them in the science of formal relations.
Their efforts to define the fundamental concepts of 
mathematics took them to the very roots of logic. Moreover, 
it gave the new logic, which had but lately sprung from the 
fertile minds of Boole, De Morgan, Peirce, and a few others, 
a definite goal, namely to construct a firm and universal 
foundation for the immense superstructure of mathematical 
reasoning, to show the connection of all its branches and 
the justification of all its supposed "fictions."
This pursuit, being something of a special departure from 
general logic, has been given the name of "logistic."* For 
the development of symbolic logic it has been invaluable, 
because it has set an exacting standard, and made tre­
* French writers apply the term logistique to all symbolic logic, 
which may lead to confusion. In English and German the usage 
here employed is generally recognized.

mendous demands on the ingenuity and resourcefulness 
of logicians— a thing which their former aim, the analysis 
of discourse and rhetorical argument, certainly did not do. 
It causes us to look not only for a correct logic, but a powerful 
one; not only for concepts that yield a calculus, but for 
such as will let us derive by definition all the necessary 
notions for mathematics. That is a big order. None the 
less, it was just the ambition to fill that order which led 
Messrs. Whitehead and Russell to begin with their particular 
version of the propositional calculus; their “ calculus of 
elementary propositions” is designed to meet, before long, 
the notions which certain great mathematicians— notably 
Peano— had arrived at as the true beginning of mathe­
matics. How this great development from the simple logic 
of elementary propositions is effected cannot possibly be 
shown in an elementary book; it can only be suggested, 
roughly outlined, pointed to as a distant perspective. This 
final chapter is necessarily sketchy and fragmentary, but it 
seeks at least to present the general ideas which carry the 
system onward.
2. 
T h e  P r i m i t i v e  I d e a s  
o f  M a t h e m a t i c s
If mathematics is really to have its roots in the pure 
logic of equivalent statements, in the relations of truths 
and falsehoods as such, then we must be able to pass some­
how from the calculus of elementary propositions to the 
notions which are “lowest terms" to the mathematicians. 
In order to see clearly what we are aiming to reach, let us 
consider the basic concepts which Peano considers the 
essential material of mathematics. These are amazingly 
few. Out of them he is able to build the great structure of 
arithmetic; and from arithmetic the entire edifice of mathe­
matical science— algebra, geometry, calculus, and what­
not— can be derived by definition and deduction. If, there­
fore, these basic ideas, and the primitive propositions he 
formulates in terms of them, may be derived by the same
3i4 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
315
methods from a system of pure logic, then the assumptions 
of this latter system are the real 'lowest terms” of mathe­
matics. As aforesaid, it will not be possible to demonstrate 
that derivation here; but I shall try to show how the ambition 
to do so has affected the development of the logical system con­
tained in Principia Mathematica.
The special concepts Peano assumes for arithmetic are: 
number, successor, and zero. His primitive propositions may 
be cited to show, in a sketchy fashion, how he proposes to 
construct out of these few concepts, with the help of logic 
alone, the system of natural numbers which is the basis of 
arithmetic. In place of his own technical-looking postulates,
I quote the simple and lucid paraphrase of them given by 
Bertrand Russell in his Introduction to Mathematical 
Philosophy* as well as some of his comments.
"The five primitive propositions which Peano assumes 
are:
"(1) 0 is a number.
"(2) The successor of any number is a number.
"(3) No two numbers have the same successor.
"(4) 0 is not the successor of any number.
"(5) Any property which belongs to 0, and also to the 
successor of any number which has the property, belongs to 
every number.
"The last of these is the principle of mathematical 
induction. . . .
"Let us consider briefly the kind of way in which the 
theory of the natural numbers results from these three ideas 
and five propositions. To begin with, we define 1 as 'the 
successor of 0/ 2 as 'the successor of 1/ and so on. We 
can obviously go on as long as we like with these definitions, 
since, in virtue of (2), every number that we reach will 
have a successor, and, in virtue of (3), this cannot be any of 
the numbers already defined, because, if it were, two 
different numbers would have the same successor; and in 
* 2nd ed., London, 1920. See chap, i, especially pp. 5 and 6.

virtue of (4) none of the numbers we reach in the series of 
successors can be 0. Thus the series of successors gives us 
an endless series of continually new numbers. In virtue of
(5) all numbers come in this series, which begins with 0 and 
travels on through successive successors: for (a) 0 belongs 
to this series, and (6) if a number n belongs to it, so does its 
successor, whence, by mathematical induction, every number 
belongs to the series."
None of the concepts here taken as primitive, i.e. number, 
successor, or zero, is a primitive notion of logic in Principia 
Mathematica. Also, to define any one of them in terms of 
p, 
and V, is a baffling demand. Some further primitive
notions would seem to be required for this purpose, but 
instead of taking simply the arithmetical notions them­
selves as primitive, we should like to have concepts which 
are unmistakably logical rather than mathematical. Out of 
what sort of logical material could ‘'number/' "successor" 
and "zero" be made?
The answer is greatly facilitated by an analysis of the 
concept "number," made by mathematicians themselves, 
notably Frege and Peano: they came to the conclusion that 
numbers are classes. The argument runs somewhat like this:
Every instance of a number, say the number 3, is a collec­
tion. A set of triplets, the tones of a triad, the parts of a 
trilogy, the Persons of the Trinity, exemplify the same 
number, and in this they are alike. Each set, or collection, 
is a class, and the numerosity of these classes is all they have 
in common. Their numerosity is 3. Now, if we could define 
this common element in other terms than with reference to 
number, we would then be defining the number 3.
One way of doing this is to take any two such classes, 
say the set of triplets, which I call A, and the tones of a 
triad, B, and note that for every member of A there is just 
one member of B. We do not need to count them to know 
that they are alike.
For instance, we may not know at all how many shoes
316 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
3i7
there are in a shoe-store, but if the proprietor assures us 
that he has no broken pairs, we know that there are just as 
many right shoes as left shoes, because each right is 
assignable to just one left. The members of the one class 
may be brought into one-to-one correlation with the members 
of the other. That is what logicians mean by saying the 
two classes are similar.
Suppose, now, we take a class A, which has a member 
ay i.e. which is not empty; we may say, then,
(3A) (3a) . a c A  
Let us assume, furthermore that
(x): x c A  . O  . x =  a
Any x which is a member of A  is identical with a. A ,  then, is 
a unit class. Now consider the entire class of all those col­
lections which are similar to A . Using a Greek a  for a variable 
term, whose values are classes of individuals, and “sm” 
for “similar,” we may write the propositional form
asm A
as the defining form of the class whose members are classes 
similar to A. This form defines a class of classes, namely 
the class of all unit classes; and this defining form is the 
concept “ 1.”
Since, however, a class in intension may always be taken 
in extension for practical purposes, we are brought to the 
odd but true conclusion that the number 1 is the class of all 
classes similar to any unit class.
By further classification, we derive the fact that “cardinal 
number” as such is a class of all those classes which are 
defined by such a form as “ a  sm A,” “/? sm B,” etc., that 
is, “ cardinal number” is the class of all cardinal numbers; 
and with a little ingenuity this definition may be extended 
to “number” as such, including ordinals as well. In this

way, Peano arrived at the conclusion, epoch-making for the 
whole science of logistics, that number is a class.
I cannot here go into all the problems which undoubtedly 
arise in the reader's mind, such as whether there is really 
a distinction between “ a” term and “one” term, i.e. whether 
(3a) . a € A does not involve the number i, and conse­
quently, whether (x) . ~  (x e A), which would define the 
concept o, does not presuppose o; I can only say that these 
matters have been most carefully weighed by Frege, Peano, 
Russell, and others, who have come to the conclusion that 
the definitions in question are sound and genuine definitions; 
for further explanations one has to consult their writings 
(see bibliography, pp. 352-5). The above explanation is 
intended only to show in a very sketchy and approximate 
way how it is possible to regard numbers as classes, and 
the class of numbers as a class of classes.
The next task which confronts us in logistics, then, is 
to bring the notion of “class” into a logic which so far 
deals only with propositions. Ordinary Boolean algebra 
allows of no such expansion of the propositional calculus; 
it can deal with classes only at the expense of propositions, 
namely by abandoning the interpretation K(p, q . . .) V, . , 
O for K(a, b . . .) + , X, < . What we want is a logic which 
can work these two sets of concepts, these two formal contexts 
together; and here the superior power of the calculus of 
elementary propositions becomes apparent, for with very 
few additional primitive notions, all of purely logical 
character, the combination can be effected.
3. 
F u n c t i o n s
The first of these ideas is gained by regarding a pro­
position, p, as an element which has a certain structure 
itself; that is, instead of beginning the construction of logic 
with unanalysed propositions, we push the analysis back a 
little further, and consider that p is a proposition about 
something. Let p, for instance, mean “ Russia is big.” The
318 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
3J9
proposition is about Russia. But that does not determine 
the character of the proposition, which consists in what is 
said about Russia. For instance, if someone says: “ Russia 
is big,” one might reply: “ The same thing might be said of 
China,” or: “ That cannot be said of Monaco.” Whether 
“that” can be truly asserted depends upon the subject—  
Russia, China, Monaco, or any other individual— the 
dining-table in my house, the Koh-i-noor diamond, or 
Mickey Mouse. This dependent part of the proposition is 
said to be a function of the subject, which means that its 
value (in this case, truth-value) depends on the subject. 
The subject is called the argument to the function. The term 
“function” is borrowed from mathematics. In a mathe­
matical expression such as x +  12, the value of the sum 
depends upon the meaning of x, and the sum is therefore 
called a function of x. But in applying this term to pro- 
positional structures, a good deal of confusion has crept into 
it, which makes the introductory chapters of Principia 
Mathematica very hard reading, unless one distinguishes 
several meanings of “ function.” * For this reason, I have 
somewhat altered its terminology, and used “function” to
* In the first place, there is the sense of “function” here adopted, 
i.e. “function as opposed to argument.” In this sense, a part of 
every elementary proposition or propositional form is a function of 
an individual (or of individuals). The other part is the argument.
In the second place, the meaning of the whole expression, “x is big,” 
depends on the meaning oi x \ as soon as a value is assigned to x, 
the expression becomes a proposition, just as, in “x -f 12,” assigning 
a value to x makes the whole term a number. And just as mathe­
maticians call the sum x -|- 12 a function of x, so the authors of 
Principia Mathematica were led to call the propositional form <f>x a 
function, namely a “propositional function,” with argument x. So 
when they speak of a “propositional function” they do not mean a 
part of a proposition or propositional form, namely the <¡> in <f>x or 
“0 Russia,” but the propositional form itself. When they speak 
merely of a function, they mean <f>.
Thirdly, the term “propositional function” is applied to a function 
of propositions, and “elementary propositional function” to a func­
tion which takes only elementary propositions for its arguments. 
Thus “p is true,” “p is false,” “p is incredible,” “p implies that q

320
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
mean only “function to an argument/' In this sense it is 
usually denoted by a Greek letter p, or where two func­
tions are to be distinguished, one by p and the other by 
ip (or x> or £)• In expressing a propositional form, it is 
customary to write the function first, then the argument; 
so we write
px
for a function <f> with argument x. If p means “is big/' 
<f>x means “x is big."
Now, since every proposition p makes a statement about 
some individual or individuals, and since p means any 
proposition, i.e. any p about any x, then what is true about 
p is true of any px, and what is true about p and q is true 
of any <¡>x and py. Consequently the calculus of p's and q’s 
may be expressed with functions and arguments, i.e. with 
elementary propositional forms, which must hold true where- 
ever any elementary propositions hold true; so we may say
|- : <j>x V px . O . </>x 
f- : py . O . px V py 
|- : pxW py . O . py V px
and so forth; wherever p,q,r, etc., occur, we may sub­
stitute px, py, Xz, etc. There has been no change of 
meaning, only a change of notation; where p denoted an
is im possible/' are functions of the elem entary proposition p. In 
this sense, ~ p  is a function of p; and this function is in turn an 
elem entary proposition, as we know from postulate 7.
Fourthly, the quantified propositional form, (x) . px, is called a 
“ propositional function.“ If p has a specific meaning, {x) . px is, of 
course, a general proposition; if p means “ a given function,“ then 
(x) . px is the form of a general proposition. In Principia Mathematica, 
however, it is called a propositional function of one “ apparent 
variable“ (“ generalterm “ ). T o  avoid confusion I have used “ function“ 
alone for the part of a proposition (or propositional form) denoted 
b y  p (or p, x, etc.); “ propositional form “ for px; “ elem entary 
propositional form “ for a form whose values are elem entary pro­
positions; “ propositional function“ for a function of propositions, 
pp; and “ general proposition“ for (x) . px.

LOGISTICS
321
unanalysed proposition, <f>x denotes a proposition as a 
structure, consisting of function and argument (there might 
be more than one argument in an elementary proposition; 
for instance, in “Brown met Jones/1 if <f> is “meeting“ the 
proposition is of the form <f>x,y. But here we shall regard 
“ meeting Jones“ as a function of x, and tre^t p always as 
meaning <f>x).
This new notation, analysing a proposition into function 
and argument, has some interesting consequences. In the 
calculus of unanalysed propositions, p and q were either 
perfectly identical or entirely different. There was no way 
of expressing that they were distinct but relevant to each 
other. Consequently they could be related only through 
their truth-values, so the calculus of unanalysed proposi­
tions is merely a calculus of truth-values; and as there are 
only two truth-values to be calculated, the whole system 
is very simple, and in itself perhaps not very interesting. 
But with the notions here introduced we have a free field 
for new and important constructions; for now we can see, 
symbolically, the difference between relevant and irrelevant 
propositions in a material implication, i.e. the difference 
between “ 'Jones is a man’ implies 'Jones is mortal/ “ and 
“ 'Jones is a man' implies 'Christmas is in Winter/ “ Both 
statements are of the form p O q; but when the propositions 
are analysed, we have in the one case, “ 'Jones is a man’ 
implies 'Jones is mortal/ “
<f>x O iftx
and in the other,
px O py
There is an obvious structural difference between these two. 
The terms of the first implication have a common ingredient, 
which makes them structurally incapable of meaning simply 
any two propositions of which the former is false or the 
latter true. The second formula, having no common ingre­
dient for its two elements, may mean any material impli­

cation whatever. So it appears that the new analysis of p 
into function and argument complicates its relations to other 
propositions similarly analysed; we can now distinguish 
between different propositions about the same thing and 
different propositions about things not necessarily the same, 
and between propositions which assert different things of 
the same subject, and propositions whose assertions need 
not be of the same nature at all. That is, in place of 
merely two distinct elementary propositions, p and q, we 
have three possible cases of two distinct elementary pro­
positions, p and q:
px and px 
px and py 
px and py
So p O q may mean <f>x O px, px O py, or px O py.
4. A ssu m p t io n s f o r a  Ca l c u l u s o f G e n e r a l P r o po sit io n s 
The most important consequence of analysing a pro­
position into function and argument is, that some functions 
are now found to hold true for any arguments assigned to 
them, some for no arguments, and some for certain argu­
ments but not for others. The notion of “ any argument” is 
here avowed as a new primitive idea. This one new idea, 
together with the analysis of p into px, gives us the means 
of stating a general proposition, namely that p, alias px, 
is true for any value of its argument x; in our familiar 
notation,
(*) • 4>x
The denial of (x) . px serves as a definition of another 
essential notion, (3#); for to say px is not ‘True with all 
values of x,y> is to say it is false for some. Therefore,
~  [(x) . px] : =df . (3 x) . ~  px
“ Tt is false that px is true for every x,y is equivalent by 
definition to: Tor some x, px is false/ ”
322 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
323
Then
(3#) . px means 
[(*) .
that is, "For some x, <f>x is true” means “ It is false that for 
every x, <f>x is false.” So the form of a simple elementary pro­
position, <f>x (called a “matrix” in Principia Mathematica) 
together with the new notation (x), the defined notion (3%), 
and the primitive concept 
gives rise to all four types of 
general proposition:
(*) • <f>x
(3x) . <f>x 
(x) . ~  <f>x 
(3x) . ^  <f>x
General propositions follow all the essential laws for 
specific propositions. Thus,
f- : 
. (x) . </>x . O : (x) . px . V 
. 
(y) . py
h : 
. (3*) .px. O : (Bx) . px 
. 
V . {By) . if>y
h : 
. \x) . px . O : {x) . px . V 
. 
(By) . Py
h : 
. (Bx) .px . O : (3^:) . px 
.V  .(y) .py
and so forth, where (x) . px or (Bx) . <£# stands in place 
of p y and (y) . py or (By) . py in place of q, in the formula: 
p . O . p V q.
Of course, p or q do not mean (x) . px or (3y) . py; the 
calculus of elementary propositions is one thing and the 
calculus of general propositions is another, for in the logic 
of Principia Mathematica px (the analysed term p) has one 
place, and (x) . px, which is derived from it, has another. 
The two calculuses belong to one system; they are not two 
interpretations of one abstract system, but two analogous 
parts within the same system. Consequently it is possible to 
construct formulae containing both elementary propositions 
and general propositions, e.g. :
f- : . (x) . px . V . p : =  : p . V . (x) . px 
“ ‘Everything has the property p, or p is true' is equivalent

to *p is true, or everything has the property of </>.' ” The 
disjunction (x) . <f>x . V . p might mean, for instance, “All 
dinosaurs are dead, or I am much mistaken.” But such 
“ mixed” propositions require very careful treatment and 
some detailed understanding.*
The most important use of the calculus of general pro­
positions is, that by means of it certain functions themselves 
may be related to other functions; that is, it allows us to 
relate not only two propositions to each other, but to 
convey the fact that one of two functions entails the other, 
or is incompatible with, or equivalent to, the other. The 
statement is, indeed, an indirect one; we can speak directly 
only about general propositions, but certain relations 
among these express indirectly relations among functions. 
The propositions which offer a means of relating functions 
themselves to each other, are related propositions having the 
same argument, and are constructed as follows:
Whenever one universal proposition implies another 
universal proposition, as:
(x).<f>x.O.(y).ifiy
the first quantifier, (x), covers the range of all individuals, 
and so does the second one, (y) ; therefore whatever value y 
may take in tfy, it must be one of the individuals for which 
4>x holds, and vice versa. So the possible meanings of 
(x) . <f>x .O  . (y) . ipy always include all the cases where 
x and y mean the same individual, where we have
(x) : <f>x. O . ij>x
“ <f>x implies ij/x, for every value of x.” So we may say:
|- : : (x). <f>x. O . (y). tfy : o  :. (x) : <j>x. O . if>x
* The relation betw een the tw o calculuses is treated a t great 
length in Principia Mathematica under the general “ theory of typ e s/' 
which I have purposely avoided as a subject too advanced for this 
introductory treatise.
324 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
325
This establishes a special kind of general proposition, namely 
an implication between two propositions with the same argu­
ment, for any value of the argument. Instead of two quantifiers, 
we have here only one, which quantifies the total assertion 
not an unasserted term. Instead of: “ 'px is true in all 
cases' implies ‘py is true in all cases/ ” this new proposi­
tion reads: “For any xt </>x implies px” ; e.g. “ For any x, 
‘x is a man' implies ‘x is mortal/ ” This is called a formal 
implication. Wherever it occurs, the first-mentioned function 
entails the other, as “being a man" entails “being mortal.” 
If the implication between px and px is mutual, i.e. if 
we have:
(x) :. px .O . px : px .O . px 
then 
(x) . px . =  . px
just as in the calculus of elementary propositions
pO q . qO p . =df . p = q
Then px and px are said to be formally equivalent. This 
means that p and p may always be interchanged, that they 
denote the same thing, i.e. that p =  p. For instance,
(*) : % is mortal. = . x will die
“To be mortal” is the same function as “to be destined to 
die.” One may always be substituted for the other, with 
any argument.
The calculus of general propositions aims primarily at 
deducing formal implications and formal equivalences. Its 
structure is closely analogous to that of the elementary 
propositional calculus from which it is derived. There is no 
room here to expound or discuss its development; several 
good presentations of it may be found in the literature of 
logistics, notably *10 of Principia Mathematica itself. The 
point I wish to stress is that in this calculus the relations of 
formal implication and formal equivalence are systematically 
developed, and these yield, indirectly, relations of entailment

and equality among functions. The significance of the latter 
will presently be shown.
5. T he D e fin it io n s o f “ Cl a s s ” a n d  “ M e m b e r sh ip”
If we consider a formal implication as a relationship 
between two functions, it is sometimes advantageous to 
write these functions in such a way that the number of their 
arguments is indicated, yet no argument is actually given 
to them, for instance <j> ( 
) . O . ip ( 
). But, since the
parentheses might be imagined to contain more than one 
letter, Whitehead and Russell have adopted the convention 
of writing a letter for the argument, and then indicating 
that it is “eclipsed” or “suppressed” by placing a cap, like 
a circonflex, over it, i.e.
<f>z .O . ipz
This may be read, “the function <f> always entails 
The 
capped letters merely indicate that we have functions of 
one argument apiece; they represent empty places for argu­
ments.*
When functions are thus abstracted from the general 
propositions wherein they might figure, or the specific pro­
positions that might exemplify them, they are treated as 
pure concepts, e.g. “dying,” “being mortal” ; or, in logical 
jargon, they are taken in intension. But, as a previous 
chapter has explained (chap, v, § 3), every concept has an 
intention, or meaning, and .an extension, or range of arguments 
with which it holds. Wherever the function takes a single 
argument, it defines a simple class, i.e. one whose members 
are all given independently of one another. The function 
taken in extension is this class.
It is an old adage in logic that extensions are more useful 
than intensions; by taking functions in extension, we find 
ourselves dealing with classes. If, then, every formal impli­
* This idea comes from Frege, who gave each abstracted function 
its proper number of Argumentsstellen.
326 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
32 7
cation or formal equivalence expresses a relation between 
the functions involved in its universal propositions, then it 
expresses a relation between classes, because the functions 
in extension are classes. A function <f>z taken in extension 
is. written :
è(<f>z)
“The (capped, unnamed) values with which <f>z is a true 
proposition/'
Now, it has been shown that a formal equivalence, such 
as
(x) : <f)X . =  . ifjx
means that <f>è =  
taken in extension,
f- : . (x) : <f)X =  iJj x  : =  . z {<j>z) =  z (ifiz)
That is, “ If <f>x is equivalent to ¡¡sx for every value of x, 
then the class defined by <f>z is identical with that defined 
by w
Here we have a definition of class-equality (identity) in 
terms of formal equivalence among propositions. On this 
basis, a calculus of classes may be constructed, which mirrors 
exactly the conditions of formal equivalence in the calculus 
of general propositions. If, by way of abbreviating our 
symbolism, we let A =  z (<f>z), B =  z (</*), and C =  z (xz)> 
it may be shown that
(x) : <f>x . 
=  . ifjx V xx 
yields A =  B +  C
(x) : <f>x . 
=  . ipx . xx 
yields A =  B x C
(x) : <f>x . 
O . i/jx 
yields A <  B
The familiar calculus of classes may thus be superimposed
on the system of general propositions. Instead of taking 
classes as primitive terms, or ultimate elements of the 
system, Whitehead and Russell choose to define them in terms 
of propositions, and then proceed to show, by virtue of the 
relations which hold among propositions, the Boolean pattern

that obtains among these defined entities. Their approach 
is, of course, much more complicated than that of the 
classical algebra, but it has inestimable advantages.
One of these vital advantages of the more difficult method 
is, that members as well as classes can be named in the 
present system. Just as p and [x) . <f>x or (3x) . <¡>x may 
figure in the same proposition, so x and i (<f>z) may be 
related to each other; we can express the fact that an ele­
ment is a member of a class, by defining membership, €, 
as follows:
x € é (<f>z) . =  . <f>x
“ *x is a member of the class z [<f>z)y means by definition 
*px is true.' ”
This relation, e, is extremely important when we want to 
construct classes whose members are classes, such as we need 
for the logistic definitions of mathematical entities, for 
instance the numbers with which Peano begins his deductive 
system of arithmetic. Numbers, it may be remembered from 
§ 2 of this chapter, were conceived as classes of such classes 
as have certain [defined) memberships. The memberships 
were defined by one-to-one correlation with the membership 
of a given class. All these definitions may now be seen to 
present purely logical constructions. Peano's three primitive 
concepts— number, successor, and zero— may all be made 
from the material of Principia Mathematica. Zero is the 
class of empty classes; i is the class of classes which are not 
empty, and whose members are all identical. *''Successor of 
a number” is the class of those classes just one of whose 
members cannot be brought in one-to-one correlation with 
any member of a class in the given class of classes (i.e. the 
original number). So the more difficult view of classes, which 
underlies their treatment in Principia Mathematica, is 
justified by the demands of the “logistic” programme, to 
construct the concepts of mathematics from material purely 
logical.
328 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
329
6. T he D efinition of “ R elation”
The Calculus of Relations is, simply and frankly, too 
difficult to figure in an introductory book; but a few remarks 
may none the less be made about the possibility and necessity 
of calculating how relations are related to each other. 
Mathematics deals almost entirely with classes that have a 
certain internal order, i.e. classes whose members are all 
those entities which have certain relations to other entities. 
Such classes are said to be defined by a certain ordering 
relation. That is, the defining function of such a class is a 
relation.
As an example, let us take the class of married couples. 
It is the class of all pairs of individuals, x and y, such that 
x is married toy. The defining function of this class is “being 
a married couple,” and this is a function of two arguments, 
<f>x, z. So the class of married couples may be signified by:
№ (4>x,z)
But a married couple is, in turn, defined by the relation
“marrying” ; the function <f>x,z is a relation, and the class
tâ {<j>x,z) is the extension, or range of validity, of a relation.
Obviously there may be formal implications or formal
equivalences among propositions with two arguments apiece,
as well as for propositions of single arguments; that is, we
may have 
, 
x 
^ ,
(x} y) . <px,y O px,y
just as well as (x) . <f>x O px
Such a formal relation, quantified for two elements, ex­
presses indirectly a relation between two functions which are 
relations. Let us call px,%, Rt and px,z, S.
Then 
h : . (x, y) : <f>x,y O px,y . =  . R =  S
As an example, we might quote the relation which holds, 
for numbers, between the relations: “successor of” and 
“greater by 1 than.” Let <f>x,zt or 2?, mean “being the 
successor of,” and pxyzt or 5, mean “greater by 1 than.”

330
Then
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
{x, y) . 4>x,y =  ipx.y
But “successor” is the same relation as “greater by i,” 
because the successor of any number is greater by i than that 
number, and vice versa; so it follows that R =  S.
Now this is an important mathematical proposition. 
It tells us that the series of natural numbers is generated by 
adding i to each new number. This is not, logically, a 
simple idea at all, though psychologically it seems simple 
enough. One of the startling discoveries which Frege, Peano, 
and other logistic-minded mathematicians have made, is 
that many of our most familiar mathematical notions involve 
relations among relations, and are logically very complex 
indeed. The calculus of relations is required for all such 
important subjects as the study of progressions, co-ordinates, 
and types of order generally. But it is more complicated than 
either the propositional calculus or that of simple classes, 
and I will make no attempt to give even an introduction to 
it here. The only points I wish to make are (i) that a function 
of two or more arguments defines a relation, and (2) that the 
class of dyads, or triads, or tetrads, etcdefined by such a 
function is the relation in extension. These two ideas suffice 
to show how a calculus of relations is generated within the 
logistic system we are contemplating.
7. T he S t r u c t u r e of P r in c ip ia  M a t h e m a t ic a
The system of logistics set forth in Principia Mathematica 
starts from very simple ideas, in essence a Boolean algebra, 
somewhat better adapted to the expression of facts about 
proposition than the modified Boolean calculus restricted 
to 0 and 1. But by very ingenious manipulation and definition, 
and the addition of a few, well-chosen, purely logical ideas, 
the calculus of general propositions is derived from that of 
elementary propositions, the calculus of classes from that 
of general propositions; not by reinterpretation of forms

LOGISTICS
331
abstracted from K(py q ,r . . .), K 
V, but by a syste­
matic augmentation of the system, until we have
K(p, q,r .. .), K ’(4>, 
x,y, z), b  V, 
(*)
This is a greater and more powerful system than Boolean 
algebra; it subsumes several systems, each of which, in itself, 
follows Boolean laws. In this great system we can build up 
propositions composed of propositions, functions whose 
arguments are propositions, classes whose members are 
classes; finally, we can define relations as entities, so that 
whole classes, or types, of relations may be studied, and 
relations among relations be established.
On this logical foundation, Whitehead and Russell rear 
the whole edifice of mathematics, from Cardinal Arithmetic 
to the several types of Geometry. The more difficult logical 
problems, notably the "theory of logical types/’ arising 
from the existence of certain fundamental contradictions in 
the construction of propositions and classes, have here been 
completely ignored ; their consideration complicates the 
system somewhat more than the present sketch tends to 
show. What I have tried to outline here is merely the purpose, 
conception, and method of development of the great classic 
of logistic, Principia Mathematica: from the calculus of 
elementary propositions, through the calculus of general 
propositions, the calculus of classes, the formation of classes 
of classes, classes of relations, and finally the calculus of 
relations, to the definitions of all the concepts employed in 
mathematics. This is indeed a great anabasis; and anyone 
who still believes that the powers of logic are exhausted in 
the syllogistic arguments of even the greatest rhetorical 
debate, and that the use of symbols has not materially 
extended that power, is well advised to open one of the three 
completed volumes of Principia Mathematica and study 
the results of symbolic reasoning. If he has ever been awed 
by nature’s miracle, namely, that "Large oaks from little 
acorns grow,” surely he will be moved to respect a Science

332
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
of Logic that derives, by rigorous proofs, all the facts of 
mathematics from the forms of propositions.
8. T he V alue of L ogic for Science and P hilosophy
Many attempts have been made to treat logic as a branch 
of psychology or epistemology; but, great names to the 
contrary, it appears that the development of logic does 
not depend upon psychological findings or metaphysical 
views. How we think, how we learn, what experiences lead 
us to the discovery of forms, is quite irrelevant to the truth 
or falsity of logical assertions. Likewise, whether concepts 
are “subsistent,” or “subjective,” or have prototypes in the 
mind of God, is irrelevant to the relations of concepts to 
each other, which concern us in logic. It is a striking fact 
that the logical propositions enunciated by Leibniz, who 
believed his mind to be a small mirror of the Divine Mind, 
are perfectly acceptable to Bertrand Russell, who regards 
his mind (and Leibniz's) as a transient occurrence of 
“mnemic causations,” and the Divine Mind as a subject for 
poetry. This uniformity of logic, despite the variety of 
psychological origins, and amid the eternal conflict of 
metaphysical doctrines, is even more impressive when we 
come to its most developed part, mathematics. Plato and 
Aristotle, St. Thomas and Duns Scotus, Newton and Spinoza, 
used the same mathematics, depending for possible differences 
only upon the degree of its development in their day. 
Spinoza used 0 as a number (though he may not have 
called it that), and Plato did not, merely because the use of 
0 was introduced into European mathematics after Plato 
and before Spinoza; not because one believed in it and the 
other did not. Their philosophical positions had nothing to 
do with the genesis of their arithmetic, or their principles 
of deduction.
The converse, however, cannot be said; for the advance 
of logic has had a great deal to do with the growth of science, 
and has shifted many a philosophical point of view. There

LOGISTICS
333
are two kinds of influence which logic constantly exercises 
upon all our systematic thought : one, to check the imagina­
tion by revealing implicit paradoxes, and the other, to 
stimulate it by showing what ingenious constructions are 
possible with any given material. When untrained and 
uncontrolled thought comes to a genuine contradiction, for 
instance, in science, to the fact that light is transmitted 
where there seems to be no medium of transmission, a logician 
naturally looks at all the notions involved in the dispute, 
and asks: “What are the presuppositions? What are the 
premises? Could one of the premises be false?— No. Then 
try to reformulate their statement. Try a substitute for the 
notion of 'transmitting/ that won't involve 'medium/ ” 
It is through such reformulations that the great insights 
of science are accomplished, just as by a slight reformulation 
of Boolean algebra the doors are thrown open for a system 
of logistics. Examples could be multiplied indefinitely: the 
substitution of the conception of gravitation among heavenly 
bodies for that of “prescribed paths” or “supporting 
spheres” ; the fertility of this new concept, which let it 
displace notions of terrestial physics, such as “seeking a 
proper level,” as well as astronomical ones; more recently, 
the new concepts of unconscious mini and psychological 
symbolism, introduced by Freud into the study of the human 
mind, to replace the older ones of association and reproduc­
tion which were too weak to describe anything as amazing 
and vagrant as human imagination, or as complex as the 
life of feeling. Whatever one may think of these innovations, 
to a logician they are interesting exploits of constructive 
thought.
In philosophy, of course, logic performs the same office 
as in science; but here, where sense-experience does not 
check our errors all the time, the need for watchful analysis 
of concepts is ever greater. It is no exaggeration, I think, to 
claim that every philosopher should be not only acquainted 
with logic, but intimately conversant with it; for the study

of logic develops the art of seeing structures almost to the 
point of habit, and reduces to a minimum the danger of 
getting lost amid abstract ideas.
Besides these purely methodological aids, logic also 
furnishes a great deal of genuinely philosophical material. 
The origin and status of concepts, their relation to nature 
and to mind, i.e. the whole problem of “universals” and 
*'‘particulars"; the trustworthiness of reason; the relativity 
of language, logical patterns, and “facts” ; these are philo­
sophical problems, which arise directly from logical con­
siderations, from attempts to form certain classes or assert 
certain propositions that meet with contradiction, the 
so-called “ paradoxes” of logic. Furthermore, the problem 
of form and content, of the “viciousness” of abstractions, 
the relation of symbol and sense, all spring from logic, but 
are not themselves logical matters; whatever view we take 
of them, our logical practice will be unaltered, but our 
philosophy may be deeply affected. How a logical formulation 
of material actually generates a philosophy is too long a 
story for this brief note at the end of an essay; besides, I 
have discussed it, with various examples, in another book.* 
Here let it only be said that general logic is to philosophy 
what mathematics is to science; the realm of its possibilities, 
and the measure of its reason.
Summary
The purpose of logistics, a somewhat specialized depart­
ment of logic, is to show that the fundamental assumptions 
of mathematics are all purely logical notions, and that con­
sequently all mathematics may be deduced from a system 
of logic. This undertaking had a great influence upon the 
development of logic, which now had to aim not only at 
consistency, but at fertility of concepts and potency of primi­
tive propositions as well.
* The Practice of Philosophy, N ew  York, 1930 (Henry H o lt and 
Co.), especially P art III.
334 
AN in t r o d u c t io n t o sy m b o lic lo g ic

LOGISTICS
335
All mathematics may be derived from arithmetic; there­
fore the notions required for arithmetic must be the aim 
of logistic construction. These notions, according to Peano, 
are number, successor, and zero. This is, of course, numerical
0, not the o of Boolean algebra, “the empty class“ or “the 
false.“
A “number“ is defined as a class of classes having a certain 
membership.“ The number o is the class of all empty classes;
1, the class of all classes with only identical members. The 
process of forming a “member“ is to define the numerosity 
of a given class without reference to number, and then 
establish the class of all classes similar to it. Two classes 
are similar if the members of one may be put into one-to-one 
correspondence with the members of the other. The concept 
“number,“ itself, denotes the class of all such classes of 
similar classes.
These complex notions are far beyond anything that can 
be made within the system of classes hitherto presented. 
The Boolean formulation of logic is not powerful enough to 
support mathematics. Within its simple canons, it is not 
possible to talk about individuals, propositions, and classes 
together. These belong to different universes of discourse, 
and to pass from one to the other requires reinterpretation 
of the whole system. The task of logistic is, then, first of 
all to construct a logic wherein these various notions, all 
of which will presently be required for mathematics, can 
be used together; and where not only general propositions 
can be asserted, but assertions made about general proposi­
tions. This is the programme of Principia Mathematica.
After establishing the most economical formulation of 
propositional logic (the calculus of elementary propositions), 
the authors analyse the propositions, p, q, etc., into their 
constituent parts, function and argument. Unanalysed, they 
can be known only as identical or distinct, and if they are 
distinct, have nothing in common but their truth-value; 
analysed, they may have function or argument in common.

In this way they may be related more intimately than 
merely by material implication.
The calculus of elementary propositions is extended to 
general propositions by asserting that the function in an 
analysed proposition is true, not with a specific argument, 
but with any or some individual as argument. The notion 
of "any individual,” i.e. the quantifier (.x), is taken as 
primitive; (3#) is defined by means of (x) and 
thus:
~  [(*) • <£*] • = df : (3x) . ^  <f>x
The calculus of general propositions is found to follow the 
pattern of the elementary calculus.
If an implication or an equivalence holds between two 
universal propositions, then it holds for any case where 
the argument is the same in both propositions; that is,
f- : . (x) . <f>x . O . (y) . ipy : O : (x) <f>x O fa 
and 
|- : . (x) . <f>x . =  . (y) . fa : O : {x) <f>x =  fa
the implied propositions express, respectively, a formal 
implication and a formal equivalence. The purpose of the 
calculus of general propositions is to express as many 
formal equivalences as possible.
The importance of formal relations among propositions 
is, that they establish relations between the functions 
involved. 
Thus, 
(x) : <f>x . O . ÿx means that <f>z entails 
ifjz, and (x) : <f>x. =  . fa 
means that the functions are 
identical (interchangeable).
Every function defines a class, namely the class of argu­
ments with which it is true. This class is its extension. The 
function taken in extension is this class. A class defined by 
a function <f>z is written : Z (<f>z).
Relations among functions taken in extension are, then, 
relations among classes; and such relations are asserted in 
every formal implication or formal equivalence. Hence a 
calculus of classes may be derived from the calculus of general 
propositions.
336 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

LOGISTICS
337
In a system where classes are defined through functions 
instead of being taken as "primitive elements,” the relation 
of membership in a class may be defined: a member of a 
class which is the extension of a function, <f>z, is an individual, 
x, such that <f>x is true. Symbolically,
x e z (<f>z) . ==df . <f>x
W ith these concepts, the primitive ideas of Peano’s arith­
metic can be defined.
The greater part of mathematics, however, is concerned 
with kinds of relation: different types of series, point-sets, 
etc. This requires the consideration of relations among 
relations, and relations themselves must therefore be able 
to figure as entities, terms of other relations. This is done 
by regarding a relation as a certain kind of function, namely 
as a function of more than one argument. Taken in extension, 
then, a relation appears as the class of dyads, or triads, 
. . . m-ads, for which the function holds. Its formal definition 
(using R to mean “relation”) is:
R%z. = d f . xz (<f>x,z)
A  calculus of relations can thus be constructed within the 
system of Principia Mathematica, but it is more complex 
than any calculus treated in this book.
The system of logistics set forth in Principia Mathematica 
is a great structure whose parts are separate systems, but 
so connected by definitions and step-wise derivations that 
their elements may be utilized for one great science, mathe­
matics. Transitions from one sub-system to another have 
created some difficulties, which the authors meet by the 
“theory of logical types” ; but this difficult doctrine is a 
subject for more advanced study than this book presents.
The value of logic for science is patent enough from its 
close relation to mathematics, the very framework of 
science. Methodologically, its exploration of unobvious 
forms furnishes many suggestions for the solution of scientific

338 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
dilemmas. For philosophy, logic is indispensable, because 
analysis of concepts is practically our only check on philo­
sophical errors. Also it offers a great deal of direct philo­
sophical material, although the science of logic itself is 
independent of metaphysical views or psychological origins.
QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW
1. What is meant by “logistics” ?
2. How has the conception of a science of logistics affected the 
development of symbolic logic in general?
3. What does Peano regard as the primitive notions of 
arithmetic?
4. What logical concepts does he require for the definition of 
number ?
5. What is meant by calling two classes “similar” ?
6. What limitation of Boolean logic does Principia Mathematica 
set out to transcend? Do you think it is successful?
7. What are the constituents of propositions? What is gained 
by analysing p and q into their constituents?
8. What primitive notion is added to the system to construct 
the calculus of general propositions ?
9. What is meant by “formal implication” and “formal 
equivalence” ? Why are these notions important?
10. How are classes derived from propositions? What is the 
advantage of defining classes, rather than taking them as 
primitive elements ?
11. How may individuals and classes be related?
12. How are relations defined, when they are taken as entities ? 
What is meant by “a relation in extension” ?
SUGGESTIONS FOR CLASS WORK
1. Write out the five formal postulates of the calculus of ele­
mentary propositions with analysed propositions.
2. Express symbolically:
Everything is subject to change, or the pyramids will stand 
for ever.
All men are mortal, and Socrates is a man.
To sleep is always to dream.
Every sleeper rlreams.

LOGISTICS
339
3. Complete these definitions:
p . q . = d f....................
p O q . s=df...................
p =  q . = d f...................
(3*) . 
. = d f............
</>z =  i/jz • =df : ...........
X€Z((f>z) . = df : ...........
4. Using N for *'number/' x +  for "successor of x** and <f> for a 
"property/' express the five postulates for arithmetic 
symbolically.
5. Symbolize:
a. There are Atlanteans.
The function of "being an Atlantean” (in intension).
The class of "Atlanteans."
b. Everybody is somebody's descendant.
The function "descendant of" (in intension).
The class of "descendants."

APPENDIX A
SYMBOLIC LOGIC AND THE LOGIC OF THE 
SYLLOGISM
For those readers who are acquainted with the traditional logic 
of the syllogism, it may be interesting to view it in relation to 
the “symbolic logic'' here presented. The older logic is a proper 
part of the new; and it is apt to be a matter of some surprise to 
find how very small a part it is. In general, it may be said that 
the categorical syllogism is a fragment of the calculus of classes, 
and the disjunctive and hypothetical syllogisms are contained 
in the calculus of elementary propositions.
First, consider the expression of the four categorical pro­
positions that make up the “square of opposition” :
All S is P ----------------------------------A
No S is P ----------------------------------E
Some S is P -------------------------------1
Some S is not P--------------------------O
The first says that the class S is entirely included in the class 
P, or: all S's are P's; the second, that the class S is entirely 
excluded from P, or: no S's are P's; the third, that S is partially 
included in P, or: some S's are P's, i.e. S and P 
overlap; and the fourth, that S is partially excluded 
from P, or: some S's are not P's. There are several 
ways of symbolizing these relationships in Boolean 
algebra:*
1. S <  P 
(x). X € S .O . x e P S X -P =  0
2. S <  -P 
(x(. X € S . O. x € -P S x P =t= 0
3. ~  (S >  -P) (3#). # e S . # e P 
S x P =  0
4. ~  (S <  
P) (3*). X € S . x €-P S x - P  4= 0
F ig . 23
* The equivalence: (a, b) . a <  b . =  . a -b = 0 is established in 
chapter ix as theorem 20. Here its usefulness becomes apparent. 
By the principle of transposition we may derive
(a, b) : ~  (a <b) . =  . ~  (a-b = 0) 
used in 3 and 4 above.

APPENDICES
341
Some S is not P 
Sx-P 4= 0
F ig . 24
It is obvious upon inspection that 1 and 4, 2 and 3, are each 
other's contradictories, as the "square of opposition" shows:
The relation which makes a product 
equal or unequal to 0 is the easiest to use, 
so I shall adopt it for the rest of this ex­
position, though sometimes the proposition 
with <  may also be given, where it is 
psychologically closer to the verbal form.
Since the e-form is to be dropped, and 
the classes S, P, etc., to be taken in 
general, I shall henceforth use lower-case 
italics, but in deference to traditional logic 
write s, p, and m respectively, for "subject- 
class," "predicate-class," and the class which is the "middle term."
A syllogism consists of three assertions, each of type A, E, I, 
or O; in a valid syllogism, the product of the first and second 
propositions implies the third. This is possible only if at least one 
of the premises is a universal proposition. Since all syllogisms 
can be reduced to the "first figure," the six valid moods of this 
figure comprise all valid syllogisms. It would, of course, be just 
as easy to reduce the whole array of combinations to any other 
figure, by conversion or obversion of terms, and inversion of 
premises. The reason for this reducibility of any figure to any 
other rests upon three facts well-known in symbolic logic : (1) that 
it is always legitimate to exchange the premises, because they 
are conjoined propositions of the form p . qy and by the com­
mutative law for propositions, p . q. = . q . p ; (2) that in a class- 
inclusion, such as the premises assert, the order of the terms 
may be inverted with changed signs, by the law of transposition,
i.e. (a, b) : a <  b . =  . -b <  -a; consequently the "middle term," 
on whose position in the premises the figure depends, may 
be put into any position we choose, provided the appropriate 
negatives are used; and (3) that by the commutative law for 
classes, the terms of a class-conjunct may also be exchanged, 
because (ayb) : a .b =  b . a. If, therefore, we wish to reduce a 
syllogism of (say) the second figure,
No p is m 
All s is m
No s is p

342
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
to the first figure, the simplest procedure is to express the above 
implication symbolically,
p <-m  
s < m
s< -p
and then, in equivalent language, with products and equations:
pm =  0 
s-m =  0
sp =  0
In the first formula, p <  -m . =  . m <  -p; so the position of 
the middle term, m, is changed, and the syllogism thereby cast 
in the first figure. To prove its equivalence to the previous form, 
translate it into products
m <  ~p . =  . mp =  0 
mp =  pm
therefore 
m <  -p . =  . pm =  0
So we arrive at the formula above:
pm =  0 
s-m =  0
sp =  0
These three principles—the commutative laws for propositions 
and for classes, and the law of transposition for classes—govern 
the entire art of reduction: inversion, full or partial, conversion, 
simple or by limitation, and obversion.
The next question is what laws, assumed or deduced in sym­
bolic logic, guarantee the conclusiveness of the "valid moods” 
and inconclusiveness of the "invalid” ones. The only law required 
for this purpose is the law of transitivity, which is expressible 
either in terms of <  or of =  :
(a, b, c) : a <  b . b <  c . O . a <  c
or: 
(a, b, c) :. a-b =  0 . b -c. =  0 . 0  : a-c =  0
This is the formula for all valid syllogisms of universal premises 
and universal conclusion. It is the familiar transitivity-formula 
of Boolean algebra, and as it stands, it expresses a syllogism in

APPENDICES
343
the first figure with the premises exchanged: obviously, if we 
want the middle-term to stand first, we may just as well write:
(a, by c) : b -c =  0 . a -b = 0 .0 . a -c == 0
As for syllogisms with a particular premise, they are not so 
readily expressed with < , for which reason I have given pre­
ference to the other notation. Whenever we have a particular 
proposition, “Some S is P,” we have a partial inclusion, or 
overlapping; but <  expresses total inclusions, and can render 
“overlapping“ of a and b only as:
(3c) . c < a . c < b . c * 0  
Of course it is much easier to write:
ab 4= 0
Let us take a syllogism in the mood A 11, in the first figure:
All steel structures are fireproof 
Some garages are steel structures
Some garages are fireproof. 
In terms of products of classes, this becomes
b-c =  0 
ab 4= 0
ac 4=0
b-c =  0 . ab 4= 0 .0  . ac 4= 0 
The proof of this inequality is simple.
ab 4 = 0 . 0 . #  =£ 0 . b 4z 0
b =  be -f b -c =  be +  0 =  be 
ab 4= 0 . b =  be . O . abc 4= 0 
abc <  ac
hence 
abc 4= 0 . 0 . ac 4= 0 
q.e .d .
Since all negative statements may be expressed as positive 
statements about negative terms—e.g., “Some S is not P” may 
be expressed as “Some S is -P,” and negative terms behave in 
the calculus exactly like their positive complements, all syllogisms 
with a particular premise are expressible by the above formula, 
which is a corollary to the law of transitivity.

344
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Two problems of the categorical syllogism remain: (i) the 
treatment of “singular propositions/' and (2) the “weakened 
cases" of the syllogism.
The first of these is easily disposed of. Take, for example, the 
most orthodox of all traditional arguments:
All men are mortal 
Socrates is a man
Socrates is mortal.
If we regard the minor premise as a singular proposition, then 
“is" here denotes a different relation from “are" in the major 
premise; then we have, really,
Men <  mortals 
Socrates e man
from which it follows that Socrates e mortal. Since “Men <  
mortals" means 
“ {x): x e man . O . x e mortal," 
this 
inter­
pretation is permissible. But if we would avoid a dangerous 
trick of language, namely letting “is" (or “are") mean some­
times € and sometimes < , we may regard “Socrates" not as the 
name of an individual, but of a unit class; then the class of 
Socrateses, which has but one member, is included in that of 
men, and therefore in that of mortals; and the “singular" premise 
is simply a universal one, asserting that all Socrateses are men, 
and the syllogism is of the form A A A ;  even though there 
happens to be only one Socrates.
The second problem, namely how to account for the “weakened 
cases" of the syllogism—A A I and E A O in the first figure, 
E A O and A E O in the second, and A E O in the fourth— 
arises from a special condition assumed in Aristotelian logic, 
which the syllogistic formulae of Boolean algebra do not express: 
namely, that in asserting a class-inclusion, it is always taken for 
granted that neither of the classes is empty. Take, for instance, a 
syllogism in the mood A A I in the first figure:
All cats are animals
All animals have feelings
Some cats have feelings

APPENDICES
This is true, if we grant that there are cats. If the example had 
been:
All griffins are animals 
All animals have feelings
345
the conclusion, “Some griffins have feelings,” would not have 
followed, since the class of griffins is 0, and A A I is of the form:
a-b =  0 
b-c =  0
ac =♦= 0
which is valid only if a 4= 0. Therefore it may be said that the 
“weakened cases” are valid if, and only if, the minor term is 
not an empty class.
From this brief account, it may be seen that the categorical 
syllogism is a small part of the algebra of classes, namely, a 
sub-system limited to three terms, other than 0 or l y and their 
respective complements, and setting forth the relations of in­
clusion (partial or total) among these. Thousands of men, through 
thousands of years, have had millions of headaches over the 
24 valid and 40 invalid combinations of theses terms, arranging, 
relating, and naming them. Symbolic logic proves them all 
equivalent to just three forms of a much greater system:
1. a -b =  0 . b -c =  0 .O . a -c =  0
2. 
b -c =  0 . ab =*= 0 .O  . ac 4= 0
3. 
a *¥ 0 . a -b =  0 . b -c =  0 .O . ac * 0
For a true Aristotelian, this exhausts the abstract system of 
logic. Later generations of scholars, however, have added to the 
Aristotelian structure the two syllogisms of compound pro­
positions, known respectively as the hypothetical and the dis­
junctive. Consider, first, the forms of the hypothetical syllogism:
Mixed Hypothetical
Modus ponens 
Modus tollens
If A is B, C is D; 
If A is B, C is D
A is B 
C is not D
C is D
A is not B

346 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
Pure Hypothetical
Modus ponens
If A is B, C is D ; 
If C is D, E is F :
Modus tollens 
If A is B, C is D ;
If C is D, E is not F
If A is B, E is F
If E is F, A is not B
The major premise in the mixed hypothetical forms is an impli­
cation of one proposition by another; the minor is a categorical 
assertion, and so is the conclusion. The whole argument is of the 
form:*
b -pO q 
h -p O q
b • P 
b • ~ q
b - q 
b • ~ p
In the calculus of elementary propositions, we meet with the 
formula:
*3.35 
!- : P • P O q . O . q, or equivalently:
b : p O q . p . O . q, which states exactly the mixed hypothetical 
syllogism in modus ponens.
Since p O
 q . O  . ~  q .0 . ~ p f (*2.16), it is easy enough to 
derive the formula also in modus tollens :
b ' P ^  Ç ^  q • O . ^ p
As for the pure hypothetical in modus ponens, let “A is B” 
=  p, “CisD” = q, “E i s F ” =  r\ then the whole statement 
reads:
b :pO q . qO r .O .pO r
which is * 3.33 of Principia Mathematica, the most familiar form 
of the law of transitivity forO. Modus tollens, then, would be:
which is easy to derive by use of the same principle as above, 
namely *2.16.
* Note that p here is a symbol for any proposition, not for any 
predicate-class.

APPENDICES
347
Any standard logic shows that all hypothetical syllogisms may 
be reduced to these forms, for instance:
In the calculus, this proposition is easily proved, of course, 
from the fact that if pOr, then 
~p\ hence, if qO ~r,
and ~ r o  ~ p ,  then qO ~ p ;  and if qO ~ p , then pO ~q, 
which is the conclusion of the syllogism. This is only one example 
of the transmutations which are possible in the hypothetical 
syllogism; the terms of the two implications in the premises 
may always be exchanged by changing their qualities, the 
premises themselves may be exchanged, just as the “syllogism" 
prescribes; but all these variants are expressible as corollaries 
of one theorem of the calculus of elementary propositions, 
namely
*3-33 
[- :pO q . qOr .O . p Or
being all derived by one principle,
* 2.16 
\- : p O q . O  . ~ q O  ~ p
These two propositions, therefore, constitute the basic forms of 
the hypothetical syllogism.
The disjunctive syllogism, we are told, has two moods, each 
of which presents two cases, in that by denying either term, we 
assert the other, {modus tollendo ponens) and by asserting either 
term we deny the other {modus ponendo tollens). This would give us 
the following four forms :
If A is B, E is F 
If C is D, E is not F
If A is B, C is not D
This argument reads:
f- : pO r . qO ~  r .O . pO ~  q
Modus tollendo ponens
h : pV q . ^  q . O . p
)- : py q . *—'P-^-Ç
Modus ponendo'tollens
\-:p V q .p .O . ~ q
I pV q • q - O . ~ p
The propositions of the first mood are easily proved in the

348 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC 
calculus of elementary propositions; for, since pV q . == . ~ p O  q
(i.e. ^
p) V q), they become respectively,
(r : r^po q . ^  q .O . p
Dem:
- p O q . O .  ^  q'O P
(*2.15)
~ p O  q . ~  q .O . ~  q
(*3-27) -P
therefore
~ p O  q . ^  q . O . p
~ p O  q
Q.E.D.
and:
f- : ~ p O q .  r**p .O . q
which is *3.35, writing ~ p  for p throughout. But the propositions 
of the second mood do not appear in the system of Principia 
Mathematica; the implication is not valid by its rules. The reason 
for this is that, just as the categorical syllogism made an 
assumption about classes which the class-calculus did not (namely, 
that the initially given classes were never empty), so the hypo­
thetical syllogism makes an assumption which the calculus of 
elementary propositions does not: namely, that disjunction 
means exclusive disjunction, either ... or, but not both. Traditional 
logic books, from the Port Royal Logic down, have taken for 
granted that either . . .  or meant one and only one of the two. In 
symbolic logic we have abandoned the tacit acceptance of this 
meaning: and if we wish to adopt it openly, we have to write 
modus ponendo tollens:
f- : .pV q . *—>(p .q) .p:0 . ~ q  
\- m
.pv q. >—>{p .q) ,q .O . >—>p
These forms are perfectly valid; but, since pO p V q, and q . O . 
p V q, the disjunction may be deleted, and only the denial of the 
conjunction, together with the assertion of p (or of q) be written:
f- • 
(p .q) .p .O .~ q  
I- : 
(p . q ) . q . O . ~ p
These propositions are perfectly acceptable; for, since
^  (p • q) • =df . ^  p V 
q
the first becomes:
; r*»./ p V 
q . P • O . 
q 
or: 
\- : pO ~  q . p .0 . ~ p
and the second:
]- : 
p\( ~ q  . q . o . 
p
or: 
'r : pO ~ q  . q .O . ~ p
which are all familiar or easily demonstrable theorems.

APPENDICES
349
It is hardly necessary to point out that a pure disjunctive 
syllogism may always be reduced to a pure hypothetical one, 
in one mood or the other; that consequently all “compound 
syllogisms“ may be formulated in terms of the propositional 
calculus; that they constitute only a very small portion of this 
calculus, being restricted to the following propositions and their 
corrollaries:
*2.l6
pO q . O . ^  q O ^  p
*3-33
\- pO q . qO r .O . pO r
*3-35
\- p O q . p . O . q
cor.
h pO q . ~ q . O .  ^ p
together with the two definitions,
p O q . =df . ~ p V  q
p . q . = df . 
p V 
q)
which account for the interchangeability of forms sanctioned by 
the “laws“ of the syllogism. All the “laws“ of syllogistic logic 
are generalized in symbolic logic; instead of making each new 
exemplification a new and special rule, symbolic logic collects 
the various analogous cases into one formula, that determines 
at once which combinations of terms (positive or negative) are 
valid, which invalid; and having disposed of the syllogism, we 
are free to construct far more elaborate systems, beyond the 
scope of rhetorical thinking, even touching the abstract heavens 
of mathematics.

APPENDIX B
PROOFS OF THEOREMS n a  and lib
These are the proofs of theorems n a  and nb, the associative 
laws for +  and X respectively, not given in the text (chap, ix, § 4) 
because of their length and difficulty. The proof of n a  was given 
by Huntington, following his postulate-set for K{a, b .. .) +, X 
(as theorem 13a).
Theorem n a
(a, b, c) : (a +  b) +  c =  a +  (b +  c)
Dem.
Let
(a +  b) + c =  x, and a +  (b +  c) =  y
Then
-x =  {-a -b) -c
Th. 10a
To prove that x = y, it is sufficient to show that -x +  y =  1 
and -xy =  0.
Lemma 1 
Dem.
hence 
Similarly, 
Lemma 2
Dem.
y  + -a = y  + -b = y  + -c = l  
y  - f  -a =  -a +  [a +  (b +  c)] =  1
Lemma 1 of 10a
y +  -6 =  1 (-6 +  y) =  {-b +  b) (-b +  y)
= -b + by 
IIb, V, IVa
by =  b [a +  (b +  c)] =  (ba) + [b (b + c)]
=  [{ba) +  {bb +  bc)] = ba + b = b
y +  -b =  -b + b =  l 
y +  -0 =  1
-xa =  -xb = -xc = 0
~xa =  0 +  -xa =  -aa +  -xa = a-a 
+  a -x = a (-a +  -x)
a {-a + -x) = a [-a +  (-a -b) -c]
=  a [{~a -J— ab) (-# -j—c)]
a [-a {-a +  -c)] =  a -a =  0
4a

APPENDICES
351
Similarly, 
-xb =  0. -xc =  0 
Lemma 3
y -\--x  = l . y - x  = 0
Dem.
y +  -x =  y +  [(-a -b) -c] =  [(y +  -a)
(y +  -b)](y +  -c) = ( I X  1)1 = 1
y -x =  -x [a -f (£> +  c)] =  -xa +
(-xb +  -xc) =  0 +  (0 +  0) =  0
Therefore, y -\--x  = l . y - x  =  0, or: -x =  -y}
or : x = y  
Q.E.D.
Theorem n b
(a, bt c) : (ab) c =  a (be)
Dem.
(ab) c =  -[(-a +  -b) +  -c] 
10b
a (be) =  -[-« +  (-b +  -c)]
(~cl -{- -b) -}- -c =  -cl -f- (~b -f- -e) 
n a
hence 
- [(-a +  -b) +  -e] =  - [-a +  (-b +  -c)] 
or: 
(ab) c = a(bc) 
q.e .d .

A P P E N D I X  C
T H E  C O N S T R U C T I O N  A N D  U S E  O F  T R U T H - T A B L E S
E v e r y  proposition is either true or false. A  calculus of tru th - 
valu es begin s w ith  propositions assum ed to  be true, or assum ed 
to  be false; w h a t one "ca lcu la te s" b y  th e v e r y  exposition  o f such 
a  system  is th e tru th -va lu e of propositions determ ined b y  th e  
tru th  valu es of th e elem ents (propositions) o rigin ally assum ed. 
F o r instance, if p is assum ed to  be true, ~  p is false ; b u t for a n y  
q th a t does n ot in vo lve  p in its m ak eu p  (as it w ould, if q w ere ~  p, 
or r . p, or r V  p) no tru th -va lu e  is determ ined b y  th e fa c t th a t 
p is true. If, how ever, q is o b ta in ed  w h o lly or p a rtly  b y  an opera­
tion  on pf th e tru th -va lu e  of q depends w h o lly or p a r tly  on th a t 
o f p. F o r in stan ce: if p is true, an d  q =  ~ p ,  q is false; if p is 
true, th a n  p V q is true no m a tter w h a t q is; if p is true, p O  q 
is true if an d  o n ly if q is true ; if p is true, q O p is true no m a tter 
w h at q is.
In  
a  com plete 
tru th -va lu e  
system , 
th e tru th -va lu e s o f all 
o peration ally constru cted elem ents are determ ined b y  those of 
their constitu ents. If, then, w e w ish to  k n ow  w h a t, under variou s 
circum stances, 
w ou ld  
be 
th e 
tru th -va lu e  
of 
th e 
elem en tary 
proposition^) V  q, w e can ex h ib it those circum stances in a  " tr u th - 
ta b le ," or graph, of all th e possible tru th -relation s am on g p, q, 
an d  p V  q, as follow s (using T  for "is tru e " and F  for "is false," 
and ta k in g  th e valu es of th e elem ents preceding th e d ouble-bar 
as arbitrarily given  an d varied) :
T h e  sim plest tab le is, of course, 
th a t w h ich in vo lves o n ly 
tw o  elem ents, p an d  
p i

p 
/~w p
APPENDICES
353
T h e  operation ~  is un ary, V  an d  . are b in a ry ; there are no 
relations of high er degree in th e  calculus. F o rm s lik e pN qV r 
m a y  alw a ys b e tre ated  as(pV q)V rtp V  (qV r), th e  tru th -va lu e s 
o f w h ich  are eq u iva le n t, as th e follow in g ta b le  show s:
p 
q 
r 
pVq qVr (^>V#)Vr />V(#Vr)
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T h e  tab le show s th a t (pW q)W r an d  p V  (q V  r) are eq u iva le n t 
elem ents in th is tm th -v a lu e  system , because th eir tru th -va lu e s 
are alike under all conditions.
T h e  tru th -va lu e s o f all possible elem ents in th e tw o -va lu e d  
calcu lu s 
o f 
propositions 
m a y  
b e 
determ ined, 
therefore, 
b y  
arb itrarily assum ing an d  v a r y in g  th e valu es o f ju st tw o  original 
elem ents. Since negation  yield s n ew  elem ents th a t loo k  as sim ple 
as their progenitors it m a y  ap p ear as th o u gh  w e should list four 
determ in in g elem ents, p, ~  p> q, an d  ~  q\ b u t if w e assum e a  
va lu e  for ^ p — say, T — th en  th a t o f p is F ;  one o f th e p air is

354
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
a u to m a tica lly  determ ined w h en ever th e v a lu e  o f th e oth er is 
arb itra rily assum ed. So w e m a y  sta rt w ith  th e m ax im u m  num ber 
o f term s th a t a n y  of th e operations require, n a m ely tw o, to  
determ ine u n am b igu o u sly th e tru th -va lu e  o f a n y  con stru cted  
elem ent; an d  th e system a tic n ature of th e operations m a y  be 
su rveye d  in one tab le:
T h e  m o st prom inent operation in th e calculus, how ever, is 
O , because it is th e operation w h ich , on th e  logica l level, p erm its 
inference; so, b y  w a y  of illu stra tin g h o w  a  tru th -ta b le  m a y  be 
co n stru cted  to  test th e le g itim a cy  o f a  defined operation, le t us 
look a t th e  conditions under w h ich  th e elem en ta ry p roposition 
p O  q holds or fails (rem em ber th a t p o  q . =  d f . ~  p V  q):
I t  appears from  th e tab le th a t p O q a lw a y s holds e x ce p t in th e 
case th a t p is true an d  q is false, w h ich  satisfies th e cond ition  for 
m aterial im plication . T h ere are, m oreover, no indeterm inable 
cases; th e defined operation, O ,  is legitim ate in th e calculus, for 
it  yield s n ew  elem ents w ith  d eterm in ate tru th -va lu e s.
A  tru th -ta b le  presents th e essential scope of an operation, an d  
m a y  be co n stru cted  to  show  th e  scope o f an entire propositional

APPENDICES
355
system , w herefore it is som etim es called  th e “ m a tr ix ”  of such a 
system . I t  show s u p  in con sisten cy in th e system  (if tw o  valu es are 
assignable to  th e sam e elem ent), incom pleteness (if none is assign ­
ab le in som e cases), an d  incoherence (if it ap plies to  less th a n  a ll 
elem ents).
Som e logicians h a v e  co n stru cted  p ropositional algeb ras w h ich  
eith er do n o t ad m it th e d ich o to m y o f “ tru e”  an d “ fa ls e / 1 i.e. th e 
law :
(p):p =  i . V  .p =  o,
or h a ve  ad d ed  furth er valu es, su ch  as “p is p o ssib le /' “p is 
n ecessary"; their tru th -ta b le s are, in th e first case, in com p lete, 
in th e second m u ch  m ore co m p lex (w hich is n o t a  lo gica l fa u lt, 
o n ly  a p ed ago gical m isfortune). A  fu ll a n d  ex cellen t tre a tm en t 
o f th e w hole su b ject of tru th -ta b le s an d  th eir uses m a y  b e  fou nd 
in th e Symbolic Logic o f L ew is a n d  L a n gfo rd , C h a p ter V I I , to  
w h ich  th e stu d en t is ad vised  to  tu rn  for m ore d eta iled  stu d y .

356
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY
A f t e r  reading the present Introduction, serious students w ill 
probably find them selves drawn to different special fields w ithin 
the scope of Sym bolic Logic. A  certain am ount of further general 
reading is h igh ly desirable, and should be undertaken first; after 
that, the reader should be able to strike out in w hatever direction 
he chooses, pursuing logistics, or postulational theory, or the his­
tory of sym bolic logic, according to his tastes. T h e  follow ing bib ­
liography is restricted to works available in English. A n  attem pt 
has been m ade to list suitable readings in order of exposition, or, 
where this is p aten tly im possible, in order of difficulty; b u t of 
course neither arrangem ent has been entirely feasible. A nyon e 
who is in need of a more com plete bibliography m ay be referred 
to the one appended to L ew is’s Survey of Sym bolic Logic, w hich 
lists the literature to 1918. “ A  B ibliograph y of Sym bolic L o g ic,” 
b y  A lonzo Church, was published in 1936 as V ol. I, N o . 4 of the 
Journal of Sym bolic Logic. A dditions and corrections and indexes 
(b y  authors and b y  subjects) were published in the sam e periodi­
cal, Vol. 3, N o . 4 (19 3 8 ), pp. 1^ 8 -2 12 . C opies of V ol. I, N o . 4, 
of the Journal and separately bound reprints of the additions and 
corrections and indexes m ay be purchased from  the Association 
for Sym bolic Logic, P.O . B ox 6248, Providence, R .I., 02904.
T h e  follow ing works are especially recom m ended for further 
stud y:
G e n e r a l
1. R u s s e l l , B .: “ L o gic as the Essence of P h ilosop h y,” in M y sti­
cism and Logic. London: G eorge A llen &  U nw in, L td ., 1918. 
N e w  Y o rk : Barnes and N oble, 1954. A  general discussion 
of “ logical form ” versus “ content,” and its im portance for 
philosophical thinking.
2. R o y c e , J.: “ Principles of L o g ic,” in W indelband and R u g e ’s
Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences, V ol. I, E ng. 
transl. London, 19 13 . A n  essay treating logic as the science 
of forms.
3. Lewis, C . I.: Su rvey of Sym bolic L ogic. B erkeley, California,
19 18 ; D o ver reprint, i960 . C overs in greater detail the 
system s here set forth, as w ell as certain system s I have not 
touched upon.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY
357
4. R u s s e l l , B .: T he Principles of M athem atics, V ol. I. C a m ­
bridge, 1903; W . W . N orton  &  C o., Inc., 1938. P a rt I, 
w hich deals w ith sym bolic logic, is the only p art here recom ­
m ended. L ater parts deal en tirely w ith  the derivation of 
m athem atics.
5. L e w i s , C . I., and L a n g f o r d , C . H .: Sym bolic Logic. N e w
Y o rk , 1932; D o ver reprint, 1959. C ontains the com pleted 
version of the “ system  of strict im plication” introduced in 
L ew is’s Survey of Sym bolic L ogic, as w ell as some new ven ­
tures in logical theory.
6. W h it e h e a d , A . N . and R u s s e l l , B .: Principia M athem atica,
V ol. I, 1st ed. C am bridge, 1910 , 2nd ed. 1925. Sections A  
and B of this great w ork should now be attem pted.
L o g is t ic s
1. R u s s e l l , B .: “ T h e  T h e o ry of C o n tin u ity,” “ T h e  Problem  of
In fin ity,” “ T h e  P ositive T h e o ry  of In fin ity ” : all in Our 
Know ledge of the External W orld . London: G eorge A llen  &  
U nw in, L td . N e w  Y o rk : H um anities Press, Inc. T h e se are 
very readable essays, and therefore a good initiation to the 
difficult problem s of m athem atics. Since R ussell has been 
the m ost active and prolific E nglish writer on logistics, it is 
natural that the next works to be recom m ended are also his.
2. _______ Introduction to M athem atical Philosophy. London:
G eorge A llen &  U nw in, L td ., 19 19 . N e w  Y o rk : H um anities 
Press, Inc. A  brief but m asterly presentation.
3. _____ The Principles of M athem atics, V ol. I (no later volum e
has appeared). T h e  later parts m ay now be read.
4. D e d e k in d , R .: Essays on the Theory of N um bers. E ng. transl.
Chicago, 1909; D over reprint, 1963. T w o  contributions b y  
one of the Germ an pioneers in logistics.
5. L e w i s , C . I.: “ T y p e s  of Order and the System  2” (am ong
Papers in H onour of Josiah R oyce on his Sixtieth B irth d ay), 
Philosophical R eview , 19 16 . Expounds the logic of R oyce.
6. Q u i n e , W . V . O .: A System  of Logistic. Cam bridge, M ass.,
1934. A  difficult but significant little book.
P o s t u l a t e  T h e o r y
1. 
Y o u n g , J. W .: Lectures on the Fundam ental Concepts of 
Algebra and Geom etry. N e w  Y o rk , 1 9 1 1. T h is book, though 
from  its title one would expect to find it under L o g is t ic s ,

358
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
is a clear and not too difficult introduction to the technique 
of choosing postulates and deducing theorems, i.e. of con­
structing deductive system s.
2. H u n t i n g t o n , E . V .: “ Sets of Independent Postulates for the
A lgebra of L o g ic,” in Transactions of the Am erican M a th e­
m atical Society, V ol. 5, pp. 288-30 9 (19 0 4 ). T h is is the 
paper from  w hich the postulate-sets for Boolean algebra, 
em ployed in this book, have been taken.
3. H u n t i n g t o n , E . V .: “ Postulates for Assertion, Conjunction,
N egation , and E q u a lity .” Proc. Am . Acad, of Arts and 
Science, V ol. 72, N o . 1 (1937).
4. H il b e r t , D .: Foundations of Geom etry. C hicago, 1910 . A
discussion of postulate-technique b y  an em inent m athem a­
tician and m athem atical logician.
5. H u n t i n g t o n , E . V .: T he Continuum  and O ther Types of
Serial Order. Cam bridge, M ass., 1917. D o ver reprint, 1955.
Further postulate-sets w orth y of stu d y are:
S h e f f e r , H . M .: “ A  Set of F iv e  Independent P ostulates for 
Boolean Algebras, w ith A pp lication  to L o gical C on stan ts.” 
Trans. Am er. M ath. Soc., V o l 14 ( 1 9 1 3 ) . T h is paper is 
im portant for the introduction of the “ stroke function,” 
adopted b y  W h itehead and R ussell in their second edition 
of Principia M athem atica.
B e r n s t e i n , B . A .: “ A  Set of Four Independent P ostulates 
for Boolean A lgebras.” Trans. Am er. M ath. Soc., V ol. 17 
( 1 9 1 6 ) .
H u n t i n g t o n , E . V .: “ A  Set of Independent P ostulates for 
C y c lic  O rder.” Proc. N at. Acad. Sci., V ol. 2 ( 1 9 1 6 ) , N o . 11.
--------- “ Com plete E xistential T h e o ry  of the P ostulates for
Serial O rder.” Am er. M ath. Soc. B u ll., V ol. 23 ( 1 9 1 7 ) .
_____“ N e w  Sets of Independent Postu lates.” Trans. Am er.
M ath. Soc., V ol. 35 (19 3 3 ).
H u n t i n g t o n , E . V . and K l i n e , J. R .: “ Sets of Independent 
P ostulates for Betw eenness.” Trans. Am er. M ath. Soc., 
V ol. 18 ( 1 9 1 7 ) .
_____ “ A  N e w  Set of Postulates for B etw eenness.” Trans.
Am er. M ath. Soc., V ol. 25 (19 2 4 ).
C h u r c h , A .: “ O n  Irredundant Sets of P ostu lates.” Trans. 
Am er. M ath. Soc., V ol. 27 (1 9 2 5 ).
H is t o r ic a l
i. 
S h e a r m a n , 
A . T .: 
T he D evelopm ent of Sym bolic Logic. 
London, 1906. A  general history, brief and readable.

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY
359
2. L e w i s , C . I.: Survey of Sym bolic Logic, C h ap. i. M ore detailed
stu d y of really significant phases of, and the chief contrib­
utors to, sym bolic logic.
A fte r these introductory readings, the student m a y be referred 
to the chief historical sources (such as are available in E n g lis h ):
3. D e M o r g a n , A .: Form al Logic. London, 1847.
4. B o o l e , G .: A n Investigation of the Law s of T hought. London,
1857. D o ver reprint. A lso reprinted as V ol. 2 of B o o le’s 
C ollected Logical W orks, C hicago, 19 16 . T h is is the original 
presentation of the “ A lgebra of L o g ic,” from  w hich sym ­
bolic logic m ay be said to have sprung.
5. M a c C o l l , H .: Sym bolic Logic and Its Applications. London,
1906. Presents a system  of logic w hich is not a “ B oolean ” 
system .
6. L ad d- F r a n k l i n , C .: “ O n  the A lgebra of L o g ic,”
7. M i t c h e l l , O. H .: “ O n a N e w  A lgeb ra of L o g ic,”
8. P e ir c e , C . S.: “ T h e  L o gic of R ela tives.”
A ll three in Studies in Logic b y  M em bers of Johns H opkins 
U n iversity, Boston, 1883. T h ese three papers, besides being 
of considerable intrinsic interest as so m an y experim ents 
in the form ulation of “ logical algebras,” afford excellent 
practice in reading a va rie ty  of sym bolism s.
9. F r e g e , G .: T ran slated  Portions of his W orks in T he M onist,
Vols. 25 ( 1 9 1 5 ) , 26 ( 1 9 1 6 ) , 27 ( 1 9 1 7 ) . O ne of R u ssell’s 
m ost im portant sources, not easily available. H ard  to read 
because of unfortunate sym bolism .
10. 
C o u t u r a t , L .: T he Algebra of Logic. E n g. T ran sl. C hicago, 
19 14 . A  sum m ing-up of the “ Boole-Schroeder A lgeb ra ,” in­
clusive of the tw o-valued algebra of propositions. C ou tu rat 
uses <  both for inclusion and im plication, in the sam e 
proposition. T h e  task of distinguishing its “ constituent” 
uses from  its “ logical” ones affords a good exercise.
A d d e n d a , 1952
T h e  follow ing books, valu able to students of this Introduction, 
have appeared since its original publication:
1. C o o l e y , Jo h n  C .: A Prim er of Form al Logic. N .Y .: 
T h e
M acm illan  Co., 1946. A  useful, straightforw ard textbook.
2. R e i c h e n b a c h , H a n s : Elem ents of Sym bolic Logic. N .Y .: T h e
Macmillan Co., 1947.

3. T a r s k i, A l f r e d : Introduction to Logic, and to the M eth od ­
ology of the D eductive Sciences. Tran sl. b y  O la f Helm er. 
N .Y .: O xford U n iversity Press, 19 4 1. 2nd revised ed., 1946. 
A n  authoritative w ork, not easy, bu t rew arding; discusses 
the 
bases 
of 
arithm etical 
operations, 
and 
offers 
m any 
exercises.
4. Q u i n e , W il l a r d  V . O .: M ethods of Logic. R evised ed., H olt,
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1959.
5. C a r n a p , R u d o l f : Foundations of Logic and M athem atics.
C h icago: U n iversity of C h icago Press, 1939 (fifth  im pres­
sion, 19 4 9 ). V ol. I, N o . 3, of the International E n c y clo ­
paedia of U nified Science. A  sem antic treatm ent of logic.
6. W o o d g e r, J. H .: 
T he Technique of Theory Construction.
C h icago: 
U n iversity 
of 
C h icago 
Press, 
1939 
(second 
im pression, 
19 4 7 ). V o l I I , N o . 
5, of the International 
E n cyclop aed ia of U nified Science.
7. R o s e n b l o o m , P a u l : T he Elem ents of M athem atical Logic.
N .Y .: D o ver Publications, Inc., 1950. A  book for m athem a­
ticians who wish to be introduced to sym bolic logic.
36o 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC

INDEX
Absorption: see under Law
Abstraction: and generalization, 17, 240 f.; nature of, 33 ff., 38, 
42 f.; fear of, 34, 43; and interpretation, chap. X, passim; 
how attained, 245, 262
Addition, Principle of: 298
Adinity: 50 n.
Algebra: kinds of, 17; and abstraction, 34; definition of, 207; see 
also Boolean algebra
Analogy: chap. I, sect. 5, passim; as common form, 29, 258 1 ; as 
*'‘logical picture,” 29 if.; and representation, 30 ff., 42; among 
propositions, 84, 301 f.
Application, Principle of: 210, 236, 300 f.
Argument: to a function, 319 ff., 335
A r is t o t l e : see Traditional logic
Assertion: of relationships, 51; understood, 52, 61; joint, see Con­
junction; total, 86; about assertions, 291, 309; as primitive 
idea, 292, 296, 306 n., 309; sign of, 293 f.; principle of, 305
Axiom: 184 f.
B o o l e, G e o r g e : 90, 208, 254, 313
Boolean Algebra: 17 1 , 174, 208, 236; abstract, 253 ff., 264, 305 f.; 
interpretations for, 255; two-valued, 260 ff., 264, 270, 282; 
and logistic, 294 1 , 335; and traditional logic, Appendix A, 
passim
Boole-Schroeder Algebra : see Boolean algebra
Calculus: nature of, 199 i , 235; of classes, 200, 203, 235 f.; formality 
of, 235, 238; of propositions, chap. XI, passim, 287; of ele­
mentary propositions, 295-308, passim, 309, 314, 335; of 
truth-values, see Truth-values; of general propositions, 
322-326, passim, 335; of relations, 329 1, 337
C a r n a p , R u d o l p h : 18
C h a p m a n , F. M i l l e r : 259
Class: symbol for, 69, 327; nature of, 114I; and concept, 115 1 , 
130; sub-, 117ÎÏ., 130; unit-, 119, 131, 317; null-, 1221, 
128, 131, 144, 147, 169, 172, 344; universe-, 123, 127, 131, 
144, 170 f., 172; intension of, 125, 153; extension of, 125!, 
153» 33°; identity o f— es, 1255., 131, 327; complementary, 
143 1, 147 ff., 154, 194, 218, 223; sums and products of — es, 
138!, 153!, 194, 223 f., 327; in traditional logic, 160; as 
constructs, 1601, 166, 326, 336; as primitive concept, 167, 
170, 179; similar — es, 317, 335; and predicates, 159 f.„ 
164 f., 177

AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC
362
Coherence: 185, 202 
Commutative Law : see under Law 
Complement : see under Class 
Composition, Principle of: 305
Concepts: scientific, 35 ft., 65, 333; as abstracted forms, 36, 43; 
and conceptions, 65, 79, 313; class-, 115 1; intension of, 115, 
130; extension of, 122, 130, 326; primitive, 167, 174, 225, 
291, 296, 303, 309, 314 if., 323
Conjunction: of propositions, 75, 80, 267; of classes, 138 f.; and 0, 
141 1; of predicates, 162 i ;  169; definition of, 303 
Connexity: 251 
Consistency: 186 i, 201 f.
Content: and form, see Form; for scientific concepts, 37; and 
instance, 37
Context: for common sense, 64 1 , 79; formal, 66-79, passim, 82, 
166 f., 174, 224, 331; with many relations, 161; with predi­
cates, 162; conjoined formal— s, 318 
Contradiction: 76, 185, 187, 201 
Contraposition: see under Law 
Contributiveness: 185, 202 
Converse: 83, 84; see also Traditional logic 
Correlation: 317, 329, 335
Definition: importance of, 135; of inclusion, 135; of terms and 
relations, 151; — s in class-system, 192, 227, 232 1; of o> 
296; of number, 316 
Degree: see Relations 
D e  M o r g a n , A u g u s t u s : 170, 242 n., 313 
D e s c a r t e s, R e n é : 312 
Dichotomy, see Negation
Disjunction: of propositions, 75, 80, 268; of classes, 139; exclusive 
and non-exclusive, 141, 348; of predicates, 163; as primitive 
notion, 296
Distributive Law: see under Law 
Duality: 221, 225; laws of, see under Law
Elements: as abstractable factors, 47; as terms, 49, 61, 167; in 
language, 51; in K, 69 f., 97, 167, 1701 , 260; specific and 
general, 103, 109, 206, 240 f. ; new, 193 f. ; identity of, 95, 
104 n., 120 f., 1941, 213, 218; confused with propositions, 
2801, 289, 295, 309; abstract, 245, 254; unique, difficulty 
of, 288, 309
Equality: as defined relation, 192; as primitive notion, 197; as 
logical constant, 197 n., 255 n.

INDEX
Equivalence: meaning of, 135; by definition, 135, 273; of expres­
sions, 1491, 154, 221, 2361; importance of, 152; definition 
of, 305 1; of propositions, 306; formal, 325, 336 
E u c l i d : 184, 185, 201, 312 
Exclusion: see Inclusion 
Exemplification: see Application 
Expansion : see under Law 
Exportation, Principle of: 305
З63
Factor, Principle of: 305 
Figure: see Traditional logic
Form: chap. I, passim ; changes of, 21 if.; synonyms for, 2 3!; 
logical, 24, 42, 53, 76, 105; as structure, see Structure; and 
science, 22, 26; and content, 26 ff., 42, 245; propositional, 
see Propositional form; of systems, 106, 252; defining, see 
under Propositional form; of propositions, 32 1 , 289, 320 
Formalization: degrees of, 91, 99, 240, 262; of relations, 244!, 
262 f.
F r e g e , G o t t l o b : 90, 274 n., 293 n., 316, 318, 330 
Function: propositional, 90 f.; meanings of, 319, 335; related — s, 
324 i, 336; and class, 326, 336
Generalization: and abstraction, see Abstraction; and specification, 
chap. IV, passim, 241; of class-system, 167, 170, 180; of 
arithmetic, 207; degrees of, 242, 262
H e n l e , P a u l : 7, 259
H u n t in g t o n , E d w a r d  V.: 191 n., 213, 225, 232, 254 n.
Implication: and preclusion, 75, 80; sign of, 75, 80; properties of, 
267, 272; material, 2760., 284, 300, 321; mutual, 306; 
formal, 325
Importation, Principle of: 305
Inclusion: and membership, 125, 130, 135; symbol for, 134; types 
of, 137, 153; as primitive concept, 167, 170; mutual, 125!, 
131, 169, 192, 226; defined, 226!, 237; spatial, 258 
Individual: in specific propositions, 112, 129; and class, 113, 171, 
336; as value, 118; in elementary propositions, 295, 309 
Inference, Principle of: 210 1 , 236 
Instance: 37, 105, 130, 253, 316
Interpretation: and abstraction, 37!, 43, 109, 261; of signs, 58, 
61; “equals by,“ 58, 88, 167, 174, 241, 244 f.; of abstract 
systems, 255, 269 ff., 283, 287

364 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC 
Intuition: logical, 33, 35; and diagrams, 166; and axioms, 184 f.
Knowledge: kinds of, 22, 42, 184; of forms, 32, 35, 77; sources of, 188
Language: ambiguity of, 51, 53, 61; conventions of, 90, 121 
Law: — s of language, 31; — s of arithmetic, 206; — s of Boolean 
algebra, 211, 221, 233 1, 236; commutative, 212, 225, 233, 
268 1, 298, 304, 307, 341; distributive, 212, 234, 268, 307; 
of tautology, 214!, 233, 298, 307; of absorption, 217, 234; 
of expansion, 218, 234; of contraposition, 219, 234, 306 f., 
341; of double negation, 219, 234, 302, 307; of association, 
220, 233, 268, 298, 307; of duality, 223, 234, 237; of unique 
elements 1 and 0, 234; of excluded middle, 262; of contra­
diction, 305 ; of transitivity, 342 ; — s of thought, 262, 300 
L e ib n iz , G o t t f r ie d  W. : 312 
L e o n a r d , H e n r y  S. : 7 
L e w is, C l a r e n c e  I.: 224
Logic: nature of, 17, 39, 40, 43, 240; relation to science, 17, 19, 40, 
332, 337; algebra of, see Boolean algebra; relation to philo­
sophy, 40, 41, 43, 332 ff., 338; technique of, 18, 41; validity 
of, 279
Logical Constants : see Logical relations
Logistic: chap. XIII, passim’, and Boolean algebra, 18, 331, 335; 
power of, 287, 308, 331
M a c h , E r n s t : 18
Mathematics: logical derivation of, 17, 313-318, passim, 328, 331; 
growth of, 60; derivations from, 90!, 197; abstractness of, 
312; primitive ideas of, 314 ff., 335, 337; importance of, 40 
Matrix: 323
Meaning: in natural language, 53; of “is,” 561 ; and intension, 
115, 130, 274; alternative, see Interpretation; and logic, 300 
Membership: symbol for, 113; and part-whole relation, 113 f., 130; 
in sub-classes, 118; in unit classes, 120; and class-inclusion, 
125; common, 137; denial of, 144 ff.; and predication, 159 f., 
178; definition of, 328 
Modus Ponens: see Traditional logic 
Modus Pollens: see Traditional logic
Negation: sign of, 72; with quantifiers, 107, 176; dichotomy by, 
142-146, passim, 218; double, see under Law; as primitive 
concept, 296
Number: concept of, 313, 316!, 328, 335; natural, 315; -series, 316

INDEX
365
Operation: upon elements, 54 n., 193, 200, 202; symbols of, 194, 
202; as primitive notion, 195, 202; degree of, 197, 202; 
manipulation of, 199; and relations, see under Relations; 
logical, 268
Peano, Giorgio: 90, 113, 207 n., 305, 315, 316, 318, 330 
Peirce, Charles S.: 50 n., 313 
Permutation: see Tautology 
Poincare, Henri: 18
Postulate: meaning of, 183, 201; and axiom, 184 1 ; choice of — s, 
185, 186, 232, 237, 308; requirements for, 185 ff., 201; — s for 
K(a, b . . .) > 2, 1 9 0 ! , 231 1 ; — s for K(a, b . . .) + , x , =, 
197 ft., 
20 81, 
225, 
232; 
types of, 
209, 
236; —s for
K(a, b . . .) x , 224; — s for K(a, b . . .) +, 225; -set, 183, 
202, 250; — s for series, 250; — s for K  (a, b . . .) @, ®, = , 
255, 3° 3 > "all or none/' 261, 264, 298; — s for K  (p, q . . .) ., 
V, 270; spurious, 290; — s for K  
V, 296 if.;
informal, 296, 297, 299 
Preclusion: see Implication
Predicates: and terms, 157; as monadic relations, 158, 177; use of, 
159!, 177 ff.; generalized, 161
Premise: exchange of — s, 341; major and minor, see Traditional logic 
Preposition: as expressing relation, 51 
Principia Mathematica: see Whitehead and Russell 
Product: see Conjunction
Pronouns: as variables, 89 f.; of symbolic language, 91; indefinite, 
107, n o
Proposition: structure of, 50, 160; symbolic expression of, 57, 61, 
161, 322 1; elementary, 71, 79, 168, 289, 295 1, 309; general 
and specific, 98 ft., 171ft., 179; general, application of/112; 
general — s and classes, 126, 178; compound, 163, 178; 
granted, 73, 77 f., 80, 82, 100, 164 ft., 169, 173, 179, 183 f., 
191, 194; singular, 344; — s as terms, 269, 283; and truth, 
2741, 296, 300, 309; asserted and unasserted, 293, 309; 
primitive, see Postulate
Propositional Form: meaning of, 90 ft., 108; quantified, 99, 109, 
322; defining, n 6 f., 126, 128, 130, 317; negated, 144; 
predicative, 159, 161-165, passim, 320
Quantifier: chap. IV, sect. 5, passim; symbols for, 93 ft., 108; 
— s of natural language, 106; manipulation of, 124, 176; in 
predicative structures, 162 ft., 178; order of, 97, 209; sup­
pressed, 299 f.; definition of, 322
Range: see Variable 
Reduction: see Traditional logic
Reflexiveness: of relations, 247, 251, 263; of propositional calculus, 
278-281, passim, 284

366 
AN INTRODUCTION TO SYMBOLIC LOGIC 
R e ic h e n b a c h , H a n s : 18
Relations: and structure, 45 f., 60, 157, 235, 290; expression of, 
48-59» passim, 61; and terms, 49, 267; degree of, 50, 55, 61, 
158, 160, 246; and predicates, 157 f., 160 n.; and operations, 
193 £i., 253; properties of, 246-251, passim, 263; serial, 
250!, 263; definition of, 329; and functions, 329 1; among 
relations, 329 i, 337; calculus of, 330, 336 f.
Constituent Relations: meaning of, 70, 79; characteristics of, 83, 
101, 104, 182, 249 f., 263; derived, 135, 155, 226; interpreted, 
241 ; uninterpreted, 243 ff., 263
Logical Relations: meaning of, 74; as constants, 74; forms of, 
75; list of, 75, 80; symbols for, 75, 80; in a system, 83 fi., 95; 
among predications, 162 ff.; properties of, 2671, 283; as 
constituent relations, 268 1, 272 ff., 282, 290, 309 
R o y c e , J o s ia h : cited, 39
R u s s e l l , B e r t r a n d : 18, 22, 31, 90, 207 n., 318; cited, 32 f., 315 f.; 
see also W h it e h e a d  and R u s s e l l
S c h r o e d e r , E r n s t : 90, 254
Science: aims of, 21, 78; concepts in, see Concepts; methods of, 
38, 43 ; and classification, 126 
Self-Evidence: 184 f., 189, 201 
Series: 251 ff., 263
Sh e f f e r , H e n r y  M.: 7, 50 n., 74 n., 91 n., 254 n.; cited, 279 
Specification: “equals by,“ 8 8 1 ; entailment by, 112, 173; see also 
Application
S p in o z a, B e n e d ic t : 312, 332 
Square of Opposition : 340
Structure: 24 ff., 42; and construction, 25; similarities of, 39, 243 1 ; 
of language, 31, 42; obscured, 55, 167; essentials of, chaps. 
II and III, passim, 80; of class-system, 183; breakdown of, 
289; of propositions, 318-322, passim 
Substitution, Principle of: 210, 236 
Summation, Principle of: 299
Syllogism: principle of, 303; categorical, 340-345; passim; hypo­
thetical, 345 ff. ; disjunctive, 347 ff.
Symbols: manipulation of, 18, 41 1 , 177; purpose of, 52, 194; types 
of, 52, 295; importance of, 57, 60, 136, 331; arbitrariness of, 
58, 75, 243; principles governing use of, 58, 62 ,152 1, 175 1, 
180, 211 ; variable, see Variable; and objects, 259 
Symmetry: 247, 251, 263
System: meaning of, 76, 80; deductive, 77, 80, 182 1 , 201; inductive, 
78, 80; mixed, 78, 80; statement of, 82 ff., 99 ff.; regularities 
of, 84, 108; comparison of — s, 103 1, 170, 263, 298 ff., 310; 
logical level of, 174; kinds of, 250 ff.; generalized, 103, 
171 ff.

INDEX
367
Tautology: see under Law 
Terms: see Element
Theorems: nature of, 186 f., 202; elementary, 211; of Principia 
Mathematica, 300
Proof of: ia, 213; 2b, 214; 3a, 215; 4b, 217; 5a, 218; 6, 219; 7, 
219; na, 350Í; nb, 351; 10a, 221 f.; 12, 126; 13, 227; 
14a, 228; 15a, 228; 16, 228 1; 17a, 229; 18b, 229; 19, 229!; 
21, 231; *1.6, 299 n.; *2.02, 300 i ;  *2.04, 302; *2.05, 302; 
*2.06, 302 f.; *2.21, 303 
Theory of Types: 324 n.
Traditional Logic: sympolic expression of, 17; typical propositions 
of, 106 f. ; dichotomy in, 142; predicates in, 157, 160; and 
classes, 160; and Boolean algebra, 262, Appendix A, passim ; 
and syllogism, 303 
Transitivity: 247 1 , 251, 263 
Transposition: see Contraposition under Law
Truth: and falsity, 71, 73, 76, 80, 90 f., 108, 270, 296, 309; of 
premises, 184 1, 202; and validity, 188 f., 202 
Truth-value: meaning of, 71, 73, 80; granted, 82; consistent — s, 
76; and propositions, 90, 97, 306; of postulates and theorems, 
188; calculus of — s, 273 ff., 284, 288, 321
Universe of Discourse: 68 f., 70, 79, 82 f., 101; generalized, 103; 
dichotomy of, 142 if., 153; confusion with 1, 170!; greatest, 
242 f.
Value: for variable, 87 ff., 108 i, 117 !, 121, 130, 177, 260; for 
propositional form, see Propositional form; exemplary, 261; 
interpretational, 261
Variable: 85-93, passim, 108 i, 207; relation-, 244, 264; see'dlso 
Value
V e n n , J o h n : 170
Verbs: as names of relations, 50 f.; double function of, 51; auxiliary, 
51, 56; and assertions, 293
W h it e h e a d , A l f r e d  N.: 90
W h it e h e a d  and R u s s e l l : Principia Mathematica of, 18, 90, 135 n., 
282, 285, chap. XII, passim, 314 1 , 330 ff., 337; cited, 304 f„  
306 f.
Y o u n g , J o h n W .: 207


A CATALOGUE OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS 
IN ALL FIELDS OF INTEREST

A CATALOGUE OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS 
IN ALL FIELDS OF INTEREST
A m e r ic a ’s O ld M a ster s, Jam es T . Flexner. 
Four men emerged unexpectedly 
from  provincial 18th  century Am erica to leadership in European art: Benjam in 
W est, J. S. Copley, C. R. Peale, G ilbert Stuart. B rilliant coverage o f lives and con­
tributions. Revised, 19 6 7  edition. 69  plates. 365pp . of text.
2 18 0 6 -6  P aperbound $3-00
F ir st F l o w e r s o f O u r W il d e r n e s s: A m e r ic a n  P a in t in g , T h e  C o l o n ia l 
P e r io d, Jam es T. Flexner. Painters, and regional painting traditions from  earliest 
Colonial times up to the emergence of Copley, W e st and Peale Sr., Foster, Gustavus 
H esselius, Feke, John Sm ibert and many anonymous painters in the prim itive manner. 
Engaging presentation, w ith 162 illustrations, x x ii +  368pp.
2 2 1 8 0 -6  Paperbound $ 3 .5 0
T h e  L ig h t  o f D is t a n t  Sk ie s : A m e r ic a n  P a in t in g , -17 6 0 -18 3 5 , Jam es T. F lex­
ner. The great generation of early Am erican painters goes to Europe to learn and 
to teach: W est, Copley, G ilbert Stuart and others. A llston, T rum bull, M orse; also 
contemporary Am erican painters— prim itives, derivatives, academics— who remained 
in Am erica. 102 illustrations, x iii +  306pp. 
2 2 17 9 -2  P aperbound $ 3.00
A  H isto ry o f t h e  Rise a n d P rog ress o f t h e  A rts o f D e sig n i n  t h e  U n it e d  
St a t e s, W illia m  D unlap. M uch the richest mine o f inform ation on early Am erican 
painters, sculptors, architects, engravers, m iniaturists, etc. The only source o f in­
form ation fo r scores of artists, the m ajor prim ary source fo r many others. Unabridged 
reprint o f rare original 18 3 4  edition, w ith new  introduction by Jam es T. Flexner, 
and 3 94 new  illustrations. Edited by Rita W eiss. 6y$ x 9 % .
2 16 9 5 -0 , 2 16 9 6 -9 , 2 16 9 7 -7  T h ree volum es, Paperbound $ 1 3 .5 0
E p o c h s o f C h in e s e  a n d  J a p a n e s e  A r t , Ernest F. Fenollosa. 
From  prim itive 
Chinese art to the 20th century, thorough history, explanation o f every im portant art 
period and form , including Japanese w oodcuts; main stress on China and Japan, but 
Tibet, K orea also included. S till unexcelled fo r its detailed, rich coverage o f cul­
tural background, aesthetic elements, diffusion studies, particularly of the historical 
period. 2nd, 1 9 1 3  edition. 2 42 illustrations, lii +  439p p . o f text.
2 0364-6, 2 0 3 6 5 -4  T w o volum es, P aperbound $ 6.00
T h e  G e n t l e  A r t o f M a k in g  E n e m ie s , Jam es A . M . W h istler. Greatest w it of his 
day deflates Oscar W ild e, Ruskin, Sw inburne; strikes back at inane critics, exhibi­
tions, art journalism ; aesthetics o f im pressionist revolution in most striking form . 
H ighly readable classic by great painter. 
Reproduction o f edition designed by 
W h istler. Introduction by A lfred  W ern er, x x x vi +  334pp.
2 18 7 5 -9  P aperbound $ 2.50

CA TALOG U E OF D O VER  BOOKS
A g a in s t t h e  G r a in  ( A  R e b o u r s) ,  Jo ris K . Huysmans. F illed w ith w eird  im ages, 
evidences o f a bizarre im agination, exotic experim ents w ith  hallucinatory drugs, 
rich tastes and sm ells and the diversions o f its sybarite hero D ue Jean des Esseintes, 
this classic novel pushed 19th-century literary decadence to its lim its. 
F ull un­
abridged edition. D o not confuse this w ith  abridged editions generally sold. Intro­
duction by H avelock Ellis, x lix  +  206pp . 
2 2 19 0 -3  P aperb ou nd $ 2.00
V a r io r u m  Sh a k e s p e a r e : H a m l e t . Edited by H orace H. Furness; a landm ark 
o f A m erican scholarship. Exhaustive footnotes and appendices treat all doubtful 
w ords and phrases, as w e ll as suggested critical em endations throughout the play's 
history. First volum e contains editor’s ow n text, collated w ith a ll Q uartos and 
Folios. 
Second volum e contains fu ll first Q uarto, translations o f Shakespeare’s 
sources (B elleforest, and Saxo G ram m aticus), D er B estrafte B ruderm ord, and m any 
essays on critical and historical points of interest by m ajor authorities o f past and 
present. 
Includes details o f staging and costuming over the years. 
By fa r the 
best edition available fo r serious students o f Shakespeare. T otal o f x x  -f- 905p p .
2 10 0 4 -9 , 2 10 0 5 -7 , 2 volum es, P aperbound $ 7 .0 0
A  Lif e  o f W il l ia m  Sh a k e s p e a r e , S ir Sidney Lee. This is the standard life  o f 
Shakespeare, sum m arizing everything know n about Shakespeare and his plays. 
Incredibly rich in m aterial, broad in coverage, clear and judicious, it has served 
thousands as the best introduction to Shakespeare. 
1 9 3 1  edition. 
9 plates, 
x x ix  -f- 792p p . 
(U S O ) 2 19 6 7 -4  P aperbound $ 3.75
M a sters o f t h e  D r a m a , Joh n Gassner. M ost com prehensive history o f the dram a 
in print, covering every tradition from  G reeks to m odern Europe and Am erica, 
including India, Far East, etc. Covers m ore than 8 0 0  dram atists, 2000 plays, w ith 
biographical m aterial, plot summaries, theatre history, criticism , etc. "Best o f its 
kind in English,’’ New Republic. 11 illustrations, x x ii -f- 890pp.
2 0 1 0 0 -7  C lothb ound $ 8 .5 0
T h e  E v o l u t io n  o f t h e  E n g l is h  La n g u a g e, G eorge M cK night. T he grow th 
o f English, from  the 14th  century to the present. Unusual, non-technical account 
presents basic inform ation in very interesting form : sound shifts, change in gram m ar 
and syntax, vocabulary grow th, sim ilar topics. A bundantly illustrated w ith  quota­
tions. Form erly Modern English in the Making, x ii +  590pp .
2 1 9 3 2 -1  P aperbound $ 3 .5 0
A n  E t y m o l o g ic a l D ic t io n a r y  o f M o d e r n  E n g l is h , Ernest W eekley. Fullest, 
richest w ork o f its sort, by forem ost B ritish lexicographer. D etailed w ord histories, 
including many colloquial and archaic w ords; extensive quotations. D o not con­
fuse this w ith  the Concise Etym ological D ictionary, w hich is much abridged. T otal 
o f x x vii - f  830pp . 61/2 x 9lA-
2 18 7 3 -2 , 2 1 8 7 4 -0  T w o  volum es, P aperb ou nd $ 6.00
F l a t l a n d : A  R o m a n c e  
o f M a n y  D im e n s io n s , E. A . A bbott. 
Classic o f 
science-fiction explores ram ifications o f life  in a tw o-dim ensional w orld , and w hat 
happens w hen a three-dim ensional being intrudes. Am using reading, but also use­
fu l as introduction to thought about hyperspace. Introduction by Banesh H offm ann. 
16 illustrations, x x  +  103p p . 
2 0 0 0 1-9  P aperb ou nd $ 1 .0 0

CATALOG U E OF DOVER BOOKS
H o w  t o K n o w  t h e  W ild F l o w e r s, M rs. W illia m  Starr Dana. This is the clas­
sical book of Am erican w ildflow ers (o f the Eastern and Central United States), 
used by hundreds of thousands. Covers over 5 00 species, arranged in extrem ely 
easy to use color and season groups. F ull descriptions, much plant lore. This D over 
edition is the fu llest ever compiled, w ith tables of nomenclature changes. 174 fu ll- 
page plates by M . Satterlee. xii +  418p p . 
203 3 2-8  Paperbound $2,75
O u r P l a n t  F r ie n d s a n d F o e s, W illia m  A therton D uPuy. H istory, economic im ­
portance, essential botanical inform ation and peculiarities o f 25 common form s of 
plant life are provided in this book in an entertaining and charming style. Covers 
food plants (potatoes, apples, beans, wheat, almonds, bananas, etc.), flowers (lily, 
tulip, etc.), trees (pine, oak, elm, etc.), weeds, poisonous mushrooms and vines, 
gourds, citrus fruits, cotton, the cactus fam ily, and much more. 
10 8  illustrations, 
xiv -f- 290pp. 
222 7 2-1 Paperbound $ 2.50
H o w  TO K n o w  t h e  F e r n s, Frances T. Parsons. Classic survey of Eastern and 
Central ferns, arranged according to clear, sim ple identification key. Excellent in­
troduction to greatly neglected nature area. 57 illustrations and 42 plates, x vi +  
215p p . 
2 07 4 0-4  Paperbound $ 2.00
M a n u a l  o f t h e  T rees o f N o r t h  A m e r ic a , Charles S. Sargent. Am erica's fore­
most dendrologist provides the definitive coverage o f N orth Am erican trees and 
tree-like shrubs. 7 17  species fu lly described and illustrated: exact distribution, down 
to tow nship; fu ll botanical description; economic im portance; description o f sub­
species and races ; habitat, grow th data; sim ilar m aterial. Necessary to every serious 
student of tree-life. N om enclature revised to present. O ver 100 locating keys. 783 
illustrations, lii -f- 934pp . 2 02 7 7-1, 2 0 2 7 8 -X  T w o  volum es, P aperbound $ 6 .0 0
O u r  N o r t h e r n  Sh r u b s, H arriet L. K eeler. Fine non-technical reference w ork 
identifying m ore than 225 im portant shrubs o f Eastern and Central U nited States 
and Canada. F ull text covering botanical description, habitat, plant lore, is paralleled 
w ith  205 full-page photographs o f flow ering or fruiting plants. 
N om enclature 
revised by Edward G . V oss. One o f few  w orks concerned w ith shrubs. 205 plates, 
35 drawings, x x viii -f- 521p p . 
2 19 8 9 -5  P aperbound $3.75
T h e  M u s h r o o m  H a n d b o o k , Louis C. C. K rieger. S till the best popular handbook: 
fu ll descriptions of 2 59  species, cross references to another 200. Extrem ely thorough 
text enables you to identify, know  all about any mushroom you are likely to meet in 
eastern and central U . S. A .: habitat, luminescence, poisonous qualities, use, folklore, 
etc. 32 color plates show over 50 mushrooms, also 12 6  other illustrations. Finding 
keys, vii -f- 560pp . 
2 1 8 6 1 -9  Paperbound $3-95
H a n d b o o k  o f  B irds o f E a s t e r n  N o r t h  A m e r ic a , Frank M . Chapman. Still 
much the best single-volum e guide to the birds of Eastern and C entral U nited States. 
V ery fu ll coverage of 675 species, w ith descriptions, life habits, distribution, sim ilar 
data. A ll descriptions keyed to two-page color chart. W ith  this single volum e the 
average birdw atcher needs no other books. 1 9 3 1  revised edition. 195 illustrations, 
xxxvi -f- 581p p . 
2 14 89 -3  P aperbound $ 5.00

CA TALOG U E OF D O VER BO OKS
T w o  L it t l e  Savages; B e in g  t h e  A d v e n t u r e s o f T w o  B oys W h o  L iv ed as 
I n d ia n s a n d  W h a t  T h e y  L e a r n e d , Ernest Thom pson Seton. G reat classic o f 
nature and boyhood provides a vast range of w oodlore in most palatable form , a 
genuinely entertaining story. T w o farm  boys build a teepee in woods and live in it 
fo r a m onth, w orking out Indian solutions to living problem s, star lore, birds and 
animals, plants, etc. 293 illustrations, v ii - f  286pp .
209 8 5-7  Paperbound $ 2 .5 0
P e t e r  P ip e r ’s P r a c tic a l P r in c ip l e s o f  P l a in  & P e r f e c t  P r o n u n c ia t io n . 
A lliterative jingles and tongue-tw isters o f surprising charm, that m ade their first 
appearance in A m erica about 18 3 0 . Republished in fu ll w ith the spirited w oodcut 
illustrations from  this earliest A m erican edition. 32pp. Al/2 x  6%.
2 25 6 0-7  P aperb ou nd $ 1.00
Sc ie n c e  E x p e r im e n t s a n d  A m u s e m e n t s f o r  C h il d r e n , Charles V ivian . 73 easy 
experim ents, requiring only m aterials found at home or easily available, such as 
candles, coins, steel w ool, etc.; illustrate basic phenomena like vacuum, sim ple 
chemical reaction, etc. A ll safe. M odern, w ell-planned. Form erly Science Games 
for Children. 102 photos, num erous drawings. 96pp. 6Yg x 9 Vi-
2 1 856-2 P aperb ou nd $ 1.2 5
A n  I n t r o d u c t io n  t o  C h e ss M oves a n d  T a ctics Sim p l y  E x p l a in e d , Leonard 
Barden. Inform al interm ediate introduction, quite strong in explaining reasons fo r 
moves. Covers basic m aterial, tactics, im portant openings, traps, positional play in 
m iddle game, end game. Attem pts to isolate patterns and recurrent configurations. 
Form erly Chess. 58 figures. 102pp. 
(U S O ) 2 12 10 -6  P aperbound $ 1 .2 5
L a sk e r’s M a n u a l  o f  C h e s s, D r. Emanuel Lasker. Lasker w as not only one o f the 
five great W o rld  Cham pions, he was also one o f the ablest expositors, theorists, and 
analysts. In many ways, his M anual, perm eated w ith  his philosophy o f battle, filled 
w ith keen insights, is one o f the greatest w orks ever w ritten on chess. F illed w ith 
analyzed games by the great players. A  single-volum e library that w ill profit alm ost 
any chess player, beginner or m aster. 308 diagram s, x li x  349pp .
2 06 4 0-8  P aperb ou nd $ 2.75
T h e  M a ste r B o o k  o f M a t h e m a t ic a l  R e c r e a t io n s, Fred Schuh. In opinion of 
many the finest w ork ever prepared on m athem atical puzzles, stunts, recreations; 
exhaustively thorough explanations o f mathematics involved, analysis o f effects, 
citation o f puzzles and games. M athematics involved is elem entary. Translated by 
F. G obel. 19 4  figures, x x iv 
430p p . 
2 2 13 4 -2  P aperb ou nd $ 3 .0 0
M a t h e m a t ic s, M a g ic a n d  M y ste r y, M artin G ardner. Puzzle editor fo r Scientific 
A m erican explains mathematics behind various m ystifying tricks: card tricks, stage 
"mind reading,” coin and match tricks, counting out games, geom etric dissections, 
etc. Probability sets, theory o f numbers clearly explained. A lso provides m ore than 
4 0 0  tricks, guaranteed to w ork, that you can do. 13 5  illustrations, x ii -f- 176p p .
2 03 3 8-2  P aperb ou nd $ 1 .5 0

CATALOG U E OF D O VER BOOKS
J o h a n n  Se b a s t ia n  B a c h , P hilipp Spitta. O ne o f the great classics o f m usicology, 
this definitive analysis o f Bach's music (and life ) has never been surpassed. Lucid, 
nontechnical analyses o f hundreds o f pieces (3 0  pages devoted to St. M atthew  Pas­
sion, 26 to B  M inor M ass). A lso includes m ajor analysis of 18th-century music. 
4 5 0  musical exam ples. 40-page musical supplem ent. T otal o f x x  -f- 1799p p .
(E U K ) 222 7 8-0, 2 22 7 9-9  T w o  volum es, C lothb ound $ 1 5 .0 0
M o z a r t a n d  H is P ia n o  C o n c e r t o s, Cuthbert G irdlestone. The only full-length 
study o f an im portant area o f M ozart’s creativity. Provides detailed analyses o f all 
23 concertos, traces inspirational sources. 4 1 7  m usical exam ples. Second edition. 
509pp. 
(U S O ) 2 1 2 7 1 -8  Paperbound $ 3 .5 0
T h e  P e r f e c t  W a g n e r it e : A  C o m m e n t a r y  o n  t h e  N ib l u n g ’s R in g , George 
B ernard Shaw . 
B rilliant and still relevant criticism  in rem arkable essays on 
W agner's R ing cycle, Shaw ’s ideas on political and social ideology behind the 
plots, ro le o f Leitm otifs, vocal requisites, etc. Prefaces, x x i +  136pp.
2 17 0 7 -8  Paperbound $ 1 .5 0
D o n  G io v a n n i, W . A . M ozart. Com plete libretto, m odern English translation; 
biographies o f composer and librettist; accounts o f early perform ances and critical 
reaction. 
Lavishly illustrated. 
A ll the m aterial ypu need to understand and 
appreciate this great w ork. 
D over O pera G uide and Libretto Series; translated 
and introduced by E llen B leiler. 92  illustrations. 209pp .
2 1 1 3 4 -7  P aperbound $ 1 .5 0
H ig h  F id e l it y  Sy s t e m s: A  L a y m a n ’s G u id e, Roy F. A llison . 
A ll the basic 
inform ation you need fo r setting up your ow n audio system: high fidelity and 
stereo record players, tape records, F.M . Connections, adjusting tone arm, cartridge, 
checking needle alignm ent, positioning speakers, phasing speakers, adjusting hums, 
trouble-shooting, maintenance, and sim ilar topics. Enlarged 19 6 5  edition. M ore 
than 50 charts, diagram s, photos, iv  - f  91p p . 
2 1 5 1 4 -8  Paperbound $ 1.2 5
R e p r o d u c t io n  o f So u n d , Edgar V illch u r. 
T horough coverage fo r laymen of 
high fidelity systems, reproducing systems in general, needles, am plifiers, preamps, 
loudspeakers, feedback, explaining physical background. "A  rare talent fo r making 
technicalities vivid ly com prehensible,” R. D arrell, High Fidelity. 
6 9  figures, 
iv  -f- 92pp. 
2 1 5 1 5 -6  P aperbound $ 1.00
H e a r M e T a l k in ’ t o  Y a : T h e  St o r y  o f  J a z z  as T o ld by t h e  M e n  W h o  
M ade I t , N at Shapiro and N at H entoff. Louis A rm strong, Fats W a lle r, Jo  Jones, 
Clarence W illiam s, B illy H oliday, D uke Ellington, Je lly  R oll M orton and dozens 
o f other jazz greats tell how  it was in Chicago’s South Side, N ew  O rleans, depres­
sion H arlem  and the m odern W est Coast as jazz was born and grew , x vi +  429p p .
2 17 2 6 -4  Paperbound $ 2 .5 0
Fa b l e s o f A e s o p, translated by Sir R oger L’Estrange. A  reproduction o f the very 
rare 1 9 3 1  Paris edition; a selection o f the m ost interesting fables, together w ith 50 
im aginative draw ings by A lexander Calder. v  -f- 128p p . 6 1/2x 91/4 -
2 17 8 0 -9  P aperbound $ 1.2 5

CA TALOG U E OF D O VER BO OKS
E a st O ’ t h e  Su n  a n d  W e s t O ’ t h e  M o o n , G eorge W .. D asent. C onsidered the 
best o f all translations o f these N orw egian fo lk  tales, this collection has been enjoyed 
by generations o f children (and folklorists to o ) . Includes T rue and U ntrue, W h y  the 
Sea is Salt, East O ’ the Sun and W e st O ’ the M oon, W h y  the Bear is Stum py-T ailed, 
Boots and the T ro ll, The Cock and the H en, Rich Peter the Pedlar, and 52 m ore. 
The only edition w ith  all 59 tales. 77  illustrations by Erik W erenskiold and T heodor 
K ittelsen. x v  - f  4 18 p p . 
2 2 5 2 1-6  P aperbound $ 3 .5 0
G o o p s a n d  H o w  t o  b e T h e m , G elett Burgess. Classic of tongue-in-cheek hum or, 
m asquerading as etiquette book. 
87  verses, tw ice as m any cartoons, show m is­
chievous G oops as they dem onstrate to children virtues o f table m anners, neatness, 
courtesy, etc. Favorite fo r generations, v iii +  88pp. 6 V2 x  9V i -
2 2 2 3 3 -0  P aperb ou nd $ 1 .2 5
A l ic e ’s A d v e n t u r e s U n d e r  G r o u n d , Lew is C arroll. The first version, quite 
different from  the final Alice in Wonderland, printed out by C arroll him self w ith  
his ow n illustrations. Com plete facsim ile o f the "m illion d o llar” m anuscript C arroll 
gave to A lice L iddell in 18 6 4 . Introduction by M artin G ardner, v iii +  96p p. T itle 
and dedication pages in color. 
2 14 8 2 -6  P aperb ou nd $ 1.2 5
T h e  B r o w n ie s, T h e ir  Bo o k , Palm er Cox. Sm all as mice, cunning as foxes, exu­
berant and fu ll o f m ischief, the Brow nies go to the 200, toy shop, seashore, circus, 
etc., in 2 4  verse adventures and 266 illustrations. Long a favorite, since their first 
appearance in St. N icholas M agazine, x i -f- 144p p . 6 %  x  9%.
2 12 6 5 -3  Paperbound $ 1.7 5
So n g s o f C h il d h o o d , W a lte r D e La M are. 
Published (under the pseudonym  
W a lte r R am al) w hen D e La M are was only 29, this charming collection has long 
been a favorite children’s book. A  facsim ile o f the first edition in paper, the 4 7  poems 
capture the sim plicity o f the nursery rhym e and the ballad, including such lyrics as 
I M et Eve, Tartary, The S ilver Penny, vii +  106p p . 
2 19 7 2 -0  P aperbound $ 1.2 5
T h e  C o m p l e t e  N o n s e n s e  o f  E d w ard L e a r, Edward Lear. The finest 19 th-century 
hum orist-cartoonist in fu ll: all nonsense lim ericks, zany alphabets, O w l and Pussy­
cat, songs, nonsense botany, and m ore than 5 00 illustrations by Lear him self. Edited 
by H olbrook Jackson, x x ix  +  287pp . 
(U S O ) 2 0 1 6 7 -8  P aperbound $ 2.00
B il l y  W h is k e r s : T h e  A u t o b io g r a p h y  o f a  G o a t , Frances Trego M ontgom ery. 
A  favorite o f children since the early 20th century, here are the escapades of that 
rambunctious, irresistible and mischievous goat— B illy W h iskers. 
M uch in the 
spirit o f Feck's Bad Boy, this is a book that children never tire of reading or hearing. 
A ll the original fam iliar illustrations by W . H . Fry are included: 6 color plates, 
18  black and w hite draw ings. 159pp- 
2 2 3 4 5-0  P aperb ou nd $ 2.00
M o t h e r  G o o se M e l o d ie s. F aithful republication o f the fabulously rare M unroe 
and Francis "copyright 18 3 3 ” Boston edition— the m ost im portant M other G oose 
collection, usually referred to as the "original.” Fam iliar rhymes plus m any rare 
ones, w ith  w onderful old woodcut illustrations. Edited by E. F. B leiler. 128p p . 
4 ^ x 6 % .  
2 2 5 7 7 -1 P aperbound $ 1 .2 5

CATALOG U E OF D O VER BOOKS
T h e  A r c h it e c t u r e  o f C o u n t r y  H o u s e s, A nd rew  J. D ow ning. T ogether w ith 
V au x’s Villas and Cottages this is the basic book fo r H udson R iver G othic architec­
ture o f the m iddle V ictorian period. F ull, sound discussions o f general aspects of 
housing, architecture, style, decoration, furnishing, together w ith scores o f detailed 
house plans, illustrations of specific buildings, accompanied by fu ll text. Perhaps 
the m ost influential single Am erican architectural book. 18 5 0  edition. Introduction 
by J. Stew art Johnson. 3 2 1 figures, 34 architectural designs, xvi +  560pp.
2 2 0 0 3 -6  Paperbound $ 4 .0 0
Lo st E x a m p l e s o f C o l o n ia l  A r c h it e c t u r e , John M ead H ow ells. 
Full-page 
photographs o f buildings that have disappeared or been so altered as to be denatured, 
including m any designed by m ajor early Am erican architects. 245 plates, x vii +  
248pp. l 7/s x  1 0 % . 
2 1 1 4 3 -6  P aperbound $ 3 .5 0
D o m e s t ic A r c h it e c t u r e  o f t h e  A m e r ic a n  C o l o n ie s a n d o f t h e  E a rly 
R e p u b l ic , Fiske K im ball. 
Forem ost architect and restorer o f W illiam sburg  and 
M onticello covers nearly 2 00  homes between 1 6 2 0 -18 2 5 . A rchitectural details, con­
struction, style features, special fixtures, floor plans, etc. G enerally considered finest 
w ork in its area. 2 1 9  illustrations o f houses, doorways, w indow s, capital mantels, 
xx +  3 14 p p . 7 %  x  1 0 % . 
2 1 7 4 3 -4  P aperbound $ 4 .0 0
E a rly A m e r ic a n  R o o m s: 16 5 0 -18 5 8 , edited by Russell H awes K ettell. T our o f 12 
rooms, each representative o f a different era in Am erican history and each furnished, 
decorated, designed and occupied in the style o f the era. 72 plans and elevations, 
8-page color section, etc., show fabrics, w all papers, arrangements, etc. 
F ull de­
scriptive text, x vii +  200pp . o f text. 8 %  x  1 1 % .
2 16 3 3 -0  P aperbound $ 5 .0 0
T h e  F it z w il l ia m  V ir g in a l B o o k , edited by J . F uller M aitland and W . B. Squire. 
F ull m odern printing o f fam ous early 17th-century ms. volum e o f 3 00  w orks by 
M orley, B yrd, B ull, Gibbons, etc. For piano or other m odern keyboard instrum ent; 
easy to read form at, x x x vi +  938p p . 8 %  x  1 1 .
2 10 6 8 -5 , 2 10 6 9 -3  T w o  volum es, P aperb ou nd$ 10 .0 0
K e y b o a r d  
M u sic, Johann Sebastian Bach. 
Bach G esellschaft edition. A  rich 
selection o f Bach’s masterpieces fo r the harpsichord: the six English Suites, six 
French Suites, the six Partitas (Clavierübung part I ) , thé G oldberg V ariations 
(C lavierübung part I V ) , the fifteen T w o-Part Inventions and the fifteen Three-Part 
Sinfonias. C learly reproduced on large sheets w ith am ple m argins; em inently play­
able. vi +  312 p p . 8 %  x  1 1 . 
2 2 3 6 0 -4  P aperbound $ 5 .0 0
T h e  M u sic o f B a c h : A n  I n t r o d u c t io n , Charles Sanford T erry. A  fine, non­
technical introduction to Bach’s music, both instrum ental and vocal. Covers organ 
music, chamber music, passion music, other types. Analyzes themes, developm ents, 
innovations, x  +  114 p p . 
2 10 7 5 -8  P aperbound $ 1.2 5
B e e t h o v e n  a n d  H is N in e  Sy m p h o n ie s , S ir G eorge G rove. N oted B ritish m usi­
cologist provides best history, analysis, commentary on symphonies. V ery thorough, 
rigorously accurate; necessary to both advanced student and amateur music lover. 
4 3 6  m usical passages, vii -}- 4 0 7  pp. 
2 03 3 4-4  Paperbound $ 2.75

CATALOG U E OF DOVER BOOKS
A l p h a b e t s a n d  O r n a m e n t s , Ernst Lehner. 
W ell-k n o w n  pictorial source fo r 
decorative alphabets, script exam ples, cartouches, fram es, decorative title pages, calli­
graphic initials, borders, sim ilar m aterial. 14th  to 19th  century, m ostly European. 
U seful in alm ost any graphic arts designing, varied styles. 7 5 0  illustrations. 256pp . 
7 x  10 . 
2 19 0 5 -4  Paperbound $ 4 .0 0
P a in t in g : A  C r e a t iv e A p p r o a c h , N orm an Colquhoun. For the beginner sim ple 
guide provides an instructive approach to painting: m ajor stum bling blocks fo r 
beginner; overcom ing them, technical points; paints and pigm ents; oil painting; 
w atercolor and other media and color. N ew  section on ’ plastic” paints. G lossary. 
Form erly Paint Your Own Pictures. 221p p . 
2 20 0 0-1 Paperbound $ 1.7 5
T h e  E n j o y m e n t  a n d  U se o f C o l o r , W a lte r Sargent. Explanation of the rela­
tions between colors them selves and between colors in nature and art, including 
hundreds o f little-know n facts about color values, intensities, effects of high and 
low  illum ination, complementary colors. M any practical hints fo r painters, references 
to great masters. 7 color plates, 29 illustrations, x - f  274pp.
2 0 9 4 4 -X  P aperbound $ 2.75
T h e  N o t e b o o k s o f L e o n a r d o  D a V in c i, compiled and edited by Jean Paul 
Richter. 15 6 6  extracts from  original manuscripts reveal the fu ll range o f Leonardo’s 
versatile genius: a ll his w ritings on painting, sculpture, architecture, anatomy, 
astronom y, geography, topography, physiology, m ining, music, etc., in both Italian 
and English, w ith 18 6  plates o f m anuscript pages and m ore than 5 00  additional 
drawings. 
Includes studies fo r the Last Supper, the lost Sforza monument, and 
other w orks. T otal o f x lv ii +  866p p . 7 %  x  1 0 % .
2 25 7 2-0, 2 2 5 7 3 -9  T w o  volum es, P aperbound $ 1 0 .0 0
M o n t g o m e r y  W ard C a t a l o g u e o f  18 9 5 . 
Tea gowns, yards o f flannel and 
pillow -case lace, stereoscopes, books o f gospel hymns, the N ew  Im proved Singer 
Sew ing M achine, side saddles, m ilk skimmers, straight-edged razors, high-button 
shoes, spittoons, and on and on . . . listing some 2 5 ,0 0 0  items, practically all illu s­
trated. Essential to the shoppers o f the 1 8 9 0 ’s, it is our truest record o f the spirit o f 
the period. U naltered reprint o f Issue N o. 57, Spring and Sum m er 18 9 5 . Introduc­
tion by B oris Emmet. Innum erable illustrations, x iii -f- 624p p . 8 %  x 1 1 % .
2 2 3 7 7 -9  P aperbound $ 6.95
T h e  C ry sta l P a l a c e E x h ib it io n  I l l u s t r a t e d  C a t a l o g u e (L o n d o n , 1 8 5 1 ) . 
O ne o f the wonders o f the m odern w orld— the Crystal Palace Exhibition in which 
all the nations o f the civilized w orld exhibited their achievements in the arts and 
sciences— presented in an equally im portant illustrated catalogue. M ore than 17 0 0  
items pictured w ith  accompanying text— ceramics, textiles, cast-iron w ork, carpets, 
pianos, sleds, razors, w all-papers, billiard tables, beehives, silverw are and hundreds 
o f other artifacts— represent the focal point o f V ictorian culture in the W estern 
W o rld . Probably the largest collection o f V ictorian decorative art ever assembled—  
indispensable fo r antiquarians and designers. Unabridged republication o f the 
A rt-Jo u in al Catalogue o f the G reat Exhibition o f 1 8 5 1 , w ith all term inal essays. 
N ew  introduction by John G loag, F.S.A . x x x iv +  426p p . 9 x 12.
2 25 0 3-8  P aperb ou nd $ 4 .5 0

CATALOG U E OF D O VER BOOKS
T h e  R ed F a ir y  B o o k , A n d rew  Lang. Lang’s color fairy books have long been 
children’s favorites. This volum e includes Rapunzel, Jack and the Bean-stalk and 
35 other stories, fam iliar and unfam iliar. 4  plates, 93 illustrations x  +  367pp.
2 1 6 7 3 -X  P aperb ou nd $ 2 .5 0
T h e  B l u e  F a ir y B o o k , A nd rew  Lang. Lang’s tales come from  all countries and all 
times. H ere are 37 tales from  Grim m , the A rabian N ights, G reek M ythology, and 
other fascinating sources. 8 plates, 13 0  illustrations, x i +  390pp.
2 14 3 7 -0  Paperbound $ 2 .5 0
H o u s e h o l d  St o r ie s by t h e  Br o t h e r s G r im m . Classic English-language edition 
o f the w ell-know n tales —  Rum pelstiltskin, Snow  W h ite, H ansel and G retel, The 
T w elve Brothers, F aithful John, Rapunzel, Tom  Thum b (5 2  stories in a ll). Trans­
lated into sim ple, straightforw ard English by Lucy Crane. O rnamented w ith head- 
pieces, vignettes, elaborate decorative initials and a dozen full-page illustrations by 
W a lte r Crane, x  +  269pp . 
2 1 0 8 0 -4  Paperbound $ 2 .5 0
T h e  M erry A d v e n t u r e s o f  R o b in  H o o d, H ow ard Pyle. T he finest m odern ver­
sions o f the traditional ballads and tales about the great English outlaw . H oward 
Pyle’s com plete prose version, w ith every w ord, every illustration o f the first edition. 
D o not confuse this facsim ile o f the original ( 1 8 8 3 )  w ith m odern editions that 
change text o r illustrations. 23 plates plus m any page decorations, x x ii +  296pp .
220 4 3-5  P aperbound $ 2 .5 0
T h e  St o r y o f  K in g  A r t h u r  a n d  H is K n ig h t s, H ow ard Pyle. The finest chil­
dren’s version o f the life  o f K in g  A rth u r; brilliantly retold by Pyle, w ith 4 8  o f his 
most im aginative illustrations, x v iii -f- 313p p . 6Vs x  9V i-
2 14 4 5 -1 Paperbound $ 2.50
T h e  W o n d e r f u l  W iza r d o f O z , L. Frank Baum. Am erica’s finest children’s 
book in facsim ile o f first edition w ith all D enslow  illustrations in fu ll color. The 
edition a. child should have. Introduction by M artin G ardner. 
23 color plates, 
scores o f drawings, iv  +  267pp . 
2 0 6 9 1-2  P aperbound $ 2 .5 0
T h e  M a r v el o u s L a n d o f O z , L. Frank Baum. The second Oz book, every bit as 
im aginative as the W izard . The hero is a boy named Tip, but the Scarecrow and the 
T in W oodm an are back, as is the Oz magic. 16  color plates, 12 0  drawings by John 
R. N eill. 287pp . 
206 9 2-0  P aperbound $ 2.50
T h e  M a g ica l M o n a r c h  o f M o , L. Frank Baum. Rem arkable adventures in a land 
even stranger than Oz. The best o f 3a u m ’.s books not in the Oz series.- 15 color 
plates and dozens of draw ings by Frank Verbeck. x v iii +  237pp .
2 1 8 9 2 -9  Paperbound $ 2.25
T h e  B ad C h il d 's B o o k  o f B ea sts, M o re B easts f o r  W orse C h il d r e n , A 
M o ra l A l p h a b e t , H ilaire Belloc. Three complete hum or classics in one volum e. 
Be kind to the frog, and do not call him  names . . . and 28 other whim sical animals. 
Fam iliar favorites and some not so w ell known. 
Illustrated by Basil Blackw ell. 
156pp. 
(U S O ) 207 4 9-8  P aperbound $ 1 .5 0

CA TALO G U E OF D O VER BO OKS
A m e r ic a n  F o o d a n d  G a m e F is h e s, D avid S. Jordan and B arton W . Evermann. 
D efinitive source o f inform ation, detailed and accurate enough to enable the sports­
man and nature lover to identify conclusively some 1,000 species and sub-species 
o f N orth Am erican fish, sought fo r food or sport. Coverage o f range, physiology, 
habits, life  history, food value. Best methods o f capture, interest to the angler, advice 
on bait, fly-fishing, etc. 3 38 draw ings and photographs. 1 +  574pp . 6%  x  9%-
2 2 3 8 3 -1 P aperbound $ 4 .5 0
T h e  F r o g B o o k , M ary C. D ickerson. Com plete w ith extensive finding keys, over 
3 00  photographs, and an introduction to the general biology o f frogs and toads, this 
is the classic non-technical study o f N ortheastern and Central species. 58 species; 
2 90  photographs and 16  color plates, x v ii +  253pp .
2 19 7 3 -9  Paperbound $ 4 .0 0
T h e  M o t h  B o o k : A  G u id e t o  t h e  M o t h s o f N o r t h  A m e r ic a , W illia m  J. 
H olland. Classical study, eagerly sought after and used fo r the past 6 0  years. C lear 
identification m anual to m ore than 2,000 different moths, largest m anual in existence. 
G eneral inform ation about m oths, capturing, mounting, classifying, etc., follow ed  by 
species by species descriptions. 263 illustrations plus 4 8  color plates show alm ost 
every species, fu ll size. 
1968 edition, preface, nom enclature changes by A . E. 
B row er, x x iv  -f- 479p p . o f text. 6 1/2 x  9V i-
2 19 4 8 -8  P aperb ou nd $ 5 .0 0
T h e  Se a -Be a c h  a t E bb-T id e, A ugusta Foote A rnold. Interested am ateur can iden­
tify hundreds o f m arine plants and anim als on coasts o f N orth A m erica; m arine 
algae; seaweeds; squids; herm it crabs; horse shoe crabs; shrim ps; corals; sea anem­
ones; etc. 
Species descriptions cover: structure; food ; reproductive cycle; size; 
shape; co lo r; habitat; etc. O ver 600 drawings. 85 plates, x ii +  490p p .
2 19 4 9 -6  P aperbound $ 3 .5 0
C o m m o n  B ird So n g s, D onald J. B orror. 3 3 */3 12 -inch record presents songs o f 60  
im portant birds o f the eastern U nited States. A  thorough, serious record w hich p ro ­
vides several exam ples fo r each bird, showing different types o f song, individual 
variations, etc. Inestimable identification aid fo r birdwatcher. 32-page booklet gives 
text about birds and songs, w ith  illustration fo r each bird.
2 18 2 9 -5  R ecord, book, album . M o n au ral. $ 2.75
F ads a n d  F a l la c ie s i n  t h e  N a m e o f Sc ie n c e , M artin G ardner. Fair, w itty ap­
praisal o f cranks and quacks o f science: A tlantis, Lem uria, h ollow  earth, flat earth, 
V elikovsky, orgone energy, D ianetics, flying saucers, B ridey M urphy, food fads, 
m edical fads, perpetual m otion, etc. Form erly “In the N am e o f Science." x  +  363pp .
2 03 9 4-8  P aperb ou nd $ 2 .0 0
H o a x e s, Curtis D . M acD ougall. Exhaustive, unbelievably rich account o f great 
hoaxes: Locke’s m oon hoax, Shakespearean forgeries, sea serpents, Loch N ess 
m onster, C ardiff giant, Joh n  W ilk es B ooth’s mummy, D isum brationist school o f art, 
dozens m ore; also journalism , psychology o f hoaxing. 54 illustrations, x i +  338pp .
2 0 4 6 5 -0  P aperbound $ 2 .7 5

CATALOG U E OF D O VER BOOKS
La st a n d  F ir st M e n  a n d  St a r M a k e r , T w o  Sc ie n c e  F ic t io n  N o v e l s, O laf 
Stapledon. G reatest fu tu re histories in science fiction. In the first, human in telli­
gence is the "hero," through strange paths o f evolution, interplanetary invasions, 
incredible technologies, near extinctions and reemergences. Star M aker describes the 
quest o f a band of star rovers for intelligence itself, through time and space: w eird 
inhuman civilizations, crustacean minds, symbiotic w orlds, etc. 
Com plete, un­
abridged. v  -f- 438pp . 
2 19 6 2 -3  P aperbound $ 2 .5 0
T h r e e  P r o p h e t ic  N o v e ls, H . G . W e l l s. Stages of a consistently planned future 
fo r m ankind. When the Sleeper Wakes, and A Story of the Days to Come, anticipate 
Brave New World and 1984, in the 2 1st Century; The Time Machine, only com­
plete version in print, shows farther future and the end o f m ankind. A ll show 
W ells's greatest gifts as storyteller and novelist. 
Edited by E. F. B leiler. 
x  
- f  335pp . 
(U S O ) 2 0 6 0 5 -X  P aperbound $2 .50
T h e  D e v il’s D ic t io n a r y , Am brose Bierce. 
A m erica’s ow n Oscar W ild e —  
Am brose Bierce— offers his barbed iconoclastic wisdom  in over 1,0 0 0  definitions 
hailed by H. L. M encken as "some of the m ost gorgeous witticism s in the English 
language." 
145p p . 
2 0 4 8 7 -1 P aperbound $ 1.2 5
M a x a n d  M o r it z, W ilh elm  Busch. 
G reat children's classic, father o f comic 
strip, o f tw o bad boys, M ax and M oritz. A lso K er and Plunk (Plisch und P lum m ), 
Cat and M ouse, D eceitful H enry, Ice-Peter, The Boy and the Pipe, and five other 
pieces. O riginal Germ an, w ith English translation. Edited by H . A rth u r K le in ; 
translations by various hands and H. A rth u r K lein , v i +  2 1 6pp.
2 0 1 8 1 -3  Paperbound $ 2 .0 0
P igs is P igs a n d  O t h e r  F a v o r it es, E llis Parker B utler. T he title story is one 
o f the best hum or short stories, as M ike Flannery obfuscates biology and English. 
A lso  included, That Pup o f M urchison's, The G reat A m erican Pie Company, and 
Perkins o f Portland. 14  illustrations, v  -J- 109p p . 
2 15 3 2 -6  P aperbound $ 1.2 5
T h e  P e t e r k in  P a p e r s, Lucretia P. H ale. It takes genius to be as stupidly m ad as 
the Peterkins, as they decide to become w ise, celebrate the "Fourth," keep a cow, 
and otherw ise strain the resources o f the Lady from  Philadelphia. Basic book o f 
Am erican hum or. 
153 illustrations. 
219p p . 
207 9 4-3  P aperbound $ 1 .5 0
P e r r a u l t’s F a iry T a l e s, translated by A . E. Johnson and S. R. L ittlew ood, w ith 
34 full-page illustrations by G ustave D oré. 
A ll the original Perrault stories—  
Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty, Bluebeard, L ittle Red Riding H ood, Puss in Boots, Tom  
Thumb, etc.— w ith their w itty verse m orals and the magnificent illustrations of 
D oré. One o f the five or six great books of European fairy tales, v iii -}- 117p p . 
8y8 x  11 . 
2 2 3 1 1 -6  P aperbound $ 2.00
O ld H u n g a r ia n  F a iry T a l e s, Baroness Orczy. Favorites translated and adapted 
by author o f the Scarlet Pimpernel. Eight fairy tales include "The Suitors of Princess 
Fire-Fly,” "The T w in Hunchbacks," "M r. Cuttlefish’s Love Story,” and "The 
Enchanted Cat.” This little volum e o f magic and adventure w ill captivate children 
as it has fo r generations. .90 draw ings by M ontagu Barstow. 96pp.
(U S O ) 2 2 2 9 3 -4  P aperbound $ 1 .9 5

CATALOG U E OF D O VER BOOKS
P o e m s o f A n n e  B r a d st r e et, edited w ith an introduction by Robert H utchinson. 
A  new  selection o f poems by A m erica’s first poet and perhaps the first significant 
wom an poet in the English language. 48  poems display her developm ent in w orks 
o f considerable variety— love poems, domestic poems, religious meditations, form al 
elegies, "quaternions,” etc. N otes, bibliography, v iii +  222pp .
2 2 1 6 0 -1 P aperbound $ 2 .0 0
T h r e e  G o t h ic  N o v e l s: T h e  C a stl e o f O t r a n t o  by H o ra ce W a l p o l e ; 
V a t h e k  by W il l ia m  B e c k f o r d  ; T h e  V a m py r e by J o h n  P o l id o r i, w it h  F ra g­
m e n t  o f a N o v el by L ord By r o n , edited by E. F. B leiler. T he first G othic 
novel, by W a lp o le ; the finest O riental tale in English, by B eckford; pow erful 
Romantic supernatural story in versions by Polidori and Byron. A ll extrem ely 
im portant in history o f literatu re; all still exciting, packed w ith  supernatural 
thrills, ghosts, haunted castles, magic, etc. x l - f  291p p .
2 12 3 2 -7  P aperbound $ 2 .3 0
T h e  B e st T a l e s o f H o f f m a n n , E. T. A . H offm ann. 
10  o f H offm ann’s most 
im portant stories, in m odern re-editings o f standard translations: N utcracker and 
the K in g o f M ice, Signor Formica, Autom ata, The Sandman, Rath K respel, The 
G olden Flow erpot, M aster M artin the Cooper, The M ines o f Falun, T he K in g ’s 
Betrothed, A  N ew  Y e a r’s Eve A dventure. 
7 illustrations by H offm ann. 
Edited 
by E. F. B leiler. x x x ix  -f- 4 19pp. 
2 17 9 3 -0  Paperbound 1 3 .0 0
G h o s t a n d  H o r r o r St o r ies o f A m b r o se B ie r c e, Am brose Bierce. 23 strikingly 
m odern stories o f the horrors latent in the hum an m ind: The Eyes o f the Panther, 
The Dam ned Thing, A n  Occurrence at O w l Creek Bridge, A n  Inhabitant o f Carcosa, 
etc., plus the dream-essay, V isions of the N ight. 
Edited by E. F. B leiler. 
x x ii 
-j- 199pp. 
2 07 6 7-6  Paperbound $ 1 .5 0
B e st G h o s t St o r ie s o f J. S. L e F a n u , J. Sheridan LeFanu. 
Finest stories by 
Victorian master often considered greatest supernatural w riter o f all. 
C arm illa, 
G reen Tea, The H aunted Baronet, The Fam iliar, and 12 others. M ost never before 
available in the U . S. A . Edited by E. F. B leiler. 8 illustrations from  V ictorian 
publications, x vii - f  467p p . 
2 0 4 15 -4  P aperbound $ 3 .0 0
M a t h e m a t ic a l  F o u n d a t io n s o f I n f o r m a t io n  T h e o r y , A . I. K hinchin. Com ­
prehensive introduction to w ork o f Shannon, M cM illan, Feinstein and K hinchin, 
placing these investigations on a rigorous mathem atical basis. 
Covers entropy 
concept in probability theory, uniqueness theorem , Shannon's inequality, ergodic 
sources, the E property, m artingale concept, noise, Feinstein’s fundam ental lemma, 
Shanon’s first and second theorem s. 
T ranslated by R. A . Silverm an and M . D . 
Friedman, iii +  120p p . 
6 0 4 3 4 -9  Paperbound $ 1 .7 5
Se v e n  Sc ie n c e  F ic t io n  N o v e ls, H . G . W e lls. The standard collection o f the 
great novels. Com plete, unabridged. First Men in the Moon, Island of Dr. Moreau, 
War of the Worlds, Food of the Gods, Invisible Man, Time Machine, In the Days 
of the Comet. N ot only science fiction fans, but every educated person ow es it to 
him self to read these novels. 
10 15 p p  
2 0 2 6 4 -X  C loth b ou n d  $ 5 .0 0

CATALOGU E OF D O VER BOOKS
V isu a l I l l u s io n s : T h e ir  C a u se s, C h a r a c t er istic s, a n d  A p p l ic a t io n s, M at­
thew  Luckiesh. Thorough description and discussion of optical illusion, geom etric 
and perspective, p articu larly; size and shape distortions, illusions o f color, of m otion ; 
natural illusions; use o f illusion in art and magic, industry, etc. M ost useful today 
w ith  op art, also fo r classical art. 
Scores o f effects illustrated. 
Introduction by 
W illia m  H. M e so n . 10 0  illustrations, x xi +  252pp .
2 1 5 3 0 -X  P aperbound $ 2 .0 0
A  H a n d b o o k  o f A n a t o m y  f o r  A r t  St u d e n t s, A rth u r Thomson. Thorough, v ir­
tually exhaustive coverage o f skeletal structure, m usculature, etc. F ull text, supple­
mented by anatomical diagrams and drawings and by photographs o f undraped 
figures. U nique in its comparison o f m ale and fem ale form s, pointing out differences 
o f contour, texture, form . 2 1 1  figures, 4 0  drawings, 86  photographs, x x  +  459pp . 
5 %  x  8 y8. 
2 1 1 6 3 -0  P aperbound $ 3 .5 0
15 0  M a s t e r p ie c e s o f D r a w in g , Selected by A nthony Toney. F ull page reproduc­
tions o f draw ings from  the early 16 th  to the end o f the 18th century, all beautifully 
reproduced: Rembrandt, M ichelangelo, D iirer, Fragonard, U rs, G raf, W ouw erm an, 
many others. 
First-rate brow sing book, m odel book fo r artists, x v iii +  150p p . 
83/s x  1 1 % . 
2 10 3 2 -4  Paperbound $ 2 .5 0
T h e  L a t e r  W o r k  o f A u b r e y  B e a r d sley, A ubrey Beardsley. 
Exotic, erotic, 
ironic masterpieces in fu ll m aturity: Comedy Ballet, Venus and Tannhäuser, Pierrot, 
Lysistrata, Rape o f the Lock, Savoy m aterial, A li Baba, V olpone, etc. T his m aterial 
revolutionized the art w orld, and is still pow erful, fresh, brilliant. W ith  The Early 
Work, all B eardsley’s finest w ork. 17 4  plates, 2 in color, x iv +  176p p . 8Vs x  1 1 .
2 1 8 1 7 -1  P aperbound $ 3 .0 0
D r a w in g s o f R e m b r a n d t, Rem brandt van R ijn. Com plete reproduction o f fabu­
lously rare edition by Lippmann and H ofstede de G root, com pletely reedited, up­
dated, im proved by P rof. Seym our Slive, Fogg M useum . Portraits, Biblical sketches, 
landscapes, O riental types, nudes, episodes from  classical m ythology— A ll Rem ­
brandt’s fertile genius. 
A lso selection o f drawings by his pupils and follow ers. 
"Stunning volum es,” Saturday Review. 
550 
illustrations, 
lx x v iii 
s s 2pp. 
9Vs x  1 2 Yu. 
2 14 8 5 -0 , 2 14 8 6 -9  T w o  volum es, P aperbound $ 10 .0 0
T h e  D isa sters o f W a r, Francisco G oya. O ne of the masterpieces o f W estern  civi­
lization— 83 etchings that record G oya’s shattering, bitter reaction to the N apoleonic 
w ar that sw ept through Spain after the insurrection of 1 8 0 8  and to w ar in general. 
Reprint o f the first edition, w ith three additional plates from  Boston’s M useum  of 
Fine A rts. A ll plates facsim ile size. Introduction by Philip H ofer, Fogg M useum . 
v  +  97pp. 93/s x  8%. 
2 1 8 7 2 -4  P aperb ou nd $ 2.00
G r a p h ic  W o r k s o f O d il o n  R e d o n . Largest collection o f Redon’s graphic works 
ever assem bled: 17 2  lithographs, 28 etchings and engravings, 9 draw ings. These 
include some o f his m ost fam ous w orks. A ll the plates from  Odilon Redon: oeuvre 
graphique complet, plus additional plates. N ew  introduction and caption translations 
by A lfred  W ern er. 2 0 9  illustrations, x x vii -j- 209pp. 9Vs x 12 * 4.
2 19 6 6 -8  P aperbound $ 4.00

CATALOG U E OF D O VER BOOKS
M a t h e m a t ic a l  P u z z l e s f o r  B e g in n e r s a n d  E n t h u s ia s t s, G eoffrey M ott-Sm ith. 
18 9  puzzles from  easy to difficult— involving arithm etic, logic, algebra, properties 
o f digits, probability, etc.— fo r enjoym ent and m ental stim ulus. 
E xplanation o f 
mathematical principles behind the puzzles. 135 illustrations, v iii -f- 248pp.
2 0 1 9 8 -8  P aperbound $1.75
P a p e r  F o l d in g  f o r B e g in n e r s, W illia m  D . M urray and Francis J. Rigney. Easiest 
book on the market, clearest instructions on m aking interesting, beautiful origam i. 
Sail boats, cups, roosters, frogs that m ove legs, bonbon boxes, standing birds, etc. 
4 0  projects; m ore than 275 diagram s and photographs. 94pp.
2 0 7 13 -7  P aperbound $ 1 .0 0
T r ic k s a n d  G a m es o n  t h e  P o o l T a b l e, Fred H errm ann. 79 tricks and games—  
some solitaires, some fo r tw o or m ore players, some com petitive games— to entertain 
you between form al games. M ystifying shots and throws, unusual caroms, tricks 
involving such props as cork, coins, a hat, etc. Form erly Fun on the Pool Table. 
11 figures. 95pp. 
2 1 8 1 4 -7  P aperbound $ 1 .0 0
H a n d Sh a d o w s t o  be T h r o w n  U p o n  t h e  W a l l : A  Se r ies o f N o v e l a n d  
Am u s in g  F ig u r e s F o r m ed by t h e  H a n d , H enry B ursill. D elig h tfu l picturebook 
from  great-grandfather’s day shows how  to m ake 18  different hand shadows: a bird 
that flies, duck that quacks, dog that wags his tail, camel, goose, deer, boy, turtle, 
etc. O nly book o f its sort, vi +  33pp. 6*4 x  9V i- 
2 17 7 9 -5  P aperb ou nd $ 1 .0 0
W h it t l in g  a n d  W o o d c a r v in g, E. J. Tangerm an. 18th  printing o f best book on 
m arket. “If you can cut a potato you can carve“ toys and puzzles, chains, chessmen, 
caricatures, masks, fram es, w oodcut blocks, surface patterns, much m ore. Inform ation 
on tools, wroods, techniques. A lso goes into serious w ood sculpture from  M iddle 
Ages to present, East and W est. 4 6 4  photos, figures, x +  293pp .
209 6 5-2  P aperbound $ 2 .0 0
H isto r y o f P h il o s o p h y , Ju lián  M arias. Possibly the clearest, most easily follow ed, 
best planned, most useful one-volum e history o f philosophy on the m ark et; neither 
skimpy nor overfu ll. F ull details on system of every m ajor philosopher and dozens 
of less im portant thinkers from  pre-Socratics up to Existentialism  and later. Strong 
on many European figures usually om itted. Has gone through dozens o f editions in 
Europe. 19 6 6  edition, translated by Stanley Appelbaum  and Clarence Strow bridge. 
x viii -f- 505pp. 
2 17 3 9 -6  P aperbound $ 3 .0 0
Y o g a : A  Sc ie n t if ic  E v a l u a t io n , K ovoor T. Behanan. Scientific but non-technicai 
study o f physiological results o f yoga exercises; done under auspices o f Y a le  U . 
Relations to Indian thought, to psychoanalysis, etc. 16  photos, x x iii +  270pp .
2 05 0 5-3  P aperb ou nd $ 2 .5 0
Prices subject to change without notice.
A vailable at your book dealer or w rite for free catalogue to D ept. G I, D over 
Publications, Inc., 18 0  V arick St., N . Y ., N . Y . 1 0 0 1 4 . D over publishes m ore than 
150 books each year on science, elem entary and advanced mathematics, biology, 
music, art, literary history, social sciences and other areas.


DOVER BOOKS ON PHILOSOPHY
Scepticism and A nimal Faith, George Santayana. (20236-4 ) 
$2.75
T he Sense of Beauty, George Santayana. (20238-0) $1.35 
Problems of Ethics, Moritz Schlick. (20947-4 ) $2.00 
T he World as Will and Representation, Arthur Schopen­
hauer. (21761-2, 21762-0 ) Two-volume set $8.00 
British Moralists: Being Selections from Writers Prin­
cipally of the 1 8 th Century, edited by L. A. Selby- 
Bigge. (21423-0, 21424-9) Two-volume set $5.50 
T he Methods of Ethics, Henry Sidgwick. (21608-X) $4.00 
Modern Historical and Social Philosophies, Pitrim A. Soro­
kin. (21146-0) $2.75
Works of Spinoza, Benedict de Spinoza. (20249-6, 20250-X) 
Two-volume set $5.00
T he Philosophy of Hegel, Walter T. Stace. (20254-2) $3.75 
Buddhist Logic, Theodore Stcherbatsky. (20955-5, 20956-3) 
Two-volume set $7.00 
A ristotle, A. E. Taylor. (20280-1) $1.25 
T he T ragic Sense of Life, Miguel de Unamuno. (20257-7) 
$2.50
History 
of 
A ncient 
Philosophy, 
Wilhelm 
Windelband. 
(20357-3) $3.00
A n Introduction to Scholastic Philosophy, Maurice de 
Wulf. (20283-6) $2.50
Philosophy and C ivilization in the Middle A ges, Maurice 
de Wulf. (20284-4 ) $2.50
The System of T homas A quinas, Maurice de Wulf. (20568-1) 
$1.50
Paperbound unless otherwise indicated. Prices subject to change 
without notice. Available at your book dealer or write for free cata­
logues to Dept. Misc., Dover Publications, Inc., 180 Varick St., 
N. Y., N. Y. 10014. Please indicate field of interest. Each year Dover 
publishes more than 150 classical records and books in science, 
languages, puzzles, music, philosophy, mathematics, chess and 
other areas. 
Manufactured, in the U.S.A.

an introduction to
SYMBOLIC LOGIC
This is probably the clearest book ever written on symbolic logic for 
the philosopher., the general scientist, and the layman. For years it has 
received the appreciation of those who have been rebuffed by other 
introductory works because of insufficient mathematical training. 
No special knowledge of mathematics is required here; even if you 
have forgotten most of your high school algebra, you can learn to 
use mathematical logic by following the directions in this book.
Now revised and corrected, the book allows you to start with the 
simplest symbols and conventions and end up with a remarkable 
grasp of the Boole-Schroeder and Russell-Whitehead systems. It 
covers the study of forms, essentials of logical structure, generaliza­
tion, classes and the principal relations among them, universe of 
classes, the deductive system of classes, the algebra of logic, abstrac­
tion and interpretation, calculus of propositions, the assumptions 
of Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica, and logistics. 
Appendices cover symbolic logic and the logic of the syllogism, 
the construction and use of truth-tables, and proofs of two theorems.
“One of the clearest and simplest introductions to a subject which 
is very much alive . . . the intelligent non-mathematician should 
have no difficulty,” Mathematics Gazette.
Third (1966), revised edition. New author’s preface. Revised bibli­
ography. Appendices. Index. 367pp. 5% x 8. 60164 1 Paperbound
A DOVER EDITION DESIGNED FOR YEARS OF USE!
We have made every effort to make this the best book possible. Our 
paper is opaque, with minimal show-through; it will not discolor 
or become brittle with age. Pages are sewn in signatures in the 
method traditionally used for the best books, and will not drop out, 
as often happens with paperbacks held together with glue. Books 
open flat for easy reference. The binding will not crack or split. 
This is a permanent book.
BY SUSANNE K. LANGER

